GENERAL DEMANDS CONCERNING THE LATE COVENANT: Propounded by the Ministers and
Professors of Divinity in Aberdene, to some Reverend Brethren, who came thither
to recommend the late Covenant to them, and to those who are committed to their
charge. TOGETHER WITH The ANSWERS of those Reverend Brethren to the said
DEMANDS. AS ALSO The REPLIES of the foresaid Ministers and Professors to their
ANSWERS.

1 Pet. 3.15, 16. Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always
to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in
you, with meekness and fear:

Having a good conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you, as of evil
doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.

Printed by ROBERT YOUNG, His Majesty's Printer for Scotland. Anno 1638.

IT will, no doubt, seem strange to see my name in print, standing so near
these men who are Interlocutors in the succeeding pages, their profession and
mine being of such different natures; But I shall entreat the ingenuous reader
to take notice of the necessity of this my doing.

I am by the three Answerers to these Demands wronged, and that by an injury
of an high nature, challenged in writing to have done that, which God does know
never entered into my thoughts; and for any thing the answerers did or do know,
never came into my mind. And though by the law of challenges, they having
challenged me, I may choose the weapons (which certainly should have been in
another kind, had the challengers been of another profession) yet being men
of so holy a function, I have thought good to make choice of their own weapons;
and by my pen to do out that blot, which they by their pen have laid upon me.
And I have thought it fit to do it in a scedule annexed to this book (which
for that cause only I have caused to be here reprinted) that where men's minds
perhaps may be poisoned by swallowing an untruth in their answers, so deeply
wounding my honor and loyalty; this antidote might be ready at hand to cure
them, before they should be fully tainted with it: As likewise supposing that
if they should be printed severally, many might meet with their answers alone,
which might leave in them a bad impression of me; if they should not be
attended with this just and true expression of mine.

The injuries wherewith I am violated by the three answerers, are of two sorts:
One of them strikes me alone, as his sacred MAJESTY'S high Commissioner; The
other wounds me as his MAJESTY'S Counselor; and with me all of that
honorable board. The former is this,

They deliver affirmatively, That the declaration which they tendered me of
their late Covenant, was such as I accepted, and was well pleased with. And
this they set down twice for failing; In their answer to the first demand
toward the end, and in their answer to the third demand a little before the
middle of it; and that with such confidence, as truly I cannot with any justice
blame the reader for believing of it, when it fell from the pens of these men,
whose profession is the teaching of truth.

But I shall desire the readers to suffer themselves (notwithstanding the
prejudice of these men's persons) to be undeceived by a plain averment of truth.

I am confident none of these three answerers ever heard me say so, nor will
they say they did. If they but heard it from others (which I do verily believe
they did not, and shall do so still, till they avouch their authors) sure no
man can choose but miss in them that civil prudence, which will not allow any
discreet man to affirm that of any other; much less of a person of my
quality, and at this time of my place; the foundation whereof shall be so
frail and slipperie, as report, which is always uncertain, and most times
false.

For clearing the truth, I do aver upon mine Honor that I never said so, I
never thought so. And though that that Declaration was much bettered by the
industry of some well affected (from what was first intended) yet it gave me
not satisfaction: and I dare boldly affirm, I never said it would give my
Master the KINGS MAJESTY any. My justifiers in this, shall be these Noblemen,
Gentlemen, and others to whom I ever spoke, either publicly, or in private. I
was indeed content to catch at any thing I could, when I could not obtain what
I would; as being willing to do my contrymen that respect, as to the utmost
of my power to recommend to my gracious Master, with all favorable
construction, even that which I then thought, and did know fell short of just
and home satisfaction. Nor is there any ground for their opinion of my
acceptance of that declaration, unless they call receiving, accepting; and
that was not in my power to refuse, it being conceived in formal words of a
supplication, and so tendered to me, who by my royal Master his instructions
was commanded to receive the petitions of all his good and loyal subjects.
And here, I do confess, I cannot charge it for a faulty mistake upon the
readers of these asseverations of the three answerers, if they should, before
this my declaration, conceive that his MAJESTY were in all probability like
to rest satisfied with that declaration of the Covenant; having it delivered to
them from men whom they have in all this business believed as much as
themselves, that his MAJESTY'S Commissioner, who in all likelihood did know his
MAJESTY'S mind best, did rest satisfied with it.

But his MAJESTY has just reason to charge me, if these asseverations were
true; as I have good reason to vindicate my self, they being not true. The
truth is, if these asseverations be true, I do profess to the whole world,
that his MAJESTY has a most just cause to discharge himself of me, and my
service, and to discharge me of all trust in this, or any other negotiation
For I profess, that I knowing his MAJESTY'S constant mislike of the said
Covenant, it must bewray in me, either breach of trust, or want of judgment;
if I should go about to make either my self, or the world believe, that my
Master could receive satisfaction by such an explanation.

And here I cannot dissemble, but must ask leave to vent my self thus far. Had
these wrongs been put upon me by the pens of other men, and not of these whose
professions I am forward and willing to believe (because I would have it so)
will not suffer them to embrace wilful and malicious designs: I should justly
have doubted, that there had been some men in this kingdom, who being afraid
of a settling and peaceable conclusion of this business, had gone about to
raise in my royal and gracious Master a jelousie of my slacknesse in my King
and Countries service, that so I might be called back, re infecta.

If any such enemies there be to the peace of this miserable distracted Church
and State, I beseech God in time to discover them, and that all may end, in
covering them with shame and confusion. The sum of all I will say of this
personal wrong offered to my self, is this; If these reverend and learned
Gentlemen, the Answerers, in these untrue aspersions intended any harm to me,
I shall only now requite them with a cast of their own calling; I pray God
forgive them. If they intended me no harm, then I do expect that they will give
my self and the world satisfaction, in clearing me that I gave them no ground
for these their asseverations. And so being confident of his MAJESTY'S
goodness to all his ministers; amongst the rest, to the meanest of them, my
self, especially in this particular, that he will never be shaken in the
opinion of my loyal and constant service, upon such slight, light, and
groundless reports: I will say no more of that first point.

For that which concerns my self as a Counselor, and the rest of that
honorable Board, averred by the three answerers, in their answers to the third
and fourteenth demand; I do here protest before Almighty God, that none of the
allegations alleged by the three answerers, nor any petition given me by the
supplicants, moved me to give way, that the order of the Council table should
not pass into an act: for I did then, and do now avow, that I then was, and
now am fully satisfied with his MAJESTY'S most gracious declaration; and that
in my opinion all ought to have thought themselves sufficiently freed from
fears of innovations. But the true reason was this, I was so tenderly
affectioned toward the peace of my Country, that I gave way to that, which
many of honorable quality assured me, if it were not done, a present rupture
might follow, and so consequently the ruin of this Kingdom; which I was
resolved to keep off so long as possibly I could, retaining my fidelity to my
Master. Which care of mine I find but slenderly required, when it is made an
argument to persuade his MAJESTY'S good subjects to do that which is so
displeasing to him, and so unsafe for them. And yet even in this passage, it
would have been expected from men of that profession, that nothing should have
passed but undoubted truth. In which point too they have failed, either as I
hope by a mistaking, or a mis-informing. For the Missive once thought fit to be
sent to his MAJESTY was never rent, but remains yet as it was: and we did
not send it, because we did not think, thanks to his MAJESTY would be
seasonable in the name of the whole Kingdom, when we knew his MAJESTY, by the
last proceedings of many, and protestations made against his royal declaration
(pretended in the name of the whole country) could not receive satisfaction.

To conclude, notwithstanding this personal wrong offered to me his MAJESTY'S
high Commissioner, I will carefully; cheerfully, and constantly go on with this
great business, wherewith he has entrusted me. Which as I pray God that it
may prosper under my hands; so I praise God that he has given me so cheerful
and willing a heart to go on in it; that if my life could procure the peace of
this torn Church and Kingdom, to the contentment of my royal Master, and
comfort of his distracted subjects; he who knows all things, knows likewise
this truth; It is the sacrifice of the world, in which I would most glory, and
which I would most sincerely offer up to God, my King and Country.

HAMMILTON.

GENERAL DEMANDS CONCERNING THE LATE COVENANT: Propounded by the Ministers and
Professors of Divinity in Aberdene, to some Reverend Brethren, who came thither
to recommend the late Covenant to them, and to those who are committed to their
charge. TOGETHER WITH The ANSWERS of those Reverend Brethren to the said
DEMANDS. AS ALSO The REPLIES of the foresaid Ministers and Professors to their
ANSWERS.

1 Pet. 3.15, 16. Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always
to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in
you, with meekness and fear:

Having a good conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you, as of evil
doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.

Printed by ROBERT YOUNG, His Majesty's Printer for Scotland. Anno 1638.

GENERAL DEMANDS CONCERNING THE LATE COVENANT; Together with Answers to them,
and Replies to those Answers.
THE FIRST DEMAND.
BY what power, or warrant, these our Reverend Brethren can suit of us, or of
our people, subscription to this late Covenant; not being sent by his Majesty,
or by the Lords of Council, nor by any National Synod of this Kingdom, nor
by any Judicatorie established in it? And, How they can enforce upon us, or
upon our people, who are no ways subject unto them, their interpretation of
the articles of the negative confession? In respect whereof, as also in respect
of that band of mutual defense against all persons whatsoever, this late
Covenant is substantially different from that which was subscribed by the King
and his subjects, Anno 1580. and 1581.

ANSWER.
WE are not come hither to usurp the authority of any civil or spiritual
judicatorie, or to enforce upon our reverend Brethren, and the people committed
to their charge, the subscription of the late Covenant, or the interpretation
of the Articles of that Confession which is called negative, or whatsoever else
of that kind: but are sent to represent unto them, in all humility, the
present case and condition of this kirk and kingdom; crying for help at their
hands also: and, in brotherly love, to exhort and entreat, that they will be
pleased to contribute their best endeavors, for extinguishing the common
combustion, which by joining with almost the whole kirk and kingdom in the
late Covenant, we trust they may lawfully do, without prejudice to the Kings
Majesty, or to any lawful judicatorie, or to that Confession of faith above
mentioned: Since the sound interpretation and application thereof, to the
errors of our times, can make no substantial change, and the band of mutual
defense, wherein we oblige our selves, To defend the true religion, and the
Kings Majesty's person, and authority, against all persons whatsoever, is
joined, at first, with the Confession of faith. Like as his Majesty's
Commissioner objecting, That our Covenant was suspect to be an unlawful
combination against Authority, and to be the main hinderance of obtaining our
desires, has accepted, and was well pleased with our Declaration; bearing,
That we have solemnly sworn, to the uttermost of our power, with our means and
lives, to stand to the defense of the Kings majesty as of Gods Vicegerent, set
over us, for the maintenance of Religion, and ministration of Justice.

REPLY.
WE have, Reverend Brethren, sufficiently considered and examined your answers
to our Demands, by which we expected full satisfaction to all our scruples and
doubts concerning the late Covenant: But truly, in modesty and brotherly love,
we tell you, that your answers (whatsoever you think of them your selves) have
not given us that satisfaction which we expected. We know that some who rashly
condemn every thing which is said or written contrary to the cause which they
maintain, will boldly say of us, that we have closed our eyes against a clear
and ingyring light: But first, we say with JOB, Our witness is in heaven, and
our record is on high. That Lord who only sees the secrets of hearts, knows,
that we love his truth, and are ready, so soon as it shall be shown unto us, to
embrace and profess it before the world. Next, we appeal to the consciences of
all impartial readers, who shall have occasion to weigh and consider maturely
the weight of our arguments, and of these answers which it has pleased you to
give us: wishing them, yea, most humbly and earnestly entreating them, to judge
both of your writings and ours without prejudice, or any partial respect. Yea,
we are confident, that ye also, of whose love to the truth of GOD we are
persuaded, will after better advisement, and more mature consideration of the
matters debated, acknowledge that we are not against the truth, but for it. The
Lord open your eyes, that you may clearly see that truth for which we stand.

WE objected to you, Reverend Brethren, that you had not a calling to urge us
to the subscription of the late Covenant, from any acknowledged authority, or
lawful Judicatorie established in this Church or Kingdom: to which objection
ye answer not here particularly, as we expected. And whereas you say, That you
are come to exhort us, and our people, in all humility, to join with you; How
is it, that without our consent, and against our will, not having lawful
authority, which you seem here not to acclaime to your selves, you have
publicly preached to our people, within our Congregation? which is a thing
repugnant to those places of Scripture, in the which the Spirit of God
recommendeth to Elders, or Pastors, the care of those flocks, over which the
holy Ghost has made them overseers, Acts 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2. as also tells
us, That the Pastors whom the flock must know, and to whom they must submit
themselves, do watch over the souls of that flock, and must give account for
them, 1. Thessal. 5.12. Hebr. 13.17. It is also contrary to the laws of the
Christian Church in all ages. For by the ancient Canons, Pastors are commanded
to contain themselves within the limits of their own charge; and not to
presume to exercise Pastoral office in another Pastors Diocese, or Parioch,
without leave: As also, they forbid Pastors to receive to divine service any
man of another Parioch, that comes in contempt of his own Pastor. Council.
Nicen. 1. Oecum. 1. Can. 16 Council. 2. Oecum. Constantinop. Can. 2. Council.
Carthag. 2 Can. 11. Council. Carthag. 3. Can. 20. Council. Chalced. Oecum. 4.
Can. 13. Council. Nicen. 2. Can. 10. Council. Tribur. Can. 28. Council. Nannet.
Cap. 1. and 2. 2. We did not without reason say, That you, and others of your
confederation, enforce your interpretation of the Negative confession upon
others; seeing we hear, that some Pastors and Prelates are forced to flee to
foreign countries, for fear of their lives, because they have refused the
said interpretation; and those who have stayed in the country, dare scarcely
appear in the high ways, or streets; and are threatened, That their stipends
shall not be paid unto them, until they subscribe your Covenant. 3. Whereas
you do in brotherly love exhort, and entreat us to contribute our best
endeavors, for extinguishing the common combustion; we praising God for your
pious zeal, and for the lovingnesse and modesty of your speeches, (wherein by
Gods help we shall labor to keep correspondence with you; that both we and you
may show our selves to have learned of Christ, Meekness, and lowliness of
heart) we most willingly promise to do so, by all means which our consciences
will permit us to use; as also to join our most humble and hearty prayers with
yours, That it may please God in this dangerous exigent, To do good in his good
pleasure to our Sion, and to build up the walls of our Jerusalem. 4. We may
justly say, That this new Covenant is substantially different from the old,
which was made Anno 1581. in respect it not only contains that old covenant,
or confession, which was allowed by two general assemblies, but also your
interpretation of it, which, as yet, has no such authority, or approbation. 5.
No band of mutual defense, against all persons whatsoever, is expressed in the
Covenant made 1581. And although it were, yet the case is very unlike: For
subjects may make such a Covenant of mutual defense by arms, with the consent
of the King, who only under God, has the power of arms, or of the sword, in
this kingdom. But they who made this late Covenant, had not his consent, as
that former or old Covenant had: which is a thing so evident, that no man can
call it in question. 6. As for that which you affirm here, That my Lord
Commissioner his Grace was well satisfied with your declaration; it becomes
not us to pry narrowly into his Graces doings: but truly we have more than
reason to pry most narrowly into the words of a Covenant, which is offered unto
us, to be sworn, and subscribed, left we abuse, and profane the sacred name of
God, and tie our selves to the doing of any thing which is displeasing unto
him. Last of all; whereas ye desire us to join our selves to you, and to the
rest of your confederacy, who are (as you affirm) almost the whole Church and
Kingdom: Truly we cannot but reverence such a multitude of our reverend
brethren* and dear contrymen, and are ready to be followers of them, in so
far as they are followers of Christ: But neither can we do any thing against
the truth, neither can we attribute so much authority to their multitude, as
otherwise we would, in respect there has been so much dealing for
subscriptions, in all quarters of this Kingdom, and so many have been
threatened, to give their consent, as we are most credibly informed.

THE II. DEMAND.
WHether or no we ought to subscribe the foresaid covenant, seeing all
covenants of mutual defense, by force of arms, made amongst subjects of any
degree, upon whatsoever color or pretense, without the Kings Majesty or his
Successors privitie and consent, are expressly forbidden by King JAMES of
blessed memory, and the three Estates of this Kingdom, in the parliament
holden at Linlithgow, Anno. 1585?

ANSWER.
THe act of Parliament forbids in the first part, leagues and bands of
maintenance privily made, such as are called bands of Manrent, as the act in
Queen Mary's time, to which it has relation, does bear. And in the second
part, only such, as tend to the public disturbance of the peace of the Realm
by moving sedition. But no act of Parliament does discharge, nor can any just
law forbid, Conventions, or Covenants in the general; or such Covenants in
special as are made with God, and amongst our selves; not for any man's
particular, but for the common benefit of all; not to move sedition, but to
perserve peace, and to prevent trouble: which by all probability had been to
many, before this time, too sensible, if this course had not been taken.
Conventions and Covenants (in the judgment of Jurisconsults) are to be
esteemed and judged of, according to their diverse ends, good or bad: which
made King James of happy memory to take it for an undoubted maxim, That pro
aris and focis, and pro patre patriae, the whole body of the Commonwealth
should stir at once: not any more as divided members, but as one consolidate
lump.

REPLY.
IN that second part of that act of Parliament, holden at Linlithgow, Anno
1585. are forbidden, All leagues or bands of mutual defense, which are made
without the privitie and consent of the King, under the pain to be holden and
execute as movers of sedition and unquietness, etc. Wherefore we can no ways
think, that any bands or leagues of mutual defense, by force of arms, are
there permitted, (that is, not forbidden) seeing first the words of the act are
so general: for in it are discharged All bands made amongst subjects of any
degree, upon any color whatsoever, without his Highn^sse, or his Successors
privitie and consent had and obtained thereunto. Next, all such bands are
declared to be seditious, and perturbative of the public peace of the Realm:
or, which is all one, are appointed to be esteemed so. And therefore, we
cannot see how any bands of that kind can be excepted, as if they were not
seditious. 2. We doubt not, but the late Covenant, being considered according
to the main intention of those pious and generous Gentlemen, Barons, and others
our dear countrymen, who made it, especially our reverend brethren of the holy
ministry, is a Covenant made with God, and proceeding from a zealous respect
to Gods glory, and to the preservation of the purity of the Gospel in this
Church and Kingdom: But we cannot find a warrant in our consciences to grant,
That such Covenants, in so far as they import mutual defense, against all
persons whatsever, none being excepted, no, not the King, (as it seems unto
us, by the words of your Covenant, but far more by the words of your late
Protestation, the 28 of June; wherein you promise mutual defense against all
external or internal invasion, menaced in his Majesty's last Proclamation)
are not forbidden by any band, nor justly yet can be forbidden. For first, we
have already shown, That they are forbidden in the foresaid act of Parliament,
Anno 1585. 2. No warfare; and consequently, no covenant, importing warfare, is
lawful, without just Authority; which, we are persuaded, is only in the
supreme Magistrate, and in those who have power and employment from him, to
take arms: yea, so far as we know, all moderate men, who duly respect
Authority, will say, That it is so in all Kingdoms, and Monarchies, properly
so called: (of which nature is this his Majesty's most ancient Kingdom) And,
that it is altogether unlawful to subjects in such Kingdoms, to take arms
against their Prince. For which cause, that famous and most learned Doctor
Rivetus, in a late Treatise called Iesuita vapulans, speaking of the judgment
of Buchanan, and others, who taught, That subjects might take arms against
their Prince, in extraordinary cases, and extreme dangers of the Religion, and
Commonwealth; professes first, That he, and all other Protestants, condemn
such doctrine. Secondly, That this error did proceed from a mistaking of the
government of the Scottish Kingdom, as if it were not truly and properly
Monarchical. Thirdly, That the rashness of those writers, is to be ascribed
partly to the hard and perilous times of persecution, wherein they lived, and
partly, Scotorum praefervido ingenis, and ad audendum prompto. Thus he writes
in the 13. Chap. of the said book, Page 274. and 275. answering to the
Recrimination of a Jesuit, who had affirmed, That Buchanan, Knox, and Goodman,
had written as boldly for the rebellion of Subjects against Princes, as any of
their order at any time had done. A thing much to be noted by us at this time,
lest we any more give that advantage to Jesuits, to make Apology for their
rebellious doctrines and practices. 3. Not only making of Covenants, but also
all other actions, are to be esteemed and judged of, first, by the equity of
the subject, and matter; then, by the end: for if the matter pactioned (that
is, which the parties mutually do promise) be justly forbidden, by a lawful
Authority, and consequently be unlawful in it self; then the goodness of the
end, or project, cannot make the paction, or Covenant, to be good, or lawful.

THE III. DEMAND.
IF it be alleged, That in extreme and most dangerous cases, such acts of
Parliament may be contraveened; Quaeritur, Whether there be now such extreme
case, seeing we have his Majesty, in his former Proclamations, avowing,
protesting, declaring, and in this last Proclamation taking God to witness,
that he never intended any innovation of Religion; and also seeing he has
removed already all that which made men fear novations, to wit, Service book,
book of Canons, and the alleged exorbitancie of the new high Commission.

ANSWER.
IF the removing of the Service book, book of Canons, and the limitation of the
vast power of the high Commission, containing so much superstition, and tyranny
of Prelates, be a benefit to this Kirk and Kingdom, we ought, under God, to
ascribe the same to the peaceable meetings, humble supplications, and religious
covenanting of the subjects; which have given information to his Majesty, and
have procured from his justice and goodness so great favor, as is thankfully
acknowledged in the last Protestation: which does also express the many
particulars, wherein his Majesty's late Proclamation is not satisfactorie. And
therefore the Lords of his Majesty's privy Council, upon the supplication and
complaint of his Lieges, were moved to rescind the act of the Approbation of
the foresaid Proclamation, and to rend the subscribed Missive, which was to be
sent therewith to his Majesty. We are confident, that the Declaration
wherewith his Majesty's Commissioner was so well pleased, will also give
satisfaction to our reverend brethren; and that they will not think it
convenient for them to give further approbation to the Proclamation, than the
Council has done, although all of us ought, with thankfulness, to acknowledge
his Majesty's benignity.

REPLY.
WE will not here dispute what has been the maine or principal cause moving
his sacred Majesty to discharge the Service book, and other things which
occasioned the present perturbation of our Church; nor yet whether or not his
Majesty's proclamation may give full satisfaction to all the fears and doubts
of his subjects. For our selves, we profess, that upon his Majesty's
declaration, and gracious promise contained in his Majesty's last proclamation,
we believe, first, That his Majesty never intended innovation in religion:
Secondly, That he will maintain the true Protestant religion, all the days of
his life: which we pray God to continue long. Thirdly, That all acts made in
favors of the Service boook, etc. are discharged. Fourthly, That he will never
urge the receiving of the Service book, Book of Canons, etc. nor any other
thing of that nature, but by such a fair and legal way, as shall satisfy all
his subjects. And thence we do collect, that which we affirmed before, to wit,
That there is no such extraordinary or extreme case, as might give occasion to
subjects to make such a band, as is directly forbidden by the foresaid act of
parliament, and to contraveen it in such a manner, as may seem to import a
resisting of Authority by force of arms.

THE IIII. DEMAND.
COncerning that interpretation of the negative confession, which is urged upon
us, and wherein the articles of Pearth, and Episcopacie, are declared to be
abjured, as well as all the points of Popery, which are therein expressly and
distinctly mentioned; Quaeritur, Who are the interpreters of that confession?
that is, Whether all the subscribers, or only those Ministers conveened in
Edinburgh, in the end of February, who set it down? If all the subscribers;
then what reason have we to receive an interpretation of that confession from
la^cks, ignorant people, and children? If only those Ministers conveened then
in Edinburgh; then seeing no man should take an honor to himself, but he who
is called of God, as Aaron, Heb. 5.4. what power and authority had they over
their brethren, to give out a judicial interpretation of these articles of
faith, and to enforce their interpretation of these articles upon them?

ANSWER.
THe subscribers are here mis-interpreted in two points, very material: One
is, that they presume upon power, or authority, which they have to give out a
judicial interpretation of the articles of the confession, and to enforce the
same upon others: whereas they only intended to make known their own meaning,
according to the mind of our Reformers; and in charity to propound and
recommend the same to others, who might be made willing to embrace it: Although
it be true also, that very great numbers of Ministers were conveened, and
testified their consent as that time: And although the private judgment of
those who are called laics, ought not to be mis-regarded. For it is confessed,
That an interpretation, which is private ratione personae, may be more than
private, ratione medii. The other, which being observed, will answer diverse of
the following demands, That the articles of Pearth, and of Episcopal
government, are declared to be abjured, as points of Popery, or as Popish
novations: where as the words of the Covenant put a difference betwixt two
sorts of novations: one is of such as are already introduced in the worship of
God, and concerning those, whatsoever be the judgment of the subscribers,
which to every one is left free, by the words of the Covenant, they are only
bound to forbear the practice of them, by reason of the present exigence of the
Kirk, till they be tried, and allowed in a free General assembly. The other
sort is of such novations, as are particularly supplicated against, and
complained upon; as the Service book, and Canons, etc. which are abjured, as
containing points of Popery. And this we avouch, from our certain knowledge,
to be the true meaning of the controverted words of the Covenant. And therefore
humbly entreat, That no man any more, upon this scruple, withold his
testimony.

REPLY.
AS for the first of these two mistakings: If you have not given out that
interpretation of the negative confession judicially, but only have made known
your own meaning, according to the mind of the Reformers, as you allege;
then, first, your interpretation has no obligatory power over others; and
consequently you ought not to obtrude your interpretation upon us, more then we
do our interpretation thereof upon you. Neither ought any man to be molested,
or threatened, for not receiving your interpretation; chiefly seeing all who are
of your confederation have so solemnly vowed, and promised, to be good examples
to others of all godliness, soberness, and righteousness, and of every duty
which you owe to God and man. Secondly, As for the mind or judgment of our
Reformers, we know no evidence of it, having public authority to oblige the
subjects of this Kingdom, except that which is expressed in our national
confession of faith, ratified in Parliament twenty years before the negative
confession was penned: wherein we find no warrant or ground of such
interpretation as you bring. Thirdly, The interpretation of the negative
confession, set down in your covenant, as it is not public, ratione personae,
so also not ratione medii: for it has no warrant, for ought we could ever
perceive, either from the word of God, or from the testimony of the ancient
Church, or from the consent of other reformed Churches, or from our national
confession, registrated in Parliament. As for the second mistaking, or
mis-interpretation of the words of the late covenant, first, we marvel, that a
general Covenant appointed to be subscribed by all, learned and unlearned,
should have been set down by you in such ambiguous terms. For, truly, all men
here, even the most judicious, do so take your words, as if the articles of
Pearth were in them abjured. 2. We have again more attentively examined the
words of the late Covenant, and do evidently perceive by them, That in the said
Covenant, the articles of Pearth, and Episcopacie, are condemned, and abjured,
as erroneous, and damnable corruptions. For where you profess, and before God,
and his angels, and the world, solemnly declare, That you shall labor, by all
means lawful, to recover the liberty, and purity of the Gospel, as it was
established and professed before the foresaid novations: We ask you, what is
that period of time, to which your words have reference, when you promise to
labor, to recover the purity and liberty of the Gospel, as it was professed
and established before the foresaid novatitions? If you mean that period of
time, when the Service book, and Book of Canons were urged upon you; to wit,
the last year bypast in Summer; then you acknowledge, That all that time you
enjoyed the purity and liberty of the Gospel; and consequently, That you yet
enjoy it; for no new thing has since that time been publicly received, and
practiced in this Church. If you mean (as undoubtedly we think you do) the time
praeceding the bringing in of Episcopacie, and the acts of Pearth; then you
comprehend both Episcopacie and the acts of Pearth under these novations: for
the removing whereof, you promise to labor, according to your power: and
consequently do dis-allow and condemn them, even before they be tried in a
free assembly, and before they be heard who maintain and approve them as
lawful. 3. We may evidently demonstrate this, argumento ad hominem, as we say
in the schools: For, those rites and ceremonies, which are abjured in the
negative confession, are also abjured in your late Covenant; which, as you say,
is all one with the negative confession, or with the Covenant made 1581. But
the rites and ceremonies which were concluded in Pearth assembly, are abjured,
as you say, in the Covenant made 1581. and therefore they are also abjured in
this your late Covenant. The first proposition is evident: For in your late
Covenant, speaking of the oath contained in that old Covenant, which was made
Anno 1581. you profess, That the present and succeeding generations in this
land, are bound to keep the foresaid national oath, as you call it, and
subscription, unviolable. The second proposition also cannot be denied by you:
For, these twenty years bypast, you have accused those who conformed
themselves to the ordinances of Pearth, of perjurie; and that because they had
violated the oath made Anno 1581. in the which those articles (as you allege)
were abjured. But perhaps you will say to us, That we think those things not to
be abjured in that oath made Anno 1581. and therefore we may swear, and
subscribe your late Covenant; and, notwithstanding of our oath and
subscription, be tied only to the forbearance of the practice of Pearth
articles for a time. We answer, first; The words of an oath should be clear,
and plain: or, if they be any ways ambiguous, the true sense of them should be
so declared, and manifested, that all may know it. 2 An oath is to be given,
according to the mind and judgment of him that requires it. And therefore,
seeing you who require this oath of us, think the rites or ceremonies concluded
at Pearth to be abjured in that oath made Anno 1581. how can we swear and
subscribe your Covenant, which renews the foresaid oath, and binds us to
it? 3 If we should swear, and subscribe the negative confession, as it is
included in your covenant; then ye, who think the articles of Pearth to be
abjured, and condemned in the negative confession, will think us tied, by our
own personal oath, to condemn the articles of Pearth. 4 Seeing this covenant
was penned by you, who have hitherto not conformed your selves to Pearth
assembly, and have opposed Episcopacie, and seeing you all condemn Episcopacie,
as if it were that popish, or wicked Hierarchy, mentioned in the negative
confession; as also esteem the things concluded in Pearth assembly, to be
idolatrous, or superstitious; how can we think, that you in your solemn vow
made to God, for reformation of this Church, and resisting, in times to come,
the novations and corruptions of it, have passed by these things, which are the
only novations already introduced by authority, and from which, as you affirm,
the Church has so great need to be purged: chiefly, seeing ye think them as
popish, superstitious, and idolatrous, as ye do these other novations, which
are not as yet introduced. 5 If in all your supplications, plaints, and
protestations, ye have only sought the removing and discharging of the Service
book. Book of canons, and the new high commission, not complaining of any other
novations; and seeing his Majesty has discharged the first two, and has
promised to rectify the third, or last of them; Then, what reason have ye to
think, that his Majesty has not satisfied your supplications? For, all the
novations, upon which you complained, are removed by his Majesty, and ye have
his princely promise, That no further shall be urged upon us, but by such a
fair and legal way, as may satisfy all his subjects. 6 As for that which your
Covenant, by your own confession, requires of us, to wit, The forbearance, and
abstinence, for a time, from the practicing the articles of Pearth; We profess
sincerely, and in the sight of God, That our c^nscience will not suffer us to
subscribe that part of your Covenant; and that because laws being standing for
them, and our lawful superiors requiring obedience from us, by practicing
them, to swear forbearance of the practice of them, is to swear disobedience,
and, to wrong their authority. 7 How can we, with a good Conscience, abstain
presently from private baptism, and private communion, being required
thereunto by sick persons, and those parents whose children cannot be carried
to the Church commodiously with their lives; seeing we think it a thing very
unlawful, in such cases, to refuse to administrate those Sacraments in private
houses? Not that we think, that God has tied himself, or his grace, to the
Sacraments; but because he has tied us unto them, by his precept: and, not to
use the means appointed by God, when our people, or their children stand in
need of them, is a contempt of the means, and a tempting of God.

THE V. DEMAND.
WHether or no we can sincerely, and with a good conscience, subscribe the
negative confession, as it is expounded and interpreted by the contrivers or
authors of the late Covenant, seeing it makes a perpetual law concerning the
external rites of the Church, which God has not made, as if these rites were
unchangeable? And how they who both swear the positive confession, and the
negative, thus interpreted, can eschew contradiction, seeing the positive
confession, Chap. 21. evidently declares, That these rites are changeable,
according to the exigencie of time; and consequently, that no perpetual law
may or ought to be made concerning them? Likewise we would know how it can
stand with truth to abjure all these rites, as Popish, which are used in the
Church, without divine institution, expressed in Gods word; seeing even these
who urge the Covenant, practice some ceremonies which are not mentioned in Gods
word; as the celebration of marriage before the Church, in the beginning, or at
the end of divine service, with all the particulars of it, and the stipulation
of Fathers and Godfathers, for the child in baptism, which are not mere
circumstances, as they use to distinguish, but also ceremonies, properly so
called?

ANSWER.
THe late Covenant makes not a perpetual law concerning the external rites
of the kirk, as if they were unchangeable: but, as we have said before, only
binds us, for a time, to forbear the practice of innovations already
introduced, and does not determine whether they ought to be changed, or not. 2.
According to this true interpretation, all appearance of contradiction betwixt
the confession of faith insert in the act of Parliament, and the latter
confession, is removed, beside that the article 21. of the confession of faith,
gives power to the Kirk, in matters of external policy, and order of the
worship of God, is expounded in the first book of Discipline, distinguishing
between things necessary to be observed in every Kirk, and things variable in
particular congregations. 3. We declare again, That the Covenant does not
abjure Pearth articles, as Popish, and thinks not time now to dispute of
significant ceremonies, or other holy rites, and whether the two particulars
named be ceremonies, or not: since the confession condescended upon on both
sides, abjureth rites which are added without the word of God.

REPLY.
FIrst, We have already told you, That we cannot subscribe your oath of
forbearance of the practice of the articles already introduced, without
violation of authority, and of wronging our own consciences, who think private
baptism and communion, not to be indifferent, but also necessary, in some
cases; not indeed, necessitate medii, as if Gods grace were tied to the
external means, but, as we say in the schools, necessitate praecepti, because
we are commanded to use these means. 2. This late Covenant leads and binds
us to the old Covenant, made 1581. and that old Covenant binds us perpetually
to that discipline which was then; that is, (as ye allege) to the whole
policy of the Church, comprehending all the external rites of it: and so, a
primo ad ultimum, this late Covenant binds us to the whole policy of the
Church, which was then; and consequently makes a perpetual law, concerning
external rites of the Church, as if they were unchangeable. All parts of this
argument are sure: For by your late Covenant, you profess your selves bound,
to keep the foresaid national oath (as you call it) inviolable: And that oath,
or Covenant, binds us, to continue in the obedience not only of the
doctrine, but also of the discipline of this Kirk. Where by the discipline of
the Kirk, ye understand (as ye have in all your writings professed, especially
of late, in your book entitled, A dispute against the English Popish
ceremonies. Part 4. Chap. 8. Sect. 6.) the whole external policy of the
Church, as it was at that time; to wit, Anno 1581. Yea, you confess, That no
other thing can be understood by the discipline of the Kirk, but that which we
have said already; and consequently we shall be tied by that oath which you
require of us, to admit and practice no other rites and ceremonies, but such as
were then received in our Church. We can no ways pass by this, seeing ever
since the assembly of Pearth, in your public sermons, and printed books, ye
have most vehemently accused us of perjurie, as violating the oath, or
covenant, made Anno 1581. and that in respect we have admitted into the Church,
some rites, or ceremonies, which were not in it the foresaid year of God. Is
not this to make a perpetual law, concerning the external rites of the
Church, as if they were unchangeable, and to abjure the practice of all rites
introduced in the Church since that time; and consequently the practice of the
articles of Pearth, and that not for a time only, but for ever? 3. Seeing the
negative confession, according to your mind, and conception of it, makes the
whole external policy of the Church, as it was Anno 1581. to be unchangeable:
and on the contrary, the confession insert into the acts of Parliament,
declares, That the rites belonging to the external policy of the Church, are
changeable; how can you escape a contradiction, if ye receive both these
confessions? 4. Whereas by that distinction mentioned in your answer, of things
necessary to be observed, and of things variable in particular congregations,
ye insinuate that by the keeping of the discipline of the Kirk as it was then,
to which we are bound in the old Covenant, ye understand the observation of
those things which are necessary to be observed in every kirk, and not of
things variable in particular congregations: We ask, Into which of the members
of this distinction ye refer Episcopacie, and the articles of Pearth? That is,
Whether they must necessarily be omitted in all Churches, and at all times, or
not? If ye say, that they must be necessarily omitted, and that the negative
confession, confirmed with an oath, does tie us to the omission of them; then
both ye would make us to swear, and subscribe against our consciences, (for we
are persuaded, That these things are lawful) as also ye would make us to
abjure Episcopacie, and the articles of Pearth, in perpetuum; which is flatly
contrary to your declaration in your answers, 1.5. etc. If you say on the other
part, That we are not tied by the negative confession, to the omission of these
things; then, why have ye, in all your writings against us, exprobrate to us,
perjurie, in violating of the oath contained in the negative confession? 5. We
would gladly have known your mind, concerning the lawfulness of such rites as
are not of divine institution, expressed in Gods word. For we ingenously
profess, That none of your answers (which hitherto we have seen) to the
instances, or examples brought by us in our fifth Demand of rites used by your
selves, in your Churches, as lawful, without divine institution, (to which we
could add many more) do give us any satisfaction: nor yet, as we think, can
give satisfaction to any indifferent man. As for example; Is blessing of
marriages a mere circumstance? Who can be so impudent, as to say so? Or, if it
be a ceremony, what precept or practice have ye of it in Gods whole word? if
it be alleged. That we have a warrant from that blessing pronounced, Gen 1.28.
upon m^n and woman, after their creation; we ask, By what consequence can that
solemnity of blessing of marriages used in our Churches, with all the
ceremonies of it, be drawn from that effectual and operative blessing of our
first parents, or rather of whole mankind? Is there here an institution of a
perpetual observance, or rite, to be used in the Church, more than in the 22.
verse of the same chapter, when God blessed the fowls, and fishes, and said, Be
fruitful, and multiple, and fill the waters in the seas? etc. If again it be
answered, That pastoral benediction, is mentioned in Scripture* first, What
is that to blessing of marriages? And secondly, Why are not all other
pactions* as well as marriages, blessed in the Church; chiefly, seeing
matrimonial blessing has been, and is, abused in the Roman Church, which
holds, That marriage is a sacrament; and consequently, matrimonial
benediction ought, as it would seem, to be secluded from the Church, rather
than other blessings?

THE VI. DEMAND.
WHether or no it be fit to subscribe such an interpretation, as in matters of
lawfulness, and unlawfulness; and consequently in matters of faith,
contradicts the judgment of so many Divines, most famous, of the reformed
Church, both ancient and modern, (who did, and do hold, that these rites and
ordinances brought into this Church by the assembly of Pearth, are in their own
nature lawful, and such as ought not to make a stir in the Church of God) and
also condemns the venerable practice of the ancient Church, and the most
eminent lights of it, even in those purest times, unto which we appeal against
the Papists, in our disputes.

ANSWER.
WE trust, That no sound Divine, ancient or modern, would in this case deny the
expedience of the forbearance of the practice of Pearth articles. And further
than this, nothing at this time is required.

REPLY.
YOur silence, in not answering that which we affirmed, concerning the
judgment of Divines, ancient and modern, of the reformed Church, anent the
lawfulness of the rites and ordinances, which were received in our Church, by
the ordinance of the assembly of Pearth; as also concerning the judgment and
practice of the ancient Church; does make us think, that ye acknowledge the
truth of that which we affirmed there. 2. We have already shown, That the oath
which ye require of us, imports more than the forbearance of the practice of
Pearth articles, for a time. 3. The forbearance of some of them, seems to us,
to be merely unlawful, and contrary to that pastoral duty we owe to our
flock. 4. The forbearance of any of them, considered with a relation to the
authority enjoining them, in our judgment, is plain disobedience.

THE VII. DEMAND.
WHether it be agreeable to charity or piety, to require us to abjure these
rites, as Popish; which in the sincerity of our hearts, following the light of
our conscience, (whereof we take God to witness) we have hitherto practiced,
as lawful, and laudably following the same light, do yet practice them? But
suppose this might be required of us by any; Quaeritur, Whether or no it
becomes them so peremptorily, and upon such a suddenty, to urge us to this,
who these bygone twenty years, have desired earnestly to enjoy the freedom of
their consciences in their Ministry, even in denying obedience to these
things, and standing laws for them; and when they were urged to obedience did
so often protest, and earnestly request, That they might have a time, to be
well informed, and maturely advised of the matter, which to the most part of
them was most graciously granted? Let them* therefore, look to that natural
Maxim, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris: and to our Saviors precept
of the same sense, and almost of the same words, Mat. 7. verse. 12.

ANSWER.
WE hope, that such a forbearance of the practice, will prejudge the liberty of
no man's conscience.

REPLY.
IT would much prejudge our consciences, to swear and subscribe the negative
confession, taking it according to your conception and meaning, who require our
oath. 2 How can we swear, to labor, by all means lawful (as ye require in
your covenant) to expel those things, whereof we hold some to be necessary,
and all the rest, to be lawful, and laudable?

THE VIII. DEMAND.
WHether it be fitting to swear to defend the Kings Person and Authority, with
this limitation, In the defense and preservation of the true Religion, laws,
and liberties of this Kingdom? As if their persons ought not to be defended
against all enemies, although as yet they embraced not the truth: or having
before embraced it, yet have fallen from it: or as if their royal Authority
were not to be acknowledged, although commanding things unlawful; and as if we
were not subject thereto, in yielding to suffer under them, when we give not
active obedience to them?

ANSWER.
1. THe answer of the first Demand, may give satisfaction here. 2. The
Specification of the defending the Kings Person and Authority, in the defense
of the true religion, laws, and liberties of the Kingdom, is warranted by the
Confession ratified in Parliament, by other acts of Parliament, by the other
Confession, and by the general band joined with it. 3 No man will withold
his Subscription from the Covenant, because it does not, as it intends not to
express every duty we owe to the Kings Majesty, as if the not naming, were a
denying of the duty.

REPLY.
WHat ye have replied in your Answer to our first Demand, we have examined, in
our confutation of your Answer. 2. If ye consider well all the circumstances of
the making of your Covenant, ye will find that it had not been amiss, at this
time, to have expressed more fully the loyalty of your intentions, to maintain
the Kings person, and honor. Next, it is necessary to express it yet more
fully, for our cause, whom ye require to swear and subscribe your Covenant;
lest we do any thing, in this matter, with a doubting conscience, (which is a
grievous sin) that is, Doubting whether or no we are tied by our oath to
maintain the Kings authority, only in so far, as it is employed in the defense
of the foresaid true Religion: or, at least, as it is not employed against it.
For it seems to us unlawful, to swear the maintenance of the Kings
authority, with this limitation precisely. And if ye be of a contrary mind,
we are most willing to confer with you of this point.

THE IX. DEMAND.
WHether or no we can sincerely swear to maintain the Authority, truly and
properly monarchical of the King; and withal swear also disobedience to these
articles, which are authorized by his standing laws, and to maintain the
meanest of his subjects against him, in their disobedience of his laws, as yet
standing in vigor concerning these things.

ANSWER.
1. THe answer to the first Demand, is useful here also. 2. Forbearance of
practice, for a time, in such a case, is rather obedience, than disobedience:
for example, Kneeling was thought convenient, because all memory of
superstition was past; should it not therefore be forborne, because
superstition, is now revived, and flagrant? They who practice, keep the letter
of the law: but they who forbear, keep the life and reason thereof.

REPLY.
YOur Covenant requires more of us, than the forbearance of the practice of
Pearth articles, as we have often times declared. 2 We have also shown, That
the forbearance of obedience to standing laws, without license of Superiors,
and contrary to their commandment, especially if it be done by deliberation,
and if men tie themselves, by an oath, to do so, is manifest disobedience. 3
The article of Pearth, anent kneeling, was not grounded only, nor yet
principally, upon that narrative which ye mention; but rather upon the
conveniencie and decency of the gesture of kneeling, in the receiving of the
holy Sacrament: which reason does yet continue; as also the other reason which
ye mention, holds yet: for the body of the people of this Church were never
papists; and consequently, have no memory of popish superstition, as those who
lived in time of reformation. 4 We cannot see nor conceive, how a vow and band
of maintaining the meanest subject of this Kingdom, against all persons
whatsoever; and consequently, against the King himself, as we have shown in our
second Reply, in disobedience of his laws, can consist with that love,
reverence, and subjection, which we owe to our King. Neither have ye brought
any thing in your Answer, to satisfy us in this point. And, because ye
allege, as we hear, that ye are mistaken in this point, and do vindicate your
selves, by those words of the Covenant, wherein ye promise to maintain the
Kings authority; we pray you to express your mind more fully, concerning it;
and to show us, 1 What ye mean by maintaining the Kings authority, in that
part of your Covenant, wherein ye express your loyal intention, To maintain
the Kings person, and authority; and in special, Whether or no the
maintaining of the Kings authority, be taken by you, as it excludes all
resisting of his Authority, by force of arms, even although he should command
things unlawful, and contrary to the truth? For so we think it should be
taken: and that it should be so taken, we are ready to demonstrate. Neither
can we swear it in any other sense. 2 Whether your promise of mutual defense,
In the same cause of maintaining the true Religion, and his Majesty's
authority, etc. ought to be understood, of the maintaining the Kings
authority absolutely: that is, Whether he maintain the true Religion, or no?
Or, on the contrary; If it ought to be understood of the maintaining the Kings
authority conditionally, in so far as he maintains the true Religion, and
not any other ways? If you say, that it is to be understood the first way, we
assent to that part of your Covenant, and have no more scruple anent it, except
that one which we mentioned in our Reply to your second Answer: to wit, That
the words of your Protestation seem to import more; and, that your Paction, or
Covenant, is made without the Kings privitie, and consent. If ye say, that it
is to be understood the second way; then we continue urging our foresaid
Demand: to wit, How a man can maintain the Kings authority, and withal
maintain the meanest of his subjects in resisting his Authority? And how we
can be said, to stand for the Kings honor, when we vow and promise, do to that
which he himself professes to be against his Honor; and which, in the common
judgment of men, is thought to be so? The determination of this point, is more
than necessary, at this time: and therefore, let us in sincerity and
brotherly love, confer of it; that the consciences of others who doubt of this,
may receive satisfaction.

THE X. DEMAND.
WHether or no we ought to swear to such a Covenant, which takes away from us
all hope of a free assembly, or Parliament, to judge of the matter presently
debated? For how can these vote freely of any matter propounded to the decision
and deliberation of the Church and Estate, who have already sworn to adhere to
one part of the question? and how can those who dissent from them, submit
themselves to their judgment, chiefly seeing they are possessours, and have
laws Civil and Ecclesiastic, standing as yet for them?

ANSWER.
WE perceive, that this tenth Demand, is made of the articles of Pearth;
therefore we answer as before; That we promise only forbearance, which can
prejudge no man's liberty in a general assembly.

REPLY.
WE have shown, That your Covenant, and Oath, imports a manifest abjuration
of the articles of Pearth: and therefore, the swearing of it does manifestly
prejudge the liberty of voting in a national assembly: For, how can they
freely either reason in an assembly, concerning Episcopacie, and the articles
of Pearth; or else, give their judgment, without prejudice, concerning them
who have already promised, sworn, and vowed, first, To adhere to the
discipline of the Kirk: that is, (according to your interpretation) to the
whole external policy of the Church, as it was 1581. 2 To labor, by all
means lawful, to remove, and expel, all those rites and ordinances, which
have come into the Church since the foresaid year of God; that the Church may
be restored to the liberty, and purity, which it then had. Whereby ye declare,
That the foresaid articles, and Episcopacie, are contrary to the liberty, and
purity of the Church; and consequently, ye are tied by your oath, to vote
against them, if ye be called to the intended assembly.

THE XI. DEMAND.
WHether our subscribing, together with our people, to the confession of this
nation, which is ratified and registrated in Parliament, Anno 1567. may give
full satisfaction to all who doubt of the sincerity of our profession, if so be
they have no farther aim, but only to know and see our willingness, and
constant resolution, to adhere to the religion presently professed, and to
oppose all errors contrary to it, to our lives end? Now seeing we are willing
to do this, as we take God to witness, we are; how are we hated, maligned, and
traduced as enemies of the truth, only because our consciences do not suffer us
to subscribe to that interpretation of the negative confession insert in the
Covenant, (concerning which we can see no warrant of the truth of it, nor
lawful authority binding us to it) and to the politic, or rather military
part of that Covenant, which is a thing without the compass of our calling,
and not belonging to that contending for the faith once delivered to the
saints, of which S. Jude speaks in his epistle.

ANSWER.
SInce no other mean could be found so effectual, for holding out of Popery,
and forbearing of dangerous novations in religion, such as the Service book,
and Canons, which as yet are only discharged, till in a fair and legal way
they may be introduced; and are by no word of the late Proclamation disallowed:
although the Service book, by the Proclamation, February 19. be highly praised,
as serving to edification, and to beat out all superstition: and nothing in
this application is abjured, but what was abjured in the former; why shall we
forbear to use a mean so just, and so powerful, for the preservation of the
purity of religion?

REPLY.
HEre ye do not particularly answer to our Demand, and seem unwilling to give
that testimony of us, your brethren, concerning our sincerity in professing of
the Truth, which, all who know and judge unpartially of us, do think to be due
to us. It is sufficiently known, what pains we take in disputing and writing
against Papists, in confuting their errors in our pulpits, in leading process
against them, according to the order of the Church, and in doing all things
against Romish errors, which can be expected from the most zealous Professors
of the Truth. If ye, or any other of our reverent brethren, doubt of the
sincerity of our profession, then pose us concerning any Article controverted,
and we shall be most ready to declare our mind concerning it before all men,
and give a sufficient proof to the world, that we have pried as narrowly into
the mysteries of Romish errors, for refutation of them, as any of those who
impiously, and uncharitably traduce us, as favorers of Popery. 2. We have
other means more effectual, and lawful, (whereas we think this your mean to
be unlawful) for holding out of Popery: and in which we ought to confide
more, than in all the promises and vows of men; yea, also, more than in all the
united forces of all the subjects of this land: to wit, Diligent preaching, and
teaching of the word, frequent prayer to God, humbling of our selves before
him, amendment of our lives and conversations, and arming our selves against
our adversaries, by diligent searching of the Scriptures, and using all other
means, whereby we may increase in the knowledge of the truth, and in ability,
to defend it against the enemies of it. 3. The subjects of this Kingdom, at
least a great part of them, either by their own inclination, or by the
persuasion of others, have such a hard conceit of the Service book, and Canons,
that if his Majesty use a fair and legal way of bringing them into this
Church, especially such a way as may give satisfaction to all his subjects, in
all appearance, we need not to fear the in bringing of them.

THE XII. DEMAND.
WHereas we hear of diverse disorders, and violent miscarriages of those who
have subscribed the Covenant, against our brethren of the holy Ministry, who
continue in their obedience to the laws of the Church and Kingdom; which
miscarriages being done without all form of justice, or legal proceeding, are
an exercising of revenge, by private authority, and consequently are forbidden
in the sixth commandment: which is one of the reasons which moves us, not to
join our selves unto their society. We would gladly therefore know of our
reverent brethren, who have come hither to recommend the late Covenant unto us;
First, Whether or no they do allow these disorders? 2. If they allow them, what
reason have they so to do? And if they allow them not, how is it, that these
disorders and miscarriages, are not publicly by them, and other Pastors of
their confederacy, condemned, and sharply rebuked in their pulpits? Why are the
actours of them not tried and censured? And why do they delay to give out some
public declaration, either in print or writ, to this effect, being long since
exhorted to do so?

ANSWER.
1. HArdly can a zealous people assembled in a Kirk for the worship of God, be
kept from tumult, when books, and a worship which they either know, or conceive
to be popish, are suddenly, and imperiously obtruded upon them by the Leaders:
and how far the keeping of the material kirks from the pollution of worship,
belongs to the people, and community of the faithful, should be considered.
2. Violence done in other places, and upon other occasions, we no more allow,
than we do approve the aspersions of perjurie, rebellion, etc. which some men
do put upon us.

REPLY.
IT belongs not to the people, or community of the faithful, to contemn
Authority, and the Lords Service, done in his own House, on his own day, so
far as to put violent hands on Prelates and Pastors, in time of Divine
worship, while they are practicing those things which are enjoined by the King,
and his Council. Such disorders, and contemptuous carriages, do not beseem
those whom Christ inviteth to come to him, and to learn of him, meekness, and
lowliness of heart; chiefly, seeing there are many other ways, whereby people
may testify their aversation of those books, and worship, which they conceive
to be Popish. If it be a sin in parents to provoke their children to wrath;
much more is it a sin in children to provoke their parents; especially Patrem
Patriae, the common father of the country, so to wrath. 2. The keeping of Gods
house from the pollution of worship, belongs to those who are clothed with
lawful authority. 3. We not only asked of you, Whether or no ye did allow the
miscarriages toward our brethren of the holy Ministry, mentioned in our
Demand? but also supposing that ye do not allow them, we asked, How is it that
those disorders and miscarriages, are not publicly by you condemned, and
rebuked? Why are the actours of them not tried, and censured? And why do ye not
give some public document to the world of your aversation of such
miscarriages? chiefly, seeing they are, as we have shown, a manifest
transgression of the sixth Commandment. We cannot sufficiently marvel, that ye
have kept up your minds in this matter, and not answered to so important, and
necessary a Demand. As for your complaint of perjurie and rebellion, etc. if ye
mean the warning late written to the subjects in Scotland, ye shall know, that
the Author thereof himself is much displeased with any offensive asperitie,
which has been found in some written Copies thereof; and has already done
that, for removing of that offense: which, we hope, shall give full
satisfaction to all men.

THE XIII. DEMAND.
HOw can we subscribe that Covenant, without incurring many grievous scandals;
as first, the scandal of dissenting from other Reformed Churches, and famous
Divines, the chief instruments of the Reformation of the Church in Europe, who
did hold these rites which are abjured in this late Covenant, as merely
unlawful, popish, and idolatrous, to be in their own nature, lawful.
Secondly, the scandal of dissenting from antiquity, and vilipending it
altogether in matters of the external policy of the Church; which we know,
and have found by frequent experience, to be a thing that makes many Papists
more averse from our profession, than other ways they would be. Thirdly, the
scandal of perjurie, which some of us cannot escape, who did swear obedience
to the articles of Pearth, and to our Ordinary, at our admission to the
Ministry.

ANSWER.
THat threefold scandal causes upon the right interpretation of the clause of
the forbearance of the novations already introduced.

REPLY.
WE have shown your interpretation of the clause of forbearance, not to be
right, and have refuted it, we think, by the very words of your Covenant; so
that none of these three scandals can be eschewed by us, if we subscribe to
your foresaid Covenant. 2. Suppose the other two might be eschewed by that
interpretation of the clause of forbearance, yet the third cannot be eschewed,
seeing at our admission we have sworn obedience to the articles of Pearth, and
to our Ordinary: Wherefore, ye must either prove the Articles of Pearth, and
Episcopacie, to be unlawful, or else, we cannot, without violation of our
oath, made at our admission, forbear the practice of the foresaid Articles,
against the will of our Ordinary, and other our lawful Superiors.

THE XIIII. DEMAND.
LAst of all; We pray these reverend and worthy brethren, to consider
impartially, and charitably, seeing we have all these scruples in our minds
concerning their Covenant, as also seeing we are yet most confident, and
assured of the lawfulness of the articles of Pearth, together with the
lawfulness and venerable antiquity of Episcopal government, how we can, with
a safe conscience, give our consent that they should preach in our pulpits, who
come professedly to withdraw our people from that which we in the inmost
thoughts of our souls do embrace as lawful; and from that obedience which they
do owe to their gracious and pious Sovereign therein; whose last Proclamation
has given full satisfaction to us all, and much rejoiced our hearts, in
respect he has there in most solemnly, and by his oath declared, not only his
sincerity in professing the truth, but also his pious resolution, to continue
therein, and maintain it constantly to his lives end, most graciously and
wisely removing these things which have occasioned the late perturbation of our
Church. We wish them likewise, to consider, how they can require this of us,
seeing they would not (we appeal to their own consciences) be content that they
should be so dealt with themselves; we mean, that any should go up to their
pulpits, and condemn their doctrine, and practice, and withdraw their people
from that which has been before recommended unto them as truth.

We conclude: Exhorting earnestly, entreating lovingly, and charging modestly,
these, and all others, our reverend brethren, before God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing in his
kingdom, if there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels of mercies, to look narrowly to their
own consciences, in these weighty matters; remembering that of Jeremy, The heart
is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? To
judge charitably of us their brethren; remembering that of our Savior, Judge
not, that ye be not judged: To deal with us in love and meekness, (if so be
they think us to have gone astray from the truth; which, God knows, we no
ways do perceive) remembering that of S. Paul, If a man be overtaken in a
fault, ye that are spiritual, restore such an one with the spirit of
meekness: as also that of S. James, The wisdom that is from above, is first
pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated; full of mercy, and
good fruits, etc. And last of all, To seek peace, and so to follow after it;
that this our dear native country be not exposed to a dangerous warfare, and
to all the woeful consequents thereof; of which our hearts cannot think,
without trembling and horror.

ANSWER.
1 NOthing in the interpretation of the Covenant, against the lawfulness of
Pearth articles, and of Episcopal government. 2 We never intended to draw the
meanest of the subjects, from that loyalty of obedience, which they owe to
their Sovereign, and ours. 3 The Counsel has rescinded the approbation of
that Proclamation. 4 His Majesty's religious and righteous disposition, has
been to us a ground, and chief argument of our hope of the hearing of all our
petitions. 5 We have no desire to wrong our reverend and worthy brethren: but
rather to pass in silence, the wrongs which we have sustained by them: And
would approve our selves unto our God, and prove faithful in the employments
put upon us: earnestly desiring, That every eye may perceive the wonderful
work of God in this land: lest any of us be found fighting against God; and
that all of us may join heart and hand, for the purity and peace of the Kirk of
our Lord Jesus Christ, blessed for ever.

Mr. ALEXANDER HENDERSON, Minister at Leuchars. Mr. DAVID DICKSON, Minister at
Irwing. Mr. ANDREW CANT, Minister at Petsligo.

July 21. 1638.
REPLY.
THere is too much, as we think, in your Covenant against the lawfulness of
Pearth Articles. 2 Your band of mutual defense, against all persons
whatsoever, may draw subjects, perhaps, to take arms against their King, (which
God avert) and consequently from that loyalty of obedience, which they owe to
their Sovereign, and ours; except ye declare, and explain your selves better,
than ye have hitherto done. 3 What the most honorable Lords of his Majesty's
privy Council have done concerning the Kings Majesty's last Proclamation, is
not sufficiently known to us, and far less upon what grounds and motives they
have (as you say) rescinded their approbation of the late Proclamation. 4 His
Majesty's religious and righteous disposition, has been to us, and is a main
ground wherefore we rest and rely upon his gracious Proclamation, persuading
our selves, that he intends not, nor ever intended, any innovation in
religion. 5 We shall labor, by all means, to eschew every thing, which in the
least degree may wrong you, our reverend and worthy brethren. As for the wrongs
already done by us to you, (as ye pretend) whenever it shall please you to
specify them, we hope to give you full satisfaction, and to clear our selves
of that imputation. 6 The work of God toward any nation, how strange and
wonderful soever it seem to be, is never contrary to his word: And therefore
we fear not to be found fighting against Gods work, so long as we fight not
against his truth, revealed in his word. That all-seeing Lord knows, that we
maintain his truth according to the light of our consciences, and are ready to
join heart and hand with you, for the purity and peace of this Church, in every
lawful way and course, as sincere lovers of truth and peace.

And now, brethren, before we conclude, again we entreat you, and all others
our dear country men, especially our reverend brethren of the holy Ministry,
to judge charitably of us, and of our proceedings at this time; and in
particular, of these our Demands, and Replies; which, God is our witness,
neither hatred of any man's person, nor love of contention, nor any worldly
respect; but only the conscience of our calling has drawn from us. And as for
our arguments for not subscribing, which are taken from our due subjection and
obedience to our Sovereign, and his laws, We protest and declare, That they
ought not to be so interpreted, as if we intended to accuse you, or others, our
dear country men, of disloyalty toward our most gracious King; or as if our
purpose were to lay any such imputation upon you: For they are only used by us,
to show what the words of the Covenant seem to us to import, and how we
conceive of them; as also, what makes us so to conceive of them. We doubt not,
reverend brethren, but ye know, that as we owe to you, and to your proceedings,
the favorable judgment of charity; so we ought to judge of those things,
which we are to swear, and subscribe, with the strict and inquisitive judgment
of verity; and consequently, we ought to ponder duly, and to propound
particularly and fully to others, (especially to those who require our oath and
subscription, and undertake to satisfy our consciences thereanent) all the
doubts and reasons which make us unwilling or afraid to give our subscription
thereunto.

JOHN FORBES of Corse, Doctor and Professor of Divinity in Aberdene. ALEXANDER
SCROGIE, Minister at old Aberdene, D. D. WILLIAM LESLEY, D. D. and Principal
of the Kings College, in Aberdene. ROBERT BARON, Doctor and Professor of
Divinity, and Minister at Aberdene. JA. SIBBALD, Doctor of Divinity, and
Minister at Aberdene. ALEXANDER ROSS, Doctor of Divinity, and Minister at
Aberdene.


FINIS.

