A TRVE REPORT Of the most gracious and merciful message of her most excellent
Majesty, sent by the right honorable Sir Christopher Hatton Knight,
Vizchamberlaine, and one of her Highness most honorable privy Counsel, to
the place where THOMAS APPELTREE should have suffered for his most Traitorlike
action: With such other discourse as it pleased him to use upon the matter at
the same time: wherein nothing is added, but his only speech verbatim, as my
weak memory would serve me to do it.

CHARITAS
printer's or publisher's device

Printed at London, by Henry Bynneman. Anno. M.D.LXXIX. Iulij. XXIIII.

MAster Carry,
Her most excellent majesty is pleased to send me to deliver her commandment
to you touching this man now here presently to die. The people doubted of a
pardon at his first speech.
And first, I think it not out of purpose, to notify his offense to these
good people, vvherby he is not only vvorthie this punishment: but in judgment
of foreign nations, and by censure of foreign laws, should be delivered to
the tormentors, to endure such torture, as the quality of his offense in so
high a case by good policy should co^dignlie deserve.

The people marvelous attentive to hear.
And to speak of this fact, such it was, and so fearful, as my heart
quaketh, and my eyes can not refrain tears to repeat it again amongst you.
(God for his mercies sake shield, and defend her most excellent Majesty,
that most mightily has digested the notable danger.) And so I vvil tell you
of this tragedy in course as it fell out.

It liked her highness in respect of the great heat, The cause is declared
why her Majesty took the water
to take the air of the water, vvher in grave and weight negotiation she
passed the time in discourse with the French Ambassador by the space of an
hour or two. In her return it pleased her to take diverse pauses, and the
rather, by cause she earnestly read a Book, vvherin it seemed for recreations
sake she took some delighte. By means whereof (even as it pleased God with
his holy hand, as it were, to direct her safety) she commanded the Bargemen
to slack their labor, Only gods providence in saving her Majesty from the
shot.
and slovvly to pass on, where if they had hasted but two strokes more,
they had brought her royal person into the shot it self.

These words were scarcely spoken out by her Majesty, but his caitiue most
unhappily (I must say most diuellishly) discharged his Arquebuse, strongly
charged with bullet, into the Barge where her Majesty was. (God that has
defended her, God that has defended her, thou most mighty God ever vouchsafe
to keep her.) With this blovv the second man to the bayles of the Barge,
within six foot of her royal person, A strange and a horrible terror
never hard nor seen the like in Englad before.
was stricke^ down from his feate, and vvounded through both his arms,
which her majesty beheld, and kingly handled this cause, as eue^ straight I
vvil tell you.

My Lords of her Majesty's counsel dispearsed abroad in their affairs, The
sudden great fear of the Lords of the Caunsell at the heering of these
terrible news.
hearing of this most perilous accidente, returned to Court, with such
speed as the vvaighte of such a cause might move them to do, and there with
fearful and loving applausure tovvard her Majesty, did most holily thank
our God for his singular help in the preservation of our most dear and
righteous Sovereign.

That done according, with their loves, and duties of service to God, her
majesty and this whole estate: after deliberate, and most grave consultation
of the cause, they al most humbly on their knees besought the Queen that this
slave might suffer, not this death, The Counsel most desirous to punish this
fact.
but ten thousand deaths (if so it were possible in nature to do) for his so
rash and fearful offense. Such, in deed, might the offense have been, which
God for his mercies sake has most fauourablye forbidden, that it might have
roughte up to heaven, and should most miserably not only have plaged this her
own land, It was strange to see the people staring in M. Vizchamberlains face,
some weeping, at the speking of these words
but all the true servant of God dispearsed through Christendom: our
Religion, and true faith in Jesus Christ, which we enjoy with unspeakable
comfort of free conscience, might hereby have suffered confusion, and
persecution of blood, and vengeance amongst us. Our peace, and secure
estates, increased with exceeding vvelthes, and nourished with most svveet
quietness of life by this her most happy government, and reign of twenty
years, might hereby have been turned to blouddie vvarres, the fruits whereof
is burning and spoiling of houses and goods, rauishing and destroying of our
vviues and children. And what vengeance soever the world can bring forth,
Here they left all both hands and eyes to heaven, saying God bless her
Majesty god bless her majesty. etc.
the same should have fallen on us, I say on us, then the most miserable me^
in the world. And therefore hear me I pray you. Let us acknovvledge before God
with all humble thankfulness these unspeakable benefits, which we have
inioyed, and still shall do, while God vpholdeth her blessed life, and state
amongst us. The loss, and lack of whom, Here the people with tears showed
themselves most sorrowful of these tragical speeches.
can not but bring on us all these calamities, and ten thousand more, which I
can not for see. If then by these, and all other benefits, which you possess,
feel, and taste of, you find how inestimable, and precious a jewel this our
dear Sovereign is for us, and amongst us, what plague, torment, or
punishment, could suffice you for revenge on him, that by any means should
deprive you of such heavenly, and vvorldly felicities, as daily by her holy
hand are ministered amongst you? But I will meddle no further with these
matters. I know you thank god for them, and with true and faithful obedient
hearts vvil ever serve her most excellent Majesty, whom he has made his
minister to distribute all these blessings into yours bosoms.

And now, if it please you, you may with marvel hear the message I come of.
This sudden strange pardon amazed the people.
I bring mercy to this man, the gracious pardon of our most dear Sovereign,
who with her merciful eye, The gretnesse of her Maiest^^ m^^cye s^^med
such, as the people between joys and sorrows were amassed.
beholding the clearenesse of this man's heart, free from evil thought, and
consequently from prepension of any malicious fact against her person,
vouchsafes to pull him from the Gallovvs. A notable action of compassion
proceeding from a heavenly mind, and so far different from the common nature
of man, forced into a fearful jealousy of loss of life, as has never bin
read nor heard of.

If casually a man suffer hurt in the fields by an arrovve shot by chance
at rouing marks, A true description of man's frail nature in seeking revenge,
confirmed with examples.
how reuengefully the party offended will follow his process of felony,
I have often seen, and the law does well allow it. If in the Court the meanest
serving man strike his fellow with his fist so that he bleed, he is to loose
the same hand. Many other examples may be given you, both touching the
casualtie in this man's fact, and touching the place, and presence, wherein it
chanced to be done. Here he notes the heavenly disposition of her Majesty,
far differente from the nature of man, in pardonyng so great an offense against
law and nature.


But our Queen looks neither on her prerogative, on the power of her
laws, nor on the peril of her person, but with the nobility of her heart,
the danger only done to her self, does as you hear, freely pardon it. And
in the sacred word of her kingly estate I protest it unto you, she has
firmly auovved that she had rather have suffered the vvounds the Bargeman now
has, ten fold, See the exceeding love of a priace toward her subjects, in
excusing all accidents without any suspicion of all meaning.
than the meanest of us al, or of any subjects, should suffer the slander of
so tyrannous or traiterous a fact, yea, or of the prepension, or forethoughte
of so horrible a treason tovvarde her, though it were in fact never executed.

Wherein to all our singular comfortes, it pleased her with most princely
affection and earnestness, graciously to affirm, that never Prince had
better, nor more kind true Subjects. God for his mercy direct us, ever to
be so, Here all the people shouted out Amen, Amen.
and with our due gratefulness to sacrifise at her kingly feet our blood
and lives for her service sake, when occasion shall call us thereto.

M. Carry was master to this lewd man APPELTREE, and Knight Marshall for that
day appointed.
One other thing I find her Majesty troubled with, that is, the sorrow this
noble young Gentleman, M. Henry Carry, has suffered in continual grief of
his heart for the offense of his man, who through the vain ielosie of some
evil dysposed persons, has lykevvise borne some sclaunder of the cause. But
it suffiseth to clear him, that no intent of malice, nor forethought of this
fact, is found in the party himself. M. Caries commendation.
His conversation besides with exceeding faith and diligence in her highness
service, vvil ever deliver him, as a most acceptable Gentleman free from this
and all other evil in the sight of her Majesty and all the world: I shall
not need therefore to speak of him, for his cause needs none excuse.

He recites the Queens virtues, and most worthily commends her rare courage
in such a pilous chance.
Here may you behold the rare goodness of our great and gracious Mistress,
full of Religion and piety, Justice and mercy, Temperance and magnanimity
(and that I cannot but tell you) of the most constant and noble courage that
ever lived: the proof whereof (the cause hard, vvherat I was present) I
leave to your judgments.

Her Majesty taking prospecte out of the bales of her Barge, Behold her
princely stoutnesse nothing dismayed at this sudden terror, but with such care
to this poor wounded man and with such countenance to the Ambassador, that
she seemed a mother to the one and a Queen to the other.
at the very instant did see the man stricken, and beheld his fall, and heard,
as it were, his deadly scritche, whom she immediately commanded to be taken
up, and then beholding him all embrued with blood, commanded his wounds
to be lapped up with a scarffe of her own, and so with her most constant
and amiable countenance, continued her entertainment of the Ambassador, as
though there had been no such matter. Afterward the man began to fainte, her
highness then commanded a cloak to be put on his body, with other such
necessary reliefes as were there presentely to be had, without alteration of
countenance.

Behold this kingly heart, and courage of rare magnanimity, seeing, as it
were, the present death of the next to her, Her highness magnanimity mingled
with mercy, the one most comfortable to her subjects, and the other most
terrible to her foes.
neither feared her ovvnelyfe, nor was dismayed with this treasonable
chance. An action more than marvelous in her sex. Hereof how much we may
rejoice, I want wit to tell you. But in one word, her highness, that with
her singular vvisdome and policy has preserved her Empire these twenty
years in most joyful peace, with this courage and magnanimity will (no
doubt) as mightily defend us in the most cruel vvarres. God therefore ever
bliss her, and let us with our hands stretched up to heaven, and our eyes
fixed on the seat of God, pray for her long life, and most prosperous reign
over us. THOMAS APPELTREE receive thy life from her most excellent Majesty, An
earnest exhortation to pray.
and pray unto God upon thy knees for her all thy days to come. etc.

Here M.Viz chamberlain kneled on his knees, with all the people praising God
for her majesty's safe ^^liuerie.
And so the people being moved to prayer for his Majesty's most happy escape,
and for the blessing of God to lengthen her days for many and many years, he
fell down on his knees with great devotion amongst them, and so departed
with exceeding joy to the people, and a thousand blessings on himself.


