A TREATISE AGAINST LYING.

WHEREIN IS SHEVVED WHAT IT IS, THE NATVRE AND CAUSES OF this sin, the
diverse kinds of it; and that all of them are sinful, and unlawful, with the
motives and means to preserve us from it, or to cure us of it.

BY JOHN DOWNHAM, B. of D. and Preacher of Gods Word.

EPHESIANS. 4. 25. Wherefore putting away Lying, speak every man Truth with his
neighbor, for we are members one with another. LONDON, Imprinted by Felix
Kyngston for Nicolas Bourne, and are to be sold at his shop, at the South
Entrance of the Royal Exchange.

1636.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD, LORD NEWBVRGH, Chancellor of the DVTCHIE of
Lancaster, one of his Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel, and to the
virtuous LADY his Wife. J. D. wishes all temporal happiness in this life,
and everlasting blessedness, in the Life to come.
THere are no diseases, (right Honorable) so dangerous to a Country or
Commonwealth, as those which being Epidemicall, infectious and of a spreading
nature, are also mortal; and yet so desperately neglected by the people, that
they have not any providence to prevent them, or care to cure them: neither do
any more need the skill and care of the learned Physician, seeing the Patient
being insensible of his sickness, is careless of his own recovery. And the
same also as it may be truly said of all vices, the sickenesses of the Soul,
which are then most perilous, when as they are common, over-spreading all
sorts of men with an universal infection, deadly dangerous, and yet so
stupifying those that are tainted and taken with them, that they are insensible
of their disease, and shun carelessely the means of cure; so especially, it
may fitly be applied to this vicious habit of Lying, which is so universal an
infection, that we may particularly apply unto it Salomons question, who can
say I have made my heart Prove. 20. 9 Psalm. 5. 6. Apoc. 22. ^^. and 21. 8.
clean, I am pure from this sin? So mortally dangerous, that without
repentance it brings certain destruction, excludes us from Heavenly
Happiness, and casts us headlong into the fire of Hell; and yet so pleasing
to corrupt nature, and so availeable (as men think) for the atchieving of
their worldly and carnal ends, that they are insensible of their danger, love
their disease, and neglecting all means of cure do live and die in it without
repentance. In which regard as it is the duty of those whom God has called to
be the Souls Physicians, that they show their skill and care in discovering
this dangerous disease, and in using all good means both for the preventing
and curing of it: So I thought my self interessed in this work, and the
rather because being an argument of such necessary importance, yet there has
been hitherto little written of it. Of which my poor labors, I have made
choice of your Honors as Patrons, being hereunto moved, partly by that
experimental knowledge which I have had of your piety and love to religion,
approved by your practice of Christian duties in your daily exercise, your good
respect to the Ministers of Christ, and all that fear God; as also your
delighting in Truth, Justice, and all other Virtues: For who are more fit to
protect those works that oppose vice, than such whose course and conversation
is ennobled with Virtue, and Goodness; and partly that hereby I might make an
acknowledgement how much I am obliged to your Honors for your undeserved
favors: And because Iam so deeply indebted, that it is not in my power to
make any satisfaction, to leave unto the world a grateful rememberance of my
many obligations: Not doubting but that our great LORD and MASTER, (whose
rewards and retributions are like Himself, Infinite and Everlasting, and has
taken whatsoever kindness is done unto any of his poor Disciples and
Ministers upon his own account, (and made it his own debt) will out of his
All Sufficiency, bountifully supply what is wanting on my part through
inability, and richly recompense all your many favors toward me, with the
Blessings of this life; and Eternal Happiness in the Life to come: which
shall be the daily prayer of

Your Honors most obliged in all Christian duties, JOHN DOWNAME.

Recensui librum hunc cui titulus est (A Treatise against the sin of Lying)
In quo nihil reperio quo minus cum utilitate publica imprimatur; modo intra
tres menses proxime sequentes typis mandetur.

Exaedibus Londin. Novem. 3. 1635. SAM. BAKER.

A TREATISE AGAINST THE SIN OF LYING.
(...). That the vice of Lying is very common.
CHAP. I.
That the vice of Lying is so common and universal, that it has corrupted all
sorts and conditions of Men.

AS good is most commendable. 1. That the vice of Lying is most common.
when as it is most common and communicable, because it multiplies it self,
and increases the happiness of many in whom it is; so vice and sin is so
much the more sinful and pernicious; by how much the more it diffuseth and
spreads it self as a common Plague or Leprosy to the infection and
destruction of many, and utter ruin of all humane societies. In which regard
this sin of lying, of which I now purpose (God assisting me) to entreat, may
challenge unto it self a special pre-eminence above almost all other vices,
there being none more common and universal, whether we respect persons,
times, or places. It begun with our first Parents as soon almost as they had
their beginning, who no sooner left their innocence and integrity, than they
left their Truth; and falling into sin, they fell to lying, hiding it in this
dark shade, and covering it under this black veil, because they saw it so
foul and loathsome, that they were ashamed to bring it unto the light* For
being asked by God why they hid themselves from his Presence among the trees of
the Garden, they allege two false causes, and conceal the Truth. The one,
was because they heard Gods Voice, which made them afraid; the other, because
they saw their own nakedness; whereas they had often before heard God
speaking unto them and were not terrified, and had seen themselves naked and
were not ashamed; neither was it their want of clothing, but of the robe of
Innocence, and their sin that brought this shame and fear. And from their
loins this corruption is naturally propagated to all their Posterity: from
their sinful breasts we have all sucked this deadly poison, which has so
generally infected the corrupted nature of all Mankind, that there is scarce
any vice or sin unto which we are more inclined, than unto this of lying.

The which will better appear, if we consider. 2. That all Nations and
conditions of Men are subject to this vice,
that there is no Country or Nation, no place, age or condition of Men,
privileged and exempted from this contagion; no people so rude and savage, but
have attained to the Art and skill of lying and dissembling; none so well
civilized and instructed in moral virtue, governed and restrained from vice by
politic laws, but that they often break their bounds, and take unto
themselves a licentious liberty to speak untruths for their advantage; yea no
Nation so well nurtured and taught in the knowledge of God and his true
Religion, but that the most of them are tainted with the contagion of this
vice; and though they make some conscience of other sins, as murder,
whoredom, drunkenness, fraud, oppression, and the like, yet they are nothing
scrupulous to use their best skill in lying, when as they think that it is for
their gain and advantage. And therefore though some people more than others,
either by a natural inclination, example or custom, do exceed in this vice,
and (like the Cretians in the Apostles time) may by way of eminency be called
Liars; yet there are no sorts Tit. 1. 12.
of Men savadge or civil, Pagans, Turks or Christians, which are not too much
addicted to this base and pernicious vice.

But that I may confine my speech within narrower. 3. That our own people and
nation are much infected with the contagion of this sin of lying.
bounds, and leaving others, come unto our selves; who sees not, that after
so long a time of preaching the Gospel, the light thereof has not yet
dispelled these foggy mystes of falsehood and lying? Take a view of all places
in our Land, Court, City and Country, and we shall find no Goshen that is
exempted and free from this Egyptian darkness; almost all Men endeavoring to
mislead others into errors, by lies and untruths. And that which is worst of
all, Men's consciences are not convinced of the greatness of this sin,
whereof it comes to pass that it is not only in daily practice, but also in
some inward esteem and credit; as contrariwise plain and simple truth in some
disgrace, the most m^n being ready to applaud themselves when they have
achieved their ends by subtle untruths, and to censure others as dull and
foolishly simple, who loving the Truth, do loose the advantage of compassing
their end; because they make conscience of their words and ways, and will not
purchase their hopes at the price of a lie. So that in these days we may
justly take up the complaint of Jeremy: Truth is perished, and is cut off from
the mouth of Men: and that of the Jer. 7. 28.
Prophet Esaias: Judgment is turned away backward, Esai. 59. 14, 15.
and Justice stands a far off; for Truth is fallen in the Street, and
Equity cannot enter: yea Truth fails, and he that departs from evil,
makes himself a prey.

For if we look amongst all sorts of Men, we. 4. That entertainment lies
find among Courtiers.
shall find Truth neglected, and lies applauded and daily practiced. Amongst
some Courtiers, they are esteemed ornaments and elegancies of speech, and
commended as witty complements to fill up the empty place of absent Truth:
neither do they use their tongues for that end, for which God gave them, namely
to be the true interpreters of their mind's and hearts, but to feign and
dissemble, professing the greatest love and kindness to those unto whom they
intend most mischief. And now it is esteemed an high point of prudence, either
cunningly to reserve themselves in a grave and solemn silence, and concealing
their own thoughts and intentions to lie upon the catch, that they may take
all advantages for the discovering of others secrets; or so to speak and
discourse, as that their words may not lay open their minds, but rather
mislead their hearers into false conceits and errors: Men not caring, so that
their maine end and aim be good, though they neglect Truth, when it will not
serve for their purpose so well as a lie.

Look into our courts of Justice, in which next. 5. That lies are frequent in
Courts of Justice Psalm. 82. 1.
unto the Pulpit Truth may challenge a place, as being the best guide that
leads unto right where God stands and judges among the gods, and therefore
nothing but truth should be spoken before the God of Truth who abhors lies,
and his Deputies and Vicegerents, who bearing his Image and sitting in his
place should, that they may judge rightly, be thoroughly informed in the Truth.
And where shall we find Truth more neglected, discountenanced and betrayed,
than amongst those who would seem to plead for it? where have lies and
untruths more frequent and familiar entertainment? For how few among that
profession that make conscience to be entertained in a bad cause, and having
taken upon them the patronage of it, make any scruple to use their uttermost
abilities to dazell and blind the eyes of the Judge; not only by their Art
and skill, but also by speaking untruths, when they will advantage their ill
cause? Neither do they only hereby endeavor to hinder the right of the
adverse party, but also disgrace his person with false aspersions, and that not
in words alone which might be blown away with the wind, but also in their
Bills and writings which must remain upon record; for which nothing can be
said that I know of, but that lying is grown into a custom, and become a
common form in the course of pleading. Yea I would there were none of this
profession that do intertaine more willingly a bad cause than a good, because
it promises greater gain, and choose to speak lies rather than Truth, because
if they prevail in the suite, they can sell them to their client at an higher
price. So that here again we may complain with the Prophet: Your fingers are
defiled with iniquity, Jer. ^^. ^
your lips have spoken lies, your tongues have muttered perverseness. None
calls for Justice, nor any pleads for Truth: or if they do both, yet it is
rather for their fees sake, than for the love of either.

Yea even our Divines themselves, though they. 6. That many Divines are guilty
of this vice.
be professors of divine Truth, cannot wholly be excused and cleared of this
vice; and that not only in respect of their private courses and conversations,
but also in regard of the work of their Ministry. For to speak nothing of
them who for sinister ends broach errors of Doctrine, and in stead of Gods
Truth, their own frothy and false conceits; that they may make Proselytes and
gather a number of Disciples, by whom they may be applauded and maintained: how
many are there that for trencher courtesies are ready to approve and applaud
their benefactors in their sins of fraud, oppression, usury? and like those
women, of whom Ezechiel speaks, sow pillowes under the arm holes and elbowes
Ezec. 1^ 18. ^^.
of sinners, that they may the more securely sleep in their sins, polluting
Gods holy Name among the people for handfulls of barley, and pieces of bread to
slay the souls that should not dye, and to save the souls alive that should
not live, by their lying to Gods People that hear their lies, making the
hearts of the righteous sad with their lies, whom GOD has not made sad, and
strengthening the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his
wicked way by promising him life? Others speak pleasing things rather than
profitable, heartning and encouraging the people in their vicious courses, both
by their words and examples, and walking (as the Prophet Micah speaks of some
such in his days) in the spirit of falsehood, do Micah 2. ^1.
^ye saying, I will prophecy unto thee of wine and strong drink. But as such
men dishonor God and that high calling unto which he has called them, by
their teaching of lies, making themselves base and contemptible and even the
very tail in the common Esa. 9 1^.
wealth, as the Prophet Esaias speaks: so will the Lord dishonor them in the
eyes of all good men, and take them away by his heavy judgments, Jer. 14. 15.
as the Prophet Jeremy threatens.

But though this sin greatly reigns amongst. 7. That this vice of Lying
chiefly reigns in Cities and Towns, and especially amongst Shopkeepers and
Artificers.
all sorts and conditions of men in our Land, yet amongst none more than our
Citizens, shopkeepers and artificers. For do we not see that they in their
Trade of buying and selling do also make a common Trade of lying? And so they
may utter their wares, they are content by sinning to set their souls to sale,
giving them in as an over-measure and (as it were) an advantage to the
bargain; neither do they more dazzle the eyes of the buyer with their false
lights, than the eyes of their minds and judgments with their false praises,
lavishly affirming that there are none so good in the town, when as themselves
know that they have much better in their own shops; that they cost them so
much, when as afterward they are content to sell them for less; that they
would not abate any thing of that price to their own father or mother, though
soon after they agree to take less of a stranger; and that none but they
should have had them so good cheap, though perhaps this be the first, and it
may be the last time that they ever saw or shall see them. Yea they are not
content to use only their natural faculty of lying, but strive also to perfect
it with art, and bend all their wits daily to improve their skill; helping
themselves by their observation and experience to know and discern what
method and skill of lying they find most advantageable. Nay they are not
content to go on themselves in these ways of darkness, but they will
compel their servants and apprentises to go together with them in the same
wicked courses, and now in these days take great sums of money to teach them
their art, in which if they profit not, they are in no esteem, as being dull
and heavy headed fellows; ill chapmen, and altogether unfit to deal with
their customers. And though they above all others cannot endure lies in their
servants in any matters that concern themselves, when as they tend to their
hurt and damage, nor that they should cover their faults committed in the
Family by speaking untruthes, and therefore will endeavor to break them of
this vice if they be given to it; yet they will not only suffer, but also
teach them to lie in their ordinary trading; as though lies to deceive others
were commendable, but hateful when they are used to beguile them; lawful and
laudable in the shop, but odious and intolerable in any other part of the
house: wherein they grossly deceive themselves, for he that makes no conscience
of lying in one place, will make as little in another: he that will not stick
to lie for his masters pleasure and profit, will as easily adventure on it to
hide his own faults, that he may escape shame or punishment; and he that by
the daily practice of lying in the shop comes to a custom and habit, can
hardly leave it in the hall or chamber. But let such masters tremble to think
that hereby they bring Gods wrath upon them, not only for their own sins,
but also for the sins of their servants, in which they are not accessaries
alone but even principals: and what a fearful account they have to make at
the Day of Judgment for poisoning of youth committed to their charge with this
vice of lying and deceit, making them hereby subject to Gods wrath and liable
to that woe and heavy judgment denounced against such servants, as Zeph. 1. 9.
fearing man more than God, do enrich their masters with their lies and
deceit. I have enlarged my self the more in showing how this sin abounds
in the City, because being so general, yet few lay it to heart as a sin
against God and man, but rather applaude themselves in it as the excellency of
their skill in their trade; whereof belike it was that in former times Trades
were called Mysteries and Crafts, because this mystery of iniquity was
practiced in them, and all craft and deceit used in their buying and selling:
or rather being good words in their prime signification, they came into
discredit by their abuse in their trades, and craft became a word of ill report
and taken in an ill sense, by reason of that cunning deceit which was used in
Crafts and Occupations. And now I should speak no more of this vice amongst
Tradesmen, if I did not observe another kind of lying practiced by
shopkeepers, which with grief and bowels of compassion I have observed to be
most pernicious, as being joined with grievous oppression; namely that when
their poor workmen (by whose art and skill, labors and endeavors they are
enriched) come unto their shops and offer them their work and wares to sell
for the relief of themselves and families, they put them off and slight their
commodities, telling them that they need them not, because they would beat them
down to a low and base price, by working upon their pressing necessity;
whereas in truth they want and need to buy them, and to procure them would
run to their worke-houses, if their urgent wants (as a goade in their sides)
did not enforce them to outrunne them and prevent their haste. Yet howsoever
these men deserve to be pitied as oppressed, yet they cannot be cleared as
innocent, seeing they likewise use the same arts and slights of lying which I
have before condemned in the other, and having made false and deceitful work
and wares, they cover usually their faults and defects in workmanship with
untruths, affirming them to be perfect and good, durable, profitable and every
way for their turn that buy them, when as themselves know that they are bad,
slight and good for nothing. So that in respect both of the one and other, we
have just cause to complain of our Citizens and townes-men in this land, as
Ezechiei did sometime of Jerusalem: She has wearied her self with lies, and
her scumme went Ezec. 24. 12.
not forth out of her. And therefore all that are plain and simple hearted had
now, if ever, need to hearken to Ieremies warning: Take ye heed every Jer. 9.
4, 5.
one of his neighbor, and trust ye not in any brother: for every brother will
utterly supplant, and they will deceive every one his neighbor, and will not
speak the truth: they have taught their tongue to speak lies, and weary
themselves to commit iniquity. Thy habitation Quid Romae faciam? mentiri
nescio. Juvenal. Satyr. 3.
is in the midst of deceit, etc. And yet let me not be here mistaken, as
though I judged all men in these places alike and under the same guilt; for I
know that there are many of them that truly fearing God, do make conscience
of all their words and ways, dealing as they would be done by, and in their
trading and conversation, abhorring to seek their advantage by lies and
deceit; but I speak only of the greater part, and of the usual and common
practice of the most in these days.

Neither let the country people bless themselves. 8. That Country people
also are tainted with this vice.
as though they were innocent, nor suppose that I acquit them because I have
not hitherto discovered and reproved them. For I doubt not but those that are
conversant with them, and are daily witnesses of their words and dealings, do
find them as faulty in their kind, as crafty and deceitful, as forward to
advance their ends and accomplish their desires with untruths and lies, and as
cunning to deceive in their buying and selling, their contracts and bargains,
by setting truth to sale at the cheapest rate, as those that live in towns
and Cities. Yea rather as they for the most part are more rude and untaught, so
they are more subject to this vice, and less ashamed when they are taken in
it, than those that are civilized and better instructed. Although perhaps they
offend more seldom than Citizens, because they are not exposed to so many
tentations as those that spend their whole time in buying and selling, unto
which this sin of lying sticks as close as the shirt to the back, or the
skin to the flesh. And this Solomon observed that the buyer usually
disprayseth in words, what he likes and approves in his heart. It is naught,
it is naught (says the buyer) but when he is gone his way, then he boasts
of his bargain. And Prove. 20. 14.
the son of Syrach tells us, that as a nail sticks Eccl. 27. 2.
fast between the joynings of the stones, so does sin stick close between
buying and selling.

Finally, as this sin of lying reigns in all places,. 9. That inferiors,
children and servants are most prone to this vice of Lying.
so in no persons more than in inferiors, as children and servants, who being
not so careful to avoid the committing of faults, as being committed to hide
and cover them, lest they might hereby incur the just displeasure of their
Superiors, and so bring upon themselves deserved punishment, do usually use
lying, that under this covert they may keep them from being discovered. Yea
having told one lie they are ready to second it with another, and that with a
third and fourth, not caring to fall into a greater sin to excuse a less,
and to make the wound of conscience more deep and desperate, by doubling and
redoubling of their fault; whereas an humble and penitent confession would be
accepted of their Governors, as a good part of satisfaction; being more
pleased with their acknowledgement which gives some hope of amendment for the
future, then displeased with the fault it self. But let such take notice of
their vanity and solly, whilst they run headlong into greater evils out of
a bare hope to avoid the less, which often deceives them and makes their
faults more heinous and unexcusable. For what is the displeasure of mortal man
which they endeavor to avoid, in comparison of the wrath of the immortal GOD
which they certainly incur? What are the momentany corrections and
punishments inflicted by men, in comparison of those torments easelesse and
endless in that Lake Apoc. 21. 8.
which burns with fire and brimstone, which are threatened by God, and shall
most certainly be suffered, unless they be prevented by unfeigned repentance?

By all which it appears that this sin of lying,. 10. That Gods Ministers
should endeavor to suppress this vice.
has so much prevailed in all places, and also over all sorts of persons in
our Land; that God may as justly complain of England, as he did heretofore of
Ephraim and Israel; Ephraim compasses me about Hos. 11. 12.
with lies, and the house of Israel with deceit. In which regard Gods Ministers
should bend their whole strength both by preaching and writing against this
vice which so much reigns in this Land: for God has appointed us to be
watchmen, who must give the people warning, and convince them of Ezec. 3.
those sins, which do most endanger them to his judgments, and lay them
open and naked to their enemies. They must lift up their voice like a Esaias. 58.
1.
Trumpet, and show Gods People their transgression, and the house of Jacob
their sin. Neither is it enough that they speak against sin in general, nor
yet that they inveigh against the sins of other Nations, to which their
people are not much subject (for this were rather to backebite sin, than to
reprove it) but they must bend their chief strength against the common and
reigning sins of the times and places where they live; and their voice like
the Trumpet must not give an uncertain or impertinent sound, but such as may
be for the use and direction of their own Troops. The consideration whereof,
as it moved me heretofore in the time of my chiefest strength to write against
those common vices of swearing, whoredom, drunkenness, bribery, rash and
unjust anger which have overflowed our Land like an universal Deluge; so does
it now in my old Age, and in my greater weakness both of body and mind,
incite me to write against this vice of Lying, both because it is no less, if
not more common, than any of the rest; and herein more pernicious, because Men's
consciences are not convinced of the greatness of this sin, and therefore
securely live in it without repentance: And also because I have not known of
any other that have written of this Subject, although many might much better
have done it, in respect of their greater strength and better abilities.

CHAP. II.
Wherein is showed what a Lie is.

NOw in speaking of this vice, I will. 1. What a lie is, and what things
concur in it.
show; 1. What a Lie is. 2. The causes of it. 3. The kinds and sorts of Lying.
4. The means to preserve us from it. And lastly, the uses which we ought to
make of all this Doctrine. Saint Augustine briefly defines Mendacium est
quippe falsa significatio cum voluntate fallendi. Aug. contr. mendac. ad
Consent. lib. 2. cap. 12. Qua* propter ille mentitur qui aliud habet in animo
and aliud verbis vel quibuslibet significationibus enunciat. lib. 1. cap. 3.
it thus; A Lie is a false signification with a will to deceive: And that
(says he) is not a false signification, when as though one thing is signified
by another, yet that is true which is signified, if it be rightly understood.
And this he explaineth in another place, where he says, that he lies who
has one thing in his mind, and utters another thing in his words, or any
other way of signification; more plainly (as I take it) we may thus describe
it. A lie is a vicious speech in which the tongue disagreeth from the mind,
which is voluntarily uttered with a purpose and desire to deceive; or thus, a
lie is a false expression or signification of the notions and conceptions of
the mind; by speaking, writing, or any other significant actions or gestures,
voluntarily uttered with a purpose and desire to deceive; or when the Truth is
suppressed and betrayed by silence, when we ought to declare and confess it:
whereby it appears, that these three things do concur in a lie. First,
falsity or untruth uttered by speaking, writing, or any other means contrary
to that Truth, with which the mind is enlightened. Secondly, that it be
voluntary, the will resisting the mind, and commanding expressions which are
contrary to its notions and conceptions. Thirdly, that it be done with a
purpose and desire to deceive. The two first do contain the matter and form,
the third the end at which he aymeth who tells an untruth.

But for the better and more full clearing of the. 2. Of the name or thing
defined.
nature of this vice, we will first say something of the name or thing
defined, and then of the definition it self. Our English name whereby we
express it is Lie, the Etymology whereof we cannot easily guess at. It may
seem to be derived or borrowed from the Belgicke word Lieghen, or the German
Lugen, which signify to lie; and they to be derived from the Greek word (...)
which signifies to speak or talk: because (as Scaliger observes) in much
speaking or talking is usually some lying. The Latin expresses it by a name
which signifies the disagreement that is in it between the tongue and the
mind, mentiri, quasi contra mentem ire, to lie is to go against the mind, or
to say that which the mind gain-sayeth, the tongue speaking contrary to that
Truth which the mind conceives. The Grecians call a lie (...) of (...) which
signifies to deceive, because deceit is the maine end of lying. And this some
derive from (...) of (...) which signifies to fly or avoyde, because lying is
such a vice as men naturally abhorring, when it is spoken against themselves,
do shun and fly from it; others derive (...) which Arist. eth. lib. 4. cap. 7.
signifies to reprehend, disprayse or disgrace, because (...) is (...), a lie
is reprehended and dispraysed amongst all, as a thing vain and wicked. The
Hebritians commonly call a lie Aven, the same word also signifying iniquity and
sin; because in all lies though they seem never so specious and excusable,
there is iniquity and sin, because the will and the tongue do disagree from
the mind, and do betray it, by forcing it (like a false interpreter) to
speak that which it does not conceive and think.

And so I come from the name to speak of the. 3. Of the falsity that is in a
Lie.
nature of the thing described. In which the first thing considerable is the
falsity and untruth that is in every lie. The which is twofold: First, when
that is false which is spoken. Secondly, when as Men speak the Truth falsely,
that is, with a purpose to deceive. Now he speaks false who does not speak
as the thing is, whether he thinks it true or not; or whether he purposes
to deceive, or not to deceive; and he speaks falselye, who does not speak as
he thinks, whether that he speaks be true or false. The one is a
Logical untruth, when as the speech agrees not with the thing: the other a
Moral lie, or a lie against Morality, when as the mind agrees not with the
speech. He that speaks that which is false, but yet thinks it to be true,
cannot be said to lie, though he speaks an untruth; because his speech
agrees with his mind, and as he thinks he speaks: only it is his
error, either through the weakness of his reason, and understanding, and
defect in judgment; or else through rashness, incogitancie and negligence;
because he does not duly consider and examine what he says, before he
speaks it. If the former, it is not so much a sin, as the punishment of
sin; or if a sin in the strictest censure, yet but only as it is a branch
of the corruption of nature, or original sin. The other must be acknowledged
and bewailed as a sin of infirmity, if it be done seldom and at unawares;
though nothing so heinous and odious unto God as a lie. But he that speaks
willingly that which he knows to be false, or does speak the Truth falsely,
that is, either when through error and mistake he thinks it to be false;
or knowing it to be true that he may deceive, or may be better believed when he
lies, he is a liar and herein resembles the Devil; who either lies in
speaking that which he knows to be false; or else when he speaks Truth,
does it with a purpose to deceive, or that he may gain the more credit to his
lies. And thus he called our Savior Christ the Holy one of God; and his
Apostles, Paul Mar. 1. 26. Act. 16. 17.
and Silas, the servants of the most high God, either because he would deceive
the people and make them to suspect them the more, because of his testimony and
approbation, as though they were friends to his kingdom of darkness, or that
he might be the rather believed, when he should afterward slander and
reproach them as seducers and false teachers. Now which of those two, he that
speaks that which is false with a purpose to deceive, or he that speaks the
Truth to the same end, be in greater fault, it is not easy to determine,
because how much the less the one has of Truth in his speech who speaks
that which is false, so much the more the other has of craft and deceit, who
can cunningly force Truth even against its nature to advance his false ends.

Whereby it appears that there is great difference. 4. Of the difference
between lying and speaking an untruth.
between lying, and telling or speaking a lie or untruth; for in a lie the
tongue disagreeth from the mind, and falsely speaks contrary to that which
the mind thinks, and therefore lies though that be true which is spoken,
because it is conceived and thought to be otherwise: but when a Man speaks
that which is a lie or untruth being persuaded that it is true, he lies not,
because his mind and tongue agree together, and he thinks what he speaks,
but he only erreth and would not willingly deceive, but that himself is
first deceived; so that such an one cannot be said to be a liar, seeing he
minds, affects and loves Truth, but is only mistaken in what he says
through ignorance, rashness or incogitancie. And of this judgment are the
ancients. So Bernard: there is Est qui dubie profert mendacium nec mentitur:
and est qui veritatem quam nescit affirmat, and mentitur, etc. Bern. in Cant.
Sermon. 17
(says he) that tells a lie doubtingly and lies not, and there is that
affirms the Truth which he knows not, and lies; for he indeed says not
that to be which is not, but yet affirms that he believes that which in
Truth he believes, and he says Truth, although that be not true which he
believes. But the other when he says that he is Non est judicandus mendax qui
dicit falsum quod putat verum, quiaquantum in se est non fallit, sed fallitur,
etc. Anselm. in 2 Cor. 1.
certain of that whereof he is not certain, speakeeth not the Truth, although
that be true which he affirms. So Saint Anselme: He is not to be judged a
liar, who speaks false thinking it true, because as much as in him lies he
deceives not, but is deceived; and contrariwise, he lies who speaks Truth,
thinking it to be false. For he is not free from a lie who speaks true
things with his mouth, not knowing them to be so; but knowingly he lies in his
will. Saint Augustine also speaks Quisquis autem hoc enunciat quod vel
creditum animo vel opinatum tenet etiamsi falsum fit, non mentitur, etc.
August. contra mendac. ad Consentium. cap. 3.
much to the same purpose; whosoever (says he) speaks that which either he
believes or thinks in his mind, does not lie although it be false. For this
he owes to the declaring of this faith, that he utters by it that which is
in his mind, and so conceives it as he utters it. But he cannot be said
to be in no fault although he does not lie, if he either believes things not
to be believed, or thinks that he knows what he knows not, although it be
true: for he takes things unknown as known; wherefore he lies, who
conceives one thing in his mind, and utters another thing by his words, or
any other significations. From whence he that lies is said to have a double
heart, a double cogitation: one is of the thing which he knows or thinks
true, and does not speak it; another is of the thing which he speaks in
stead of this, knowing or thinking it to be false. Whence it comes to pass
that a man may speak that which is false, and yet not lie, if he thinks it
to be so as he speaks, although it be not so; and that he may speak that
which is true and yet lie, if thinking it to be false, he speaks it for a
Truth, although indeed it be so as he speaks. For a man is to be esteemed
a liar or no liar, according to the meaning of his mind, and not according to
the Truth or falsenesse of the things themselves. And therefore he that
speaks that which is false for true, thinking it to be so, may be said to
err or to be rash, but he cannot be truly said to be a liar; because when
he thus speaks, he has not a double heart, nor desires to deceive, but is
himself deceived. And in another place speaking to the same purpose he says:
neither by any means is he free from a lie, Enchirid. ad Laurentium. cap. 17.
who with his mouth speaks the Truth not knowing it to be so; because
knowingly he lies with his will, etc. and he is better who not knowing it,
speaks false, because he thinks it true, than he that willingly has a
mind to lie though he speak Truth, not knowing it to be true which he
speaks, etc. The like also may be said of promises, as P. Martyr affirms,
when as a man making 1 Samuel 21. 12.
them purposes to perform them, but afterward does not; either because he
cannot through impotency, which he foresaw not when he promised; or will not
upon some pressing necessity and much altering of the case from what it was. As
when an able man promises to pay a debt at such a day, and in the mean time
is disabled by some unexpected loss. So when one promises to lend a sum of
money to one whom he takes to be an honest man and able to repay it at such a
time, and in the mean while it appears that he is an unthrift who will
consume it in drinking or gaming; or a dishonest banke-rupt, who will make no
conscience to cheat him of it. Or if a man promises to lend his sword to one
that is sober and in his right mind, and soon after he prove distracted and
frantique, who is likely therewith to kill himself or some other: In these and
such like cases a man lies not, though he does not perform what he promised,
because his mind and tongue agreed when he made it, and the change is not
from himself, but from him unto whom he promised, because there is error
personae an error in the person, he not being the same man which he was or
seemed to be when the promise was made. And thus the Apostle Paul is excused
from a lie, when as he said that he would go into Spain, Romans 15. 24, 28. 2
Cor. 1. 15, 17.
whither he went not; and promised the Corinthians, that at such a time he
would come unto them, but did not perform it. In neither of which he lied,
because when he made these promises he did not dissemble, speaking one thing
and thinking another, but speaking then what he afterward purposed to
perform, God did in the mean while otherwise dispose of him; whose disposition
overruleth all, and is above all humane resolution.

The second thing considerable in the nature of. 5. That a lie is always
voluntary.
a lie is, that it is always voluntary, the will resisting the mind in a
known Truth, and injoyning the tongue to speak that which is contrary to it;
the heart also and affections desiring and delighting in it, either absolutely
or conditionally in respect of circumstances. So that if the will imbraceth not
an untruth as it is untrue, but only as through error of the mind and
judgment it is presented and commended unto it; and if the heart affects it
not, nor delights in it as a lie, but only as it is disguised with some
shadow or color of truth, an untruth thus mistaken cannot be accounted a lie,
because the will agrees with the mind, and the tongue is directed by the
will; so that though a man speaks a lie, yet he is no liar; because he
neither thinks that he lies, nor would willingly do it if he knew it to
be so. Interest enim inter mentientem and mendacem; nam mentiens est qui
mentitur invitus, etc. Ad Consent. lib. 1. c. 11.
To this purpose Saint Augustine: There is a difference (says he) between
one that tells a lie, and one that is a liar; for one may tell a lie that
lies unwillingly, but a liar loves to lie, and dwells with his mind in the
delight of lying.

The third thing that concurreth in a lie is, that. 6. That a lie is uttered
with a purpose to deceive.
it is an untruth, always uttered with a purpose and desire to deceive, and to
make the party to whom we speak think that to be so which is not. So that
such an untruth as is uttered without any purpose to deceive, is not to be
esteemed a lie, because it aymeth not at that end which a liar always
propounds. For howsoever some appropriate this end to pernicious lies that
the lier intends it therein only, yet indeed it belongs also to those lies
that are officious and in jest. It is true that there are some liars that have
a will and desire to deceive him unto whom they speak, without his loss, yea
it may be for his profit and delight; as those that use officious and merry
lies; and some lie with a will and desire to hurt and endammage him, as
pernicious liars, but all agree in this that all would deceive, though the one
for their good, the other for their hurt; for whosoever speaks that which is
false wittingly and willingly, whether it does good or hurt, he always
speaks it to this end, that the Truth may not be understood by him that
hears him, and consequently to deceive him. I say it is his next end to
deceive (although his remote end at which he aims, be to delight or profit
him) which he uses as a means to attain unto his desire. As when a
Physician tells his sick Patient that the potion which he wills him to
take is sweet and pleasant, though intruth it be bitter and loathsome, that so
he may persuade him to drink it for the recovery of his health, the maine end
at which herein he aims is the welfare of the sick Man, but the next end is
to deceive him, by telling an untruth, which he uses as a means to further
the other end of curing him, which is principally in his intention and desire.

The last thing in the definition to be considered. 7. Of the diverse manner
and means whereby a lie is expressed.
of, is the diverse manner and means whereby a lie is expressed and committed;
and that is either positively and directly, when as the Truth is contradicted
and opposed, or else privatively and indirectly, when as it is suppressed and
betrayed. The former is done by any outward signification of the inward notions
and thoughts of the mind, especially by our speech and actions. By our speech
a lie is expressed and committed, when as we speak otherwise than that which
we conceive in our minds, either affirming that to be which we think is
not, or denying that to be which (as we conceive) is. By our actions, when by
our outward shows, gestures and deeds, we deceitfully feign, dissemble and
disguise the Truth, that we may deceive our neighbor, by making him to think
that to be which is not, or that not to be which is; and to conceive by our
outward shows and carriage that we intend that which is least in our thought,
to this end that we may deceive and hurt him. Secondly, a lie is committed
privatively and indirectly, when as the Truth is suppressed and betrayed, and
that is done when as by silence it is concealed at such times, and before such
persons, wherein and before whom, we are bound in conscience to reveal and
confess it, for the glory of God, and good of our neighbors. For truth and
falsehood being contraries without mean, the suppressing of the one, is the
exalting of the other, and we may be truly said to lie when we deny the
truth, and to deny it when we conceal it by silence at such times as we are
lawfully called to confess it. And therefore our Savior (as appears by his
antithesis and opposition) makes this to be all one, to deny him and not to
confess him; Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess
Matthew. 10. 32, 33.
also before my Father which is in Heaven; but whosoever shall deny me before
men, him will I deny also before my Father which is in Heaven. So that our
silencing of truth when it ought to be spoken and confessed, is no better than
a denial, seeing by such silence it is betrayed, and the contrary error and
truth advanced and maintained. And therefore, fitly does the Apostle John in
that Catalogue of Apoc. 21. 8.
sinners, which shall have their part in that Lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, rank the fearful with liars, because as the one belly the truth,
so the other through their cowardice and infidelity dare not confess it, which
is all one as to betray and deny it.

CHAP. III.
Of diverse sorts and forms of speech which are to be acquitted from the
censure of a Lie.

ANd these are the things which always. 1. Of hyper^ol^es, and that they are
no lies.
concur in every Lie, whereby it appears that diverse forms of speaking
which are suspected and accused as lies, are acquitted and cleared hereof at
the Bar, before the seat of Justice, by a right sentence of true judgment,
as namely hyperbolicall speeches, fables, parables and ironies. In all which
though there be not the same spoken which is meant, punctually and literally,
yet the same in the sense and intention of the speaker, in whom there is no
will to lie or speak contrary to the truth with a love and delight in
falsehood, but a diverse expression of the same truth conceived in the mind, in
other words and phrases than are ordinary, namely such as are tropicall,
metaphorical, parabolicall and hyperbolicall, not only for the greater
elegancy, but also for the more profit of the hearer; and not to blind him
with untruthes, or deceive him with lies; but rather the better to convince him
of the truth, and to move him to embrace it with greater profit and delight. As
first for hyperboales or hyperbolicall speeches which is the raising of things
to their highest pitch, and the enlarging of them above all due proportion, not
to deceive, (for then some measure should be observed to make the thing
probable and credible) but to express the conceits of the mind in an
extraordinary loftiness of speech, not only to delight the hearer, but for
the more full informing of him of the truth for his greater profit. As also
when we give to things senseless or inanimate motion and life, yea sometimes
the use of reason. Of the former are such speeches as ascribe a kind of
infiniteness to things finite; as when speaking of a multitude, we say
commonly that they are innumerable like the sands of the Sea, of long lasting
things, that they are everlasting and without end; of those that are of great
quantity or capacity, that they are immense and above all measure. And such
phrases are used in the Scriptures, as that the Benjamites were so cunning in
the use of their slinges, Judge. 20. 16.
that they could cast their stones at an hairs breadth and not miss; that the
sins which the faithful Psalm. 137. 18.
confess themselves to have committed, were above not only the hairs of
their head in number, but even the sands by the Sea shore; and that if all
things which Christ did should be wtitten, the John 21. 25.
whole World would not contain the volumes that should be written. By which
speeches no man can be deceived, seeing if they were taken literally, there
were no shadow or show of truth in them; but rather the truth which they
persuade is the more cleared and enforced, namely that the Benjamites were
exceeding cunning in the use of their slings; that the sins confessed were a
number almost numberles, and the actions done by Christ were very many, more
than the Evangelist had recorded. Of the other we have many examples in the
Psalms and Prophets, as when the Mountains are said to skip, the Floods to
clap their hands, the Earth to hear the Word of the Lord; which cannot be
taken in their proper sense, but only as Rhetorical phrases, expressing the
truth according to the intention of the speaker in a loftiness of speech, for
the better understanding of the hearer and affecting of him with more delight.
Neither can they be esteemed lies, because they do not deceive the hearer or
reader, seeing they do not beget a false conceit in his mind, but rather
cause him to conceive and embrace the truth with greater admiration. So S.
Augustine: Whatsoever Quicquid autem figurate fit aut dicitur non est
mendacium, etc. Contra mendac. ad Consent. lib. 1. cap. 5.
is done or spoken figuratively is not a lie. For every enunciation or
signification is to be referred unto that which it signifies to the
understanding of those unto whom it is uttered: otherwise (as he says in
another place) all tropes and metaphors which are not taken in a proper but
borrowed cap. 10.
sense, by one thing signifying another, should be judged lies; as where it is
said that Christ is a Rock, a Door, a Vine, and that impenitent persons have
hearts of stone, all which are not properly and literally true, but in a
figurative sense.

The like may be said of an Ironie, which is a. 2. Of Ironies, and that they
are no lies.
Rhetorical manner of speaking, whereby we signify one contrary by another;
which is commonly used by way of jesting or derision for the dispraising or
discountenancing of that which is evil, as when we say of an unthrift, O he is
a good husband, or of a man infamous for deceit and unjust dealing; O he is a
very honest man. The which manner of speech is easily understood either by our
gesture, or pronunciation, or the palpable difference that is between our
words, and the thing it self. The which manner of speaking though it be often
abused unto sin, as scoffing, scorning, deriding; yet is it lawful in it
self and to us also, when it is rightly used, not to deceive, but the better
to clear the truth, to discountenance sin, and to convince offenders of
their faults and errors; neither has he that so uses it, a will to lie or
deceive, but to signify the truth in an improper way, that it may be
received with more delight. And of this we have examples in the Scriptures, as
in the speech of Michajah the 1 King. 22. 15.
Prophet unto wicked Ahab: Go up and prosper. In Elias deriding the folly of
Baals Priests: in Job, to his three friends; No doubt but ye are the 1 King.
18. 27.
people, and wisdom shall dye with you. In the Apostle Paul convincing the
Corinthians of their pride Job 12. 2.
and folly. Ye suffer (says he) fool^s gladly, seeing your 2 Cor. 11. 19.
selves are wise; and elsewhere telling them that he had not been burdensome
unto them as to other Churches, he concludes with an Ironie, forgive me 2 Cor.
12. 13.
this wrong. Yea, even God himself uses (and by his using justifies) this
figure and form of speaking to Job, that he might thereby the better convince
him of his folly and weakness. Gird up now thy loins like a man and answer
me: And, Deeke thy self now with majesty and excellency, and array thy self
with glory and beauty, etc.

Finally, upon the same grounds we acquit and. 3. Parables acquitted from the
censure of lying.
exempt from lying; first, Parables, whereby the truth of things is signified
and represented unto us by fained stories of other men and their actions,
wherein the circumstances are so fitted, as though they had been truly done,
that by them the truth may be signified, as it were in real words, and
portraied in living and speaking pictures for the better convincing of the
hearers to the acknowledgement of the truth, when they without partiality may
judge of it in other men's persons, as we see in Nathans Parable to David; and
our Saviors 2 Samuel 12.
to the Scribes and Pharisees concerning the vineyard let out to those unjust
farmers that killed the heir to get possession of it; which drew Matthew. 21.
33, 41.
from both a just sentence against their own sins, which they would rather
have minced and excused, if directly and plainly they had been charged with
them. So also they serve sometimes to dazzle the understanding, when they are
darkely propounded and not applied to use, the which our Savior used, when he
spoke to those whom in just judgment he would have hear and not understand;
sometimes to make what is said more clear and evident when things are
illustrated by such examples as are common and familiar; by which as the hearer
is made docible and capable of what is taught, so are the things learned much
the better imprinted in his memory. Neither is there any lie in such forms of
speech, seeing the end of the speaker is not to deceive the hearer, but rather
to discover the truth in a more familiar manner, the mind and tongue agreeing
together, and aiming at the same end, although the words must not be taken as
proper and direct, but by analogy and way of similitude.

Not much unlike unto these is the way of teaching. 4. Of fables and poetical
fictions, and that they are not to be reputed lies.
by Fables and Poetical fictions, in which, beasts and birds, yea, trees and
plants are brought in speaking and reasoning one with another; which were
purposely invented to teach men some politic lesson or moral instruction,
that thereby they might be made more wise or more virtuous, provoked to some
good duty, or made more cautious in shunning some evil either of sin or
punishment, which fabulous tales cannot justly be reputed lies, because he that
tells them speaks the truth, though not in a proper and literal sense, yet
in the reason and moral of his speech; and because it is not his purpose to
deceive his hearer, but to teach him the truth in an easy and familiar manner,
that it may be better conceived and remembered. In which respects fabulous
tales are of best use when as they are told to rude and simple people, who not
being capable of arguments, syllogismes and demonstratiue reasons, give no
heed unto them, but when the truth is represented in a fabulous tale which
they understand, being allured with the noveltie of the thing, they listen unto
it, that they may know what will be the issue, and so at unawares are taken
with the reason and moral of it, when as stronger reasons would not persuade
them. And being informed in the truth the lesson which they have learned is
more firmly imprinted in their memory; for things which are strange and
pleasant do extraordinarily delight; and being delightful are not easily
forgotten. And of such fables we have examples in the Scriptures; as that of
Iotham, who by that fable of Judge. 9.
the trees, convinced the people of their ungratitude and folly, in preferring
ambitious and wicked Abimelech before all the sons of Gedeon who were
virtuous and modest. And that of Iehoash in which he resembled Amaziah to a
Thistle and himself to 2 King. 14. 9.
a Cedar, that by the inequality of their strength he might dissuade him from
provoking him to battle. And such was the fable of Menius Agrippa to the
mutinous people of Rome, about the disaagreement between the rest of the
members of the body with the belly or stomach, whereby he persuaded them to
come back and join with the Senators. The which kind of fables are lawful,
as being no lies, but representations of truth under fictions, and not to
deceive the hearer, but to draw him on more easily to the acknowledgement of
the truth; only in them that devise them care must be had to avoid all
obsceanesse and scurrilitie, because as the Apostle speaks, such 1 Cor. 15.
rotten speeches do corrupt good manners. For whereas it may be objected, that
the Apostle Paul 2 Timothy 4. 4.
condemns those that turn away their ears from the truth, and hearken unto
fables, and forbids Timothy to give heed unto them; and 1 Timothy 1. 4. 2 Pet.
1. 16.
the Apostle Peter says, that he had not followed cunningly devised fables,
they do not speak of all fables, but only of profane old wives and Jewish
fables, which did not tend to edification and instruction in the knowledge of
the truth, but only by pleasing the ear to fill the mind with unprofitable
vanities and misleade the judgment into errors and lies. And that he speaks
of such only and not of the other which have their politic 1 Timothy 4. 7. Tit.
1. 14.
and moral use, he plainly expounds himself in diverse other places.

CHAP. IIII.
Two questions discussed; the first concerning stratagems in war; the second
concerning simulation and dissimulation.

ANd thus have I showed what a lie is,. 1. That stratagems in war are lawful.
the nature thereof, the things concurring in it, and what forms and kinds of
speech are suspected for untruths, but cleared from this suspicion. And now for
conclusion of this point two questions come to be resolved. First, what is to
be thought of stratagems in War; by which I understand such sleights and
policies, either by words or actions, as are purposely devised and practiced to
circumvent and deceive an enemy; where as one thing is pretended to conceal
the truth, and another thing is intended, but colored and covered with some
subtle device. To which I answer that it is lawful by all just and honest
policies to circumvent an enemy in a lawful war, either by word or action.
For if it be lawful by strength of arms to spoil, kill and utterly destroy
them, then also to use the strength of our wits and all good policies which may
conduce to the obtaining victory, especially considering that here there is no
falsehood or treachery, under show of love and amity, but an open denouncing
of hostility, by which both sides profess, that they will use the uttermost
of their endeavor to supplant one another both by strength and policy; by
which general profession both sides have sufficient warning to expect the
uttermost that can be done by power or wisdom for their ruin, and
consequently to prepare themselves and (as it were) to countermine against them
for the preventing of their designs, and to catch them if they can in their
own wiles. And this as it is warranted by reason and nature, that in our own
defense or just and necessary offense, we should use all good means to
destroy them who otherwise would destroy us; so also by the holy Scriptures,
and that both by the examples of pious and religious Kings and Captains, as
Joshua, David and diverse others; and also by the commandment of Josh. 8. 2. 2 Samuel 5. 23.
God himself, injoyning them to use such politic stratagems. And with this
also agrees the law of Nations and the law of Arms, that all means may be
used both apertly and professedly, and also secretly and cunningly, as
ambuscadoes and subtle devices for the surprising of Cities and Forts, masked
and disguized under shows and appearances of such things as are not really
intended. Neither is there in all this any falsehood or unjustice, but only an
endeavor to conceal the truth, when as being unseasonably professed, it would
become hurtful and pernicious to our selves and country.

But yet some caution must here be observed,. 2. That the former point is to be
held with some caution.
namely, that though we take lawful liberty in these stratagems and martial
policies to conceal the truth from an enemy* yet that we do not, under any
pretense or to advance any end, tell direct lies, and much less confirm them
by false oaths and imprecations; and least of all must we hold it lawful to
break and nullify our promises and covenants made with enemies, either for
the concluding of peace, or a truce and cessation from arms and hostility for
an appointed time, or keeping of quarter, or any other course agreed upon for
the right ordering and managing of the war to the good of both parties, and
tending to the welfare of common wealths and humane societies. The which is to
be abhorred of all Christians, yea though such breach of promise might be
colored and excused by equivocations, mental reservations or any other
pretense whatsoever; seeing such lies and falsifying of promises are not only
most dishonorable unto God, especially when as by oath he is brought in as a
witness to a lie, but also most hurtful to humane societies and common
wealths, when as this chief bond of peace and justice is violated, seeing none
thus deceived would be willing afterward to trust another, or to make truce or
peace upon any conditions, when as they can have no assurance that they will be
observed and performed. Yea such lies and breach of promises are above all most
pernicious to the parties themselves, seeing through Gods just judgment they
are either taken in their own net and miscarry in their enterprise, or have
the same measure from others measured unto them, who taking them upon advantage
falsify their faith to them whom they have found faithless. For he that is
Lord of hoasts and God of battles, Who gives salvation to Kings Psalm. 144.
10.
and delivers David his servant from the hurtful sword, is also the God of
truth; and therefore as we may expect that he will crown Justice and Truth
with conquest and triumph; so that he will execute vengeance upon liars and not
suffer falsehood to go unpunished. The like may be said of spies and
intelligencers, who if any other, might in many respects plead for a liberty
in lying. But howsoever it may be lawful for such to disguise themselves and
their intentions, and to use all good policies to conceal an unprofitable and
unseasonable truth, yet it is in no wise lawful for them to use means that
are evil and sinful to effect their desire, as to deny the truth, renounce
their religion, to make profession of a false religion, as Judaisme,
Mahumetisme, Popery, by going to Mass, and joining with them in any
superstitious service; or finally by telling lies, or using any other falsehood
to deceive and blind their eyes with whom they converse, that they may
atchieve their designs the better, when as they live among them unsuspected.

The second question is concerning simulation. 3. The second question
propoundedand discussed, and first of simulation lawful and unlawful.
or faining, and dissimulation or disguising. Simulation is, when by word,
action, or any other sign that is fained to be which is not. Dissimulation is
when as by any of these means any thing is disguised and hid, which in truth
is. Now the question is whether either of these can be judged lawful and
justly acquitted from being a lie. For the former, we must answer by
distinction; for either the thing fained has no being at all, either in
reality and truth, or in reason and signification; or else though it have no
existence properly and in the very nature of the thing, yet it has an improper
and figurative being by which it signifies and represents something that is.
If the thing fained have no being at all, then is it all one with a lie; but
though it have no being in reality, yet if it have a being in the reason of the
thing, and be brought to signify, demonstrate and illustrate something that
is, then is it no lie, but wholly tends to the setting forth of truth: and of
this kind are many poetical fictions, fables, apologies and parables. So
Saint Augustine, not all that which we Non omne quod singimus mendaciu^ est,
sed quando id singimus quod nihil significat, etc. Quaest. Evangel. lib. 2.
cap. 51.
feign is a lie, but then it is a lie, when as we feign that which signifies
nothing. But when our fiction is referred to some signification, it is not a
lie, but some figure of truth; otherwise all those things which are spoken
figuratively of wise and holy Men, yea even God himself should be thought
lies, because according to common understanding truth is not in such speeches.
As for example, the parable of the prodigal was not really and properly true,
but figuratively and in the reason and signification of it. So our Saviors
coming to look for fruit on the fig tree when the time of bearing was not,
had in it no real intention to find fruit upon it, seeing every one might
know that in such a season it could have none; but it was fained, that (as it
were) under this real parable, he might signify that they who brought forth
no Fictio quae ad aliquam veritatem refertur figura est: quae non refertur
mendacium est Aug. ibid.
fruits were under the curse. And therefore (as he says) a fiction which is
referred to some truth is a figure, and that which is not thus referred is a
lie. Secondly, we may distinguish of the purpose and resolution of our mind
and heart of doing or not doing what we feign and make show of. For either it
is absolute, or conditional. Now if in show or words I feign that I will do
that which I have absolutely resolved not to do, then do I lie, whether I do
or do it not, because my words and significations disagree from my mind and
heart. But if my resolution were only conditional, then it depends upon the
performance of the condition, and I may do a thing resolved on, or not do it
without lying, as the condition is observed or not observed. As for example, if
I go to a friends house with a resolution to return home to my own supper,
if he do not use some importunity in desiring me to stay supper with him: then
if I feign that I will go home and use some earnestness that I may take
leave, I lie not if I go away, though I desired to stay, being not at all, or
but slightly entreated; nor yet if I stay, though I made show that I would
depart, if importunity be used; because my resolution was conditional, and I
was truly purposed to depart, if not earnestly invited, or to stay and suppe
with my friend, if he instantly desired it. Lastly, we may distinguish of the
diverse ends which they that feign do aim at in their faining. For either their
aim is to deceive their neighbor in making him to believe that which is not
true, or to do him some other hurt; or else that they may hereby benefit
themselves or others. The former is to be reputed a lie, yea such a lie as is
hurtful and pernicious: as when men feign themselves to be pious and
religious, when as in truth they are impious and profane, the which is
damnable hypocrisy, and this fained piety, double iniquity; or when outwardly
by their words and shows they feign love and friendship when as their hearts
are full of enmity, that they may get the fitter opportunity of revenge, and
executing their malice. These men lie in their faining, seeing their minds
disagree from their words and shows, and because also their end and aim is to
deceive and hurt.

Now these distinctions being received will. 4. Diverse examples of simulation
objected and cleared.
serve to clear some places of Scriptures objected to maintain unlawful
faining; as first that the holy Angels themselves fained when Lot entreating
them to come into his house, they refused saying, Nay, but we will abide in the
street all night, contrary Genesis 19. 2.
to what they purposed, for afterward they were content to lodge with him, and
so no doubt were resolved to do before he requested them. I answer, that their
purpose was not absolute, but upon the condition of his earnest entreaty, which
if he had not used, they would not have tarried; for so it is said, that when
they refused, he pressed upon them greatly, and so they turned in unto him,
and entered into Luke 24. 28.
his house. Secondly, it is objected that our Savior himself fained, when as
traveling with his Disciples to Emaus, he made as though he would have gone
further which he intended not, for afterward being entreated, he stayed with
them, and he knew beforehand that they would thus entreat him. To which some
answer, that this his making as though he would go further, is to be
referred not to Christ's intention, but to the opinion and conceit of his
Disciples, who seeing him still go on thought that he had purposed to proceed
in his journey, and therefore stayed him with their earnest importunity. But
though this would not stand good, seeing unless Christ had showed some purpose
of going, they should not have needed to have constrained him upon this reason,
that it was too late to travel, the night approaching; yet the former answer
will serve, that it was his purpose to stay, yet not absolutely, but upon the
condition of their importunity which he knew they would use, neither did he
herein (as Saint Augustine observes) feign any thing which was false, seeing
he was indeed a stranger upon earth, and was not here to stay, but to go
further till he came into his own Country and Heavenly Kingdom. Neither was
it his end to deceive, but to convince the Disciples of the truth, as of their
incredulity, of the necessity of his sufferings, for the redemption of his
People, and of the certainty of his resurrection. Lastly, it is objected that
David being in the Court of Achish fained 1 Samuel 21. 13.
himself mad, that he might escape the danger of his life. To which I answer,
that though David were an holy Man, and according to Gods own heart, yet he
had his failings and infirmities as well as others; and therefore we must not
in all things propound him unto our selves as an example for our imitation. It
is true that this fact and fault of his may admit of some excuse and
extenuation, namely that he thus fained, not out of any love or liking of this
course, but transported and perplexed with a great and sudden fear by the
apprehension of imminent danger, wherein he showed much weakness of faith;
seeing he had special promises that God would keep him in all his ways, and
notwithstanding the malice of all his enemies would settle him upon the Throne
and give unto him the Crown and Kingdom.

The like also may be said of dissimulation whereby. 5. Of dissimulation,
lawful and unlawful.
we hide and disguise that which is, the which is either lawful or unlawful;
lawful when as we only dissemble and hide the truth, but do not deny or
falsify it with a lie, neither use it to hurt or deceive our neighbor, but
for his profit and benefit; not to lead him into error, but to reserve our
selves, and to conceal our good counsels and intentions, that they may
succeed the better and not be hindered by their discovery. And thus our
Savior Christ the eternal Son of God dissembled and hid his Divine nature
under the veil of our flesh; not by denying, but by not discovering that he
was God, and hindering also his Apostles Matthew. 17. 9.
from making it known till after his resurrection; which he did not with a
purpose to deceive men, but that hereby he might further their salvation by
laying down his life as the price of their redemption. The which his counsel
would not have been effected, if it had been discovered, seeing the people
would not have killed and crucified him, had they known him to be the Lord of
Glory, as the Apostle speaks. And thus also God himself 1 Cor. 2. 8. Act. 3.
17. Job 42. 2. John 21. 17. Heb. 4. 13.
does graciously dissemble our sins, not that he does not see and know them,
for he knows all things and they lie open and naked in his sight, but
because he will take no notice of them to impute them unto us for
condemnation. And thus Saul laudably dissembled his displeasure when he 1 Samuel
10. 27.
was despised and neglected by the sons of Belial; and David his just
indignation against Shemei, that 2 Samuel 19. 22.
by this his clemency he might more firmly knit unto him the hearts of his
revolted people. And thus may we lawfully dissemble such wrongs and injuries as
have been offered us by such friends, as we are willing so to forgive, as that
we are unwilling to call them to account; either because we would not grieve
their hearts by such repetitions, or would not make them suspicious of the
sincerity of our love out of the apprehension of their own guiltiness. Thus
also we may dissemble the good parts of our neighbor, when as taking notice
of them will but make them proud; and much more our own, which though it be
unlawful to deny as being truth, yet in modesty ought to be dissembled,
seeing it is vain glory to vaunt of them, or to be Trumpets of our own
praise. Unlawful dissimulation is when as it is joined with untruth, or is
used to deceive or hurt our neighbor, seeing it is opposed not only to Truth
and Justice, but also to candidous ingenuity, and honest simplicity. As when
men hide and disguise their malice, under the show of love and friendship, that
they may get the fitter opportunity to take sharp revenge, as we see in the
example of Absolon toward Amnon, and of Ioab toward Abner and Amasa. Or when
they dissemble their pride and ambition under the show of Humility and
Affability, that becoming popular, they may raise themselves into the seat
of Honor, as we see in Absolon, who by these cunning subtilties stole the
hearts of the People from his Father, and made way for his own usurpation.

CHAP. V.
Whether it be lawful to dissemble the Truth.

BUt for the better clearing of this point. 1. In what cases it is lawful to
conceal and dissemble the truth.
let us further consider whether it be lawful to suppress, hide or dissemble
the Truth in whole or in part, and in what cases it is lawful or unlawful. For
the understanding whereof, I will set down this conclusion, that it is lawful
to conceal the Truth, (if it be not masked with a lie) in whole or in part;
when the Glory of God, the good of our neighbor either public or private, and
our own good in particular does require it; and utterly unlawful when it is
otherwise: for though it be not lawful at any time to deny it, yet is it both
lawful and expedient to conceal it in such cases by our silence, or any other
way which is not sinful. And thus ought we to conceal the truth in whole,
if we be left to our selves and not necessitated to declare it, or in part if
we be examined, making use of that part which we reveal to be as a cover
or color to hide that part which we conceal, which being discovered would
impeach and hinder Gods Glory, or our own and neighbors good. An example
whereof we have in Jeremy, who being examined by the Princes, The example of
Jeremie.
and asked what king Zedechiah, said unto him, he confesses the Truth in part,
namely his supplication to the king, that he would not send him back to
Ionathans house to die there; but concealed his counsel in advising him to
yield up himself and the City into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. 38. 27.
because this discovery would not have conduced to the former ends, but only
have exasperated the Princes against both the King and Prophet, and caused them
to cross this counsel, if he should afterward resolve to follow it. Now if
any except against this, that Jeremy might do it through infirmity, and that
therefore it is no president for us to The example of Samuel.
follow, we have another example above all exceptions, namely of Samuel, who by
God himself 1 Samuel 16. 2.
was appointed, by uttering one part of truth, to conceal the other, if the
matter should come to be examincd, and to say (if his going to Iesse his house
came to Saul's ear) that the end of his going was to offer sacrifice, that so
he might hide from him the other part, which was the maine end of his going
thither, namely to anoint David King in Saul's stead.

And thus (as Saint Augustine thinks) Abraham. 2. The speech of Abraham in
calling Sarah his sister, examined.
may be acquitted of telling a lie, when he said that Sarah was his sister,
seeing she was his near kinswoman, who according to the usual speech of the
Hebrews were called sisters. Neither did he say; She is not my wife, but she
is my sister, the which was no lie but the truth, being rightly understood. And
so Abraham himself excuses it, yet indeed she is my sister, she is the
daughter, that is, the Grandchilde of my Father, etc. Therefore (says he)
Abraham concealed something of the truth, but said nothing that was false, when
he concealed that she was his wife, and said that she was his sister. And it
is not a lie when the truth is Non est mendacium, cum silendo absconditur
verum, sed cum loquendo promitur falsu^. Contra mendac. ad Consent. lib. 2.
cap. 10.
concealed by silence, but when by speaking we utter that which is false: unto
which might be added that Abraham had no will to lie, nor desire to deceive,
but to preserve his own life, and the people with whom he conversed, from the
sin of murder. But (saving his better judgment) these reasons alleged do
not justify Abraham as innocent, but only thus far excuse his fact, that it
was a fault of infirmity into which fear, and not maliciousness thrust him.
For there is great difference between the fact of Jeremy and Samuel, and this
of Abraham: seeing they concealed only one part of truth and acknowledged
another; but he in the same speech uttered (as I may say) a truth and untruth;
a truth in the reality of it, but an untruth in his intention: a truth in some
sense, as himself understood it, but not in that sense wherein he would have
them to conceive it; for it was his purpose in speaking it to make them falsely
to think, that she was only his sister, and not his wife, or else it would
not have secured him from that danger which he feared. And a speech is not
true, when as it is so in a reserved sense, but when it is so in that sense
wherein we would have the hearer to take it. And so Abraham's speech could not
be true, but a plain equivocation, which is no better than a lie, for in
saying that she was his sister, his desire was that they should conceive that
she was not his wife. And though it were not Abraham's absolute and free will
to ly, yet it was his will by accident, as he thought himself necessitated
hereunto to save his life, and though it were not his principal and maine end
to deceive by speaking untruth, but to escape the danger of being killed; yet
it was his next and mediate end which he used to advance the other. Neither
does Abraham's speech to the King imply that he was wholly faultlesse, but
rather the contrary. For if he had spoken a clear and ingenuous truth, in
saying that she was his sister, why should he excuse it, that he did it not
upon free choice, but because he was necessitated thereunto being in danger of
his life? And his saying that indeed she was his sister, tends not wholly
to acquit him of all fault, but only to extenuate it, seeing she was so truly
in some sense, though not in that where in he desired that they should
understand him. Finally, Abimelech even by the light of nature discerned that
notwithstanding Abraham's excuse, Sarah had equivocated in saying that she was
his sister, and therefore Genesis 20. 16.
reproved her for it, because it was such an untruth as had exposed her to the
danger of being defiled. But though it be unlawful to lie or equivocate, yet
it is lawful to conceal the truth, wholly by silence if we be not examined, or
to conceal it in part if we be questioned, so that the other part which we
speak be not only true in it self Non autem hoc est occultare veritatem,
quod est proferre medacium, etc. Contra mendac. ad Consentium lib. 2. cap. 10.
and in our own sense, but also in his understanding to whom we utter it, or
at least as we desire to have him understand it. And of this judgment is Saint
Augustine himself else where: It is not all one (says he) to hide the truth,
and to tell a lie; for although every one who lies desires to conceal what
is true, yet not every one lies who wills to conceal it. For very often we
conceal things that are true, not by lying, but by our silence. Neither did
our Lord lie when he said, I have many things to say unto you, but as yet ye
cannot John 16. 12.
bear them. He concealed truths, but did not speak untruthes, because he
judged such truths as yet unfit for them to hear.

But let us examine this question yet more fully. 3. That the truth of Religion
is to be confessed when we are lawfully called thereunto.
and distinctly, in what cases the truth is to be spoken or concealed, and when
the Glory of God and good of our neighbor, or our own good, does require the
profession of it; and when we should conceal and hide it by silence or
otherwise. For the understanding whereof we are to distinguish of truth,
namely that it is either religious or civil. Religious truth is the truth of
religion, or the doctrine of Faith; the which we are upon all occasions to
profess being lawfully called thereunto, when the Glory of God, or good of our
neighbor does require it, according to that of the Apostle Peter; Sanctify
the Lord in your hearts, and be 1 Pet. 3. 15.
ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the
hope that is in you, with meekness and fear. Neither is it enough to believe
the truth and keep it to our selves, but we must also openly profess it: for
as with the heart man believes unto Romans 10. 10.
righteousness; so with the mouth confession is made unto salvation, as the
Apostle Paul tells us. For if we conceal the truth when we are called to
profess it, we do not only deny the truth, but also the Lord of Truth, who
is the Author and Patron of it, and whosoever shall deny him before Math. 10.
33.
men, him will he deny before his Father which is in Heaven. But when are we
called lawfully to make this confession of truth? surely at all times when by
our confession we may glorify God, or benefit our neighbors. As when we are
called before a lawful Magistrate and required an account of our faith, then
we must in no case suppress the truth, though we confess it with the danger
of our lives: for he stands in Gods stead as his Deputy, and to hide or deny
the truth before him is (as it were) to deny or hide it in Gods sight and
presence. And then also God is glorified by our Christian apology, when as we
will not shrink from the truth whatsoever we suffer for it. So also we are
bound to profess the truth of our religion before private men, when as we
conceive that thereby we shall glorify God by propagating his Truth, and
edify them to whom we confess it. Otherwise if there be no cause why we
should conceive this hope, because we know them to be scorners and enemies of
Gods true Religion, who would but deride it and our profession, we may, yea in
Christian discretion we ought to conceal it, seeing we shall by our
confession dishonor God by exposing his Truth to contempt, and wrong our own
persons by laying our selves open to scorn and derision, if not to the danger
of their rage and violence. For which we have our Savior Christ's Word for our
warrant; Give not that which is Holy unto Dogs, neither cast ye your Pearls
Math. 7. 6.
before Swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and
rent you.

Secondly, there is a civil truth which is exercised. 4. That civil truth is
to be confessed, when Gods glory or our neighbors good does require it.
about the affairs of this life, the which also is to be spoken and
professed, when the glory of God and our own and neighbors good does require
it, or to be hid and concealed when by the profession of it God is dishonored
and our selves and neighbors endammaged. Now if we further enquire when Gods
glory and our own and neighbors good does require it to be spoken, and when
it ought to be concealed, we are to distinguish of it, either as it is to be
spoken publicly before the lawful Magistrate sitting judicially upon the
judgment seat, or privately to ordinary men in our common course of
conversation. When we are judicially called before the lawful Magistrate, and
required according to law to speak the truth, we ought not to conceal it,
whether it be for us or against us. And for this we have the same reason that
we have for speaking of religious truth; for the Magistrate sits in the
place of God as his Deputy to enquire and examine the truth, and therefore to
deny or dissemble it unto him in a legal manner inquiring after it, is (as it
were) to deny and dissemble it unto God himself; the which in this respect is
the more grievous sin, because in course of law men are examined upon oath
and are bound thereby to speak not only the truth, but also the whole truth,
in which they call God as Witness to what they say, and so grossly abuse his
Majesty being the God of truth, if they draw him, as much as in them lies, to
countenance and confirm a lie. Secondly, hereby they transgress in a high
degree Gods express Commandment, by which as he forbids us to bear false
witness in the negative part, so in the affirmative he requires that we
speak the truth to his glory and our neighbors good. Finally, we sin
against the common wealth and against all good policy, order and government,
which cannot stand if in these legal Uterque reus est, and qui veritatem
occultat, and qui mendacium dicit: quia and ille prodesse non vult, and ille
nocere desiderat. Ad Casulanum.
proceedings the truth should be denied or suppressed. In all which respects
Saint Augustine speaks fitly to our purpose; either of these are guilty and
faulty, both he that hides the truth, and he that tells a lie, because the
one denies to profit, and the other desires to hurt.

Upon which grounds and reasons I conclude,. 5. That the Truth must be
confessed before the Magistrate, when he requires it in a Legal manner.
that being convented before a lawful Magistrate, and by him examined, we are
bound in conscience to speak the truth and whole truth, if he proceed legally
and in judicial manner, and demand of us such things as we may answer unto
piously, without dishonouring God, and justly without any prejudice to the
Church and Commonwealth, or wrong to any particular person. For if such
questions be propounded as are not lawfully demanded, nor we bound by the Law
of God and of the Commonwealth to answer, we may in such a case refuse, and
conceal the truth. So likewise when the discovery of it tends to Gods
dishonor, to the hindering or suppressing of his true religion, to the hurt
and damage of the Commonwealth, by betraying unto the enemy the secrets of
State; or the delivering of the innocent into the hands of impious and unjust
men that are in authority and seek their ruin, and the taking away of their
goods, liberties and lives, we are not bound to answer the truth of the things
demanded, yea we ought in such cases to hide and conceal it, though it be
with the extreme and imminent danger of our goods, liberties and life it
self. As for example, when in the times of persecution we are examined by
wicked tyrants; whom we know to be of our religion, or who were present with us
and accompanied us in such a place, and at such a time in Gods divine Service,
Prayer, and hearing of the Word; we should in such a case endure any losses and
tortures, rather than betray them into their hands that seek their lives. But
though we may not discover the secrets and counsels of the innocent when it
tends to their hurt and ruin; yet we may and ought to confess, when we
are examined to reveal the faults and crimes of those that are guilty and have
offended against the Laws of God or the Land, yea though we have been
copartners with them in their wickedness, and by solemn promise or oath have
mutually bound our selves to secrecy, because such oaths and promises are
unlawful, as tending to Gods dishonor, the hindering of Justice, the
nourishing of Vice, and the great prejudice of Church and Commonwealth.

But here another question comes to be resolved;. 6. Whether malefactors
are bound in conscience to confess the truth, though it be with the hezard of
their lives.
whether a man that is guilty of a fault or crime that concerns his life,
being examined in a Legal manner before a lawful Magistrate, be bound in
conscience to confess the Truth, and so by accusing himself to endanger his
life. To this I answer, that every one who is guilty is bound to testify the
Truth, if he be required by the lawful Magistrate, though it be with the
hazard of his life, and sins if he hide his fault with a lie; and better it
is to expose the body to the danger of death by confessing the Truth, than by
lying and sinning to offend God, and cast both soul and body into Hell. But
yet men thus guilty are more or less bound to confess the truth and accuse
themselves, and do sin more or less haynously by concealing it in diverse
cases and considerations. For if the Judge having no evidence of Truth, nor
competent witnesses to clear the cause, and direct him in giving a right
sentence, does seriously examine the offender, charging him upon his Conscience
to testify the Truth that God may be glorified, when he his Deputy does
Justice; and if thus strictly examining him, he does in some degree rest upon
his testimony for his direction and judgment, in such a case the guilty person
sins greatly if he conceal the truth or hide his offense with a lie; for
Judgment being the Lords, he dishonors him, that hinders the execution of
justice with a lie. And therefore Iosuah thus strictly examining Josh. 7. 19.
Achan in a weighty cause, wills him to give Glory unto God by confessing the
Truth, implying hereby that he should much dishonor him if he did otherwise.
Besides by concealing the truth and telling a lie in such a case, he blinds.
7. Whether offenders at the bar are bound to plead guilty of those crimes
which are justly laid to their charge in our judiciary proceeding.
and misleadeth the Judge, and causes him to pervert justice, and to pronounce
an unrighteous sentence.

But if (as it is in our judiciary proceeding) the question be asked, whether
the offender at the Bar be guilty or not guilty, he is not so strictly bound
as in the former case to confess the Truth, nor sins so much if he does
conceal it. For in this case the Judge greatly regards not the testimony of
the person arraigned, when he pleads not guilty, thereby to be directed in
passing his sentence, but only in a Legal proceeding he demands this
question; that in a formal and orderly manner he may put himself upon another
trial, namely of the Jewry, who are in no sort directed by the offenders
testimony, but by the testimony of competent witnesses and evidence of reason.
Neither does our law in these criminal causes of life and death, bind an
offender to accuse himself, nor inflicteth any punishment, if he refuses to
do it. Yea rather if pleading not guilty he put himself upon trial of his
Country, he has a fair and sometime favorable proceeding and issue, being
often acquitted, when being guilty he has deserved punishment; whereas if he
concealeth the truth by silence, and refusing to put his cause upon trial,
does condemn himself as guilty, because he will not use the Legal form in
pleading not guilty, he has no favor of law, but is adjudged to greater and
more torturing punishment, than if he were found guilty by the Jewry, or his
own voluntary confession. Again, there is great difference between the
offenses which are confessed or concealed; for if in themselves they are
heinous and capital, both by the moral Law of God, the law of Nature and
Nations; as Treasons, Parricides, Murders and the like; for which every
natural Conscience will condemn the offenders as worthy of death; then do
they much more haynously sin, if being examined by a lawful Magistrate they
conceal the Truth, and excuse themselves by telling lies. Yea in such cases it
is probably thought that if there were no other to bring these heinous crimes
to light, they are bound in conscience, that Justice may be executed, to
discover and accuse themselves. But if the offenses be such as are not capital
by the moral Law, and the Law of Nations; but are only made so by the
Positive laws of particular Commonwealths, which admit rather of a particular
mischief, than a general inconvenience, and respect in their punishments the
universal good of the Commonwealth, more than the demerit of the offender;
punishing with more severity less faults, which being through the disposition
of the people inclining thereunto, more commonly committed to the hurt and
damage of the whole State, than greater offenses which being rarely committed
bring no such prejudice; then is it much more tolerable and less sinful,
when the offenders by pleading not guilty do put themselves in a Legal form
upon trial of the Jury, in hope to be acquitted by their verdict, when the law
affords them no favor upon their confession. As for example, in the case of
stealth and small thefts which the Law of God punishes not with death, but
restitution; yet is so punished by positive laws with all severity, because it
is generally necessary that it should so be for the preservation of the
Commonwealth, although in some particular cases, there may be a lawful and
conscionable mitigation of punishment, which in Legal proceedings that respect
the common good more than the preservation or immunity of some private persons,
cannot be so lawfully used by inferior Magistrates, who are bound to judge
according to law, if the offender confess his fault and plead guilty: In such
a case I say, it is more excusable if the truth be concealed by such a
denial, as is to be understood only as a form in pleading, whereby he
puts himself upon a Legal trial, that he may have the favor of the law,
for the remitting of his small offense, and not as a real, cordial, and
resolute denial of the truth: For when they plead not guilty, it is not much
unlike in sense, though different in words; as if they should say, I will not
discover my faults by acknowledging my self guilty and accuse my self, seeing
the law does not require it, but I will for my purgation put my self upon
trial, and stand (upon the examining of witnesses) to the verdict of the jury,
to be acquitted or condemned according to their evidence directing their
Conscience.

And thus I have showed how it is lawful or expedient. 8. Of confessing or
concealing the truth to private men.
to confess the truth when as we are examined in a legal manner before a
lawful Magistrate: now concerning the confessing or concealing of it in our
private conversation, the case is much different, seeing therein we have a
liberty to utter or hide it from those that have no authority to examine us,
according as our occasions shall require and Christian prudence direct us. It
is true that commonly and ordinarily we must speak that truth with our tongues
which our minds conceive, because they were given us to this end that they
should be as faithful Interpreters of our hearts to discover our thoughts one
to another, but yet this is no farther required than as in our speech we may be
useful and profitable one to another. In which regard it is not only lawful
but very expedient that we should conceal the truth in many cases from those
that have no authority to examine us of it. And thus we may, yea ought to
conceal such secrets as are entrusted to our keeping, when as they are
lawful, as also the faults and infirmities of our neighbors, seeing love does
cover a multitude of sins; yea to discover them when we are not necessitated
thereunto by some great and necessary cause, does not only show want of love,
but also of honesty and justice, which requires that we should do unto
others, as we would have them to do unto us. And the like also may be said of
our own faults and infirmities, which we ought by all lawful means to hide
and conceal from all men, unless it be to our spiritual Physicians, that
they may the better cure us, or to our weak Patients troubled and afflicted in
mind, that we may comfort and cure them, by making our selves examples unto
them of the same infirmities wherewith they think none so troubled as
themselves. Otherwise, except it be in these and such like cases, it is not
only permitted as lawful, but required as expedient and necessary to hide and
conceal our own sins and infirmities. For first whereas in the ninth
Commandment in the affirmative part, God injoyneth us to use all good means,
both by giving a true testimony and also by our silence whereby we may preserve
the good name of our neighbor, setting forth their virtues and good parts, and
concealing their faults and failings; he requires also the same at our hands
for the preserving of our own fame and reputation, for charity begins at home,
and the love of our selves is the rule of our love toward our neighbors. And
whereas it may be objected, that this Commandment injoyneth us to give a true
testimony, whether it be with or against us; and that God requires that every
man should speak the truth to his neighbor; Zach. 8. 16.
to this I answer, that affirmative precepts though they bind us always to
perform the duties commanded, yet not at all times, but when it is seasonable
and profitable for Gods glory, and our own and neighbors good. And as the
Prophet requires that we should always speak the truth to our neighbor, so
the Apostle teaches how it Ephesians. 4. 15.
must be spoken, namely in love. Secondly, the unnecessary and unseasonable
discovery of our own faults and infirmities tends to Gods dishonor, who as
he is glorified when we bring forth much fruit, John 15. 8. Matthew. 5. 16.
and have the light of our holy lives shining before men: so is he dishonored
by our evil conversation, and his holy Name blasphemed by those that are
without, when they discover our sins and corruptions: for the vices and faults
of the servants 1 Samuel 2. 30. 2 Samuel 12. 14.
do often redound to the discredit of the master. Thirdly, the discovery of
our faults and failings, tends to the disgrace of Gods true Religino which
we profess, when men that are wtihout discover in us such evil fruits, and
to the discredit of our Christians profession, seeing they are apt to attribute
them rather to our religion and profession, than to our natural corruption,
and are willing through the sides (as it were) of our fame and reputation, to
wound the Gospel. Fourthly, hereby we shall become scandalous and stones of
offense to those that are weak, and those also that are not yet called;
encouraging the one to fall into the same vices and sins by our evil
example, and discouraging the other from entering into the profession of our
religion, when as they hear us say well, but see that we do no better.
Lastly, hereby we shall sin against our selves in blasting and blemishing our
good name with just aspersions; and whereas it should be in higher esteem
with us than great riches, and sweeter than the most odoriferous Prove. 22. 1.
Eccl. 7. 1.
ointment, we shall deprive our selves of this precious jewel by unnecessary
discovery of our faults and failings. Neither can we, when we have once opened
a breach, stay at our pleasure the current and stream of men's suspicions; but
when we have spoken much, they will be apt to think that we could say more,
seeing every one is naturally so favorable to himself, that he will speak
the least of that which he knows will tend to his prejudice and disgrace.

And thus much of the second question whether it be lawful in whole or in
part to conceal the. 9. Of equivocations, and mental reservations.
truth, and in what cases it is to be approved as good, or disallowed as
evil: unto which this Treatise would require that I should add a third,
namely concerning equivocations and mental reservations, which are not only
in continual practice among the Papists, but also warranted and defended by
their doctrine. But I shall not need to speak any thing in this point, seeing
it is already fully and learnedly handled of late by a reverend Mr. Henry Mason.
Divine in this City. Only let me briefly set down my judgment of it, namely
that such equivocations and mental reservations, are not only lies, but in
this respect of the worst sort; in that there lies lurking in them the
greatest deceit, as being masked with the show of truth. For not only that
which is false is in them affirmed both in his sense that speaks as he
desires to be understood, and in his that hears in ordinary understanding,
but also it is done wittingly and willingly, and to this end that they may
deceive and mislead men into error; which if it were allowed would prove most
pernicious, seeing it would overthrow all societies, and all contracts and
dealings, public between Commonwealths, and private, between Man and Man;
seeing none could know how words or oaths are to be understood, and
consequently could not believe one another in what is spoken. And as they are
pernicious in these and many other respects unto other men; so in this regard
most pernicious to themselves; In that whereas other lies are condemned by a
natural Conscience, and so often repented of, these being maintained and
defended as no sins, are committed without remorse, so that men live and dye
in them without repentance.

CHAP. VI.
Of the causes of Lying.

THE maine end of all my former discourse. 1. Of the outward causes of Lying,
which are first the Devil.
has been to inform the judgment in the true nature of a Lie, and to
distinguish it from such Truths, as in outward show and appearance may seem
to have some semblance of it, that so rightly discerning it, we may the better
avoyde it: and yet not through our untaught zeal in shunning it, loose our
lawful liberty in speaking such truths as being clear and candide enough in
their own nature, yet (like a fair green tree near unto a Smiths forge) are
(as it were) dusked and obfuscated with the sulphurous smoke of lies, by
reason of their vicinity. For virtue dwells between its extremes, and the
most unreconcileable enemies do often border one upon another. And now in the
next place according to my order propounded, I am to say something of the
causes of lying, the which are either outward in others, or inward and in our
selves. The chief outward cause is the Devil, who as he is a liar from the
beginning and the father of lies, so does he beget children after his own
likeness, and indeavoureth to make them as great liars, as himself. And as by
his lies at the first he murdered Mankind, so ever since he makes them
murderers of themselves, by drinking daily deep draughts in this poisoned cup
of lying, which he puts into their hands. Wherein also he shows his
desperate malice against God himself, in that not being able to resist his
Power, he opposes him as he is the God of Truth, gainesaying what he says,
as we see in his first tentation to our first Parents: For God having
threatened death against them, if they did eat of the forbidden fruit, he
expressly contradicts him, and says, Ye shall Genesis 3. 4.
not die at all. And when he cannot impeach or hurt him in himself in regard
of his most absolute and perfect being, he adventureth upon us, and as it is
reported of a kind of Serpent called the Panther, that he so maligneth Man,
that when he cannot hurt him, he will fly upon and bite his Picture: So this
old Serpent the Devil bearing an inveterate malice against God, when he cannot
revenge himself upon him, he flies upon his Image, that he may deface it,
blotting out of it its created Truth and Righteousness, and stamping upon it
his own image of lies and falsehood.

Another outward cause of lying is the World,. 2. Of the second outward cause
of lying, which is the world.
whether we understand it of the Persons of worldly wicked men, or of Worldly
things. For worldly Men are the common teachers of lies, both by their
precepts, setting up (as it were) a School of falsehood, and instructing one
another in those cunning and politic arts of lying for advantage, and also by
their practice; for the whole World lying in 1 John 5. 19.
wickedness (as the Apostle John speaks) but yet not willing to have it
discovered, do tell lies in 1 Timothy 4. 2.
hypocrisy, as (Saint Paul foretells of the false teachers of the latter
times) and commonly use the Art of lying to hide and disguise their sinful
courses, not caring to commit any wickedness, which by lies they can keep
from coming to light, whereby they become precedents and examples to encourage
one another in these wicked practices, which every one not restrained with the
fear of God are apt to follow; partly because being become so general and
universal, the custom does take away the conscience of it, and the multitude
of offenders, leaves no place for shame, if they be taken in the sin; and
partly because they see one another thrive by these lying Arts; so as they
think with Dionysius, that Divine providence favors their untruthes, seeing
they are carried with so fair a gale of wind into the Port of their desires.
Yea worldly wicked men allure oftentimes one another with promises and rewards
to afford mutually the help of a lie, when as it may advance their ends, and
redound to their benefit and advantage; which if they refuse, they become
enemies (as the Apostle speaks) because Gal. 4. 16.
they tell the Truth. And if they cannot entice them to swallow the hook with
these alluring baits of favor and friendship, they will not stick to drive
them into their nets with terrors and fears, watching all occasions to do
them a mischief, if they refuse to satisfy their desires. Finally, the things
of the World, as honors, riches, and pleasures, are by way of object the
usual means to draw men to lying, there being no kind of lies which the
ambitious, covetous and voluptuous, will baulke, when they think them
advantageous for the obtaining of their preferments, wealth and carnal
delights.

The inward Cause of lying is our own corrupt. 3. Of the inward causes of
Lying, namely the flesh and fleshly lusts: and 1. Ignorance and forgetfulness
of God.
flesh and the sinful lusts thereof. For as the Devil is a liar and the
father of lies, so the flesh is a liar and the mother of this bastardly brood,
who receiving from Satan this sinful seed, does nourish it in her fruitful
womb, conceiving, breeding and bearing it, until it be so multiplied that it
has filled the earth. Neither is our corrupt nature more prone unto any vice
than unto this of lying, nor yet gives more full swinge unto any without
remorse or check of conscience, than unto it, if it be simply considered in it
self, or produce any advantage, and be not made odious by some evil
consequents, or pernicious fruits which it brings to our neighbors or to our
selves. And as the flesh generally is the cause of lying, so is it in its
particular lusts and the sinful fruits which it produces. As first ignorance
of God and his truth, is a special Cause of lying. For did we know and
acknowledge Gods Omniscience, whereby he beholds all secrets, and takes
notice of not only the words of our mouths, but also of the hidden thoughts of
our hearts, and discerns how they differ one from another; his omnipotence,
whereby he is able not only to kill the body of him that lies, as he did
Ananias and Sapphira, but also to cast both body and soul into hell, and in
the mean time to frustrate all our hopes and ends which we propound unto our
selves in lying, either by detecting our untrueths, or by crossing us in them,
so as they shall not effect our desires, but rather hinder them; and finally if
we did know that he is a God of truth, who hates and abhors lies, and
will according to his Word give liars their portion in that lake which burns
Apoc. 21. 8.
with fire and brimstone, if they do not prevent their just damnation by
unfeigned repentance, we would not take pleasure in lies, nor be hired to tell
them with the base wages of worldly vanities. But it is our ignorance of these
things that causes us so easily to fall into this sin, when as Satan or the
World tempts us unto it. And therefore the Prophet joyneth them together as
the Cause and Effect: They bend (says he) their tongue like Jer. 9. ^.
their bow for lies; but they are not valiant for the truth upon the earth;
for they proceed from evil to evil, and they know not me, says the Lord.
Another Cause is oblivion and forgetfulness of God, for many that know Gods
Nature and Attributes, and will acknowledge that he is omniscient, omnipotent,
just and true in all his Word and ways, yet fall into this sin through
forgetfulness, not pondering and considering what they know, when they should
make use of it to keep them from sinning. And of this the Prophet Esaias
speaks; Of whom (says he) have thou been afraid or feared, that thou Esaias
57. 11.
have lied, and have not remembered me, nor laid it to thy heart?

A third Cause of lying is our inordinate and. 4. A third Cause is immoderate
fear of men.
immoderate fear of men more than of God; the which the Prophet implies in
the same words; Of whom have thou been afraid, that thou have lied, and have
not remembered me whom thou have more cause to fear than all men or devils? For
they at the most can but kill the body, but God can also cast body and soul
into hell. Neither is either man or devil Mat. 10. 28.
so able to protect us against the stroke of Gods vengeance when we speak
lies, as he is both able and willing to defend and preserve us against all
their might and malice whilst we make conscience of speaking the truth; for
according to his gracious promise, He shall cover us with his feathers, Psalm.
91. 4.
and under his wings shall we trust, his truth shall be our shield and
buckler. But because men look only unto the present and take care to avoid
imminent danger, and live by sense more than by faith, beholding the arm of
flesh ready to strike them, and not the power of God which is all-sufficient to
protect them, nor seeing him that is invisible; Therefore they make lies their
refuge, and hide Esaias 28. 15.
themselves under falsehood and vanity. And this appears principally in the
practice of inferiors, as children and servants, who having committed any
fault, do usually color and cover it with a lie, that so they may escape the
displeasure of their governors: whereas if they feared God more than men, they
would be much more fearful to fall into his hands than theirs, seeing he is
a consuming Heb. 12. 24.
Fire, who is able in his just wrath utterly to destroy them; and would rather
choose to speak the truth though they lost the favor of mortal men, than by
lies to loose the favor of the immortal God: yea they would know that their
greatest safety would be in speaking the truth, seeing God the author and
lover of it, has the hearts of all men in his hands, and can move superiors
to pardon what is done amiss; yea to love them more for their truth and
ingenuity, than to mislike them for their faults and errors.

A fourth Cause of lying is carnal confidence and security, whereby men bless
themselves in. 5. A fourth Cause of Lying is Carnal Confidence and Security.
this sinful course, presuming that their lies shall be so cunningly
contrived, and so boldly and impudently outfaced, that they shall never come to
light; and that as they have long practiced them and yet have escaped both the
punishment of God and men, so they may still go on securely in their sin
without fear of danger. And of such the Prophet Esaias speaks; Who had made a
covenant with death, and an agreement with hell, promising unto Esaias 28. 1^.
themselves, that when the overflowing scourge should pass through, it should
not come unto them, because they had made lies their refuge, and hid themselves
under falsehood. And again, they trust in vanity and speak lies, hoping
through their cleanly conveiance Chap. 54. 4.
that they shall never be discovered. But the truth which they oppose is as a
shining light, which will lay open all these hidden works of darkness, and
bring them at length to shame and punishment. And whereas they presume that
they shall still escape because having long lived in this sin they find no
hurt in it, nor have felt Gods hand in punishing of it, and so encourage
themselves to go on in their wickedness, according to that of the Preacher,
Because sentence against an evil work is Eccles. 8. 11.
not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men, is fully set
in them to do evil. Let them know that though they are respited, yet they are
not remitted, and though the overflowing scourge has Esaias 28. 18.
passed over, and not yet whipped them, yet at last they shall as God has
threatened, be trodden down by it, if they do not prevent his judgment by
true repentance: or though they should wholly escape in this life, yet this is
but cold comfort, if they consider, that they are hereby hardened in their
sin, that living and dying in it without remorse, they may at last receive
their full payment without mercy Apoc. 21. 8.
in the world to come.

The last Cause of Lying (which I intend to. 6. A fifth Cause of Lying is
Covetousness.
speak of) is Covetousness, whereby men immoderately loving worldly wealth,
will not stay Gods leisure in the use of lawful means for the compassing of
their desires; but resolving to be rich, and making all haste in satisfying
their greedy avarice, they leave no stone unmoved, no means untryed which may
advance their ends. Amongst the rest they find none more fitting for their
purpose than this of Lying, as being a special help whereby they are enabled
to supplant and deceive one another, and to enrich themselves by their
neighbors ruins; especially when they have any intercourse of Trading, buying
and selling, in which all manner of deceit is used to defraude one another, and
all disguised and hid with these lying arts. So that as Covetousness is the
root of all 1 Timothy 6. 10. Exodus 18. 21.
evil, so especially of lies, and therefore when Iethro would describe fit
Magistrates, he joyneth these together, that they must be such as fear God,
men of Truth and hating Covetousness; implying that covetous persons cannot
love the Truth, seeing it is one of their chiefest arts in getting wealth, to
make no other use of Truth, but that it may serve sometimes for a show to
color their lies. In which regard if we would leave this Vice of Lying, we
must also forsake our Covetousness, which makes men to make more haste than
good speed that they may attain unto riches. To which end let us consider
with the wise man, that treasures of wickedness profit nothing, but
righteousness Prove. 10. 2.
delivers from death: That riches (thus gotten) will Prove. 11. 4
not profit in the day of wrath; and that when this day comes we shall find
by experience, that it is better to be a poor man than a liar; That wealth
gotten Chap. 19. 20.
by vanity shall be diminished, whereas he that gets by honest labor,
shall increase. Finally, that the Chap. 13. 11.
getting of treasures by a lying tongue, is a vanity tossed Chap. 21. ^.
to and fro of them that seek death.

CHAP. VII.
Of the diverse sorts and kinds of Lies.

THe next point which now comes. 1. The kinds of Lies diversely distinguished.
to be handled, is the diverse sorts and kinds of lying and lies. In which
regard they are diversely distinguished. The first distinction is taken from the
causes: for either they proceed from the Devils tentation, or the Worlds
instigation, or from the corruption of our own flesh, if at least, these may
be said to be diverse kinds in which these causes ordinarily concur and
meet together. And these which proceed from our flesh and the lusts thereof,
are either lies which arise from ignorance and forgetfulness of God and his
Truth, or from infirmity and immoderate fear of men, of which sort was that
of Abraham and Peter to avoid danger; or out of a natural vanity and delight
in lying, or finally, from covetousness which causes men to lie for their
gain and advantage. The second distinction is taken from the very form and
nature of a lie, which is as Aquinas says, the most proper 2^. 2^. Quaest.
110. art. 2.
and natural division. And so a lie either transcendeth and exceeds the
truth, and is called boasting or arrogance, or else it comes short of that
which is true and extenuateth it, offending in the defect, and so is called an
irony. And this is the Philosophers division, the which is thought to be
Arist. eth. lib. 4.
the most proper, because a lie is opposite to Truth, which consists in an
equality and evennesse between the speech and the thing, and therefore the
opposition unto it, which is in a lie, is according to these two extremes,
which are either the excess or defect.

The third division which is the most common. 2. Lies distinguished into 3.
kinds; merry, officious, and pernicious Lies.
and received is taken from the diverse ends which men in their lying propound
unto themselves; for either their end is to delight themselves and their
hearers, and then it is called mendacium jocosum, a merry lie; or their end is
to profit and do good to themselves or others; the which is called mendacium
officiosum, an officious lie; or finally their end is to do hurt and
mischief, which is called mendacium perniciosum, a pernicious lie. In which
division I purpose to insist, only adding thereunto a fourth kind, which is
called mendacium modestum, or a modest lie, when men in a kind of humility
deny or extenuate their virtues and good parts. A merry lie is that wherein the
liar propounds A merry lie what it is.
this end only, that he may delight his hearer, and not deceive him, or so
far only to deceive, as that thereby he may delight him. For there are some
(as Saint Augustine says) who Contra mendacium ad Consentium. lib. 1. cap. 10.
desire by their lies to please men, not that they may injure or reproach any,
but that they may be sweet and pleasant in their talk. Now these differ from
other liars in this, that they delight to lie, rejoicing in the deceit it
self; but these delight to please with the urbanity and sweetness of their
speech, who notwithstanding, had rather please by uttering truths; but when as
they cannot easily find true things which are acceptable to their hearers,
they choose rather to lie, than to hold their peace. Now such lies are either
so cunningly framed and colored with likely hoods and similitude of truth,
that they deceive the hearer with their specious shows, and afterward delight
him, when he discerns the jest and finds his error; or else spun with so
course a thread by the teller of them, having no probability or show of truth,
that the hearer plainly discovers them, and is only delighted with the
artificial absurdities and prodigious hyperboles of the tale, which transcend
all truth and likelihood. So that the hearer is no way deceived by it, knowing
that it is spoken in jest to move delight. An officious lie is when as the
speaker wittingly and willingly utters An officious lie what it is.
an untruth, either out of Piety that he may glorify God, or out of Charity
and love of Justice and Mercy, that he may thereby do good to himself or his
neighbor, either to prevent or free him, or himself from some loss, danger,
disgrace, or other mischief; or to procure unto either some profit and
benefit; and that without the hurt or damage of any other. A pernicious lie,
is A pernicious lie what it is.
when as the speaker intends by lying not only to deceive his hearer, but
also to damnifie and hurt his neighbor in his person, name or state, and that
wittingly and willingly. In which kind concur all the sinful evils that
are in a lie in the highest degree. For first, he that thus lies, not only
speaks that which is false, but also falsely against his mind and knowledge.
Secondly, he thus speaks willingly, loving and delighting in his lie; and
lastly, with a purpose and desire to deceive, and to do hurt and mischief by
his deceit. In all which respects this sort of lies is above all others most
abominable unto God, pernicious to our Neighbors, and damnable, to our own
souls. In the practice whereof men then grow to the highest pitch of this
hellish impiety, when with the Devil the Father of lies, they not only use
them for profit or necessity, but also love and delight in them more than in
the truth; like those of whom the Psalmist speaks. Thou love evil Psalm.
52. 3, 4.
more than good, and lying rather than to speak righteousness. Thou love
all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue. And again, They only consult
to cast Psalm. 62. 4.
him down from his excellency, they delight in lies.

Now this kind admits of another distinction. 3. Of religious lies
concerning matters of faith and doctrine.
in respect of the diverse subjects whereabout it is exercised, for either it is
in points that concern matters of faith and the doctrine of Religion, in which
respect it may be called a religious lie, or matters civil and political in
humane affairs and the things of life, either public or private, in which
regard it may be called a political or civil lie. The former is so much more
pernicious than the latter, as the glory of God and the eternal salvation of
our souls, which are hindered and impeached by it, are more precious and highly
to be esteemed than our present corporal estate, and the momentany things of
this life. Neither is any deceit so dangerous as this in matters of religion,
seeing this (as we say) touches our free hold and leads us into such
errors as will hinder our ever lasting salvation. In which respect these
errors and untruthes in matters of religion the Apostle calls the doctrine
of Devils, because as he invented 1 Timothy 4. 8.
it, and his instruments teach it, so is it no less than he such an enemy that
hinders our heavenly happiness: the confirming whereof by lying wonders is by
the same Apostle made a mark of Antichrist, who speaking lies in hypocrisy
ratifieth his false doctrines with no less false miracles. All which lies 2
These. 2. 9.
are to be abhorred above all other which concern our temporal goods or
lives. So Saint Augustine, Contra mendacium ad Consentium. lib. 1. cap. 13.
If (says he) a lie which is spoken against the temporal life of any man be
detestable, how much more that which is against life eternal, as every lie is,
which is made in the Doctrine of religion? Enchirid. ad Laurent. cap. 18
And again, he does not hurt so much who by lying puts a traveller out of
the right way, as he that by a deceiving Lie, depraveth the way of Life.

A modest ly is when as a man denies or extenuateth. 4. Of a modest lie, and
what it is.
Gods graces in him, his virtues, good parts, and commendable actions, which
he knows to be in him or done by him. The which proceeds either from
humility, whereby a man undervalueth himself and his gifts, either in the
sight and sense of his contrary corruptions, or when he compares the little
which he has received, with that that he wants, which he thinks so far
short in proportion, that his little in comparison seems nothing. And thus an
humble man speaking what he thinks cannot properly be said to lie, because
his tongue and heart agree, although he utters an untruth, not speaking as
the thing is: or else it proceeds from inward pride, which pursues glory and
praise, though not in the ordinary way, yet (as it were) by a back door or
posterne gate; dispraysing those things in themselves which they know to be
praiseworthy, and denying or extenuating those gifts and good parts, which
they not only know to be in them in some good measure, but also in
selfe-conceite much overvalue them above their true worth. The which Art they
use to draw on the hearer to cross their words, (though not their hearts) with
excessive praises, which they think no more than their due, and would be much
displeased if he should take them at their word, and crossed in their ends and
desires, if he should not cross them in their undervaluing of themselves, and
take occasion thereby to fasten upon them the greater commendations.

CHAP. VIII.
Whether any sorts of Lies are lawful.

ANd thus having showed the diverse. 1. Though some lies are more sinful*
than others, yet all sorts are unlawful, and against the ninth Commandment
sorts of lies, it now follows that we examine whether any of them at any
time or upon any occasion, be lawful and warrantable? And surely it cannot be
denied but that there is great difference in the degree of sinfulness between
some sorts of lies and others; and that the guilt of merry and officious lies
is much extenuated by many circumstances and considerations, by their nature,
the will and desire of the speakers, who love and delight not in the lie for it
self, but as they think it fit to further some good end; and because their
end is not at all to hurt, nor principally to deceive, but to profit or delight
their neighbors: Even as contrariwise the guilt of pernicious lies is much
aggravated, because they are most opposite to Truth, and those that tell them
do it willingly with love and delight: And finally, because their chief aim
and end is to deceive, and by deceit to hurt and wrong their neighbors in
their goods or good name, life or liberty. But though some lies are lighter and
of less guilt than others, yet all in some degree are sinful and unlawful,
as being forbidden in the ninth Commandment. For whereas some object that they
are not condemned by this precept, because it only forbids such untruths as
are against our neighbor, whereas officious and merry lies are not against,
but for him, and for his good, even for his profit and delight; and offend not
against charity, which is the sum of the Law. To this I answer, that all
untruth is forbidden in this Commandment, whether it be for or against our
neighbor; neither does the Hebrew word Beth used here signify only against,
but also toward, or concerning, about or touching our neighbor: neither is
hurt only forbidden, but also any falsehood and untruth by any means signified
of, unto, or concerning our neighbor; for the word which is translated bearing
witness, as if it were Legally, and before a Judge, signifies in the
original, thou shall not answer, which is as much in the Hebrew phrase as
thou shall not say or cause to be said, as appears in diverse Prove. 15. 1.
Matthew. 11. 25. b Joh. 1. 7.
places. And the word witness, signifies any manner of showing any thing, and
so it is taken in other Scriptures. So that the sense of the Commandment, 1
Cor. 15. 15.
extends further than the words outwardly portend: Neither does it only forbid
all false, but also all vain and idle speech, as merry lies for the most part
are; nor yet only lies which are against our neighbor, but also such as are
for him, either for his delight as merry lies, or for his profit and advantage,
as those lies which we call officious. And therefore, seeing all lies are the
transgression of the Law, it follows by the Apostle 1 John 3. 4.
John's definition that they are sins; yea seeing every lie is a sin against
a precept of the decalogue, it follows that even by the opinion of the
Schoolmen themselves, who otherwise so much extenuate officious and merry
lies, they are mortal sins, seeing venial sins (as they call them) are
not committed Contra praecepta decalogi, sed praeter ea; not against the
Commandments, but besides them. Again, it is a sin against nature to lie in
any kind; because words naturally are the signs and significations of those
things which are in the mind; and therefore it is against nature to speak or
signify any way that which the mind thinks not. Finally in every lie though
never so pleasant or profitable, there is a loss of Truth, which is a virtue
most acceptable unto God, and therefore the impeachment of it cannot be
recompensed by our profit or delight.

But let us more particularly examine these diverse. 2. That merry Lies are
sinful and unlawful.
sorts of lies, and consider how and in what measure and degree they are
sinful and unlawful. And first for pernicious lies, there is no question made
by any, but that they are in a high degree sinful, as being against Truth,
Justice and Charity, and wholly tend to Gods dishonor, the hurt of our
neighbors, and our own destruction and damnation, as I shall more fully show
hereafter. And therefore passing them over I will examine the other kinds. And
first for merry lies, it is commonly conceived, that if there be no scurrility
in them, they may pass as tolerable, because they do no hurt unto our selves
or neighbors, but delight and recreate both; and they that tell them intend
not to deceive their hearers; or but a while, that they may the more delight
them. For either they are apparent in themselves to be but jests and lies by
the gross absurdities that are seen at the first view, or are discoverd to be
so by the gesture and pronunciation. So that they are not much unlike unto
Hyperboles or Ironies in respect of the outward form and show, saving that
they differ in their end and use: seeing they are used to teach and express
the Truth in a Rhetorical manner, but these only to delight the hearer. And
of this mind Saint Augustine seems to have been, Contra mendacium ad
Consentium. lib. 1. cap. 2.
who thinks that they can scarcely be taken for lies. Jests therefore (says
he) are to be excepted which were never thought to be lies, because they have
a most evident signification, by the pronunciation, or the disposition of him
that thus jesteth; and proceed from a mind not willing to deceive, although it
utters not truths. And surely there is says Peter Martyr, but a little of a
lie in these merry tales, seeing though they willingly speak that which is not
true, yet the falsity is easily discerned and cannot deceive the hearer. But
whether these merry tales or lies ought to be used by perfect men or strict
Christians, S. Augustine doubts in Chap. 3.
that place, though he clears it in another, where he says, that he lies,
who has one thing in his mind, and utters another thing by his words or any
other signification; the which the merry liar always does. And though he does
not deceive or hurt, this does not clear his tales from being lies, but only
shows that they are not lies of the worst kind, or such as are pernicious,
seeing he lies who does speak willingly otherwise than he thinks. And as he
speaks in another Contra mendacium ad Consentium. lib. 1. cap. 11.
place, Those lies are not to be admitted, which although they do not hurt
another, yet they do not profit any, and do hurt themselves with lies gratis
and for nothing; who properly Duo sunt genera mendaciorum in quibus non magna
culpa est, sed tamen non sunt sine culpa: cum aut jocamur, aut ut proximis
prosimus mentimur. There are two sorts of Lies in which is no great fault, and
yet they are not without fault, when we jest or lie to profit our neig^^^rs.
Aug. in Psalm. 5. Tom. 8. Col. 27. Matthew. 12. 36.
are to be called liars. For there is this difference between one that
tells a lie and a liar. For he tells a lie who lies unwillingly; but a
liar loves to lie, and has a mind that delights in lying. And though such
lies hurt not the hearer, yet they greatly hurt the liars themselves, because
in so lying they forsake the truth and delight in falsity, and choose rather to
please men than to speak the Truth. Again these merry lies are not only in
their falsity opposite to Truth, but are also vain and idle speeches; and our
Savior tells us, that We must give an account at the day of judgment of
every idle word. Yea Epaminondas though an Heathen, shall at this day rise up
in judgment against merry liars, who was so strict and severe in embracing
Truth, that he would not allow a lie to be spoken so much as by way of jest.
Furthermore, if it be unlawful to tell officious lies though they tend to our
own and others benefit, as we shall show hereafter, how much less these
merry lies, which tend only to carnal delight? For if (as we ought to be)
we were spiritually minded, why should we rather take pleasure to hear or
speak lies, than to speak and hear the Truth? Moreover the Apostle
requires that We speak the Truth one to another, and put away lying, and
that our speech be always with grace, seasoned with Ephesians. 4. 25.
salt, and tending to the use of edifying, that it may minister Col. 4. 6.
Ephesians. 4. 29.
grace to the hearers. Finally, if they were condemned who made the hearts of
Kings and Princes glad with their lies, who in respect of their great Hos. 7. 3.
cares and serious studies about their weighty affairs may be allowed an
over-measure of pleasure and delight, how much more are they unlawful, if they
be used to ordinary persons, who stand in need of such means to glad and
cheer their hearts?

Secondly, it may be demanded whether it be. 3. Whether officious Lies be
unlawful.
altogether unlawful to tell officious lies, seeing these in diverse respects
may seem both justifiable and commendable; for he that tells them has no
will simply to lie, but to do good, nor delights in lying, but only as it
conduces to this end; neither has he any desire to deceive or hurt his
neighbor, but mainly aims at this end, that he may benefit him by
delivering him from some dangers, or free him from some great evil, which he
is not able to effect by any other means. To which I answer, that if it be a
sin to lie, (as before I have showed and shall more fully prove hereafter)
because it is opposite to truth, a virtue which is in high esteem with the God
of Truth, and a direct breach of his Commandment, then it is unlawful to lie
out of a desire to produce the greatest good. For every sin is an offense
against Gods infinite Majesty, and therefore deserves an infinite and endless
punishment both in soul and Romans 6. 23.
body; from which we cannot be freed by all Men and Angels, seeing nothing can
satisfy Gods Justice for it, but a price of an infinite value, which no finite
creature could pay, but only the LORD JESUS CHRIST, God and Man, whose death
and sufferings were an All-sufficient price for our redemption, in respect of
the Dignity of the Person that thus suffered. Again, if it be a sin to lie,
then we ought not voluntary to commit it for the effecting of the greatest
good, seeing the Scripture teaches us, that we may not do evil that Romans 3.
8.
good may come thereof. And they also teach us that all lies without exception
or distinction are odious and abominable unto God, and that he will destroy
them that speak leasings. And what good Prove. 12. 22. and 6. 17, 19. Psalm. 5.
6.
can any lies procure that being put into the balance, can countervaile all
these evils? Finally, when we lie out of hope to effect thereby any good, the
sin committed is our own, but the issue and effect is not in our power; for
issues and future events are only in Gods hand, and therefore we do not know
whether upon the sin committed the good will follow; yea rather we have just
cause to fear the contrary: for how can we expect Gods blessing upon the use
of the means which he has cursed? Especially seeing in trusting unto our
own sinful inventions, we distrust his Power and Providence, as though he
were not sufficient without the help of our lie to effect our good ends and
desires, in freeing any from imminent evils, or preserving them in the most
desperate dangers.

CHAP. IX.
Diverse questions and Cases concerning officious Lies, propounded and resolved.

NOw these things being well weighed,. 1. That it is not lawful to lie for
good ends or that we (...) do good.
will serve as a thread to guide us out of the most intricate labyrinth of the
most difficult cases that are usually propounded, and enable us to answer the
hardest questions and objections. First, it may be demanded whether it may not
be lawful to tell a lie, when therein we propound unto our selves some
special good end; as either the obtaining of some great benefit, or the
avoiding of some great and imminent danger of falling into some evil of sin
or punishment. Concerning the former, I answer, that there can accrue unto us
no such benefit by lying, as is sufficient to counterpoise the loss, to wit,
of our souls by sinning, if God in mercy should not give us repentance.
Secondly, that is not to be esteemed a benefit which is procured by unjustice;
for even the Heathen man could teach us, that Nihil utile quod non honestum.
Cic. offic.
there is nothing profitable which is not honest, as no lie is, seeing truth is
opposed by it. And the doctrine of Christian religion informs us in this
truth, that it is not sufficient for the making of an action good and lawful
that our end be good, unless also the means be so, by using whereof we
attain unto this end. Thirdly, if this were granted that we might do a less
evil for the advancing of a greater good; then as Saint Augustine Contra
mendacium ad Consentium. lib. 2. cap. 8.
says all good Laws and manners should be quite overthrown, and a wide door
opened to all wickedness. For then it might be lawful for a thief to rob a
rich covetous man, that hordeth up his wealth and does no good with it; if he
propound this end to his theft, that he will bestow the greatest part of what
he has stolen for the relief of the poor, or for a man to bear false
witness before a Judge, if it tend to the clearing of the innocent and
condemning of the nocent party; or to burn a Will or Testament when the
Testator has made choice of a bad Heir, and to substitute a false Will in the
place thereof, that the inheritance or goods may not come to the hands of such
as will do noe good, but may by this means fall unto them who will feed the
hungry, cloth the naked, lodge strangers, redeem captives, and build
Churches, Why should not all these evils be done for these ends that be so
good, if for these good things they cease to be evil? Yea (says he) if this
were allowed Cur non fiant illa mala propter haec bona, si propter haec bona
nec illa sunt mala? Aug. Contr. menda^^d Consentium. lib. 2. cap. 7.
that we might do evil to good ends, what fact so flagitious, what offense so
heinous and dishonest, what sacrilege so impious, which might not be said to
be done rightly and justly, not only without fear of punishment, but boldly
and gloriously in hope of reward?

Concerning the latter, it may be questioned. 2. Whether it be lawful to lie
to prevent a greater sin in others.
whether it be lawful to lie which is a less evil, to avoid a greater
evil either of sin or punishment? Concerning sin we may consider it either
in another or in our selves. In another it may be demanded whether we may not
commit this small sin of an officious lie, to pull one or many of our
neighbors out of a great sin, in which if they live and dye, there were no
hope for them to escape damnation. As when we see men to live in some damnable
heresy, the which they keep so secret that there is no means to discover
them to the Magistrate that they may be examined, confuted and reformed,
unless some orthodoxe Christian by telling a lie, whereby he faineth himself
to be of the same opinions, do dive into their secrets, and come acquainted
with the most of them that are of this heretical society, that so afterward
he may lay them open unto those that are best able to reclaim them. And this
was the case of Consentius, dealing with those cunning heretics called the
Priscillianistes, which occasioned Saint Augustine to write those two books of
this argument, wherein he commends Consentius his love of truth, zeal,
learning and elocution, but withal confuteth his opinion and practice. For to
say nothing of that ill companion which accompanies this kind of lying, which
is treachery joined with deceit, a vice odious in the eyes of all that are
virtuous and ingenuous, and to consider of the lie used to the former good end,
what charity will teach a man to fall into one sin, that he may pull his
neighbor out of another, or to offend God our selves that we may keep others
from offending him, or to endanger our own souls that we may deliver theirs
out of danger? For true charity begins at home, and teaches us to love our
neighbor as, and not better than our selves; and to love them in the same
quality and truth of affection, and not in the same quantity and proportion.
Yea if we should take this course to reclaim Heretics, we should love our
selves less than them; because in some respects we commit a greater sin than
they, seeing they maintain their errors out of ignorance, but we lie against
knowledge and conscience, as he also speaks. And Lib. ^. cap. 8.
therefore if we can by no other means pull impious Heretics out of their
secret dens, unless our Orthodoxe and Catholic tongues do stray out of the
path of truth, it is more tolerable that they should still lie hid, than that
truth should be impeached; better that these Foxes should lurk in their
holes, than that those who hunt them that Tolerabilius in suis foveis
delitescerent vulpes, quampropter illas capiendas in blasphemiae foveam
caderent vena^ores. Aug. Contra mendacium. lib. 2. cap. 7.
they may take them, should fall into the pit of lies and blasphemy, as the
same Author affirms. To say nothing that the sin in using this lying policy
is certain, but the good issue and event aimed at uncertain, seeing that
being in Gods hand he might justly cross and curse this unlawful means, so
that they shall not conduce to their conversion, but rather to their further
confirming and hardening in their heresy and impiety.

But though it be unlawful by lying to prevent. 3. Whether it be lawful to
lie, that we may greater sins in our selves; a^ name^^* rape and ravishment.
sin in others; yet perhaps it may be lawful, yea commendable to use it,
when we may thereby prevent greater sins not only in others, but also in
our selves. As suppose that a virtuous Matrone or chaste Virgin should be
assaulted by an adulterer with violence to defile or deflowre them, and they
might escape the rape, by putting him off with a lie, is it not lawful to do
it in such a case to prevent so great a mischief? I answer, that though a
stony heart could not choose but relent and be much affected to hear of such a
villainy, and though the tentation be so strong that it is scarsely to be
expected, humane strength should be able to resist it, yet in clearing of the
truth we must not consider what we would, but what we should do being so
assaulted and brought into such straites. Indeed if it were a sin to be
mere patients in the sin of others, the question were easily answered; but
it is not so, for the greatest sin in others is not the least sin in us, if
we only be the subjects of their sin, through unresistable violence, and
do not give the least consent unto it. For here it is all one as in the case
of persecution, oppression, murder or robbery, all which though they be
heinous sins in the agents, yet none at all in the patients, when they have
no will to consent or allow the commission of such sins, nor power to prevent
or shun them. Yea in such cases that is lawfully suffered, which cannot but
unlawfully be avoided; and no act is to be judged sinful if the will be
wholly averse unto it. For it is the very form that gives unto sin its life
and being, to be in some kind or degree voluntary, and though the will give
not its consent in all sins, yet it has some kind of operation in or about
it, as in sins of ignorance, though we do not consent unto sin as knowing
it to be so, yet we consent to that action which is sinful, the will being
misled through the error of our judgment. And so in concupiscence which goes
before consent, there is that which we call inescation, or the bayting of the
hook of sin with some pleasure, profit or other allurement, which is Satan's
tentation, and not imputed unto us as sin if we wholly resist it; and there
is that which we call titillation or the retaining and revolving of the
tentation with some delight, and (as it were) the itching of the desire and the
watring of the teeth after it, if we might enjoy it upon no hard conditions.
But when they are so propounded, as that we cannot enjoy the pleasure or
profit of sin, unless we displease God, and endanger our own souls, then the
will rejects the tentation, and will by no means give its consent.
Notwithstanding, that retaining of the tentation with some tickling delight, is
a sin of concupiscence, and this very parlying with the Devil is a
transgression of Gods Law, though we do not yield up unto him the Fort of our
hearts, nor give our consent that sin shall enter. Of which sin the will is
guilty, which though it did not consent to the Act, yet it gave way to the
Devils dispute, and that with some tickling delight we should listen to his
tentation alluring us to sin. But if as in this case of a violent rape the
will be wholly averse unto it, and the heart abhor it, even as the terrors of
death; though the agent and ravisher commits an horrible sin, yet the
patient or party forced and ravished is wholly clear of it. For the body only
is violated, but the soul not vitiated, and though that be defiled, yet it is
not corrupted, or at least with such a corruption that is not sinful; as S.
Augustine speaks. For there is only the matter of sin which gives it no
being in a subject forced by outward violence; but not the form, which gives
only being and denomination, seeing the will is wholly averse unto it. So that
if this be granted which cannot be denied, that it is a sin to lie, but no
sin to be forced and ravished, then the case is easily cleared, namely that it
is not lawful by the evil of sin, to shun such an evil as is not sinful;
actively to defile the soul that the body may not passively be defiled; or
only in hope that we may shun the outrage of the adulterous ravisher, to cast
our selves certainly into the snares of the Devil by lying and sinning, and
so to be defiled by spiritual filthiness; and to be deflowred and deprived
inwardly in our souls of their purity and chastity. And of this judgment is
Saint Augustine who speaks excellently Nulla est pudicitia corporis, nisi
(...)itate any(...)deat, and (...) mend. lib. 1. c. 7.
to our present purpose. There is (says he) no chastity of the body which
does not depend upon the integrity of the mind, which being pulled from the
other, it must needs fall, although it may seem untainted and untouched, and
for this cause is not to be numbered amongst temporal things, seeing they may
be taken from those that are unwilling to leave them. And therefore by no means
the mind must corrupt it self with a lie for its body, which it knows to
remain incorrupt, if the incorruption does not depart from the soul. For what
the body suffers through violence, there being no precedent lust, it is rather
to be reputed vexation than corruption. Or if every such vexation be
corruption, yet every corruption is not then dishonest, but only that which
lust has procured, or unto which lust has consented. And by how much the
soul is better than the body* it is by so much the more wickedly corrupted:
chastity then may there be preserved, whereas there can be no corruption, but
that which is voluntary; neither can it be violated in our selves by the lust
of another. Wherefore because no man doubts that the soul is better than the
body, therefore the integrity of the mind ought to be preferred before the
integrity of the body, seeing it perpetually may be preserved. But who can say
that the mind of a liar is sincere and upright, etc? And so he concludes
that no man can convince any that it is sometimes lawful to lie, unless he
can prove that an eternal good may by lying be obtained.

And so much concerning the evil of sin. The. 4. Whether it be lawful to
lie to prevent the evil of punishment, and namely, 1. the death of others.
second question respects the evil of punishment, whether we may avoid it
lawfully by telling a ly, when we see no other means whereby we may be
preserved from it. And because it were endless to stand upon all the
particulars, I will insist only in one, which will clear the question in all
the rest, as being the greatest and last of all the rest, namely Death, which
is the king of terrors, and therefore to be avoided by all lawful Job 18. 14.
means above all other temporary evils. And this we will consider either as
it respects our neighbors or our selves. Concerning the former, we will
consider the case in two instances propounded by Saint Augustine, and not much
vary from him in our answer and resolution. Suppose that a Father and his
dear and only Son were at the same time dangerously sick in several places
or rooms, and that the Son (in whose life the life of the Father is bound up,
as it is said of Jacobs in Benjamins) should dye the Father continuing in great
weakness, yet in some hope of recovery. If the Father in this case should
inquire (suspecting the worst) whether his Son be dead or alive, what answer
should be given him? If it be said that he is alive, it is a lie, but yet such
an one as comfort and strengthens the Fathers heart, and may prove a good
means of his recovery; but if it be told him that he is dead, (or which is
all one in effect, if the hearers refuse to give any answer, because he will
surely presume upon their silence that he is departed, seeing otherwise they
would not withhold news which would cheer him) the grief hereof will
presently strike him to the heart, and be a certain cause of his death and
ruin. But I answer with him, that though the case be lamentable, and much
commiseration to be had of the sick Father, yet it is not lawful to save his
life by telling a lie. For this is but a means of our own for his recovery,
and we know not whether God will bless it or no, yea we may well suspect,
that if we distrust in his All Sufficiency, who has in his hand the issues of
life and death, and is able to bring to the grave, and to return back again,
and trust more to our lie and means unlawful, it will prove rather a
hindrance than a furtherance to our desires. Whereas on the other side we are
certain that lying is a sin, and that all sin will slay our souls, if the
wound be not recured by repentance, which we cannot promise unto our selves,
seeing it is not in our own power, but the gift of God which he gives when
and to whom he pleases. Finally, if it be lawful by sinning to prevent the
death of another, the death of their body which is temporal, with the death of
our soul which is eternal; why might it not be lawful also much more, if an
adulteress should so desperately love us, that if she might not have her lust
satisfied, she would hang or drown her self, to prevent her death by
yielding to her desire, seeing by one act of uncleanness we should prevent
her murder, and by prolonging her life procure time for her repentance, that
she may be saved; whereas by the other course she not repenting plungeth her
self into Hell. The other instance is this; If an August. Contra mendacium ad
Consentium lib. 1. cap. 13.
innocent religious man should be pursued by murtherous ruffians, or bloody
persecutors, with a full intention to deprive him of his life, for the
preventing whereof he is forced to fly from them, or to hide himself in some
secret place, with which his flight or place of hiding we only are acquainted:
The question is if the pursuers ask us which way he is gone, or if he be
hidden with us or no, whether we may not by an officious ly preserve his life,
directing them to take a wrong way in their pursuit, that so he may escape, or
telling them that he is gone from us and not in our house; seeing if we speak
the truth, we shall thereby expose him to certain danger of death, and if we
refuse to answer, we shall not only be endangered to taste of their rage, but
also do no good to the party, whom we have received and hidden, seeing upon
our silence they will certainly presume, that he is hidden with us, or else we
would make no scruple to deny it. To which I answer with Saint Augustine, that
we must not lie, and so by sinning offend Gods infinite Majesty, and endanger
the eternal salvation of our souls, in hope to preserve the momentary life of
another body. What then? must we tell the truth and so betray his life into
their hands that seek it? No by no means, for this is much worse than the
other. Must we then say nothing, when as silence is no less dangerous then
speaking the truth? Nor this neither, seeing this as little conduces to our
end of preserving our neighbors life, as if we confessed the truth. What then
must be done? surely (as Saint Augustine also resolves it) we are in such a
case called by God to put on Christian courage and resolution, and to endure
any extremities, rather than we will either betray the truth or the innocent
man, who has entrusted his life to our secrecy. And therefore we ought boldly
to profess, that we know what is become of the party whom they pursue, but
will not by telling them expose him to the danger of their cruelty, because we
will neither betray him, nor offend God by telling a lie. And of this Saint
Augustine brings an example of a Bishop, called Firmus, whom he commends to
have been more firm in his will and resolution, than in his name: who when he
had with all diligence hid a persecuted Christian from the rage of an heathen
Emperor, and being by his Pursevants which he had sent to apprehend him,
demanded where they might find him, courageously answered them, that he could
neither lie, nor betray the man; for which though they put him to many
tortures, yet he remained constant in his resolution. Who afterward being
brought to the Emperor, seemed unto him so admirable in his faith and
constancy, that without any difficulty he obtained pardon for him whom he had
hidden.

The other part of the question concerns our 6. Whether we may lawfully lie
to save our own lives.
selves, namely whether we ought for the preservation of our own lives tell a
lie, when as all other means are wanting, and this only promises security.
Unto which a short answer may suffice, if we consider what has been already
said in the former cases; for it is a sin to lie, but no sin to dye; and our
life is not so much worth, that we should spinne out the thread thereof to a
further length with wicked hands, nor buy it at so dear a rate as the price of
sin, which is an offense against Gods infinite Majesty, and therefore of
infinite guilt; from the condemnation whereof we could not be redeemed at any
lower price, than the precious death and blood shed of the Eternal Son of
God. Again, by voluntary sinning we expose our souls to death everlasting,
and at the most by not sinning and lying we endanger but our bodies to a
temporal death, which either sooner may be brought by some unexpected
sickness, or by nature it self a little later; so that in effect long life is
but the addition, and untimely death but the substraction of a few days or
years. And therefore as much as the soul is to be preferred before the body,
and life Eternal before this life of mortality, with so much more care and
circumspection, we must shun lying more than dying, seeing by that the loss
of our chiefest jewel is endangered, and by this we have no great loss.
Excellently Saint Augustine to this purpose: who (says he) Quis observat
vanitatem? qui timendo mori mentitur; timendo enim morimentitur and moritur
antequam moriatur, qui idco mentiebatur ut vivcret, etc. In Psalm. 30.
observes vanity? He that lies fearing to dye. For fearing to dye he lies,
and so dies before he should dye, who therefore lies that he might live. Thou will lie lest thou should dye, and so lie and dyest. And when thou
shunnest one death which thou can only put off, but not escape, thou fallest
into two, first dying in thy soul, and afterward in body, etc.

Finally, it is so far of from being lawful to lie. 7. That we may not
lawfully lie to advance Gods glory.
officiously in the behalf of men, that it is unlawful to do it for the
advancement of Gods glory; for though he requires that we should propound it
as the maine end of all our actions, according to that of the Apostle: Whether
you eat, drink, or 1 Cor. 10. 31.
whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of God: yet he will not have us
only to seek his Glory in respect of the end, but also in regard of all
lawful means which conduce to the furthering of this end; and being the God
of Truth, he esteems himself more dishonored than glorified by our lie,
though our chief end and aim therein be to advance his Glory. For as one
says well: It is no less evil Pet. Mart. in 2 Samuel 9. 8.
to speak false things to Gods praise, than not to believe of him those that
are true. And therefore Job reprooveth his friends for those untruthes, which
they spoke against him; though their maine end was to Justify God, and to
Glorify him in his Justice. Will you (says he) speak wickedly Job. 13. 7.
8, 10.
for God, and talk deceitfully for Him? Will ye accept his Person? Will ye
contend for God? He will surely reprove you, if ye do secretly accept
persons. So Saint Paul, though for the glory of Christ, and 1 Cor. 15. 15.
God his Father, he had testified that he had raised him up from the dead, yet
he acknowledges that he should deservedly be esteemed no better than a
false witness of God, if Christ indeed were not yet risen. So that we must
not lie though our end be that God thereby may have Glory, seeing he needs
not our lie, being able to glorify himself by us, when we use lawful means
to lawful ends. In which respect I have* much misliked those fained miracles
recorded in some Ecclesiastical Stories, wrought upon slight occasions, and
to as little end, purposely (as it seems) devised by the Authors to glorify
Christ, and propagate the Gospel; and much more the lying miracles and minte
of untruthes invented and stamped by the Pope and his Emissaries in their
Legends, to work as they pretend an higher esteem of the Christian Truth in
the hearts of the people, though they grace them with the title of Piae
frauds, Pious deceits: seeing they 1 These. 2. 9.
not only use lying means, but also aim at wicked ends; not to confirm and
grace the truth, but to seduce the people, and lead them into errors.

CHAP. X.
Objections in defense of officious Lies, propounded and answered.

ANd thus have I fully prooved that. 1. The objection, that officious lies are
not against charity answered.
no lies though never so officious to God or men, may be lawfully used; the
which being clearly understood and well weighed, it will be easy to answer
all objections which are usually made by the Authors of them; whether they be
grounded on seeming reasons, or on the examples of the faithful who have
sometimes used them. Concerning the former; It is first objected, that these
officious lies are lawful, because they are not against charity which is the
end and sum of the Law; but they advance our neighbors good, at which we
should aim in all our words and actions, and do not offend against humane
societies, but rather preserve them, seeing thereby men are kept safe and freed
from dangers. So the Apostle says, that the end of the Commandment is
Charity: 1 Timothy 1. 5. Romans 13. 8. Matthew. 22. 37.
and he that loves another has fulfilled the Law. I answer, If we take
Charity in a general sense, it is the sum of the whole Law, as our Savior
makes it, and includes both all duties toward God required in the first
Table, and toward our neighbors commanded in the second; in both which we are
enjoined that our love should be in truth. For first, God requires that we
should John 4. 24. Psalm. 51. 17.
worship him in spirit and in truth, and in all his Service He requires Truth
in the inward parts, without Psalm. 17. 1. Jer. 3. 10. Esaias. 29. 13.
which all religious duties are odious unto him; for he abhors such prayers
as are made with fained lips; and if there be a distance between our tongues
and our hearts when we draw nigh unto him, our prayers will be rejected and
reproved. So also our love toward our neighbors, must be joined with Truth;
for Charity rejoices in the Truth, as the Apostle teaches us, even as 1 Cor.
13. 6.
the Truth rejoices in Charity, and therefore as we must speak the Truth in
Love, so we must love in the Truth, seeing neither are sincere and right, if
either of them be divided from the other. And if our Charity be racked by
importunity of our neighbors to speak a lie in their behalf, we must say
with the Apostle, that we can do nothing 2 Cor. 13. 8.
against the Truth, but for the Truth. For though carnal love may thus stretch
it self beyond the bounds of Truth and Justice, yet Christian Charity will
never go alone, but delights in the company of these and all other virtues.
And even the Heathen themselves, who had no other guide but the light of
nature, limited their love and friendship with their Piety and Truth; and
therefore, though they would go far with their friends in the way of amity,
yet no further than would stand with Piety; to which that proverb tended,
usque (...).
ad aras, your friend in what I lawfully may, but yet no further than the
Altar. And that other, Plato is my friend, and Socrates my friend also, but
(...). Aristot.
Truth is a greater friend than both. And the Philosopher says, that it is a
pious thing even among friends, to honor and esteem highly of the Truth,
besides Christian charity requires not that we should hurt our selves to
help another, or to destroy our own souls, by wilful sinning, that we may
preserve our neighbors body or state from destruction. For it is said, that
the Lord will destroy Psalm. 5. 6.
them that speak leasings.

Secondly, it is objected that it is a good and. 2. The objection of doing good
by lies answered.
commendable thing to do good, to preserve life, and deliver from danger; but
this is done by an officious lie. I answer, it is good and commendable to do
good by good and lawful means, and to compass our laudable ends by such
means as are lawful and commendable; but it is not so, if we use sinful
means, though our ends be never so excellent; for we may not do any evil,
that good Romans 3. 8.
may come thereof. Now lies in all kinds are evil, because they are contrary
to the truth, and forbidden by Gods Law, as before I have showed. Neither is
any lie (as Saint Augustine says) to be reputed Enchirid. ad Laurentium. cap.
22.
no sin, because by lying we may sometimes profit another; for so we may
do also by stealing, if a poor man to whom what we steal is openly given,
do feel the profit of it, and the rich man from whom we secretly take it do
not feel the disprofit of it. And yet for all this no man will say that theft
is no sin. Yea so we may profit by committing adultery; if a woman out of
desperate lust will dye unless we consent unto her, seeing though she have
played the harlot, yet if she live, she may repent of it; and yet no man will
say that we do not sin if we commit upon these terms such an act of
filthiness. Now if Chastity does deservedly so much please us, wherein I pray
you has truth offended us, that we may not for another man's profit violate
that by committing adultery, and yet may violate this by telling of lies?

Thirdly, it is objected, that an officious lie comes not under the
definition of a lie, seeing he. 3. The objection that an officious lie comes
not under the definition of a lie, answered.
that uses it has no love to lying nor delight in it, neither is it his mind
or desire to deceive or hurt, but to do good and benefit his neighbor. I
answer, that it is a lie to speak an untruth contrary to that which we know
and conceive in our mind, whether we love and will it with delight, or dislike
and loath it; or whether it deceive and hurt our neighbor, or delight and
benefit him. For though we do not absolutely will it, yet we do
conditionally and accidentally, that we may attain unto our end. And though we
do not deceive our neighbor to the hurt of his person, or the hinderance of
his estate, yet we deceive him by misleading his mind and misinforming his
judgment, causing him to fall into error, and to embrace falsehood in the
stead of truth. Besides truth it self is violated, whilst it is dis-throned,
and untruth which is opposite unto it, is set up in its place. But hereby we
do most of all deceive and hurt our selves, whilst by sinning to benefit our
neighbor in his corporal and temporal estate, we endanger our souls to
everlasting perdition. And whereas it may be objected, that it is no sin nor
breach of Gods Law, which only forbids such untruths as are against, and
not for the good of our neighbors: to this I have before fully answered, and
therefore need not here to insist further on it.

Finally, it is objected that we have many examples. 4. The objection taken
from examples of the faithful in the Scriptures, answered.
of the faithful in the Scriptures, who upon several occasions have used
officious lies to free themselves and others out of great and imminent dangers.
To which I first generally answer, that these examples are recorded, but not
approoved, or if in some respects allowed or commended, yet not for their lies,
but for their love of justice and mercy, their aim at Gods glory or their own
and others good; their pious affections to virtue and goodness, and their
readiness to advance religious and honest actions. Neither are their lies
propounded as patterns and precedents for our imitation, but as examples of
humane frailty, that they may serve as Sea marks to make us shun these
rocks, when by like tempests of tentation we are in danger to fall upon them.
For howsoever they were Gods great worthies, and had attained to a great
measure of grace and goodness, yet they were but in part sanctified, having
still infirmities and corruptions in part remaining in them, as it were little
spots and blemishes in beautiful bodies. And therefore we must live, not by
examples, but by precepts, or at least imitate them only so far as they follow
the rule of Gods word, and make them our patterns in their virtuous actions,
and not in their frailties and aberrations; according to that of the 1 Cor. 11.
1.
Apostle; be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ.

But let us descend to some particulars. And first. 5. The example of Abraham,
objected.
the example of Abraham is objected, who called Sarah his sister to preserve
his life from danger. But I have showed before that this was Abraham's infirmity
through fear of death, and we must follow Abraham's example in his faith, and
not in his frailties and failings. Again, the example of Abraham is objected
saying to his young men: Abide you here with the Ass, and I and the lad will
go yonder Genesis 22. 5.
and worship, and come again to you, whereas it was his resolution to
sacrifice his son. To which I answer with Saint Augustine, that Abraham was
a Prophet, and might speak this as a Prophetical prediction, not directed
with his own reason, but by the instinct and motion of the Spirit, who knew
what would be the issue of his action: or he might speak this out of the
confidence of his faith, persuading himself that though he sacrificed and
killed his son, yet God was able to restore him again to life, and would
assuredly do it as being both gracious, and also true in that special
promise, that he would give him Isaac, and that in his seed all the Nations of
the earth should be blessed. And to this I rather incline, because I have my
warrant from the words of the Apostle, who says, that Abraham Heb. 11. 17, 18,
19.
by faith when he was tried offered up Isaac, and he that had received the
promise offered up his only begotten son, of whom it was said, that in Isaac
shall thy seed be called: accounting that God was able to raise him up even
from the dead, from whence also he received him in a figure.

Secondly, the example of the Egyptian midwives. 6. The example of the Egyptian
Midwives objected and answered.
is objected, who by an officious ly preserved the young children of the
Israelites from that bloody slaughter intended and commanded by Pharaoh. To
which I answer, first, that it does not manifestly appear that they lied, and
where things or speeches are doubtful, charity will have us to take them in
the best sense. It may be that the Israelitish women having special strength
and assistance from God, that they might escape the Kings inhumane decree,
concerning the death of their children, were delivered in their travel before
the Midwives coming, having also some help one of another; a thing to be
believed without any great difficulty by the Irish-women, and those that
converse with them and know their manners, who have experience of their easy
labor, quick dispatch, and speedy recovery. And it is likely that in their
case they would put themselves to the uttermost of their strength, though it
were with some danger, to preserve their Children. Neither is it improbable
that the Egyptian Midwives out of their merciful disposition, faith and fear
of God, did them all the favor that they could, by giving them secret notice
of their coming, that they might have time to prevent the mischief by hiding
their Children, and when they came, by making a slight or no search. But
though it were granted that they lied in their excuse to Pharaoh, yet this will
prove nothing, because they are no precedents or patterns for us to immitate
in their lying, seeing they might do it through fear and infirmity. And
whereas it may be objected that their faith is commended and their work
rewarded by God; for it is said, that Exodus 1. 20. 21.
God dealt well with the Midwives, because they feared God more than the King,
and built them houses. To this I answer, that their mercy, faith, and fear of
God was acceptable, approved and rewarded, but not their lie; and therefore
graciously looking upon the better part rather than the worse, God pardoned and
passed by their infirmity and failing, and in his grace and mercy rewarded
their faith and obedience. Even as he is said to have approved and prospered
diverse of the good Kings of Judah, because their hearts were upright in the
maine points and parts of his Service, though they took not away the high
places; not because he approoved their want of zeal, in purging the Church
thoroughly from superstition, but because delighting in their integrity he
passed by, and pardoned their failings and infirmities.

Much like unto this is the example of Rahab,. 7. The example of Rahab objected
and answered.
hiding the Israelitish spies, and telling her Citizens that they were
departed. The which some would charitably excuse, as though it were no lie,
because keeping an Inn, some other of her guests might depart in the Evening,
of whom she might truly say, that they were gone. And I would willingly be as
charitable as they, if there were any probability of truth. But it is not
likely that the Citizens in such a weighty business, would make such a slight
inquiry, but that she might easily understand after whom they inquired. Yea,
it is manifest that she knew those whom she had hid were the Men, or else to
what purpose did she hide them? And therefore, for her to say that they were
departed, not meaning them after whom they inquired, but some other who in her
own knowledge were not the Men; what was it, but to equivocate and lie, seeing
she spoke not as the thing was, nor in that sense as they asked, nor yet as
she desired that they should understand her; and that to this purpose, that
she might deceive and delude them. But what of all this? Is Rahabs example a
privilege against plain precepts, and a fit pattern for us to immitate, who
lately was an Harlot, an Innekeeper, having small knowledge as yet of Gods
Will, and now but a new convert, under a strong tentation, and in a great
conflict between fear and faith? Yea, but the Apostle Heb. 11. 31.
commends her faith in this act, by which she was preserved from perishing
with the rest. I answer, that she was saved by her faith, and not by her lie;
and because believing Gods wonders done for the Israelites, and his Word
revealed and expounded unto her by her Guests, she had received them,
concealed, dismissed them, and preserved their lives, with the hazard of her
own; and not because she had in the manner of doing it, followed her own
device, which fear and not faith suggested, seeing she had no warrant for it,
out of GODS Word.

CHAP. XI.
Whether modest Lies are lawful.

IN the last place it may be demanded,. 1. That modest lies are unlawful.
whether a modest lie be lawful, either when we deny those gifts, graces and
good parts, in whole or in part which we know to be in us, or accuse our selves
of those sins and imperfections, of which we know that we are guiltless and
innocent, either altogether, or else in respect of that measure and degree
which we lay to our own charge; seeing this is a notable means to curb and
subdue our pride, arrogance and insolency, and to nourish and increase
humility, which is a grace most acceptable unto God. To which I answer, that
when we are to deal with God, and to humble our souls before him in the
unfeigned acknowledgement of our sins and wants, imperfections and
corruptions, it may be lawful and profitable to aggravate them even with
hyperbolicall expressions, out of a godly jealousy of our selves, because our
hearts are so wicked Jer. 17. 10.
and deceitful above all things that none can know them, nor search the gulf
of corruption and sink of sin to the bottom; and because we have in us
naturally the seeds of all wickedness and flagitious impieties, which are
ready to sproute and to bring forth their cursed fruit upon all occasions, if
they be not checked and nipt with Gods grace and holy Spirit; so that we do
not wrongfully accuse our selves of those gross acts of sin; as murder,
adultery, drunkenness and the like, of which our consciences in the sight of
God do clear and acquit us; because hereby we give glory unto God, magnifying
his mercy and bounty, who has forgiven unto us such great debts, and because
we do also exercise our repentance and increase our sorrow for sin and work
our hearts to a true hatred of it; according to that of the Prophet: Then shall
Ezech. 36. 31.
ye remember your own evil ways and your doings that were not good, and
shall loath your selves in your own sight for your iniquities and
abominations. But when we have to deal with men, we must speak the truth,
as we in our understanding conceive of it, as well of our selves, as of other
men; and though we ought for the most part modestly to conceal those things
which concern our own praises, and may to the full lay open our wants and
infirmities when just occasion shall be offered; yet when we are necessarily
put to speak of either, we must not out of a sinful modesty lie and betray
the truth, but ingenuously speak what we truly conceive, neither denying or
too much extenuating Gods gifts and graces in us, nor accusing our selves of
those sins, imperfections and corruptions of which we know that we are as
clear as other of Gods servants; yea if we be unjustly suspected and accused
of them, we are bound in conscience to excuse and defend our selves and to
manifest what we can our own innocence. For first Gods Law requires that we
should give a true testimony of our selves, as well as of others, and use all
good means to preserve our own fame and good name, as well as our neighbors.
Secondly, by denying Gods gifts and graces in us, we ungratefully dishonor
him, not acknowledging his bounty and goodness toward us, and refusing to
ascribe unto him the Glory of these gifts whereof he is the Author. Thirdly,
we put out these lights which were given Matthew. 5. 16.
us to this end, that shining before men, they might take occasion thereby to
glorify our Heavenly Father. Fourthly, we wrong our neighbors by working in
their minds a false opinion, and by causing them unjustly to slight and
disesteeme us, when as they think that our gifts and good parts are much
lesser, and our faults and sins far greater than in truth they are; seeing
men for the most part speak of themselves, rather better than worse than they
deserve. And secondly, whilst we suppress, deny or extenuate our virtues,
and aggravate our failings and corruptions, we neglect this Christian duty of
edifying one another by our good example, and contrariwise make our selves
scandalous and offensive. And finally, we wrong our own persons; for if it
be an injury to belie another, it is no less if we belie our selves; and if
it be an unjust and uncharitable act to rob our neighbors of their good
name, by false extenuatio^s of the good things which are in them, or
aggravations of their faults and faylings, how can it be less sinful if
we use the same means to spoil our selves of this precious jewel? To this
purpose (though in another case) Saint Augustine excellently speaks for
confuting the Pelagians, and Coelestianians, who affirmed that they were pure
and free from sin, and yet for humility sake against their conscience and
persuasion confessed their sins, of which they thought themselves pure and
clear, he thus convinces them of their error: Do thou (says he) lie for
humility? Thou art just and without sin; but for humilities sake thou Propter
humilitatem ergo mentiris? etc. August. de verbis Apostoli. Sermon. 29. Tom. 10.
call thy self a sinner; how shall I receive thee as a Christian for a
witness against another, whom I find to be a false witness against thy
self? Thou art just, thou art without sin, and yet thou say that thou
have sin: therefore thou art a false witness against thy self, God will not
accept of thy lying humility; examine thy life, and look into thy conscience,
etc. How shall I take thee for a witness in another man's cause, who lie in
thine own? Thou make Saints guilty, whilst thou bear against thy self a
false testimony, what will thou do to another who slanderest thy self? I
demand; art thou just or a sinner? thou answerest a sinner. Thou lie, because
thou do not say that with thy mouth, which thou beleevest of thy self in
thy heart. And therefore, though thou will not be a sinner before, now thou
beginnest to be since thou lie. For thou say for humilities sake that
thou call thy self a sinner, etc. But can there be humility where there is
falsity.

But against this is objected, that we have many. 2. The Example of Agur in
defense of modest lies, objected and answered.
examples of holy men in the Scriptures, that in modesty and humility have
abased themselves in the acknowledgement of their wants, infirmities, and
sins, beyond all bounds of Truth; against some whereof we can take no
exceptions, seeing they were Penmen of the Scriptures, and immediately
inspired by the Holy Ghost. 2 Pet. 1. 21.
The first is of Agur, who being a Prophet of great wisdom and understanding,
thus abaseth and vilifieth himself: Surely I am more brutish than any Prove.
30. 2.
man, and have not the understanding of a man. I neither learned wisdom, nor
have the knowledge of the Holy. I answer, that we must not understand these
words simply and absolutely, but respectively. First, in respect of the Person
to whom he speaks and in whose presence he stands, to wit, Ithiel, which
signifies the strong God with us, and Veal, signifying one who having all
power in his hand, is able to do whatsoever he will. By both which he
understands our Lord JESUS CHRIST, the Wisdom and Power of his FATHER, in
comparison of whom the wisest in the world are brutish and destitute of
knowledge. Secondly he makes this acknowledgement in respect of the subject
matter which he was to speak of, namely divine and heavenly Wisdom, which as
much transcended his reach and capacity, as reason in man excels brutish
sense; according to that of the Psalmist: Such knowledge is too wonderful for
me; Psalm. 139. 6.
It is high, I cannot attain unto it. And that of the Apostle; And who is
sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2. 16.
Thirdly, he speaks not simply but respectively, comparing the little which
he knew, with the much which he knew not; like that of Socrates, hoc unum
scio, me nihil scire; I only know this, that I know nothing. Fourthly, he may
be said thus to speak, not as he was now sanctified and enlightened with the
spirit of Grace and understanding, but as he was in the state of nature, in
which respect the Prophet says, Every man is brutish in Jer. 10. 1^.
his knowledge, understanding nothing in spiritual 1 Cor. 2. 14.
things which concern his eternal salvation, till he be regenerate and in
Christ: The which sense the words will best bear, if with Iunius we thus
render them; for I am a beast or brutish since I was a man, that is, even from
my birth, and the wisdom of a man is not in me, that is, like that which was
in man by his first creation (before by his fall he became brutish) and so
ought to be in him still.

Secondly, the example of the Apostle Paul is. 3. The example of Paul, objected
and answered. 1 Cor. 15. 9. Ephesians. 3. 8. 1 Timothy 1. 15. 2 Cor. 11. 5. 1 Cor. 15.
10. Phil. 3. 5. Act. 26. 5.
objected, who says that he was the least of the Apostles, and not worthy to
be called on Apostle, yea that he was the least of all the Saints; yea which is
more, that he was the chief of sinners; whereas elsewhere he makes himself
equal to the chief of the Apostles, superior unto them all in his labors
and sufferings, and as touching the Law a Pharisee, yea in respect of his life
and conversation of the strictest of that Sect. From whence they conclude, that
in those speeches wherein he so much abased himself he used a modest lie, and
therefore that modest lies are in such cases lawful. To which I answer, that
he called himself the least of the Apostles, and the least of the Saints, not
simply and generally, but respectively, as he expresses himself, because he
had persecuted the Church of God. 1 Cor. 15. 9. 1 Timothy 1. 13.
In which regard also he calls himself the chiefest of sinners, as it is
evident in the same places. But how can this be other than a modest lie, that
Saint Paul should call himself the chiefest of sinners, seeing others
committed far greater sins than he, and yet upon their repentance were
received to mercy, as Manasses? Some understand the words, that he was the
first of sinners (as the word may also signify) namely the first of all those
that came unto Christ, who had before persecuted him in his members. But this
had been no great aggravation of Paul's sin, nor amplification of Gods mercy
in pardoning it, both which the Apostle intends in that place. And therefore
I had rather take it in a litterall sense, namely that in truth he calls
himself the greatest sinner that had received mercy. First because he
speaks as he thinks, and finds himself in his own sense and feeling:
for as it is the nature of hypocrisy to make our own beams moates, and
others moates beams; so it is the nature of true repentance, to aggravate our
own sins, and to extenuate other men's: and when the eyes of our minds are
enlightened, we see our sins to be more in number, and more heinous in
quality, either in themselves, or in respect of circumstances, than we can
charitably suspect to be in any other of Gods servants. Secondly, because he
speaks in my judgment as the thing is. For if we limitte his speech to the
faithful only, who upon their repentance, have been received to grace; (as
we must needs do, seeing some have lived and died in their infidelity and
final impenitency, and others have committed the sin against the Holy Ghost,
with whom there is no probability that the Apostle compared himself) I say,
restraining the comparison only to penitent sinners, then it is true which the
Apostle speaks, that of all sinners he was the chief; whether we consider
the sin it self, or as it was aggravated by circumstances. For he madly and
maliciously persecuted the Saints of God, for their profession of Christ and
the Gospel; and not being content Act. 26. 11.
to blaspheme his holy Name himself, he does as much as in him lies, compel
them also to blaspheeme, as he confesses, and so lacked nothing but this of
committing the unpardonable sin, that he did it ignorantly, as himself
acknowledgeeth. 1 Timothy 1. 13.
Besides he had great and many means of knowledge and of revealing unto him
Christ and the Light of the Gospel, and some of them he carelessly neglected,
and some he utterly despised. Of the former sort was the Law of God, in which
having great skill, he might in the ceremonies and sacrifices have seen Christ
crucified before his eyes, by which, through the blindness of his mind, and
hardness of his heart, he profitted not. Of the latter was the Heavenly and
Powerful Sermons of our Savior himself, and of his Apostles, which were
confirmed by many and wonderful miracles, all which he despised; either not
vouchsafing to hear them, or not receiving or believing them; so that nothing
could touch his heart hardened in his sin: And whereas some had sinned out of
simple error and ignorance, and had proceeded in their sin, even to the
crucifying of the Lord of Life, yet afterward when by the Preaching of the
Apostles, they were convinced of their sin, they repented of it and believed
in Christ; he still proceeds in his madness and fury to persecute the
Saints of God, not contenting himself to hear that they were murdered and
massacred, unless he stood by and satiated his eyes with their death and
slaughter. Yea so obstinate he was in his sin and rebellion, that either he
must perish in it, or God must pull him out of it by strong hand, and use a
miracle upon him for his conversion. By all which it appears that S. Paul had
no need to use the help of a modest lie, when he called himself the chiefest
of sinners.

Lastly, it is objected, that our Savior Christ. 4. The example of our Savior
Christ, objected and answered.
himself, who was greater than all the Angels, as being the Eternal Son of
God, equal with his Father, the Prince of Angels, and as he was our Mediator
God and Man; yet in that Prophetical Psalm of his Passion and Sufferings, he
that was God makes himself less than a man; But I (says he) am a worm and
no man. The which is to be understood not only of David the Type, but also,
and that chiefly of Christ himself the Antitype, in whose Person the Psalmist
speaks. To which I answer, that our Savior speaks this not simply, but
respectively; not what he absolutely was, nor what he was in his own nature,
or in his selfeconceit, but what he was reputed to be in the sight and opinion
of the people; who looking upon him as a Man forsaken of God, and exposed to
the malice of his enemies, and being astonished at him, his visage was so marred
with his sufferings more than any Esa. 52. 14.
man, and his form more than the sons of men; and seeing in him no form,
comeliness nor beauty, that they should desire him: He was despised and
rejected of men, as a man of sorrows and acquainted with griefs, and they hid
(as it were) their faces from him, he was Esa. 53. 2, 3.
despised and they esteemed him not, as the Prophet Esaias prophesied of him; and
in this regard he says, that he was a worm and not a man, as if he should
have said, I am so vilified of my enemies, by reason of my sufferings, and so
despised, and contemned, because they see no form or beauty in me, being
defaced and marred with afflictions and persecutions, that they number me not
among men, but esteem me no better than a contemptible worm, which is good
for nothing but to be trodden under foot. And that he speaks this of his
enemies false opinion, and not as himself thought or would have others to
conceive, the words following do sufficiently show; I am a worm (says he)
and no man, areproach of men, and despised of the people. All they that see
me, laugh me to scorn, they shoot out the lip, and shake the head, etc.

CHAP. XII.
Of the means to dissuade us from Lying, and first, because it is an heinous
sin.

HAving spoken of the diverse sorts of lies,. 1. That Lying is an heinous sin,
proved by the Scriptures.
and proved that they are all sinful and unlawful: It now follows
according to the order which I first propounded, that I set down the means
whereby we may be preserved from this sin. The which are of two sorts; the
first is to show the dangerousnesse and desperateness of this disease of
lying, that so we may with more earnestness desire to be cured; and then the
remedies which may further the cure. For so much do men slight this
sickness of the soul, as though there were no danger in it; yea so far are
the most in love with it, so loath to leave it, and so willing to live and die
in this disease, which in their carnal reason they find so pleasant and
profitable, that in this, if in any other, the question of our Savior may be
well propounded to our sick and impotent Patients; will thou be made whole?
For as those that John 5. 6.
are sick of a Lethargy delight in sleeping, though it will bring assured
death, and being rouzed out of it by their friends, are much displeased with
them, because they are disturbed and disquieted: so is it with the most men in
this case, apprehending no danger, and sensually feeling delight in this
sickness, they love their disease and loath the remedies. That men therefore
may not securely sleep in this sin of Lying, as apprehending no danger, I
will first show the greatness and heinousness of it in the sight of God and
all good men; that so all may be brought into a hatred and detestation of it,
and then prescribe some means which may strengthen us against it. Concerning
the former, though lying were but a small sin in it self, yet it were not
small unto us, if we allow and approve it, love and delight in it, seeing it
is joined with presumption and impenitency; neither (as one says) is there any
sin so venial, which is not Augustine
made criminal, whilst it pleases and delights: But it is not so in Gods
sight, how lightly soever men esteem of it, as will easily appear by the
following discourse. For the Apostle Paul setting down a Catalogue of most
heinous sinners, as profane persons, parricides, murderers, adulterers, 1 Timothy 1. 10.
Sodomites, men-stealers and perjured persons, does rank liars in the rear of
them; and the Apostle John numbereth them with dogs, sorcerers, Apoc. 22. 15.
whore-mongers and idolaters, all which shall be excluded out of the gates of
the Heavenly Jerusalem. And the Holy Ghost in the Hebrew tongue calls a lie
Aven, which also signifies iniquity; implying that all lies are iniquity, and
that all iniquity is after a sort included in a lie, seeing every sin is in
this respect a lie, as it is committed against the Truth of God which
forbids it. And A liar worse than a thief.
howsoever men measuring the guilt of sins by their profit and disprofit, do
hang up thieves, and oftentimes laugh at liars, yea even reward them if they be
skillful in their Art: yet is lying in it own nature worse than theeving, and
a common liar, than a common thief; according to that of the son of Syrach:
A thief is better than a man which Eccli. 20. 25.
is accustomed to lie, and they both shall have destruction to heritage. For
theft is committed immediately against men, but a lie against God, the God of
Truth, and is therefore aggravated as being committed against a much more
excellent Object. Theft spoyleth us of our worldly goods, and hurts our
estates, but lying exceeds theft in theft, robbing us of a much more
excellent jewel, even spiritual truth, which is the riches and ornament of
the mind. Yea it depriveth both the liar and him that hearkneth unto lies of
eternal salvation, seeing in this respect the thief only hurts himself,
but cannot hinder him from the fruition of blessedness whom he robs, though
he takes from him his earthly riches. Again, the Law of God appointed that
the thief should make satisfaction to him whom he had wronged, by restoring
unto him sour or five fold, and so by recompense made the fault in respect of
men curable; but no satisfaction is appointed to be made unto those who are
wronged by lying, there being for it no valuable recompense, seeing they are
robbed of a Jewel Prove. 23. 23.
above all price. Finally, lying is worse than stealing as being the cause of
it, and the chief encouragement which sets the thief on work to commit
his sin: for if men were resolved to speak nothing but truth, they would
never steal, seeing when they are examined, they must confess their offense,
and receive deserved punishment; but because they hope to escape by hiding
their sin with lies, therefore they are imboldned to the committing of it.
And yet I have said nothing of the malignity of this sin and sickness of
the soul, more than is in theft, whereby it becomes more contagious,
infecting others with its poison; for whereas in stealing the thief himself
only sins, and not he that is robbed by him; in lying not only they sin
who tell the lies, but all they likewise who delight to hear them, and are too
credulous in believing of them.

Yea not only the Scriptures, but even the Heathen writers, Poets and
Philosophers, by the light. 2. Lying condemned as a great sin even by the
Heathens
of nature have in all ages condemned lying as an heinous and hateful vice.
Many of whose sayings Stobaeus records to this purpose: One says that he is
unhappy, who rather uses lies though seemingly Euripides.
good, than truths when he judges them evil. And again; certainly it is a
thing intolerable to tell lies. Another tells us, that he is equally his
enemy as the gates of Hell, who conceaveth one thing in his mind, and speaks
another thing with his mouth. And that Jupiter the great father (...). Homer.
Iliad. lib. 4. Phocyllides.
who helps all, yet will not be helpful unto liars. Another persuades thus;
tell (says he) no lies; but speak all truths: And again, do not hide one
thing in thy heart, and utter another with thy tongue. Another affirms, that
every prudent Cleobulus.
and wise man hates a lie. And the Philosopher (...).
(as before was showed) deriveth the Greek word signifying a lie, from another
which signifies a thing dishonest and worthy reprehension, because every lie
is of this nature. Finally, Plato in many (...). Plato in Theat. lib. 2. de
Repub.
places condemns lies and pleads for the truth. To think the truth (says
he) is honest, but a filthy and dishonest thing to lie: And again, a lie is
odious not only to the gods, but also to men. And therefore if the Heathens
could discover the fowlnesse and deformities of this vice by the dim light of
nature; what a shame is it for us to be so blind in our understandings and
ignorant, as not to discern the ugliness of it, when as we have the clear
sunshine of the Gospel, and the illumination of Gods Holy Spirit to guide and
direct us.

But let us come more particularly to show the. 3. That Lying is opposite to
Gods nature.
haynousnesse of this vice, which will better be cleared if we prove that it
has in it all relations of sin, as it is committed either against God, our
neighbors, or our selves; and is not only a sin in it self, but also the
cause and the effect of many other evils, both of sin and punishment, as it
will appear if we examine some particulars. For first, lying is in this
respect a great sin, because it is contrary to God the chief goodness,
whether we consider his Nature or his Persons. In his Nature and Essence he is
in and of himself, and the fountain of Being; and in this sense it is most
true that being, Truth, and Goodness, are convertible and all one: He is not
only True but Truth it self, and all other things are true in and for him. And
thus he describes himself; Merciful, Gracious, Exodus 34. 6.
Long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth. So Moses in his song: He
is a God of Truth, and without Deuteronomy. 32. 4.
iniquity, just and right is he. So Esaias: He that swears in the Earth,
shall swear by the God of Truth; Esaias 65. 16.
yea he is so essentially True, as that there is none true besides him;
according to that of the Apostle, Let GOD be True, but every man a liar; and
though Romans 3. 4.
it be at man's choice to speak the truth or to lie, yet truth being of Gods
Essence, and the Truth of God, nothing but the True God, hence it follows
that God can no more deny the Truth, than deny Himself. And therefore it is
said, that God is not a man that he should lie, yea though he can do Numb. 23.
19.
all things, yet He cannot lie; yea that it is impossible Tit. 1. 2. Heb. 6. 18.
for God to lie, which does not argue any impotency in him, but perfection of
Being, seeing if he could lie, he could also deny himself and so not be,
seeing Truth in him and Being are all one. And as the former places are
affirmed of the whole Divine nature, and so primarily of God the Father, the
Fountain of Truth and Being; so other places testify the like of the Son,
namely that He is full of John 1. 14.
Grace and Truth, and that all verse. 17.
Grace and Truth, come by him, yea that he is the John 14. 6.
Way, the Truth and Life it self: And so also of the Holy Ghost, who is called
the John 14. 17.
Spirit of Truth, yea, 1 John 5. 6.
Truth it self, who proceeds John 15. 26.
from the Father and the Son. And those whom by regeneration he makes his
Children, John 16. 13.
He leads into all Truth, and works in them all sanctifying and saving
Graces and Truth amongst the rest, which is therefore by the Apostle numbered
among the Ephesians. 5. 9.
fruits of the Spirit. In all which respects as it must needs follow, that
Truth is a Virtue most acceptable unto God, as being according to his own
Likeness, so also that those best please him, who resemble him in Truth, by
loving, embracing and speaking it, approving themselves hereby to be his
Children, because they are like him, according to that of the Prophet Esaias,
Surely they are my people, Children Esa. 63. 8.
that will not lie. To which purpose an Heathen Philosopher speaks
excellently, who being asked Pythagoras.
in what thing men were most like unto God, answered (...). i. if they speak
the Truth. And in this respect their magi or magitians affirmed that their
greatest god whom they called Oromagden, Sermon. 11.
was in his body like unto the light; and in his mind or soul like unto truth,
as Stobaeus records it. And excellent to this use is the etymology of the
Greek word (...) (by which they signify Truth) which Iamblichus brings, ut
(...) deducta sit (...), because as the Greek word signifying the Truth, so
Truth it self is derived from the gods; although others give another Etymology
deriving (...) from (...), and the privative participle, because the Truth
cannot lie hid. Whereby it appears that as Truth is dear unto God, so a lie,
which opposes it, is a great sin and most odious unto him, seeing it
opposes himself and his own nature, who is a God of Truth; for he who
lies, denies the Truth; and he who denies it, denies God himself. Again,
Truth which has its existence in the mind against which the liar speaks, is
of the Spirit of God, who is the Author of all Truth, and therefore what is it
to lie, but to make the tongue speak against the Truth engraven in the mind
by the Spirit, and consequently to speak against the Holy Spirit himself who
is the Lev. 6. 2.
Author of it?

Secondly, by lying we sin immediately against. 4. That Lying is a breach of
Gods Commandment.
God, in that we break and violate his Word and holy Commandments, which
injoine us to speak the Truth and not to lie, in any thing, nor at any time.
For in the ninth Commandment under the name of bearing false witness against
our neighbor, as in the affirmative part he requires all Truth, so in the
negative he forbids all lies and falsehood in thought, word and deed, even
as under the name of murder, he forbids all the kinds and degrees of it;
as anger, hatred, railing, revenge, and under the name of Adulterer, all manner
of filthiness and uncleanness. And therefore raising of a false report by
lying, and bearing Exodus 23. ^.
of false witness against our Neighbors, are both joined together and
forbidden in the three and twentieth of Exodus. And that we may know that lies
in no kinds were ever tolerated; God has ever inhibited and condemned them,
both in the Law, Prophets, and in the Gospel. In the Law, ye shall not lie
one to another. So by the Prophet Levit. 19. 11.
Zecharie: Speak ye every man the Truth to his neighbor; Zech. 8. ^^.
and the Apostle Paul; Lie not one to another, seeing ye have put off the old
man with his deeds. And Col 3. 9. Ephesians. 4. 29.
to the Ephesians, Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with
his neighbor. So that if we have any respect either to Law or Gospel in
yielding obedience unto them, we must speak the Truth, and abhor lying.
Finally we sin immediately against God by suppressing truth and telling lies;
because thereby we hinder and impeach his Glory, whilst we hide our vices and
faults from coming to light, and stop the course of Justice when it should
deservedly proceed against us, to inflict upon us deserved punishment, in the
execution whereof, Gods glory is advanced, as Iosuah implies in his speech to
Achan; My son, I pray thee Jos. 7. 19.
give Glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him, and tell
me now what thou have done.

Secondly, by lying we sin hainously in many. 5. That by lying we sin greatly
against our neighbors by corrupting their minds and judgments with errors
and untruthes.
respects, against our neighbors generally and particularly. For first by lies
we corrupt and deprave their minds and judgments, in putting down Truth
which should reign and rule in them to direct them rightly in all their
courses, and inthrone in the place of them false conceits and opinions, which
are fit guides to misleade them into all errors and sins. Now if it be a
great wrong to blemish, deface and defile the bodies of our neighbors, then
how much more to offer these injuries against their minds, whilst by our
strong delusions we make them to believe lies? Secondly, Secondly, lies are
pernicious to all humane societies in perverting order, and overthrowing all
contracts.
lies are most pernicious to all humane Societies, and Commonwealths, by
perverting that order which God has appointed to be amongst them which is,
that men conversing together should by their words and speeches impart and
communicate their minds and meanings one to another, for the good of all;
whereas if lies be spoken in stead of Truth, there can nothing follow but
confusion, like that of Babel, whilst speaking one thing and thinking another,
they cannot understand one another language, nor guess at their meaning by
their words, whereby the building of the State, and the work and welfare of
the Commonwealth is much hindered. For hereby all contracts, covenants, and
intercourse of dealings between man; which is (as it were) the life of the
Commonwealth, the food that nourishes it, and chief means whereby it is
maintained and enriched are quite overthrown, when as men cannot give credit
unto any thing that is spoken, nor trust unto the performance of any promise,
nor be assured of any bargain, seeing those with whom they deal make no
conscience of lying, nor have any care to keep their word further than fear
of loss, or force of law compels them. The which as it is pernicious unto
States and Commonwealths, in hindering their wealth and welfare, their
livelihood and well being in time of peace, so also it is no less hurtful in
time of war, when as Nations having experience of one another lies and
falsehood, being at enmity can conclude of no firm peace or truce, but take
all advantages to work one another ruin and utter destruction, because they
have little or no hope that any covenants between them will be observed.

Thirdly, these lies are the causes of all jealousies. 6. That lies are the
causes of jealousies and suspicions between man and man.
and suspicions amongst men, when as there being found no fidelity and truthin
the speaker, there can be no faith and belief in the hearer; but having often
found him faulty and faithless, he dare no more trust him upon his word or
promise, and suspision interpreting all that is spoken to the worst, he will
not believe what he says, neither when he lies, nor when he speaks truth.
And whereas it is the nature of faith, if it be not abused to believe that
which another speaks, because nature has given men words that they may be
signs and significations, expressions and interpreters of the mind, when by
lies it is often frustrated, it cannot assent to what is spoken, but is turned
to diffidence and unbeleefe. In which respect one being Demetrius apud Stobaeum.
asked what evil befalls them that tell lies, answered this, that they were
not believed when they speak the truth. For we are apt to conceive that he
who has often by lying deceived, is a liar and deceiver still; and therefore
shun all dealings, familiarity and friendship with him: because we can have no
assurance of his faith and truth. So that as faith between man and man
receives a deadly wound by usual lying: So is it the bane of all true
friendship, when we are jealous and distrustful one of another, and
consequently pernicious to humane societies. For not only he that has been
deceived distrusteth the liar who has falsified his faith, but also he who
usually lies distrusteth all others with whom he deals, measuring every ones
shoe by his own Last, and suspecting all others as guilty of the same vice,
whereof his own conscience accuses and condemns himself, to which purpose
S. Chrysostom speaks: He that is a liar (says he) does think Qui mendax
est, neminem putat dicere veritatem, neque ipsum Deum. In Math* 6.. 7. That
lying depriveth men of the end and use of speech.
that no man speaks the truth, no not God himself.

Finally, this vice of lying depriveth men of the use and end of that excellent
gift and property of speech, which was given to man above all other creatures,
that it might serve as a true interpreter to make known our minds, and the
secret thoughts of our hearts one to another, and not to lie and deceive,
seeing it were better to say nothing than to lie, and to leave men to their
own uncertain guess, then by our untruthes certainly to deceive them and
mislead them into errors. So Saint Augustine, every one that lies does speak
Omnis qui mentitur, contra id quod anima sentit loquitur voluntate fallendi,
etc. August. Enchir. ad Laurent. cap. 22.
against that which he thinks in his mind, with a will to deceive. Now words
were therefore instituted, not that by them men should deceive one another, but
that every one might thereby make known his thoughts to others. And therefore
to use words, that we may deceive, and not for that end for which they were
ordained, is a sin.

And as this sin of lying is pernicious to the. 8. That lying is pernicious
to every particular family.
Commonwealth, so also unto every particular family where it reigns, as
being the common cause of all confusion and disorder, of all evils and
mischiefs which happen unto it. For as it brings Gods judgments upon those
families where it is tolerated, as the deserved punishment of their sin, so do
they suffer many evils from one another which are the effects of it. For if
the Governors be such as do love and listen after lies, it makes all the
servants wicked, because there will be no Justice executed, no difference
between well and ill-deserving, no rewards for the one, nor punishments for
the other, when as the innocent and faithful shall by lies be traduced and
branded, and the faulty and faithless, excused and commended. No marvel then
if the government become lame and much weakened, when as rewards and
punishments, which are the sinews of it, are cut in sunder, and if there be
no good government; how can there be any true obedience? And this is that
which Solomon observes: If (says he) a Ruler Prove. 29. 12.
hearken unto lies, all his servants are wicked. Again, if in a family there
be no conscience made of lying, all that live in it become negligent of their
duty, and are much emboldned to commit any fault, so it be not known, and to
break, burn, spoil, steal and loose any thing that belongs to their
governors, when as they can by a lie deny or excuse it; neither is there any
fear of shame or punishment to restrain them; seeing they can by lying so
shift and shuffle off the fault from one to another, that the master of the
family cannot possibly discern who is faulty or faultlesse, and therefore is
put to his choice, whether he will let the offender escape, or endanger
himself to punish the innocent; and so either to suffer evil in others, or to
be evil himself, whilst his severity is not guided by knowledge and truth.
And all this made David so out of love with liars, that he professes he
would not suffer one of them to dwell in his family. He that works deceit,
shall not dwell in my house; he that tells Psalm. 101. 7.
lies shall not tarry in my sight.

CHAP. XIII.
That the Liar sins most of all against himself.

BUt as lies are in these and many other. 1. That lying defaceth Gods Image in
us, and stampeth on us the image of Satan.
respects hurtful to our neighbors, so are they much more pernicious to our
selves; and that both in respect of the evil of sin, and also of the evil
of punishment. Concerning the former, lying is most pernicious unto our selves
in many considerations. For first, it defaceth and blotteth out Gods Image in
us, seeing we resemble him not only in wisdom, holiness and
righteousness, but also in truth, which has such relation unto them all, that
it is necessarily required to their very essence and being, so that wisdom,
righteousness and holiness, are of no worth and existence, unless truth be
joined with them. And therefore the Apostle exhorting us to be renewed
according to Gods Image, does bid us to put on the new man, which after (...).
Ephesians. 4. 24.
God is created in righteousness and true holiness, or as the words there
signify, holiness of truth. And this the Greek Orator saw by the light of
nature, (...). Demosthenes.
for being asked in what things men came nearest to the likeness of GOD,
answered, in Truth and beneficence. Now this Truth is most opposed and
defaced by Lying, and consequently it is most pernicious. For if we esteem it
a great hurt, to have our eyes put out, our faces gashed and deformed, and our
bodies maimed and dismembered, how much more hurtful is it to have these
blemishes in our souls and to have Gods image defaced in us? And yet it does
not only blot out of us the image of God, but it also stampeth on us the image
of Satan and sin. For the Devil is not only a Liar himself, but also the
author and father of lies, according to that of our Savior; He is a Murderer
from the beginning, Joh. 8. 44.
and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him: when he
speaks a lie he speaks it of his own, for he is a Liar and the father of
it; where (as Saint Basil observes) our Savior puts no difference In reg.
Contract. Number. 76.
of lies, but speaks this indefinitely of them all. And this we see in the
example of our first Parents, unto whom Satan lies even against God himself,
and also teaches them to lie; from whom this corruption and disposition of
Lying is propagated to all their posterity; in the example of the four hundred
false Prophets in whose mouth Satan was a lying spirit teaching them to lie
perniciously to Ahabs destruction, as himself confesses; and of Ananias and
Saphira, Whose hearts 1 Kings 22. 22. Acts 5. 3.
Satan filled with deceit, to lie unto the holy Ghost, as Saint Peter
speaks. Wherein he shows himself a right Serpent indeed, seeing he
carries his poison in his mouth, whereby he kills both himself and others.
And as the Devil is the Father of Liars, so are they his children, in nothing
more resembling him than in loving and making lies. For in this particular
respect our Savior chiefly speaks; Ye are of your Father the Devil, and
the lusts of your Father ye will do. Yea in this also they Joh. 8. 44.
show themselves to be of this serpentine generation, in that Their poison is
like the poison of a Serpent, Psalm. 38. 4. and 140. 3.
sharpening their tongues like him, and having Adders poison under their lips.
Yea herein they go beyond their Father the Devil, in that he believes the
truth and trembles, whereas they not only love and make lies, but also
believe them more than truth, yea rather any thing more than it, according to
the saying of our Savior, Because I tell you the Joh. 8. 45.
truth, therefore ye believe me not. Now what can be more pernicious unto
man, than to have Gods Image defaced in him, to become the child of the Devil,
and to resemble him in sinful Lying, seeing they that are like him in his
sin, shall hereafter be made like him in his punishments?

So also by Lying not only the Image of Satan. 2. That the sin of Lying
encourages men to commit all other wickedness.
is stamped upon us, but also the Image of sin; and as thereby we prove our
selves to be the children of the Devil, so also the servants and slaves of
sin. For as it is a great sin in it self, having in it all relations of
sin, as before I have showed; so is it the cause of many other sins, and a
fruitful mother and nurse of much other wickedness, even as it is also the
bastardly Brat and hellish of spring of other sins which like cursed fathers
beget it. First it is the Cause of sin, because it is the common
encouragement which sets men on to work wickedness whilst they hope to hide
and disguise it so with their lies, that they shall never come to light. This
emboldeneth the adulterers to commit filthiness, because if they be questioned
Expe delinque^tibus promptissimum est mentiri. Lys^^s apud Stobaeum. Sermon. 12.
they resolve to deny it, and none can prove it but only their Partners in
wickedness. This heartneth men to kill and slay, to coozen and deceive, to rob
and steal, and what not? Because if they be suspected and examined, they by
their cunning lies can hide their sins from the sight of men, and so escape
shame and punishment. Whereas if they did not trust in lies, Adam would not
eat the forbidden fruit, Cain would not murder his brother, Jacob would not
deceive his father, Joseph's brethren would not sell him to the Ismaelites,
Gehazi would not take a bribe; the Harlot would not entice her young Lover to
commit whoredom and then wipe her mouth as though she had not committed
filthiness, Ananias and Saphira would not play the Hypocrites, and withold
part of the price of their possession; the servant would not defraude his
master, the thief would not steal his neighbors goods, nor the subject
commit treason against his Prince; and as the Prophet speaks, Israel shall
do no iniquity, if they will not Zeph. 3. 13.
speak lies to hide and cover it. But when men have made lies their refuge and
have hid themselves under falsehood, then they are ready to make a covenant with
death and an agreement with hell, and to let loose the reins to all
wickedness, because they hope for immunity and to escape punishment, and that
when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall Esaias 28. 15.
not come nigh unto them. And as Lying is the Cause, so also the Effect of
sin; which follows it as the shadow does the body, as we see in the example
of our first Parents, who having committed sin, did seek to hide it with
lies and frivolous excuses, even as they did with fig leaves seek to hide
their shame. The which is also the common practice of all their degenerate
posterity, who are no more ready to sin, than to deny or excuse it with a
lie. For that which Saint Chrysostom speaks Mendacil causa ex furto
nascitur. Chrysostom. in Mat. 5. Hom. 19.
of stealing, that the Cause of Lying springs from theft, the same may be
verified of all other sins which make men liable to shame or punishment;
although indeed the sin of stealing is a most usual cause of Lying, when as
men having stolen, do use it as a color and cover to hide their theft, and
therefore the Prophet Nahum joyneth them together as the Cause and the Effect.
Woe unto the bloody city, it is all full of lies and robbery. Nahum. 3. 1.
And as Lying is the Cause and Effect of many other sins, so it is the means
to make us lie and dye in them without repentance: for whereas there is no
other means to bring us to the sight of our sins and unfeined sorrow for it,
nor to work in us reformation for the time to come, but the careful and
conscionable hearing of Gods Word, and Law, which convinces us of our
wickedness and shows our miserable condition whilst we continue in it,
Lying does stop our ears, that we will not listen unto it, nor beeleve it; as
the Prophet implies in those words, This is a rebellious people, lying
children, children that will not hear the Esaias 30. 9.
Law of the Lord. And this comes to pass, partly because they make lies
their refuge, and sheltring and hiding themselves under this covert, they
imagine that as they deceive men with their lies, so they shall also deceive
God, and preserve themselves from his just judgments, because he takes no
notice of their wickedness: and partly because being accustomed to Lying, they
give no credit to the words of his Ministers and Ambassadors, nor believe God
or man in any thing which is spoken against them, as thinking that there is no
more Truth in them than they find in themselves.

Secondly, the Liar makes himself guilty of. 3. That the Liar abuses his
tongue and speech.
a great sin, by abusing of his tongue which should be his glory, and which
was given unto him by God as an excellent instrument to set forth his praise,
to speak the truth which his mind conceives and to discover it to others
for their mutual good, a privilege wherein God has advanced man above all the
rest of the creatures, but Liars shamefully abuse this singular gift of God,
and whereas it was given unto them as an instrument of righteousness and
truth, and for the setting forth of Gods praise, they make it to become a
weapon or instrument of iniquity by their lying, wherewith they dishonor God
and hurt their neighbors; whereby they make it appear that they are subjects
of Satan. For whereas there are two kingdoms, the one of light, the other of
darkness, and God the King of the one, the Devil of the other; they have
also two several languages, the one of truth, which is the language of the
spiritual Canaan; the other of lies, which is the idiome or language of hell:
So that by our speech we may be known unto what Kingdom we belong, either of
God, when we speak the truth from Psalm. 15. ^.
our hearts, or of Satan, when we commonly lie and deceive; which language
when we usually speak, it may be said unto us as it was unto Saint Peter,
thou art a subject of the Kingdom of darkness, for thy speech bewraieth thee.
Now if any liar shall object, that this is not his ordinary language,
Incredibile est non mentiri hominem ne capiatur, qui mentitur ut capiat. i. It
is not to be believed but that a man will lie, that he (...) be (...), who
(...) not to ^^, that he may (...) and over^^^^^* August. Sen^^^^. 2, 3. Ubi
causa me^ti^n^i sublata est mentimur ex consuetudine. Sen. Epi. 46. Qui non
seductione diaboli deceptus mentitur, sed proposito mendax est, nunquam desinit
esse mendax neque post mortem. Chrysostom. in Matthew. 6. Hom. 10. Matthew 7. ^2.
but that he only uses it when it may seem for his advantage; to this I
answer, that a frequent act will bring an habit, and he who often lies for
his profit, will within a while be so inured unto it, that he will be ready to
lie, out of mere vanity and love of lying, for his pleasure and delight. Yea,
he will be ready to lie when he never thinks of it; and as the skillful
Musition, who has brought his hand by much practice to an habit, will play
his lesson when his mind is on some other matter; so when by custom men are
come to an habit of lying, they will lie at unawares, and if they be
challenged for it, they are ready to lie again by denying that they lied. In
respect of which habit and custom, Saint Chrysostom says, that a liar will
continue to lie even after death. He that lies (says he) being not deceived
by the seduction of the Devil, but willingly and of set purpose, will never
leave to lie, no not after death, for death separateth the soul from the body,
but does not change the purpose of lying: will thou know this? consider those
liars even after death. Lord in thy name we have done this and that. Did not
they know in themselves, that they never loved Christ, nor did his Will? yes,
but they think that as in this world they have deceived men, so also there
that they can deceive even God himself: and therefore he does not say; depart
from me ye that have wrought iniquity, but ye that now work it: because wicked
men cease not to be wicked, no not after death; seeing though they cannot now
sin, yet they retain still their purpose of sining.

Thirdly, the liar sins against his own soul,. 4. That the Liar robs
himself of his good name and credit. Eccles. 7. 1. Prove. 22. 1.
in that by his lying he robs himself of a most precious jewel, even of a
good name, which is better than a precious ointment, and much to be preferred
before great riches; for a poor man being true and honest, is better than
alyar though never so rich, Prove. 19. 22.
as the wise man tells us. Neither is it possible that a man should hold his
reputation, when he has by lying lost all opinion of his truth, but his words
are esteemed no better than wind, and if there be no clearer evidence for what
he says, then his bare word, he is no more believed when he speaks truth,
than when he lies* according to that of the son of Syrach: Of an unclean
thing what Eccli. 34. 4.
can be cleansed, and from that which is false, what truth can come? Now what
greater mischief can befall a man in this life, than to live infamous? what
greater loss, than to loose a good name? And when it is once lost, what can
again be more hardly recovered? If we loose our riches, by labor and
industry we may recover them: If we loose our health, by physic and good
diet it may be regained: If our bodies be sore wounded, they may be cured: but
if we once loose our fame, and have wounds inflicted into our good names and
reputation, they hardly admit of any cure, or if the wound be healed, there
will ever after remain a scarre. But there is no more ready way to bring this
evil of dishonor upon us, than to be accounted common liars; for as the son
of Syrach tells us, The disposition of a liar is dishonorable, and Eccli.
20. 26.
his shame is ever with him. And the wise man teaches us the same lesson; A
righteous man (says he) hates lying, but the wicked man, that is (as the
antithesis Prove. 13. 5.
infers, such an one as loves lies) is loathsome and comes to shame.
Neither can there in common repute a greater shame befall a man, than to be
esteemed and called a liar; whereof it is that the very name is so much
abhorred in all Nations, and amongst all conditions of Men, yea even those that
make no conscience of committing the sin, that by a certain kind of
propriety or eminency, it is called the word of disgrace, and no greater injury
or affront can be offered unto them, than that any, upon any cause (yea even
when they deserve it) shall give them the lie. Although I think that our great
gallants do not take the word so much to heart, because their truth is
questioned and impeached (for then they would hate the vice it self as much as
the name) as because it touches them in their valor and courage, seeing lying
is a base and cowardly vice, into which men oftentimes fall out of mere fear,
and because they dare not speak or stand to the truth.

Fourthly, this vice of lying makes us odious. 5. That lies make men odious
unto God and men.
both to God and men. First God abhors liars, and hates lies, because they
are contrary to his Nature, and to his Law, and not only very sinful in
themselves, but also the causes of much wickedness. And therefore Solomon
numbreth it amongst those seven abominations which God abhors; A proud
look, a lying tongue and hands that shed innocent Prove. 6. 17. Prove. 12. 22.
blood. And again, lying lips are an abomination to the Lord, but they that
deal truly are his delight. And wisdom, even that eternal Word and Wisdom
of the Father, his only dear Son professes that his mouth should speak
truth, and that Prove. 8. 7.
wickedness (that is the iniquity of lying, as the antithesis shows) is an
abomination to his lips: now how odious ought this vice to be unto us, that
makes us odious unto God? and how ought we to love and embrace Truth, which
God so much loves, according to that of Jeremy: O Lord, are not Jer. 5. 3.
thine eyes upon the Truth? namely to approve, love and reward it; for he
loves Truth, and desires it above all things in the inward parts, as the
Psalmist Zech. 8. 19.
speaks. And who would not love that which God loves? and embrace and
delight in that, in which God delights and will reward? Secondly, it makes
liars odious unto men; as being a dishonest and dishonorable vice, reprehended
and condemned of all as unworthy an ingenuous civil man, and much more a
Christian, who professes himself a servant and child of the God of Truth.
But especially, it is hurtful to those that fear God and love his truth, and
makes those that make and love lies odious in their eyes, according to that of
the wise Solomon: A righteous man hates lying, but Prove. 13. 5.
a wicked man, that is a wicked liar, is loathsome and comes to shame. An
example whereof we have in David; I have (says he) hated them that regard
Psalm. 31. 5.
lying vanities. And again, I hate and abhor lying, Psalm. 119. 163.
but thy Law do I love. Yea he makes this a note and sign of a blessed man,
that he dis-respecteth liars: Blessed is the man (says he) that respects
not Psalm. 40. 4.
the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies. But though liars are chiefly
odious in their eyes, yet not in theirs only; for even ingenuous men, though
merely civil, do abhor liars as they are pernicious members of a State,
and bring with them much mischief, both to the whole Commonwealth, and also
to private families and particular persons: yea oftentimes they that make no
conscience of lying for advantage, do yet hate it in others when unpartially
they look upon it, and do not behold it through the spectacles of self-love,
and even they that like and love it in themselves, yet cannot endure that
others should use it. Yea so loathsome it is in its own nature, if it be not
sugared and sweetened with some profit or pleasure, that though they use it, yet
they are ashamed to own it, and can upon no terms endure to be branded with
the name, which they hold most odious and reproachful, though they make no
scruple (so it be unknown) to be tainted and poisoned with the vice. Finally,
as lying makes men odious both to the innocent and guilty, so it makes the
innocent odious to the liar, when as he knows that he has abused them with
his untruthes, according to that Italian, or rather Machivellian proverb, whom
I have wronged, I will never forgive. And this disposition the wise Solomon
observes to be in malicious liars and slanderers; A lying tongue (says he)
Prove. 26. 28.
hates those that are afflicted by it: Of which this may be the reason,
because they who have injured others by their lies, do expect from them just
revenge, and upon due examination of their fault, that they will bring the
truth to light, and them to suffer deserved shame and punishment.. 6. That Lies
weaken faith and hope, dispoile us of the girdle of verity, and a good
conscience.


Fifthly, lies are pernicious unto the liars themselves in diverse other
respects; for first they weaken their faith in the assurance of their
salvation, yea deprive them of all hope of Heavenly happiness; seeing it is an
infallible mark of one that shall dwell in this holy Hill, that he speaks
the Psalm. 15. 2.
Truth in his heart. Now if we count that pernicious to our persons and state,
that defaces our evidences of some earthly Patrimony, and cuts off all our
assurance ever to enjoy it; how much more is that pernicious, that cuts off all
our hopes to our everlasting Inheritance, and deprives us of that comfortable
note and sign, that we have just title unto it? Secondly, it dispoyles us of
a chief part of our Christian armor, the girdle of verity, wherewith Ephesians. 6.
14.
all the rest is buckled unto us, and so lays us open and naked to all the
assaults of Satan's tentations, to be thereby foiled, overcome, and led
captive of sin, when as he finds us so disarmed. Thirdly, because it
depriveth us of a good conscience, when as we make no scruple of such a sin
as is committed directly against it, yea it wastes and wounds a natural
conscience, when as we live in such a vice as it condemns. For if conscience
be not seared, it is ready as soon as a man has lied, to accuse him of sin,
and to testify against him, that he has offended God by denying truth, and
done that which would be a shame and dishonor unto him if it should come to
light. And this is the cause why having lied they are so loath to acknowledge
it, but use all their Art and policy to hide and cover it, that so they may
seem not to have lied: yea if they be convinced or but suspected of it, they
are ready to discover their inward guilt of conscience by their outward
blushing, the which is especially to be observed in children, who are not by
custom hardened and heartned in their sin; because they even naturally
knowing that lying is a foul and dishonorable vice, and that they have done
evil in falling into it, as their consciences are pressed with the guilt of
their sin, so their faces are filled with the shame that accompanies it.

And thus liars are pernicious unto themselves,. 7. That lies bring upon liars
the evil of punishment in this life.
in respect of the evil of sin: Now further it comes to be considered how
it brings upon them the evil of punishment. For howsoever it is made but a
slight sin amongst men, and so accordingly for the most part slightly
punished, yet it is heinous in Gods sight, and punished by him with great
severity. And though the liar through his cunning skill can often so hide his
lies, that men cannot discover them, and so are freed from the punishment both
of their fault and lie with which they cover it, yet Gods All-seeing eye can
easily find them out in all their subtilties and cunning conveyances, and his
mighty hand of Justice shall surely reach unto them, and inflict upon them
Prove. 19. 5.
deserved punishments. So the wise man says, that howsoever it may fare with
others, yet he that tells Psalm. 63. 11.
lies shall not escape. And though they delight to open their mouths to lie
for their advantage, yet God will stop them with his punishments, as the
Psalmist speaks: upon which ground in another place by a Prophetical Spirit
foreseeing their impenitence, he prays against them: for the sin of their
mouth, and the words of their lips, let them even Psalm. 59. 12.
be taken in their pride, and for their cursing and lying which they speak.
Neither will God lightly punish those who love and make lies, but it causes him
to have a controversy with a land, to hasten his Assizes, and to inflict such
heavy judgments, as will make the land to mourn, and every one that dwells
therein to languish, as the Prophet Hosea threatens. Hos. 4. 1. 2, 3.
For he will bring upon liars utter destruction; according to that of the
Psalmist: Thou shall destroy Psalm. 5. 6.
them that speak leasings; and that of the wise man. A false witness shall
not be unpunished, and he that speaks lies shall perish. To the same purpose
speaks Prove. 19. ^.
the son of Syrach. A thief is better than a man that Eccli. 20. 25.
is accustomed to lie, but they both shall have destruction to heritage. And
because they are seldom severed either in this life, or in the life to come;
therefore the Prophet joyneth the sin and punishment together: Ephraim daily
increases lies and desolation. Hos. 12. 1.
And of this we have examples in the Scripture; as in Gehazi, whose lie was
punished with a perpetual Leprosy, upon himself and all his Posterity: In
Haman, who slandering Mordecai and the Jews, and by his lies plotting their
ruin, was taken in his own net, and both he and his sons hanged upon the
same gallows which he had made for innocent Mordecai: And in Ananias and
Sapphira, Hest. 3. 8. Act. 5. 2. 3.
who for their lie were punished with present and sudden death. And therefore
as much as we hate death and destruction, so much let us abhor lying, which is
the cause thereof; and with as much care and endeavor let us shun the one,
as well as the other.

And as God thus punishes lies in this life; so. 8. That God punishes liars
with everlasting condemnation
much more fearfully in the life to come. For first it excludes liars out of
the Kingdom of Heaven, seeing none are admitted to dwell in Gods Holy Psalm.
15. 2.
Hill, but those that speak the Truth from their hearts; and the Gates of
this Heavenly City are only opened that the righteous Nation which keeps
Esa. 26. 2.
the Truth may enter in. And as the Apostle John tells us, there shall in no
wise enter into it any thing Apoc. 21. 27.
that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie. And
that without the gates of the City Apoc. 22. 15.
are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters,
and whosoever loves and makes a lie. Yea not only does this sin of lying
exclude liars out of the Kingdom of Heaven, but also if they live and dye in
it without repentance, it will irrecoverably plunge them headlong into Hell.
For the same Apostle tells us, that the fearful and unbeleeving, and the
abominable and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers and idolaters, and
all liars, (without any difference made of their diverse kinds of lies) shall
have their part in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the
second Apoc. 21. 8.
death. And therefore as we love to enjoy eternal happiness in Heaven, so let
us love to speak the Truth from our hearts, which will assure us of it; and as
we abhor everlasting torments in Hell fire, so let us hate and abhor Lies,
which are the means, that will bring us to them.

CHAP. XIV.
Diverse other motives, to make us hate the Vice of Lying.

ANd thus have I showed that lies are. 1. That lies are odious, because most
opposite to truth.
accompanied with all manner of evils, both of sin and punishment, and that
both in this life, and in the Life to come. Unto which diverse other motives
might be added, to bring us into a further detestation of this vice, though
none more effectual than those already named, if we have any respect to Gods
glory, our Neighbors good, our own present comfort and well-being, and the
everlasting salvation of our body and souls. As first that as lies are friends
and fanters of all vices, causing and encouraging men to fall into them, and to
live in them without repentance; so they are enemies and opposites to all
Virtues, and especially to Truth, Justice and Charity. First, they stand in
direct opposition to Truth, so that where they are set up, there Truth falls
and fails; and where Truth is magnified and embraced, lies are condemned and
banished. And this opposition between lies and Truth the Apostle James notes;
Jam. 3. 14.
Lie not (says he) against the Truth: and the Apostle John likewise, where he
says, that he who braggeth 1 John 2. 4. 21, 27.
that he knows God, and keeps not his Commandments he is a liar, and the
Truth is not in him. Yea they are such contraries as have no mean, but the
presence of the one argues the absence of the other, and the same heart at the
same time cannot love and delight in both, but if it loves and delights in
lies, it hates and abhors the Truth. And therefore seeing Truth is a most
excellent Virtue, and exceeding pleasing and acceptable unto God, as being like
unto him in his own Nature; It must needs follow by the rule of contraries,
that lying is a most base and dishonorable vice, and most odious and
abominable unto God, as being opposite to his own Nature. Neither may we
qualify and extenuate the sin by our distinction of merry, officious and
pernicious lies: for howsoever these several kinds may in other respects, be
much more heinous and wicked one than another, much more odious to God and men;
and will condemn liars to greater or lesser punishments in Hell fire; yet all
of them are alike odious and abominable in this, that they are all opposite to
that excellent virtue of Truth, and in every kind of them, contrary to Gods
pure and perfect Nature, who is essentially true and Truth it self. In which
regard even the best sort of officious lies are evil and sinful, as namely
when as men will tell them to confirm the Truth of Scripture, and to persuade
men more strongly and effectually to embrace, profess and practice the true
religion, by reporting fained miracles that have been for merly wrought for
the confirmation of this Truth, which, as also others of like nature, are
called pious lies. For first they are contrary to Truth, an excellent Virtue,
and therefore must needs be vicious; they are opposite to Gods Nature, and
dishonorable unto him, as though he were not able to maintain his Truth,
unless we helped him with our lies; neither do they so much grace and
confirm the Truth of religion, when they are kept secret, as disgrace and
weaken it, when they are discovered and come to light: nor so much strengthen
men's faith in believing it, being thus countenanced with lying wonders; as
weaken it when the deceit is known, seeing these pious and officious lies will
make men, when they are discerned jealous and suspicious of real truths, and
take away from their teachers all power in persuading, making their arguments
and motives unto piety of no credit or efficacy; seeing they that are moved and
persuaded, are ready to suspect that their speeches are all alike; that seeing
they have told them of false miracles, therefore there are none true, but all
of one kind, although some more than other, are more cu^ningly acted; and that
all the reasons and motives which they use to persuade men to a godly life, are
nothing but officious lies, which their teachers out of a pious affection and
intention, use to countenance religion, and to make their exhortations and
persuasions unto piety and honesty, more forcible and efficacious. And this was
the reason which made Saint Augustine August. lib. Epistol. Epist. 15.
oppose Saint Jerome, who maintained the lawfulness of such officious and
pious lies; because if this were once permitted as lawful or tolerable it
would take away all authority in the teacher, all faith and belief in the
hearer; yea make the Scriptures themselves to be suspected: so as no
admonitions, reproves or counsels can be given with any fruit, because the
hearers and readers will easily surmise, that the things they hear and read
are but pious and officious lies, to bring into, and keep men in the right
way: and not because they have in them any reallity of Truth. And therefore
seeing these lies are also unlawful as being opposite to Truth; I conclude
that there are not any lawful, according to that of Saint Augustine: There are
(says he) many kinds of lies, Mendaciorum genera multa sunt quae quidem omnia
universaliter ^disse debemus. Contmendac. ad Consent. lib. 2. cap. 3.
all which universally we ought to hate. For there is no lie which is not
contrary to Truth; for as light and darkness, piety and impiety, justice and
iniquity, sin and righteousness, health and sickness, life and death; even
so Truth and lying are contrary to one another, and therefore as much as we
love that, so much ought this to be hated and abhorred. And again, those
things which are done against the Law of God cannot be just, and David says
unto God, thy Law is Truth; so that Psalm. 119.
what is against Truth, cannot be just, as all lies are, etc. And therefore
when examples of lying are alleged out of the Scriptures, either they are not
lies, but are only thought so, because they are not understood, or if they be
lies, they may not be imitated, because they are not just, as being against
Truth.

And this is the next motive to make us to abhor and forsake lies, because
they are also opposite. 2. That lies are opposite to Justice.
to Justice, the which consisting in an evennes, equality, and just proportion
and agreement of one thing with another, that is to be esteemed unjust wherein
there is inequality and disagreement. And consequently there is unjustice and
iniquity in every lie, wherein there is no equality or agreement between the
speech and the mind: this conceiving one thing, and the tongue uttering
another; that dictating what is the truth, and this speaking what is false. To
which purpose Saint Augustine thus speaks; every one who lies, Omnis qui
me^titur iniquitatem facit, etc. August. dedoctr. Christiana. Tom. 3. col. 19.
does iniquity, and if it seems unto any that a lie is sometimes profitable,
it may also seem unto him that it is profitable to commit iniquity; for no man
that lies, in that wherein he lies keeps his faith: For his will is that he
to whom he lies should have faith to believe him, which notwithstanding in
lying to him, himself keeps not; now every one who violateth his faith is
unjust. And therefore either injustice is sometimes profitable, or else a lie
is always unprofitable: and hereof it is that the Prophet Zephany joyneth
these two together: The remnant of Israel shall not do Zeph. 3. 13.
iniquity, nor speak lies, neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in
their mouth. And so Malachie, affirming that Truth was in Levies mouth, denies
also that there was iniquity found in it. The Law Mal. 2. 6.
of Truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips. And
therefore as we love Justice, so also we must love Truth; and if we would not
be accounted unjust and wicked, we must be careful to hate and shun lying.

Finally, lying is contrary to Charity, which as. 3. That lies are opposite to
Charity. 1 Cor. 13. 6.
the Apostle speaks delights and rejoices in the Truth: Now Charity is the
fulfilling of the whole Law, and compriseth in it all duties toward God, our
neighbors and our selves: and therefore lying in this respect, as it opposes
Charity, transgresses the whole Law of God; for first, it dishonors God,
and robs him of his Glory, as in those respects formerly spoken of, namely
because it is contrary to Gods Nature and Truth, and transgresses his Word and
revealed Will; so also because the Liar, like the Devil, in a sort blasphemeth
God in opposing his works, taking upon him to give a being to that which is
not, and to make something of nothing, which is proper and peculiar to divine
Omnipotency, which nevertheless is but an apish imitation, and not done in
Truth; for whereas God by his Almighty Power gives a true being to things that
are not, and makes all things of nothing; the Devil and those his children
that resemble him in lying, do not by their words give a true being to things
that are not, but only labor to imitate God herein as much as they are able,
giving unto them a false being in the opinions of those whom they deceive with
their lies, and though they are not, yet make them seem to be in show and
appearance. Even as the Devil by his juggling tricks and impostures, casts
false mists before men's eyes, and makes them believe that they see many things
which they see not, and which in truth are not, whilst being unable to give a
true existence to these things, he only deludeth and abuses their fantasy.
Secondly, it is contrary to true Charity in respect of our neighbors, seeing it
robs their minds of that precious Jewel of Truth, and puts in the place
thereof (as it were) the base bugles and worthless counterfeits of lies,
besides all those evils and mischiefs, of which I have formerly spoken.
Finally, it is most contrary to that Charity and Love which every man owes to
himself, seeing it brings upon a man innumerable evils, spoiling him of
truth, and many other graces in this life, and depriving him of all hope to
enjoy eternal blessedness, or to escape the everlasting torments of Hell fire
in the life to come.

Again, (for a conclusion of this point) that we. 4. That lying is but a vain
and slight vice.
may be moved to loath lying, let us consider, that as it is base and
dishonorable, so it is but a vain and slight vice, which has no solidity or
substance in it, and therefore lasts and endures not, but only serves for
the present turn, to make a seeming and false show, and then like a snuff,
the blaze going out, it ends in stink. It may seem to bring profit for the
time, and to make us rich like a Bristoll Diamond or counterfeite Pearl, but
being so soft that it will not endure the hard touch of a wise trial, it will
soon loose its gloss and glory, and make the owner if he have given oughts
for it, a looser by his bargain. It may like glittering tinsell seem for the
time rich, and make a fair show, and promise also to cover our nakedness, but
even whilst it seems outwardly to hide our sin and shame, we are inwardly
in our hearts and consciences never the warmer in respect of peace and sound
comfort; and within a while this base and slight stuff will be worn out to
rags, so that it will be easy to see through it, and to discern all that
nakedness and filthiness of vice and sin, which at the first they promised to
hide. To which purpose the wise Solomon speakeeth excellently: The lip of
Truth shall be established Prove. 12. 19.
for ever, but a lying tongue is but for a moment. The which even the Heathens
have found by their Menander apud Stobaeu^. Sermon. 12.
own experience. For one of them says, that no liar can long lie hid. Another
speaks the same more elegantly: no lie proceeds and lives unto Sophocles.
old age. And the Orator tells us, that all Ficta omnia celeriter tanquam
flosculi decidunt; nec simulatu^ quicquam potest esse diuturnum: Cic. offic.
lib. 2. (...) ex eo dicitur quod non possit (...), id est, latere. Pro Coelio.
Nihil simulatio proficit, paucis imponit, leviter extrinsecus inducta facies.
Veritas in omnem partem sui semper eadem est. Quae decipiunt nihil habent
solidi. Tenue est mendacium; perlucet si diligenter inspexeris. Sen. Epist.
79.. 5. That lying though it be slight, yet is a laborious vice. Oportet
mendacem esse memorem.
fained things fade and fall like flowers; neither can any thing which is false
and dissembled hold out long. Hence it is that the Graecians call Truth by a
name which signifies such a thing as cannot lie hid; but as the same Author
speaks, though by the dishonesty of many it may be depressed, yet it rises
again, and though the defense of innocence may be checked and interrupted, yet
in a while it will breath again and get life. So Seneca (like himself)
speaks to this point wittily and fully. No dissembling (says he) profitteth,
it deceives but a few, slightly drawing outwardly over it a false semblance.
Truth is always the same, and which way soever ye turn it, good on both
sides. Those things that deceive, have in them nothing solid. A lie is so
thin a thing, that if thou do diligently look into it, thou may see
through it.

And yet (which may be another motive to make us hate lying) though it be but
a vain and slight vice, and of short durance; yet it is no easy thing, but
requires much labor. For it puts the wit to its strongest invention, and
tries to the uttermost the memory, and even tyreth it with much exercise; that
the parts of their lies may agree one with another, and when they are repeated,
may seem (like truth) to be always the same: wherein if there be for want of
wit or weakness of memory the least failing, they are taken tripping and
tardy in their tale, and sometimes punished both for their fault and falsehood,
but always at the least shamed and disgraced. In which regard when they have
toyled themselves in their uttermost endeavors to hide their sin, yet are
they always upon the rack, and even when they are safe, they are not secure,
but still in fear lest their lies shall come to light; If at least their
impudence armed with power do not encourage them to outface the Truth, and
restrain their inferiors to whom they lie, from pressing them any further
than will stand with their liking. An example whereof we have in Jacob, who
intending to steal a blessing from his Father, does use the uttermost of his
wit and memory to interweave cunningly the web of his lies, that he might not
be discovered. And yet when he had improoved his lying Arts to the uttermost
advantage, with what fear do you think was he surprised? with what shaking
hands and trembling voice did he utter his lies, whilst he doubted, lest his
father discovering his fraud, he might bring upon himself a curse in stead
of a blessing. And therefore well might the Prophet speak of Jerusalem, that
she had wearied her self Ezech. 24. 12.
with lies, and yet her great scumme, even her polluting sins and the guilt
of them, was not gone out of her: for they that delight not to speak the
truth, but have taught their tongues to speak lies, do (as Jeremy speaks)
weary themselves to commit Jer. 9. 5.
iniquity. So that the Art of lying may well be compared to the Spiders web,
in weaving whereof she takes great pains, yea spends and wastes out her
own bowels, though it serves for no other use but to catch a few flies; and
when all is done, she cannot be secure in her weak hold, but might justly
fear (if she had as much wit as a liar) that she shall be beaten out of it
with every blast of wind, or brush of a broom: whereas on the other side, the
way of truth is so plain and easy, that a weak memory, if we have once gone
in it, will serve our turn to go it again; and whereas error is manifold,
it is ever one and the same, so that we may with confidence proceed in it, and
not fear to be tripped and catched, though we are examined at several times
and before diverse persons, because if we know the truth, and speak nothing
but what we know, the oftener we relate it the more we shall confirm it, seeing
we shall still speak the same thing without varying in any matter of substance
from that we have first spoken. And with this the judgment of Saint Augustine
accords: The fictions of a lie (says he) are very Difficillima and laboriosa
sunt figmenta mendacii. Qui verum vult dicere non laborat. etc. Aug. Sentent.
66.
difficult and laborious; whereas he who desires to speak the truth is at no
great pains. For good men are far quieter than those that are evil, and the
words of those who speak truth, are much more absolute than the lies of
deceivers. And therefore if we would not take much pains to little purpose, and
not with great danger go the further way about, when we may go the next way
with ease and safety; Let us not labor to compass our ends by false
sleights, and lies, which have always in them more frothy subtilty, than
substantial solidity; but seek to attain unto them in the plain and safe
ways of simplicity and truth. In which ways if Jacob had walked, he had
prevented many dangers, escaped many cares and toilsome labors under a
churlish uncle and deceitful master, and with much more speed and safety had
attained unto his end, and quietly enjoyed both birthright and blessing.

CHAP. XV.
Of the means whereby we may be preserved from Lying.

HItherto I have showed the reasons which. 1. The first means is seriously to
meditate of the manifold evils which accompany lies.
may move us to loathe and abhor Lying, as a pernicious Vice; and if we be
inclined to this disease or already tainted with it to desire earnestly, that
we may be preserved from it or cured of it; and now in the next place, if this
desire by the former motives be wrought in us, it is necessary that we
carefully use all good means which may strengthen us against this poisonous
contagion like sovereign antidotes, or if we be already infected, may
recover us out of it. Now these means either respect meditation or affection
and action. First, if we would shun or leave Lying, we must often and seriously
meditate on the manifold evils both of sin and punishment before spoken of, as
that it is dishonorable unto God and consequently odious and hateful to his
pure and perfect Nature, most injurious to our neighbors and therefore
abhorred of all, and unto our selves most pernicious both in respect of our
souls and bodies, in this life and the life to come. For the reason why men
are so apt to commit this sin, is because they so much slight it, as though it
were no sin at all, or if it be any, yet so small and venial, that it may
well pass among humane frailties and infirmities; by which also we have
little damage, seeing it is so common amongst men, that the multitude of
offenders takes away the shame, and makes it seem to be no sin; and on
the other side brings with it so much seeming profit and benefit, that it
does much overballance all the evils which do accompany it. All which false
conceits will easily vanish, if we thoroughly weigh and consider the manifold
and great evils of this sin which I have formerly discovered; and
contrariwise the excellency of Truth, and the innumerable blessings that it
brings to those who love and embrace it both in this world and the world to
come.

Secondly, let us consider that we are always. 2. That we consider that we
are always in Gods sight.
in Gods sight and presence, who is omniscient, and searches and knows the
very secrets of our hearts, and takes notice when we lie, what distance and
disagreement there is between our minds and tongues; and omnipotent also to
punish those sins which is all-seeing eye discovers; and most true, as well
in his threatenings as promises, so that he will not let Liars go unpunished,
seeing he has threatened to destroy them Psalm. 5. 6. Apoc. 21. 8.
and cast them into hell. And therefore what will it advantage the Liar, though
he can so cunningly coin his lies that they will for a time go current
amongst men; if his Lord and Sovereign discovers his falsity and treason?
What if he can tell his tale so smoothly that the standers by will acquit him
as innocent, when as the Judge himself sees his guilt and sin? So
Augustine, Thou Mentiri Deo potes; fallere non potes, etc. In Euang. Johannis.
Tract. 26
may lie unto God, but thou can not deceive him. For he knows what thou
do; he sees thee inwardly, inwardly he beholds, examineth and judges
thee; inwardly he either damneth or crowns thee.

Thirdly, let us consider that Truth rather than. 3. The third means is to
consider that Truth is the best and readiest way to attain our ends.
lies is a better and more likely means to attain unto our ends, either of
obtaining some benefit desired, or of escaping some punishment feared. For the
events and issues of all things are in Gods hand: he it is that by his
blessing conferreth benefits, and in his just judgment inflicteth punishments,
and the hearts of all men are at his disposing, either to like or dislike us,
to favor and further us for our good, or to be the instruments of his justice
to do us hurt: For they are all but tools in the hand of the great Worke-man,
by whom he effects what he will, according to his good pleasure. Now then
which is the likelier way for the compassing of our desires, either in the
obtaining of good or the avoiding of evil, to please God by speaking Truth,
or to offend him by telling lies, seeing all things are at his disposing?

Lastly, let us meditate and consider that there will come a Day of Judgment
when the secrets. 4. The fourth means is to meditate on the Day of Judgment.
of all shall be disclosed, and whatsoever is done in the dark shall be
brought to light. At which Day we shall all appear before Christ's Tribunal,
to give a reckoning of all that we have done in 1 Cor. 6. 9.
the flesh, yea to give an account of every idle word Matthew. 12. 36.
as our Savior speaks, and how much more of lies, whereby we have
dishonored God, and hurt both our neighbors and our selves. Now if it were a
great shame to have all our lies written in our foreheads, or if they be not
large enough, to have them published in the market place, and set up upon every
post and pillar in the street; then what shame and confusion shall cover their
faces, when as they shall be discovered at this dreadful Day in the presence
of Men and Angels, and when as Satan finding his mark and image upon Liars
shall own them for his children, and carry them with him to inherit their
patrimony in that Lake which burns with fire and brimstone?

And these are the means which respect meditation:. 5. Of the means which
respect affection and action; first, that we work our hearts to a love of
Truth.
the means which respect affection and action are diverse; the first is that we
work our hearts to the love of the Truth; by considering the beauty,
excellency, profit and necessity of it; whereof it will come to pass that we
shall so esteem it that we will purchase it at the dearest prices, but not
sell it at any rate, according to that of the wise man, Buy the Truth, but
sell it not. And if we love Prove. 23. 23.
and highly esteem the Truth, then will we hate lies as opposite unto it,
and then will we delight and rejoice in it as in a precious jewel. But if we
will not receive it with love and delight, God will leave us to the vanity of
our minds, the corruption of vile affections, and unto strong delusions 2
These. 2. 11.
both to make, believe and delight in lies.

The second means is that we set a careful watch over our lips and tongue,
that we do. 6. The second means is that we set a watch over our tongues.
not speak vainly, nor rashly and unadvisedly. For commonly in many words
there are some untrueths, and they that are rash in their words, speak
oftentimes they know not what, and for want of consideration, at unawares
speak lies in stead of Truth, and having once spoken them, they will stand to
what they have said for their credits sake, and to tell a second lie to make
the former seem truth. And therefore if we would avoid Lying, we must with
David, look carefully to our ways, and keep our mouths, as with a bridle,
Psalm. 39. 1.
that we sin not with our tongues.

The third means is, That we mortify our carnal. 7. The third means is that
we mortify our carnal lusts which are the causes of Lying.
and worldly Lusts, which are the common Causes of Lying, as first and
principally carnal and inordinate fear, whereby we fear men more than God,
and so become more careful to please them, that they may favor and reward us,
and to avoid their anger and displeasure that they may not hurt or punish us,
than to please God or avoid his wrath who has all power in his hand to reward
or punish us both in this life or the life to come. And this moves men to tell
Lies, because they look only to the present and not to eternity; and choose
rather thereby to hazard their souls and bodies to everlasting destruction,
than to suffer temporary evils, or to endanger themselves to present
punishments. And therefore if we would avoid Lying, let us mortify this
carnal fear, and consider for this end, how much more fearful it is to fall
into the hands of the everliving God, who is a consuming Fire, than into the
hands of mortal men, who when they have done their worst, can but punish or
kill the body, whereas he Matthew. 10. 28.
is able to cast body and soul into hell, as our Savior speaks. Secondly,
we must if we would avoid Lying, mortify our carnal love of the world and
earthly things, whereby we are ordinarily tempted to the committing of this
sin. For who does not see that they who set their hearts immoderately on
riches, are ready upon all occasions to lie and deceive that they may get and
increase their wealth? and that they who dotingly affect honors, make no
scruple to supplant others by their Lies and machievellian policies and deceits
that they may raise themselves by their ruin.

The fourth means is that we be more careful. 8. The fourth means is that
we be more careful to fly sin than the punishment due unto it.
to fly sin, than the punishment due unto it, and to avoid Lying than the
evils of smart and shame that do accompany it. For what is the reason which
moves men so often to fall into this sin of Lying? but because they make no
conscience of sin, and when they have committed it, and expect disgrace or
punishment, if it should come to light, they use all their lying Arts to hide
it, facing and out-facing the Truth, that their faults may not be discovered,
nor they punished according to their demerits. Whereas if men should labor in
all things to keep a good conscience, they would not fear to have what they
do known unto any; and if they walked in the ways of innocence, they would
not fear to go in the ways of Truth. And therefore if we would not lie, we
must carefully avoid the doing of any thing, which being done, if we be
examined, we are not willing to confess: or if through frailty and infirmity
we have failed in our duty, let us rather acknowledge our fault, than hide and
excuse it by a lie; and choose rather to undergo the penalty and punishment,
than to free our selves from it by committing sin. To which end let us
consider, that sin is the greatest evil, as being an offense against an
infinite Justice and Majesty, provoking an infinite wrath, and so deserving as
the due merit of it an infinite and everlasting punishment. And therefore what
is all the shame and punishment of this world unto which we shall endanger our
selves by acknowledging our faults, and confessing the Truth; in comparison of
Gods wrath, which is a consuming fire, and which by lying we kindle against
us, and those everlasting Torments in the flames of Hell?

The fifth means is to use all our lawful endeavor. 9. The fifth means that
we with all lawful endeavor shun poverty.
for the preventing of poverty, and to get such a sufficiency and competency of
estate, as that we may have wherewith to provide necessaries for our selves and
those that belong unto us, and to supply craving and pressing wants when they
importune us. For as the immoderate love and desire of riches and abundance,
is a strong tentation to draw men to this sin of lying (as I have showed) so
the fear of want, and the sense and smart of penury, is no less potent and
powerful, to make them leave truth and to tell lies, when they seem helpefull
for the bettering of their estate. And this we find by daily experience; for
who sees not that lies, (above all sorts of men) are most frequently used
among them that are of poorest condition, being necessitated hereunto by their
pinching wants and penury? And this the wise Agur well knew, who having
entreated God to remove Prove. 30. 8.
far from him vanity and lies, prays in the next place that he would give
unto him neither poverty nor riches, but feed him with food convenient for
him: because as they who desire abundance, commonly use lying, that they may
get and increase their wealth; so they that live in want and misery, do as
usually fall into this sin of lying, that they may supply their necessities
and free themselves from the smart of penury. In which respect those that will
avoid this sin of lying, must do their best to preserve themselves from
extreme poverty; and to this end use all good providence in getting and
keeping a sufficient competency of estate, and all industry, diligence and
painfulness in the duties of their particular callings, craving Gods blessing
upon their labors, who only gives power to get riches; and except he build
the house, they labor in Prove. 10. 22. Deuteronomy. 8. 18. Psalm. 127. 1.
vain that build it. For as the Apostle speaks of stealing, so I may say the
same of lying; let him that lied lie no more, but rather let him labor working
Ephesians. 4. 28.
with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give to him that
needs, seeing it is no less possible to avoid lying than stealing, if
through negligence in our callings we fall into want and penury.

The last and chief means is fervent and effectual. 10. The sixth means is
effectual Prayer.
prayer unto God, that he will fill our hearts with Grace and Truth, and with
his Holy Spirit lead and guide us in it; that he will work an high esteem
and love of Truth in us, and an utter detestation of lying, which is so
dishonorable unto him, and pernicious unto us, and that he will set a watch
before our mouths and keep the door of our Psalm. 141. 3.
lips, that no lies may issue out of them: wherein we have David for our
example, who prays earnestly, that God would remove from him the way of
lying, in which he was apt to walk, if he should Psalm. 119. 29.
be left unto his natural corruption, as he had diverse times found by woeful
experience; and also the wise Agur, who prays fervently that God would remove
far from him vanity and lies, the which (it seems) he so much detested,
that he could not endure the very neighbor-hood of them. Neither is it enough
that we use the former means, unless God by his blessing give such virtue and
power unto them, that they may preserve us from this sin; nor with David that
we resolve to look to our ways, and keep our mouths with a bridle, that we
offend not with our tongues: (for as the Apostle James tells us, The tongue
is a fire, and a world of iniquity, Jam. 3. 6, 8.
and an unruly evil, which no man can tame) unless the Lord join with us and
give us help, by Judge. 12. 6.
setting also his Watch before our mouths, and keeping the door of our
lips, that no lying and lisping Sibboleth may pass out of them, nor any
speech which brings not with it the Watchword of Truth.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the uses which we ought to make of the former discourse.

ANd thus having through Gods gracious. 1. The first use, that we have Truth
in high esteem.
assistance handled the points, which in the beginning of this Treatise I
propounded, and showed the nature of this vice, what it is, the causes and
kinds of it, with the means whereby we may be preserved from this common
infection, or cured if we be tainted with it; it now follows in the last
place, that I add a word or two by way of use. And first, seeing Truth is such
an excellent Virtue and precious Jewel, let this move us highly to prise and
dearly love it, and following the wise man's counsel, let us buy it though it
cost us Prove. 23. 23.
dear, but never sell it at any rate. For though it may seem at the first
sight that we have much damage and disadvantage by it, and that by speaking the
simple truth we make our selves a prey to the crafty, who have great help by
their lies to circumvent and deceive us; that we have much loss in our
trading and bargaining, buying and selling when we are restrained in our
liberty of lying, whilst that others that make no conscience of it, have many
helps and advantages thereby to further their ends, and advance their gain:
And finally, that we shall by confessing the Truth, when we have offended,
incur much displeasure, and expose our selves to the hard opinions of those
that are set over us, yea oftentimes to rigor and punishment; whereas others
more faulty by the help of their Iyes do frame such excuses, that they are
acquitted as blameless, held in good esteem, yea sometimes praised and
rewarded as innocent and well deserving: yet let us rest assured that by loving
and speaking Truth, we shall find our selves gainers in the end. For first
Truth it self is such an unvaluable Jewel, that it is sufficient to enrich
its owners by it self, and to make full amends for all the inconveniences,
disadvantages, losses and punishments which they have by it; seeing it is
accompanied with the inward peace of a good conscience, and Spiritual joy in
the assurance of Gods Love and our Salvation. Besides it will make us
acceptable unto God, who is in himself alone All-sufficient to reward our
loving and embracing of Truth in obedience to his Commandment; and to
recompense abundantly all inconveniences and disadvantages which we have by it.
For he is infinitely wise, and knows how to uphold us in our simplicity and
Truth against all the cunning machinations of crafty Machiavells: He Psalm. 24.
1.
is infinitely rich, as being the Lord and Owner of Heaven and Earth, and
therefore able abundantly to recompense all losses which we have by speaking
Truth and shunning lies, and to give us sufficient riches by honest means, and
together with them such inward joy and peace, that we shall experimentally say
with the Psalmist, A little that a Psalm. 37. 1^*
righteous man has, is better than the riches of many wicked; and with the
wise man: Better is a little with Prove. 16. ^*
righteousness, than great revenewes without right. Finally, by his Power and
Providence he rules our rulers, and so disposes of their hearts, that they
will as much like us for our truth and simplicity, when we acknowledge our
faults, as mislike us for the committing of them; and spare us for our
ingenuity, rather than punish our defects and failings: or otherwise if they
inflict upon us as much or much more than we have deserved, if we bear it
with meekness and patience, we shall have more peace and comfort in our
sufferings than we should have had, if we had prevented and escaped them by
telling of lies. In which respects let us not only Jer. 9. 3.
stand for the Truth, but be valiant also in defending and preserving of it;
seeing all that we can do or suffer, is not comparable unto those benefits
which we shall receive by it.

Secondly, seeing it has been showed and proved. 2. The second use is that
we abborre lies.
to the convincing of all men's Consciences not wilfully blind, that lying is a
most odious vice, dishonorable unto God, and pernicious to our selves and
neighbors; let us not upon any pretense of pleasure or profit be allured to
like or love it; or if we have formerly been overtaken with it, yet let us
not continue in it, but rise out of this sin by unfeigned repentance. For
howsoever heretofore our ignorance might make it the more excusable, because
we did not know that it is so odious unto God, so heinous in it self and
pernicious unto us; yet now that the light of Truth has laid it open in its
own colors and shape, if we still make no conscience of committing it, nor
lay it to heart to bewail, hate and turn from it by unfeigned repentance, we
shall be left unexcusable, and sinning against the light of our own knowledge,
we shall hereby aggravate our sin, and increase our punishment.

Finally, seeing this vice is so hateful and abominable,. 3. The third use is
that Magistrates should endeavor by all means to suppress this vice.
and brings with it so many and great evils, both to private Persons, and to
all Families and Societies, Church and Commonwealth, and after this life
hellish misery, and eternal condemnation: Let this moove all men in their
several places and callings to use their best endeavors to suppress this
vice, and to amend and reform it both in themselves and others. And first,
Magistrates should be persuaded to do all they can to discountenance this vice
by making good laws against it; and seeing them duly executed, because it is
no less dangerous to a State, than any other vices, as being an incourager to
all wickedness, and the color and cover which does conceal and hide it. And
therefore as Plato thought those Commonwealthes most miserable, which abounded
with Lawyers and Physicians, because in them contentions and suites,
sickenesses and diseases abound also; so may it much more truly be spoken,
that those States and Kingdoms are most miserable, in which lies are most
frequent without control or punishment, because it argues plainly the
abounding of all other vice, seeing their chief use is to cover all other
sin, and encourage to all wickedness, whilst they promise to hide it. But
especially it must be the care of Governors and Rulers to stop their ears to
tale-bearers and liars, because it is the receivers that make thieves; and if
they had no ear to listen unto lies, men would have no tongues to tell them;
if they with their countenance, (as a North wind the rain) would drive them
away, they would quickly leave their Prove. (...).
lying, and labor to regaine their favor by speaking of Truth, whereas If a
Ruler hearken unto lies, Prove. 29. 12.
all his servants are so wicked as to tell them; if the King will be made glad
with wickedness, and the Princes Hos. 7. 3.
with lies; those that are about them will to their uttermost skill use all
their lying Arts to please and delight them.

But though the care of reforming this vice. 4. The fourth use is, that we do
our best to prevent this sin in others.
ought to be chiefly in Rulers and Magistrates, yet not in them only; but
every Christian ought to do his best to maintain and nourish Truth, and to
suppres this Vice of lying both in himself and others. Especially it concerns
every man to take heed, that he so carry himself in his intercourse and
dealings, that he be not a cause or occasion unto his neighbor of falling into
this sin. And because it is most frequently committed in buying and selling,
the Seller laboring to raise his commodity by telling untrueths, and the Buyer
to pull down the price by dispraising it, therefore let us not only watch over
our own tongues that we do not offend, but also avoid all occasions whereby
our neighbor with whom we deal may fall into this sin. Now this is done
when as we do not in driving our bargain, delight in using many words which
are seldom free from lies, but take a plain and fair course in our asking
and offering with all convenient sparingnesse of speech. And as the Seller is
not by his lavish praises to draw on the Buyer to speak worse of the commodity
than either it deserves, or he thinks, so let not the Buyer by his dispraises,
moove the Seller to use untrue commendations, that hereby he may dazzle his
eyes, and allure him to a better liking. And as the one must not ask at the
first excessive prices for his wares, from which height he does not usually
descend to his selling price, but (as it were) by the steps and stairs of lies
and untruthes, so must not the other by too much hucking and niggardly offers
as much under the just price, move him to the practice of his lying arts and
eloquence; nor by distrusting his words when he speaks truth, occasion him to
further the bargain by speaking lies, because he sees that the one is
believed as well as the other.

To conclude all that I have to say in this discourse,. 5. Tbat governors of
Families should do their best to suppress or reform this vice in their
inferiors.
seeing this vice of lying is so sinful and pernicious, let Parents and
Governors of Families use their best care and endeavor in the education of
their children, and government of their servants, to suppress and reform it
by all good means, that those under their charge be not tainted and poisoned
with it. And to this end they must make themselves in all their speeches
examples of truth unto their inferiors, and such as hate and shun lies. In
which respect I have much misliked and condemned their practice which make no
scruple of telling lies to their little children, either by promising unto them
that which they mean not to perform, that hereby they may allure them to do
what they would have them; or by skaring them with bug-beares and faise
frights, that they may make them leave their crying, or doing other things
amiss, whereby they usually loose their credit and authority with them, so
that they do not believe them when as they are serious in speaking truth; and
withal poison Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem Testa diu. Horat.
their tender natures which in themselves are too apt to receive any sinful
impression, and make them apt and ready to follow their evil example, and so
by custom habituate them unto it, that they can hardly be brought to leave it
when they come to riper age. Another means is to make it one part of their
chiefest care in observing their Children and Servants, that they may find
them out in their lies, unto which by natural corruption they are so much
inclined, and taking them with the manner, to rebuke and discountenance them in
their sin, showing them the hainousnes of it by Gods Word, and the
punishments which are threatened against them that are guilty of it. And if all
this will not reclaim them, they must add to their instructions and rebukes
seasonable corrections, and show themselves more ready and willing to remit or
tenderly to chastize their faults committed against themselves, than their sin
of lying, whereby they deny or excuse them which is committed against God.
Finally, if we would have our inferiors to confess the truth when they are
faulty and guilty, and not use lies and false excuses, we must in our
government avoid too much rigor and cruelty in our corrections, which out of
fear and infirmity will move inferiors to hide their faults with lies, and so
to hazard their souls rather than endure bodily smart, and rather to presume
on Gods mercy for the forgivenes of their sins, than to confess them to such
governors as are so cruel, that they can expect from them no pardon of their
fault, nor moderation in their punishments: whereas if they would leave unto
them some hope of finding mercy upon their confession and promise of amendment,
if they would not always deal with them in severity and strictness of
justice, but pardon some faults because they are slight and venial, and some
of an higher nature, because of their ingenuity and truth, which moves them by
an humble acknowledgement to submit themselves to their pleasure, and to rely
upon their mercy, they would not be so apt to make lies their refuge,
especially if they knew that they are so odious to their governors, that they
will, if they be discovered, inflict upon them more certain and severe
punishment. And as rigor and cruelty must be shunned in correction: so also
injustice and indiscretion, whereby men make no difference of faults, but
punish with as much severity trivial and small oversights, as great and
pernicious offenses; infirmities and unwilling slips and faylings, as voluntary
and wilful negligences. For when the delinquent does not lie under any great
guilt, nor in his conscience is convinced that he has deserved much blame,
and yet knowing in respect of his governors indiscretion, that he shall fare
as ill as if he were more faulty; this causes him to make no scruple to
prevent and escape his punishment by lies: and because these light faults
happen often, and so the offender is put often to his lying shifts, at last
custom will bring an habit, and imbolden him to use lying excuses to hide his
greater faults, as well as his lesser faylings. The like care must be used by
Superiors in their corrections, that they avoid all rashness and furious
passion; for if they come masked and disguised under this terrible vizard and
fall to execution before they have duly examined and judged, they put the
offender into a sudden fright, and not being able to see the face of his Father
or Master, whilst it is covered with this rash rage and tyranny, for very
fear he denies the faults which he has committed, before he well knows
what he speaks, and having once said it, he out-faceth the Truth, and
stoutly stands to his first lie, being ready to back it with another; lest
if the Truth should come to light he should incur more displeasure, and draw
upon himself double punishment, both for his fault and falshoode in hiding it
with his lies.

(...).
FINIS.

