Master D. his council, to all that are his: as also a brief lesson for all
estates.
Keep counsel. Use not many words. Tell the truth. Be slow to speak.
Bridle thine anger. Appease debate. Hinder no man's good name. Take heed of
drink. Remember thy end. Be merciful. Try before thou trust. Repose no
confidence in a reconciled adversary. Sorrow not for that which can not be got
again. Rejoice not in thy neighbors cross. Strive not with thy over match.
Reveal not thy secrets to thy wife, nor to thy children: for women, and
children, say all they know. Three things undid the Romans reign: privy
grudge, young heaves, and private gain. Bear with others, as thou would have
others hear with thee. Be not to rash, hasty, bold, nor wise in thine own
conceyte.

Do not speak all thou know. Do not believe all thou hear. Do not do
all thou can. Do not say all thou see.
Behold the end ere thou begin,
Have mind on death, and fear to sin:
For death shall reap that life has sovvne,
And life shall spring where death has movvne.
If thou by God art set on hie,
Remember yet that thou shall die.
Abstinence is good for the health and wealth of the Soul, Abstinence is good
for the health and wealth of the Mind, Abstinence is good for the health and
wealth of the and body.
If thou fly idleness, Cupid has no might,
His Bow lies broken, his fire has no light.
FEAR GOD, And keep his Commandments.

GODLY private prayers for householders to meditate upon, and to say in their
families.

MARK. 11.24. What so ever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall have
it, and it shall be done unto you.

ROMANS 10.13. Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved.

Psalm. 55. verse. 16. I will call unto God, and the Lord will save me: Evening
and morning and at noone will I pray and make a noise, and he will hear my
voice.


Godly private prayers for householders to be said in their Families.
A prayer containing the effect of the Householders Catechism.
Almighty God and most merciful Father, I see in thy blessed laws and
commandments, the greatness of my sins and wickedness: yea, I see (O
Lord my god) the whole course of my life to be almost nothing else, but a
continual breaking of thy holy laws and commau^dements. The thoughts of my
heart, either in vanity, or else open wickedness, are in number infinite,
daily in the abundance of them, causing my mouth to speak, and my body to
execute and do contrary to thy holy will. And again (O Lord) I see thy heavy
wrath, vengeance, and judgment against sin to be intolerable, that even the
least wicked thought and most secreat cogitation of my heart, procures thy
heavy wrath, and everlasting curse, the tormente of hell, and everlasting fire,
even although I had but once in all my life broke any of thy commandments, so
much as once in thought. And I know (O Lord God) that thou art true and just,
and can not abide sin and wickedness, but wilt justly punish every sin,
even with the self same torments of hell which thy justice has appointed,
even for every sin. This O Lord my God throws me down and even amaseth me,
so that I know not what to do. I look into my self, vewing mine own power,
whither I am able to overcome this punishment of my sin or no: and I see that
al eue^ the most exquisite punishment which I can devise to my self, in
whipping of my body as long as I live, wearing hair cloth, pineing my self
with fasting, or any other pain, I see, I see (O Lord) that all this
punishment is not sufficient for one of my least sins because it deserves
even the everlasting pains of hell. I look to Heaven, I see there is no
Saint nor Angel able to abide and overcome this punishment of sin: I look
to men in this world, even to the Popes treasure, that wicked man of sin,
and I see yt neither his mass nor purgatory, pilgrimage, pardons, penance,
satisfactions, nor any of such like wicked stuff, alas I see they are nothing
for the satisfying for one of my least wicked thoughts, seeing the punishmente
is by thy just decree and sentence thine everlasting curse. Wherefore I am
driven out from my self, and all that I can do, to seek this punishmente
discharged other where, or else to quall under the burden. I see there is no
healpe for me in Angels, Saints, nor mortal men, but only in that perfect
man Christ Jesus thy dear son, in whom I see the full punishment of my
sin wholly paid, satisfied, discharged, and overcome: death vanquished, the
pains of hell in victory swalowed up, the curse satisfied, and the eternity
of the punishmente (through his everlasting power) ouerreachead. This I see (O
Lord) by the eyes of faith, being through thy holy spirit wholly assured, that
all the whole punishment of sin paid by my Savior Christ, is not only paid
for other men, but even also for me and my sin. This assurance of my faith,
being thine only woork in me, I beseech thee in mercy to strengthen and
increase, for I feel it often full of wavering and doubting. Grant that I may
daily more and more in my soul and conscience, feel my self knit and grafted
into the body of thy son, whereby I may be assured, that whatsoever He has
done, pertains to me, and is fully and wholly mine: that I may through the
power of his death, feel daily sin die in me, and thorough the power of his
resurrection feel my self risen from sin, to have my full joy and comfort
in those things which be agreeable to thy holy will, utterly detesting, hating,
and abhorring from my heart althinges which be contrary to thy will and
pleasure: that even in this life I may still look for this endless joy and
felicity, using the things of this world, as though I used them not, till
that good time that it shall please thee to call me to thine everlasting
Kingdom of Glory, there to reign with my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ for
ever and ever. Amen.

A prayer upon the Lords prayer.
O Most mighty Lord and eternal God, who have by thy dear son Christ
Jesus our Lord and Savior, Our father which art in heaven.
reconciled unto thy self all things in heaven and earth, and in him haste
made an everlasting bond and couenaunte with us thy faithful children, that
thou will not only be our God, but also our most loving and merciful Father,
whereof as a pledge thou have given us thy holy Spirit of adoption, whereby
we may with boldness and full trust and confidence come to thee by hearty
prayer, as unto our most loving and merciful Father, being assured that thou will not deny us any thing which thou know shall be expedient for us: grant
we beseech thee (dear Father) that we being fully persuaded in our hearts of
this thy fatherly love and affection toward us, may be sturred up to make our
petitions with such an affection, ardent desire, love and reverence to thy
majesty, that our minds be not carried away with bythoughts creeping in, but
without all wandering may be fully bente and attentive to the thing we ask,
and fully staide upon thy merciful and just protection.

We then beseech thee (dear Father) that thou will strengthen our hearts
with thy holy Spirit, Holowed be thy name.
that considering thou have made all things for the glory of thy Name, so we
may in all our doings, enterprises, counsels and purposes, chiefly above all
things seek thy Glory: that we may fully acknowledge thee not only the
Author of all things, but the ruler, guider and governor of all things,
both in Heaven and earth: that we never diminishe thine incomprehensible Glory,
by attributing unto our selves any power, strength, or ability to do, will, or
think that which is good: but from our hearts we may acknowledge all our
goodness to come from thee, yelding for the same continually praise and
thanksgiving to thy glorious Name: that we never by distrusting thy merciful
providence, dishonor thy Name, but that even in our greatest distress we may
put our full confidence in thee, not looking upon our weakness, but staying
upon thy power and promises, by hearty prayer fleeing unto thee our only
refuge: that our whole life may be so framed according to thy holy will in all
points, that thy glorious Name in us may be sactified, and that we be not an
occasion that thy holy Name be blasphemed through our wicked life and
conversation.

Let thy Kingdom (most merciful Father) appear, and manifestly be declared
in all the world, Thy kindome come.
but especially amongst thy Church, and faithful flock: declare thy self
Lord and King oue^ them, ruling them by the scepter of thy holy word, and
force of thy holy Spirit. Increase the number of faithful Pastors and
Preachers amongst the people: bless their labors to the increase of this
Kingdom of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, and to the destruction of the
kingdom of satan and antichrist. Suppress the rage of the enemies, that they
may know that thou, O Lord, do reign in all ages, to the behoof of thy
Church and terour of thine enemies. Grant these mercies good lord, not only to
the whole Church in general, but especially to every one of us thy Children
particularly: Grant that we may effectually feel the force of this thy
Kingedome in our hearts. Beat down in us our old corrupt Adam, with all
sinful delights, thoughts, motions, and desires: and renew in us day by day
our spiritual and inward man, that we may be wholly bente to delight, think,
desire, and do those things which be acceptable in thy sight.

Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven.
Frame our hearts (good Lord) with such humble obedience to thy holy will,
that we may be heartily well content with whatsoever it pleases thy goodness to
lay upon us: that we never cease in our miseries, but continually call upon
thee by hearty prayers, although we feel no release at all, yet that still
patiently we may abide, and quietly wait for thy good leisure and appointed
time of deliverance, when thou know it shall be most expedient for us.

Grant us, dear Father, that al our counsels, studies, labors and
endeavors, being by thy holy spirit guided and framed, Give us this day our
daily bread,
we may every one in that vocation in which thou haste placed him, so
faithfully travail, to the discharging of our consciences, and edifying of thy
Church, that our account may be found acceptable before thy throne and
Judgment seat. So bless our labors and travels, that we may have sufficient
for the preserving of this present life, and be content with those benefits
which thou shall bestow upon us, whether they be many or few, acknowledging
them to be received of thee: not greedily to care for them or vainly to
delight in them, but tha^kfully esteem of them, as thy benefits bestowed
upon us, and as faithful Stewards moderately to use them to the relief of our
brethren, and the discharge of our consciences.

Increase in us (good Lord) the gift of faith, that we may daily more and
more in our souls and consciences be assured, Forgive us our trespasses as we
forgive them that trespass against us.
that our sins be defaced, clean blotted out, and covered with the full,
perfect, and sufficient sacrifice of thy dear Son Christ Jesus our Lord and
Savior once made for us* that we are united, knit, and made one body with
him, partakers of his righteousness, justification, and holiness, and even
fellow heirs with him of everlasting life: that we may unfeignedly from the
bottom of our hearts love thee for this thine unspeakable goodness and
mercy: forgiueing from our hearts our brethren which do offend us, pray for
them, love, cherishe, and comfort them as fellow members all of one body,
with perfect natural love and compassion linked together to our head Christ
Jesus.

Strengthen us, good Lord, Lead us not into temptation.
with thy holy spirit, that we be not overcome with the subtle suggestions
and sinful motions of satan the devil: hold us up with thy merciful hand
that we sleep not in sin, that we be not drawn away with the wicked world,
nor the enticementes of the flesh, to delighte in wickedness: but so arm us
with thy mighty power, that we may strongly abide all the assaults and
subtle sleightes of our ghostly enemy, and sincerely to walk before thy face,
both in prosperity and adversity, to thy honor and glory, the health of our
souls, and profit of thy Church, through Jesus Christ our only Lord and
Savior. Amen.

Our father which art in Heaven.
The Lords prayer more at large.
O Most mighty and eternal God, who of thine infinite love to mankind,
haste given us thine own eternal son Christ Jesus our Lord, to be made man
for us, in the similitude of sinful flesh, to become flesh of our flesh,
bone of our bones, in all things like unto us, sin only excepted:who being
thy true and natural son, has made us with him, sons, children, and
heirs to thee our most merciful Father, giving unto us by grace, that which
is his by nature: And by his due, alone, once offered, sufficient sacrifice,
has paid the ransom of our sins before thy divine Majesty, to satisfy
thy justice upon sinnful flesh. Which debt being paid for us, he has
brought us in favor with thee, so that we may now with boldness and trust
come to thee as unto our most merciful and loving Father, with full
assurance, that as thy love is so much greater and more excellent toward us,
then all love of earthly Parents toward their children, as thou passest all
men in goodness and mercy, so thou will deny us nothing which shall be
expedient for us. So that although all the fathers which are in earth, having
shaken off all feeling of fatherly naturalnesse, would forsake their children,
yet thou would never forsake us, because thou canste not deny thy self:
who promisest, that if earthly fathers being evil, can give good gifts to
their children, how much more will thou our heavenly Father, being altogether
goodness it self, give good things to them that ask in thy Sons name? And
that although a mother should forsake her children, yet will thou not forsake
us thy children, whom thou haste before the bginning of the world in thy
dear Son Jesus Christ, chosen to be thy children and heirs with him of
thine immortal Kingdom. Whereof that we in our selves might be sure and
certain, and out of all doubt that we are the children and heirs of
everlasting life, thou haste given into our hearts thy holy Spirit, as a true
pledge and earneste of our inheritance, which Spirit does assure our
spirits that we are thy children, and therefore cries in our hearts Abba
Father.

We therefore as thy dear children, raunsomed and boughte by thy dear son,
flee to thee our most loving and merciful Father, who in goodness art
infinite, in mercy abundant, in substance incomprehensible, in immortality
everlasting: who by thy mighty power and singular providence rulest all
things, according to thy heavenly wisdom: beseeching thee for thy dear sone
Christ Jesus his sake, Holowed be thy name.
yt as thou have sufficiently set forth thy glorious Name in making the whole
world, heaven, earth, and al things therein contained: so we may in beholding
and viewing thy creatures the works of thine hands, be lifted up to thee our
Lord God the Creator and Maker, and in them, glorify thy holy name,
acknowledgeing in them thy singular goodness and love toward man, for whose
use thou haste created all things, both in Heaven and earth: and that we may
for the same, even from the bottom of our hearts, yield due honor, praise and
thanksgiving to thee (dear Father) all the days of our life. Grant most
merciful Father, that we may in heart and mind be fully assured, that thou by
thy heavenly providence rulest and guidest all things in heaven and earth, so
that nothing in the whole world comes to pass but according to thine
appoyntmente: that thou guidest and framest the affairs and doings of men,
that thou haste even their hearts and all their powers in thy merciful hand,
to turn them which way soever it seems best to thy godly wisdom: so that
whither we be in prosperity or adversity, we may acknowledge both of them to
be thy work in us, and therefore be no less thankful for sickness then for
health: for sorrow, then for comfort: for a troubled mind, then for a quiet:
for imprisonment and banishmente, then for liberty: especially seeing we know
that y^ turnest them all (seem they never so sharp) to the comfort and
commodity of thy children which fear thee: and that in all things which shall
befall unto us, whither they be grievous or joyous, prosperity or adversity,
life or death, thy holy Name may be sanctified in us by yielding due and
continual praise and thanksgiving to thy eternal Majesty: that we never
cease to put our full trust and confidence in thy merry, who haste promised to
be our defender, buckler, and shield, to keep us as the apple of thine eye,
to deliver us when we call upon thee, to open when we knock, to give when we
ask: that we knowing our own weakness, that of our selves we have no power
or strength to do, no not so much as to will that which is good, we may
acknowledge all our strength, comfort, joy, faith, love, hope, and confidence
to be thine only gift and work in us. And for the same, and the increase of
the same, and for all thy benefits in us, whereof we feel our selves
destitute, we may constantly flee unto thee by hearty prayer, requiring the same
at thy merciful hand. And having felt thy merciful dealing toward us, we
may always to the end of our life continue thankful to thy blessed Name: that
we never speak or think of thee (O Lord God) without high reverence and an
obedient fear unto thy Glorious Name.

And that thy kingdom (O Lord) may more gloriously shine amongst men, Thy
kingdom come.
subdue the hearts of the people to be obedient to thy word. Lighten all
nations with thy glorious Gospel: raise up faithful ministers of thy word;
abundantly in every place, who with pure and perfect zeal in true knowledge
may feed the hungry souls with the food of life. Lighten the hearts of thy
children, whom yet thou haste not called to the feeling of thy mercies in thy
son revealed. Beat down the fury and rage of the kingdom of satan and
antichrist with all tyrants, who show their utter malice and fury against thy
dear and faithful flock. Confound their devises, suppress their pride, and
so strengthen all thy true and faithful servants against their rage, that
they may have true wisdom to confound their enemies, and steadfast constancy
to profess the truth of thy glorious gospel, even to the death. And that
every one of us may feel the force of this thy kingdom particularly in our
selves, we beseech thee kill in us, by thy holy spirit, all wicked delights
of sin, and vanities of this world. Mortify in us our earthly and carnal
affections, and grant that we may have our full delighte and pleasure in
thee our Heavenly Father, and in thy son Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior,
and reverently embrace thy holy Word, that our souls may be comforted
therein, and our faith thereby confirmed. Lighten our understanding, that we
may in thy holy word learn, and in heart be fully assured that thou art our
most merciful Father: and thy dear Son, our Lord and Savior. Beat down
in us all sinful motions of the adversary, which do rebel against thy
holy spirit, and settle and frame our minds by thy holy spirit in us, that
all rebellion in our flesh being killed, we may quietly with stayed minds
and consciences set our full joy, comfort, and consolation in heavenly
things, walking before thee in sincerity of mind: put our full trust and
confidence in thee, rest, and quiet our selves wholly in thy mighty protection
and providence. Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven.


And forasmuch (O Lord God) as of our selves we be nothing but stubbernesse
and rebellion, we beseech thee (dear Father) that as thine Angels in heaven
do willingly obey thy Will without resistance, so we thy children in earth
(all stubbernesse and perverseness, by thy holy spirit, in us being utterly
extinguished and quenched) we may willingly submit our selves, resign and
yield our whole affections to thee O Lord, to be governed after thy blessed
and heavenly Will. That we may feel in our selves no other motion or desire,
then a meet consent to thy holy Will: that whatsoever affections in us fight
against thy holy Will, thou will utterly make them void. That we never will
any thing of our selves, but that thy holy Sp^rite in us may govern our
hearts, by whom inwardly being taught, we may learn to love, embrace, and
take comfort in those things that please thee, and to hate those things that
displease thee: That our hearts, minds, and wills, being wholly subdued to
thy most blessed Will, we may willingly be content with that estate of
life, which it pleases thy goodness to exercise us withal in this world,
whither it be in adversity or prosperity, in sickness or health, in
ignominy or glory, in quietness or trouble, in sorrow or gladness. Grant
us, dear Father, this willing and patiente mind, that even in our greatest
distress we may be content with thy good will, and not to murmur or grudge
against thy Majesty, knowing that thou will lay nothing upon us, but that
which shall turn to our goodness or profit. And that we may patiently
abide whatsoever it shall please thee to lay upon us: that we be assured in
our hearts, that thou will not lay more unto us, then thou will give us
strength to bear, and even in our greatest afflictions, will find a way for
our deliverance, and that thy power and strength is more fully declared, when
we feel our selves utterly void of all strength, and see no way of
deliverance: that we may in our most grievous assaults, conflicts, and
anguishe of mind, submit our selves wholly to thy blessed will, and look for
our deliverance at thy hand, when thou know it shall be most expedient for
us, and most for thy glory, leaving the time and mean of deliverance to thy
good Will and pleasure, and that in the mean time we never cease but call
upon thee, by hearty prayers continually as thou haste commanded, until such
time as thou shall hear our petitions. And although after many and sundry
callinges upon thee, thou seem not to regard us, but rather deal more
extremely with us: yet notwithstanding strengthen us so with perseverance in
prayer, that we faint not, but still continue in prayer, being assured, yt
although we feel our selves nothing released, yet we may quiet our selves
herein, that we as thy children have laid our complaints, griefs and sorrows
in the bosom of thee our heavenly Father, who wilt as a loving Father, when he
sees it most convenient, healpe us. And that although thou seem nothing to
grant our requests, yet we honor thee in calling upon thy Name: seeing
thou doeste accept it as a most chief honor, to be called upon in the day
of trouble. Give us this day our daily bread,


And forasmuch (dear Father) as thou doeste by thy mighty power, nourish,
feed, sustain, preserve, and maintain all living creatures, yea, even the
very young fowls and beasts, we beseech thee to send unto us thy children,
(over whom thou haste a more special care) all things necessary for this
our present life: that we having sufficient, may walk every one in our
calling, in sincerity and pure holiness before thy face, acknowledging all
our benefits of richesse, wealth, health, meat, drink, apparel, and all our
substance to be thy mere gifts, bestowed upon us, and delivered unto us from
thy hands: that we be not drawn from thee through setting our minds to
much upon them, but so moderately use them, as thy benefits for a time
bestowed upon us, knowing that thou will at our hands require an account
how we have used them. That we do not carefully gape or seek after them,
but discretely to thy glory use them, acknowledging in them thy goodness and
liberality toward us. And seeing (most merciful Father) that it is not our
travail, labor, pains, study, or endeavor which is able to get us our
living, but only in so much as it pleases thy goodness to bless and
prosper them: we beseech thee that if through our great travails and
pains, we be yet still in poor and mean estate, that thou will give us a
contented heart, knowing that thereby thou letteste us understand, that it is
thy good will and pleasure so to keep us under, that we more effectually may
give our selves to serve thee. Or if it be thy will and pleasure more
abundantly to bless us and our travail, to send us abundance of all
things, we beseech thee (dear Father) give us a thankful heart to
acknowledge them to be thy good gifts: and frame our hearts with such
liberality that we may be contented to distribute them according to the
necessity of thy children, being assured that thou haste to that end made us
Stewards over them, that thou may at his hands require much, on whom thou
haste bestowed much: so that we having the due estimation of thy benefits
which we ought to have, may both reverence thy goodness in thy benefits,
and supply the want of our brethren, to the relief of their necessity, and
furtheraunce of thy Glory.

Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And whereas (most merciful Father) thy Son, our Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus has in our nature paid the ransom and debte of all our sins, which
we have from the beginning of our life committed, and do daily commit, we
beseech thy gracious goodness that thou will by thy holy Spirit in our
hearts, assure our souls, and consciences with a lively faith, that by that
same one alone sufficient sacrifice, the punishment of our sins is paid, thy
wrath appeased, and thy justice satisfied, whereby our consciences may be
quieted and set at peace with thee our merciful Father and God. Let us, dear
father, feel in our souls and consciences, that we are united and knitte to
thy dear Son Jesus Christ, and made one body with him, and heirs with him
of everlasting glory, so coupled and joined with him, that we are members of
his body, so that what so ever he has done in his body, we may be assured that
it is ours: that his righteousness, is our righteousness: his sanctification
and holiness is ours: the curse, condemnation and death which he suffered, is
the same curse, condemnation, and death due for our sins: that we knowing
that our sins be done away, and clean forgotten and forgiven by thy
merciful love and goodness declared, in offering up thy son to death for
us, we may be driven to love thee unfeignedly from the bottom of our hearts
for this thine unspeakable love. And considering that thou haste in mercy
pardoned so many our heinous offenses, we may gladly be moved to forgive one
another their offenses, and put out of our heart al rancour, malice, and hatred
toward our brethren, knowing that we are all members of one body Christ our
Savior: that so surely as we have forgiven al them that offend against us,
we may be so certainly assured, that thou our merciful Father, haste
forgiven us, like as we have forgiven our brethren.

And forasmuch (most heavenly Father) as we of our selves be feeble, Lead
us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
frail, and weak, and have a strong and subtle adversary satan the devil,
who goes about continually like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour:
we beseech thee strengthen us by thy holy spirit, that we may withstand his
subtle suggestions and motions: hold thou us by thy merciful hand, and keep
us always in thy safegarde and protection, that we be not overcome in the
mighty assaults of our adversary. And forasmuch as he often uses even our
own flesh armed against us, to conquer us, we beseech thee dear Father,
mortify, subdue and kill in our flesh all subtle suggestions, and sinful
motions of satan, that we yield not our selves as slaves thereunto, but
continually fight against them, and bring them into subjection of the spirit.
Grant unto us, dear Father, that we be not drawn through the subtilitie
and sliely torments of satan, to have our delight and pleasure in the vanities
of this present world, but by thy Grace, might and power, may so in the
prosperity of this life be vppholden, that our minds with full joy and
comfort may be lifted up to our perfect consolation in our Lord and Savior
Christ, and in him, take our full and perfect joy and consolation, so that no
vain delight of this world put us from the same, neither any sharp
adversity, as poverty, misery, or calamity, through the malice of the
devil, drive us to despair of thy merciful goodness toward us: but
always being through thy grace and assistance defended, we may be fully and
perfectly armed against all the subtle intrappings of satan, and rest wholly
in thy merciful defense and aid. For thou haste (O Lord and eternal God) in
thy government, all things in heaven and earth, all power and dominion over
all creatures, Angels and devils, to rule them according to thy good pleasure
and will, to the profit and commodity of thy church, and every faithful
member thereof, and to thine own incomprehensible glory: in all things, in
all ages, for ever and ever thy glorious name may be exalted, and thy
faithful flock edified thorough Christ our Lord. Amen.

A confession of sins with faith and repentance.
O Merciful and heavenly Father, we thy servants do humbly prostrate our
selves before thy Majesty, acknowledging here in thy sight our heinous
offenses committed against thy Majesty, seeing and beholding thy heavy wrath
against them: we feel our selves laden (O Lord our God) with a huge company
of horrible sins, whereofeuen the very least, being but conceived in
thought, is sufficient in judgment to throw us down to the everlasting
burning lake. Our own consciences, O Lord, do bear witness against us, of
our manifold transgressions of thy blessed law, of our security and
senseless blindness running headelong to destruction, committing sin after
sin, although not notorious to the woorlde, yet horrible before thine eye.
The thoughts of our hearts rise up in iudgmente against us: the vanity of
our talk before thy majesty condemns us: the wickedness of our deeds from
thy sight rejects us: all our wicked thoughts, words and deeds, with the
inward corruption of our nature, do altogether as it were a whole lump and
lode of sin, lie heavy upon us, and with their intolerable weight do even
press us down to hell. We do daily groan under the burden of them, inwardly
lamenting our own folly so greedily running into them. In Heaven, earth, or
hell, we see none able to sustain the weight of them, but even thy dearly
beloved Son Jesus Christ, who in mercy infinite, and compassion endless,
has sustained and overcome that endless punishmente due unto them: in him
therefore, in him, most merciful Father, and through him we come to thee,
being fully assured according to thy promise, that thou will accept and take
that full recompense which he thy dear son has made for us, as a just
rau^some for all the sins of all those who with a true faith take hold on
him. In him therefore we see thine anger toward us appeased, thy wrath
satisfied, and our debts paid.

Increase in us, good Lord, we beseech thee, this lively and feeling faith,
for we feel it often times in us very weak, and troubled with many doubts:
increase it in us (O Lord) that we may through thy holy spirit be assured,
that the punishment of our sins is fully in thy son discharged. Make us, O
Lord our God, to feel this same in our souls and consciences, that Jesus
Christ is ours, and all that he has done: that we are graffed into his body,
and made one with him, and therefore fellow heirs with him of everlasting
life. Let us not only have these words in our mouths (good Lord) but
through thy holy Spirit let us feel the comfort of them in our hearts
fully sealed and settled in us: that we feeling our selves inwardly before thy
judgment seat discharged, and our consciences toward thee appeased, may be
swallowed up with an unfeigned love toward thy Heavenly Majesty, and toward
our brethren for thy sake. Make sin to die in us daily more and more, that
we may hate, detest, and utterly abhor all sin and wickedness in all men,
but especially in our selves: that we may strongly through thy holy Spirit set
our selves in open war and defiaunce against all sin and wickedness: that
we please not our selves in our sins, but straightly examining sin by the
just rule of thy holy Laws, we may utterly from the bottom of our hearts
condemn even the least sin in our selves, having our whole joy, comfort and
consolation upon those things which be agreeable to thy blessed will,
always being afraid to do any thing contrary to the same: that we may even
from the bottom of our hearts, examine and try our thoughts, before thy
presence, that they be vprighte and unfeigned, not hypocritical in outward
show only and appearance, but that even all corners of our hearts being
opened and disclosed before thee, we may even as though it were openly before
the face of the whole world bring them in show, knowing that a double heart
is detestable in thine eyes: and yt we may walk always as before thine eyes,
not only before the eyes of man, being more careful to walk circumspectly, in
this respect, that we have thee to be a viewer of our doings, a thousand
fold more then the eyes of man: that thus we may walk as becomes thy
children, not only in outward show, but also in sincerity of heart,
abhorring even the least sin in our selves, striving, resisting and fighting
against sin, not delighting our selves in sin, nor nourishing the same in
our breast, but earnestly embraceing, and studiously seeking after those
things which be pleasante in thine eyes: yt neither the fear of man, nor
loss of goods, life, lands possessions, or friends draw us away from thee, to
do any least thing contrary to thy will and pleasure: neither the favor or
friendship of man, nor yet the flattering enticementes of this world, nor
the vain promotions of the same do move us any whitte from the true and
endless joy, delighte and pleasure which we ought to have in those things
which be agreeable to thy will, and the constante performance of ye same: but
that always to the end of our life we may continue in thy paths, growing and
increasing from faith to faith, from strength to strength, til at length we
shall come to thy everlasting rest. Amen.

A prayer for the estate of the whole Church.
O Lord our God and Heavenly Father, for as much as by thy holy word we are
commanded in our prayers not only to be mindful of our selves, but also of
all others thy children, yea even of our enemies: we commend unto thy Majesty
all thy whole true and catholic Church, and every member thereof: that as it
has pleased thy goodness by the brighte beams of thy holy word, to shine
over the whole world, whereby thou haste expelled, driven away, and caused to
vanishe the dark and mistie clouds of ignorance and superstition, so thou
would vouchsafe by thy holy spirit to touch the hearts of men, that they
may joy fully embrace that thine so high a treasure sent amongst us, that
through our unthankfulness we provoke not thy Majesty in anger to take it
from us. Crush, bruise, and destroy with the breath of thy mouth, the mighty
power of that man of sin, which so proudly exalts himself above all that
is called God. Let not thy simple flock (dear Father) in whose consciences he
of long time has and yet does sit as GOD, be any longer poisoned with his
sweet enticeing poisons: but so lighten their hearts, that they may perceive
his iuglynges, and embrace the sweet and comfortable doctrine of life
everlasting, revealed in thy Glorious Gospel.

And forasmuch as it has pleased thee in mercy above all nations of the earth,
to power down the sweet showers of thy Heavenly Graces upon this our
English nation abundantly, in more plentiful wise watering the same with the
gifts of thy holy Spirit, in promoting thy Gospel, and overthrowing
idolatry, we beseech thee continue thy favor toward the same, and utterly
root out all remnantes, relics and monumentes of idolatry, that thy
Glorious Name may be thoroughly exalted, in sincere, pure, and holy worship.
And as thou haste in mercy from amongst us in this thy Church, utterly
banished all false, venomous and poysonfull doctrine, wherewith the souls of
thy Children heretofore have been wounded to death, and in place thereof haste
placed the true and comfortable doctrine of life everlasting, wherewith the
souls of thy children be fed and nourished to everlasting joy: so in like
mercy and favor we beseech thee, dear Father, establish in the same thy
Church, a true, perfect, and sincere regiment thereof, according to the
prescripte rule of thy blessed word, all fantasies of man's brain, and dreams
of human policy utterly abolished: that thy glorious Majesty only may be
exalted in the light of thy glorious Gospel: and that thy Church may flourishe
and increase, being through thy protection aided, supported, maintained and
defended: we beseech the by thy holy spirit, guide and rule every part and
member thereof, especially thy servant ELIZABETH our Queen, whom thy gracious
favor and merciful providence has appointed a chief member in the same:
under whose wings next unto thy protection it has a chief succor and
supporte. Grant unto her, O Lord, a pure and perfect Zeal, above all
things to promote thy Glory: first and chiefly in laboring and endeavoring
of her self earnestly in wiping away and purging out of thy Church all blots
and deformities, to reduce the same to a pure and sincere form of worship,
agreeing to thy blessed word, utterly to remove all stumbling blocks which
stay and hinder the course of thy Gospel: give her in like manner O Lord, the
spirit of wisdom, discretion, and government, that with equity and justice
she may see this whole Realm, which thou have committed to her charge,
peaceably and quietly governed: that she may studiously labor, that as well
thorough the whole Realm virtue be exalted, and vice abandoned: as especially
in her own house and court, that all wicked vanities of this world, al
licentious and inordinate life, all flattering and dissimulation being utterly
banished, the fear of thy Glorious Majesty may so reign in the hearts of
all within her palace and court, that their lives and conversation may be
agreeable to thy blessed will, in sincerity and true holiness and integrity
of life, that from them, as from the head, may shine purity of life and
conversation, as an example and pattern of true Godliness to the whole
Realm. Preserve her, we beseech thee good Lord, from all conspiracies and
treasons, that if it be thy good will she may have a long and quiet reign over
us, to the benefit of thy Church, and the advancement of thy glory. Indue
the whole counsel, good Lord, with true and perfect wisdom, that in all their
consultations and counsels, having thee present before their eyes, they may
consulte of those things which principally and chiefly may be for the
aduanceme^t of thy glory, and the commodity of thy church, and next for the
quiet peace and gracious government of this realm. So lighten al inferior
Magistrates of this Realm, good Lord, with the brightness of thy holy
Spirit, that understanding thy will, they may zealously defend, maintain and
further the course of the Gospel with the sword of justice, cut off the wicked,
and cherish the godly.

Defend and govern, by thy holy Spirit, the Pastors of thy Church, and
laborers in thy vineyard, that they may zealously, earnestly and diligently
feed thy flock committed unto them, with the food of life thy blessed word,
wherewith their souls may be nourished to Life Everlasting. Increase the
number of them, dear Father, place over every flock a godly, learned and
paineful Pastor, who may painfully and carefully trauail every one in his
charge, to bring thy people (which now alas in most parts do wander and go
astray like lost sheep) to the true knowledge of thee their Lord and God, and
of thy dear son Christ Jesus their Savior. And for thy mercy, we beseech
thee, to take pity upon thy poor and simple flock, root out all ravening
wolves, which have craftily crept into thy sheepefolde and do make havoc of
the souls of thy simple flock. Cast out al hirelings, time seruers, and dumb
dogs, which to fill their bellies only, have thrust themselves among thy sheep,
and do pitifully suffer the flock of Christ thy son, to be deuowred and
scattered of the woolfe. Stir up, good Lord, and place in their rooms
faithful sheepheardes, which diligently, painefully, carefully and earnestly
may labor in thy vineyard, seek to win the souls of thy people, out of the
tyranny and power of satan, to the freedom of thy dear son Christ Jesus our
Lord.

And that thy Church may better be furnished with Godly learned Pastors, we
beseech thee prosper and increase in all Godly knowledge, all Schools of
learning, especially the two Universities Cambridge, and Oxforde: Grant dear
Father, unto all the students of the same, that the chief end of all their
studies may be to the furtheraunce of thy Church, and maintenance of the
common wealth. Bless their studies, dear Father, that all vain studies set
aside, they may so fructify and profit in all profitable and godly sciences,
that hereafter they may become profitable members in thy church, and godly
vpholders of the common wealth.

Grant, good Lord, to all the whole Commons of this Realm, that their hearts
being touched with a sincere fear and reverence of thy heavenly Majesty,
acknowledging thy mercy in placeing over them a Godly Princess, they may
every one in their callings, walk in all true and humble obedience unto her,
in thee and for thee without resistance, tumults, insurrections, conspiracies,
or rebellions: knowing that to resist the higher powers, is to rebel against
thy Majesty. Finally we beseech thy goodness so guide and govern the hearts
of all ye whole Realm of every degree, yt every one in his calling, being by
thy grace supported, may so occupy his talent, that thy Glory in all things
may be advanced, thy Church enlarged, and this whole Realm into sincere
Godliness virtuously reduced.

Moreover we beseech thee (O Lord our God) in mercy behold all those which
suffer persecution for thy glorious words sake, whither it be imprisonmente,
death, or banishment, or whatsoever else: strengthen them good Lord, yt they
having thee always before their eyes, and the glory laid up for the^ in ye
life to come, may continue constant in defe^ding thy truth, without fear of
man or vain allurementes of the world, yt whether it come by life or death,
they may glorify thy Holy name in continuing in ye truth to the end. Preserve
in like manner we beseech thee, all others thy children, whom it has pleased
thee with any other kind of cross to chasten for their amendment, whither by
pestilence, famine, war, poverty, imprisonment, sickness or banishment,
trouble of conscience, vexation of spirit, disquietnesse of mind, want of
spiritual comfort, or whatsoever kind of affliction of body or minds, thou
do try them with: that by thy holy spirit being fully assured, that thou by
this thy correction mindest to call them back to a feeling of their sin, and
due consideration of their life and conversation, that they may patiently abide
thy Fatherly trial, looking for aid, help, and comfort from thee, when it
seems most convenient to thy godly wisdom: and being by thy merciful hand
once delivered, may acknowledge thy singular power and work, giueing al laud
and praise to thy glorious Name: and afterward, all the days of their life,
study to live before thee in sincerity and perfect holiness, even to their
lives end. Amen.

Morning prayer for private houses and Families.
O Gracious God, and loving Father, according to thy commandment, we do here
present our selves before thy Majesty, humbly prostrating ourselves before ye
throne of mercy, acknowledging and confessing from the bottom of our hearts
that we be miserable sinners, daily breaking thy commandments, both in
thought, word, and deed, wherein we justly deserve everlasting damnation,
and to be utterly thrown from thy presence: yet, O Lord, we see thy
goodness again toward us, who not suffering us thus to perish in our
sins, have sent thine own dear Son Jesus Christ, to take upon him
whatsoever is due, to reconcile and make us at one with thee again: In him
therefore, good Lord, and through him do we come unto thee, beseeching thee
for his sake, that we feeling the greeuousnesse of our sins, and groneing
under the burden of them, may feel the release and ease of them, in that we be
through thy holy Spirit assured, and steadfastly believe, that Christ has
borne the burden of them, even for us. Grant, O Lord, that we being assured
hereof in our consciences, may through thy holy Spirit be renewed in the inner
man, to hate, deteste and abhor sin, and to study to live according to thy
blessed will during our whole life.

We do not only pray for our selves, but also for all thy whole Church,
especially such as be persecuted for thy word: grant unto them, that
whither it be by death or life, they may glorify thy Name to their lives end.
Be merciful to this Church of England and Irelande, we beseech thee good
Lord, and preserve every part and member of the same, especially thy Servant
Elizabeth our Queen: grant her all such gifts as be needeful for so high a
calling, to the advancement of thy Glory, and benefit of this common wealth,
to the establishing of a perfect government of thy Church, according to the
prescript rule of thy blessed word, to the rooting out of all superstition and
relics of antichriste, to the governing of her Subjects in all peace and
tranquillity. Defend her, O Lord, from all conspiracies, treasons, and
rebellions, and so work in the hearts of all her Subjects, that knowing her
authority does come from thy Heavenly Majesty, they may with obedient hearts
humbly obey her in thee and for thee. Preserve the whole Counsel and the
Magistrates of the Realm, that being lightened through thy holy Spirit, they
may defend thy truth, suppress wickedness, and maintain equity. Behold
all the Pastors and Preachers of the word, bless their labors, increase
ye number of them, place over every Church a paineful watchman, remove all
idle Lubbers, and confound the power of antichriste, and turn the hearts of
the people that they may be obedient to thy truth. Bless the two
Universities, Cambridge and Oxforde, and all the Studients of the same, with
all Schools of learning. Behold al those that be afflicted with any kind of
cross, that they may profit by thy correction in newness of life. *

Lastly, for our selves here gathered together, we heartily crave at thy hands,
that it would please thee to make us thankful unto thy Majesty, for all thy
loueing kindness showed unto us even from our infancy: especially, that thou
haste this present night delivered us from all dangers both of body and
soul, whereinto many have fallen, as we into like manner should have done, if
we had not been stayed with thy merciful hand: that thou haste also granted
unto us so sweet and comfortable rest, and haste now presently brought us
to the beginning of this day. For these things, good Lord, we yield unto
thee most hearty thanks, beseeching thee to make us more and more daily
thankful unto thy Majesty for them, and pardon our unthankfulness. And as
thou have safely preserved us unto this present hour from all the dangers of
this life: so we beseech thee continue thy favor toward us this day, and the
whole course of our life. Defend us, O Lord, that we now entering into the
affairs of this day, be not drawn away with the vain allurementes of this
world, to sin and wickedness: that we walk not in the shadow of death,
that we be not entangled in the snares of sin, that we stumble not at the
blocks of iniquity, that we finally fall not into the pit of death, and
destruction: but being shadowed under thy wings, we may cheerfully and
constantly go on forward to the end of our course. Grant unto us, O Lord our
God, that this good time which thou grauntest unto us in this life, be not
idely, or vainly of us consumed, but that every one of us may be diligently
exercised in his calling this day, and all our life long, being assured that
thou will once call us to yield an account of our stewardshippe: indue us we
beseech thee, with those gifts and graces which be needeful for us in our
calling, and that with a pure and sincere conscience we may use them to the
benefit of our brethren, and discharge of our own consciences, before thy
Majesty. We beseech thee, O Lord, that in all our consultations, words and
works this day, and the whole course of our life, we may always have thee
present before our eyes, knowing that thou see even the very deep thoughts
of our hearts, which always may be as a bridle to pull us back, that we
neither do, nor yet consent unto any sin or wickedness: but that always we
may be so exercised in the affairs of this life, that we look still to the end
of our course, when it shall please thee to bring us through ye pilgrimage of
this life to our everlasting rest with thy dear Son Jesus Christ our
Savior. In whose name for these mercies and whatsoever thou know to be
needful for us, and for the whole Church, we pray unto thee, as he himself
has taught us in his holy word, saying: Our Father which art. etc.

The Lord bless us and save us, the Lord make his face to shine upon us, and
be merciful unto us, the Lord turn his favorable countenance toward us, and
grant us his peace. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God the
Father, and the most comfortable fellowshippe of the holy Ghost be with us,
preserve and keep us this day and evermore. Amen.

Evening prayer for private houses and Families.
O Gracious God and loving Father. etc. As in the beginning of the morning
prayer, reding so forth, til ye come to this mark. *. Then read this following
for the Evening.

Lastly, for our selves here gathered, we render most hearty thanks to thy
majesty, O Lord, which have hitherto from our infancy, preserved us by thy
mercy from all perils and dangers both of soul and body, whereunto frail
man is subject, that thou have sent unto us al things necessary for this
present life, as health, food, apparel, and such like, which many of thy
dear children do want, being notwithstanding as preciously bought with the
precious blood of thy dear son, as we be, and yet lie in misery and
calamity, oppressed with poverty, nakedness, imprisonement and bannishment,
in which case also, dear Father, thou might have brought us, save only
that thou dealest herein more favorably with us, then with them. For the which
thy loving kindness we give thee hearty thanks, desiring thee, that as thou
have hitherto thus favorably in mercy preserved us by thy protection, and
even presently this day have brought us past all the dangers thereof: so we
beseech thee good Lord, in like favor behold us this night, that we taking
our natural rest and quietness may through thy protection be defended, that
our bodies resting, our souls may be occupied in beholding thy favor and
mercy toward thy children, still looking for the coming of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ for our full redemption. Grant that our sleep be not
immoderate, according to the lust of our flesh, but as much as is sufficient
to refreshe our weak nature: that being thus refreshed, both the body and
the mind may be more able to do their several office and function, in that
vocation wherein thou haste placed us.

Grant that we laying our bodies down to rest, may be thereby put in mind
of our long rest of death: that as we do now lay down our bodies in bed,
so we may be thereby admonished, that hereafter they shall be laid down in
grave, to be consumed to duste, earth, and ashes, from whence they were
taken: That we having this before our eyes, may be stirred up in mind
warely to walk in this our pilgrimage, not knowing when the time shall be of our
departure, but always to be found ready with our lamps of pure faith
clearly burning, that we may be accepted to meet the Bridegroom, when our
mortal, earthly, and corruptible bodies shall be made like to the glorious body
of our Lord and savior Christ Jesus, there to reign with him in perpetual joy
and co^solatio^ together with all the elect children of God, continually lauding
with all the heavenly multitude the glorious Majesty of thee our Lord God and
heavenly Father, in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. For these and whatsoever
else thou know to be needful for us and thy whole Church, we pray unto
thee, as he himself has taught us, saying: Our Father. etc.

The Lord bless us and save us, the Lord make his face to shine upon us,
and be merciful unto us: the Lord turn his favorable countenance unto us,
and grant us his peace. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God
the Father, and the most comfortable fellowshippe of the Holy Ghost, be with
us, preserve and keep us this night and evermore. Amen.

A prayer to be said before the studying or reading of holy Scripture.
O Heavenly Father, what soever I am, what so ever I have, whatsoever I know,
it is only by thy free grace. For by nature I am the child of wrath, and I am
not borne a new of flesh and blood, neither of the seed of man, or of the
will of man. Flesh and blood cannot reveal the mysteries of thy Heavenly
Kingdom unto me: but by thy blessed will I am that I am, and by the same
know I that I know. Therefore, O Father, do I commit into thy hands only,
my salvation. If my knowledge be small, yet I doubt nothing but that I am the
child of thy everlasting kingdom: and therefore by thy mighty power I shall
grow (when it shall be thy good will and pleasure) to a more full and riper
knowledge, as of a more perfect age, wherein my faith shall be fully able to
comprehend and perceive the breadth, deapth, height and largeness of thy
great mercies and gracious promises. But seeing, O Father, this power of full
knowledge and perfect revelation, passes all power natural, and remains
only in thy power, and the light of thy spirit: O Lord do thou whatsoever it
shall please thee, to open unto me and all the rest of thine elect servant
and children, depending upon thee, so much of the light of thy countenance
as may be most for thy Glory and our comfort, yea, and at such time as
shall seem good to thy wisdom and fatherly mercy. In the mean while thus
resting wholly upon thee, neither can I despair, neither will I be to much
careful, although I cannot attain to the knowledge of many of thy works,
neither to the understanding of many places of thy scriptures. But I will
confess unto thee the weakness of my faith, waiting alwais for the further
revealing of thy glorious light to be uttered unto me thy poor servant, when
thou shall think (of thy fatherly benevolence and goodness) meet and
convenient. I knowing most assuredly that thou will pity my weak
imbecillitie and childishe infancy, and cause the same to serve for thy
glory, and my great commodity: seeing that I err as a child before such a
Father, which can not put off thy fatherly pity and compassion, but rather
as thou haste bought me unto thee, to be an heir of the kingdom by the blood
of thy natural son my Savior Jesus Christ: so am I sure that thou will
lighten me in the end with full fruition of the brighte light of thy
countenance, that I may see thee and know thee as this thy son knows thee:
yea, see thee and know thee my Father face to face, and know as I am known.
Thus rest I only in thy hands (O my God) craving of thee to increase my
knowledge in thy holy word, whereby I may know thy good will and pleasure. And
knowing the same, give me, O Lord thy holy Spirit to conduct and lead me in
the same all the days of my life, that in sincerity of faith, and pureness of
living and conversation, thy glorious Majesty may be magnified in me for ever.
Grant this, O Father, for thy dearly beeloued Son our savior Jesus
Christ, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be all honor, glory and
praise, world without end. Amen.

Prayers and thankesgiuinges to be said before and after meat. Prayer before
meat.
O Lord our God and Heavenly Father, in thy beeloued Son Jesus Christ,
work in our hearts true repentance, with increase of a true and lively
faith: make us thankful unto thy Majesty for all thy benefits which we
continually receive at thy merciful hand: grant us the grace, that we may
at this present with thankful hearts as from thy hands receive meat and
drink for the sustenance of our bodies, with moderation use them to thy Glory,
and through thy blessing, receive by them perfect nourishment: and above all we
crave at thy hands, good Lord, the heavenly food of our souls, which never
perishes: that through thy gracious goodness, we may be nourished and
stre^gthened both in soul and body to eternal life, through Jesus Christ our
Savior. Amen.

Thanksgiving after meat.
Eternal God, and merciful Father, we yield unto thee most hearty thanks
for all thy benefits so plentifully bestowed upon us: especially that thou
haste at this present fed and nourished our mortal bodies with meat and
drink: we beseech thee in like manner let our souls feel the sweet taste
of thy heavenly food, that we being fed and nourished at thy hands, both
in soul and body, may in this life walk as it becomes thy children, and in
the life to come, be received to thine eternal Kingdom of glory, through
Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Prayer before meat.
O Merciful and Heavenly Father, who give food to every liueing creature,
and without whom nothing can live, bless and sanctify our meats and
drinks, which we are now about to receive, that they may turn to the
nourishmente of our bodies, whereunto thou haste appointed them: that we
acknowledging thy gracious goodness in providing so liberally for our bodies,
may with cheereful hearts be lifted up earnestly to long after the food of
our souls, whereby we may be fed eternally, through Jesus Christ our
savior. Amen.

A thanksgiving after meat,
O Heavenly Father, for these thy benefits wherewith thou haste now
sufficiently fed our bodies, we beseech thee make us thankful: And as we
feel the sweetness of them pleasant to our bodies: so we beseech thee, good
Lord, that the food of our souls may be as pleasante and comfortable unto
our souls, and that we may with as careful hearts provide for the nourishment
of our souls, as we are careful for our bodies, til it shall please thy
Majesty to bring us to the place, where we shall never hunger nor thirste more,
but live eternally through Christ our Savior. Amen.

A Prayer before meat.
O Lord our God and heavenly Father, which haste provided meat and drink for
the nourishment of our bodies, give us grace to use them reverently as from thy
hands with thankful hearts. And as we do greatly hunger and thirste for
this food of our bodies, so we beseech thee, good Lord, that our souls may
earnestly hunger after the like food and nourishment, that with earnest minds
we may seek to have our souls fedd and refreshed eternally, through our only
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. So be it.

A Thanksgiving after meat.
Wonderful is thy providence, O Lord, in preserving all liueing creatures.
Grant us grace we beseech thee, that with thankful hearts we may
acknowledge thy bountiful goodness, so liberally giving unto us al things
needeful: especially feeding us so plentifully at this present with thy
manifold blessings whereof a great many of our brethren are destitute, as in
like manner we should be, if thou did not deal more liberally with us:
grant us therefore, gracious Lord, that we may be thankful for this thy
goodness, and to be mindeful of them, which have not such abundance to
relieve them: that being all members of one body, we may at length reign with
our head Christ, to whom be al honor and glory woorlde without end. Amen.

A thanksgiving after the receiving of our bodily sustenance, and reading of
some part of Gods holy word our spiritual food.
O Lord our God the only giver of al good gifts, who of thy great mercies have
made us partakers both of the Heavenly gifts of thy holy word, to feed our
minds, and of thine earthly creatures for the necessary sustenance of our
weak bodies: grant we beseech thee that through thy grace, these thy gifts
may be madeperfect unto us: give strength unto our meat, that it may be our
healthful nourishment, not to breed in us any carnal desire of our vain
life, but to enable our bodies to all good works during the time of this
present pilgrimage, that so thy good creatures may be our good relief, so long
as thou will, and so much as thou know to be expedient for us thy servants,
to finishe our days which thou have numbered, in the edifying of thy saints,
and glorifying of thy Holy Name. And because (O Lord) we know nothing of our
selves, but our ignorant hearts are full of darkness, therefore we beseech thee
that this thy Word (which is thine eternal wisdom) that now we have read,
(and wherein we have had our conference) may be in our minds a shining light
of thine only truth, and in our hearts a fruitful seed of our new birth,
so that thine own Image may be happily again restaured in us, and we may be
made before thee a holy and righteous people, by the inward working of thy
gracious spirit, daily strengthening our hearts in earnest love of thy
truth, and careful obedience of thy commandementes, through Jesus Christ our
only Mediator, who in the sacrifice of his own body, has purchased unto us
all thy favor, and has given us this boldness to call upon thee: unto whom
(O Father) with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory world without
end. Amen.

A prayer for all times.
O Lord God Father of mercy and God of all consolation, without whom we have
neither hope nor comfort, we poor wretches and miserable sinners beseech thee
of thy fatherly goodness to look upon us, and so make us partakers of thy
gracious goodness, that we may still increase in all goodness, so that
evermore we may set forth thine honor and glory: let our conversation be
such, that a great many beholding our good works, may glorify thee our
heavenly Father: and so direct our ways, that we may hold forth the
profession of thy Gospel as a lantern to lighten the steps of a great many,
that they may turn to thee, and praise thy name in their visitation. Thus (O
Lord) we beseech thee to deal with us, that in deed we may be vessels of
honor unto thee, now to set forth ye praise of thy name, and after this
transitory life, to behold thy Glory, who have immortality alone, and
dwell in light yt no man has approached unto: remove far from us our sins
and iniquities, that they may not separate between us and thee: blot out of us
our offenses, and make our prayers righteous, that thou maiste favorably
grant our requests: look upon us with thy favorable mercy, that thou may
have pity upon us, and behold us in the righteousness of thy beloved son
Christ Jesus, and yt we may be presented faultlesse in thy sight: and thou
accepting us as holy, we may find the grace evermore to set forth thine
honor and glory, and to speak of thy praises in the mids of all thy
people. Let us love (O Lord) the things that are good, and hate the things
that are evil: let us delight in all things that may please thee, and let us
be grieved with whatsoever is displeasant in thy sight. And to the intent we
may have true understanding and be able to discern between things, what is
good or evil, we beseech thee let thy word dwell plentifully in us, which may
guide our understandings so, yt we may abound in all knowledge, and do
according to that which is righteous. And in this estate of true Christianity,
being instructed in mind, and ready in body to all holy obedience, we
beseech thee make us to grow and increase from grace to grace, from faith to
faith, until we come unto the fullness of age to be perfect members of the
body of Christ, waiting for the blessed hope of thine elect, and sighing in
spirit until the time that thy children shall be revealed. In the mean season
let us sighe with all those that have received the first fruits of thy
Spirit, that these days of sin may cease, that satan be trodden down under
feet, that antichrist may be revealed, yet to many thou sands that be in
ignorance, that the number of thine elect may be full, the body of thy
Saints made perfect, all tears wiped from our eyes, even than when the Son
shall appear again the second time to judge the quick and the dead, which
time (O Lord) send quickly, according to thy good will, and teach us to pray
with all thy Saints, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: grant this (O Father) for
thy Sons sake, in whose name we pray unto thee. And although we be but earth
and ashes, yet we are bold to say unto thee, (the God of all Glory) even as
he has taught us. Our Father which art in Heaven. etc.

E.D.

A prayer for all estates.
O Lord God Father of light, with whom is no change, neither yet shadow of
change, but have established thine appointed counsels, which shall not be changed
for ever: thou (O God) have made among us this diversity of estates and
degrees, according as every common wealth requires, keep us all, we beseech
thee, that we may walk obediently in our calling, and follow the steps that
thou haste set before us, even from the highest to the lowest, let us
accomplish that duty unto which thou haste appointed us, and with a
faithful remembrance of thy promise made of old to our Father Abraham, that
thou art his exceeding great reward, we may likewise depend on thy providence,
and seek not any shameful ways to get our living, wandering from ye
righteousness of our vocation, into the manifold errors of sin and
iniquity: look upon us (O Lord) and enrich us with thy grace, make us obedient
to our inferiors, meek toward our enemies, faithful to our friends, true
and just toward all men, that we may dwell steadfastly rooted in the hope of
thine elect, until thou shall make an end of all our labors: look upon our
most excellent Queen, and her Honorable Counsel, and as thou have called
them to the highest room, so give unto them the greatest measures of grace,
that they faithfully dispense the talentes committed unto them: lead them with
the good king David into thy Sanctuary that they may see thy loving kindness
which is better then life, and say with the Prophet: Al flesh is grass, and
the glory of man is as the flower of the field, and so consecrate themselves
to do thy will, offer up their bodies to be holy, lively, and reasonable
sacrifices unto thee, that they may be nurses and noursfathers unto thy
Church: look also we beseech thee upon thy ministers whom thou haste
appointed to the preaching of thy Gospel, make them (O God) faithful
dispensers of thy mysteries, without respect of persons to do the work unto
the which thou have appointed them, that they may convert sinners, and have
their glory perfect in the day of Christ: and knit us together in peace and
love, that we may be full of compassion one toward an other, to rejoice with
the^ that rejoice, and mourn with them that mourn, especially to instruct one
another in the ways of righteousness, that by our mutual healpe we may the
better withstand our enemy, and dwell, safe in hope of thine elect, till our
days shall be full, and we shall walk the ways of all the world, which
time we beseech thee bring us happily unto, even for thy Sons sake we
beseech thee, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost three persons and one God,
be all honor and glory now and for evermore. Amen, Amen.

A form of Morning prayer necessary for this present time for Godly
Christians, to use in their houses and families.
WE most humbly thank thee (O Heavenly Father) for the sweet and quiet rest
that we have had this night, for the loving and favorable deliverance out of
all dangers both of body and soul, which we justly deserve to be thrown
into for our manifold sins: for that thou have raised us up this morning,
we pray thee to go before us: and for as much as thou see our sluggishnesse
and drowsines, it would please thee (good Lord) to pull us after thee, and to
show us those ways, which thou have appointed us to walk in. And as thou
renuest this morning, so renew thy mercies: and as thou causest the Sun
comfortably to shine to our bodily eyes, so vouchesafe (we pray thee) to be Sun
unto our bodies and to our souls, by the beams of thy holy Spirit, and Starr
of thy blessed Word, shining into the mids of our hearts, to drive away all
the night and darkness of all profaneness: to chase away all want of true
fear of thy good Majesty: and in place thereof, bring in love toward thy
Glory, zeal of thy House, love also toward our brethren: especially those
that thou above the rest commendest unto us, that we may love them with that
love, wherewithal thou haste first loved us: which is pure, vncorrupt,
vehement, and everlasting: and therefore we pray thee to rid our hearts of
al naughty and corrupt love, and whatsoever is unmeet to be in those vessels
that are to serve such a mighty Prince as thou art: and in those houses
wherein it pleases thy Majesty by thy holy Spirit to dwell: and therefore on
the other side (good Lord) chase away from us all rancor and malice, all pride,
enuiousnesse, disdainfulness, uncharitableness, unnaturalness, unkindness,
and whatsoever is contrary to that love, whereof thou have given us a lively
example in our savior Jesus Christ: unto ye which example, grant (good Lord)
that we may always have our eyes lifted up, and therein holden, and caused
thereby to profit, until such time as we come to that perfection, whereunto
thou haste appointed we shall come. Vouchsafe moreover by the coming of the
self same Spirit, to scatter in us all the night and darkness of ignorance,
and forgetfulness, and of all those things which perteine to the clearer and
fuller knowledge of thy truth. Take from us all negligence, all want of
judgment and discretion, and deliver us from all those things, which thou
know to be hinderaunces to us, either to walk in that great calling of
Christianity whereunto thou have called us, or in those several and
particular callinges wherein thou have placed every one of us: that we may
walk so (good Lord) both in the one and in the other, that thy Name may be
glorified in both. Amen.

Evening prayer.
O Lord prepare our hearts to pray, bow down thine ears (dear Father) and
hear us, open thine eyes and look upon us for thy dear Son Jesus Christ's
sake, and receive our humble confession that we make to the against our selves,
which have broken al thy laws, and therefore deserve to have thy heavy
judgments powered upon our heads to our utter destruction, if thou should
enter into judgment with the least of our sins, whereof we have so great
and infinite thousands: notwithstanding, we pray thee to turn away thy face
from our sins, and for Jesus Christ's sake to forgive us all that is past,
and grant that we may have the assurance of the forgiveness of our sins,
sealed up by thy Holy Spirit in our consciences, whereby we knowing that we are
at one with thee, may have our hearts kindled with thy love so fervently, as it
may waste in us all that is against thy holy Will. And for this cause we
beseech thee, Lord, to go forward with the work of our new birth, that thou
have begun in us, and never take away thy hand, until such time as thou
have made an end of it: and to this end, we beseech thee to slay in us every
day, more and more, the old man with his concupiscences, nailing them to the
cross of thy dear Son Jesus Christ: and causing us to feel the power of
his Passion in our bodies and in our souls, that we being partakers thereof,
may come also to the fellowship of his holy Resurrection: not only in that we
shall once appear before thee, having these our base bodies changed, and made
like unto his Glorious body, but also that we may in the mean time rise from
the death of sin to all newness of life, and that our good works may so
shine before men, that they seeing them may glorify thee our Heavenly Father:
not only they that are of the self same religion with us, but those also that
are enemies unto thy truth, may rather in the time of their calling by the
voice of thy Gospel, yield themselves to be one sheepefolde with us. And we
most humbly thank thee (O Heavenly Father) for all thy loving kindenesses
bestowed upon us from time to time, and especially for that old and ancient
Love, wherewithal thou haste loved us before the beginning of the world: for
that also that thou calling us by the voice of thy holy Gospel in that good
time that thou appointedst for us, have given us faith, hope* and love, and all
other graces which thou know to be needful for us: which we beseech thee
to increase in us with mighty increases, according to that thou see we have
need of, having regard to our manifold enemies, that we have to wrestle
with: and that we have not to strive with flesh and blood, but against the
devils themselves. And therefore considering their strength and our weakness,
their craft and our simplicity, their watchfulness and our sluggishnesse,
their long experience and our rawnesse, their preparation and our nakedness,
and that we have not only nothing to help us, but also do carry about us our
own co^cupiscences, ready to betray us into the hands of our enemies, it may
please thee to furnishe us from above, giving us the strength of thy holy
Spirit, in the inner man, reaching unto us the complete harness of thy
Grace, wherewith we being armed on both sides, may be prepared at all assayes
against all assaults of our enemies. And for as much as in this weakness
we oftentimes give back, and sometimes run away, we pray thee (O Lord) that
with the hand of Faith, we may lay hold on the victory of our Savior Jesus
Christ: that albeit we be not able to overcome in our own persons, yet
notwithstanding we may overcome in His, who has ouercommed for us all, and so
be partakers of those promises that thou have knit unto that glorious victory.
And we most humbly thank thee also for those graces both of the body and
soul which perteine to this present life: desiring thee to increase them upon
us, and in us, so far forth as thou see we have need of to thy Glory, the
commodity of others, and our own comfortes: therefore we beseech thee,
Lord, to teach us with thy holy Spirit the lawful use of them: that thou
would not suffer our hearts to be rooted in them, but that at all times we
may be willing to part from them. And whenever it shall please thee to call
for us, we may willingly go unto thee, as children to their dear Fathers,
strangers unto their own Country, and members of the body unto their Head:
and so much the gladder, by how much thou Lord art better then all the men
in the world, and the Kingdom that thou haste prepared, better then all the
Kingdoms thereof.

An addition to the former morning prayer, as time and leisure shall serve
WE pray not only for our selves (O most merciful Father) but for all those
that thou haste appointed to eternal life: beseeching thee to gather the
number of those that are to be gathered, those that thou haste already called,
thou would always keep: and to this end (good Lord) raise up faithful
Ministers both of thy Church and common weal, whose hearts thou would
fill with all Graces of thy holy Spirit meet for their callings, meet also
for these dangerous times: root out from among thy Church, all ravening and
devouring Beasts, which to fill their own bellies, destroy thy flock: ease
thy self of al hirelings and idle shepheardes, which have no care nor skill
to feed thy flock with the wholesome food of thy blessed word, nor to rule
them with that equity wherewithal thou will have thy people to be ruled:
those Pastors that thou haste given, it would please thee to increase the
number of them: those that are fallen a sleep and carried away with the
corruptions of these times, that thou would awake, letting them understand
the charge that thou haste committed unto them, the trust that thou haste put
them in, and the account that thou will take at their hands. Be gracious (O
Lord) unto this Land of ours, and enter not into judgment with the horrible
sins of it, namely, the contempt and light esteeming of thy holy Word, so
many years offered unto us, and we being trusted withal, so many Nations
better then we being passed by, which would have brought forth the fruit
thereof more then we have done: and we not only have brought forth no good
fruit, but rotten and unsavory, to provoke thy Majesty withal: not
withstanding all these our sins, it would please thee in that love,
wherewithal thou haste first loved us, when we hated thee, and in that long
patience wherein thou haste hitherto borne with us, and do yet bear, and
tarriest for our repentance: to grant us hearty and earnest repentance, our
hearts being effectually touched with thy holy Spirit, striking these rocky
hearts of ours, that they may be resolved into rivers of tears for our
sins, making them soft and meek to receive the print of thy holy Word, and
seal of thy blessed Spirit, writing with thy finger thine own laws in them,
so, that thou may read thine own hand, acknowledge thine own seal, and
so pass by us, when thou shall bring thy iudgmente upon the face of the
Earth, for the iniquities thereof: whereof thou haste given, and still give,
from time to time diverse tokens, which we beseech thee may be profitable unto
us, whilst first of all we acknowledge thy hand striking us, and thy counsel
calling us thereby to repentance, that thy heavier judgments do not fall
upon us to our utter destruction.

Moreover, we thank thee (O Lord) for that it has pleased thee to be the
watch man, and as it were the spy of this Church and common wealth, and
haste foreseen all the storms, and treasons coming against it, and against
thine annoincted our Sovereign who^e thou in mercy have appointed to rule over
it, and haste scattered them and brought them to naught, and haste pursued
certain of thine enemies and ours unto death, beseeching thee to continue
this watchful and careful eye over us, still to do us good, and to pursue the
rest of thine enemies and ours unto the grave giving notwithstanding
repentance unto them, unto whom thou haste left place of repentance. And to
this end, raise up the hearts of our most Gracious Queen and her honorable
Counsel thy Magistrates, that as they sit in thy seat, and are called by
thy Name, so they may execute thy justice, which thou so well approuest of,
whereof also thou will require a streighte account at their hands. We desire
thee also to show these thy Graces to all other Churches of thine, namely thy
Church of Scotland, that it may enjoy that peace that thou haste given it:
and grant that the same be referred to that end wherefore thou haste given
it: namely, to the full establishment of the throne of thy dear Son our
Savior Jesus Christ, and to the building of his Kingdom there. We beseech
thee also for the Churches, which thy hand has planted long since: especially
those, from whom we have received knowledge in time of our ignorance, places
of refuge in time of persecution: that it would please thee to continue thy
loving kindness toward them, and therefore cause them to continue their
faith toward thee, and obedience toward thy holy Word. And whenever it
shall be thy pleasure, to try them with any kind of affliction, it would
please the to grant unto them, that they may put their trust in thee, having
regard to the truth of thy promises, and to the good experience that they have
of thy help in times past, and thereby conceive comfort and hope (O Lord)
even of life in death, and of Salvation in destruction. We pray the also (good
Lord) that we may have the feeling of the miseries of our Brethren, as members
of the same body, and those that live by the same Spirit. And therefore we
pray thee, that according to the manifold troubles that thou shall visit them
with, it would be thy good pleasure, to measure out thy grace in such
plentiful manner, that thy children may patiently bear, and joyfully attend,
for the good hour wherein thou will pull them out of al their troubles. And
especially we pray thy Majesty for our Brethren that are afflicted for thy
Gospel sake: namely, those that suffer imprisonment or otherwise in any nation,
for the clearer testimony of it: that it would please thee to give them
patience in all their troubles, wisdom and mouths to defend thy cause,
against all those that rise up against it: that thou would bless their
travels and sufferings for that, for which they are taken: which is, to give a
freer course of thy Gospel into all places. And therewithal we beseech thee
for the churches of France and Flaunders, which are so miserably racked and
torn in sunder, and which are almost consumed with these fiery trials: that
it would please thee to look upon their sighings and groneings, the tears
that fall from their eyes continually, the blood that is shed in all parts of the
land, ye bodies that lie unburied, to be meat to the fowls of the air, and
Fishes of the Sea, the lonenesse of wives lacking their husbands, children
their Fathers, and every friend his freende. And for as much as those things
are come upon them for thy Names sake, let it be thy good pleasure to help
them, considering that they are forsaken of all their friends round about:
and therefore pray thee that thou would not look upon our sins, nor the
sins of our forefathers, whereby we deserve not only this correction, but
utter destruction, as Sodom and Gomorra: but rather to look upon thy mercies
which were before them: whereby thou have said, that although we do offend,
and thou do correct us, yet thou will not take away thy mercies from us, but
wilt leave a remnant which thou will multiply, and make as the Stars of the
Heaven, and as the sands of the Sea. Look also (O Lord) upon the
outrageousnesse and cruelty, unfaithfulness, and blasphemy of the enemies,
wherewithal they blaspheme thee, and provoke thee to thy face, and therefore
in thine own cause, and for thine own sake, take the matter into thine own
hands, and pay into the bosoms of thine enemies double and treble of that
they have given to thee. Notwithstanding, those amongst them, that belong to
thine holy election, hasten their calling, that afterward thy judgment may
hasten upon the earth, and the inhabitants thereof may learn to know thee by
thy judgments, that would not understand and come to thee, by the loving
calling of thy Gospel. We pray thee (O Lord) for our brethren that are up in
arms in both those countries: that thou would go before them, and come
behind them, and on every side of them: cover their heads in the day of
battle, teach their hands to fight, and their fingers to war: give them
wisdom and valiantness, and good success in all their enterprises: strike a
dizinesse and maaze of spirit into the enemies hearts, and take away from them
all force, and disappoint al their counsels. And upon our brethren in
Flaunders, we beseech thee that thou would comfort them over all the
troubles that they have received, and breaches that have been made in upon
them: and where there are new forces every day gathered, new sleights invented
to destroy them, it may please thee, to scatter their forces, and bring their
sleightes to nothing. Yea, grant also (O Lord) that that which they have
devised against thy children, may come upon their own heads. And for our
Brethren in France we beseech thee (O Lord) what streights so ever they be
in, thou would deliver them: and although they be forsaken in the judgment
of all the world, and in their own judgments, notwithstanding thou that haste
the issues of death in thine own hands, deliver those that are appointed to
death. And finally we most humbly thank thee, for that it has pleased thee
to keep us this day, and all the days and times of our lives: beseeching thee,
that thou would receive us this night into thy holy keeping, that we may
have quiet rest, not of bodies alone, but of our souls also, resting from all
those things that are contrary to thy most holy will, attending while thou
raisest us up in the morning, to do all those things that thou haste
appointed us. These things we desire of thee, and al other things (which thou
know to be more needful for us, and thy whole Church, better then we
ourselves do know) for Jesus Christ's sake: saying the same prayer, that he
himself has taught us. Our Father. etc.

A prayer for the Queen.
O Gracious Lord, and most merciful father, we acknowledge thee the Lord of
Lords, and the King of Kings, creating at the beginning, and ruling all
things evermore in heaven and earth, according to thy wonderful wisdom and
power: and our selves to be thy poor servants, the work of thy hands, and
the sheep of thy pasture, subjected to thy high Majesty, and depending upon
thy fatherly providence for all things. Nevertheless, seeing thou in thy
wisdom annoyntest Kings and Queens, appoyntinge them to rule over thy people,
to sit as Lieuetenantes in thy seat, to minister justice, and most of all, as
Fathers and Nurses to maintain and cherish thy Church: commaundinge us not
only to obey and honor them, but moreover to pray for the^, as watching over
us for our good: we therefore beseech thee for thy great names sake, and for
Jesus Christ's sake, to show thy mercy to all Kings and Princes, that maintain
thy glorious Gospel: but especially we pray thee to bless our gracious
Queen, in all spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus, and in all temporal
blessings, according to thy good pleasure, that in the great measures of thy
effectual Law she may more and more find great increases of virtue, and
wisdom, and strength in Christ Jesus to the faithful and happy discharge of
her duty: that her holiness, and joy, and zeal of thy house may be multiplied
and everlasting.

And, seeing it has pleased thee of thy singular mercy, to give her this
especial honor, first to suffer for thy Glorious truth, and afterward
miraculously delivering her out of the hands of her enemies, to set a Crown
upon her head, and to make her the instrument to advance thy Glory and
Gospel, for which she suffered, and to bring it out of darkness into light,
out of persecution into this great and long peace: as we give thee most hearty
thanks for this singular benefit, so we beseech thee to make her and us
evermore thankful for it, and in thy good pleasure still to preserve her for
the continuance of these blessings toward us, with all increase from time to
time, to thy Glory, the benefit of the Church, and her infinite peace in
Christ Jesus, the Prince of Peace. And furthermore we pray thee for her, and
the estate, that such as be enemies of the Gospel, and her enemies also, for
the defense thereof, may not despise the peace offered them to repentance, but
that they may account thy long suffering, and her peaceable and vnblouddie
government an occasion of salvation to their souls, and unfeigned love to the
truth, and their merciful sovereign. Otherwise if they still remain
disobedient to the truth, disobedient to her highness, and dangerous to the
state, then (O GOD of our Salvation) as thou haste discovered them, so discover
them still, as thou haste prevented them, so prevent them still, and let their
eyes wax weary with looking, and their hearts faint with waiting for the
coming of that, which yet comes not, neither let it come (O Lord) we
beseech the, but a blessed, and a long reign to her, and peace to Sion for
evermore.

Also (dear Father) so bless, so love, so in thy Spirit sanctify and keep
her, that she may in the Spirit of counsel and fortitude so rule that other
sister also, namely this her Common wealth, that they may flourish together,
and grow up together as Palm trees, in beauty, and in strength, giueing aid
and help one to another, that in the Church the Glory of God may appear, as
the Sun in his brightness, and that the land may flow with milk, and
honey, and true peace abou^d therein as in the triumphant reign of Debora.

These graces (O Lord) are great, and we miserable sinners, unworthy of the
least of them: therefore look not to us but to thy self, not to our
iniquities but to thy great mercies, acceptinge the death and passion of thy
son, as a full ransom for all our offenses: throwing the^ into the bothome
of the sea, and making his cross and resurrection effectual in us to all
obedience and godliness as becomes thy Saints, that to all other thy good
blessings toward our gracious Sovereign, this may be added, that she
governs blessedly, over a blessed people, a people blessed of the Lord, and
beloved of the Lord, and that thy graces may abound as the waves of the sea,
in the Prince and in the people, in the Church and in the common wealth, from
day to day, til the day of our translation into ye kingdom, where justice
inhabiteth, where we also shall inhabit and reign with thee, according to thy
promise, for ever. Grant us these things (O merciful father) for thy dear
son our Lord Jesus Christ his sake, in whose name we crave them at thy
merciful hand, prayinge furthermore for them, as he has taught us to pray.

Our father which art. etc.


