THE ELEMENTS OF LOGIC By PETER DV MOVLIN.

Translated out of the French Copy by NATHANAEL DE-LAVVNE, Bachelour of Arts
in Cambridge.

With the Authors approbation.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for Nicholas Bourne, at the Royal Exchange. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Robert Debney, Esquire, Mayor of the City of
Norwich, Sir Thomas Hyrne, Knight, Sir Peter Gleane, Knight, and the rest of
the Worshipful Justices of Peace, with the Sherifs and Aldermen of the City
of Norwich.
Right Worshipful and right Worthy SENATORS;
SOme ignorant People imagining Logic to be nothing else but a kind of
Sophistry to deceive the simple, have not spared to cast aspersions upon this
noble Art, and also upon the public Schools where it is taught; affirming
that such as were sent thither did but learn to turn white into black, and
black into white, to serve their own purposes, and to make people believe what
they list. I wish that such men would take the pains to read over this Book,
or at least consider but the definition and nature of Logic here set down in
the very first lines of the same, and then I suppose they will easily perceive
that they have but small reason to speak against the rule of reason. The best
things may be abused; and so may Logic by a contentious caviling spirit: but
the fault is not to be imputed to the thing, no more then drunkenness to good
Wine; but to the person, as good meats are corrupted by a bad stomach, or
sweet oil by a stinking vessel For Logic teaches not to practice quirkes
and deceits, but to discover and avoyde them; as the last lines of this book
do show. All Judicious Authors both sacred and profane have ever honored
this Art, and endowed it with right noble Titles. They have styled it the Art
of Arts, the science of sciences, Dounhami Orat: ad auditores.
the learning of learnings, the chief of all knowledges, the instrument of
instruments, the hand of Philosophy, an Art sent from God, yea and said that
God himself is (...), the best Logician: for indeed He is the best and truest
Rule of all reason and understanding. Which being that faculty that Logic
labors to perfect, this Art is so much more excellent then all other Arts
and Sciences, by how much the understanding surpasses other faculties and
powers of soul and body. It is the mould and frame into the which all other
Arts and Professions must be cast, and without which they are no arts. It
frames it self and them, and tries them all by the infallible Rules of Truth,
Justice, and Prudence, termed by the Greeks (...), and (...). It is the lively
spring of invention, the tribunal of judgment, and the best Art of memory.
And say that a man be of the soundest brain and best natural parts that can
be, yet he may be bettered by this Art of Logic. For Art perfects Nature. And
indeed without this help, nothing can be so wittily and readily invented, nor
so truly and confidently affirmed, nor so methodically and orderly disposed,
nor so well and safely remembered. This is the only Art which diving into the
depth of man's understanding, teaches how to teach, and how to learn, and
makes a man know that he knows; as the eye sees that it does see, by
reflection upon a looking Glass.

Now considering that every man has a special interest in the use of natural
reason, why should any man envy another the sight and knowledge of this Art,
which should direct it. The learned Author having long since published a very
excellent Logic in Latin for the Schools, has notwithstanding thought it not
amiss to give his Countrymen this other in their vulgar Language. I hope
therefore that sheltring my self under the Shield of so judicious a Precedent,
I shall easily escape the darts of such as would carpe at this my Translation
of it out of the French into English; seeing it may as well profit the English
as the French. And howsoever our Country wanted not this Art already in
English, yet the more Candles the better light. I will not here enter upon the
commendation of this learned man, or of his Work: I should but lessen his
worth by the meaness of my person and skill, and as it were light a Candle to
the Sun.

I had rather turn my speech unto You, (worthy Senators,) unto whom I have
emboldened my self to Dedicate these first fruits of my Studies, humbly
entreating your Worships to accept of this my poor labor, as a public
testimony of my desire to be thankful unto you all, for that it pleased your
worthy Senatehouse to choose me out of your Grammar Free-Schoole, and to send
me as your poor Scholar to Corpus Christi College in Cambridge in the year
1618. Thus craving pardon for my boldness, hoping your kind acceptance, I
shall still pray for your Worships long lives, and happy government of this
famous City, resting

Your Worships in all Christian duty to be commanded, NATHANAEL DE-LAVVNE.

The Authors Epistle. TO MY LORD FREDERICK MAVRICE de la Tour, Prince of Sedan;
Son and heir of the high and mighty Prince HENRY de de Tour, Duke of
Bouillon, first Marshall of FRANCE, etc.
MY LORD,
That which the hand is among Instruments, the same is Logic among other Arts
and Sciences. For as the hand is a general Instrument that handles all other
instruments: So Logic is a general Instrument, the knowledge whereof serves
to handle all other knowledges, and to make a skillful use of them. And as it
is the property of Art to polish and perfect Nature: So it is the property of
this Art to polish and direct natural reason. For there is a certain natural
Logic, which man uses naturally, without any art; even the unlearned sort
will sometimes make a Syllogism unawares. But Philosophy, having searched out
all the secrets of natural reason, has observed the causes of a good
Discourse, and has set down rules to that purpose,

Wherein appears the excellency of this Art above the rest. For seeing that
man is discerned from a beast by the use of reason: other Arts and Sciences
frame man as he is a Citizen, or a Magistrate, or a Lawyer, or a Physician; but
Logic frames man as he is man, and makes him after a sort a more reasonable
creature by the right use of reason.

But this Art has chanced to fall into bad hands, that have robbed it of her
natural ornaments, and by a strange Metamorphosis have turned it into a faggot
of dry thorns, which pricketh on every side; and in stead of drawing the rules
thereof from natural reason, and fitting them for the use of man; they have
entangled it with Metaphysicall questions, which are like unto Crabs, where
there is much pickling, but little meat, and are for no use, neither civil,
nor religious.

This inveterate evil, which by custom is turned into nature, would require a
skilfuller Physician, and a quieter mind then mine is now, and a calmer season
then this wherein we are. Notwithstanding being cast upon this place by the
tempest, as a planke of the general shipwreck, and brought to a sorrowful
rest, I have bestowed certain hours upon this Work, and have endeavored to
give a milder look and countenance to this Art, plucking those thorns from
it, which it had gotten in the Schools; and clothing it with a French habit,
that it might no longer walk in France like a stranger. For these many Ages
past it has been commonly taught in a most barbarous and thornie Latin, as if
sweetness and elegancie could not stand together with soliditie.

If the public receive any benefit out of this my labor, it shall be wholly
beholding to my Lord the Duke your Father for it. Who having received me into
his house, and given me a favorable entertainment, with all kind of respect
and benefits, has exhorted me to undertake this task, and to teach you the
Precepts thereof; wherein I have taken a singular delight. For, besides that it
was a great honor to me to do you any service, it has also given me the
occasion to try your wit; which I have observed to be endowed with a strong
imagination, and a solid judgment, and which is not discouraged through
difficulties: and by a laudable curiosity will not be satisfied but with
reason, and where the same is not evident enough, mooveth doubts of it self.
Whence it is easy to conceive how great the dexterity of your wit will be,
when time and necessity shall give you occasion to make use of it in things of
a higher and more important nature.

The fear of God being joined to this so quick and judicious a spirit, which
has planted in your heart a hatred of vice, and moved it with a holy
ambition, to consecrate your life to the service of God, what may we not hope
of such a disposition, which God has so great^y favored? especially
considering that you are brought up in a family, whence all bad examples, and
all idle words are banished, and where the service of God is carefully
maintained: and have before your eyes the example of my Lord your Father, who
among Princes is a notable pattern of wisdom, of great experience, of
singular understanding, and of wise government: whose courage rouseth it self
against adversity, and whose mind is not daunted through affliction. To whom
nature has given more than others have gotten by study and industry, having
a natural facility to compass that, which others by long meditation cannot
attain unto. Whose words are to you as dai^y lessons, and his wise actions as
a continual pattern.

He it is from whom you have received, that Learning is a goodly ornament to a
Prince. Because he that guides others must have the clearer sight; and that he
must have most knowledge, that has most employment. There being nothing more
unbeseeming a Prince, then, to be inferior to the most part of his Subjects
in understanding and good knowledge, and to owe all the preferment he has to
his birth, and nothing to his virtue; and who to judge aright of things, must
search into another man's brain for that which he should find in his own.
This happens unto such Princes as have spent all their younger years in
learning how to manage horses, rather then to govern the minds of men, who
are creatures a thousand times more unruly and untamed. Whose outword behavior
is taught, whilst their souls are left untaught: who employ months and
years in hunting after wild beasts, whilst they themselves are caught by
domestical beasts, that is to say, by flatterers, that entangle them in vices.
Who are taught to live, as if their Subjects were made for them, whereas they
are made for the good of their Subjects; and to remember that they are Princes,
but not to call to mind, that they are men subject to the same infirmities:
and that having received of God more graces then others, they have the greater
account to give up unto him; and that being the image of God upon earth, they
ought to strive to be like unto him, not only in Justice, clemency,
liberality, and foresight; but chiefly in that GOD reigns over his
Subjects, not for his own good, but for theirs.

Now when I speak of Learning, I do not mean a laborious knowledge, busying
it self about words or swelling Discourses, or about heaping up of much Latin.
But I am of opinion that the true learning of a Prince consists in the
knowledge of God, and of the world, and of himself, and of the affairs of his
own Estate and of his neighbors; and to be a Scholar of the dead, I mean, to
search in Histories the examples of wisdom; and to learn the trade of a
Prince, which is the hardest of all. Because it is a hard matter to walk
steadily upon the top of a very high place, the brain of him easily turning
that is very high mounted. And also because the actions of Princes are most
controuled, and their life most crossed, and their faults most exposed to view,
and that they authorize vices by their example.

These instructions, my Lord, are familiar unto you, and you want no
domestical helps. Notwithstanding I have thought that you would not take it
amiss, if I endeavored to contribute somewhat thereunto: and that by this my
labor, as by a small evidence, I should testify my acknowledgment of the
honor which I have received of my Lord your Father, and how earnestly I pray
unto GOD for the prosperity of your most illustrious house, and more
particularly for your self, my Lord, as being

Your most humble and most obedient servant, DV MOVLIN.

A Table of the Chapters.
The first Book, which treats of SIMPLE NOTIONS.
Chapter. 1. WHat Logic is. How many sorts of Notions there be in the mind of
man. Page. 1. Chapter. 2. How many sorts of Simple Notions. Of Singulars and
vniversals. Also of Substance and Accident. Page. 2. Chapter. 3. The names of
the ten Categories. Page. 6. Chapter. 4. Of Substance. Page. 7. Chapter. 5.
Of Quantity. Page. 9. Chapter. 6. Of Quality. Page. 13. Chapter. 7. Of
Relation and Relatiues. Page. 18. Chapter. 8. Of Acting or Action. Page. 22.
Chapter. 9. Of Suffering or Passion. Page. 25. Chapter. 10. Of Where. Page. 26.
Chapter. 11. Of When. Page. 28. Chapter. 12. Of Situation. Page. 29. Chapter.
13. Of Habit. Page. 29.
The second Book. Of the places of Invention.
Chapter. 1. HOw these Simple Notions are of use for an argument. Page. 31.
Chapter. 2. Of the Genus. Page. 33. Chapter. 3. Of the Species. Page. 36.
Chapter. 4. Of the difference. Page. 38. Chapter. 5. Of Proper. Page. 39.
Chapter. 6. Of the Accident. Page. 41. Chapter. 7. Of the Whole and Parts.
Page. 43. Chapter. 8. Of Definition. Page. 48. Chapter. 9. Of Division. Page.
52. Chapter. 10. Of things coupled, called in Latin Coniugata. Page. 55.
Chapter. 11. Of Cau^es and Effects. Page. 57. Chapter. 12. Of Etymol^gie. Page.
69. Chapter. 13. Of things Alike or unlike. Page. 71. Chapter. 14. Of things
Opposite. Page. 75. Chapter. 15. Comparison of things. Page. 82. Chapter. 16.
Comparison of the Probability, or Likelihood. Page. 85. Chapter. 17. Of
testimony. Page. 88. Chapter. 18. Of the Use or Practice of the Precedent
Doctrine. Page. 91.
The third Book. Of Enuntiations.
Chapter. ^. What an Enuntiation is, and the parts thereof. Page. 105.
Chapter. ^. Of the kinds of Enuntiation. Page. 109. Chapter. ^. Of the
Opposition of Enuntiations. Page. 113. Chapter. 4. Of the Conversion of
Enuntiations. Page. 117.
The fourth Book. Of a Syllogism.
Chapter. 1. WHat a Syllogism is. Also what a Conclusion is, and a Question or
Problem, and of the parts thereof. Page. 121. Chapter. 2. How to make a
Syllogism, and of the parts of it. Page. 123. Chapter. 3. The natural reason
upon which a Syllogism is grounded. Page. 126. Chapter. 4. Of the Figures of a
Syllogism. Page. 127. Chapter. 5. General Rules common to all Figures. Page.
128. Chapter. 6. Particular Rules to each Figure. Page. 134. Chapter. 7.
Certain Artificial words, which serve to show how many ways we may argue in
each Figure, and the means to convert the second and third figure into the
first. Page. 142. Chapter. 8. Of an Enthymeme. Page. 146. Chapter. 9. Of
Induction and Example. Page. 148. Chapter. 10. Of the Enumeration of parts.
Page. 150. Chapter. 11. Of a Dilemma. Page. 152. Chapter. 12. Of a Sorites or
heaping Syllogism. Page. 154. Chapter. 13. Of Conditional or Hypotheticall
Syllogismes. Page. 155. Chapter. 14. Of Disjunctiue Syllogismes. Page. 157.
The fifth Book. Of the Masterpiece of Logic called DEMONSTRATION.
Chapter. 1. What Science is. Page. 161. Chapter. 2. What a Demonstration, or
a Demonstratiue Syllogism is. Pages. 163. Chapters. 3. What questions are
demonstrable. Pages. 164. Chapter. 4. What the propositions of a demonstratiue
Syllogism ought to be. Page. 166. Chapters. 5. A special note how to know a
perfect demonstration. Pages. 169. Chapters. 6. Of an Imperfect demonstration.
Pages. 170.
The sixth Book. Of Sophismes or Fallacies.
Chapters. 1. OF Fallacies in words. Pages. 175. Chapters. 2. Of fallacies in
the matter. Pages. 181. Chapters. 3. The fallacy by Accident. Pages. 182.
Chapters. 4. The fallacy which takes a thing as simply true which is not so,
but only in some respect. Pages. 183. Chapters. 5. The fallacy supposing that
which is questioned. Pages. 184. Chapters. 6. The fallacy of Inconsequence.
Pages. 184. Chapters. 7. The fallacy whereby a thing is taken for a cause,
which is not. Pages. 186. Chapters. 8. The fallacy which mingleth many
Interrogations, as if they were but one. Pages. 187. Chapters. 9. The fallacy
which is committed through the Ignorance of that, which contradicts the
question. Pages. 188. Chapters. 10. Of the faults in Syllogismes. Pages. 190.
ERRATA.
PAge 42. line 19. for by blunt horns, read by the blunt horns. p. 49. l.
23. for Now, r. None. p. 50. l. 13. for ana xe, read an axe. page 55. between
line 10. and 11. put Accidents into other Accidents. p. 80. l. 7. for certain,
r. contrary.

THE ELEMENTS OF LOGIC.
The first Book, which treats OF SIMPLE NOTIONS.
The first Chapter. What Logic is. How many sorts of Notions there be in the
mind of man.
LOGIC is an Art which gives rules to argue well, and to discern truth from
falsehood.

To be able to form an argument, and to frame a good reason, we must know, that
all the Notions or Conceptions in man's understanding are, either Simple, or
Compound.

Simple Notions are such, as are expressed by one word only; As, horse, man,
whitenes, to see, to run, etc.

Compound Notions are such, as are expressed by an Enuntiation or Proposition,
which affirms or denies something; As, Man is reasonable. God is no liar.

Of many Propositions knit together, an Argument or Syllogism is: made, by
those means and rules, which shall be set down hereafter.

The second Chapter. How many sorts of simple Notions there are. Of Things
singular and universal. Also of Substance and Accident.
THere are as many simple Notions as there be things in the world.

Of Things some be singular, and some universal.

Singular things are those, which are one in Number; As, Frederick, Peter, this
horse, this tree.

Universal things comprehend and contain the Singulars. For an universal is
a gathering together of many Singulars under one nature common to all. As,
horse, man, tree, under which words considered in general, we comprehend all
horses, men, trees.

Singulars are known by sense, but vniversals are comprehended by the
understanding. Therefore bruit beasts know only Singular things. Singulars in
Philosophy are called Individuals, because they cannot be divided into two
parts, keeping the same name. As, Alexander cannot be divided into two
Alexanders, nor one horse into two horses.

A whole compounded of parts alike; As, water, blood, wood, are not called
Individuals, because they may be divided into parts, which may keep the name
of the whole. For every drop of water is water, and of a great piece of wood
every parcel is wood. But if you will turn these things into Individuals, you
must add the name of the measure. For one pint of water cannot be divided into
two pintes, nor one acre of ground into two acres.

All things, whether Singular or Universal, are either Substances, or
Accidents.

A Substance is that which subsisteth of it self; as, man, water, earth, etc.

An Accident is that which cannot subsist by it self, but must have a subject
or substance to uphold it, and unto which it must adhere; as, whitenes,
swiftnes, wisdom, heat. For whitenes can have no being, if it subsisteth not
in some subject; as, in snow, or in the skin: so heat is an accident to fire;
swiftnes is an accident to an horse; wisdom is an accident to the
understanding.

Accidents are sometimes expressed by a Substantive; as, justice, beauty; and
sometimes by an Adjectiue; as, just, fair. In the first manner, accidents are
called Abstracts, or Separated; In the second, they are called Concretes, or
Conjoined. For he that names justice, or beauty, considers justice or beauty
without any certain Subject. But he that names just or ^^ire, considers
justice and beauty, as ^dhering to a certain Subject that is clothed
therewith.

Common custom often confounds ^hese things, saying, the true, the ^lack the
sweet; in stead of saying, the truth, the blacknes, the sweetness.

Now because there are diverse and ^undry kinds of accidents, the Phi^osophers
have ranked them into ^ine Orders or Classes of things; unto which Substance
being added, ^here are ten Classes, which the Phi^osophers call Categories or
Predi^aments. So that there is nothing in ^he world which is done either by
Nature, or by Art, by Council or Chance, which may not be referred ^o, and
contained in some one of ^hese Categories.

The third Chapter. The Names of the ten Categories.
The ten Categories are these.

1. Substance; as, man, horse. 2. Quantity; as, length, breadth. 3. Quality;
as, swiftness, whiteness, roundnesse. 4. Relation or Respect; as, to be a
Father, or a Son, a Master, or a Servant, etc. 5. To Act, or Action; as, to
run, to speak. 6. To Suffer, or Passion; as to be driven, to be burned. 7.
Where; as, here, there. 8. When; as, yesterday, to day. 9. Situation; as, to
sit, to stand, to kneel. 10. Habit; as, to have a cap on, to have hose on, to
have a cloak on.
The fourth Chapter. Of Substance.
SVbstance is that which subsisteth of it self, and is the subject of all
Accidents.

Singular Substances, are called, Primary Substances.

Universal Substances, are called Secondary Substances. Because that ^ingular
substances are first known. So children that have no knowledge but by sense,
wanting yet the use of reason, know nothing but singular things. This knowledge
is common unto us with bruit beasts. But afterward reason gathering diverse
Singulars together, comprehends them under Universal things.

The Sun, the World, the Moon, are primary and singular Substances; yet in
regard that they have a nature and essence, which might agree with many, if it
so pleased God, they are also secondary substances.

All substances are either vncreate^ or created: the uncreated substance i^
God, all other are created.

Created substances are clothed with accidents: but God has no accident. For
he is simple, and not compounded: his Attributes being his own proper
essence, which we^ distinguish in regard of their diverse effects; but in truth
they are but one and the self same thing.

Of created substances, some are Immateriall, as, Angels and Spirits; others
are Material, namely, Such as have bodies, whereof here is a more exact
Division.

The Table of Substances.
Substance is either Uncreated, as God. Created Immateriall Angels. Separated
souls.
Material, called bodies Simple, as Heaven. The four elements. Fire. Air.
Water. Earth.

Compound Perfectly Living Plants, as Herbs. Shrubs. Trees.
Animals Man. Beast Perfect, which have five senses, and are either Airie
Birds. Insecta, as Flies.
Earthy Creeping things. Four footed beasts.
Waterie. Amphybia, that is, of a doubtful kind.
Imperfect, are such as want some of the senses, as, Oysters. Zoophyta, or
Plant-Animals.



Not living as Stones. Minerals.

Imperfectly, which are called Meteors, as, Comets, Winds, Snow, Ice, etc.




Place this Table of Substances between Page 8 and 9 at this hand

There can be nothing contrary to substance. Also, no substance is more
substance then another, as, one horse is not more a horse then another,
although it be a better horse. True it is that God and the Devil are
substances, and that there is a contrariety between them. As also fire is
contrary to water; but this contrariety is not in the substance, but in the
will of the Divel's, and in the quality of fire and water.

The fifth Chapter. Of Quantity.
QVantitie is that by which Substances are numbered, measured, or divided; and
by which they are equal, or unequal.

There be two sorts of Quantity.

The one is compounded of severed and disjoined parts, and therefore is called
disjoined Quantity.

The other is compounded of continued parts, and therefore is called continued
Quantity.

Quantity disjoined or severed is called Number, because the parts have
between them no Continuitie. This Quantity cannot be measured, but must be
numbered.

Number is of two sorts; either numbering, or numbered.

Numbers numbering are the numbers of Arithmetic, as, one, three, six, etc.
Numbers numbered are the things that are numbered, as, six men, ten horses, etc.

Sometimes the number numbered stands in stead of the number numbering, as,
Counters.

Unity is no number, but the beginning of number.

The greatest number of all cannot be found or imagined. For a man may still
add to the greatest number that can be given.

Continued Quantity is that whose parts are joined together with a continued
sequel, and which may be measured. This Quantity is either, a Line, or a
Superficies, or a Mathematical body, or Time.

A Line is a length without breadth, as, a mile, a meating wand.

Superficies is a length with breadth, as, the surface of the water, or of an
acre of Land.

Under the Superficies we comprehend also the Place, which is nothing else but
the interior Superficies of a body, containing another, as, the inward
Superficies of a Hogs-head of Wine, is the place of the Wine.

A Mathematical body is length, breadth, and depth; this body differs from a
Physical or natural body, which is a material substance, and not a
quantity. Notwithstanding every natural body has these three dimensions,
and cannot be without quantity.

Time is the measure of the continuance of things. This measure is taken from
the motion of the heavens, which makes days and years.

Time has two parts, namely, past, and to come: as for the present it is not
time, but it is the instant or running moment, which coupleth together the time
past, with the time to come.

The continuance of God is not called time, but Eternity, which consists in
two things. First to have neither beginning nor ending. Secondly, not to pass
away, nor to have succession of parts. For the life of God consists in rest:
because that if the life of God had a flux, or succession of parts, his life
were partly past, and partly to come.

As Unity is neither number nor quantity, so a Prick is neither quantity,
nor part of a line: as also a moment is no part of time, but the end or
extremity of time past.

Number is ancienter then continued quantity, as it appears by the number of
the Persons in the Trinity, which is eternal and without beginning of time.
But continued quantity had a beginning with the creation of bodies.

Again, number may be counted by it self, and without any other help, but
continued quantity cannot be measured but by the help of the discontinued
quantity. For every length or breadth is measured by the num^ring of the feet,
or inches, or metingwands, or miles, or degrees.

Nothing is contrary unto quantity. For great and little are not contraries,
but Relatiues or Respectiues; and one contains the other, which cannot be in
contraries. The less number is contained under the greater, and is part of it:
But heat is no part of ^olde.

The Table of Quantity.
Quantity is either Discontinued, which is called Number Numbering Numbered.
Continued A Line. A Superficies. A Body. Time.


The sixth Chapter. Of Quality.
QValitie is that whereby substances are qualified, and made like or unlike one
to another. For as things are said to be the same things, when they have one
self same substance and equal when they agree in quantity: so they are said
to be alike, when they agree in quality.

There are four sorts of Qualities. 1. For they are either Active qualities,
which be in the objects of our outward or inward senses, and bring unto us some
alteration or change in our bodies, or minds, as, sweetness in honey, coldness in
snow, beauty in a face, hardness or roughnes in a stone, or in a body, which
hurts the sense of touching, delight in a Comedy. The effects which these
qualities do work in us are called Passion, whilst it is received. For when
the smart of burning is over, the mark or blacknes that remains, is no
longer called Passion.

2. Or else they be natural qualities or faculties, as, the virtue of herbs,
the faculties of the soul, heavines in lead, heat in fire, and coldness in
water.

3. Or else they be habits, or qualities gotten by study and exercise, as all
Arts are, whether mechanical or liberal; and all Sciences. Which when ^ man
has attained unto, and gotten ^ habit of them, he is thereby made the fitter
for any action or exercise.

Bruit beasts that have hearing, as, dogs, horses, apes, etc. are capable to
get a habit, if fear do not hinder them. For such creatures as are
excessiuely ^imerous cannot be taught, as, mice, etc.

The instruments by which the habit is put into practice may be lost, and yet
the habit remain still, as, the skill of playing on the Lute, when the hand is
cut off.

The preparation to a habit is called Disposition, which is when a man has not
as yet gotten a habit, but is in the way to it, and has besides his
inclination some little knowledge.

Natural faculties are great helps to get and form a habit. For he that by
nature is unfit to any Art or study, can never attain unto a perfection,
whatsoever pains he takes in it. 4. Or else they are Figures and outward
forms, as, to be square, round, sharp, crooked, wrong, straight.

Qualities are contrary one to another, as, heat, and coldness. And natural
powers are contrary to impotencie, as, sight to blindness, hearing to deafenes.
Only Figures and outward forms have no contraries. For roundnes differs
from squarenes, but is not contrary unto it.

To judge aright of any quality, it must be considered in the abstract, and as
not being tied to any certain subject: So justice or whitenes are to be
considered in themselves, and not the just or the white. Because the
consideration of the subject in the which justice or whitenes are inherent, do
but trouble and divert man's thought. Therefore if you will consider a thing
aright, you must consider it apart and separated.

One substance can have but one quantity, but it may have a great number of
diverse qualities.

Qualities do act, but quantities do not, only they do help the action of
the quality, as, the greatness of a stone increases the weight of it.

A Spirit has qualities, but no quantities.

The excellency of quality above quantity, consists principally in that the
quantity proceeds from the matter, but the quality from the form. Now the
form is ever more excellent then the matter. For by the form things are made
fit to act; but matter is that which makes them apt to suffer.

Form and Figure act not, but they help and facilitate the action of him that
acts, as, the roundnes of a stone makes it to roll the easier.

The Table of Quality.
Qualities are 1. Such as act against the senses Outward. Inward.
2. Natural power or impotencie. 3. Habits, whose beginning is called
Disposition. 4. Outward forms and figures.

The seventh Chapter. Of Relation and Relatiues.
RElatiues are two things which have a mutual respect one to another, so as
the one cannot be without the other, and the one is defined by the other,
neither can the one be thought upon without thinking upon the other, as, the
Father and the Son, the Prince and the Subjects, the master and the servant,
the double and the half, the equal and the equal.

The mutual respect between these two things is called Relation. There be many
Relatiues which have the self same name, as, friend and friend, like and like,
equal and equal.

The relation between two friends is called friendship; the relation between
two things alike, is called resemblance or likeness.

There be relatiues whose relation is imperfect, namely, when one of the two
relatiues depends on the other, and cannot be without it, but the other may
well be alone, and depends not on his relative, as, the Pastor and the flock,
the Prince and the people, the sight and the thing visible. For there may be
people without a Prince, but no Prince without people.

There be also relatiues, which are not relatiues in their own nature, but
only in regard of us, and because we make them so to be by our conceiving of
them: as, the right and the left between two walls, or two trees: but if we
turn our selves, then that which was left, is right. For in a tree there is
neither right nor left by nature.

If a Father have many sons, there are as many sundry relations, as there be
sons; because the Father is taken diverse times as is the center of a Circle,
which is taken as often as the lines are drawn from the said center to the
circumference.

One and the same thing may have the name of two relatiues; as, to be Father
and Son, to be high and low; but in diverse respects. For the same may be
Father to one, and Son to another.

There be relations which spring from quantity, as, the relation which is
between the double and the half; Others that proceed from Quality, as, the
relation between two friends. Others which come from Action, as, the relation
between the mother and the son, the Creator and the creature. Others that
spring from Situation, as, the right and left, the high and low, the foremost,
and the hindermost; between which Relatiues the relation has no name.

We call that foremost in living things, toward which the natural motion is
made; we call right that part which naturally is fittest for service. In a
living creature we call that part high, by which the nourishment is drawn; as,
in Plants, the root is the highest part, not in regard of the universe, but in
regard of the Plant.

Such relations as are grounded upon quality, admit of contrariety, as,
friendship, likeness: other relations admit of none.

In relations grounded upon action, as between that which heateth, and that
which is heated, there is no contrariety. For that which heateth, and that
which cools are contraries; but this contrariety proceeds from the quality,
namely, heat, which is the ground of this relation.

Friendship, as it is an affection moving the lover, is a quality; but as it
is a mutual respect between two friends, it is a Relation.

Although God, as he is Master and Creator, be a relative to his servants and
creatures, there is not for all that any accident in God: because the relation
is not in the two relatiues, but between the two relatiues. And therefore it
brings in no composition, nor to the substance any natural change.

It is to be noted that two relatiues are commonly called the two terms of the
relation.

The Table of Relatiues.
Relatiues are Either of their own nature Perfect having the same names. diverse
names.
Imperfect.
Or only in regard of us. All these relatiues are grounded upon Quantity.
Quality. Action. Situation.


The eight Chapter. Of Acting or Action.
TO Act is to move it self against the patient, and to make it receive the
power of the Agent.

Of Actions some be natural, as, the panting of the heart, the motion of a
stone downward. Others are voluntary, as, to buy, to sell, to paint, to fence;
which notwithstanding are not done without the help of nature. Others are
mixed, that is to say, partly natural, partly voluntary: as, to eat, to walk,
to run; which indeed are natural actions, but are guided by the will.

Violent actions and against nature, are such as are contrary to natural
actions, as, the throwing of a stone upward. But those are contrary to
voluntary actions, which are called forced or constrained, as, to be pulled or
haled into prison. There be certain actions that are partly voluntary, partly
forced, as, when a Merchant casts his merchandise into the Sea to ease the
ship; or when a Patient causes his arm to be cut off.

The natural actions and motions are swiftest in the end; as, the falling of a
stone downward. The voluntary actions are swiftest in the midst; as,
running. The violent are swiftest in the beginning; as, the casting of a stone;
or, shooting of an arrow.

Every action imports a certain motion. If the motion be in the substance,
it is called Generation, or Corruption. If in the Quantity, it is called
Augmentation or Diminution. If in the Quality, it is called Alteration. If in
the place, it is called Local motion, or Transportation.

There is no generation without corruption, nor no corruption without
generation. But we call it generation, when the matter takes a better form;
and corruption, when it passes into a worser.

The local motion is the chiefest of all motions, without which the rest move
not at all. And besides there is no other motion belonging to the heavens;
where motion is the cause of all other motions, as well in Substance, as in
Quantity, and Quality.

The heavens in regard of the whole do rest, but in regard of the parts, do
change place, even as a Top that sleeps turning.

The Table of Actions.
Actions are Natural. Voluntary. Mixed. Violent.

The Table of Motion.
Motion is on the Substance, and is called Generation. Corruption.
Quantity, and is called Augmentation. Diminution.
Quality, and is called Alteration. Place, and is called Transporting or
Local-motion.

The ninth Chapter. Of Suffering or Passion.
TO Suffer is to receive the power of the Agent.

There are as many kinds of Suffering, as of doing.

Oftentimes the Agent does suffer in acting, as, when a man rolling a weighty
stone tireth himself, and sweateth: or when a man hurts his teeth in
cracking a Nut. The Agent does not suffer, when it is out of the compass of
the Activitie of the Patient, as, the Sun shining on the water, receives not
the brightness which the water send's back: because it is out of the extent,
which limiteth the reflection of the beams sent back again by the water.

God acts always, and every where, but never suffers.

There are Verbs Actiues in Grammar, which are Passiues in Philosophy, as, to
love, to hear, to learn: for all these are Passions, and are done by
receiving. On the contrary, he which is loved or heard, is he that acts and
moves the lover and the hearer.

There are some Passions perfecting, and others which are corrupting, as, the
inlightning in the air, the receiving of learning in the understanding, or of
the images of things in the sight, are Passions, which bring some perfection to
the air, to the understanding, and to the sight.

The corrupting Passions are such as would destroy the Patient, if they did
continue their increase, or did increase above measure, as, heating, cooling,
wearisomnesse.

The perfecting Passions are those which perfect a faculty or natural power,
and give it that perfection for the which God did create it.

The tenth Chapter. Of Where.
WHERE is not the place it self, but it is a designation, or a note of some
certain place. For place is a quantity, and a space that may be measured: But
the Where cannot be measured. When a man puts forth a question touching the
Place, the demand is, by how much, as for example, how much place does such a
body take up? But here the question is by where or whither, as, where is the
King? and, whither go you?

Concerning Bodies the question may be asked, how much place they take up: but
concerning Angels and souls, that question cannot be asked, but only this,
where they are. This is it which the Philosophers mean when they say, that
Bodies are in a place Circumscriptiuely, and Souls definitiuely; because
Souls are not limited or circumscribed by place, and yet a man may say of
them, that they are here, or there, and not els-where.

We cannot say that God is in a place any of these ways. For he is infinite,
and so present in all places, as he is neither limited, nor defined by any
place. It may be truly said, GOD is here; but it cannot be said, GOD is here,
and not there.

The eleventh Chapter. Of When.
WHEN is not the time it self, but it is a designation, or a note of a
certain time, as, yesterday, to day, to morrow, etc.

When we speak of time, and of the continuance of it, the question is, by how
long? as, how long lived Noah? how long did the Roman Empire continue? But
here we ask by When, as, When shall we have the Equinoxe? When was Julius
Caesar slain?

Some things are done in time, which notwithstanding are not measured by time;
namely, such as are done in a moment, as, the impression of a Seal; the
inlightening of a chamber by the air at the opening of the windows; the
receiving of the images of things in the eye. Concerning these things, we ask
not in how long time, but when they were done.

The twelfth Chapter. Of Situation.
SItuation is a Position or placing of parts in their whole, whether the
situation be natural; as, the situation of the arm at the shoulders end; or
voluntary, as when we sit, or kneel.

The thirteenth Chapter. Of Habit.
BY Habit we do not understand garments, for they belong to substance; but we
mean the applying of garments and other ornaments about the body, as, to be
clothed, to be shod, to have a Cassock or a Cloak on.

Under these ten Classes or ranks of things, are contained all things in the
world, and all simple Notions. And of these are framed Enuntiations and
Arguments or Syllogismes, whereof we shall speak hereafter. For there is
nothing in the world out of which a man may not draw some Argument or Discourse.

The second Book, Which is OF THE PLACES OF INVENTION.
The first Chapter. How these simple Notions are of use for an Argument.
TO show how these simple Notions enter into an Argument, or Syllogism, and
how they are of use for Reasoning and discourse, they must be clothed with
other names. For if we should consider them no otherwise then as they are
handled in the Categories, they would never serve to open a discourse, and to
frame a reason. For as it is one thing to consider Leather or wood in
themselves, and another thing to consider them as they are a fit matter to make
a shoo or a bench: So it is another thing to consider things as they are in
themselves, and another thing to consider them as they are means or
instruments of reasoning. We have considered in the Categories things as they
are in themselves, now we are to consider them as they may serve to argue and
discourse.

And therefore when a man will search out the truth of any question, (as for
example, Whether voluptuousness be a good thing) and desires to gather proofs
to prove or to impugn the question propounded; all that can be brought, is
either, 1. The Genus of that which we desire to prove. 2. Or the Species. 3.
Or the Difference. 4. Or the Proper. 5. Or some Accident. 6. Or the Whole or
some part of the Whole. 7. Or the Definition. 8. Or the Division. 9. Or some
thing coupled unto it. 10. Or the Cause or Effect. 11. Or the Etymology. 12.
Or something Like or Unlike. 13. Or the Opposite. 14. Or a Comparison in the
things. 15. Or a Comparison in the Probability. 16. Or some Testimony.


Of all which heads we are now to treat of in particular, that we may know
what they are, and how to make use of them.

The second Chapter. Of the Genus.
THe Genus is a nature which belongs unto many things differing in Species.
As this word, Animal, is a Genus signifying a nature common both to man and
beast: Animal is the Genus; man and beast are the Species. So Plant is the
Genus of Trees and of Herbs; and virtue is a Genus whose Species are Justice,
Temperance, etc.

There is a Supreme and most General Genus; and an Inferior and Subalternall
Genus. As Substance is a supreme Genus, which can never be a Species: but
Animal is an inferior Genus. For though it be a Genus to man and beast, yet it
is a Species to Body: as also Body is a Species to Substance. As in this
Table; Substance without body. with body living Plants. Animals man. beast.

not living.




Such Genuses are equally attributed to their Species, and upon the same
ground. But there are some Aequivocall Genuses, which are attributed to diverse
Species upon diverse grounds. As this word, Wolf, is attributed to a
terrestrial devouring creature, and to a Fish, and to a certain disease.

A Genus Analogicall is that which is attributed to diverse Speci^ses, though
not altogether in regard of the same cause, yet for some respect or similitude.
As this word, Foot, is attributed to the foot of a living creature, and to the
foot of a Table, and of a Verse, and of a mountain, and of a drinking glass.
So the word healthful is attributed to the body, and to the Air, and to
exercise, and to urine in diverse senses, and yet with some agreement too.
Commonly such a Genus agrees primarily to some one of the Species, and then
secondarily to the rest, by reason of some relation which it has with them, as
may appear by the forenamed examples. For the word Foot, first and properly is
said of the foot of a living creature, and afterward of the foot of a mountain
or of a Table by a certain resemblance or proportion. So likewise to be
healthful is said first of the body, and then of exercise, and of urine,
because they are helps or marks of bodily health.

The Table of Genus.
Genus Supreme Inferior Vnivocall, as, Animal, Plant. Aequivocall in whole,
as Wolf. part when there is some relation or agreement among the Species, As,
foot, healthful.



The third Chapter. Of the Species.
SPecies is a nature comprehended under the Genus, which being joined with a
difference makes a Species. So man is a reasonable creature: creature is the
Genus of man, and the word reasonable is the difference which distinguishes
man from other sorts of creatures.

There be two sorts of Species. The one most special, which can never be a
Genus, as, man, lion, elephant, gold: For such Specieses cannot be divided into
other Specieses: but only into singular Substances or Individuals.

The other is a Subalternall Species, which being compared with an inferior
Species is a Genus. As, the word, Animal, is a Species in regard of a Body:
but a Genus in regard of man.

From the Genus and Species are drawn Arguments for Discourse; and such
arguments are grounded upon these Maxims following.

1. Whatsoever agrees with the Genus, Maxims.
agrees also with the Species. For whatsoever may be said of a tree in
general, may be said also of the Laurel, etc. Excepting that which is
attributed to the Genus, as it is a Genus. As to be more general then the
Specieses, and to contain them.

2. That which agrees not with the Genus, agrees not with the Species. For that
which cannot be said of animal, cannot be said of man.

3. It is not necessary that the Species be wheresoever the Genus is. For if
such a thing be an animal, it follows not that it must therefore be a man.

4. But on the other side. Where the Species is, there the Genus must needs be
also. For whosoever is a man, is also an animal. And whosoever says, that this
is a lettice, does by consequent affirm, that it is an herb.

The fourth Chapter. Of Difference.
DIfference is that, whereby one thing differs from another.

Of differences some are greater then others. For there are things which differ
only in number; as Peter and John. There be others which differ in the
Species, as, man and beast. There be others also which differ in the Genus, as,
a man and a stone. But the greatest difference is, when two things are in two
diverse Categories, as, a horse and whitenes.

There be also essential differences, and accidental differences. As, a man
differs from a horse in essence, and definition. But a French man differs
from a Moore only in color and complexion, which are accidents, and not
things which make man to be man.

Among the essential differences, the principal and most considerable is
that, which is called Superficial, by which the Specieses of the same Genus
differ essentially. This difference has these two properties. That it
constitutes the Specieses; And divides the Genuses. Thus the life sensitive, is
the difference which constitutes the animal, and makes the animal to be
Animal. The self same difference divides the Genus; namely, Living. So
likewise to be reasonable, is the difference which divides animal, and
constitutes man. And the same perfection which makes man to be man, is that
which makes him differ from other Animals.

The fifth Chapter. Of Proper.
PRoper is of two sorts. For there be some properties most-proper, and others
lesse-proper to a thing.

The properties most-proper, are such as are attributed to the singulars of the
same Specieses, and with them only, and that always. As, it is the property
of the Loadstone to draw Iron. And it is the property of man, to be able to
laugh, and speak: and of a horse to neigh: and of an ox to bellow.

The properties lesse-proper, are such as agree only to the singulars of a
Species, but neither always, nor to all. As it is proper to a man to be a
Philosopher, or a Musician: but neither to every man, nor at all times. So it
is the property of the Moon to be Eclipsed, but not at all times. And the
property of Plants to loose their leaves in Winter; but that agrees not with
all, nor always: for there be some that are always green.

Maxim.
Wheresoever a difference is, there also is the Species, and the property
most-proper. For these ever go all together.

The sixth Chapter. Of the Accident.
BY Accident in this place, we do not understand whatsoever is in the world,
Substance excepted. For Accident so taken at large comprehends also the
Proper, and is of no use to frame a Discourse or Argument.

But by Accident we understand the mutable, or separable circumstances of a
Subject, which may be, or not be in a Subject, without destroying the said
Subject. As, whitenes in a wall, and valor in a man are accidents, which may
be or may not be in a wall, or in a man, and that without destroying either man
or wall, or causing them to be more or less man or wall.

Of these Accidents compared together, some go before, and precede by order of
nature the thing which we intend to prove. Others do accompany the same. And
others do follow it. The first are called Antecedents. As, wearisomnesse, and
shaking before an Ague; the foaming of the Sea before a tempest; the dawning of
the day before the day: The second are called Concomitants, that is to say,
accompanying, because they go together, As, Pride and folly; The Eclipse of
the Moon, and the full Moon: The third are called Consequents. As, rain,
after a red morning; an ague after distaste and wearisomnesse without former
labor.

Antecedents and Concomitants are used to prove probably that a thing is, or
shall be. As, by palenesse we argue fear^: and by blushing shamefastness, or
the touch of conscience: and by blunt horns of the Moon, we conclude that we
shall have rain: and by the rednes of the same, that we shall have wind.

But those proofs are most forcible that are drawn from subsequent accidents,
which cannot be unless some other thing has gone before. As, we know there has
been a battle by many slain bodies lying in a field; and shipwreck by
sun^ry plankes s^o^^^ng on the S^a.

The M^ximes Maxims.
are.

1. The Antecedent being granted, the Cons^qu^nt ^^th probably follow.

2. The Consequent being granted, the Antecedent must needs have gone before.
E^pecia ly when it is such an Effect as cannot be produced, but by one cause:
A^ we prove, that because it is day, the Sun is ris^n. But if it be ^n
Effect, which may arise from diverse Causes (As, the corruptions of an Estate;
and Agues) the proof is not necessary.

The seventh Chapter. Of the Whole and Parts.
THe Whole is that which has all the Parts joined together in a convenient
order and situation. As, the whole and entire of a house is not only when all
the parts are there, but when every part is convenien^ly placed.

There be two sorts of Whole: the one which may be divided into formal parts;
the other into material parts.

The Formal parts are those whereof the Definition is compounded. As, the
Genus and the Difference are the parts of a Definition. So animal and reason be
the two formal parts of a man. So the formal parts of a house, or of an image
of stone, are their matter and their external forms or figures. Such parts
may easily be discerned and distinguished by our understanding, but cannot be
really separated.

The Material parts are those which differ in Situation, and which for the
most part may really be separated. As the material parts of the world are the
heavens and the four Elements: the material parts of a house are the
foundation, the walls, and the roof.

Every material part has a situation by it self, except there be a mingling
or commixtion of the said parts. As when wine is mingled with water, or when
the four Elements are mingled in a Body. Material parts are either alike
among themselves (As, the parts of water, Blood, Butter, Oil:) or else are
unlike, as, the parts of a man's body, or of a house. The parts alike among
themselves have no certain number; because they may be infinitely divided.

The parts unlike are either Integrals, or not Integrals.

The Integrall parts are those whereof the whole is immediately compounded. As,
a Kingdom is immedidiately compounded of a King and the three estates. The
world is compounded of the heavens and the four Elements. An animal is
compounded of a body and a soul.

But under one of these parts are oftentimes contained other little parts which
are not Integrals: that is to say, whereof the Whole or the Entire is not
immediately compounded. Among which there are some that are not necessary,
serving rather for ornament and conveniencie, then for necessity. As, in a
Commonwealth, hunters, perfumers, musicians, and Poets. In a house, shuts to
windows, gutters, and weathercockes.

Sometimes in a Commonwealth the more necessary parts are such as appear
least, and are less in account then such as are for ornament or pleasure. A^
Bakers are less in account then Cooks, and Plowmen less then Goldsmiths.

There are little p^rts and not Integrall, which are notwithstanding
principals, and altogether ne^essary. As, the heart and brain in man. A vault
has that prope^^ie, that all the parts how little soever they be, are
principals; because if one of them be taken away, the rest fall to the ground.

There are certain parts which are not necessary for the being, and yet are
necessary for the well and commodious being. As, the eye in a man's body,
locks in a house, Merchantdrapers in a town.

The Nails are part of man's body, as also the teeth: but hair is not. For it
is an excrement.

A small quantity of our blood is not accounted a part of the bodi^; because
though it be taken away, the body remains complete, and oftentim^s is the
more healthful. But the who^e mass of blood is part of the body.

Now to argue and seek the truth by the help of the Whole and Parts, these
Maxims are to be understood.

1. Wheresoever the Whole is, Maxims.
there also all the Integrall parts requisite to being, must necessarily be. As,
where man is, there necessarily is the body and soul. 2. Take away any of the
Integrall and necessary parts, and you destroy the Whole. As, take away the
foundation or walls, and you destroy the house.

3. Whatsoever is said of the Whole compounded of parts alike, may be said also
of every several part. Except that which is said of the Whole, as it is Whole,
namely, to contain all the parts. For example, to be salt is said of the whole
Sea, and of every part of it: but to encompasse the earth, is attributed only
to the Sea, as it is a Whole: and therefore it is not attributed to any part of
the Sea.

The Table of the Whole and Parts.
The Whole is composed of parts Formal. Material which are among themselves.
alike. unlike integrall. not integrall necessary for being. well-being.
not necessary.




The eight Chapter. Of Definition.
DEfinition is a speech which expresses the essence of the thing. The perfect
definition of a Substance is that, which is compounded of the next Genus and
the specificall difference. As, the definition of a Plant is, to be a body
living a vegetative life: of man, to be a reasonable creature. There are but
few such Definitions; because the forms and essential differences of
substances are not so well known unto us. God only who made them, does
exactly know them.

The perfect definition of an Accident is compounded of three parts, namely, of
the next Genus, of the proper Subject, and of the next Efficient or Final
cause. As for example, death is an accident, whereof the Genus is, the end or
destruction of life, the Subject is, a living body, and the next Efficient
cause is, the extinguishing of vital heat.

This therefore is the perfect definition of death, namely, that it is the
destruction of the life of a living body by extinguishing the vital heat.
Thus are defined anger, grief, sickness, thunder, earthquake, the Eclipse of
the Moon, and that of the Sun, Civil-warre, respiration, and diverse other
things, whereof we shall produce some examples in the end of this Chapter.

Now but Proper Accidents can be thus defined. For mutable and casual
Accidents, or such as have no certain known cause, or that depend upon the
will of man, cannot be exactly defined. And therefore in stead of a Definition,
we describe them, as well as we may, expressing their Genus, and some certain
property. So whitenes is defined, when we say, that it is a most simple and
most clear color. And light is defined to be the chief of all whitenesses;
or, the whitenes of the body of the Sun sending forth his likeness through
transparent bodies.

Natural instruments, as, the eye, and the hand; or, artificial, as, a
hammer, or ana xe, are defined by their Genus, and by their fitnes for that use
for which they are ordained. So the Eye is the instrument of seeing, and a
Hammer is an instrument to knock withal.

Definition serves to discourse and to argue by the means of this Maxim.
Maxim.


To whatsoever thing the definition agrees, unto that same also the thing
defined does agree. And reciprocally, to whatsoever the defined thing agrees,
to the same the definition agrees also.

The Table of Definition.
Definition is either of a Substance which is composed of the Next Genus.
Difference.
Accident which is Proper defined by the Next Genus. Proper subject. Next cause
Efficient. Final.

Improper or casual, defined as the Substance, so far as may be.


Certain examples of the definition of a Proper Accident.
THunder is a sound in the cloud, by the breaking out of a flaming exhalation.

Death is the destruction of a living creature by extinguishing the vital heat.

The Eclipse of the Moon is the darkning of the Moon by the interposition of
the earth.

Anger is a perturbation of the mind arising from the opinion of a sustained
wrong.

Civil war is the trouble of an Estate arising from the discord of the
parties.

Baldnes is the loss of the hair of the head through the want of radical
humor.

Respiration is the drawing in of air into the lungs to refresh the heart.

Sickness is an Indisposition of the body caused by the distemperature of the
Humors.

The Earthquake is the stirring or moving of a part of the earth through the
violence of winds therein enclosed.

Blindness is a privation of light in the eye by the corruption of the
instruments of seeing.

Sorrow is a grief in the irascible faculty, through the grief of some evil.

The Eclipse of the Sun is the darkning of the air by the interposition of
the Moon.

The ninth Chapter. Of Division.
THere are diverse sorts of Divisions. For either we divide the Genus into the
Species, or the Whole into the Parts, or the Substance into diverse Acc^dents,
or an Accident into diverse Subjects, or a Word into diverse significations.

1. First we divide a Genus into the Species. As, a living creature into man
and beast. Actions into natural and voluntary.

2. Or else we divide the Whole into Par^s. So man is divided into Soul and
body. A house into the foundations, walls and roof. Which division is made
either in thought or in deed.

3. Or else we divide the Subject into diverse Accidents. As, when we divide men
into free and bond, into males or females, into fools or wisemen.

4. Or else we divide an Accident into other Accidents. As, when we divide
Physicians into rich and poor ones: soldiers into great or little ones,
strong or weak.

5. Or else we divide Accidents into diverse Subjects, As, sickness, into the
sickness of the body, and sickness of the soul. So we may divide corruption
into the corruption of simple bodies, or into the corruption of mixed or
compounded bodies.

6. Or we divide an Aequivocall word into diverse significatio^s, As the word,
link, which signifies a Sausage, a Torch, and a link of a chain.

Rules for Division.
1. A good division must have but few parts, and those opposite, if it may be.
As, animal is divided into reasonable and unreasonable; Number into even and
odd; A line into straight and crocked. But that is not always possible. As
when we divide the external senses into five. And France into seventeene
governements.

2. In a Division nothing must be either superfluous, or wanting. As, if a man
should say, that the senses are, hearing, seeing, smelling, and the two eyes;
there were in such a Division something wanting and something superfluous.

3. The parts of a Division must not overreach one another. As, who should say
that all clothing of the body is either garments, or habillements, or gowns.
Or that Justice consists in three things, to live honestly, to hurt no body,
to give every man his own. In these divisions the parts are but little or not
at all differing, and are in a manner the same thing.

The Table of Division.
Division is of the Genus into the Species. Whole into the Parts. Subject into
Accidents. Accidents into diverse Subjects. Aequivocall word into diverse
significations.

The tenth Chapter. Of things Coupled, called in Latin Conjugata.
COupling is considered either in Words or in Things.

Words coupled or conjoined are such, as come from the same beginning, and
differ in termination, As, just, justice, justly: white, whiting, to white,
whitenes. The link and affinity of which words is grounded upon some
affinity which is in the nature of the things signified by these words.

But there are certain things coupled in Nature which are not coupled in
Words. As the sleep, and to slumber.

There are also certain words coupled, which notwithstanding for matter are not
of neces^^tie linked together. As, buckle and a buckler.

Now for argument and discourse, the coupling and affinity which is in words
is of no use, except there be also affinity in the thing: but where the
affinity of words proceeds from the affinity in the thing, we use this Maxim.

Maxim.
To whomsoever one of the Coniugates or things coupled does belong, the others
also belong unto the same. As, he that lies is a liar. And, to whomsoever it
belongs to do a just thing, to him also belongs justice, and to live
justly. And, seeing thou art a knave, thou must be given unto knavery.

This Maxim is not without Exception. As, may appear by the example of
Cambyses, who being very unjust, did notwithstanding some just actions. As in
that he covered the seat of justice with the skin of an unjust Judge, whom he
caused to be fl^ad, as a warning to all that should sit upon the said seat. And
so there may be a Prince loving treason, who notwithstanding hates the
traitor.

The eleventh Chapter. Of Causes and Effects.
A Cause is that which brings forth an Effect: or that by which or for which
any thing is.

There be four kinds of Causes: the Material, the Formal, the Efficient, and
the Final. For example, the matter of a house is stones, wood, and tyles: the
form is the structure and manner of building, which arises from the placing
or ordering of the parts: the efficient cause is the Master Builder: the final
cause is for dwelling or habitation.

The efficient and final causes are called External, because they are out of
the thing, and are not parts of it. As the builder is no part of the house: for
suppose the builder were shut up in the house, which he has built, yet were he
still an external cause, by reason that he is not of the essence or definition
of the house, nor any part of it. But the matter and form are Internal causes,
because the thing is composed of them.

The cause Material.
Matter is that whereof the thing is composed. As, leather is the matter of a
shoe, because a shoe is made of leather.

Matter is of two sorts: the one is called matter of Generation, as, the seed
is the matter of the Generation of a tree; slime is the matter of the
Generation of frogs; so water is the matter of ice. The other is the matter of
Composition. As, the four elements are the matter whereof a body is composed;
wood and stone are the matter of a house.

Sometimes matter is taken improperly for the subject whereof we speak or
write. Thus battails and love are the matter of the book of Ariost. And
sometimes for the occasion and subject whereabout man does labor and occupy
himself. As, numbers are the matter of an Arithmetician, and dangers and
troubles are the matter of prowess and patience.

Form is that which gives being to a thing. Formal.


Of Forms some are Natural. As the form of an Animal is the sensitive soul:
and the form of the eye is the faculty of seeing: Others are Artificial. As
the form of a statua, of a house, or of a clock.

Natural forms are part of the substance, and are multiplied by generation.
But Artificial forms are qualities, and no parts of the substance, neither
are they multiplied by generation or propagation. If we engraue the image of
Caesar upon a nut, that nut being planted will bring forth fruit and nuts, but
not the image of Caesar. And thence it is that children are not heirs of the
learning or piety of their fat^ers.

The Efficient Efficient.
cause is that by which a thing is. As the Sun is the efficient cause of the
day: and the fire of burning: and sickness of death: and the interposition of
the Moon, the cause of the eclipse of the Sun.

Under the Efficient cause we comprehend the cause which is called Meritorious.
As murder is the cause of punishment.

Likewise under the Efficient cause we comprehend the cause which is called
Defective. As the want of sight is the cause of going astray; and the absence
of the Sun, is the cause of night, howsoever by nature it be the cause of day.

All instruments, both natural, as, the eye and the hand; and artificial, as,
an Axe and a sword, are in some sort Efficient causes. For though they act not
by their own proper power, yet they help the action; and without them the
natural action would either be weak or altogether hindered.

The Final Final.
cause is that for the which a thing is done. So the end of Physic is to heal
the sick, and the end of Study is to get learning.

We must warily distinguish the scope from the end. As, the scope of walking is
health, but the end is the last step; the one is the end of the intention; the
other the end of progression.

The final cause may also be the formal and efficient cause, but ^n diverse
respects. As, the form of the house is the end of the builder: and the form
of a horse engendered is the efficient cause of the operations of the same
horse, and also the final cause of the horse engendring. And that which is the
final cause, i^ commonly an effect. As to see is the final cause, and also the
effect of sight.

Of causes the final is the best, and most excellent: because all the other
tend unto it, and serve it.

The final cause as it is the last in execution, so it is the first in the
intention.

Efficient and final causes bring forth their effects, Causes of themselves,
or by accident.
either of themselves and of their own nature; or by accident. Thus the Sun
gives light of it self, and of his own nature; but by accident it blinds
Owls. And the neighing of Darius his horse was the accidental cause of his
raise to the kingdom. And thirst may be an accidental cause to save a man out
of the battle; if being thirsty and gone out of the army to drink, it so
happened that whilst he was a drinking, the army was suddenly discomfited. So
a Musician that builds a house, is not the cause of the building as he is a
Musician, but as he is an architect or builder. It is the same of the final
cause. For example, healing is the proper end of Physic, but the gain of the
Physician is an accidental end: the one is the end of the Art, and the other
of the person.

Causes next or remote.
Again, there be some next, and some remote causes. For example, the next end
of the art of a soldier is war, and the remote is victory, and the end more
remote is a happy peace. So the next efficient cause of death is sickness, of
sickness excess, and of excess bad company.

The same may be said of forms and matters. The next matter of a Table is the
wood, but the remote matter are the four Elements. The next form of any thing
is that which we call Specificall; but the remote forms are those of the next
or of the remote Genus. So the next form of a man is to be reasonable, but to
have sense is the form of a living creature, which is the Genus of man, and by
consequent also is the form of man, but remote.

Moreover, there be causes, Causes sufficient, or not sufficient.
which are Sufficient of themselves to produce an effect. As, the Sun is of
it self sufficient to give light, and fire to burn, and the favor of God to
make a man happy. But there are some causes, which are not of themselves
Sufficient, and must have many together. As, to make a fertile soil, the
ground must be lusty, it must be well tilled, rain must moisten it, and the
Sun must heat it in due season, and moderately. To attain unto learning, a
man must have a good wit, good instructions, and be diligent and painful. So
diverse things are the causes of victory, experience in the General, valor in
the Soldiers, military Discipline, necessary weapons, etc. but above all the
will of God.

Now to argue from the causes and effects, these Maxims Maxims.
are of use.

1. That which agrees with the matter, agrees also probably with the thing
composed of that matter. As, the earth is heavy, and therefore terrestrial
bodies are heavy. This Maxim is sometimes faulty. For example, Ice is hard,
yet notwithstanding the matter of it is soft and liquid, namely, water.

2. Where the matter is wanting, there also the thing composed is wanting. As,
where there is no iron, a sword cannot be made.

3. The next efficient and necessary cause being granted, or denied, the effect
also must be granted, or denied. As, if the Sun shine, it is day, if it
shines nor, it is not day. And this effect being granted, the efficient cause
is also granted.

4. When diverse causes are necessarily requisite to produce an effect, one of
the same causes being wanting, the effect also is wanting.

5. Such as is the efficient cause, such commonly are the effects. As of wicked
Fathers, come wicked Sons: and strong things beget strong things; and Moors
have black sons. This Maxim is often false, especially in remote and
universal causes. As the Sun grows not, and yet it causes plants to grow,
it has no sent, and yet causes flowers to smell sweet, and carions to stink.
And God mooveth all, but yet is immoovable. Also in causes which act by
accident. As a Whetsto^e is not sharp, yet causes sharpness: the Sun is
not hot, yet warmeth by accident, in clearing and purifying the air by the
reflection of his beams.

6. If the self same quality be attributed unto the agent and unto the
patient, it must much more be attributed unto the agent. As, the hand is warm
by reason of the fire which acts upon it, therefore the fire is hotter then
the hand. And the Sun causes the water to shine, therefore it is brighter
then the water.

This Maxim is false in the fourth species of quality, namely, in the form
and figure; because this quality receives neither more nor less. As, if the
Seal be round, it follows not that the figure printed in the wax be less
round, then the Seal.

7. The end being granted, those means also without which the end cannot be
attained unto, are likewise granted. As, if you grant that a man lives, you
grant also that he eats, drinks, and breaths. And happiness being granted,
virtue, and the favor of God are likewise granted.

8. The means to attain unto the end being granted, it follows not that the
end must therefore always be granted. For it is no good reason to say, Philip
has books, therefore he is learned: he has horses and weapons, therefore he
shall obtain the victory. So also, the end being taken away, the means are
not always therefore taken away. For many, though they have the means in
their hands, never attain unto the end.

9. Causes by chance or hazard are not fit to argue withal.

10. If necessary effects be taken away, the causes also are taken away. I say,
necessary; For there are some causes which act not necessarily, and which do
not always produce their effects. As, sickness brings not always death.

11. Causes are more excellent then their effects, unless the effect be a
final cause. And therefore, to see, and hear, are things more excellent, then
the faculties of seeing, and hearing; because those faculties are ordained
only for these effects, namely, to see, and to hear.

12. The causes ever go before their effects in the order of nature, but not
always in time. Thus the Sunbeams are as ancient as the Sun; and the flame
is never without clearenesse or brightness.

The Table of Causes.
Causes are Internal Matter of Generation. Composition.
Form Natural. Artificial.

External Efficient Properly. Improperly, as the cause Meritorious.
Instrume^tall natural. artificial.


Final.

All causes are either 1. Next. or Remote.
2. By themselves. or By accident.
3. Sufficient. or Insufficient.


The twelfth Chapter. Of Etymology.
Etymology is the derivation of a word.

Etymology in regard of the word, is as a Definition in regard of the thing;
and serves to argue and discourse. As when we say, Such a one is not a
Counselor, because he gives no Counsel. And Philip cannot be called a
Philosopher, because he loves not wisdom.

Thus by the Etymology of these names Jesus and Christ, we gather what our
Saviors calling and office is. And we encourage such as have a name importing
some virtue, in stirring them up to virtue by the Etymology of their names. So
Eusebius and Pius may be exhorted to Piety, and Andrew to valor, and
Celestinus to give himself to heavenly things, least they belie their names by
a contrary conversation. And so one gathers probably, that all things in
times past were common, the Robe excep^ed, because when a theft is committed,
we use to say, Such a one has been robbed: and that the first Wars were
against Beasts, because the Latin word Bellum, comes from Bellua. But these
kind of proofs are very weak, because names are given unto men, before it
can be known whether they will be virtuous or no; nay, sometimes names are
given by contraries, and by way of derision. As, when a dwarf is called a
Goliath.

Good Etymologies in the English tongue, are for the most part taken from the
Latin; but such as are drawn from the English tongue are commonly absurd and
ridiculous. For example, if a man should say, that the woman is the woe of the
man; and beer, quasi, be here.

The thirteenth Chapter. Of things alike or unlike.
THose things are called Alike which have between them some Analogy and
correspondencie or proportion.

The analogy is known by the end and use. As the Shepherd in regard of his
flock, and the Pastor in regard of his Church, are things Alike.

There be certain things differing, which the vulgar take for the same things,
and none but Philosophers do distinguish them. As, love and friendship;
continency and temperance; the flatterer and the man-pleaser; memory and
remembrance; chance and fortune; hate and envy; whose differences are learned
by the Ethics and Physics.

Similitudes are rather ornaments of a speech, then any proofs. As, when we
say, Even as cracks in a vessel are known when the vessel is filled with
liquor: So the secret vices of the heart are discovered by plenty and
prosperity. And, that Hypocrites are like unto Bees which have honey in the
mouth, and a sting in the tail. And that covetous persons are like unto
Christmas-boxes, out of the which money cannot be gotten before they be broken.
And false friends are l^ke unto Swallowe^, that d^part from us in hard weather.

Metaphors well drawn are similitudes reduced to one word. As when we say, to
feed the flock, that is, to teach: and to stain ones reputation, that is to
say, to backbite.

Similitudes have two parts, the proposition and the reddition. The
proposition, namely this, even as swallows, etc. The reddition as this; So
false friends, etc.

Examples are taken from things done, and from humane actions: but Similitudes
are oftentimes drawn from things fained, and from that which is observed in
nature.

Now to argue from the like, we use this probable Maxim. Maxim.
To things alike agree things alike.

EXAMPLES OF ANALOGY.
The Analogy between an Animal and a Plant.
In an Animal, In a Plant. The skin The bark or rind. The heart The pith or
marrowe. The arms The branches The mouth The root. The excrements The leaves
and gum. The veins The grain of the wood.
The Analogy between man's body, and a Commonwealth, or Estate.
In Man, In an Estate. The head The Prince. The eye The Council The arms The
soldiers and trads-men. The belly The idle persons. The sinews The money. The
joints Concord and good order.
The Analogy between a building and a man's body.
In a building, In Man's body. The kitchen The belly. The kitchen knives The
teeth. The study The brain. The windows The eyes. The five doors The five
instruments of the senses. The Master of the house The soul. The sink The
conduits of the excrements.
The Analogy between the indispositions of the Body and of the Soul.
In the Body, In the Soul. Blindness Ignorance. Pain Grief The dropsy
Covetousness. The itch Impatience. Swelling Pride. A fit of an ague Choler.
Shaking Fear. Contagious air Bad examples. Painting Hypocrisy. Collicks
Troubles of conscience. Weakness Pusillanimitie.
The foureteenth Chapter. Of things Opposite.
OPposites are such as cannot stand together in the same subject, at the same
time, and in the same regard. As a man cannot be at the self same time both
white and black in the same part of his body, and not compared to other
things: though he may be black and white, in diverse parts of his body, either
at diverse times, or comparatively, white in respect of a Moore, and black in
respect of a Swan.

There are four sorts of Opposits. 1. Relatiues. 2. Contraries. 3. Privatiues.
4. Contradictories.

1. Of Relatiues Relatiues.
we have already spoken. lib. 1. cap. 7.

2. Contraries Contraries.
are two qualities or two actions which being under the self same Genus, are
most remote one from the other, and are incompatible. As black and white have
the same Genus, namely, color: Virtue and vice are specieses of habits, which
being under the same Genus are of a contrary nature.

Contraries are either Mediate or Immediate. Thus, there is a middle between
black and white, namely, pale and brown: and between hot and cold there is
lukewarm. But between the number even and odd, between the straight and
crooked line, there is no third. The middle or mean does usually participate
of the two contrary extremes: the mean between good and bad actions excepted.
For the mean is that which is called an Indifferent action, participating
neither of good nor evil.

Between two contrary vices, virtue is the mean. As between covetousness and
prodigality, there is liberality, and good husbandry: between rashness and
cowardnesse, there is valor.

This mediocritie or mean participating of two extremes, is not in the virtue
it self; for that has no participation with vice; but it is in those actions
and things about which virtue is occupied. As, to avoid danger, and to lay out
money. For these actions partly imitate the covetous man, and partly the
liberal. And it falls out oftentimes that to each of the extremes there is a
contrary virtue: as to prodigality, good husbandry; to covetousness,
liberality: so cowardnesse and rashness are two extremes; and to
cowardnesse, valor is contrary; and to rashness, discretion.

If two contraries happen to be under two next differing Genuses, (as, justice
under virtue, and injustice under vice) these two Genuses must needs be
contraries one to another, and Species of the same Genus. By this means all
contraries, if they be not under the same next Genus, they are under the same
remote Genus.

Words are sometimes wanting to express one of the contraries. Thus we have no
word to express the habit contrary to an ague, nor to a rheum, nor to the
Physics, nor to Grammar.

3. Privatiue Privatiues.
opposits are a quality, and the absence and privation of that quality. As,
light and darkness; sight and blindness.

There can be no privation, when the subject is not capable of the contrary
quality. Thus in a stone there is no blindness, because it is not capable of
sight. And a child in the womb cannot be said to be blind, nor a whelp before
it be nine days old, because they are not come to that time wherein they should
see.

The privation of Actions may be remedied and recovered. As the privation of
the act of seeing is recovered, when he that sleeps opens his eyes to see.
But the privation of the Faculty of seeing is irrecoverable.

Knowledge and ignorance simple and childish or brutish, are opposits
privatiuely. But wilful ignorance that arms it self with reasons against the
truth, is opposed unto knowledge as a contrary, and not as a privation.

4. Contradictories Contradictories.
are such between which there is no mean or middle. As, to be, and not to be;
man and no man; horse and no horse. For there is nothing that is not either man
or not man; horse or not horse.

Now when we will argue and prove any thing, Opposits are of great use. The
Maxims Maxims.
are these.

1. Whosoever grants one of the relatiues, does necessarily grant the other. As
he that calls such a one a father, affirms that he has a child.

2. One and the same thing may be two relatiues; As, to be a father and son,
master and servant, right and left: but in diverse respects.

3. Contrary things have a contrary consequence. As, vice makes a man wretched,
therefore virtue makes him happy. Here are excepted such things as do belong
to the Genus of the two contraries. For if blackness be visible, it follows
not that whiteness be invisible; because to be visible, belongs to the Genus
of whiteness and blackenesse, namely, to color. We must also except such
causes as do act by accident. As, if a white man builds his own house; it
follows not, that a black man must pull down his; and if heat does harden
the ground, it follows not that frost must soften it.

4. The self same cause may bring forth certain effects, when the action of
the cause depends from the disposition of the matter against which it acts.
So the Sun gives a sweet smell to flowers, but it makes a carrion stink: and
fire hardens the earth, and softens wax.

5. Every subject that is capable to receive the one of the contraries, is also
capable to receive the other. Thus, whatsoever may be heated, may be cooled;
and whatsoever may be hardened, may be softened.

6. One of the contraries being granted, the other is overthrown. Thus, he
that is not free is a bondsman. But it follows not that if one of the
contraries be denied, the other must be granted; except they be such
contraries, as have no mean between them. As, if the body be not white, it
follows not that it is black. But in contraries that are without mean, this
consequent i^ good. As, if this line be not straight, it is crooked.

7. Of two good things whereof the one is lesser and the other greater, the
contrary to the greatest good is the greater evil. As, virtue and health be
two good things; if virtue therefore be a greater good then health, vice must
be a greater evil then sickness.

Except when one of the two good things is comprised in the other. As, to have
the skill of reading, and the skill of Philosophy. For though the skill of
Philosophy ^e a greater good, then the skill of reading, yet it follows not,
that not to be skillful in Philosophy is a greater evil, then not to be
skillful in reading, because the skill of reading is comprehended under the
skill of Philosophy.

8. Contradictories cannot stand together, and one of them must of necessity
be. As, there is nothing that is not either man or not man; and it is
impossible to be both the one and the other, at the same time.

The fifteenth Chapter. Comparison of things.
THings are often compared according to their goodness and excellency, and then
the comparison is made by these Rules or Maxims. Maxims.


1. Whatsoever is desired in regard of it self, is better then that which is
desired only in regard of some other thing. As, life is better then money, and
sight is more to be desired then spectacles, and health then Physic.

2. That which is good to all, is better then that which is only good to some,
and which is used but seldom, and for certain respects. Thus light is better
then darkness, and to have two arms is better then to be maimed. For
darkness is of use only for thieves, and debauched persons; and to have but
one arm is of use only to beggars, who thereby set forth their misery.

3. That which is good of it own nature, is better then that which is good
only by accident, or which is of use only to avoid a greater evil. Thus,
health is better then Physic; and to have our wares in our ship, is better
then to cast them into the Sea; and prudence is better then chance.

4. One good which when we have, we need not the other, is better then that,
which when we have, we have yet need of the other. Thus to be loved of God, is
better then to be loved of men; and to have the perfect knowledge of an Art, is
better then to have it written in a book.

5. Of final causes, the last is ever the best. Thus happiness is better then
virtue, and the skill of managing a horse, is better then the skill to make a
spur.

6. Permanent goods are better then the transitory. As, virtue is better then
money.

But in general without any respect to the goodness or excellency of things,
they may be compared by these Maxims following.

1. Other Maxims.
That which is such of it own nature, is more such then that which is only
such by participation. Thus the Sun is cleerer then a looking glass, when
the Sun shines on it.

2. That which is such of it self, is more such then that which is such only
by accident. As, exercise and good nourishment is more healthful, then the
cutting off of an arm: and the death of the Son of God has been more
beneficial to salvation, then the treason of Judas, howsoever God used it as a
means for our good.

3. That which is most remote from his contrary, is more such then that which
is less remote. And therefore the cold in Norway is greater then that in
Italy, because it is more remote from the South, from whence the heat comes.

4. That which acts more forcibly, is commonly more such, then that which
acts more weakly. As, that which hurts more is worse then that, which
hurts less, and that which pricketh more is sharper pointed, then that which
pricketh less. This rule has exceptions. Air and water are equally moist,
nay, Aristotle holds the air to be moister; yet water moistens more then air.
So the flame is hot, or rather hotter then the hot iron, and yet a hot iron
burns more then the flame does.

The sixteenth Chapter. Comparison of Probability or Likelihood.
THings are compared in probability, when we question whether of the two is
the more credible. And this is done, when to prove some one thing, we bring in
another equally, or more, or less probable, then that which is in question.

This comparison may be made three manner of ways. 1. Probable alike.
For

First when we will prove a thing in question, we may bring in another thing as
probable as it. For example, if a Prince has granted something to one Citizen,
another Citizen may pretend, that the like grant ought to be made unto him
also; because he is a Citizen as well as the other, and nothing inferior to
him. So a fault which is pardoned to some one in regard of his youth, must be
pardoned to another as young as he. This reason is grounded upon this Maxim.
Maxim.


Of two things equally probable, or equally just, the one being granted, makes
the other to be easi^y believed.

2. More probable.
Secondly, to prove a thing in question, we may bring another thing more
probable then it, arguing thus. If that which is more probable is not, much
less shall that be, which is less probable. For example, if a Father will not
have his children go richly apparelled, much less will he suffer it in his
servants. And if the Apostles were not without sin, how much less are we;
This is called arguing from a more probable to a less, and grounded upon this
Maxim. Maxim.


If that which is more possible, and more probable be not; much less shall
that be which is less probable and possible.

The conclusion of such arguments must always be negative.

Lastly, 3. Less probable.
we may prove a thing in question, by bringing in another thing that is less
probable, saying thus: If a thing less probable, and harder to be believed, is
notwithstanding, or has been; much more ought we to believe, that which is
more probable and easier to be done. So if one at twelve years of age can
carry a weight of a hundred pound; by a stronger reason one may carry the same
weight at the age of twenty years. And if Alexander took Tire, much more
easily might he have taken Jerusalem, which was weaker then Tire, if he had
besieged it. This is called arguing from the less probable to the greater,
grounded upon this Maxim. Maxim.


If that which is less probable and less possible may be, much more shall
that be, which is more probable and more possible. The conclusion of such
arguments must always be affirmative.

We must warily distinguish between the greatness of the thing, and the
greatness of the probability. For greatest things are often less probable, and
more difficult. For it were no good argument to say thus. If birds can fly,
how much more bulls. And if a thread can go through the eye of a needle, how
much more a cable. And if Michael Angel could paint very excellently, how much
more the Emperor Charles the fifth.

The seventeenth Chapter. Of Testimony.
TEstimonies are often used to argue and prove a thing.

Testimonies are of force and do persuade, when they be such as may not be
denied, by reason of the quality, authority, sufficiency, or multitude of
persons.

Testimonies are either divine or humane.

Divine testimonies are Oracles, and all that is called the Word of GOD:
likewise dreams, visions, miracles, be they true or false, if they be
delivered as true. Also rules to live well, derived from nature.

Humane testimonies, if the question be about matter of right, are humane
laws, customs, the testimonies of Ancestors, or such as are skillful in
their own art, the consent of nations. But if the question be of fact, then
are to be produced schedules, acquittances, confessions, eye or ear witnesses.

Such witnesses, Maxim.
as do not affirm or deny a thing to be or not to be, are of no force. For
there is a great difference between these two sayings; God says not that such
a thing is, and God says that such a thing is not. The latter is a good
proof, but the former has no consequence or sequel. And likewise this proof
is of no effect: Aristotle has not said so, therefore it is not so. Or, the
Word of God says not that man is a reasonable creature, and therefore man is
not a reasonable creature.

Notwithstanding, if it be a thing which cannot be known, but by the
testimony of one alone, then this kind of arguing is good and firm. Such a
one said not ^o, and therefore you cannot maintain that it is so. For example,
if we had no knowledge of China but by the report of one man only; whosoever
would affirm any thing without the warrant of such a one, without question
would be prooved a liar; or i^ he spoke the truth it were but by chance, and
not knowing himself whether he spoke true or no. So likewise seeing that
nothing that is necessary to salvation can be known without warrant from the
Word of God; whosoever in things necessary to salvation, affirms any thing
not contained in the said word of GOD, ought not to be believed, and affirms
that which he knows not.

The eighteenth Chapter. Of the use or Practice of the precedent Doctrine.
THis Doctrine contained in the sixteen precedent Chapters is called the
doctrine of Places; because it shows the places whence matter is drawn for
argument and furniture for proofs. For example, if we undertake to prove,
that, Death is not to be feared of a virtuous man, we must run over these
sixteen places, and take notice of such as will best furnish us with matter.
To make this plain we will run over the said places, and apply them to this
example.

The Genus of Death.
Death is the end of man's life. Now the end is to be desired, when it is not
only the end, but also the scope that we must aim at; such is death, unto
which a wise man ought to prepare himself every day, as being the end of his
hope.

The difference.
This death comes by the separation of the soul from the body, now we must
not fear the separation of such things, as being joined do hurt one another:
the soul consumes the body with cares, like unto a knife that cuts its
sheath; the body is to the soul as a burden or a prison; God separateth them
to reioyne them again in a better estate and condition.

The Species.
There be two kinds of death; the one natural caused through age, the other
violent, which happens by sickness, or when a man is killed. Philosophers say
that death which comes through age is without pain, because it is without
combat or resistance; and who would live when all his strength is spent?
violent death is not also to be feared of a virtuous man, for what matter is
it, whether I dye of an ague, or by the sword? Whether by the distemper of
humors, or by the distemper or commotion of people? Whether I yield up my soul
by the mouth or by a wound, so it may go to God.

The properties and accidents of Death.
Death makes all alike, both great and small; It dismasketh and discovers
thoughts; then dissimulation has no more place; The words of the dying are
serious and of great weight, their prayers are fervent, their confession
humble, their admonitions to their children are received with attention, the
spirit of God comfort them within, the Angels guard and assist them without,
and Jesus Christ reaches them out the crown.

Of things conjoined with Death.
If we must not bewail the dead, why should we then fear death?

The causes of Death.
The efficient cause of death is the will of God, which we were better to
yield unto willingly then by compulsion; why should we resist Gods will, seeing
it is just and vnevitable? Again, the law of nature under the which we are
borne is the cause of death: plead not therefore against your own hand
writing. Would thou have the laws of the world changed for thee? The final
cause of death in regard of the world, is that we may give place one to
another; thy father has given place to thee, give thou place to thy children.
The final cause of death in regard of every virtuous man is to put an end to
all his miseries, and to bring him home to God. For all these causes of death a
virtuous man ought not to fear it.

Causes wherefore a thing ought not to be fea^ed.
A thing is not to be feared: first if it is vnevitable; secondly, if it
hurts not; thirdly, if it be profitable. Death has in it these three things.
For it is vnevitable; therefore as it is a folly to hope for things impossible,
so it is a folly to fear things vnevitable. Again, death (...) not hurtful
because our Savior Christ has taken away the curse thereof. Lastly, it is
profitable, and that is known by the effects which follow.

The Effects.
Death is profitable before death, for it abateth pride. Thou see now a
triumphing Monarch, and ere long toads will breed in his skull, and worms in
his entrails. The thought of death keeps a man in fear and sobriety, as also
from sinning. Without it man would hardly be tamed. It makes us despise the
world, and to acknowl^dge the vanity of all our toil. It makes us more
earnest in prayer, and increases our faith through resistance. After death, it
makes us fully know that which we here see but a far of, and very obscurely.
It ioineth us with the Saints and places us with Christ Jesus. To fear death
is to offer wrong unto Christ, as if it were ill being with him. It makes us
to see the face of God, which changes them that see it into his own
likeness. It brings us into the possession of peace without end, of
contentment without interruption, and felicity without measure.

The Similitudes.
If newborn babes had the use of reason, they would never cry, but rather
much rejoice that they part from such an unclean and obscure place, to enter
into the light of this world: So, if we had the right use of reason, we would
not be sad when death comes, because our souls go out of an unclean,
straight, and obscure place, or rather prison, to enter into the light of
heaven. Death is like Samsons Lion, whereof it is written, that from
bitterness came sweetness. Or like unto the harsh sound of a boult at the
opening of a door, which notwithstanding is very pleasing, if it be to come
out of a prison. Or as when Christ came to his Disciples walking on the waters,
they said it was a spirit; but when they saw him nearer hand, they said of him,
and so must we of death, it is the Lord that comes unto us.

The Opposits.
Present life is opposed unto death, now if there be no cause to desire life,
no more is there to fear death. Upon this occasion you may run through every
age of man's life, as also through the d^vers conditions that are from the
Prince to the beggar, and show that all is but misery. Besides those evils and
accidents which are common to all.

The Comparison in regard of Goodness.
Mutable and transitory things are not so good as those that are eternal and
permanent. Again, the good which suffices alone, is better then that good,
which when we have, we have yet need of another. He that has happily ended
his life, needs neither money nor apparel, nor honor, nor health, etc. but
he that has nothing but the present life, has need of all these things; and
besides them eternal good things.

The Comparison in regard of Probability.
Probable alike.
If Martyrs feared not to dye in the fl^mes of fire, why should we fear to dye
in sickness, seeing we have the same hope?

Less probable.
If the Heathen went to their deaths with as joyful a countenance, as others
that returned safe from thence; why should we fear it that have a better
hope? Why should ambition have more force in them, then faith in us? If a
soldier does adventure himself upon the mouth of the Cannon-shot, and
offers himself the first upon a breach for the pay of sixpence a day; what
should we do for an everlasting kingdom.

Testimonies.
Here must be alleged the passages of the word of God, the sentences of
Philosophers, the examples of such as have dyed constantly; As, of Regulus, of
the two Decius, of the Gymnosophists, of the Indian Women, of the Tribals, of
the Martyrs, etc.

Finally, by these sixteen places, as by certain directions, we are furnished
with abundance of matter for argument and discourse. And by these helps we are
put in remembrance of all that we have read, heard, or seen, which may serve
to amplify the matter propounded. But the Maxims which are added to every
place, are of use to teach us how the argument may be well grounded, for they
are as lights unto our reason. And note also, that these places furnish us with
matter to argue, as well for Death, which is the Subject of this question, as
for Not to be feared, which is the Attribute thereof, as we shall see
hereafter. But the Arguments which are drawn from the attribute are the
strongest and most forcible.

ANOTHER EXAMPLE. The praise of Sobriety. The Species of Sobriety.
WE speak not here of that Sobriety which the Physicians appoint by diet:
nor of that which is through necessity, when we have nothing to eat: nor of
that cold gravitie of the Germans a^ the beginning of their meals: nor of that
of covetous persons, who grudge themselves things necessary: nor of that which
is performed by a scrupulous abstinence. But of that which is a moral virtue.

The Definition.
Sobriety is a temperance, which prescribes a moderation in eating and
drinking.

The Whole and the Parts.
Neither do we speak of that Sobriety which consists in certain meats,
and not in other, in eating and not in drinking, in his own h^use and not in
company. For sobriety gives laws for all times, and all places, and for all
sorts of meats and drinks.

The Etymology.
(...)
The Grecians have rightly derived sobriety from a word which signifies to
keep the understanding sound; because it preserves the health, and the
liberty of the understanding.

The Genus.
I say it is a species of Temporance. Now Temperance is the nurse of all other
virtues, the guardian of bodily h^al^h, and of the light of the mind, making
it not to be subi^ct to the belly; it keep^th in brutall concupiscence, and
teach^th how to eat to live, and not to live to eat.

The causes.
The cause why a thing is to be commended or desired is, if it be honest,
delightful, and profitable. Now sobriety has all these three; for it is a
good and comely thing to have an upright body in old age, to have a fresh and
lively countenance, not to be seen drunk nor croaking in an Alehouse among
debauched persons etc.

It is a delightful thing to be cheerful and affable, and to have peace at
home; for drunkenness breeds quarrels. Pleasures seldom used are sweetest.

It is a profitable thing to have a strong body, a free mind, fit to go about
civil affairs, to have a good memory, not to wast goods, to provide for the
necessity of the family; to husband the time well, not to reveal secrets;
sobriety is of use for all these.

The Effects.
The causes for the which sobriety is commendable, are also effects of
sobriety, and therefore we shall not need to repeat them.

The Opposits.
Here a drunkard must be set forth in all his colors, his speech, his gesture,
his countenance, his troubled mind, the gout accompanying it, the red and
bleer'd eyes, the memory overthrown, the understanding becomes more brutish,
the leaness proceeding from excess is worse then that which comes of want.
Add unto these the shame and reproach, when as the diseases of old age are
imputed to the excess of youth, by such as will be ready to say; it is well
bestowed, he has not left his vices, but his vices have left him. Again, the
good of the family is wasted, time is misspent, the body and mind corrupted,
quarrels are picked in drinking, and lascivious desires are stirred up, a man
becomes a babbler disclosing his most hidden secrets. It is a bottomless gulf,
for a little will content nature, but a greedy desire has no end.
Intemperance either kindles or discovers all manner of vices.

The causes of drunkenness and gluttony.
Bad company does cause excess: so does the opinion of a false pleasure. For
what pleasure is there to drink without thirst, and to stir up an artificial
hunger when the belly is full. Also vain glory causes excess, when men will
imagine it to be a thing praiseworthy to be able to hold more drink then
another; and yet such a man shall never hold so much drink as a hogs-head; and
though he have a more capable body, he shall not therefore be accounted a man
of greater capacity.

Comparison in the Probability.
Seeing the very beasts do not overdrinke themselves, why should a man by his
drunkenness make himself worse then a beast? Shall the instinct in a beast be
of greater force, then reason in a man?

Similitudes.
A man cannot study near a Kitchen; a drunkard is not fit for a Sentinel.
God has not made our bodies to be like Spunges, which are filled and then
squeesed out. Excess in drink kindles concupiscence, as Oil powered on a fire.

Testimonies.
Add to those divine and humane testimonies. That God has given man very long
and revolved intestines, to the end that the meat being long in the passage, he
should not need to feed again so soon. That God has placed the brain far
from the belly, which is the Kitchen of the body. That the Lacedaemonians would
sometimes make one of their slaves drunk, and point him to their children, to
m^ke this vice odious unto them.

All these things afford matter of argument: Of all these proofs some are more
forcible then others. The force and soliditie of the proofs, is known by the
help of the Maxims, which we have added to every place.

The third Book. Of ENVNTIATION.
The first Chapter. What an Enuntiation is, and the parts thereof.
THE places or helps of invention contained in the sixteen precedent
Chapters, afford unto us abundan^ (...) ^^ter for proofs and arguments. I^ n^w
remains that we give a form unto these proofs or arguments, and show how to
frame an argument, so as it may be of force to prove.

An argument or reasoning is by the Philosophers called a Syllogism; which is
a Grecke word signifying the making up of an account, or the collecting of a
sum. For that which is the making up of an account, or the total sum of
Addition or Multiplication in Arithmetic, the same is the conclusion in a
Syllogism, namely, that which resulteth and follows from the proof.

Every Syllogism is composed of two Propositions or Enuntiations, and of a
Conclusion.

Enuntiation is a speech, wherein something is affirmed or denied.

Every Enuntiation consists of two words at the least, which the Logicians call
Terms: as, who would say, the two ends, or the two pieces. For example.

The fire burns.

God is good.

These Enuntiations are compounded of two parts, the one is called the Subject;
the other, the Attribute. Fire is the Subject; and burns is the Attribute;
For burning is attributed to fire. God is the Subject; and this word good is
the Attribute.

This Verb, Is, is not reckoned as a part of the Enuntiation, but is only the
link and bond of these two parts.

Wheresoever there is an affirmation or negation, there is an Enuntiation,
though it seems to be but one word. As when we say in Latin, Curro, we
understand, ego curro, I run. And in English, It raineth, is an usual and
common word, which is as much as this Enuntiation, the rain falls. So when
we say, It freezeth, It snoweth, etc.

And when we ask any body, Sleep you? He that answers No, makes a kind
of secret Enuntiation; for it is as much as if he should say, I sleep not.

When we argue, the Enuntiations must be full and perfect, so as there may be
no need of any supplying.

All truth and falsehood is expressed by the Indicative mood; and therefore
every Enuntiation must be couched in the Indicative; because we affirm or
deny a thing only by that mood. And therefore Imperatiues, Optatiues and
Subiunctiues enter not into an E^^untiation, nor do any ^ervice to the Art of
Logic, who^e end and scope is to search out and discern the truth. Now truth
is only expressed ^y the In^icatiue. The other moods are left to Rhetoric,
and serve only for ornament.

Sometimes one of the^^ terms or parts of the Enuntiation is expressed by many
words; as, All the lines drawn from the center to the circumference of the
circle are equal.

God is free from all infirmity.



The Verb Substantive is th^^ ^^^ch causes the Subject to be ^^^^^ed from the
A^tribute; for (...) between both.

An Enuntiation and a Proposition are the same thing; yet out of a Syll^gisme
we^ call it Enuntiation, but in a Syllogism we call it Proposition.

The second Chapter. Of the kinds of Enuntiation.
ENuntiations are either Simple or Compounded.

The Simple Enuntiatio^, which also is called Categoricall, when a thing is
affirmed or denied simply and without condition, and without adding a Whether,
or an If; as, Man is reasonable.

Heaven is round.

Water is cold.

God is no liar.



Of these Enuntiations some are Universal, and some particular.

Universal Enuntiations are such as have these words, All, or None, joined
with them. As, All men are sinners.

No man is perfect.



Particular Enuntiations are such as do not affirm or deny generally of all,
but only of some in particular. As, Some man is black.

Some Kings have not been wise.

Every horse is not white.



Under particular Enuntiations, the Singulars are also comprehended: As, Peter
is foolish.

This man is a Philosopher.



Enuntiations which have no note whereby they may be discerned to be vniversals
or particulars, are called Indefinites, and in strict dealing must be taken for
particulars. Notwithstanding, when the matter is Necessary, they are of as
much force as vniversals. As when I say, Man is reasonable, it is as much as if
I should say, All men are reasonable.

But if the matter be contingent and and mutable: as, Man is white, they are
but as particulars, and is no more then if I should say, Some man is white.

Again, Enuntiations are either Affirmative or Negative: Affirmative; as, God
is good. Negative; as, God is no liar.

Thus we see there are four kind of Enuntiations. For they are either
Universal Affirmatiues. As, All men are white. Or Universal Negatiues, as, No
man is white. Or Particular Affirmatiues, as, Some man is white. Or Particular
Negatiues, as, Some man is not white.

The universality or particularitie of an Enuntiation is called the quantity
thereof. But to be Affirmative or Negative makes the quality.

Simple Enuntiations are sometimes modified by certain circumferences of
Necessity, or Contingency, or Possibility, or Impossibility; as, It is
necessary that man be reasonable.

It falls out that it thunders in Winter.

It is possible that it raineth or has rained.

It is impossible that the Soul should be mortal.



An Enuntiation thus modified or qualified by such circumstances is Negative,
when the negation is joined to the modification or circumstance. As when we
say, It is not necessary that Caesar overcome. But this Enuntiation, It is
necessary that Pompey overcome not, is affirmative.

Compounded Enuntiations are either Conditional or Disjunctiue.

Conditional Enuntiations are such as neither affirm nor deny simply, but
with an If; as, If it be day, the Sun is up.

If God will, the troubles shall cease.



These Enuntiations are compounded of two parts; the former is called the
Antecedent: and the latter the Consequent. And both these may be affirmative;
as, If it be day, the Sun is up.

Sometimes the one is affirmative, and the other negative; as, If the Sun be
not up, it is night. or, If the Sun be up, it is not night.

And sometimes both negatiues; as, If it be not a living creature, it is no man.

Disjoined or Disjunctiue Enuntiations are such as are compounded of opposed
parts, whereof the one overthrowes the other; as, either, It is day, or night.

This man is alive, or dead.



These Enuntiations are not true, except both parts be immediately contraries
or opposits. For if I should say, This cloak is black, or white, I might
speak against the truth; for the cloak may be gray or tawnie, etc.

The third Chapter. Of the Opposition of Enuntiations.
OF Enuntiations some are necessary, and some probable or contingent. According
to this difference Enuntiations are more or less opposite one to another.
Necessary Enuntiations are either when the Genus is attributed to the Species;
as, Man is a living creature. Or the difference; as, Man is reasonable. Or the
property; as, All fire is hot. The Contingents are when some accident is
attributed to the Subject; as, The horse is white. Man is a Physician.

The Opposition of Enuntiations is done three manner of ways. Either as
Contraries, or Subcontraries, or Contradictories. In all which Oppositions one
of the two opposed Enuntiations must ever be affirmative, and the other
Negative, and the same terms must still be kept.

Contrary Enuntiations are an universal affirmative, and an universal
negative; as, All men are just.

No man is just.



Which are both false, because the matter is Contingent. But if the matter be
Necessary, then the one is true, and the other false; as, All men are living
creatures.

No man is a living creature.



Subcontrarie Enuntiations are two particulars contained under two vniversals,
whereof the one affirms, and the other denies; as, Some man is just,

Some man is not just.



In a necessary matter the one is true, and the other false. But in a
contingent matter they may both be true.

Contradictory Enuntiations are an universal affirmative, and a particular
negative. Or else an universal negative, and a particular affirmative; as, All
men are white.

Some man is not white.

Or else. No man is not white.

Some man is white.



Of these two Enuntiations it is necessary that the one be true, and the other
false, in what matter soever it be.

Contraries agree in quantity, but are opposite in quality; as also
Sub-contraries: but Contradictories are both.

The Opposition of Enuntiations in matters Necessary.
The one true and the other false.
VNIV. AF. All men are living creatures. Contraries. VNIV. NEG. No man is a
living creature. Subordinates. Contradictories

Contradictories

Subordinates. The one true and the other false.
PART. AF. Some man is a living creature. Subcontraries. PART. NEG. Some man is
no living creature. The Opposition of Enuntiations in a matter Contingent.
VNIV. AF. All men are white. Both false.
Contraries. VNIV. NEG. No man is white. Subordinates. Contradictories

Contradictories

Subordinates. PART. AF. Some man is white. Both true.
Subcontraries. PAR. NEG. Some man is not white.

Two singular Enuntiations cannot be opposed one to another, but
Contradictorily; as, Peter is white. Peter is not white.

And therefore of necessity the one must be true, and the other false.

The fourth Chapter. Of the Conversion of Enuntiations.
TO Convert an Enuntiation, is to change it so as that the subject is turned
into the attribute, and the attribute into the subject, keeping still the
truth. As, No man is a horse. Then if you will convert this Enuntiation, you
must say, No horse is a man.

This Conversion is done either Simply, or by Accident.

The Simple Conversion is, when the Enuntiation is changed without altering the
quantity. Thus are universal negatiues converted; as in the example before
mentioned.

And so are particular affirmatiues. As, Some man is learned, and, Some learned
is a man.

But universal affirmatiues cannot be converted Simply. For in turning them
so, their truth would be lost. Thus it is true, that, Every man is a living
creature: but it is not true, that, Every living creature is a man.

Therefore when we go about to convert such Propositions, we take away their
universal quantity, and in stead of saying Every man is a living creature, we
turn it into a particular Enuntiation, and say, Some living creature is a man.
Except when the subject is the species, and the attribute the property or
difference. For in this case the proposition may be converted simply. For
example, All living creatures have sense; and, All, that has sense is a living
creature. All bodies have three dimensions: All that has three dimensions is a
body.

Particular negatiues are not converted: for example, this Enuntiation, Some
man is not a Philosopher, is true. But if you would turn it, it would prove
false: Some Philosopher is not a man.

Universal affirmatiues may be converted into universal negatiues, composed
of two negations. As, All men are living creatures.

Whatsoever is not a living creature is no man.



A singular affirmative may be converted into a particular affirmative. As,
This horse is lame: Some lame thing is a horse.

The fourth Book. Of a SYLLOGISM, and the form and kinds thereof.
The first Chapter. What a Syllogism is. Also, what a Conclusion is, and a
Question, or Problem, and the parts thereof.
A Syllogism is a reason or argument in the which from two Enuntiatio^s or
propositions coupled together by certain laws, we draw and deduce a
necessary Conclusion. For example, if we join these two Propositions
together, All that lives has a soul.

All plants live.

This conclusion will follow, Therefore all plants have a soul.

As Propositions are called Enuntiations before they belong to a Syllogism; So
the Conclusion before it be proved by a Syllogism, is not called a Conclusion,
but a Question or Proble^e.

Now every question or conclusion has two parts, namely, the Subject, and the
A^tribute. As in the example above mentioned Plant is the Subject, and, to have
a soul, is the Attribute. The Philosophers call them the two Terms, whereof
the subject is called the lesser Term, and the attribute the greater Term:
because the attribute commonly is more general then the subject. And that
which in the Mathematics is said, to contain, in Logic is said, to be
attributed.

The second Chapter. How to make a Syllogism, and of the parts of it.
A Syllogism is thus made. A question or problem is propounded: For example,
let the question be, Whether Philip be a living creature or no? Now he that
will prove by a Syllogism that Philip is a living creature, must dismember the
said question into two parts; the one whereof is the subject, namely, Philip;
and the other the attribute, namely, living creature. Then he must look out
some third thing, which may be joined and fitted to each of these two parts.
For example, the word Man; which he must first join with living creature, and
say, Every man is a l^ving creature; and then he must join it with Philip, and
say, Philip is a man; thence will follow this Conclusion, Therefore Philip is a
living creature.

This word man is called the Mean or Link: because by the means thereof as by
a Link, the two parts of the conclusion are coupled together. It is of this as
of two Rings which are linked together by the means of a third, which is
placed between both, as, diagram

If the Ring A be joined with the Ring B and the Ring B with the Ring C, it
follows that the Ring A is joined with the Ring C.

This may also be illustrated by an example drawn from Numbers, reasoning
thus. Twelve contains six, and six contains three, therefore twelve
contains three. For we said before, that that which is said to contain in
Mathematics, the same is said to be attributed in Logic.

Therefore every Syllogism is compounded of three parts or Terms, namely, the
Subject of the conclusion, the Attribute of the conclusion, and the Mean or
middle Term, which knitteth these two parts of the conclusion together.

It is no hard matter so soon as a Syllogism is propounded, presently to
perceive which is the Middle term. For it is all that which is not in the
conclusion.

The Mean or middle term joined with the attribute of the conclusion, makes
that proposition which is called the Major or Greater: because the attribute of
the conclusion which is called the greater term is there. The same Mean being
joined with the subject, makes the other proposition, which is called the
Minor or Lesser; so called because the subject of the conclusion which is
called the lesser term is there. This Minor proposition is also called the
Assumption. Now for more ease in this point, we will call the first proposition
simply the proposition, and the second the assumption.

The third Chapter. The natural reason upon which a Syllogism is grounded.
THis structure of a Syllogism is grounded upon two natural Maxims,
acknowledged to be true by those of the Meanest capacity. Whereof the first
is. Whatsoever contains any thing, contains also that which is contained in
that thing.

Which Maxim conceived in Logical terms, is thus to be expressed. Whatsoever
is generally attributed to any thing, must also be attributed to such things,
as the said thing is attributed unto. As, seeing that to be a living creature
is attributed to all men, it must also be attributed to Philip, because Philip
is a man. This first Maxim is the foundation of all Syllogismes that conclude
affirmatively.

The second Maxim is, That which agrees not to a thing and cannot be
attributed unto it, agrees not likewise to those things which are contained
under that said thing. As, to be Almighty belongs not to any creature;
therefore it belongs not to Angels, because they are creatures. This Maxim
is the ground of all Negative Syllogismes, that is to say, such as conclude
negatiuely.

The fourth Chapter. Of the Figures of a Syllogism.
BEcause the Mean is diversely joined with the two terms of the conclusion:
hence it comes to pass that according to the diverse placing of the said Mean,
sundry Figures and Forms of Syllogismes do arise. Now these Figures are three.

The first figure is that wherein the mean is the subject in the proposition,
and the attribute in the assumption. As, in the examples before named; and also
in this, All MEN are sinners.

Paul is a MAN.

Therefore Paul is a sinner.



The second figure is when the Mean is the attribute both in the proposition
and in the assumption. As, All birds have FEATHERS.

No Batt has FEATHERS.

Therefore no Batt is a bird.



The third figure is when the Mean is the subject as well in the proposition,
as in the assumption. As, The SOVLE is immortal.

The SOVLE is a creature.

Therefore some creature is immortal.



The fifth Chapter. General Rules, common to all Figures.
ALL Syllogismes that are faulty in any of the Rules following conclude
nothing.

The first Rule.
A Syllogism must have three Terms, namely, the Subject, and Attribute of the
conclusion, and the Mean; for where there be two Means the Syllogism is
stark naught. The reason drawn from nature is this: If two rings be linked
with two other several rings, it follows not that therefore these two former
rings be linked together. And likewise if you would know whether two pieces of
ground agree in quantity, you must not take two sundry measures; but only one
and the same. Now the two Terms are like unto these two pecces of ground, and
the Mean is like unto the said measure.

We use to say there be four terms, not only when we find in a Syllogism
four differing terms in words; but also when one and the same word is taken
in a double sense, and is equivocall; as, KING is but one syllable.

Alexander is a KING.

Therefore Alexander is but one syllab^e.



King in the proposition is taken for the word; in the assumption for the
person. Likewise if I should say, Every NVMBER is an Accident.

Ten men are a NVMBER.



Therefore ten men are an Accident. I should make four terms, for in the
proposition the word Number is taken for the number numbering, and in the
Assumption for the number numbered. Thus, The END is good.

Death is the END.

Therefore death is good.



In the proposition the word End is taken for the scope, and in the assumption
for the extremity of a thing.

The second Rule.
Out of two negative propositions nothing can be concluded. As, No man is a
beast.

No horse is a man.



Hence nothing is concluded. This may be known by the second fundamental
reason or Maxim, set down in the third Chapter. And the reason is manifest:
For conclusions are then Negative, when the Mean agrees with one of the
terms of the conclusion, and not with the other: whence it is inferred, that
the terms of the conclusion agree not together. And therefore the Mean must
needs agree with one of the two terms; and this is expressed by affirmation.

Yet here is an exception, namely, when the proposition has two negations
equivalent to an affirmation. For example, Whatsoever is not a living creature
is not a man.

A Statua is not a living creature.

Therefore a Statua is not a man.



This Syllogism is good, for the proposition having two negations, imports
as much as this affirmative: Every man is a living creature.

The third Rule.
If both the propositions be particulars, the Syllogism is not good, and the
form of it is naught, and can conclude nothing.

This is likewise evident by the two fundamental Maxims set down in the
third chapter, where these words, Whatsoever contains any thing, presuppose
an universal proposition.

Nevertheless, from two singular propositions a particular conclusion may be
well drawn in the third figure. As, NERO was a Minstrell.

NERO was an Emperor.

Therefore some Emperor was a Minstrell.



Again.

IVDAS is damned.

IVDAS was an Apostle.

Therefore some Apostle is damned.

Or in the second figure.

Thersites was DEFORMED.

This man is not DEFORMED.

Therefore this man is not Thersites.

Whence it is easy to see, that singular propositions are of more force in
reasoning then particulars.

The fourth rule.
The conclusion ever follows the worser and the weaker of the two
propositions: That is to say, if one of the propositions be Negative, the
conclusion also must be negative, and if one of the propositions be particular,
the conclusion also must be particular.

Whence it follows, that if the proposition be an universal negative, and
the assumption a particular affirmative, the conclusion must be a particular
negative. For affirmation is better then negation, and an universal
proposition is better then a particular, because it teaches more things. The
reason of this Maxim is evident. For a thing of less worth cannot bring forth
a thing more excellent, then it self.

The fifth Rule.
There must not be more in the conclusion then there is in the propositions,
As, All that is ordained of God is good.

Marriage is ordained of God.

Therefore marriage is good for an old man; or, with an Infidel.



The sixth Rule.
True propositions well coupled, cannot bring forth a false conclusion; but
false propositions may by chance yield a true conclusion. Which is done, when
we intend to prove a truth by a false reason; and a true conclusion by a Mean
which agrees with neither of the two terms, or only with the one. As, who
would prove Philip to be a living creature, because he is a horse. Or that a
diamond is a stone, because it is a man. As, All men are stones.

All diamonds are men.

Therefore all diamods are stones.



This conclusion is true, howsoever the two propositions be false.

The sixth Chapter. Special Rules for every Figure, and first for the first.
IN the first figure the proposition must be universal, and the assumption
affirmative: or else the Syllogism is naught. For example, Some body is a
living creature.

Every stone is a body.

Therefore some stone is a living creature.



This conclusion is false, and follows not from the propositio^s: because the
first proposition is particular. And if I argue thus, All men are living
creatures,

No horse is a man.

Therefore no horse is a living creature.



This conclusion is false, and follows not from the propositions; because the
assumption is negative. This rule is grounded upon the second Maxim set down
in the third Chapter which says, that in Syllogismes concluding negatiuely,
one of the propositions must be affirmative. Except when the negation do make
a part of the Mean. As if I say, All that is not right is crooked.

This line is not right.

Therefore this line is crooked.



The evidence of this will appear, if you frame the assumption thus, This line
is a line which is not right.

For then the assumption is turned into an affirmative.

The preeminences and prerogatives of the first figure are great above the two
others. For the second figure cannot conclude affirmatively, and the third
figure cannot conclude universally, but in the first figure we may conclude all
manner of ways, and prove all manner of questions: whether universal
affirmatiues, or universal negatiues, or particular affirmatiues, or
particular negatiues.

Universal affirmatiues. As we may prove that all covetous persons are
thieves, because they withhold other men's goods.

Again universal negatiues. As we may prove that no covetous person is free,
because he is a slave to his money.

We may also prove in the first figure a particular affirmative conclusion. As
we may prove that some fishes have lungs, because they breath.

Lastly, we may prove in the first figure a question that is particular
negative. As, that Judas and Saul are not saved, because they were impenitent.

Moreover, the excellency of the first figure appears in this, that the
others are reduced unto it. For by changing something in them, they are reduced
to the first figure; as we shall see hereafter.

Rules for the second Figure.

In the second Figure the Mean is the attribute in both the propositions.

The first proposition in this figure must be universal, or else nothing can be
concluded. As, Some living creatures have two feet.

No horse has two feet.

Therefore some horse is not a living creature.



The conclusion is false, and follows not; because the proposition is
particular.

Again, in the second Figure one of the propositions must be negative, and
consequently the conclusion. For this reason were not good to say, All henns
have two feet.

You have two feet.

Therefore you are a hen.



The natural reason hereof is apparent. For it follows not, that if one
thing be attributed to two other things, that these two things should be the
same thing. As, if to be yellow belongs both to honey and to gall, it follows
not therefore that honey is gall: but it follows well in the negative. As,
Honey is sweet.

Gall is not sweet.

Therefore gall is not honey.



The natural reason hereof is, because if one thing belongs to one of the
two terms of the question, and not to the other, it follows that the two
terms agree not together.

How to reduce the Syllogismes of this second figure ^o the first.
In this figure when the proposition is negative, it is easy to convert and
reduce the Syllogism unto the first figure. For then we must only convert the
proposition simply. As.

No terrestrial body mooues upward.

Smoke mooues upward.

Therefore smoke is no terrestrial body.

You may convert this proposition, saying thus, Nothing that mooues upward is a
terrestrial body.

And so you shall have it in the first figure.

But if the assumption be negative, you must put it in the place of the
proposition, and then convert simply the conclusion, as also the assumption,
which is become the proposition. As in this Syllogism, All men are living
creatures.

No statua is a living creature.

Therefore no statua is a man.



You must change the assumption, and say, No living creature is a statua.

And set it in the place of the proposition, thus, No living creature is a
statua.

All men are living creatures.



Whence the conclusion follows well, Therefore no man is a statua.

Which is the same conclusion, but only converted simply.

Rules for the third Figure.

In the third figure the Mean is the subject in both propositions.

The assumption must be affirmative, as in the first figure.

The conclusion is always particular, and cannot be universal.

The natural reason hereof is, because if two things are attributed to the
same thing, it follows not that these two things agree always together: but
only it follows that they agree sometimes and in certain subjects. As, if
to be bright and round belongs to the Sun, it follows not that whatsoever
is round must be bright. So to be reasonable and to have two feet belongs to
man; whence it follows not, that whatsoever has two feet must be reasonable:
but only that something which has two feet is reasonable.

The Syllogismes of this figure are reduced to the first by converting the
assumption. As, All horses neigh.

All horses have four feet.

Therefore something that has four feet neigheth.



If you convert the assumption, How to reduce the Syllogismes of the third
figure to the first.
saying, Something that has four feet is a horse,

This Syllogism will be in the first figure.

But if the proposition be particular, ac in this Syllogism, Some Apostle is
damned.

All Apostles are sent of God.

Therefore some one that is sent of God is damned.



Now to reduce this Syllogism to the first figure, you must convert the
proposition, and say, Some damned persons is an Apostle.

And then put it in the place of the assumption in this manner, All Apostles
are sent of God.

Some damned person is an Apostle.

Therefore some damned person is sent of God.



Which is the very same conclusion, but simply converted.

The seventh Chapter. Certain artificial words which serve to show how many
ways we may argue in each figure, and how the second and third figure may be
converted into the first.
TO help the memory Logicians have found out certain artificial words, which
serve to show how many ways a man may argue in each figure. The words are
these; 1. BARBARA, CELARENT, DARII, FERIO. 2. CESARE, CAMESTRES, FESTINO,
BAROCO. 3. DARAPTI, FELAPTON, DISAMIS, DATISI, BOCARDO, FERISON.
To understand the use of these words, you must note that every one of these
words has but three Syllables: the first whereof signifies the proposition, the
second the assumption, and the third the conclusion.

Again, note that in all these words there are but four Vowels, namely these,
A. E. I. O.

A signifies an universal affirmative proposition.

E signifies an universal negative proposition.

I signifies a particular affirmative proposition.

O signifies a particular negative proposition.



The Syllogismes which are made

The word BARBARA, intimates, that whenever the two propositions in the first
figure shall be A, that is, universal affirmative, the conclusion shall
likewise be A, that is, an universal affirmative.

So the word CELARENT signifies that whenever the proposition in the first
figure shall be E, that is, an universal negative, and the assumption A, that
is, an universal affirmative; the conclusion shall be E, that is, an
universal negative. So likewise of all the other words.



The word FESTINO intimates, that whenever the proposition in the second
figure shall be E, that is, an universal negative, and the assumption I, that
is, a particular affirmative; the conclusion shall be O, that is, a particular
negative. As, FES -- No compounded thing is eternal.

TI -- Some thing in man is eternal.

NO -- Therefore something in man is not compounded.



Note that in these four words, the last syllables are always either E or O,
to show that the conclusion must always be negative.



For example, the word FELAPTON signifies that if the proposition in the third
figure be E, that is, an universal negative, and the assumption A, that is, an
universal affirmative; the conclusion must be O, that is, a particular
negative. As, FE -- No Batt has feathers.

LAP -- All Batts fly.

TON -- Therefore something that flies has no feathers.



Note that in all these six words, the last syllables have either I or O, to
show that the conclusion in the third figure must always be particular.

The Consonants of these same words are not without their special use. For
they serve to know how the Syllogismes of the second and third figure may be
reduced to the first. To this end serves the first capital letter. For Cesare
and Camestres are reduced to Celarent: Darapti, Disamis, Datisi are reduced to
Darij: Festino, Felapton, Ferison are reduced to Ferio.

Baroco and Bocardo cannot be reduced, because one of the propositions is a
particular negative, which cannot enter into the first figure.

S signifies that the proposition which is noted with an S, must be simply
converted. As in Cesare and Datisi.

P signifies that the proposition must be converted by Accident, that is to
say, that the universal affirmative must be converted into a particular
affirmative. As in Darapti and Felapton.

M signifies that the propositions must be transposed, and must change their
place. As in Camestres and Disamis, whereof we have given examples.

The eight Chapter. Of an Enthymeme.
AN Enthymeme is nothing else but a Syllogism, whereof one of the propositions
is suppressed, either for brevities sake, or for some deceit. For brevitie, as
God sins not.

Therefore God is no liar.



Or Nothing that corrupts man can be the chief good.

Therefore Voluptuousness is not the chief good.



For deceit, as, This Commonwealth is the greatest.

Therefore it is the best.



Or Whatsoever troubles a Commonwealth must be banished.

Therefore the Gospel must be banished.



In these imperfect Syllogismes, that proposition is suppressed which is most
odious, and wherein the falsehood lies, namely, Every Commonwealth, that is,
the greatest is the best. As also this, The Gospel troubles a Commonwealth.

Sometimes to make the speech more smooth and current, we put the conclusion in
the first place. As, The estate of Oligarchy is the worst of all.

Because it is most subject to civil war.



Rhetoricians call Enthymemes proofs grounded upon probable signs. As, Milo
killed Claudius:

For he hated him before.



Or This man is learned:

For he is pale and has many books.



These proofs are of no force, except they be in great number. For signs and
conjectures which have no force being alone, become forcible when there are
many of them together.

The ninth Chapter. Of Induction, and of Example.
INduction is a Syllogism wherein diverse singulars or particulars are as a
Mean to prove an universal conclusion. As when I will prove that all living
creatures have feeling; because birds, fishes, serpents, terrestrial beasts,
and Amphibia have feeling.

Or thus, the Stag, the Do, the Hare, the Coney, the Mouse have a great heart
in proportion to their body: Now the fearful creatures are the Stag, the Do,
etc. Therefore all fearful creatures have a great heart in proportion to their
bodies.

By this kind of discourse all Sciences have been invented. For example,
Physicians having by the trial of many plants of Mercury or of Parietarie
observed, that they are laxatiue, have thence gathered a general rule, that
all plants of Mercury or Parietarie are laxatiue. Thus have men attained to
the knowledge of the causes of Eclipses, of Apoplexies, and of Floods greater
then ordinary about the Aequinoxes by sundry particular observations.

An Example is an imperfect Induction. Of Example.
For in stead of many particulars we use but one.

In natural causes Examples are more forcible then in civil and voluntary
actions: because natural events are much more alike then civil and voluntary
actions, which are subject to many changes and chances. As if I should say,
Yesterday in the evening the sky being red, the day following proved fair:
this example has some likelihood to prove, that seeing the sky is red this
evening, to morrow it will prove a fair day. But if I say, Philip digging his
garden found a pot of gold, it follows not that Alexander digging shall have
the same hap.

Orators notwithstanding do much enlarge themselves upon such examples. And by
reason of the mischiefs which have happened to any one through drunkenness, or
lying, or anger, they use to exhort others to shun the same vices.

The tenth Chapter. Of the Enumeration of parts.
THe Enumeration of parts is also a kind of Syllogism, serving to conclude
both affirmatively and negatiuely.

When we will conclude affirmatively, we make a rehearsal of all the parts:
that so having remooved all the parts but one, that one which remains may be
concluded or affirmed. As,

What goods soever a man has, he has them either by inheritance, or by
purchase, or by exchange, or by gift, or by labor, or by play, or because he
has found them, or stolen them. But the goods which you have, you have them
neither by inheritance, nor by purchase, nor by exchange, nor by gift, nor by
labor, nor by play, nor because you have found them. Therefore you have stole
them.

But when we will conclude negatiuely, we remove all the parts. As, All
Frenchmen are either Normans, or Picards, or Champenois, etc. But the Lorrains
are neither Normans, nor Picards, nor Champenois, etc. Therefore they are no
Frenchmen.

You must ever take heed that the Enumeration be not imperfect; as, when we say
that all mankind is either male or female: Or that every action is either good
or bad. For there are Hermaphrodites; and there be some actions that are
indifferent. So if I should say that every quality is either a natural
faculty, or a habit, or an active quality in the objects of the senses, this
enumeration would prove imperfect. For besides these there are forms and
figures.

The eleventh Chapter. Of a Dilemma.
A Dilemma is a forked or horned argument, wherein we give our adversary his
choice of two things, to show him that whether of the two soever he chooses,
he is still overcome in both. As, to prove that a man should never marry, we
may argue thus, If thou marriest, thy wife will be either fair or deformed; If
fair thou will prove jealous; If deformed thou will not like her. Therefore it
is better not to marry. Or, be not a lawyer, for if thou pleadest for
injustice, thou shall displease God; If thou pleadest for justice, thou shall
displease men. Our Savior Christ made a Dilemma when he was buffeted, saying,
If I have ill spoken show wherein; but if well, why smitest thou me? Thus a man
may reason against one that has dreamed that we must not believe dreams: Or
that has sworn that he will forswear himself. If thou forswear thy self,
thou art a perjured person; If thou do not forswear thy self, yet art thou
still a perjured person; because thou have sworn that thou will forswear thy
self.

Carneades gave twenty crowns to his Master Diogenes to teach him Logic. One
day disputing with his Master according to the rules that he had taught him,
his Master told him that he disputed not well; Whereupon his Scholar made him
this Dilemma. I dispute either well or ill: If I dispute well, why blamest thou
me? If I dispute ill, give me back my twenty crowns? Such was the
disputation between Protagoras and his Scholar Evathlus, Gellius. l. 5. c. 10.
which example is well known, and the recital would be too too long. You may
see it in A. Gellius. lib. 5. cap. 10.

The twelfth Chapter. Of a Sorites, or heaping Syllogism.
A Sorites is a kind of argume^^ which knitteth many propositions together, to
show that the subject of the first agrees with the attribute of the last. As,
Whatsoever acts, mooveth.

Whatsoever mooveth, is mutable.

Whatsoever is mutable, is corruptible.

Whatsoever is corruptible, is not God.

Therefore it is inferred, if God acts, he is not God.



So many propositions, so many Syllogismes which have God for the subject of
the conclusion.

The thirteenth Chapter. Of Conditional or Hypotheticall Syllogismes.
WE have said that Enuntiations are either simple or compound; and that of
compounded Enuntiations, some are Conditional or Hypotheticall, and some
Disjunctiue.

Hitherto we have treated of Syllogismes consisting of simple propositions, now
we are to speak of Conditional and Disjunctiue Syllogismes, whose
propositions are conditional or disjunctiue.

A Conditional Syllogism is, whose proposition has an If. As, If there be a
God, he must be served.

But there is a God.

Therefore he must be served.



The proposition has two parts, the first whereof is called the Antecedent, If
there be a God: the second is called the Consequent, He must be served.

There are two Rules for these Syllogismes.

I. Maxim.
The first is, that if the Antecedent be granted, the Consequent is also
granted. As, If Paul be a man, he is a living creature.

But he is a man.

Therefore he is a living creature.



But you cannot by over-throwing the Antecedent, overthrow the Consequent. As,
If a fly be a bird, it is a living creature.

But a fly is no bird.

Therefore it is no living creature.



II. Maxim
The second Maxim is, that if the consequent be overthrown, the antecedent is
overthrown also. As, If a statua be a man, it is a living creature.

But a statua is no living creature.

Therefore it is no man.



If the antecedent be the species, and the consequent be the difference or
property, then you may overthrow the antecedent to overthrow the consequent.
As, If a statua be a horse, it neigheth.

But it is no horse.

Therefore it neigheth not.



But such conclusions follow by chance, and not by the force of the Syllogism.

In these Syllogismes the assumption is part of the proposition, which
proposition makes an entire Syllogism. And it is probable that this word
Assumption is borrowed from these Syllogismes, because that in them the second
proposition is taken and assumed out of the first.

The foureteenth Chapter. Of Disjunctive Syllogismes.
DIsjunctiue Syllogismes are such, whose proposition is compounded of two
disjunctiue parts or pieces, or which are separated by this particle OR. As, It
is day or night. This number is even or odd. As thus, This man is dead or alive.

But he is dead.

Therefore he is not alive.

Or else thus, But he is alive.

Therefore he is not dead.

Or thus, But he is not alive.

Therefore he is dead.



For those propositio^s are compounded of such parts, the one whereof cannot be
granted, without overthrowing the other; Nor can you overthrow the one without
establishing or granting the other. And for this cause, these two parts must
be immediately opposite, so as there may be no third. For example, this argument
is not good.

There is peace or war.

But there is no war.

Therefore there is peace.

For there may be a truce.

In these Syllogismes to the end that the truth may be evident and without
exception, the two parts of the proposition must not be contradictorie, but
must be either contraries, or privatiues, or relatiues. For example, if I argue
thus, This line is straight, or crooked.

But it is straight.

Therefore it is not crooked.



This argument is clear and certain.

But if I argue thus, Philip is wise or unwise.

But he is unwise.



From thence we can draw no conclusion that may have any likelihood of reason.

The fifth Book. OF THE MASTERPIECE OF LOGIC called DEMONSRATION.
The first Chapter. What Science is.
THIS word Science is sometimes taken for the whole body of one kind of
learning. Thus Ethics, Physics, Metaphysics, civil Law, are called
Sciences. Sometimes the word Science signifies only the knowledge of a
conclusion prooved by Demonstration. And this is it whereof we purpose to treat
of in this place; which is thus defined.

Science is a certain knowledge of a thing certain, whose proof is drawn
from the cause.

To have the Science of a thing, two certainties are required. The one is, that
the thing be certain of it self and unchangeable. The second is, that the
persuasion which we have of it be firm and clear. If either of these two
certainties be wanting it is no Science, but opinion. For a man may have a
doubtful opinion of a thing certain. As he that doubts whether there be a
God.

And on the contrary, a man may have a firm and steadfast persuasion of that
which is uncertain and false. As those that suffer death for the defense of a
false Religion.

And therefore it is not amiss to know the difference between Science, Faith,
and Opinion. Science is a certain knowledge of a certain thing by the next
cause. Opinion is a doubtful or false knowledge. Faith is a firm persuasion
grounded upon the Testimony of some other.

If a man know certainly a thing because he sees it, or touches it, that is
neither called Science, nor Faith, nor opinion; but sense, which knows only
things singular: but Science is of things universal.

The second Chapter. What a Demonstration or Demonstratiue Syllogism is.
A Demonstratiue Syllogism is that which gives or brings certain knowledge
of the conclusion. If we will define it more exactly, we must define it thus. A
demonstratiue Syllogism is that which prooveth that the attribute of the
conclusion is truly attributed unto the subject, by a Mean that must be the
next efficient or final cause of the attribute of the said conclusion. These
two sorts of causes were called external, in the Chapter of Causes above
mentioned: because they are no parts of the effect, nor of the thing
compounded, though sometimes the efficient cause be in the very same subject.
As, the soul of man is the cause of the sense in man: and the thickness of
gold is the cause of the weight of it. In these examples the efficient cause
and the effect are in the same subject.

The third Chapter. What questions are demonstrable.
SVch questions wherein the attribute is a substance, cannot be prooved by
demonstration: because substances have no certain efficient cause proper unto
them. For the will of God is an universal cause common to all things, and by
consequent it can be no Mean in a demonstratiue Syllogism.

Again, such questions or conclusions wherein the attribute is a mutable or
casual accident, cannot be proved by demonstration: because these accidents
have no certain and assured cause. As, Philip is rich. Bucephalus halteth.

But those questions are demonstrable, whose attribute is a proper and
immutable accident, whereof the next efficient or final cause may be given.
For example, these questions may be prooved by demonstration.

A transparent body is without color.

Eunuchs are never bald.

Fixed Stars do twinckle.

The Moon suffers obscurity.

Of all estates Oligarchie is the most subject to civil war.

Lines parallel never meet.

All bodies compounded of Elements are corruptible.

Under the scorching Zone it is very hot.

For the next efficient or final cause of the attribute of these questions may
be given.

The fourth Chapter. What the propositions of a demonstratiue Syllogism ought
to be.
THe Demonstration must consist of necessary propositions; among which those
are the most necessary, which are called Immediate.

There be two sorts of immediate propositions, that is to say, such as are
without any middle. For some are immediate in regard of the subject, and others
are immediate in regard of the cause.

Immediate propositions in regard of the subject are when the attribute agrees
next of all and immediately to the subject, so as a nearer subject cannot be
given. In such propositions the attribute agrees with the subject, because it
is such a subject. For example, if I say that a horse has sense, this
attribute agrees not next and immediately to a horse; for there is a nearer
subject, namely, an Animal, unto the which sense belongs. But if I say that a
horse neigheth, this agrees next and immediately to a horse, as he is a horse,
and not by reason of any other nearer subject.

Immediate propositions in regard of the cause are, when an attribute is so
nearly joined to the subject, as that the cause or reason cannot be yielded
why it should be so. For example, here is a Demonstration: Whatsoever has a
sensitive soul has touching.

Every animal has a sensitive soul.

Therefore every animal has touching.



In this Syllogism the conclusion is immediate in regard of the subject, but
not in regard of the cause. For in this Syllogism the Mean is the cause of
the conclusion. But the two propositions are immediate, both in regard of the
cause, as also of the subject, for nothing can be alleged as a cause of their
truths.

Sometimes the efficient and final causes are linked together with a long
chain. As, Under the Equator the air is very hot, because it is very
subtle; The air is very subtle, because the Sun does rarefie it very much;
The Sun rarefies the air, because the beams fall in right angles; The
beams fall in right angles, because the Sun is there in the Zenith. Thus it
is in the final cause.

The Lungs draw in the air to refresh the heat of the heart: The heat of the
heart is refreshed to keep the Temperature: The Temperature is kept to
preserve life. So many causes, so many demonstrations. But the last where also
the chiefest and last cause stands for the Mean, is the noblest of all:
because it can no further be demonstrated: and the two propositions are
immediate every manner of way.

The fifth Chapter. A special note to know a perfect Demonstration.
OF all the marks of a perfect Demonstration, this is the most evident, when
it may be conver^ed or reduced to a definition. For we have said heretofore
that the definition of a proper accident is compounded of three parts; namely,
L. 2. c. 8.
of the Genus of that which is defined, and of the proper subject, and of the
cause thereof. As the definition of Death is, the destruction of the life of
the creature by the extinguishing of vital heat. Out of this definition a
demonstration may be framed, making the Subject of this accident to be the
subject of the conclusion, the Genus to be the attribute, and the cause the
Mean. As thus, Whenever the vital heat is extinguished, life is destroyed.

But in a living creature the vital heat is extinguished.

Therefore in a living creature life is destroyed.



The same may be said of these definitions following. Sleep is the heaviness
of a living creature, by the cessation of the common sense. Thunder is a noise
in the clouds, by the breaking out of the fire.

The sixth Chapter. Of an Imperfect Demonstration.
WE have showed that a perfect demonstration is that, which proves by the
next efficient or final cause of the attribute; that the attribute of the
conclusion agrees with the subject.

If any of these perfections be wanting, the demonstration is the weaker, and
less perfect.

If the Mean be not the next cause of the attribute, but only a remote cause,
then is the demonstration weaker, and more imperfect. And such demonstrations
for the most part conclude negatiuely. For example.

Where there is no opposition of contrary qualities, there is no death.

But in the heavens there is no opposition of contrary qualities.

Therefore in heaven there is no death.

Or He that is of a cold temperature will never be bald.

But Eunuchs are of a cold temperature,

Therefore Eunuchs will never be bald.



In these demonstrations the propositions are not immediate: For the Mean is
not the next cause of the attribute. To have no contrary qualities is not the
next cause of not dying, but a remote cause: for the next cause of not dying in
man's body is the continual preservation of the humors in an equal temperature;
and the cause hereof is to have no contrariety or combat between the
elementarie qualities in the body.

Thus the cause why Eunuchs become not bald is, become the radical humor of
the hairs is not spent: and the remote cause is, because they have but little
heat.

In these demonstrations the propositions are not immediate, for the Mean is
not the next cause of the attribute.

And though the propositions be immediate, yet if the Mean be not the cause,
but the effect of the attribute, then it shall be a less perfect
demonstration; proving not the effect by the cause, but the cause by the
effect. This kind of demonstration shows not why the conclusion is, but only
that it is. As, All that love God are beloved of God.

But all that have faith in Christ, love God.

Therefore all that have faith in Christ are beloved of God.



The Mean is to love God, which is not the cause, but the effect of the love
which God bears unto us; which love is the attribute of the conclusion in
this demonstration, wherein the cause is proved by the effect: whereas in a
perfect demonstration we prove effects by their causes. Therefore this
imperfect demonstration proves only that the thing is, but shows not why it
is. The effect may very well be the cause of knowing, but not of being. As the
smoke which we see come out of a chimney may be a cause to make us know that
there is fire in the house: but it is not the cause of the fire, but only the
effect. And the unequal beating of the pulse is not the cause of the Ague, but
it is a cause which makes us know that such a one has an Ague.

The sixth Book. OF SOPHISMES OR FALLACIES.
The first Chapter. Of Fallacies in words.
ALL Fallacies or Sophismes committed in disputing are either in the Words, or
in the Matter.

Fallacies in words are of six kinds. 1. Aequivocation. 2. Amphibologie. 3.
Deceit by Composition. 4. Deceit by Division. 5. Deceit in the Accent or
Pronuntiation. 6. And deceit in the Figure of the word.

1. Of Aequivocation.
Decipt by Aequivocation is, when the Mean is a doubtful word, taken in the
proposition one way, and in the assumption another way. As, That which has
neither beginning nor ending, God created not.

The roundnesse of the Heavens has neither beginning nor ending.

Therefore the roundnesse of the Heavens God created not.



In the proposition beginning and ending is taken for continuance of time: but
in the assumption it is taken for the beginning and ending of a figure. Or
thus, He that says that thou live, says true.

He that says that thou art a goose, says that thou live.

Therefore he that says that thou art a goose, says true.



In the proposition it is meant of an express saying; but in the assumption of
a saying by consequence.

Thus a man of great capacity may be taken for a learned man, and sometimes
for one whose stomach is able to contain much wine.

The same fallacy may be committed also when a word is otherwise taken in the
propositions, then in the conclusion.

2. Of Amphibologie.
Amphibologie is an ambiguous constructio^, making the sense doubtful. As,
Faith alone justifies.

It cannot be known whether the meaning be, that faith being alone justifies;
or else that faith justifies only. In the first sense it is false; for faith
alone without good works is no true faith, and by consequent justifies not.
But in the second sense it is true that faith only justifies, because it
only has the property to justify. So it is true in one sense, that the eye
alone sees, but it is false in another sense that the eye sees alone. For an
eye that is out of the head sees not

3. The fallacy in Composition.
The fallacy in Composition is, when things are taken as conjoined, which
cannot be true, but in a divided sense. As in this proposition: A man that is
set may run.

Which is true if it be meant at diverse times; but if it be meant at the same
time it is false and impossible. For a man that is set cannot run whilst he
is sitting. So, that men are male and female, is true of diverse persons; but
false if it be meant of the same persons.

4. Of the fallacy by Division.
This fallacy of Division is contrary to the former. For this separateth
things which cannot be true, except they be joined together. Thus, though it be
true that two and three make five, yet it follows not, that two or three are
five. If a man should say, This wall is white, therefore this wall is; this
consequence were good, because to be white is an accident which could not be,
if the subject were not. But if one should say, Philip is dead, therefore
Philip is; the consequence were not good: because that to be dead is not an
accide^t, but a privation, which presupposes that the subject, namely, Philip,
was, but now is no more. Whosoever therefore argues thus, divides that which
cannot be true except it be joined. This division may happen sometimes in one
word only. As, Ingeniosus, being taken for one word is a commendation, but
divided into two, as, Ingenio sus, it is a reproach.

5. Of the fallacy in the Accent or Pronuntiation.
The fallacy in the Accent is, when a false thing is affirmed under color of
pronouncing it as another thing that is true. For example, Where no ach is,
there needs no salve.

In the Gout there is no H.

Therefore in the Gout there needs no salve.



Again, if a man should say, I am hot; are you as hot? Or, I am cold; are you
as cold? A man cannot distinguish in fast speaking of it, whether he says a
sot, in stead of as hot; Or, a scould in stead of as cold. But being written a
man shall easily perceive this fallacy.

This fallacy is also committed when that which is spoken positiuely, is taken
as if it were spoken by Interrogation. As if a man commanding say to another,
Rest you, and he taking it Interrogatiuely should answer; No.

6. Of the fallacy in the Figure of the word.
The fallacy in the figure of the word is, when from the Gender or Number of
the word, or because the Verb is Active or Passive, a man will infer that
the nature of the thing is such. For example, if a man should argue, that
Prudence, Temperance, or Justice are only proper and peculiar unto women,
because they are of the feminine gender, which no way follows. So likewise,
because to hear and to see be not Passiues, it follows not, that therefore
hearing and seeing are no Passiues. And although I say, that I have received
letters from my brother, it follows not, that I have received more then one,
though the word be Plural.

The second Chapter. Of Fallacies in the Matter.
THere are seven fallacies in the Matter; that is to say, when the deceit
lies not in the words, but in the ignorance or disguising of the thing. These
fallacies are, 1. The fallacy by Accident. 2. The fallacy which takes a
thing as spoken simply or absolutely, which is true only in some respect. 3.
The Supposing of that which is in question. 4. The fallacy of Inconsequence.
5. The fallacy whereby a thing is taken for a cause which is not a cause. 6.
The fallacy which mingleth diverse questions as if they were but one. 7. The
Ignorance of that which contradicts the question.

The third Chapter. The fallacy by Accident.
THe fallacy by Accident is, when from an assumption which is true only by
accident a conclusion is drawn which is absolute, simple, and without
restraint. As in this argument: That which stirs up troubles in a
Commonwealth is pernicious.

The Gospel stirs up troubles in a Commonwealth.



Therefore the Gospel is pernicious. Thus the Sun darkeneth the eyesight:
and the law of God hardens the sinner. Whence if a man would infer, that
the Sun were the cause of darkness, or, that the Law were the c^use of
sin, he should fall into the fallacy of the Accident. For the Gospel of it
own nature stirs up no troubles, seeing it preaches peace: but men take
occasion thereby to rise up against it. Neither does the Sun blind the eyes
by nature, but by accident, when it meets with a weak eyesight.

The fourth Chapter. The fallacy which takes a thing as simply true, which is
not so, but only in some respect.
THis fallacy is committed, when one of the propositions being true only in
part, or in some respect, we labor to draw from thence a conclusion to make
it true at all times, in all respects, and in every part. As, Every good thing
is to be desired.

Wealth is a good thing.

Therefore wealth is to be desired.



The assumption is true in some respect only, and to some men. For riches are
not good, but to good men, and to such as can use them well. And so in this
Syllogism: He that is borne of a woman had a beginning.

Our Savior Christ was borne of a woman.

Therefore our Savior Christ had a beginning.



The fifth Chapter. Of the Supposing of that which is in Question.
WE suppose that which is in question, when we make a Syllogism, wherein one
of the propositions is the same thing which is in question, though it be
couched in other terms. As if I would prove tha^ the world was not created,
because God made it not. Or, if I would prove that men are just, because they
are without sin; that were to prove a thing by it self.

The sixth Chapter. Of the fallacy of Inconsequence.
THe fallacy of Inconsequence is, when we break the rules which are set down
in the Chapter of the conversion of Enuntiations, and in the Chapter of
Hypotheticall Syllogismes. For ^^ample, we said in the fourth Chapt^^ of the
third Book, that an universal affirmative enuntiation cannot be converted
into any other proposition, but into a particular affirmative, or into an
universal, having two negatiues. As, All men are living creatures, is thus
converted; Some living creature is a man: Or into this, Whatsoever is not a
living creature is not man.

Again, we said that in Hypotheticall Syllogismes we may proceed from the
establishing of the Antecedent, to the establishing of the Consequent: And that
we may proceed from the over-throwing of the Consequent to the over-throwing
of the Antecedent.

Now if any would dispute contrary to these Rules, saying, All men are living
creatures; therefore all living creatures are men. Or, All men are living
creatures; therefore all that is not man is not a living creature, he should
fall into the fallacy of a bad Consequence.

The same fallacy is committed if you argue thus, If Bucephalus be a man, he
is a living creature.

But he is a living creature.

Therefore he is a man.

Or thus, If Bucephalus be a man, he is a living creature.

But he is not a man.

Therefore he is not a living creature.



For such arguments are against the rules of Hypotheticall Syllogismes, set
down in the thirteenth Chapter of the fourth Book.

The seventh Chapter. The fallacy whereby a thing is taken for a cause, which
is none.
THe fifth fallacy is, when you allege a Mean which seems to be the cause
of the conclusion, but indeed is not. Such was the answer of a certain Pyrate
to Alexander the great: who having asked of him what had made him a Pyrate; he
answered, that he was a Pyrate, because he had but one Fregat or small Bark;
but if he had two hundred Galleys, as Alexander had, that then he should be a
King. Such also are these proofs. The Church of Greece is the best, because it
is the greatest. Or, This man is learned, because he has many books. Or, that
Charles has a grey-beard, because he was not hanged ten years ago. Here the
ordinary fault is, when the occasion is taken for a cause. For causes do act,
but occasions act not; but are only the subject and matter of acting. Thus
truth breeds hatred, not of it own nature, but by occasion. So the Law of God
hardens the hearts of wicked men that oppose themselves against it. It is not
the cause of the hardness, but only the occasion.

The eight Chapter. Of the fallacy which mingleth many Interrogations, as if
they were but one.
SOmetimes many Interrogations are cunningly entermingled, that an untruth may
be crowded in amongst many truths. As, Cyrus, Alexander, Caesar were they not
valiant Kings? Or, these qualities, to be bay, old, tall, one-eyde, are they
not in this horse?

Some will be ready to grant all this, not marking that Caesar was never King;
and that to be one eyde is a privation, and not a quality; and that to be old
is not a quality, but a quantity or length of time past. Therefore such
Interrogations must be answered by distinction.

The ninth Chapter. Of the fallacy which is committed by the Ignorance of that
which contradicts the Question.
THe fallacy through the Ignorance of that which contradicts, is, when he
that argues against me brings a conclusion which he alleges as contrary or
contradictorie to my position, which notwithstanding is nothing prejudicial
unto it, and may be granted. For example, if I say that God is no liar; a
Sophister will go about to conclude, that God says not all the truth: which
notwithstanding agrees very well with that which I affirm; neither does it
from thence follow that God is a liar.

To the end therefore that these be not taken for contradictorie or contrary
Enuntiations, which indeed are not: we must understand that if we Every Cock
is living, and, Every Cock is not living, are not contradictorie: if the one
be meant of a living creature, and the other taken for the cock of a Gunne.
Again, the attribute must agree with Man is mortal; and, Man is immortal,
are not contradictorie: if the one be understood of the body; and the other of
the soul of man. And, The Grecians were valiant, contradicts not this, The
Grecians were not valiant, for both are true, if you consider them at several
times.

Cicero is of great stature; and, Cicero is not of great stature, may both be
true, if Cicero be compared to diverse persons: little in comparison of a giant,
and great in comparison of a dwarf.

The tenth Chapter. Of the faults in Syllogismes.
GEnerally all Syllogismes may be faulty, either in the form, or in the
matter. They are faulty in the Form, when the rules of the figures are not
observed, committing a fault, either in the quantity, or quality, or the
propositions, or in the placing of the Mean, or if there be more then three
terms.

The Syllogism is faulty in the Matter, when one of the propositio^s, or
both, are false, either in the whole, or in part. This faultiness happens
sometimes through simplicity, and without cunning, bu^ sometimes it is
fraudulent and with cunning; such as are the fallacies above mentioned. If a
Syllogism be faulty in the form, it must be brought to the true form. If it
be faulty in the matter, that proposition which is false must be denied. And
if it be doubtful or true in part only, it must be distinguished.

But if the fault be neither in the form, nor in the matter, but only in the
fallacy of the ignorance of that which contradicts the question, by the
which the adversary maintains a thing which does not prejudice the question;
in such a case we must grant all that the adversary says, and show him, that
in thinking to contradict us, be does it not.

The end and scope of these fallacies, is not to teach us how to deceive, but
how to avoid deceit.

FINIS.

