A TRVE Coppie of a Discourse written by a Gentleman, employed in the late
Voyage of Spain and Portingale:

Sent to his particular friend, and by him published, for the better
satisfaction of all such, as having been seduced by particular report, have
entered into conceits tending to the discredit of the enterprise, and Actors of
the same.

AT LONDON Printed for Thomas Woodcock dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at the
sign of the black Bear. 1589

To the Reader.
SOme holding opinion, that it is only proper to men of learning (whose Art
may grace their doings) to write of matter worthy to be committed to the
view of future Ages, may judge the publication of such Discourses as are
contained in this Pamphlet, to be an adventure too great for a professed
Soldier to undertake: but I, more respecting the absolute truth of the
matter, than the fair show that might be set thereon; and preferring the high
reputation of the Actors in this Journey before the request of my particular
friend, have presumed to present unto you a report of the late Voyage into
Spain and Portingall, sent unto me almost 4. months sithence from a Gentleman
my very nere friend employed in the same; who, as it appears in his
observations, has advisedly seen into every action thereof: and because I
have often conferred with many that were in the same Journey, very nere upon
every particular of his relation, and find as much confirmed as I have
received, I presume to deliver it unto you for true and exact. Howbeit,
forasmuch as it came unto my hands with his earnest request to reserve it to my
self, I had almost consented thereunto; had not the desire I have to reconcile
the contrartetie of opinions that be held of that action, and to make it known
what honor the cause has laid upon our whole Nation, moved me to publish the
same: whereof since there may grow a greater benefit in public, (for that
many shall partake thereof) than the pleasure can be to him in smothering the
labors he has bestowed in setting down the Discourse, I doubt not but he
esteeming a common good before his private fancy, will pardon me herein. In
the behalf of whom, I beseech you to whose view and reading the same is
offered, not so curiously to look upon the form, as upon the matter; which I
present unto you as he sent it, naked and unpolished. And you that were
companions with him of the Journey, if any of you may think your selves not
fully satisfied in the report of your deseruings, let me entreat you to excuse
him, in that he indeuouring to write thereof briefly for my particular
understanding, did only take notice of them who commanded the services in
chief, as being of greatest mark, and lay the blame upon me, who can by no
means avoid it: saving that from the fault I have committed, (if it be a
fault) I hope there may some good proceed. It has satisfied me in many things,
whereof I being ignorant, was led into an erroneous conceit of the matter and
of the persons: and I hope it shall both confirm others who may remain
doubtful of either; and reform them that having been seduced, are become
sectaries against the same. I will therefore commend the man and matter to your
friendly censure, forbearing to notify his name, least I might increase mine
offense against him; and be namelesse my self for other good considerations:
which I leave friendly Reader to thy best construction.

THE TRVE COPY of a letter sent from a Gentleman, who was in all the services
that were in the late Journey of Spain and Portingall, to a friend of his.
ALthough the desire of advancing my reputation, caused me to withstand the
many persuasions you used, to hold me at home, and the pursuit of honorable
actions drew me (contrary to your expectation) to neglect that advise, which
in love I know you gave me: yet in respect of the many assurances you have
yielded me of your kindest friendship, I can not suspect that you will either
love or esteem me the less, at this my return: and therefore will not omit
any occasion which may make me appear thankful, or discharge any part of
that duty I owe you; which now is none other, than to offer you a true
discourse how these wars of Spain and Portingall have passed since our going
out of England the xviii. of April, till our return which was the first of
July. Wherein I will (under your favorable pardon) for your further
satisfaction, as well make relation of those reasons which confirmed me in my
purpose of going abroad, as of these accidents which have happened during our
abode there; thereby hoping to persuade you, that no light fancy did draw me
from the fruition of your dearest friendship, but an earnest desire by
following the wars, to make my self more worthy of the same.

Having therefore determinately purposed to put on this habit of a Soldier, I
grew doubtful whether to employ my time in the wars of the Low Countries,
which are in auxiliarie manner maintained by her Majesty; or to follow the
fortune of this voyage, which was an adventure of her and many honorable
personages, in revenge of unsupportable wrongs offered unto the estate of our
Country by the Castilian King: in arguing whereof, I find that by how much
the Challenger is reputed before the defendant, by so much is this journey to be
preferred before those defensive wars. For had the Duke of Parma his turn
been to defend, as it was his good fortune to invade, from whence could have
proceeded that glorious honor which these late wars have laid upon him, or
what could have been said more of him, than of a Respondent (though never so
valiant) in a private Duel? Even, that he has done no more than by his honor
he was tied unto. For the gain of one Town or any small defeat gives more
renown to the Assailant, than the defense of a Country, or the withstanding
of twenty encou^ters can yield any man who is bound by his place to guard the
same: whereof as well the particulers of our age, especially in the Spaniard,
as the reports of former histories may assure us, which have still laid the
fame of all wars upon the Inuador. And do not ours in these days live
obscured in Flanders, either not having where withal to manage any war, or
not putting on Arms, but to defend themselves when the Enemy shall procure
them? Whereas in this short time of our Adventure, we have won a Town by
escalade, battred and assaulted another, overthrown a mighty Princes power in
the field, landed our Army in three several places of his Kingdom, marched
seven days in the heart of his Country, lain three nights in the Suburbs of
his principal City, beaten his forces into the gates thereof, and possessed
two of his frontier Forts, as shall in discourse thereof more particulerly
appear: whereby I conclude, that going with an Inuadour, and in such an action
as every day gives new experience, I have much to vaunt of, that my fortune
did rather carry me thither, than into the wars of Flanders. Notwithstanding
the vehement persuasions you used with me to the contrary, the ground whereof
sithence you received them from others, you must give me leave to acquaint you
with the error you were lead into by them, who laboring to bring the world
into an opinion, that it stood more with the safety of our Estate to bend all
our forces against the Prince of Parma, than to follow this action, by looking
into the true effects of this Journey, will iudicially convince themselves of
mistaking the matter. For, may the Conquest of these Countries against the
Prince of Parma, be thought more easy for us alone now, than the defense of
them was xi. years ago, with the men and money of the Queen of Egland? the
power of the Monsieur of France? the assistance of the principal States of
Germany? and the Nobility of their own Country? Could not an Army of more
than 20000. horse and almost 30000. foot, beat Don John de Austria out of the
Country, who was possessed of a very few frontier Towns? And shall it now be
laid upon her Majesty's shoulders to remove so mighty an Enemy, who has
left us but 3. whole parts of 17. vnco^quered? It is not a Journey of a few
months, nor an auxiliarie war of few years that can damnifie the King of
Spain in those places, where we shall meet at every 8. or 10. miles end with
a Town, which will cost more the winning, than will yearly pay 4. or 5000.
men's wages, where all the Country is quartred by Rivers, which have no passage
vnfortefied: and where most of the best Soldiers of Christendom that be on
our adverse party be in pencion. But our Army which has not cost her
Majesty much above the third part of one years expenses in the Low
Countries, has already spoiled a great part of the provision he had made at
the Groyne of all sorts, for a new voyage into England; burnt 3. of his ships,
whereof one was the second in the last years expedition, taken from him above
150. pieces of good artillarie, cut off more than 60. hulkes, and 20. French
ships well manned, fit and ready to serve him for men of war against us,
laden for his store with corn, victuals, masts, cables, and other
merchandises; slain and taken the principal men of war he had in Galitia;
made Don Pedro Enriques de Gusman^, Conde de Fuentes, General of his Forces in
Portingall, shamefullie run at Penicha; laid along of his best Commanders
in Lisbone: and by these few adventures discovered how easelie her Majesty
may without any great adventure in short time pull the Tirant of the World upon
his knees, as well by the disquieting his usurpation of Portingall as without
difficulty in keeping the commodity of his Indies from him, by sending an
army so accomplished, as may not be subject to those extremities which we
have endured: except he draw for those defenses, his forces out of the Low
countries and disfurnish his garrisons of Naples and Milan, which with safety
of those places he may not do. And yet by this mean shall rather be enforced
thereunto, than by any force that can be used there against him: wherefore I
directly conclude, that this proceeding is the most safe and necessary way to
be held against him; and therefore more importing, than the war in the Low
Countries.

Yet has the journey (I know) been much misliked by some, who either thinking
too worthily of the Spaniards valor, too indifferently of his purposes against
us, or too unworthily of them that undertook this journey against him, did
think it a thing dangerous to encounter the Spaniard at his own home, a thing
needless to proceed by invasion against him, a thing of too great moment for
two subjects of their quality to undertake. And therefore did not so advance
the beginnings as though they hoped for any good sucesse thereof.

The chances of wars be things most uncertain: for what people soever
undertake them, they are indeed but as chastizements appointed by God for the
one side or the other. For which purpose it has pleased him to give some
victories to the Spaniards of late years against some whom he had in purpose
to ruin. But if we consider what wars they be that have made their name so
terrible, we shall find them to have been none other, than against the
barbarous Moors, the naked Indians, and the unarmed Netherlanders: whose
yielding rather to the name than act of the Spaniards, has put them into such
a conceit of their mightines, as they have considerately undertaken the
conquest of our Monarchy, consisting of a people united and always held
sufficiently warlike: against whom, what success their invincible Army had
the last year, as our very children can witness, so I doubt not but this
voyage has sufficiently made known, what they are even upon their own
dounghill: which had it been set out in such sort as it was agreed upon by
their first demand, it might have made our Nation the most glorious people of
the world. For has not the want of 8. of the 12. pieces of Artillery which
was promised unto the Adventure, lost her Majesty the possession of the
Groyne, and many other places, as hereafter shall appear; whose defencible
Rampires were greater than our battery (such as it was) cold force: and
therefore were left unattempted.

It was also resolved to have sent 600. English horse of the Low Countries,
whereof we had not one, notwithstanding the great charges expended in their
transportation hither: and that may the Army assembled at Puente de Burgos
thank God of, as well as the forces of Portingall: who foreranne us six days
together: Did we not want seven of ye thirteen old Companies, we should have
had from thence: four of the ten dutch Companies: and six of their men of
war for the sea, from the Hollanders: which I may justly say we wanted, in
that we might have had so many good soldiers, so many good ships, and so
many able bodies more than we had?

Did there not, upon the first thinking of the Journey diverse gallant Courtiers
put in their names for adventurers to the sum of 1000 li. who seeing it went
forward in good earnest, advised themselves better, and laid the want of so
much money upon the Journey?

Was there not moreover a round sum of the adventure spent in leuieng,
furnishing, and mainteyning three months 1500. men for the service of Berghen:
with which companies the Mutinies of Ostend, was suppressed: a service of no
small moment?

What misery the detracting of the time of our setting out, which should have
been the first of February, did lay upon us, too many can witness: and what
extremity the want of that months victuals which we did eat, during the
month we lay at Plimoth for a wind, might have driven us unto, no man can
doubt of, that knows what men do live by, had not God given us in the end a
more prosperous wind and shorter passage into Galitia, then has been often
seen; where our own force and fortune reuictualled us largely: of which cross
winds that held us two days after our going out, the Generals being weary,
thrust to Sea in the same, wisely choosing rather to attend the change thereof
there; than by being in harborough to loose any part of the better when it
should come by having their men on shore: in which two days 25. of our
companies shipped in part of the fleet, were scattered from us, either not
being able or willing to double Vshant.

These burdens laid upon our Generals before their going out, they have
patiently endured, and I think they have thereby much enlarged their honor:
for having done thus much with the want of our Artillarie, 600. horse, 3000.
foot, 20000 li. of their adventure, and one months victuals of their
proportion, what may be coniectured they would have done with their full
compliment?

For the loss of our men at Sea, since we can lay it on none but the will of
GOD, what can be said more, than that it is his pleasure, to turn all those
impediments to the honor of them, against whom they were intended: and he
will still show himself the God of hoasts in doing great things by them,
whom many have sought to obscure: who if they had let the action fall at the
height thereof in respect of those defects, which were such especially for the
service at land, as would have made a mighty subject stoop under them; I do
not see, how any man could justly have laid any reproach upon him who
commanded the same: but rather have lamented the iniquity of this time,
wherein men whom foreign Countries have for their conduct in service worthily
esteemed of, should not only in their own Country not be seconded in their
honorable endeavors, but mightily hindered, even to the impairing of their own
estates, which most willingly they have adventured for the good of their
Countries: whose worth I will not value by my report, least I should seem
guilty of flattery, (which my soul abhors,) and yet come short in the
true measure of their praise. Only for your instruction, against them who had
almost seduced you from the true opinion you ought to hold of such men, you
shall understand that General Norris from his book was trained up in the
wars of the Admiral of France: and in very young years had charge of men
under the Earl of Essex in Ireland: which with what commendations he then
discharged, I leave to the report of them who observed those services. Upon
the breach betwixt Don John and the States, he was made Colonel General of
all the English forces there present, or to come, which he continued two
years: he was then made Marshall of the field, under Conte Hohenlo: and after
that, General of the army in Frisland: at his coming home in the time of
Monsiers government in Flanders, he was made Lord President of Monster in
Ireland: which he yet holds, from whence within one year he was sent for,
and sent General of the English forces her Majesty then lent to the Low
Countries: which he held till the Earl of Leicesters going over. And he was
made Marshall of the field in England, the enemy being upon our Coast, and
when it was expected the Crown of England should have been tried by battle.
All which places of commandment which never any Englishman successively
attained unto in foreign Wars, and the high places her Majesty has thought
him worthy of, may suffice to persuade you, that he was not altogether
unlikely to discharge that which he undertook.

What fame General Drake has gotten by his journey about the world, by his
adventures to the west Indies: and the scourges he has laid upon the Spanish
Nation, I leave to the Southern parts to speak of, and refer you to the
book extant in our own language treating of the same; and beseech you,
considering the weighty matters they have in all the course of their lives
with wonderful reputation managed, that you will esteem them not well
informed of their proceedings, that think them insufficient to pass through
that which they undertook, especially having gone thus far in the view of
the world, through so many incombrances, and disappointed of those agreements
which led them the rather to undertake the service. But it may be you will
think me herein either too much opinionated of the Voyage, or conceited of the
Co^manders, that laboring thus earnestly to advance the opinion of them both,
have not so much as touched any part of the misorders, weakness and wants that
have been amongst us, whereof, they that returned did plentifully report. True
it is, I have conceived a great opinion of the Journey, and do think
honorably of the Commanders: for we find in greatest antiquities, that many
Commanders have been received home with triumph for less merit, and that our
own Country has honored men heretofore with admiration, for adventures
unequal to this: it might therefore in those days have seemed superfluous to
extend any man's commendations by particular remembrances, for that then all men
were ready to give every man his due. But I hold it most necessary in these
days sithence every virtue finds her direct opposite, and actions worthy of
all memory, are in danger to be enuiouslie obscured to denounce the praises of
the action, and actors to the full, but yet no further than with sincerity of
truth, and not without grieuing at the injury of this time, wherein is enforced
a necessity of Apologies for those me^, and matters, which all former times
were accustomed to entertain with the greatest applause that might be. But to
answer the reports which have been given out in reproach of the actors and
action by such as were in the same. Let no man think otherwise, but that they
who fearing the casual accidents of war had any purpose of retourning, did
first advise of some occasion that should move them thereunto: and having
found any what so ever did think it sufficiently just, in respect of the
earnest desire they had to seek out matter that might color their coming home.

Of these there were some, who having noted the late Flemmish wars, did find
that many young men have gone over and safely returned Soldiers within few
Months, in having learned some words of Art, used in the wars, and thought
after that good example to spend like time amongst us: which being expired they
began to quarrel at the great Mortallitie that was amongst us.

The neglect of discipline in the Army, for that men were suffered to be
drunck with the plenty of Wines.

The scarsetie of Surgions.

The want of Carriages for the hurt and sick: and the penury of victuals in
the Camp.

Thereupon divining that there would be no good done. And that therefore they
could be content to lose their time, and adventure to return home again.

These men have either conceived well of their own wits (who by observing the
passages of the war: were become sufficient Soldiers in these few weeks)
and did long to be at home, where their discourses might be wondered at, or
missing of their Portegues and Milrayes they dreamed on in Portingall, would
rather return to their former manner of life, than attend the end of the
Journey. For seeing that one hazard brought on another: and that though one
escaped the bullet this day it might light upon him to morrow, the next day, or
any day; and that ye war was not confined to any one place, but that every
place brought forth new enemies, were glad to see some of the poor Soldiers
fall sick, that they fearing to be infected by them might justly desire to go
home.

Answer in the first.
The sickness I confess was great, because any is too much. But has it been
greater than is ordinary amongst Englishmen at their first entrance into the
wars, whether soever they go to want the fulness of their flesh pots? Have
not ours decayed at al times in France, with eating young fruits and drinking
new wines? have they not abundantly perished in the Low Counteries with cold,
and rawnes of the Air, even in their Garrisons? have there not more died in
London in six Months of the Plague, than double our Army being at the
strongest? And could the Spanish Army the last year (who had all provisions
that could be thought on for an Army, and took the fittest season in the
year for our Climate) avoid sickness amongst their Soldiers? May it then be
thought that ours could escape there, where they found inordinate heat of
weather, and hot wines to distemper them withal?

But can it be, that we have lost so many as the common sort persuade
themselves we have? It has been proved by strickt examinations of our musters,
that we were never in our fulness before our going from Plymoth 11000.
Soldiers, nor above 2500. Mariners. It is also evident that there returned
above 6000. of all sorts, as appears by the several payments made to them
since our coming home. And I have truly showed you that of these number very
near 3000. forsook the Army at the Sea, whereof some passed into France and
the rest returned home. So as we never being 13000. in all, and having
brought home above 6000. with us, you may see how the world has been seduced,
in believing that we have lost 16000. men by sickness.

To them that have made question of the government of the wars (little
knowing what appertains thereunto in that there were so many dru^kards amongst
us) I answer, Answer to the second.
that in their government of shires and parishes, yea in their very
housholdes, themselves can hardly bridle their vassalls from that vice. For we
see it a thing almost impossible, at any your faires or public assemblies to
find any quarter thereof sober, or in your Towns any Alepoles unfrequented:
And we observe that though any man having any disordered persons in their
houses, do lock up their drink and set buttlers upon it, that they will yet
either by indirect means steal themselves drunk from their Masters tables,
or run abroad to seek it. If then at home in the eyes of your Justices,
Mayors, Preachers, and Masters, and where they pay for every pot they take,
they cannot be kept from their liquor: do they think that those base
disordered persons whom themselves sent unto us, as living at home without
rule, who hearing of wine do long for it as a dainetie that their purses could
never reach to in England, and having it there without money eue^ in their
houses where they lie and hold their guarde they can be kept from being drunk?
and once drunk held in any order or tune, except we had for every drunckard an
officer to attend him. But who be they that have run into these disorders?
Even our newest men, our youngest men, and our idlest men, and for the most
part, our slouenly pressed men, whom the Justices (who have always thought
unworthily of any war) have sent out as the scumme and dregs of their
Country. And those were they, who distempering themselves with these hot
wines, have brought in that sickness, which has infected honester men than
themselves. But I hope (as in other places) the recovery of their diseases
does acquaint their bodies with the air of the Countries where they be; so
the remainder of these which have either recovered, or past without sickness
will prove most fit for Martial services.

If we have wanted Surgions, Answers to the third.
may not this rather be laid upon the Captains: who are to provide for their
several Companies, than upon the Generals, whose care has been more
general. And how may it be thought that every Captain, upon whom most of
the charges of raising their Companies was laid as an adventure could provide
themselves of all things expedient for a war, (which was always wont to be
maintained by the purse of the Prince:) But admit every Captain had his
Surgion: yet were the want of curing never the less, for our English Surgions
(for the most) part be unexperienced in hurts that come by shot; because
England has not known wars, but of late, from whose ignorance proceeded
this discomfort, which I hope will warn those that hereafter go to the
wars to make preparation of such as may better preserve men's lives by their
skill. Answer to the fourth.


From whence the want of carriages did proceed, you may conjecture in that we
marched through a Country, neither plentiful of such provisions, nor willing
to part from any thing: yet this I can assure you that no man of worth was
left either hurt or sick in any place unprovided for. And that the General
commanded all the Mules and Asses, that were laden with any baggage, to be
unburdened and taken to that use: and the Earl of Essex and he, for money
hired men to carry men upon Pikes. And the Earl (whose true virtue and
Nobility, as it does in all other his actions appear, so did it very much in
this) threw his own stuff: I mean apparel and necessaries which he had
there from his own carriages, and let them be left by the way, to put hurt and
sick men upon them. Of whose most honorable deseruings: I shall not need here
to make any particular discourse, for that many of his actions do hereafter
give me occasion to observe the same. Answer to the fifth.


And the great complaint that these men make for the want of victuals: may
well proceed from their not knowing the wants of the war; for if to feed
upon good beenes, mutton and goats, be to want, they have endured great
scarcity at land; whereunto they never wanted two days together, wine to mix
with their water, nor bread to eat with their meat (in some quantity),
except it were such as had vowed rather to starve, than to stir out of their
places for food: of whom we had too many; who if their time had served for it,
might have seen in many Camps in the most plentiful Countries of the world
for victuals, men daily die with want of bread and drink, in not having money
to buy, nor the Country yielding any good or healthful water in any place;
whereas both Spain and Portingall, do in every place afford the best water
that may be, and much more healthful than any wine for our drinking.

And although some have most injuriously exclaimed against the small
provisions of victuals for the Sea, rather grounding the same upon an evil
that might have fallen, than any that did light upon us: yet know you this,
that there is no man so forgetful, that will say they wanted before they came
to the Groyne; that whosoever made not very large provisions for himself and
his company at the Groyne, was very improuident, where was plentiful store of
wine, beef, and fish, and no man of place prohibited to lay in the same into
their ships; wherewith some did so furnish themselves, as they did not only
in the Journey supply the wants of such as were less provident than they, but
in their return home made a round commodity of the remainder thereof. And that
at Cascais there came in such store of provisions into the Fleet out of
England, as no man that would have used his diligence could have wanted his due
proportion thereof: as might appear by the Remainder that was returned to
Plymouth, and the plentiful sale thereof made out of the Merchants ships after
their coming into the Thames.

But least I should seem unto you too studious in confuting idle opinions, or
answering frivolous questions, I will address me to the true report of those
actions that have passed there: wherein I protest, I will neither hide any
thing that has happened against us, nor attribute more to any man or matter,
than the just occasions thereof leads unto: wherein it shall appear, that
there has been nothing left undone by the Generals which was before our going
out undertaken by them; but that there has been much more done than was at the
first required by Don Antonio, who should have reaped the fruit of our
Adventure.

After 6. days sailing from the Coast of England, and the fifth after we had
the wind good, being the 20. of April in the evening, we landed in a Bay more
than an English mile from the Groyne, in our long Boats and Pinnyses without
any impeachment: from whence we presently marched toward the Town, within one
half mile whereof we were encountered by the Enemy, who being charged by ours,
retired into their gates. For that night our Army lay in the villages, houses
and milles next adjoining, and very near round about the Town, into the
which the Galeon named Saint John (which was the second of the last years
Fleet against England) one hulk, two smaller ships, and two Galleys which were
found in the Rode, did beat upon us and upon our Companies, as they passed too
and fro that night and the next morning.

General Norris having that morning before day viewed the Town, found the
same defended on the land side (for it stands upon the neck of an Island) with
a wall upon a dry ditch: whereupon he resolved to try in two places what might
be done against it by escalade, and in the mean time advised for the landing
of some Artillarie to beat upon the ships and Galleys, that they might not
annoy us: which being put in execution, upon the planting of the first piece
the Galleys abandoned the Road, and betook them to Farroll, not far from
thence: and the Armado being beaten with the artillary and musketers that was
placed upon the next shore, left her playing upon us. The rest of the day was
spent in preparing the Companies, etc other provisions ready for the surprise
of the Base town, which was effected in this sort.

There were appointed to be landed 1200. men under the conduct of Colonel
Huntley, and Captain Fenner the Vizeadmirall, on that side next fronting us by
water in long boats and pynnises, wherein were placed many pieces of
artillarie to beat upon the Town in their approach: at the corner of the wall
which defended the other waterside, were appointed Captain Richard Wingfeild
Lieutenant Colonel to General Norris, and Captain Sampson Lieutenant
Colonel to General Drake to enter at low water with 500. men if they found
it passable, but if not, to be take them to the escalade, for they had also
ladders with them: at the other corner of the wall which joined to that side,
that was attempted by water, were appointed Colonel Vmpton, and Colonel Brett
with 300. men to enter by escalade. All the Companies which should enter by
boat being embarked before the low water: and having given the Alarm,
Captain Wingfeild and Captain Sampson betook the^ to the escalade, for they
had in commandment to charge all at one instant. The boats landed without
any great difficulty: yet had they some men hurt in ye landing. Colonel Bret
and Col. Vmpton entered their quarter without encounter, not finding any
defense made against them: for Captain Hinder being one of them that entered by
water, at his first entry (with some of his own Company whom he trusted
well, betook himself to that part of the wall, which he cleared before that
they offered to enter, and so still scoured the wall) till he came on the back
of them who maintained the fight against Captain Wingfeild and Captain
Sampson; who were twice beaten from their ladders, and found very good
resistance, till the Enemies perceiving ours entered in two places at their
backs, were driven to abandon the same. The reason why that place was longer
defended than the other, is (as Don Iuan de Luna who commanded the same
affirms) that the Enemy that day had resolved in council how to make their
defenses, if they were approached: and therein concluded, that if we attempted
it by water, that it was not to be held, and therefore upon the discovery of
our Boats, they of the high Town should make a signal by fire from thence,
that all the low Town might make their Retreat thither: but they, (whither
troubled with the sudden terror we brought upon them, or forgetting their
decree) omitted the fire, which made them guard that place till we were entered
on every side.

Then the Town being entered in three several places with an huge cry, the
inhabitants betook them to the high Town: which they might with less perrill
do: for that ours being strangers there, knew not the way to cut the^ of. The
rest that were not put to the sword in fury, fled to the Rocks in the Island,
and hid themselves in chambers and sellers, which were every day found out in
great numbers.

Amongst those Don Iuan de Luna a man of very good commandment, having hidden
himself in a house, did the next morning yield himself.

There was also taken that night a Commissarie of vittels called Iuan de vera,
who confessed that there were in the Groyne at our entry 500. Soldiers being
in seven companies which returned very weak (as appears by the small
numbers of them) from the Journey of England, namely.

Under Don Iuan deluna.

Don Diego Barran, a bastard son of the Marquis of Santa Chroche; his
company was that night in the Galeon.

Don Antonio de Herera then at Madrill.

Don Pedro de Mauriques Brother to the Earl of Paxides.

Don Ieronimo de Mourray of the order of Saint Iuan, with some of the Town
were in the fort.

Don Gomer de Caramasal then at Madril.

Captain Mouson, Caucaso de Socas.

Also there came in that day of our landing from Retanzas the companies of Don
Iuan de Mosalle, and Don Petro pour de leon.

Also he says that there was order given for baking of 300000. of Bisquet,
some in Bataneas, some in Riuadea, and the rest there.

There was then in the Town 2000. pipes of wine, and an 150. in the ships.

That there was lately come unto the Marquis of Seralba 300000. ducats.

That there was 1000. Iarres of oil.

A great quantity of beans, pease, wheat, and fish.

That there was 3000. quintells of beef.

And that not 20. days before there came in three Barques laden with match and
harquebufes.

Some others also found favor to be taken prisoners, but the rest falling
into the hands of the common Soldiers, had their throats cut: to the number of
500. as I conjecture first and last after we had entered the Town; and in the
enterie thereof, there was found every celler full of Wine, whereon our men by
inordinate drinking, both grew themselves for the present senceles of the
danger of the shot of the Town, which hurt many of them being drunk, and
took, the first ground of their sickness, for of such was our first and
chiefest mortality. There was also abundant store of victuals, salt and all
kind of provision for shipping and the war: which was confessed by the said
Commissarie of victuals taken there to be the beginning of a Magasin of all
sorts of provision for a new Voyage into England: whereby you may conjecture
what the spoil thereof has aduauntaged us, and prejudiced the King of Spain.

The next morning about eight of the clock, the Enemy abandoned their
Ships. And having ouercharged the Artillarie of the Gallion, left her on
fire, which burnt in terrible sort two days together, the fire and
ouercharging of the pieces being so great, as of 50. that were in her, there were
not above 16. taken out whole, the rest with over charge of the powder being
broken and molten, with heat of the fire, was taken out in broken pieces into
diverse Ships. The same day was the Eloister on the south side of the Town
entered by us, which joined very near to the wall of the Town, out of the
Chambers and other places whereof we beat into the same with our Musketeers.

The next day in the afternoon there came down some 2000. men gathered
together out of the country, even to to the gates of the town, as resolutlie
(led by what spirit I know not) as though they would have entered the same:
but at the first defense made by ours that had the guard there, wherein were
slain about eighteen of theirs, they took them to their heels in the same
disorder they made their approach, and with greater speed than ours were able
to follow; Notwithstanding, we followed after them more than a mile. The
second day Col. Huntley was sent into the country with three or four hundred
men, who brought home very great store of Cowes and Sheep for our relief.

The third day in the night the General had in purpose to take a long Munition
house builded upon their wall, opening toward us, which would have given us
great advantage against them; but they knowing the commodity thereof for us,
burnt it in the beginning of the evening: which put him to a new council, for
he had likewise brought some Artillarie to that side of the town. During this
time, there happened a very great fire in the lower end of the town; which
had it not been by the care of the Generals heedilie seen unto, and the fury
thereof prevented, by pulling down many houses which were most in danger, as
next unto them, had burnt all the provisions we found there, to our wonderful
hinderance.

The 4. day were planted under the guard of the Cloister two demie Canons, and
two Culuerings against the town, defended or gabbioned with a cross wall,
through the which our battery lay; the first and second tire whereof shook all the wall down, so as the ordnance lay al open to the enemy, by reason whereof
some of ye Canoniers were shot and some slain. The Lieutenant also of the
ordnance Master Spencer was slain fast by Sir Edward Norris, Master thereof:
whose valor being accompanied with an honorable care of defending that trust
committed unto him, he never left that place, till he received direction from
the General his brother to cease the Battery which he presently did, leaving
a guard upon the same for that day: and in the night following made so good
defense for the place of the Battery, as after there were very few or none
annoyed therein. That day Captain Goodwin had in commandment from the
General, that when the assault should be given to the Town, he should make a
profer of an escalade on the other side, where he held his guard: but he
(mistaking the signal that should have been given) attempted the same long
before the assault, and was shot in the mouth. The same day the General
having planted his Ordenance ready to batter, caused the town to be sommoned,
in which sommons, they of the Town shot at our Drum: immediately after that
there was one hanged over the wall, and a parley desired, wherein they gave us
to understand, that the man hanged, was he that shot at the Drum before;
wherein also they entreated to have fair wars, with promise of the same on
their parts: the rest of the parley was spent in talking of Don Iuan de Luna,
and some other prisoners, and somewhat of the rendering of the Town, but not
much, for they listened not greatly thereunto.

General Norris having by his skillful view of the Town (which is almost all
seated upon a Rock) found one place thereof myneable, and did presently set
workmen in hand withal: who after 3. days labor, (and the seventh after we
were entered the base Town) had bedded their powder, but indeed not far
enough into the wall. Against which time ye breach made by ye cannon being
thought assaultable, and Companies appointed as well to enter the same, as that
which was expected should be blown up by the Mine: namely, to that of the
Cannon, Captain Richard Wingfeild, and Captain Philpot, who lead the
Generals foot Company; with whom also Captain York went, whose principal
Commandment was over the horsemen. And to that of the Mine, Captain John
Sampson, and Captain Anthony Wingfeild Lieutenant Colonel to the Master of
the Ordinance, with certain selected out of diverse Regiments. All these
Companies being in Arms, and the assault intended to be given in all places at
an instant, fire was put to the train of the Mine: but by reason the powder
brake out backwards in a place where the cave was made too high, there could be
nothing done in either place for that day. During this time, Captain Hinder
was sent with some chosen out of every Company into the country for
provisions, whereof he brought in good store, and returned without loss.

The next day Captain Anthony Sampson was sent out with some 500. to fetch in
provisions for the Army, who was encountered by them of the Country: but he
put the^ to flight, and returned with good spoil. The same night the Myners
were set to work again, who by the second day after had wrought very well
into the foundation of the wall. Against which time the Companies aforesaid
being in readiness for both places (General Drake on the other side with 2. or
300. men in Pinnaces, making profer to attempt a strong Fort upon an Island
before the Town, where he left more than 30. men) fire was given to the train
of the Mine, which blew up half the Tower under which the powder was planted.
The Assailants having in charge upon the effecting of the Mine presently to
give the assault, which they did accordingly; but too soon, for having entered
the top of the breach, the other half of the Tower, which with the first force
of the powder was only shaken and made loose, fell upon our men: under which
were buried about 20. or 30. then being under that part of the Tower. This so
amazed our men that stood in the breach, not knowing from whence that terror
came, as they forsook their Commanders, and left them among the ruins of the
Mine. The two Ensigns of General Drake and Captain Anthony Wingfeild, were
shot in the Breach, but their colors were rescued: the Generals by Captain
Sampsons Lieutenant, and Captain Wingfeilds by himself. Amongst them that the
wall fell upon, was Captain Sydnam pitifully lost: who having three or four
great stones upon his lower parts, was held so fast, as neither himself could
stir, nor any reasonable Company recover him. Notwithstanding the next day
being found to be alive, there was 10. or 12. lost in attempting to relieve him.

The breach made by the Cannon, was wonderful well assaulted by them that had
the charge thereof, who brought their men to the push of the pike at the top of
the Breach. And being ready to enter, the loose earth (which was indeed but
the rubbish of the outside of the wall) with the weight of them that were
thereon slipped outward from under their feet. Whereby did appear half the
wall vnbattered. For let no man think that Culuerine or Demie Cannon can
sufficiently batter a defensible Rampire: and of those pieces we had, the
better of the Demi Canons at the second shot brake in her cariages, so as the
battrie was of less force, being but of three pieces.

In our Retreat (which was from both breaches through a narrow lane) were many
of our men hurt: and Captain Dolphin, who served very well that day, was hurt
in the very Breach. The failing of this attempt, in the opinion of all the
beholders, and of such as were of best judgment, was the fall of the Mine:
which had doubtless succeeded, the rather, because the approach was unlooked
for by the Enemy in that place, and therefore not so much defense made there
as in the other. Which made the General grow to a new resolution: For finding
that two days battery had so little beaten their wall, and that he had no
better preparation to batter withal: he knew in his experience, there was no
good to be done that way: whith I think he first put in proof, to try if by
that terror he could get the upper Town, having no other way to put it in
hazard so speedily, and which in my conscience had obtained the Town, had not
the Defendants been in as great peril of their lives by the displeasure of
their King in giving it up, as by the bullet or sword in defending the same.
For that day before the assault, in the view of our Army, they burnt a
Cloister within the Town, and many other houses adjoining to the Castle, to
make it the more defencible: whereby it appeared how little opinion themselves
had of holding it against us, had not God (who would not have us suddenly made
proud) laid that misfortune upon us.

Hereby it may appear, that the four Cannons, and other pieces of battery
promised to the journey, and not performed, might have made her Majesty
Mistres of the Groyne: for though the Mine were unfortunate, yet if the other
breach had been such as the earth would have held our men thereon, I do not
think but they had entered it thoroughly at the first assault given: which had
been more than I have heard of in our age. And being as it was, is no more than
the Prince of Parma has in winning of all his Towns endured, who never entered
any place at the first assault, nor above three by assault.

The next day, the General hearing by a prisoner that was brought in, that the
Conde de Andrada had assembled an Army of 8000. at Puente de Burgos, six
miles from thence in the way to Petance, which was but the beginning of an
Army: in that there was a greater leauie ready to come thither under the
Conde de Altemira, either in purpose to relieve the Groyne, or to encamp
themselves near the place of our embarking, there to hinder the same; for to
that purpose had the Marquis of Seralba written to them both the first night of
our landing, as the Commissarie taken then confessed, or at the least of stop
our further entrance into the Country, (for during this time, there were many
incursions made of three or four hundred at a time, who burnt, spoiled, and
brought in victuals plentifully. The General, I say, hearing of this Army,
had in purpose the next day following to visit them, against whom he carried
but nine Regiments: in the Vangard were the Regiment of Sir Roger Williams, Sir
Edward Norris, and Colonel Sidney: in the Battle, that of the General, of
Colonel Lane, and Colonel Medkerk: and in the Rereward, Sir Henry Norris,
Colonel Huntley, and Colonel Brets Regiments; leaving the other five
Regiments with General Drake, for the guard of the Cloister and Artillarie.
About ten of the clock the next day, being the sixth of May, half a mile
from the Camp, we discovering the Enemy, Sir Edward Norris, who commanded
the Vangard in chief, appointed his Lieutenant Colonel, Captain Anthony
Wingfield to command the shot of the same, who divided the^ into three troops;
the one he appointed to Captain Middleton to be conducted in a way on the left
hand: another to Captain Erington to take the way on the right hand, and the
body of them (which were Musketters) Captain Wingfield took himself,
keeping the direct way of the march. But the way taken by Captain Middleton
met a little before with the way held by Captain Wingfield, so as he giving
the first charge upon the Enemy, was in the instant seconded by Captain
Wingfield, who beat them from place to place (they having very good places of
defense, and cross walls which they might have held long) till they betook
them to their bridge, which is over a creek coming out of the Sea, builded of
stone upon Arches. On the foot of the further side whereof, lay the Camp of
the Enemy very strongly entrenched, who with our shot beaten to the further
end of the bridge, Sir Edward Norris marching in the point of the pikes,
without stay passed to the bridge, accompanied with Colonel Sidney, Captain
Hinder, Captain Fulford, and diverse others, who found the way clear over ye
same, but through an incredible volie of shot; for that the shot of their Army
flanked upon both sides of the bridge, the further end whereof was barricaded
with barrells: but they who should have guarded the same, seeing the proud
approach we made, forsook the defense of the Barricade, where Sir Edward
entered, and charging the first defendant with his pike, with very earnestnes
in ouerthrusting, fell, and was grieuouslie hurt at the sword in the head, but
was most honorably reskued by the General his brother, accompanied with
Colonel Sidney, and some other gentlemen: Captain Hinder also having his
Caske shot off, had five wounds in the head and face at the sword: and Captain
Fulford was shot into the left arm at the same counter: yet were they so
thoroughly seconded by the General, who thrust himself so near to give
encouragement to the attempt, (which was of wonderful difficulty) as their
brauest men that defended that place being overthrown, their whole Army fell
presently into route, of whom our men had the chase three miles in four
sondrie ways, which they betook themselves unto. There was taken the Standerd
with the Kings Arms, and borne before the General. How many, two thousand men
(for of so many consisted our Vangard) might kill in pursuit of 4. sundry
parties, so many you may imagine fell before us that day. And to make the
number more great, our men having given over the execution, and returning to
their stands, found many hidden in the Vineyards and hedges which they
dispatched. Also Colonel Medkerk was sent with his Regiment three miles
further to a Cloister, which he burnt and spoiled, wherein he found five
hundred more and put them to the sword. There were staire in this fight on our
side only Captain Cooper, and one private soldier: Captain Barton was also
hurt upon the bridge in the eye. But had you seen the strong Baracades they
had made on either side of the bridge, and how strongly they lay encamped
thereabouts, you would have thought it a rare resolution of ours to give so
brave a charge upon an Army so strongly lodged. After the fury of the
execution, the General sent the Vangard one way, and the Battle another, to
burn and spoil; so as you might have seen the country more than three miles
compass on fire. There was found very good store of Munition and Victuals in
the Camp, some plate and rich apparel, which the better sort left behind,
they were so hotly pursued. Our Sailors also landed in an Island next adjoining
our ships, where they burnt and spoiled all they found. Thus we returned to
the Groyne, bringing small comfort to the enemy within the same, who shot many
times at us as we marched out, but not once in our coming back again.

The next day was spent in shipping our Artillarie landed for the Battery, and
of the rest taken at the Groyne, which had it been such as might have given us
any assurance of a better battery, or had there been no other purpose of our
Journey but that, I think the General would have spent some more time in the
siege of the place.

The two last nights, there were that undertook to fire the higher town in
one place, where the houses were builded upon the wall by the water side: but
they within suspecting as much, made so good defense against us, as they
prevented the same. In our departure there was fire put into every house of
the low town, in so much as I may justly say, there was not one house left
standing in the Base town, or the Cloister.

The next day, being the eight of May, we embarked our Army without loss of
a man, which (had we not beaten the Enemy at Puente de Burgos) had been
impossible to have done; for that without doubt they would have attempted
something against us in our imbarking: as appeared by the report of the
Commissarie aforesaid, who confessed, that the first night of our landing, the
Mar^^es of Seralba writ to the Conde de Altemira, the Conde de Andrada, and to
Terneis de Santisso, to bring all the forces against us that they could
possibly raise, thinking no way so good to assure that place, as to bring an
army thither, wherewithal they might either besiege us in their Base town,
if we should get it, or to lie between us and our place of embarking, to fight
with us upon the advantage; for they had above 15000. soldiers under their
commandments.

After we had put from thence, we had the wind so contrary, as we could
not under nine days recover the Burlings: in which passage on the 13. day, the
Earl of Essex, and with him Master Walter Deuereux his brother (a Gentleman of
wonderful great hope), Sir Roger Williams, Colonel general of the foot men,
Sir Philip Butler, who has always been most inward with him, and Sir Edward
Wingfield, came into the Fleet. The Earl having put himself into the Journey
against the opinion of the world, and as it seemed to the hazard of his great
fortune, though to the great advancement of his reputation, (for as the
honorable carriage of himself toward all men, does make him highly esteemed
at home; so did his exceeding forwardnes in all services, make him to be
wondrred at amongst us) who, I say, put off in the same wind from Famouth,
that we left Plymouth in, where he lay, because he would avoid the
importunity of messengers that were daily sent for his return, and some
other causes more secret to himself, not knowing (as it seemed) what place the
Generals purposed to land in, had been as far as Cales in Andalosia, and lay
up and down about the South Cape, where he took some ships laden with Corn,
and brought them unto the Fleet. Also in his return from thence to meet with
our Fleet, he fell with the Islands of Bayon; and on that side of the river
which Cannas stands upon the, with Sir Roger Williams, and those Gentlemen
that were with him went on shore, with some men out of the ship he was in, whom
the enemy that held guard upon the Coast, would not abide, but fled up into the
country. After his coming into the fleet (to the great rejoicing of us all) he
demanded of the Generals, that after our Army should come on shore, he might
always have the leading of the vanegard, which they easily yielded unto: as
being desirous to satisfy him in all things, but especially in matters so much
tending to his honor as this did; so as from the time of our first landing in
Portingall, he always marched in the point of the vangard, accompanied with
Sir Roger Williams (except when the necessity of the place he held) called
him to other services.

The 16. day we landed at Penicha in Portingall, under the shot of the Castle,
and above the wast in water, more than a mile from ye town, wherein many were
in peril of drowning, by reason the wind was great, and the Sea went high,
which overthrew one boat wherein 25. of Captain Dolphins men perished. The
Enemy, being five companies of Spaniards under the commandment of yt Conde
de Fuentes, fallied out of the town against us, and in our landing made their
approach close by the water side. But the Earl of Essex, with Sir Roger Williams
and his brother, having landed sufficient number to make 2. troops, left one to
hold the way by the water side, and led ye other over the Sandhils: which the
Enemy seeing, drew theirs likewise further into the land; not, as we
coniectured, to encounter us, but indeed to make their speedy passage away:
notwithstanding they did it in such sort, as being charged by ours which were
sent out by ye Colonel general under Captain Iacson, they stood the same
even to the push of the pike: in which charge and at the push, Captain Robert
Piew was slain. The Enemy being fled further tha^ we had reason to follow
them, al our companies were drawn to the town: which being unfortified in any
place, we found undefended by any man against us. And therefore the General
caused the castle to be somoned yt night: which be^^g ^^andoned by him that
commanded it, a Portingall, name^ Antonio de Aurid, being possessed thereof,
desired but to be assured that Don Antonio was landed, whereupon he would
deliver ye same, which he honestly performed. There was taken out of the castle
100. shot and pikes, which Don Emanuel furnished his Portingals withal, and
20. barrels of powder: so as possessing both ye town and the castle, we rested
there one day; wherein some Friars and other poor men came unto their new
King, promising in the name of their Country next adjoining, that within two
days he should have a good supply of horse and foot for his assistance. That
day we remained there, the Generals company of horses were unshipped.

The Generals having there resolved yt the Army should march ouerland to
Lisbone under ye conduct of general Norris: and that general Drake should meet
him in the river thereof with the fleet: that there should be one company of
foot left in guard of the castle, and 6. of the ships: also yt the sick and
hurt should remain there with provisions for their cures. The General, to try
ye event of the matter by expedition, the next day began to march on this sort:
his own regiment, and the regiments of Sir Roger Williams, Sir Henry Norris,
Colonel Lane, and Colonel Medkerk, in the Vangard: General Drake, Colonel
Deuereux, S. Edward Norris, and Colonel Sidneis in ye Battle: S. James Hales,
Sir Edward Wingfield, Colonel Vmptons, Colonel Huntleis, and Colonel Brets
in the arrereward. By that time our army was thus marshalled, general Drake,
who though he were to pass by sea, yet to make known the honorable desire he
had of taking equal part of al fortunes with us, stood upon the ascent of an hill,
by ye which our Battalions must of necessity march, and with a pleasing
kindness took his leave severally of the co^maunders of every regiment,
wishing us al happy success in our journey over the land, with a constant
promise yt he would, if the injury of ye wether did not hinder him, meet us in
the river of Lisbone with our fleet. The want of carriages the first day was
such, as they were enforced to carry their Munition upon men's backs, which
was the next day remedied.

In this march Captain Crispe, the Provost Marshall, caused one who (contrary
to the proclamation published at our arrival in Portingall) had broken up a
house for pillage, to be hanged, with the cause of his death upon his breast,
in the place where the act was committed: which good example prouidentlie given
in the beginning of our march, caused the commandment to be more respectiuelie
regarded all the journey after, by them whom fear of punishment does only
hold within compass. The Camp lodged that night at Lorignia: The next day we
had intelligence all the way that the enemy had made head of horse and foot
against us at Toras Vedras, which we thought they would have held: But coming
thither the second day of our march, not two hours before our Vangarde came
in, they left the Town and Castle to the possession of Don Antonio.

There began the greatest want we had of victuals, especially of bread, upon
a Commandment given from the General, that no man should spoil the Country,
or take any thing from any Portingal: which was more respectively observed,
than I think would have been in our own Country, amongst our own friends
and kindred: but the Country (contrary to promise) having neglected the
provision of victuals for us, whereby we were driven for that time into a
great scarcity. Which moved the Colonel General to call all the Colonels
together, and with them to advise for some better course for our people: who
thought it best, first to advertise ye king what necessity we were in, before
we should of our selves alter the first institution of abstinence: the Colonel
general having acquainted the General herewith, with his very good allowance
thereof, went to the King; who after some expostulations used, took the more
careful order for our men, and after that our Army was more plentifully
relieved.

The third day we lodged our Army in three sundry villages, the one
Battalion lying in Enchara de los Caualiers, another in Enchara de los Obisbos,
and the third in San Sebastians.

Captain York who commanded the Generals horse company, in this march made
trial of the valor of the horsemen of the Enemy; who by one of his Corporalls
charged with 8. horses through 40. of them, and himself through more than 200.
with some 40. horse: who would abide him no longer than they could make way
from him.

The next day we marched to Loris, and had diverse intelligences that the enemy
would tarry us there: for the Cardinal had made public promise to them of
Lisbone, that he would fight with us in that place, which he might have done
aduantageouslie; for we had a bridge to pass over in the same place: but
before our coming he dislodged, notwithstanding it appeared unto us that he
had in purpose to encampe there: for we found the ground staked out where
their trenches should have been made: and their horsemen with some few shot
showed themselves upon a hill at our coming into that village. Whom Sir
Henry Norris (whose Regiment had the point of the Vangard) thought to draw
unto some fight, and therefore marched without sound of Drum, and somewhat
faster than ordinary, thereby to get near them before he were discovered,
for he was shadowed from them by an hill that was between him and them: but
before he could draw his companies any thing near, they retired.

General Drakes Regiment that night for the commodity of good lodging, drew
themselves into a Village, more than one English mile from thence, and near
the Enemy: who not daring to do any thing against us in four days before,
took that occasion, and in the next morning fell down upon that Regiment,
crying, Vina el Rey Don Antonio, which was a general salutation thorough all
the Country as they came: whom our young Soldiers (though it were upon their
guard, and before the watch were discharged) began to entertain kindly, but
having got within their guard, they fell to cut their throats: but the Alarm
being taken inwards, the Officers of the two next Companies, whose Captains,
(Captain Sydnam and Captain Young) were lately dead at the Groyne, brought
down their colors and pikes upon them in so resolute manner, as they presently
drove them to retire with loss: they killed of ours at their first entrance
14. and hurt six or seven.

The next day we lodged at Aluelana within three miles of Lisbone, where many
of our Soldiers drinking in two places of standing waters by the way, were
poisoned, and thereon presently died: some do think it came rather by eating
of honnie, which they found in the houses plentifully. But whether it were by
water or by honnie, the poor men were poisoned.

That night the Earl of Essex, and Sir Roger Williams went out about eleven of
the clock with 1000. men to lie in Ambuscade near the Town, and having laid
the same very near, sent some to give the Alarm unto the Enemy: which was
well performed by them that had the charge thereof, but the Enemy refused to
issue after them, so as the Earl returned as soon as it was light without
doing any thing, though he had in purpose, and was ready to have given an
honorable Chardge on them.

The 25. of May in the evening we came to the Suburbs of Lisbone: at the very
entrance whereof, Sir Roger Williams calling Captain Anthony Wingfield with
him, took thirty shot or thereabouts, and first scowred all the streets till
they came very near the Town; where they found none but old folks and
beggars, crying, Viuael Rey Don Antonio, and the houses shut up: for they had
carried much of their wealth into the Town, and had fired some houses by the
water side, full of corn and other provisions of victuals, least we should be
benefited thereby, but yet left behind them great riches in many houses.

The four Regiments that had the Vangard that day which were Colonel
Deuereux, Sir Edward Norris, Colonel Sydneys and General Drakes whom I name
as they marched, the Colonel General caused to hold guard in the nearest
streates of the Suburbs: The Battle and the arrierward stood in Arms all the
night in the field near to Alcantara. Before Morning Captain Wingfield, by
direction from ye Colonel General Sir Roger Williams held guard with Sir
Edward Norris his Regiment in three places very near the Town wall, and so
held the same till the other Regiments came in the morning. About midnight
they within the Town burnt all their houses that stood upon their wall either
within or without, least we possessing them, might thereby greatly have annoyed
the Town.

The next morning Sir Roger Williams attempted, (but not without peril) to
take a Church called S. Antonio, which joined to the wall of the town, and
would have been a very evil neighbor to the town: but the Enemy having
more easy entry into it than we, gained it before us. The rest of that
morning was spent in quartering the Battle and arierward in the Suburbs
called Bona vista, and in placing Musketeers in houses, to frunt their shot
upon the wall, who from the same scowred the great streates very dangerously.

By this time our men being thoroughly weary with our six days March: and the
last nights watch, were desirous of rest: whereof the Enemy being advertised,
about one or two of the clock sallied out of the Town, and made their approach
in three several streates upon us, but chiefly in Colonel Bretts quarter: who
(as most of the Army was) being at rest, with as much speed as he could, drew
his men into Arms, and made head against them so thoroughly, as himself was
slain in the place, Captain Carsey shot through the thigh, of which hurt he
died with in four days after, Captain Carre slain presently, and Captain
Cave hurt (but not mortally) who were all of his Regiment.

This resistance made as well here, as in other quarters where Colonel Lane and
Colonel Medkerke commanded, put them to a sudden foul retreat: in so much,
as the Earl of Essex had the chase of them even to the gates of the high
Town, wherein they left behind them many of their best Commanders: their
Troop of horsemen also came out, but being charged by Captain York, withdrew
themselves again. Many of them also left the streates, and betook them to
houses which they found open: For the Serieant Mayor Captain Wilson slew in
one house with his own hands three or four, and caused them that were with
him to kill many others. Their loss I can assure you did triple ours, as well
in quality as in quantity.

During our march to this place, General Drake with the whole Fleet was come
into Cascais, and possessed the Town without any resistance: many of the
inhabitants at their discovery of our Navy, fled with their baggage into the
Mountains, and left the Town for any man that would possess it, till
General Drake sent unto them by a Portingall Pilot which he had on board, to
offer them all peaceable kindness, so far forth as they would accept of their
King, and minister necessaries to the Army he had brought: which offer they
joyfully embraced, and presently sent two chief men of their Town, to
signify their loyalty to Don Antonio, and their honest affections to our
people. Whereupon, the General landed his Companies not far from the
Cloister called San Domingo, but not without peril of the shot of the Castie,
which being guarded with sixty five Spaniards held still against him.

As our Fleet were casting anchor when they came first into that Road, there
was a small ship of Brasil that came from thence, which bare too with them, and
seemed by striking her sails, as though she would also have ankered: but
taking her fittest occasion, hoysed again, and would have passed up the River,
but the General presently discerning her purpose, sent out a Pinnace or two
after her, which forced her in such sort, as she ran her self upon the
Rocks: all the men escaped out of her, and the lading (being many chests of
sugar) was made nothing worth by the salt water. In his going thither also, he
took ships of the Port of Portingal, which were sent from thence, with fifteen
other from Pedro Vermendes Xantes Serieant Mayor of the same place, laden with
men and victuals to Lisbone: the rest that escaped, put into San Vues.

The next day, it pleased General Norris to call al ye Colonells together, and
to advise with them, whether it were more expedient to tarry there to attend
the Forces of the Portingall horse and foot whereof the King had made promise,
and to march some convenient number to Cascais to fetch our Artillarie and
munition, which was all at our ships, saving that, which for the necessity of
the Service, was brought along with us: Whereunto, some carried away with the
vain hope of Don Antonio, that most part of the Town stood for us, held it
best to make our abode there, and to send some 3000. for our Artiliarie:
promising to themselves, that the Enemy being well beaten the day before, would
make no more sallyes: Some others, (whose unbelief was very strong of any
hope from the Portingall) persuaded rather to march wholly away, than so be
any longer carried away with an opinion of things, whereof there was so little
appearance. The General, not willing to leave any occasion of blott to be laid
upon him for his speedy going from thence, nor to loose any more time by
attending the hopes of Don Antonio; told them, that though the Expedition of
Portingall were not the only purpose of their Journey, but an adventure
therein; which if it succeeded prosperously, might make them sufficiently rich,
and wonderful honorable; and that they had done so much already in trial
thereof, as what end soever happened, could nothing impair their credits: Yet
in regard of the Kings last promise, that he should have that night 3000. men
armed of his own Country, he would not for that night dislodge. And if they
came, thereby to make him so strong, that he might send the like number for
his munition, he would resolve to try his fortune for the Town. But if they
came not, he found it not convenient to divide his Forces, by sending any to
Cascais, and keeping a Remainder behind, sithence he saw them the day before
so boldly sally upon his whole Army, and knew that they were stronger of
Soldiers armed within the Town, than he was without: And that before our
return could be from Cascais, that they expected more supplies from all places
of Soldiers, for the Duke of Bragantia, and Don Francisco de Toledo were
looked for with great relief. Whereupon his conclusion was, that if the 3000.
promised, came not that night, to march wholly away the next morning.

It may be here demanded, why a matter of so great moment should be so
slenderly regarded, as that the General should march with such an Army
against such an Enemy, before he knew either the fulness of his own
strength, or certain means how he should abide the place when he should come
to it. Wherein I pray you remember the Decree made in the Council at Penicha,
and confirmed by public protestation the first day of our march, that our
Navy should meet us in the river of Lisbone, in the which was the store of
all our provisions, and so the mean of our tariance in that place, which came
not, though we continued till we had no Munition left to entertain a very
small fight. We are also to consider, that the King of Portingall (whether
carried away with imagination by the aduertisements he received from the
Portingalls, or willing by any promise to bring such an Army into his
Country, thereby to put his fortune once more in trial) assured the General,
that upon his first landing, there would be a revolt of his subjects: whereof
there was some hope given at our first entry to Penicha, by the manner of the
yielding of that Town and Fort, which made the General think it most
convenient speedily to march to the principal place, thereby to give courage
to the rest of the Country. The Friars also and the poor people that came
unto him, promised that within two days ye Gentlemen and others of the
country would come plentifully in: within which two days came many more
Priests, and some very few Gentlemen on horseback; but not till we came to
Toras Vedras, where they that noted ye course of things how they passed, might
somewhat discover the weakness of that people. There they took two days more:
and at the end thereof, referred him till our coming to Lisbone, with
assurance, that so soon as our Army should be seen there, all the
inhabitants would be for the King and fall upon the Spaniards.

After two nights tarriance at Lisbone, the King, as you have heard, promised a
supply of 3000. foot, and some horse: but all his appoyntments being expired,
even to the last of a night, all his horse could not make a Cornet of 40. nor
his foot furnish two Ensigns fully, although they carried three or four
Colors: and these were altogether such as thought to enrich themselves by the
ruin of their neighbors: for they committed more disorders in every place
where we came by spoil, tha^ any of our own.

The General, as you see, having done more than before his coming out of
England was required by the King, and given credit to his many promises even
to the breach of the last, he desisted not to persuade him to stay yet nine
days longer: in which time he might have engaged himself further, than with
any honor he could come out of again, by attempting a Town fortified, wherein
were more men armed against us, than we had to oppugn them with all our
Artillarie and Munition, being fifteen miles from us, and our men then
declining; for there was the first show of any great sickness amongst them.
Whereby it seems, that either his Prelacie did much abuse him in persuading
him to hopes, whereof after two or three days he saw no semblance: or he like
a silly lover, who promises himself favor by importuning a coy mistress,
thought by our long being before his Town, that in the end taking pity on
him, they would let him in.

What end the Friars had by following him with such devotion, I know not, but
sure I am, the Laity did respite their homage till they might see which way
the victory would sway; fearing to show themselves apparantlie unto him,
least the Spaniard should after our departure (if we prevailed not) call them
to account: yet sent they under hand messages to him of obedience, thereby to
save their own if he became King; but indeed very well contented to see the
Spaniards and us try by blows, who should carry away the Crown. For they
be of so base a mould, as they can very well subject themselves to any
government, where they may live free from blows, and have liberty to become
rich, being loath to endure hazard either of life or goods. For durst they have
put on any minds thoroughly to revolt, they had three wonderful good occasions
offered them during our being there.

Themselves did in general confess, that there were not above 5000. Spaniards
in that part of the Country, of which number the half were out of the Town
till the last day of our march: during which time, how easily they might have
prevailed against the rest, any man may conceive. But upon our approach they
took them all in, and combined themselves in general to the Cardinal.

The next day after our coming thither when the sallie was made upon us by
their most resolute Spaniards, how easily might they have kept them out, or
have given us the Gate which was held for their retreat, if they had had any
thought thereof.

And two days after our coming to Cascaies, when 6000. Spaniards and
Portingalls came against us as far as S. Iulians by land, as you shall
presently hear, (all which time I think there were not many Spaniards left
in the Town) they had a more fit occasion to show their devotion to the King,
than any could be offered by our tarrying there. And they could not doubt, that
if they had shut them out, but that we would have fought with them upon that
advantage, having sought them in Galitia upon disadvantage to beat them: and
having taken so much pains to seek them at their own houses, whereof we
gave sufficient testimony in the same accident. But I think the fear of the
Spaniard had taken so deep impression within them, as they durst not attempt
any thing against them upon any hazard.

For, what civil Country has ever suffered themselves to be conquered by so few
men as they were; to be deprived of their natural King, and to be tyrannized
over thus long but they? And what Country living in slavery under a stranger
whom they naturaly hate: having an Army in the Field to fight for them and
their liberty, would lie still with the yoke upon their necks, attending if
any strangers would vnburthe^ them, with out so much as rousing themselves
under it but they? They will promise much in speeches, for they be great
talkers, whom the General had no reason to distrust without trial, and
therefore marched on into their Country: But they performed little in action,
whereof we could have had no proof without this thorough trial. Wherein he
has discovered their weakness, and honorably performed more than could be in
reason expected of him: which had he not done, would not these malingners who
seek occasions of slander, have reported him to be suspicious of a people, of
whose infidelity he had no testimony: and to be fearful without cause, if he
had refused to give credit to their promises without any adventure? Let no
frivolous Questionist therefore further enquire, why he marched so many days
to Lisbone, and tarried there so small a while.

The next morning, seeing no performance of promise kept, the gave order for
our marching away; himself, the Earl of Essex, and Sir Roger Williams
remaining with the Stand that was made in the high streate, till the whole
Army was drawn into the field, and so marched out of the Town, appoynting
Captain Richard Wingfield, and Captain Anthony Wingfield in the Arrereward of
them with the shot; thinking that the Enemy (as it was most likely) would
have issued out upon our rising; but they were otherwise advised. When we were
come into the field, every Battalion fell into that order which by course
appertained unto them, and so marched that night unto Cascaies. Had we marched
through his Country as enemies, our Soldiers had been well supplied in all
their wants: but had we made enemies of the Suburbs of Lisbone, we had been
the richest Army that ever went out of England: for besides the particular
wealth of every house, there were many warehouses by the water side full of
all sorts of rich Marchandizes.

In our march that day, the Galleys which had somewhat, but not much, annoyed
us at Lisbone, (for that our way lay along the river) attended us till we were
past S. Iulians, bestowing many shot amongst us, but did no harm at all,
saving they struck off a private Gentleman's leg, and killed the Sergeant
Majors moyle under him. The horsemen also followed us a far of, and cut off
as many sick men as were not able to hold in march, nor we had carriage for.

After we had been two days at Cascais, we had intelligence by a Friar, that
the Enemy was marching strongly toward us, and then come as far as S.
Iulians: which news was so welcome to the Earl of Essex and the Generals, as
they offered every one of them to give the messenger a hundred Crowns if they
found them in the place: for the General desiring nothing more than to fight
with them in field room, dispatched that night a messenger with a Trompet, by
whom he writ a Cartell to the General of their Army, wherein he gave them the
lie, in that it was by them reported that we dislodged from Lisbone in disorder
and fear of them (which indeed was most false) for that it was five of the
clock in the morning before we fell into Arms, and then went in such sort, as
they had no courage to follow our upon us. Also he challenged him therein, to
meet him the next morning with his whole Army, if he durst attend his
coming, and there to try out the iustnes of their quarrel by battle: by
whom also the Earl of Essex (who preferring the honor of the cause, which was
his Countries, before his own safety) sent a particular Cartell, offering
himself against any of theirs, if they had any of his quality: or if they
would not admit of that, six, eight, or ten, or as many as they would
appoint, should meet so many of theirs in the head of our Battle to try
their fortunes with them, and that they should have assurance of their return
and honorable entreaty.

The General accordingly made all his Army ready by three of the clock in
the morning and marched even to the place where they had encamped, but they
were dislodged in the night in great disorder, being taken with a sudden fear
that we had been come upon them, as the General was the next day certainly
informed: so as the Trumpet followed them to Lisbone, but could not get other
answer to either of his letters, but threatening to be hanged, for daring to
bring such a message: howbeit the General had caused to be written upon the
backside of their pasport, yt if they did offer any violence unto the
messengers, he would hang the best prisoners he had of theirs: which made them
to advise better of the matter and to return them home, but without answer.

After our Army came to Cascais, and the Castle sommoned, the Castillan
thereof granted, that upon five or six shot of the Cannon he would deliver
the same, but not without sight thereof. The General thinking that his
distress within had been such for want of men or victuals as he could not
hold it many days, because he saw it otherwise defencible enough, determined
rather to make him yield to that necessity, than to bring the Cannon, and
therefore only set a guard upon the same, least any supply of those things
which he wanted should be brought unto them. But he still standing upon those
conditions, the General about two days before he determined to go to Sea,
brought three or four pieces of battery against it: upon the first tire
whereof he tendered, and compounded to go away with his baggage and Arms: he
had one Cannon, two Enluerings, one Basiliske, and three or four other field
pieces, threescore and five Soldiers, very good store of munition, and
victuals enough in the Castle; insomuch as he might have held the same longer
than the General had in purpose to tarry there. One Company of foot men was
put into the guard thereof, til the Artillarie was taken out, and our Army
embarked; which without having that Fort, we could not without great peril
have done. When we were ready to set sail (one half of the Fort being by
order from the General blown up by mine) the Company was drawn away.

During the time we lay in the Road, our Fleet began the second of June, and
so continued six days after to fetch in some Hulks to the number of 60. of
Dansik, Staten, Rastock, Lubec and Hamburgh, laden with Spanish goods, and as
it seemed for the Kings provision, and going for Lisbone: their principal
lading was Corn, Mastes, Cables, Copper, and Wax: amongst which were some of
great burden wonderful well builded for sailing, which had no great lading in
them, and therefore it was thought that they were brought for the Kings
provision, to reinforce his decayed Navy: whereof there was the greater
likelihood, in that the owner of the greatest of them, which carried two
Misnes, was known to be very inward with the Cardinal, who rather than he
would be taken with his ships, committed himself unto his small boat, wherein
he recovered S. Sebastians. Into the which our men, that before were in
Fleeboates, were shipped, and the Fleeboates sent home with an offer of Corn
to the value of their hire. But the wind being good for them for Rochel, they
chose rather to lose their Corn than the wind, and so departed. The General
also sent his horses with them, and from thence shipped them into England.

The third of June, Colonel Deuereux and Colonel Sidney, being bath very
sick, departed for England, who in the whole journey had showed themselves
very forward to all services, and in their departure very unwilling to leave
us: that day we embarked all our Army, but lay in the Road until the eight
thereof.

The sixth day the Earl of Essex, upon receipt of letters from her Majesty, by
them that brought in the victuals, presently departed toward England, with
whom Sir Roger Williams was very desirous to go, but found the Generals very
unwilling he should do so, in yt he bare the next place unto them, and if they
should miscarrie, was to command the Army. And the same day there came unto
us two shall Barks that brought tidings of some other ships come out of
England with victuals, which were passed upwards to the Cape: for meeting with
whom, the second day after we set sail for that place, in purpose after our
meeting with them to go to the Isles of Acores, the second day, which was the
ninth, we met with them coming back again toward us, whose provision
little answered our expectation. Notwithstanding, we resolved to continue our
course for the Islands.

About this time was the Merchant Royal, with three or four other ships sent
to Penicha, to fetch away the Companies that were left there; but Captain
Barton having received letters from the Generals that were sent ouerland, was
departed before, not being able by reason of the enemies speedy marching
thither, either to bring away the Artillarie, or all his men, according to the
direction those letters gave him; for he was no sooner gone, than the Enemy
possessed the Town and Castle, and shot at our ships as they came into the
Road.

At this time also was the Ambassador from the Emperor of Moroco, called Rays
Hamet Bencasamp, returned, and with him Master Ciprian, a Gentleman of good
place and desert, was sent from Don Antonio, and Captain Ousley from the
Generals, to the Emperor.

The next morning, the nine Galleys which were send not five days before out
of Andolosia for the strengthening of the river of Lisbone (which being joined
with the other twelve that were there before, though we lay hard by them at S.
Iulians, durst never make any attempt against us upon our departure from
thence) were returning home, and in the morning being a very dead calm, in
the dawning thereof fell in the wind of our Fleet, in the uttermost part
whereof they assailed one straggling Bark of Plymouth, of the which Captain
Cauerley being Captain of the land Company, with his Lieutenant, the Master,
and some of the Mariners abandoned the ship, and betook them to the ship
boats, whereof one, in which the Master and the Captain were, was ouerrun with
the Galleys, and they drowned. There was also two Hulks stragled far from the
strength of the other ships, which were so calmed, as neither they could get to
us, nor we to them, though all the great ships towed with their boats to have
relieved them, but could not be recovered; in one of which was Captain Minshaw
with his Company, who fought with them to the last, yea after his ship was on
fire, which whether it was fired by himself or by them we could not well
discern, but might easily judge by his long and good fight, that the Enemy
could not but sustain much loss, who setting also upon one other Hulk wherein
was but a Lieutenant, and he very sick, were by the valor of the Lieutenant
put off, although they had first beaten her with their Artillarie, and
attempted to board her. And seeing also one other Hulke a league of, a stern
of us, they made toward her; but finding that she made ready to fight with
them, they durst not further attempt her: whereby it seemed their loss being
great in the other fights, they were loath to proceed any further.

From that day till the 19. of June, our direction from the General was, that
if the wind were Northerlie we should plie for the Acores; but if Southerlie,
for the Isles of Bayon. We lay with contrary winds about that place and the
Rock, till the Southerlie wind prevailing carried us to Bayon, part of our
ships to the number of 25. in a great wind which was two days before, having
lost the Admiralls and Fleet, according to their direction, fell in the
morning of that day with Bayon, among whom, was Sir Henry Norris in the Aid:
who had in purpose (if the Admiralls had not come in) with some 500. men out of
them all to have landed, and attempted the taking of Vigo. The rest of the
Fleet held with General Drake, who though he were two days before put upon
those Islandes, cast off again to sea for the Acores: but remembering how
unprovided he was for that Journey, and seeing that he had lost many of his
great ships, returned for Bayon, and came in there that night in the Evening,
where he passed up the river more than a mile above Vigo.

The next morning we landed as many as were able to fight, which were not in
the whole above 2000. men, (for in the 17. days we continued on board we had
cast many of our men over board) with which number the Colonel General
marched to the Town of Vigo, near the which when he approached, he sent
Captain Anthony Wingfield with a Troop of shot to enter one side of the
same, who found upon every streets end a strong Barricade, but altogether
abandoned: for having entered the Town, he found but one man therein, but might
see them making way before him to Bayon. On the other side of the Town entered
General Drake with Captain Richard Wingfield, whose approach on that side (I
think) made them leave the places they had so artificially made for defense:
there were also certain ships sent with the Vizeadmirall to lie close before
the Town, to beat upon the same with their artillarie.

In the afternoon were sent 300. under the conduct of Captain Petuin and
Captain Henry Pour, to burn another village betwixt that and Bayon, called
Borsis, and as much of the Country as the day would give them leave to do;
which was a very pleasant rich Valley, but they burnt it all, houses and
corn, as did others on the other side of the Town, both that and the next
day, so as the Countrry was spoiled seven or eight miles in length. There was
found great store of wine in the Town, but not any thing else: for the other
days warning of the ships that came first in, gave them a respite to carry
all away.

The next morning by break of the day, the Colonel General, (who in absence
of the Generals that were on board their ships, commanded that night on shore)
caused all our Companies to be drawn out of the Town, and sent in two Troops
to put fire in every house of the same, which done we embarked again.

This day, there were certain Mariners (without any direction) put
themselves on shore, on the contrary side of the River from us, for pillage;
who were beaten by the Enemy from their boats, and punished by the Generals
for their offer, in going without allowance.

The reasons why we attempted nothing against Bayon, were before showed to be
want of artillarie, and may now be alleged to be the small number of our men:
who should have gone against so strong a place, manned with very good
soldiers, as was showed by Iuan de Vera taken at the Groyne, who confessed
that there were 600. old Soldiers in Garrison there of Flanders, and the
Tercios of Naples, lately also returned out of the Journey of England: under
the leading of

Capitan Puebla.

Christofero Vasques de Viralta, a Soldier of Flanders.

Don Petro Camascho, de tercio de Naples.

Don Francisco de Cespedes.

Capt. Iuan de Solo, de tercio de Naples.

Don Diego de Cassaua.

Capt. Sanban.

Also he says, there be 18. pieces of brass, and four of iron lately laid
upon the walls of the Town, besides them that were there before.

The same day the Generals seeing what weak estate our Army was drawn into
by sickness, determined to man and victual 20. of the best ships for the
Islandes of Acores with General Drake, to see if he could meet with the
Indian Fleet, and General Norris to return home with the rest. And for the
shifting of men and victuals accordingly, purposed the next morning to fall
down to the Islands of Bayon again, and to remain there that day. But
General Drake according to their appointment being under sail, never struck
at the Islandes, but put straight to sea; whom all the Fleet followed saving
33. which being in the River further than he, and at the entrance out of the
same, finding the wind and tide too hard against them, were enforced to cast
Anchor there for that night: amongst whom, by good Fortune was the Foresight,
and in her Sir Edward Norris. And the night following, General Norris being
driven from the rest of the Fleet by a great storm, (for all that day was
the greatest storm we had all the time we were out) came again into the
Islands, but not without great peril, he being forced to trust to a Spanish
Fisherman (who was taken two days before at sea) to bring him in.

The next morning he called a Council of as many as he found there, holding
the purpose he had before concluded with Sir Francis Drake the day before, and
directed all their courses for England, tarying there all that day to water and
help such with victual, as were left in wonderful distress, by having the
victuals that came last, carried away the day before to sea.

The next day he set sail, and the tenth day after, which was the second of
July came into Plymouth, where he found Sir Francis Drake, and all the Queens
ships, with many of the others, but not all: for the Fleet was dispersed into
other harbors; some lead by a desire of returning from whence they came, and
some being possessed of the Hulkes, sought other Ports from their Generals eye,
where they might make their private commodity of them, as they have done to
their great advantage.

Presently upon their their arrival there, the Generals dissolved all the
Army, saving 8. Companies, which are yet held together, giving every Soldier
five shillings in money, and the Arms he bare to make money of, which was more
than could by any means be due unto the^: for they were not in service three
months, in which time they had their victuals, which no man will value at
less than half their pay; for such is the allowance in her Majesty's ships to
her Mariners, so as there remained by ten shillings a month more to be paid,
for which there was not any private man but had apparel and furniture to his
own use, so as every common Soldier discharged, received more in money,
victuals, apparel and furniture, than his pay did amount unto.

Notwithstanding, there be even in the same place where those things have
passed, that either do not or will not conceive the Soldiers estate, by
comparing their poverty and the shortness of the time together, but lay some
injuries upon the Generals and the action. Where, and by the way, but
especially here in London, I find there have been some false prophets gone
before us, telling strange tales: For as our Country does bring forth many
gallant men, who desirous of honor, do put themselves into the actions
thereof, so does it many more dull spirited, who though their thoughts reach
not so high as others, yet do they listen how other men's acts do pass, and
either believing what any man will report unto them, are willingly carried away
into errors, or tied to some greater man's faith, become secretaries against a
noted truth. The one sort of these do take their opinions from the high way
side, or at the fardest go no farther than Paul's to enquire what has been
done in this Voyage: where, if they meet with any, whose capacity before
their going out could not make them live, nor their valor maintain their
reputation, and who went only for spoil, complaining on the hardness and
misery thereof, they think they are bound to give credit to these honest men
who were parties therein, and in very charity become of their opinions. The
others to make good the faction they are entered into, if they see any of those
malcontents (as every journey yields some) do run unto them like
tempting spirits to confirm them in their humor, with assurance that they
foresawe before our going out what would become thereof.

Be ye not therefore too credulous in believing every report, for you see
there have been many more beholders of these things yt have passed, tha^ actors
in the same; who by their experience, not having the knowledge of the ordinary
wants of the war, have thought that to lie hard, not to have their meat well
dressed, to drink sometimes water, to watch much, or to see men die and be
slain, was a miserable thing; and not having so given their minds to the
service as they are any thing instructed thereby, do for want of better matter
discourse ordinarily of these things: whereas the journey (if they had with
that judgment seen into it, and as their places required) has given them
far more honorable purpose and argument of discourse.

These men's discontentments and mislikings before our coming home, have made
me labor thus much to instruct you in the certeintie of every thing, because
I would not willingly have you miscarried in the judgments of them, wherein
you shall give me leave somewhat to delate upon a question, which I only
touched in the beginning of my letter, namely, whether it be more expedient
for our estate to maintain an offensive war against the King of Spain in
the Low Countries, or as in this journey, to offend him in his nearer
Territories, seeing the grounds of arguing thereof are taken from the
experience which the actions of this journey have given us.

There is no good subject that will make question, whether it be behoofefull
for us to hold friendship with these neighbors of ours or no, as well in
respect of the infinite proportion of their shipping, which must stand either
with us, or against us; as of the commodity of their Harbors, especially that
of Vlishing, by the favor whereof our Navy may continually keep the Narrow
Seas, and which would harbor a greater Fleet against us, than the Spaniard
shall need to annoy us withal; who being now distressed by our common Enemy,
I think it most expedient for our safety to defend them, and if it may be to
give them a reentrie into that they have of late years lost unto him. The one
without doubt her Majesty may do without difficulty, and in so honorable
sort as he shall never be able to dispossess her or them of any the towns
they now hold. But if any man think that the Spaniard may be expelled from
thence more speedily, or conveniently by keeping an Army there, than by
sending one against him into his own Country: let him foresee of how many men
and continual supplies that Army must consist, and what intolerable expenses
it requires. And let him think by the example of the Duke of Alua, when the
Prince of Orrenge had his great Army against him: and of Don Ion, when the
States had their mighty assembly against him, how this wise Enemy, with whom
we are to deal, may but by prolonging to fight with us, leave us occasions
enough for our Army within few months to mutine and break; or by keeping
him in his Towns leave us a spoiled field: where though our provision may be
such of our ownes as we starve not, yet is our weakness in any strange Country
such, as with sickness and misery we shall be dissolved. And let him not forget
what a continual burden we hereby lay upon us, in that to repossesse those
Countries which have been lately lost, will be a war of longer continuance
than we shall be able to endure.

In the very action whereof, what should hinder the King of Spain to bring
his forces home unto us? For it is certain he has long since set down in
Council, that there is no way for him wholly to recover those Low Countries,
but by bringing the war upon England it self, which has always assisted
them against him: and that being determined, and whereunto he has been
vehemently urged by the last years loss he sustained upon our Coasts, and
the great dishonor this journey has laid upon him; no doubt if we shall give
him respite to do it, but he will mightelie advance his purpose, for he is
richly able thereunto, and wonderful desirous of revenge.

To encounter wherewith, I wish even in true and honest zeal to my Country,
that we were all persuaded that there is no such assured means for the
safety of our estate, as to busy him with a well furnished Army in Spain,
which has so many goodly Bays open, as we may land without impeachment as
many men as shall be needful for such an invasion. And having an Army of
twenty thousand royally furnished there, we shall not need to take much
care for their payment: for shall not Lisbone be thought able to make so few
men rich, when the Suburbs thereof were found so abounding in riches, as had we
made enemy of them, they had largely enriched us all? Which with what small
loss it may be won, is not here to show; but why it was not won by us, I
have herein showed you. Or is not the spoil of Civil sufficient to pay more
than shall be needful to be sent against it, whose defense (as that of
Lisbone) is only force of men, of whom how many may for the present be raised,
it is not to be esteemed, because we have discovered what kind of men they
be; even such as will never abide ours in field, nor dare withstand any
resolute attempt of ours against them: for during the time we were in many
places of their Country, they cannot say that ever they made twenty of our
men turn their faces from them. And be there not many other places of less
difficulty to spoil, able to satisfy our forces?

But admit that if upon this Alarm that we have given him, he tendering his
natural and nearest soil before his further removed off governments, do draw
his forces of old Soldiers out of the Low Countries for his own defense, is
not the victory then won by drawing and holding them from thence, for the
which we should have kept an Army there at a charge by many parts greater than
this, and not stirred them?

Admit further our Army be impeached from landing there, yet by keeping the
Sea, and possessing his principal Roades, are we not in possibility to meet
with his Indian Merchants, and very like to prevent him of his provisions
coming out of the East Countries? without the which, neither the subject of
Lisbone is long able to live, nor the King able to maintain his Navy: for
though the country of Portingall do some years find themselves corn, yet
are they never able to victual the least part of that City. And albeit the
King of Spain be the richest Prince in Christendom, yet can he neither draw
cables, hew masts, nor make powder out of his mettalls, but is to be supplied
of them all from thence. Of whom (some will hold opinion) it is no reason to
make prize, because they be not our enemies: and that our disagreeance with
them, will impeach the trade of our Merchants, and so impouerish our Country.
Of whose mind I can hardly be drawn to be: For, if my enemy fighting with me
do break his sword, so as I thereby have the advantage against him; what shall
I think of him that puts a new sword into his hand to kill me withal? And
may it not be thought more fitting for us in these times to loose our trades of
cloth, than by suffering these mischiefs, to put in hazard, whether we shall
have a Country left to make cloth in, or no? And yet though neither Hamburgh
Embden, nor Stood do receive our cloth, the necessary use thereof in all
places is such, as they will find means to take it from us, with our
sufficient commodity.

And admit (which were impossible) that we damnifie him neither at sea nor
land (for unless it be with a much more mighty Army than ours, he shall
never be able to withstand us) yet shall we by holding him at his home, free our
selves from the war at our own walls: the benefit whereof let them
consider, ye best can judge, and have observed the difference of inuading, and
being invaded; the one giving courage to the Soldier, in that it does set
before him commodity and reputation; the other a fearful terror to the
Country man, who if by chance he play the man, yet is he never the richer:
and who knowing many holes to hide himself in, will try them all before he
put his life in peril by fighting: whereas the Inuador casts up his account
before he goes out, and being abroad must fight to make himself way, as not
knowing what place or strength to trust unto. I will not say what I observed in
our Country men when the enemy offered to assail us here: but I wish that
all England knew what terror we gave to the same people that frighted us, by
visiting them at their own houses.

Were not Alexanders fortunes great against the mighty Darius, only in that
his Macedonians thirsted after the wealth of Persia, and were bound to fight it
out to the last man, because the last man knew no safer way to save himself,
than by fighting? Whereas the Persians, either trusting to continue still
masters of their wealth by yielding to the Inuador, began to practice against
their own King: or having more inward hopes, did hide themselves even to the
last, to see what course the Conqueror would take in his Conquest. And did not
the advice of Scipio, though mightily impugned at the first, prove very sound
and honorable his Country? Who, seeing the Romans wonderfully amazed at the
nearness of their enemies Forces, and the losses they daily sustained by them,
gave counsel, rather by way of diuersion to carry an Army into Affricke,
and there to assail, than by a defenciue war at home to remain subject to
the common spoils of an assailing Enemy. Which being put in execution, drew
the Enemy from the Gates of Rome, and Scipio returned home with triumph:
albeit his beginnings at the first, were not so fortunate against the^, as ours
have been in this small time against the Spaniard. The good success whereof,
may encourage us to take Arms resolutely against him. And I beseech God it
may stir up all men that are particularly interested therein, to bethink
themselves how small a matter will assure them of their safety, by holding the
Spaniard at a bay, so far of: whereas if we give him leave quietly to hatch
and bring forth his preparations, it will be with danger to us all.

He takes not Arms against us by any pretense of title to the Crown of this
Realm, nor led altogether with an ambitious desire to command our Country,
but with hatred toward our whole Nation and Religion: Her Majesty's Scepter
is already given by Bull to another, the honors of our Nobility are bestowed
for rewards upon his attendants, our Clergy, our Gentlemen, our Lawyers, yea
all men of what condition soever, are offered for spoil unto the common
Soldier. Let every man therefore in defense of the liberty and plenty he
has of long enjoyed, offer a voluntary contribution of the smallest part of
their store for the assurance of the rest. It were not much for every Justice
of peace, who by his blewe coat protecteth the properest and most serviceable
men at every muster from the wars, to contribute the charge that one of
these idlemen do put him to for one year: nor for the Lawyer, who rises by
the dissentions of his neighbors, to take but one years gifts (which they
call fees) out of his coffers. What would it hinder every Officer of the
Exchequer, and other of her Majesty's Courts, who without check do suddenly
grow to great wealth, honestly to bring forth the mystical commodity of one
years profits? Or the Clergy, who look precisely for the Tenths of every
man's increase, simply to bring forth the Tenth of one years gathering, and in
thankfulness to her Majesty, (who has continued for all our safeties, a most
chargeable war both at land and sea) bestow the same for her honor and
their own assurance, upon an Army which may make this bloody Enemy, so to
know himself and her Majesty's power, as he shall bethink him what it is to
move a stirring people? Who, though they have received some small check by
the sickness of this last Journey, yet doubt I not, but if it were made
known, that the like Voyage were to be supported by a generality, (that might
and would bear the charge of a more ample provision) but there would of all
sorts most willingly put themselves into the same: some carried with an
honorable desire to be in action, and some in love of such, would
affectionately follow their fortunes: some in thirsting to revenge the death
and hurts of their brethren, kindred, and friends: and some in hope of the
plentiful spoils to be found in those Countries, having been there already
and returned poor, would desire to go again, with an expectation to make
amends for the last: and all, in hatred of that cowardly proud Nation, and in
contemplation of the true honor of our own, would with courage take Arms, to
hazard their lives against them, whom every good English man is in nature
bound to hate as an implacable Enemy to England, thirsting after our blood,
and laboring to ruin our land, with hope to bring us under the yoke of
perpetual slavery.

Against them is true honor to be gotten, for that we shall no sooner set
foot in their land, but that every step we tread will yield us new occasion
of action, which I wish the gallantrie of our Country rather to regard, than
to follow those soft unprofitable pleasures, wherein they now consume their
time and patrimony. And in two or three Towns of Spain is the wealth of all
Europe gathered together, which are the Magasins of the fruits and profits of
the East and West Indies: whereunto I wish our young able men, who against the
liberty they are borne unto, (term themselves Serving men) rather to bend
their desires and affections, than to attend their double liuerie and forty
shillings by the year wages, and the reuersion of the old Coppie-hold, for
carrying a dish to his masters table. But let me here reprehend my self and
crave pardon, for entering into a matter of such state and consequence, the care
whereof is already laid upon a most grave and honorable Council, who will in
their wisdoms foresee the dangers that may be threatened against us. And why
do I labor to disquiet the security of these happy Gentlemen, and the trade
of those honest Serving men, by persuading them to the wars, when I see the
profession thereof so slenderly esteemed? For though al our hope of peace be
frustrate, and our quarells determinable by the sword: though our Enemy has
by his own forces and his pencionaries industry, confined the united Provinces
into a narrow room, and almost disunited the same: if he be now in a good way
to harbor himself in the principal Havens of France, from whence he may
frunt us at pleasure: yea though we are to hope for nothing but a bloody
war, nor can trust to any help but Arms; yet how far the common sort are
from reuerencing or regarding any persons of conduction, was too apparent in
the return of this our journey, wherein the base and common soldier has been
tolerated to speak against the Captain, and the soldier and Captain
against the Generals, and wherein mechanical and men of base condition do
dare to censure the doings of them, of whose acts they be not worthy to talk.

The ancient grave degree of the Prelacie is vphelde, though Martin rail
never so much, and the Lawyer is after the old manner worshipped, whosoever
inueigh against him: But the ancient English honor is taken from our Men of
War, and their Profession in disgrace, though never so necessary. Either we
commit Idolatry to Neptune, and will put him alone still to fight for us as he
did the last year, or we be enchanted with some devilish opinions, that
travail nothing more than to diminish the reputation of them, upon whose
shoulders the burden of our defense against the Enemy must lie when occasion
shall be offered. For whenever he shall set foot upon our land, it is
neither the preaching of the Clergy that can turn him out again, nor the
pleading of any Lawyers that can remove him out of possession: no, then they
will honor them whom now they think not on, and then must those men stand
between them and their perils, who are now thought unworthy of any
estimation.

May the burning of one Town (which cost the King then being, six times as
much as this has done her Majesty, wherein were lost seven times as many men
as in any one service of this journey, and tarried not the tenth part of our
time in the Enemies Country) be by our elders so highly reputed, and sounded
out by the history of the Realm; and can our voyage be so meanly esteemed,
wherein we burned both Towns and Countries without the loss of forty men in
any such attempt?

Did our Kings in former times reward some with the greatest titles of honor
for overthrowing a number of poor Scots, who after one battle lost, were
never able to reenforce themselves against him; and shall they in this time who
have overthrown our mighty Enemy in battle, and taken his royal Standerd
in the field, besieged the Marquis of Saralba fifteen days together, that
should have been the General of the Army against us, brought away so much of
his Artillarie (as I have before declared) be unworthily esteemed of?

Is it possible that some in some times should receive their reward for looking
upon an Enemy, and ours in this time not receive so much as thanks, for
having beaten an Enemy at handie strokes?

But it is true, that no man shall be a Prophet in his Country: and for my
own part, I will lay aside my Arms till that profession shall have more
reputation, and live with my friends in the Country, attending either some
more fortunate time to use them, or some other good occasion to make me forget
them.

But what? shall the blind opinion of this Monster, a beast of many heads, (for
so has the generaltie of old been termed) cause me to neglect the profession
from whence I challenge some reputation; or diminish my love to my Country,
which hitherto has nourished me? No, it was for her sake I first took Arms:
and for her sake I will handle them so long as I shall be able to use them: not
regarding how some men in private conuenticles do measure men's estimations up
their own humors; nor how every populer person does give sentence on every
man's actions by the worst accidents. But attending the gracious aspect of our
dread Sovereign, who never yet left virtue unrewarded: and depending upon the
justice of her most rare and grave aduisors, who by their heedie looking into
every man's worth, do give encouragement to the virtuous to exceed others in
virtue: and assuring you that there shall never any thing happen more pleasing
unto me, than that I may once again be a party in some honorable journey
against the Spaniard in his own Country, I will cease my complaint: and with
them that deserve beyond me, patiently endure the unadvised censure of our
malicious reprouers.

If I have seemed in the beginning hereof troublesome unto you in the
discovering of those impediments; and answering the slanders which by the
vulgar malicious and mutinous sort are laid as blemishes upon the journey, and
reproaches upon the Generals (having indeed proceeded from other heads): let
the necessity of conseruing the reputation of the action in general, and the
honors of our Generals in particular, be my sufficient excuse: the one having
by the virtue of the other made our Country more dreaded and renowned, than
any act that ever England undertook before? Or if you have thought my
perswasivie discourse long in the latter end; let the affectionate desire of my
Countries good be therein answerable for me. And such as it is I pray you
accept it, as only recommended to your self, and not to be delivered to the
public view of the world, least any man take offense thereat; which some
particular men may seem justly to do, in that having deserved very well, I
should not herein give them their due commendations: whereas my purpose in this
private discourse, has been only to gratify you with a touch of those
principal matters that have passed, wherein I have only taken notes of those
men who either commanded every service, or were of chiefest mark: if therefore
you shall impart the same to one, and he to another, and so it pass through
many hands, I know not what constructions would be made thereof to my
prejudice; for that the Hares ears may happily be taken for horns. Howbeit,
I hold it very necessary (I must confess) that there should be some true
manifestation made of these things: but be it far from me to be the author
thereof, as very unfit to deliver my censure of any matter in public, and
most unwilling to have my weakness discovered in private. And so do leave you
to the happy success of your accustomed good exercises, earnestly wishing
that there may be some better acceptance made of the fruits of your studies,
than there has been of our hazards in the wars. From London the 30. of
August. 1589.

FINIS.
Errors in sundry names must thus be read.
Page 16. lin. 31. read Santa Cruz. lin. 23. read at Madrid. Page 17. lin. 1.
read at Madrid. lin. 2. read Capt. Manco. Page 21. lin. 12. read Cap.
Sydenham. Page 29. lin. 8. read at Lorin^a. lin. 34.35. read los Caualleros.
Page 34. lin. 6. read Sant' Vues. Page 45. lin. 29.31. read del Tercio de
Napoles. lin. 34. read Capt. Sauban.


