A PROCLAMATION concerning the Kings style, made the. XXIII. day of January,
the XXXIII. year of his majesty's most gracious reygne.
WHERE WE BE IVSTELY and rightfully king of out Realm of Irelande, and ought
to have the title style and name thereof by right of inheritance, and the non
use thereof in our style has caused much disobedience, rebellion, dyscention,
and sedition in our said realm, to the great impouery shyng and peril of
destruction of the same, if we had not for the redress thereof, put to our
kyngly hand, as we have done, in such wise, as by reason thereof our said
realm (thanks be to god) is no we brought and reduced to better order peace
and civility, than it has been many years past. AND for as much as our
loving subjects of our said realm, both the prelates nobles and commons, do
think and determyne, that the good estate, peace, and tranquyllitie, wherein
our said realm now stands. shall the better and longer contynewe, if we
would as we ought of right, accept and take upon us the title and name of
king of the same: which to do all our said subjects, of our said realm,
by their mutual assentes, by authority of parlyament holden within the same,
have agreed and assented unto, and most instantly desired us, that the said
title and name of king of Irelande, together with our said hole realm, should
be united and annexed to our imperial crown of our realm of England. To
which their desires and humble requests, for the better consecuation of the
good peace of our said realm, we have assented, and have caused for that
purpose our style to be altered and reformed, as well in the latin as in the
english tungue, as hereafter follows. HENRICUS octauus dei gratia Anglic
Franciae and Hibernie rex, fidei defensor, and in terra ecclesiae Anglicanae
and Hibernicae supremum caput. HENRY the, VIII, by the grace of god king of
England, France, and Irelande, defendour of the says, and of the church of
England and also of Ireland in earth the supreme heed.

And to the intent that our said subjects should not be ignorant of the
alteration of our said, in form as is aforesaid, we have caused this present
proclamation to be made, and by the same will and command all and synguler
our officers instices and ministers, and all other our subjects and resiauntes
within this our realm of England, and else where, within any our domynyons,
that they shall accept, take, and use our style, in form above written, in
like form, as they used and accepted our old style before this alteration.
Never the less, to the intent that no dyscorde varyaunce occasyon. trouble,
ympechemente, or molestation should be had or made to any our Justices,
officers, minysters, and other our subjects or resyauntes, before they may
have conuenyent knowledge of the change and alteration of our late style: we
are therefore pleased and contented, that none of our said Justices officers
ministers subjects or other resiantes within our realm of England, the
dominion of wales, Calais; and of theyles of Iersay and Carnysay, for omyttyng
of our said title and name of king of Ireland in wryttes patentes process or
other writings, to be passed under any our seals, or for non acceptance or
mis acceptance thereof, or for any offense touching the same, done or
committed, or to be done or committed, before the last day of Apryl next
coming, shall be vexed troubled impeched, or by any wise molested or troubled,
but that all wryttes patentes process or other wrytynges that be passed or shall
pass under any our seals, before the said last day of Apryll, wherein shall
happen our said title and name of king of Irelande to be omytted, shall be
taken construed accepted and admytted to be of the same force, strength,
quality, and condition in all things, as they were before the said title and
name of king of Irelande was annexed to our style. And that the non
acceptance or mysacceptation of our said title and name of king of Ireland,
or any acts or things done, or that shall chance to be done before the said
last day of Apryll, by any our subjects or resiauntes, towthynge or
concerning our said title or name of king of Irelande, shall be construed and
expounded any offense or occasion of trouble to any of our said subjects or
resiauntes: any thing contained in this proclamation, or any thing that shall
be expressed in the same, or any other thing or things to the contrary thereof
in any wise not withstanding.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
Thomas Berthelet regius impressor excudebat. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum
solum.


