News from France: CONTAINING Two DECLARATIONS OF TWO NEW CONVERTS from the
Church of ROME to the reformed Churches of FRANCE: the former made by Master M.
du TERTRE, Lord de la MOTTHE LVYNE, late Preacher amongst the Order of the
CAPVCINS under the name of F. FIRMIN, etc. at SAVMVR on the 27. of May last:
The latter by the Marquise BONIVET, Lord of CREVE COEVR, etc. at ROCHELL on the
seventh of August last. Both translated out of the several French copies into
English by E. M. of CHRIST-CHVRCH in OXFORD. Whereunto is added an English
Letter sent from PARIS by an English Gentleman to his friend in England,
touching the late surprisall and imprisonment of the Prince of Conde, which
happened on the 22. of August last.

LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for Nathaniel Butter, dwelling near S.
Austins gate at the sign of the Pide-Bull. 1616.

TO THE REVEREND, right Worshipful, and my worthy friend, Mr. Doctor
GOODWIN, Doctor in Divinity, and Deane of Christ-Church in OXFORD, the
Translator wishes all happiness both in body and soul.
Reverend and Right Worshipful,
Having within these few days lighted upon this book, by the means of a
familiar friend of mine, who lately had received it out of France, and
considering the happy subject and methodicall composure thereof, I thought it
would not be amiss (nay rather a very profitable work for the Church, at
least for the bringing home of such, of whom there is yet good hope they may be
reclaimed) if I did set by some few of these vacation hours for the
translating thereof. And I was the rather induced thereunto, by reason of a
more particular charge, which not long since it pleased you to lay upon me, to
the performing whereof this might (with Gods help) not a little avail. The
points perhaps that are handled in this Treatise, or at least most of them,
have been formerly and often discussed to the full by others, but yet very
seldom (would to God it happened more often) by way of recantation or
reclaiming: and if in that manner, as of late we have had an example thereof,
The advice of a son, etc. printed at Oxford, 1616.
and our Press is yet hot with it, (I would our affections were so also) yet
most seldom by men of my Authors coat, by such I mean who are so far gone,
and sunk so deep into the whirle-poole of their superstitions, that they have
with a nearer bond, and as it were an apprentiship for term of life, bound
themselves never to depart, I will not say, from their religion (for that is
common to them with others) but from their particular order and quintessence as
it were of religion; it being from thence that such only (and no others, either
of their Clergy or Laity) are called (...), and by way of eminency,
religious. Having thus showed the profit which (I trust) may come from this my
small endeavor, or rather from the Authors own labors and travels (his indeed
being as the very waters of life, the only tasting whereof is salvificall, and
mine but the channel to convey them) it remains now that I recommend this my
labor to your patronage, from whom I first received the occasion of taking it
in hand. I will not now stand upon Apologies (as the manner of most is) either
for my self or the book. The book (I am sure) needs none; and for my self,
I trust, I have met with a Patron that will read me without any Apology. If
any shall think I have been too busy herein, it being a subject for the
which I am scarce ripe; let him know thus much, that what I have done, may be
the work, nay ought of duty so to be, I say not, of every Divine, ( Quanquam
o, would to God every such would put to their helping hands) but of every one
that is only brought up in the bare school of Christianity. Thus committing
my self and these my labors to your good acceptance, I pray to the Almighty
God, that he will continue and confirm in his Church those that to all
appearance are in already, with the ninety and nine of that good Shepherd in
the Gospel, and that it will please him, with the same Shepherd who brought
home his one sheep, daily to bring home and add unto his true Church, such as
either by others seducing have straied from, or out of forced ignorance never
could find the way to his fold. Amen.

From my Study in Christ-Church, Oxford this 31. of July. 1616.
The Authors Epistle, to my Masters of the Romish Church.
SIrs, I have a long while debated and disputed with my self, whether I should
set to your view the causes and reasons of my retreat from you and your
Church, and of my conversion and union to the Reformed ones of this Kingdom,
and their society and company. On the one side, the sincerity of my intention
in this charge seemed wholly to divert, turn, and hinder me from so doing, as
caring very little what men thought, spoke, or esteemed of it; so that my
actions were pleasing and acceptable to the supreme and eternal majesty of my
God, conformable to his holy and divine will, tending and redounding to his
honor and glory, and aduantagious and profitable for mine own good and
salvation. And besides contenting my self with that which I have spoken,
treated, and declared thereof in my Profession, made in the Church of this
City, the 24. of April. But on the other side, the duties and obligations
which I owe to the truth, joined with the most affectionate suits and
opportunities, which almost an infinite number have used toward me, and often
reiterated, and the calumnies and slanders, wherewith many amongst you (though
unjustly and wrongfully) do charge me, do force and constrain me to set
down in this paper, produce to the day and bring to light, that which almost I
then said of it; this only excepted, that now I will enlarge my self a little
more, then the shortness of the time and discourse could at that time permit
me. I have thought and believed that I could not more justly, and with better
reason and equity, direct this Treatise to any, then to those, from whom I
separated my self, to the end I might take from them the idle and light
opinions, and the bad beliefes, far removed from piety and honesty, and
remove the scandal which they might have conceived thereupon. Receive it
therefore, I pray you* with the same gentleness and sincerity of affection, with
the which I offer and present it unto you. And do me the favor to take the
pains to read it; but with quietness, if it please you, and tranquillity of
mind, without trouble and passion. And I hope, nay I am certain, and assure
my self that you shall find, that there is more reason and knowledge in my
action, then you think, and more obligation to follow me, and to do that which
I have done, then you imagine. To this end I do open all the secrets of my
heart, and foulds of my soul before the Majesty of my God: and in your
presence, with a solemn oath and protestation, that I will say nothing but the
truth. I beseech the divine goodness, to assist you with his grace and
heavenly light, to make you know clearly both the one and the other. I do
pray with all my heart, and with as great affection, as I am verily, and shall
be all my life, notwithstanding this change and alteration of religion, and
departure from you, and your society and company.

Sirs, Your most humble, inward, and affectionate, for your good and salvation,
Dela Motthe Luyne.
From Saumur, this 27. of May, 1616.
A DECLARATION and manifestation of the chief causes and motives which have
moved and induced Mr. M. de TERTRE Lord de la MOTTHE LVYNE, to withdraw
himself from the Romish Church: Directed to those of the Church of ROME.
THe most clear actions of men (even of the most famous and illustrious in
virtues, perfections, and most commendable qualities) are subject to shadows,
and their works exposed to the foolish and rash examination, search, censure,
and judgment even of the common people.

When you heard of, knew, and saw my departure, God knows what sinister
opinions I ran into in regard of many amongst you; some taking my design to be
but a lightness, inconstancy, and inconsiderateness of mind; others
thinking it to have proceeded from a matter and occasion of disquietnesse and
discontent received from them, from whom I am departed; others from a desire of
greater liberty and more licentious life; and many other the like: but all in
general esteeming it a manifest disloyalty and notorious treacherousnesse to
your society and company.

I could never have thought (and yet less believed) that the actions of a
worm of the earth, of one so poor and wretched as I am, should have been
gathered up with such a throng: but sithence that by the manifest providence of
God they are fallen into this debate, 1 Pet. 3. v. 15. Matthew. 10 33.
I am most willing and content to render and give an account of them, as S.
Peter commands me, or rather Jesus Christ, who would disclaim me before his
heavenly Father, if I did not confess him (in the truth) ingenuously before
men.

I swear therefore and protest before the most holy Trinity (to whom al
things are known and manifest, which sounds my very reins, which sees and
pierces even to the inmost and most secret part of my heart and thought of my
soul) that this my change has no other aim, and tends purely and simply to
no other end, then to the glory of my God, and the assurance of my salvation:
for which two things I do not nor will ever refuse, in regard of men, either
shame, or confusion, or poverty, or dishonor, or martyrdom whatsoever,
though armed with the most cruel and sensible prickings of all the punishments
and torments that at any time were felt by any reasonable creature. And if I
have any other intent, I pray my God that he will make an exemplary vengeance
of my hypocrisy, and punish and chasten me most severely, if he knows and
can find out that I speak not the truth, and that my words do disagree and
differ from the thoughts of my soul and feeling of my heart.

I am now come to the 32. year of mine age, or thereabouts; and though it has
been with much pains, wearisomnesse, and travel, partly in my studies, and
partly in my other public or private businesses, yet I do not think (thanks
to Gods bounty) that I ever did wear in my countenance and forehead any mark
whatsoever, which might make me blush for shame, or hinder me from going with
my head lifted up aloft. I have not lost with that little experience which I
have gotten in the world, the desire of going on and ending my life in the same
bed of honor and state of innocence, for to prostitute that so lightly, which
I have kept and maintained so dearly and with so much care. And how weak
soever I am in body and mind, yet the lightness, inconsiderateness, and
inconstancy, which some closely object unto me and reproach me withal, has
not as yet (God be thanked) so far possessed my brains, as that any one
should have seen from thence to issue the effects of folly; and I hope that
his goodness will not derelinquish or leave me to that wretched and lamentable
extremity. As for the matter and occasion of discontent, which some others
produce and lay abroad, I should be to blame, and should lie, if I should
complain thereof; it being true (and I must needs avouch and confess it
ingenuously) that I have been but too much beloved, cherished, and honored in
that state wherein I was, and as much or more advanced then I could have
desired, wished, or challenged, having been put to the study of Philosophy
and Divinity even sooner then their customs, statutes and ordinances could
well allow of and permit, having also been made Priest precisely at the time
permitted and appointed, and eftsoons admitted and preferred to the office of
preaching, which I have begun to exercise from my 25. year, and always since
continued at Burges, Bloys, in this City, Tours, Angiers, Chasteaugontier,
Laval, Mayenne, le Man's, Alenson, Rhedon, and other such like well known towns
of France, with all kind of contentment and satisfaction (thanks be to God)
being welcome to all, and understood by every one. As for the liberty and a
more licentious life, which others last of all do object unto me, God knows
and is my record (and experience also can witness it, and give an assured
proof thereof) that I have had nothing less in my mind and thought then
that, but rather on the contrary it was the desire of a more retired, solitary,
peaceable and quiet life, and for to put an end to those poastings and
vagaries, which are ordinary and essential to men of that estate and
condition, who like Daedalus his images are in a perpetual stirring, motion,
and agitation. But if that had been the cause, I need not to have come out
from thence where I was, such occasions and opportunities offering and
presenting themselves daily unto me (as well as to others, yea a thousand times
more) if I would have taken and accepted them as well as they. But God by his
infinite goodness and mercy has kept and preserved me even against these
encounters, wherein the strongest and perfectest in show have shamefully
yielded and foulely fallen.

I would not therefore so play with my self, and and out of an humor (as it
were) change my Religion, if that I had not some sound cause and ground for it,
it being otherwise very easy for me (if I had willed) to keep my wonted
manner of life, and to keep my self (so doing) from so many blows of the
tongue, from wry looks, from pricking suspicions, which I have (in truth) to
the quick felt, and do yet feel in good earnest. But there is no remedy: I
must resolve with my self to swallow down by little and little this cup of
bitterness for the love of our Savior, Heb. 12.2.
who (says S. Paul) when he could, and it was free unto him, to stay above in
heaven in the same glory, felicity, and happiness with his Father, waited on
and adored by the highest Spirits and Angelical powers, not only abased and
emptied himself, humbling himself so far, as to cloth himself with the
weakness and infirmity of our nature, and to take upon him the form of a
servant and slave, yea enen was resolved willingly to suffer and endure the
infamous and painful death and punishment of the Cross, and indeed endured
it, without having any regard, or caring at all for the shame, ignominy,
confusion, and reproach which was to ensue thereupon; it being enough to him
that it was for our sakes, to deliver and enfranchise us from the power of the
devil, sin, and hell, and to bring us again into favor with his eternal
Father, and into the possession of the kingdom of heaven, lost by the sin
and offense of our parents. Add hereunto that which himself says, Matthew. 9
10.
The Disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his Lord. If they
have called the master of the house Beelsebub, Io. 24 25.
how much more them of the household? If they have persecuted me, how much more
will they persecute you also? Verse. 37.38.
He that loves father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me. He that
takes not his Cross and follows me, is not worthy of me. He that loves his
soul, shall lose it; and he that hates it in this life for my sake, shall
keep it in the life everlasting. And if it were so (as thanks be to God it is
not) that I should be uncertain and ignorant of what I owe to my conscience in
this behalf, I would then strive to cover again and hide my straying with
excuses and repentances, which I am sure would not be denied me, but rather
would be received willingly, and with all kind of joy, contentment, and
cheerfulness, with open both arms and hearts, as it has been sufficiently
testified unto me by those instant searches, affectionate pursuits, and truly
charitable offers, and I cannot but acknowledge and confess it ingenuously; at
the least if their intent were answerable to their words, which those of that
state and condition have used and often reiterated unto me, both by themselves,
and by third persons interposed.

What do I then? And by your favor I do pray you (you which take the pains
and the patience to read these draughts of my pen, or rather of my soul) to
think on me with as much attention, as I my self have thought of it, and to
weigh my reasons with the just balance of reason it self, and then I am
certain and assured that you will judge and find me as far from hastiness,
precipitation, inconstancy, inconsiderateness of mind, and other such like
things, which many amongst you, yea it may be your selves do object unto me
and reproach me withal, as I am near to the truth.

My change and my departure do seem strange to you, I desire it. I can do
nothing in it, much less hinder and stop the readiness of your minds. But if
it please you to stay a while with me, I shall it may be make this change more
familiar unto you. For it first of all it be strange unto you, because that
every alteration and change of religion is simply so of it self, and that we
ought to end in that wherein we have begun; what then I pray will become of
those among the Jews, Turks, the men of Iapan, of Margaia, and other
barbarous and strange nations, which have changed and daily do change their
own religion, and that of their fathers, in the which they had been nurtured
and brought up, for to make themselves Christians, to wed themselves to the law
and faith of our Savior, and to profess his religion? If it be, because that
more particularly and specially it is ill done to depart from your company, you
might have right therein, if you or your Doctors could enlighten or ease me in
this doubt. But I think that you and they would be troubled as much to do
that, as to prove, show, and make it plain unto me, that yours is more worth
and truer then that which I have embraced, the which notwithstanding would be
wholly and altogether requisite and necessary to that proof.

From whence then (you will say unto me) comes this so sudden a change? From
the special and singular grace of God, and from the particular knowledge which
it has pleased his goodness to give me, for to depart from the disorders,
abuses, and errors of your Church, as well in matter of faith and doctrine, as
of manners. It is very long since I began to know and take notice of them;
finding it very strange, ridiculous, without reason, nay against all reason
both divine and humane, and not being able to comprehend and conceive, Bellar.
caeterique omnes vna voce and communi consensu.
1. How the holy Scriptures (and the Spirit of God speaking in them) were not
the certain and infallible rule of faith, but rather men which are blind,
ignorant, and faulty of their own nature: 2. That they were obscure,
doubtful, imperfect, altogether insufficient to salvation: 3. That of
themselves without traditions they were not so necessary, and that the
traditions of themselves purely and simply (without the said Scriptures) were
absolutely necessary: 4. How the substance of bread and wine were changed and
converted into the substance of the body and blood of Jesus Christ: 5. How the
humanity of our Savior in the same Sacrament was substantially present almost
every where, or at least was really in almost infinite, distinct, and severed
places in one and the same instant: 6. How the Mass was a true, proper, real,
and substantial sacrifice, in the which the body of Christ in his own
essence, substance, and nature and proper person, was again offered, immolated
and sacrificed by the hands of the Priest to the everlasting Father, for the
expiation of our faults, sins and offenses: 7. How there was a Purgatory and
set place wherein the souls of the faithful after this life were detained for
the satisfaction of their crimes: 8. How the said souls could be helped by the
suffrages of the living, as by prayers, cries, alms, and other the like, but
especially by applying of Masses and Papal Indulgences: 9. How there was in
the Church a treasure composed of the superfluous merits of the Virgin, of the
Saints, etc. which could be applied to the living and to the dead for a
satisfaction and remission of their faults and offenses: 10. And that this
application belonged and was proper to the Pope alone, who might dispose
thereof as should seem good unto him, and deliver by the means thereof the
souls detained in this pretended Purgatory at his will and pleasure: 11. How
Jesus Christ was not alone the only sufficient Mediator, Intercessor, and
Advocate for us to his everlasting Father: and that for this purpose we ought
to resort and have our refuge to the Saints and blessed ones: and that a
thousand other such like things which you believe, and your Doctors teach and
preach, ought to be held for Articles of faith, there not being any trace or
ground of them in the sacred Scripture, the true rule of that which ought to be
believed and done. Not being able (I say) to persuade my self that that was
the true Church, in the which the true faith and the doctrine of the Gospel
was held and taught, wherein the manners, life and actions were so contrary and
opposite unto them, and the corruption so great and universally diffused and
extended throughout. But those were but small, light, and vain Ideaes, which
went no farther by reason of the negligence (as I believe) in the which the
watchings which I bestowed on my studies and other businesses kept me asleep:
as also by reason of the age whereof I was, which for that time did not give me
more lively conceits thereof for want of some body that might have heartened
them on farther, as indeed I was bred in the midst of them who believed and did
the quite contrary. Thus did my simplicity hatch my ignorance, wherein I lived
five or six whole years since this first glimpse of light, which did kindle in
my soul and heart this desire and affection of the truth, and to return to
this first spring and original of the faith and manners of the Apostles and
Disciples of the Son of God our Savior, yet of that very Savior, from whom
by process of time even your Church has swarued. At the end of which years
finally it has pleased that supreme goodness and majesty (which does impart
and communicate his graces and favors to whom he thinks good, yea oftentimes
to least worthy and capable subjects, and makes the splendour of his everlasting
light to cast his beams on those souls that are deepest plunged into the
obscurity of darkness) to pour out on mine the amplitude and greatness of
his heavenly and divine benedictions, and to make me to see abundantly, purely
and to the full, in their own essence and natural day, both the truth and
falsehood, and to harden, strengthen and encourage my mind for to embrace
valorously the one, and to reject the other, against all the objects and
representations of humane reason, the attractiue and alluring persuasions of
nature, the impetuous assaults of flesh and blood, and the strong suggestions
and temptations of the devil, and the furious and bloody combats of hell.
Whereupon I am and shall always be obliged unto him, over and above all the
obligations which I owe unto him already in number almost infinite: and I do
bless, praise, and will praise him to al eternity, yea all the holy Angels of
heaven and just men of the earth, which (whereas the envious, hateful, and ill
willers have their foreheads wrinkled) will be glad for me and rejoice at my
departure and conuension. This my change then has no other scope, and aims
purely and simply (as I have already said) at nothing but the glory of my God,
and the assurance of my salvation, which I have truly found out, and swear and
protest that I could not have attained unto and wrought out in that state
wherein I was: understand, I pray you, and hearken to the reasons thereof. The
two grounds and foundations of all Christian religion, and consequently of
everlasting salvation, are faith and charity, without which neither one nor
the other can remain and continue standing: faith (I say) in Christ, Faith.
He that believes in me (says he) shall not come into judgment; but he that
believes not, is already condemned. Not any faith whatsoever, but such as God
and the holy Scripture do demand and require of us, not languishing, dead,
grounded on humane inventions and traditions, but purely and simply on Gods
word, animated and quickened by the spirit of grace, accompanied with good
works. Charity, not fained, Charity.
dissembled, in show only, but as the Apostle says, proceeding from a pure and
clean heart, from a good conscience, from an unfeigned faith, and a loyalty
not counterfeted.

The same S. Paul speaking of the first in the 1. Epist. to the Corinthians,
Verse. 10.11.12.
chap. 3. says it clearly and in very express terms: According to the grace
of God which is given unto me, as a wise master builder, I have (says he) laid
the foundation, and another builds thereon. But let every man take heed how
he builds thereupon: for other foundation can no man lay then that is laid,
which is Jesus Christ. Now if any man build upon this foundation gold, silver,
etc. Where you see clearly how under the metaphore and comparison of a
material edifice and building (which that it may be firm, sound, and lasting,
has necessarily need of a good strong foundation of firm and hard stones,
laid very far and deep in the ground) he declares, signifies, and gives
clearly to understand, that the true faith and belief in Jesus Christ our
Savior (such as he teaches and shows us in his writings) is the true, sure,
and only foundation, and the solid and settled groundworke of all Christian
religion, and consequently by a necessary sequel, of everlasting salvation,
according to my proposition, which for this first point remains enough by this
place and sufficiently proved. As also no man does deny it and call it in
question, but all generally do admit and receive it for a certain and assured
ground.

Let us come to the proof of the second point thereof, to wit, of Charity: I
had need of more time then the shortness of this discourse can afford me,
for to relate all the places of holy Scripture making for this purpose. That
namely is manifest and clear by the very words of our Savior, when as being
asked of that Doctor of the Law, Matthew. 22.
or Scribe and Pharisie, which was the first, the greatest and chief
commandment thereof, and having made answer that it was to love God with all
his heart, with all his soul, etc. and his neighbor as himself, he adds,
that in these two points were comprised and contained, closed and shut up the
whole Law and the Prophets, and consequently by a necessary sequel and
infallible conclusion, all religion grounded and salvation established, as on
two solid and firm foundations, without the which neither one nor the other
(as I have already said) can remain and continue standing.

Now let us see whether those two grounds and bases of salvation be or can be
found in your Church, and in the state and condition from whence I am departed,
to the end that from thence you may know and judge, whether I have had just
cause and lawful occasion to do this or no; and that the tongues that make
themselves malicious and slanderous, may cease from their calumnious assaults
and pursuits. And to begin with the faith and belief in Jesus Christ: How the
Papists fail in matters of faith.
we have amongst many others three things to be considered in him; 1. his
person, 2. his charge and offices, 3. the singular graces, favors and benefits
which he has conferred on us, and we have received from him.

As for his person, 1. About Christ's person.
it is a matter of alike faith and belief, equally grounded in the holy
Scripture, and acknowledged, approved, and confessed by all, that he is very
God and very man; God, begotten from all eternity, of the proper substance,
essence, and nature of his eternal Father, yea the very same perfectly and in
all points, equally God as he is: Man, conceived, in time produced, and
begotten within the chaste entrails of the proper substance of the Virgin
Mary, by the working of the holy Ghost, of the seed of Abraham and David
according to the flesh, truly man as we are, subject to the same and altogether
alike infirmities, except sin and ignorance. Now although your Doctors
directly and openly do not beat down and destroy these two things in the
Son of God our Savior; yet so it is notwithstanding that by manner of
consequence and necessary sequel, they take from him, rob him of, and carry
away at the least his humanity, when as they say (and it is their common
doctrine and universal belief) that in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, by the
means which they call (and they have forged and invented it for themselves but
of late times) of transubstantiation, the substance of bread and wine is
converted and changed (they are the proper words of the Council of Trent in
the first and second Canon of the fourth chapter, and of all your Doctors in
dependence thereof) into the body and blood of Jesus Christ; which is properly
and to speak truly, to overthrow topsie turuie and destroy the truth of the
incarnation and humanity of our Savior, and to give him a body not taken and
drawn from the substance of the Virgin, made and begotten by the seed of
Abraham and David according to the flesh, following the promise which had been
made them thereof by that supreme majesty long time before; but from the
substance of the bread, and by a necessary consequence and infallible
conclusion, no longer any true body or a natural man, but a morsel of paste,
a piece of the oven: horrible and accursed blasphemy! but yet far more when
as they affirm, avouch, and wilfully maintain, that the same humanity of
Christ (in the same Sacrament) is substantially present almost every where: or
at least is really and corporally in almost infinite distinct and severed
places in one and the same instant.

So Bellarmine in his controversies of the Eucharist, and after him all the
others in a row; which is properly to make the body of Christ no longer a true
body, but to speak plainly, an immense and infinite God, contrary both to the
truth of his humane nature, and to the testimony of all the holy Scriptures
and reason it self. For what body would that be, which wants his natural
greatness and stature, which can neither be felt, handled, nor seen, etc.
which occupies and fills almost infinite places distant and far asunder in
one and the same instant, as we have already said? Thus do you see that your
Church does oppose and destroy his holy and sacred person, and the humanity of
our Savior, and turns topsie turuie (as much as in her lies) this ground of
our salvation, whereas in lieu of the true body of Christ, she offers,
presents, and gives you an idle vision, and a very apparition. But this is
enough on this matter.

Let us now come to his charges and offices: 2. About his offices.
They are many and in great number, but may notwithstanding all be reduced to
these three principal, of Prophet, of King, of high Priest: A Prophet, As he
is a Prophet.
who like another Moses, yea better then he and more perfectly many thousand
times, and without compare, nay then all the other Prophets, has both by
himself and by his Apostles and Disciples foretold, denounced and declared the
will of his eternal Father, the laws, precepts and ordinances, which he
required and willed us to observe. So had the foresaid Moses a long time before
foretold, when as being near to his end, and upon the finishing of his days,
turning himself to the children and people of Israel, and comforting them in
the behalf of his departure, Deuteronomy. 18.^5.
he did warrant them and promised that God would raise up unto them a Prophet
from the midst of them, of their brethren, etc. And the Apostle in the first to
the Hebrews says expressly, that God having in times past at sundry times and
in sundry and diners manners spoken to the Fathers by the Prophets, has spoken
to us in our days by his well-beloved Son, etc. And a thousand other the like
testimonies of Scripture, which I omit of purpose not to weary you. Scriptures
insufficient according to the Papists.

Beliarm. disputatione seu controuersia 1. de verbo Dei scripto and non
scripto, totis 4 libris, tom. 1. and praecipue li 3. cap. 1. cap. 2. and cap.
4. lib. 4. ca 2. cap. 4. and 12.


Now those of your Church do deny unto him this honorable charge and office,
when as they say, hold and maintain, that the holy Scripture is obscure,
ambiguous, imperfect, insufficient to salvation: That there is nothing in it
heavenly and divine, which can bind us to believe that which is contained
therein: That that which the Apostles and Prophets have given us and left in
writing, they did it not as being driven thereunto by any particular and
special commandment, or inspiration from God, but by contingent occasions and
accidental causes: That its proper principal and last end is not to be and to
stand for a rule of faith, but only for a certain useful and profitable
recommendation to the keeping and observing of the doctrine proceeding from the
preaching of the Gospel, etc. And that not contenting themselves with this
heavenly doctrine, by the means whereof the Son of God our Savior has
given and left unto us both by his living voice, and by the Apostles and
Prophets, as it were by his own hands, all that is requisite and needful to
salvation, and to the perfection which he wills, Deuter. 4. Apocal. vlt. Ad
Galat. 1.
requires and demands of us, they add to this heavenly and divine written
word (contrary to the express prohibition which is given of it in many places
therein, where an Anathema is pronounced, and a curse thundered out against
those that shall be so daring, bold and shameless, as to undertake it) they
add unto it (I say) as being insufficient, another not written, to wit, an
infinite number of humane constitutions, traditions, and inventions. To the
which (although for the most part uncertain, Council. Tridentin. sess. 4.
Decret. 1.
obscure, and contrary among themselves) they will have us to give the like
credit and belief, and carry toward them the same and altogether equal
devotion with the word of God, nay far greater, seeing they hold and teach,
as I have said heretofore, that of it self alone, without the said traditions,
the Scripture is not so necessary, and neither can nor ought to serve for a
rule of faith: and the traditions alone of themselves purely and simply,
without the said Scripture, ought to be and absolutely are so. Which while they
do, what is this else, but to reject and impudently refuse to admit, receive
and acknowledge the Son of God Jesus Christ our Savior (in whom, Coloss
as the Apostle says, are laid up all the treasures of the divine knowledge
and wisdom of the Father) for their true Prophet and Lawgiver? or at the
least to think him unfit, insufficient, who neither knew, nor could (but what
say I? nay malicious, who would not) declare and give us to understand the will
of his Father, and his purpose concerning the service and obedience which he
would have, and which we ought to render him; yea most unjust, to tie and bind
us (and that on pain of eternal death and destruction) to observe a law which
he had not made known unto us. Which are three blasphemies none of them less
damnable then the other, the which notwithstanding (before you perceive or
think of it) your Doctors and Prelates do make you lamentably run into, by
this false, perverse, and wicked doctrine which they set before you to believe,
twofold worse then you, yea threefold, and an hundredfold, who therefore
also shall be punished for it a thousand times more grievously.

As he is a King.
A King and Pastor ordained of God, and established over his Church, for to
feed, order, guide and govern it by his divine spirit, as a sovereign
Monarke, head and Pastor thereof; and to keep, maintain, conserve and defend
it against all his enemies visible and invisible, by his almighty arm and his
strong and forcible hand, and to make her finally arise and come to the haven
of everlasting salvation, of felicity and bliss. Psalm. 1.
I have been (says he himself through the mouth of his ancestor and
grandfather David) anointed and consecrated King by him, to wit, his eternal
Father, upon his holy hill of Sion. In Esaias 16. Ierem. 23. in S. Luke 1. He
shall reign (says the Archangell to the Virgin) over the house of Jacob for
ever, and of his kingdom there shall be none end. And he himself last of all
in S. Matthew 28. speaking to his Disciples after his glorious and triumphant
resurrection, did ascertaine and assure them, that all power was given him both
in heaven and in earth. And in a thousand more places and passages of the
Scripture he is called, and himself also styles himself by the title of
Pastor. Now those of your Church do deprive and disrobe him of these
honorable charges and glorious offices, The Pope head of the Church according
to Papists.
for to make them over to a mortal, frail and perishable man, whom they admit
and receive into his place, acknowledging him for their sovereign chief
Pastor and Governor, as if this King of infinite glory and majesty, and true
Shepherd of our souls, were not able and sufficient for to feed, order,
guide and govern them, attributing and transferring by a horrible and
detestable blasphemy to him, the titles, qualities, and conditions, which
befit and pertain to the Savior only, as he is the Bridegroom, universal
Head and Pastor of the Church, etc. which is nothing else, to speak properly
and truly, but to pluck and drive away Christ from his kingly seat and throne,
and to set therein another, to take from his head the crown and Miter, and out
of his hands the Scepter, for to give them to the Pope. For if he be head of
the Church, Christ shall be so no longer, else she would be deformed,
monstrous, and two-headed. If all power has been given unto him in heaven and
in earth, as he impudently boasts, then truly it will altogether be taken
away from Christ: for as Alexander said very well to Darius (as learned
Plutarch reports and witnesses) even as the heaven is enlightened but by one
Sun, from whom all the other stars and planets receive and keep alike (by
mere and simple dependence and communication) their light and splendor, and
there cannot be two of them: in like manner in a kingdom there can be but one
King, and there cannot be suffered to be two; otherwise the Royalty would be
imperfect, and the Empire subject to perpetual troubles and continual wars,
and would quickly begin to fall to decay and utter ruin. To be short, if the
Pope be the general, only, and universal Pastor and Bishop of the Church, to
whom the Son of God has given and committed all his authority, care and
diligence, in ruling, governing, ordering, disposing, establishing of laws,
and setting down rules to the consciences, with a bond of yielding to him all
obedience and submission as to himself; what then has he more to busy
himself withal here below in his Church? Truly he has utterly deprived
himself of his kingdom, and disrobed himself of his pastoral office and
charge, he is now no longer any thing else in their reckoning, but a mere
cipher and o in Arithmeticke; which is a blasphemy, not only to say, but even
to think: the which notwithstanding these wretches make you to commit and
utter, though you think not or neglect to have regard of it. But to what a
pitiful and deplored state would the Church be brought, having for her chief
Pastors and universal Governors men that of their nature are weak, feeble,
wretched and blind, who scarce are fit to rule, guide and govern themselves,
their works and actions? From thence it is that are sprung and have had their
source, so many disorders, irregularities, and Corruptions in your Church, as
is to be seen at this day. But it is no wonder: for as Jesus Christ our
Savior says very fitly, Matthew. 15. Luke 6.
If the blind will undertake to guide and direct other blind men in their
way, what can be hoped and looked for, but that they shall stumble on their
faces to the ground, and finally all of them have a deadly downfall? No no,
there are no others besides that sovereign King and glorious Monarke, the
eternal, almighty, and divine Governor and Shepherd of our souls, who can
only rule the whole body of the Church, have an eye over all, give order for
all things, as being wholly wise, cleeresighted and provident, yea Wisdom and
Providence it self, by the means whereof the eternal Father does govern,
guide, and dispose of all things. 1. Pet. 2.25.
It is he who is the true shepherd and bishop of our souls; says Saint
Peter, The Lieutenant general, and viceroy of God his Father, says Saint
Matthew, Matt. 26.
Who has given him all power, authority, and might in heaven and in earth; And
having brought all things under his feet, says Saint Paul, Ephesians. 1.
has set him over all things, for to be head to his Church.

A true and sovereign Priest after the order of Melchizedeck, As he is a
Priest.
anointed and consecrated by the eternal Father before all worlds. Psalm. 110.
The Lord has sworn (says the kingly Prophet speaking to this purpose) and
will not repent him, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedeck. (The Apostle S. Paul confirms and repeats this many and diverse
times in the Epistle to the Hebrews, 5.7.8.9.10.) For to offer up to him in
time according to the office and duty of the high Priest, his precious body and
blood, his sacred and spotless flesh upon the altar of the Cross, as a
pleasing sweet smelling and acceptable sacrifice to his divine Majesty, justly
provoked against us for our crimes and offenses, for to assuage and appease him
to reconcile us with him, to deliver and set us free from the power of the
Devil, and from the writ, whereby we were bound over to everlasting pains
and torments of hell, and to bring us again gloriously to the happy fruition
of the kingdom of heaven: In the Ps. 65. Esa. 33. in the first of S. Peter,
23. to the Romans 3. Heb. 10. and a thousand the like. Hence it is that he is
called and styled by the same Apostle, our Salvation, Redemption,
Sanctification, etc. For to offer unto him, I say, according to the forenamed
duty and office of the Highpriests, prayers, supplications, and requests
continually to intercede for us, and to stand us in stead of an Advocate
toward his divine Majesty, Ier. 30. Zachar. 1. Romans 3.5.8. Ephesians. 2. Hebr.
7.8.9.18. Ioh. 4. This he does effect and accomplish very faithfully, and will
continue so to do unto the end and consummation of the world. Now your Church
does take from him, Christ's passion and satisfaction, insufficient according to
the Papists.
and carries away the one and the other of his charges and offices, after many
ways and manners, but especially in two.

First, when as she presumes to reiterate this Sacrament, and does fondly
imagine, that she offers up again every day at the Mass, the body of Jesus
Christ for the sins and salvation of the living and dead: by means whereof
the anger and wrath of the eternal father is assuaged and appeased, and men
find and obtain mercy; so that with you the Mass is a propitiatory, and
impetratorie sacrifice. Whence it follows plainly, that that first oblation
and sacrifice of our Savior, made on the tree of the Cross, by the effusion
of his precious and divine blood, was not sufficient but wholly imperfect? as
the Apostle to the Hebrews, 7.10. argues and gathers very well from the
ancient sacrifices of the old Law, the which because they had not the force and
efficacy fully to wipe away sins, were therefore reiterated many and sundry
times, but the sacrifice of the Son of God having had that virtue, power, and
efficacy: hence it is that it ought in no ways to be reiterated and offered up
again, having been more then able and sufficient, even the first time to blot
out and to quit the sins of the whole world, yea of a thousand worlds, if so
many there had been. This notwithstanding your Church denies by those
pretended imaginary, The sacrifice of the Mass.
unbloody (as she calls them) oblations and sacrifices, which she repeateth
every day, showing enough thereby that she does not believe the first to have
been sufficient, impairing in this manner the authority, credit, and dignity
of this only High Priest, according to the order of Melchizedeck. Read I
beseech you, and take pains to consider heedfully, the 7.9. and 10. of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, and you shall see more clearly, how your faith and
belief in this matter and doctrine of your Church, is far different and
contrary, to that of the Apostle Saint Paul, and of the first believers of the
primitive Church.

Secondly, Mediation and intercession of Saints for us.
she takes from him the office and charge of mediator, etc. when as to his
disparagement she sets, and appoints almost an infinite number between God and
men, the Virgin, Saint Peter, etc. the which she commands to be called upon,
and teaches that reciprocally they understand our prayers, and make
intercession for us to his divine Majesty, etc. Now if this were true, it would
follow thence by a necessary consequence that Jesus Christ our Savior, were
not alone the only and sufficient Mediator, Intercessour, and Advocate for men
toward his Father, which not only is most false, but altogether blasphemous,
directly against the Scriptures, in the fore-alleaged places to the Hebrews,
7. and 10. and a thousand other the like, all which I omit of purpose (as also
a more ample proof of this truth) because the time vrges me, and the
shortness of this discourse forces compels me to pass it by in silence, and
to come to the third thing, which I have said is to be considered in Jesus
Christ our Savior, to wit, his singular and not to be equalled benefits, and
graces, and favors, which so lovingly he has communicated unto us, and we
have received from him in so great abundance, that so I may show, and make
plain unto you, how your Church, and your Prelates and Doctors, and you with
them, do likewise err and fail greatly and foully therein, and in the humble,
hearty, and loving acknowledgement, which we ought to have toward that
bountiful Lord.

His offices are many and in a great number, as I have said (yea almost
infinite, and he would never have done, that will recount them and stand upon
each of them in particular) but they may all notwithstanding be reduced to
these two specials and particulars; which he has purchased us by his death and
passion, and merited by the effusion of his precious blood, our Justification
and Sanctification, which God promises to his people in that new covenant,
which he foretells by Jeremy, 31. and 32. that he was to make with them,
rehearsed by the Apostle to the Hebrews, 8. and the 10. Behold (says the
Lord) I will make with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah, a new
Covenant; which is this: I will put my Law in their understanding, and will
write it in their hearts; (there is sanctification) and I will forgive their
unrighteousness, and I will remember their iniquities, and sins no more;
There is Justification.

^ustification.
The first then of these benefits is our justification, which is the merely
free remission and pardon which God gives us of all our offenses and sins:
witness S. Paul, Romans 4. who following David, Psalm. 32. does place the
justification and happiness of man in this remission, as also David denounces
the happiness and bliss of that man to whom God imputes righteousness
without works, etc. This pardon is gotten and deserved for us by the merit of
Jesus Christ our Savior, in as much as he offering himself for an offering
and sacrifice of good and sweet savor to his Father on the tree of the Cross,
he has thereby fully satisfied his divine justice for all our sins, as S.
Paul teaches us, Romans 3.23. and 24. Being justified freely, etc. and S. John
in his first general Epistle 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from
all sin. And in the second chapter, verse 2. For he is the propitiation for
our sins. This benefit of justification is communicated by God, through the
free imputation of the merits of our Savior, to the true believers
apprehending and receiving them through a true and lively faith working by
charity, as the Apostle teaches us to the Romans 3.28. Therefore we conclude
that a man is justified by faith without the works of the Law. And in the fifth
chapter, verse 1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ. There is justification by faith. And as for the
imputation of the merit of Christ, he shows it there also in the fourth
chapter, when as telling how God had imputed to Abraham his faith for
righteousness, he adds, Now in that, that this was imputed to him for
righteousness, etc. This faith is not an idle imagination, or false illusion
and persuasion, or fantastical speculation in the believers brain (as your
Doctors do slanderously say) but an holy assurance and firm confidence in the
bounty and mercy of God, by the which we believe that according to the truth of
his infallible promises he will be gracious and merciful unto us in Jesus
Christ his Son, freely for his sake pardoning us all our faults. Such a
belief is not idle nor fruitless in those who have it, but fructifieth unto
all manner of good works, righteousness, godliness, holiness, love, etc.
Not for to merit and obtain that pardon, which is already wholly gotten; but
for to show toward God that we acknowledge this so inestimable a benefit. This
faith is not from our selves, but is a special gift of God, who has given us
freely through his Son not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for
his sake, as says S. Paul, Philip. 1.29.

Sanctification.
God having thus justified us freely through faith in his Son, he sanctifies us
also through his spirit, which is the second benefit that we have observed to
be gotten for us in Jesus Christ, and which he has merited and obtained for us
by his death, as we have said: and does bestow it upon us by the virtue and
efficacy of his Spirit of regeneration and sanctification, by the which
mortifying daily more and more the natural corruption in which we all are
borne, he makes us by little and little to renounce and to die to all sin,
for to live to righteousness and holiness all the days of our life, until
that in the end he do sanctify us fully, when as after this life he shall
receive us into that other, in his heavenly glory. This is briefly that which
concerns these two great benefits of our Lord, accordingly as the Scripture
and Gods holy word do show and teach us.

It is a pitiful thing to see after how many sorts and manners Satan has
lamentably spoiled, sophisticated, falsified, perverted, and corrupted in your
Church, by your Pastors and Doctors, this doctrine being so wholesome and full
of comfort touching these two benefits of Jesus Christ our Savior: first, How
Papists err about justification.
by extenuating as much as they could, and can, the greatness of these graces
and favors: secondly, by taking from him and robbing him of all what they can,
for to attribute it to the merits either of themselves, or of others, and to
their own satisfactions and papal Indulgences. They extenuate the greatness
of grace two ways: first, by lessening and diminishing the greatness of our
offense and sin; secondly, by debasing the excellency and perfection of
Christ's merit. They do lessen and diminish the greatness of sin; first, in
denying that original sin deserves eternal death, contrary to that which
the Apostle teaches us to the Romans 6.23. that the wages of sin is death; and
to the threatening of the Law, which sounds thus, Cursed is he, whosoever does
not continue and persevere to observe all things written and delivered in the
book of the Law. Secondly, by their distinction of sins, venial and
mortal, teaching that there are some petty sins which do not deserve
eternal death and damnation, but rather pardon, which is directly against that
very sentence of S. Paul, that the wages of sin is death; and that menace of
the Law, Cursed is he, etc. They debase the excellency of Christ's merit, when
they teach: first, that he has not satisfied for those sins and offenses
which they call venial, but only for those that are mortal, contrary to that
which Saint John has in his first Catholic Epistle, chap. 1.7. That the blood
of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. Secondly, that as for mortal
sins, he has only changed the eternal into a temporal punishment, which is
by them affirmed and maintained, not only without any ground upon the holy
Scripture, but also is much repugnant to the goodness and mercy of God, who in
so doing would pardon but by halfes. Thirdly, that by the death of Jesus Christ
we obtain only remission of the guilt, and not of the punishment, which is as
much, as openly to mock with God, and to disanull altogether the merit of our
Lord: for what is it, I pray you, to remit and pardon the guilt, but not the
punishment? As if a Master should say to his servant, a Lord to his subject, a
King to his vassal, that had grievously wronged and offended him, Go thy
ways, I pardon and forgive thee thy fault, but I will punish thee howsoever
when I see time for that that thou have done, according as thou deseruest. What
pardon would that be? nay would it not rather be a mocking of him? It is even
so with God according to them. They do take from Jesus Christ, and rob him as
much as in them lies, of the glory of his merit, for to attribute it to the
merits of another, when as refusing the true pardon of God by faith in the
blood of his son, they will themselves deserve of God by the power of their
works this pardon, and the fruition of life everlasting: wherein they do just
like a wicked malefactor, who being in the hands and power of his Judge ready
to be executed, would refuse the grace and pardon of his Prince, and would make
no use of it, but would think that he could merit, yea would stiffly
maintain, that he had justly merited by his good deeds both his freedom and
the expiation of the punishment which was prepared and made ready for him, and
to be one of the chief officers and best furnished houshold-seruants of his
Lord: wherein besides the intolerable arrogance whereof they cannot (nor you)
clear themselves, they fall into a gross, foul, and palpable ignorance;
first, in that they think that they can of themselves do any worthy thing,
and such as can deserve at Gods hands that which they think they do deserve,
although notwithstanding it stands so, that of our selves, as of our selves, we
are not able to think any thing, but all our ability is and proceeds from
God, as speaks the Apostle in the second to the Corinthians, chap. 3. yea
even all the most just actions of man, which God works in him through his
grace, are so marred, infected and tainted with our natural corruption, that
they are all (as says Esaias 64.) as a menstruous cloth. Secondly, when as (for
a refuge) they say that those good works which they do, are not from
themselves, but from the grace of God working in them: for it is little to the
purpose for to presume to merit of him by such works; it is as if a vassal,
that had received as a free gift from his chief Lord all the goods that he
possesses, would challenge to merit of him yet more then he has received, for
having given him some apple, pear, or other fruit, which he had gathered upon
these grounds: there being far less proportion between all the good that we
do through the grace of God, and the remission of our sins or life
everlasting, which they think and pretend to merit by their works, then there
is between an apple and many large possessions. For to merit, it is required
that there be a proportion between that which we do or give, and that which
we challenge thereby to merit: it is also required, that that whereby we do
merit, do come from our selves, and be not given us by him from whom we
pretend to merit: for to merit by grace, it is to merit without merit, it is
not to merit at all, it is to renounce all merit; grace and merit being in such
sort opposed amongst themselves, that they can by no means stand together:
Romans 11.6.
for if it be by works (says the Apostle) then is it no longer by grace; if
it be by grace, then is it not by works, else grace is no longer grace. This
spiritual pride is seen yet more clearly herein, Against works of
supererogation.
that not being content to merit pardon and Paradise through good works
commanded by God, they think and pretend to merit yet somewhat over by their
works not commanded, which they have forged for themselves, of supererogation,
as they call it: a name that witnesses thoroughly their pride, whereby they
think that they bestow upon God somewhat over and above that which he requires
and demands at their hands, or then they are bound to give him: as if God
asking and requiring of us that we should love him with all our heart, with
all our soul, force and strength, and our neighbor as our selves, which is
the vpshot of the whole Law, we could do any thing beyond that. And yet what
ar these goodly works of supererogation, that are of so great a merit? They
will come to this, to wear a frocke, an habit, a cord, the sandals of a Monk,
a Capuchin, etc. to go barefooted, not to wear a shirt, to use the
discipline and chasten the body, to use an haire-cloth, to wear the cord of S.
Francis, Dominicke, etc. to be of the brotherhood of the Rosarie, of the
Beads, etc. and other the like works, in truth not commanded nor appointed by
God, but of which also one day justly and with good right he will say, Who has
required this at your hands? Esaias 1.12.
In vain do they honor me with their works, and their fear toward me is
an humane commandment invented by men. And yet notwithstanding what is it that
they make account of, or commend in your Church, but these works of
supererogation? Is it not therein that you put all the marrow and juice of
piety, devotion, perfection, holiness, and service of God? And what do you
make (for the most part) of all the works commanded and ordained by God, in
respect of those which men have invented, but hay and chafe, which no man
regards? 2. They rob Christ of the glory of his merit, in that they teach
that we must our selves satisfy for the temporal punishment of our sins
and offenses, our Savior having (by their saying) only taken away the
eternity thereof. Against Purgatory.
Whereupon they have devised and kindled in their brain the imaginary fire of
Purgatory, which they set in the very next place, and as it were in the
suburbs of hell, for therein after this life to satisfy in our own persons
the justice of God for our sins, as if the blood of Jesus Christ, which
cleanses us from all sin, were not a soape and lie (as it were) strong
enough for to wash away all this filth, and that we needed another scouring
more rugged and purgative, of fire altogether as hot and violent (say they) as
hellfire it self; for they must needs know much certain and assured news
thereof in particular, by the relation of so many souls as return from
thence, as they say. But to what end, I pray you? Is it for to have Masses
sung, for to have services and obits said for the dead for their delivery from
this so boiling a fire? Alas poor fools, that suffer your selves to be
deceived and cousened by these tales, fables, and gulleries, and to be muffled
by these weak terrors and humane inventions! No, no: it is for to fill their
purse and belly, and to make good cheer at your cost, and under the name and
pretense of the poor deceased. But though it were true, that there were such a
fire and place appoinred by divine justice for the satisfaction of sins after
this life, (whereof notwithstanding we have not, nor can they produce any
true, sound and clear ground and testimony in the Scripture) is there any
thing amongst all those which they give and offer you for to deliver you, yea
also for to keep you quite from the coming therein, such as are anniuersarie
Masses and obits, testamentarie legacies and foundations, etc? Is there, I say,
any of these things, yea any other that might possibly be devised or imagined,
which can counterpoise the greatness of these torments which they faigne to be
in this pretended and supposed Purgatory? Truly if that which the Devil
maliciously said of the holy man Job, be true, though spoken by him to a very
bad end, Skin for skin, and all that a man has he will give for his life;
how much more shall it be true in this respect, and what will not men give for
to free themselves from such a fire, and to redeem themselves from such
torments, if possibly it could be done? Truly they wo^^^ give all their goods
even to their very shirt, yea even to their skin. And thus it is, and under
this fair cloak and pretense, that they cosen folks, and deceive and abuse
poor silly people, squeesing out and drawing to themselves all their goods and
substance, for to make their own hearts merry withal, and to make their
flesh-pot to boil. An horrible wickedness; beyond all comparison, and more
then detestable mischief and impiety! for to make way for their avarice and
gluttony, under pretense of piety, devotion, and compassion toward the
deceased. No, no: if it were so (as I have said before, which notwithstanding
is not) that this Purgatory and the fire thereof were true, nothing of this
world, nor any humane action would be able and sufficient to bring deliverance
and freedom, and to counteruaile the pains and torments; and we ought therein
(as says our Savior, but to another sense then they urge and allege him for)
to satisfy the rigor of Gods justice even to the utmost farthing, and to the
smallest fault, before we should come out from thence: which notwithstanding
would savor rather of a cruel Tyrant, then of a loving, pitiful, bountiful
and compassionate God, such a one as ours is. But to their account, they do
deliver themselves yet more easily, and at a cheaper rate then the aforesaid,
by means of the Popes Indulgences and Pardons, by wearing a pair of Beads,
or an hallowed Medaill, and saying three Pater-nosters, or some such other the
like mere fooleries, bables, and inventions proceeding out of the forge and
shop of some superstitious brain, or rather covetous and desirous of gold and
silver, very fit in truth and convenient for to help toward the charges and
expenses of the Popes Court, and of other Ecclesiastical persons his deputies.
But (as I have said) an impious wickedness and detestable impiety, nay, an
horrible and execrable blasphemy, thus to disrobe and deprive Jesus Christ of
the glory of his merit, and to imagine by such means to satisfy the rigor of
Gods justice, better then by the effectual and divine virtue of his precious
blood, shed for the sins not only of the whole world, but of an hundred, yea
of a thousand, if so many there were. I give leave to all truly Christian and
religious souls, desirous of their own salvation and zeal to the honor and
glory of their Savior, to think well of it, and to judge whether this be to
give him the entire glory of our salvation, and whether he be well assured,
leaning and being built upon such foundations.

The time would fail me, if I discover, and my heart would ache and pant at the
sight of all the filth and abominations that are covered and hidden under this
cloak of merits and satisfactions, which are taught and preached in your
Church, far more then the grace, goodness, mercy, and free pardon of God;
yea by the which merits and satisfactions this grace, goodness, mercy, and
free pardon of God, and the merits of Jesus Christ are not only darkened and
disfigured, but quite defaced and altogether abolished, as much at least as in
them lies. Let that which has been said be enough, and suffice for this
time, for to show and make you to see how the benefit of our justification by
Christ Jesus our Savior, is set as it were at naught by the doctrine of your
men. Let us now come to the benefit of sanctification, which he has likewise
(as I have already said, How Papists err about sanctification.
and repeated twice or thrice) obtained and merited for us by his death and
passion, and by the effusion of his precious and divine blood. This is no less
perverted, corrupted and abolished, then the former. For in stead of
acknowledging with the Scripture (which teaches it us) that of our own
nature, being dead in our sins, unable to frame even a good thought, and bring
forth of our selves any good thing, by reason that the whole imagination of
man's heart is set upon nothing but evil at all times even from his youth; God
hereupon does baptize us not only with water, but principally with the holy
Ghost, by the which correcting and mortifying by little and little the
corruption of our nature, infected with the sin which we bring with us from
the belly of our mother, of unbelievers, impenitent, rebellious, wilful, and
disobedient to his commandments and precepts, such as we are of our selves
and of our own nature, he makes us to believe his truth, takes from us the
hardness of our hearts, makes us flexible and pliable under the yoke of his
laws, and of his obedience, that so renouncing all unfruitful works of sin
and darkness, we may live as true children of light in righteousness and true
holiness: in stead (I say) of acknowledging, teaching, and carefully urging
this, they do the quite contrary, 1. extenuating (as I have already said) and
diminishing as far as they are able, this natural corruption and original
sin which is in us, saying that it is but a light infirmity, spiritual
languor, and weakness of nature, which makes us indeed backward and slow in
good, but not dead to all good, and quick and ready to all evil: 2.
attributing to the water, salt and spittle, and other such like things of
baptism, the mortification of that natural corruption in us, and not rather
to the merit of Jesus Christ our Savior, and to the power and efficacy of his
death and passion: 3. in that, that seeming to acknowledge the grace of God to
be necessary for the healing of this evil, yet in effect they do quite
disanull this, Free Will.
and attribute it to themselves, and to the force and power of their free will:
1. in that they imagine that in man, by the force and power of his nature,
there are some preparatiues and dispositions to receive this grace, and
consequently that there are in him certain merits of congruitie; so that with
them the cause why God offers and presents his grace to one and not to
another, is because the one is well prepared, (of himself, you must
understand, and not by the grace of God, seeing he prepares and disposes
himself for to receive it) and the other is not: as if man being so miserably
corrupted as he is, could of himself do any thing that might deserve grace
de congruo, as they speak, that is, might bind God by way of honesty and
conueniencie, to bestow upon him his grace: 2. in that they make this grace to
be such, as that all the virtue and efficacy thereof depends wholly upon the
liberty of man, which in effect is to make this grace idle and unprofitable:
for how can any man call that medicine sufficient, and effectual for the
healing of a malady, which can do no good without one certain ingredient?
Now do they make the grace of God like to this medicine; it can do nothing (as
they say) nor work in us without the force and virtue of our free will, which
is the chief ingredient, according to them, which gives force and efficacy
to this spiritual medicine. Is this to recommend the grace of God unto us, or
to exalt it, and is it not rather to exalt man and his ability? Is not this to
take from God for to give to man? to rob the Creator for to cover, deck, and
enrich the creature? Thus you see that those of your Church (especially your
Doctors, directours and Prelates) like to children of a perverse, neglectfull,
and ungrateful nature, with a presumption that shuts to their heart and puffes
up their spirit, they hate nothing so much, as to acknowledge, avouch and
confess their fault, pass condemnation upon it, cry for mercy, ask pardon,
and acknowledge that all their good and eternal happiness consists in the
goodness, mercy, grace, and merely free pardon of God: but do extenuate as
much as they can their fault and offense, do pluck down grace, and abolish
as much as in them lies all pardon, that so they may not seem to be beholden
to God; they do preach and extol the greatness of their merits, by the which
they pretend to make God beholden and indebted to them: whence it is not very
hard to consider, acknowledge and judge, whether the true humility, which is
essential to Christianity, and so beseeming it, yea the fairest and richest
ornament of a true believer, can be in them, who not only maintain and
wilfully defend such a doctrine, but do glory therein, and do oppugn and
persecute even to the fire and blood, those which on the contrary, forsaking
themselves, and all that can come from their own strength and merits, have no
other refuge, prop, foundation and assurance for their eternal salvation, then
in the mere bounty, grace, mercy, and free pardon of God, in Jesus Christ his
Son, his merit, and intercession.

He should never have done, that would relate, show, and set to view all the
abuses and errors touching the points of faith necessary to salvation. Gather
only and judge out of that little which the shortness of the time and this
discourse gives me leave to speak, whether the first ground and foundation of
salvation premised and supposed, to wit, a true faith and belief in Jesus
Christ, (such as the Scripture declares, and requires of us) is and can be
found in your Church, in which is taught and preached a doctrine so diametrally
contrary and opposite to it, yea against all reason; and whether I have had
just cause and occasion to withdraw my self from thence (and you also are
bound to do the like) in case that you and I desire to work out our salvation.

But that which is worse, and more to be lamented, (even with tears of blood
if it were possible) is, that for the most part amongst those of your Church,
there is no more any faith, or law, or God, or religion at all: but by a
lamentable event (permitted notwithstanding by Gods providence for the just
punishment of their deserts) are fallen into a gross ignorance of matters of
God, (I will not say into Atheism) and is fulfilled in them completely and in
all points, that which the Apostle S. Paul has sometimes spoken of the
Gentiles, Pagans, and Idolaters, in the first to the Romans, Verse. 21.22.
namely, that having known God, they glorified him not as God, neither were
thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was
darkened, professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, and changed the
glory of the incorruptible God into an image made like to a corruptible man,
etc. And who then would not withdraw himself from men so blinded, and given
over to error, and the darkness of ignorance?

Now if their faith be such (or for to speak aright and more properly) their
unbelief so great, what can be hoped and looked for of the other, I mean of
the manners of their life; indeed it is very likely, that such as is the
doctrine, such will be the life and manners, namely perverted and corrupted,
etc. And this is it which now in order I am to show to you, and set to your
view. Let us begin with charity, Charity toward God and our neighbor.
the love and affection toward God and our neighbor, the true ground of all
Christianity, and the second firm and assured foundation of eternal
salvation, as we have said and declared before.

As for the first, the true testimony, the certain and undoubted proof
thereof amongst many that might be given and alleged is, an hearty and loving
zeal and affection to his honor, worship, and service, and to the true
observing of his laws and ordinances, and the entire and perfect fulfilling of
his holy will, as far as our weakness and frailty can suffer us, and the
estate and condition of our corrupt and infected nature can permit and bear
it. If you love me, (says our Savior, speaking of this love to his Apostles,
and Disciples, and to us in their persons, and in the 14. of S. John) keep my
commandments. He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that
loves me. And this he repeats many and diverse times, and amongst others, that
well beloved and favored Disciple, in the second Chapter of his first
Catholic Epistle, confirms it, He that keeps his word, the love of God
(says he) is truly accomplished and perfected in him. As on the contrary, the
true and infallible sign of the want and the defect of the love of God is, not
to care for to keep and observe his laws and precepts, as (besides reason it
self which is clear and plain for it) our Savior in the same place before
alleged, of the Evangelist Saint John does say, He that loves me not, says
he, does not keep my words: and the same Saint John, in the forecited places:
He that says, I have known him, and yet does not keep his precepts and
commandments, he liar, and the truth is not in him.

Gods worship external.
As for Gods honor, worship and service, it is double, and of two sorts,
external, outward, and of the body, such as he prescriheth unto us in his
word; namely that Liturgy, or outward and public service wherewith he will be
honored, (even publicly in his Church) consisting of the duties of piety, and
the external actions of religion, which do show and testify some humility,
deiection, submission, affection and acknowledgement of the mind toward his
divine majesty. Internal.
Internal, inward, in the soul and inmost part of the mind, by a true
acknowledging of his immense and infinite excellence, perfection and
greatness, and of the sundry and innumerable obligations we owe him, with an
humble submission, a most dejected humility, and low deiection before his
supreme majesty, honoring, adoring, fearing, respecting, cherishing, and
loving him with all the strength and power of our souls, the faculties of our
minds, and the affections of our hearts, as our only bliss and chief master
and Lord, from whom we hold by mere dependence, and free, bountiful and
liberal communication all, what we are, what we have, and what we can at
any time challenge, look, and hope for, both in this life, and in the other,
referring in the mean time, and giving over our selves, and all what belongs
to us, or concerns us, our lives, persons, goods, health, honors, affairs,
and other the like wholly to his divine providence, to the end that he may do
with them as he shall think fitting, and according to his pleasure and sacred
will, as belonging wholly to him, with a true confidence certain and firm
hope, and an undoubted assurance of his divine goodness, infinite mercy, and
promises of salvation, and this is the chief honor, worship, and service,
that God wishes, desires, and demands of us, as shows very well the Son of
God himself Jesus Christ, our Savior answering to the question of the
Samaritan woman; The true worshippers, says he, John 4.
shall worship the Father in spirit and truth, and such are those he desires,
demands, and seeks after: And he gives the reason thereof, Because God is a
spirit, therefore his worship ought to be spiritual, internal, and in the
truth of the heart, answerable to his nature; by so much more noble, excellent,
perfect, and complete, then the external and corporal, by how much the soul
surpasses and exceeds the body, in excellent perfection and nobleness:
free, unviolable, in the liberty and power of every one, and such as cannot be
hindered (as the external and corporal) by any endeavor or change
whatsoever. For he that is lame of his whole body, he that lies in his bed
grievously and mortally sick, he that is clogged with irons both on hands and
feet, and kept prisoner in the bottom of an obscure and dark dungeon,
hindered from making, or showing any sign of outward service and corporal
reverence, may have his heart and soul lifted up and devoted unto God: and may
serve honor and worship him spiritually; as did Jonas in the belly of the
Whale, and in the deep of the waters, and bottom of the sea: Manasses in his
prison, the diseased with the palsye, in his bed and couch, and the good thief
having all the members and parts of his body fast bound and tied. This being as
the cause and the mother which brings forth, and ingendereth the outward and
bodily, which is as it were the scum, which arises and proceeds from the
boiling of the fire of the inward and spiritual devotion: to be short, this of
it self alone is good and perfect, retaining and carrying with it, his worth
and value, yea and in necessity sufficient. But the outward and corporal is
so far from being alone good and sufficient, that it is rather a delusion and
Mascarado; it is that hypocrisy so much cried out upon, blamed, and condemned
by the Son of God, our Savior, in those, who with their strange behavior,
and countenance, and with some gestures, actions, and ceremonies, do think
they can flatter God, and discharge their duty toward him, doing it only
with the tip and end of the tongue, with their mouth and edge of their lips,
without any heart, devotion, affection, or spirit: This people, Esaias 29.
says he, honors me with their lips, but their heart and spirit is far
from me. This is just so as the Jews did, who at the passion of our Savior
did kneel before him, saluted him, King and Prophet; but in derision and
mockery: How Papists offend in both these worships.
Now who knows not how far the most part those of your Church are removed
(but what do I say?) almost quite deprived, and disrobed of that hearty and
loving zeal and affection to the observing of Gods laws and commandments, to
the fulfilling of his sacred will, and to the true worship and service which
he desires, demands, and seeks at our hands? daily experience makes us see
it with our eye, and touch it with the finger, and indeed we should be quite
void both of eyes and understanding, if we did neither see nor perceive it: it
is the least of their thoughts, and the least of their cares, whereof they make
no esteem, no reckoning, preferring the edicts, commandments, and ordinances
of a mortal, frail, and perishable man, to those of that supreme and divine
majesty, of that glorious, eternal, and almighty monarch: yea esteeming less
of these, then of their own irregular passions and affections, corrupted
appetites, filthy concupiscences, and insatiable desires, and for the most part
standing upon, and contenting themselves with the only mere external, and
corporal honor, worship, and service, with using strange behavior and
ceremonies, making faces, offering of cierges, being present at Masses,
offices, and services; rightly dividing their beads, running over their hours,
saying the seven Psalms and the prayers for the deceased uttering many words
and vocal prayers, babbling and muttering them all the day long in an unknown
language, and words not understood, without devotion, without attention,
without affection of the heart, the will, or the mind, speedily, postingly,
with have, and only for fashion sake, never, or very seldom, lifting up their
minds to the consideration of the excellent greatness, and divine perfection
of that supreme majesty, or of their own vileness, baseness, worthlesnesse,
and nullity, in comparison to him, and to the innumerable obligations they owe
him, for to bring forth the actions of deep humility and low subjection, of
true and hearty and inward acknowledgement, of the fervent and ardent love, of
the honor, respect, and high reverence they bear to the God of bounty, and
King of infinite glory, greatness, and majesty, with an entire forsaking of our
selves, and totally and perfectly submitting us to his divine providence,
disposition and will, which notwithstanding is the true honor worship and
service (as I have already said) that he wills, demands, and seeks at our
hands, and that alone is pleasing and acceptable unto him him; and not only
have not any true confidence, certain and firm hope, and in fallible
assurance in his divine goodness, and infinite mercies, and promises of
salvation, or any refuge to him in their necessities: but even rather do
blame, reprehend and condemn on the contrary such as do so, (at the least
your Doctors) giving by a blasphemy no less horrible and detestable, then
worthy of all manner of punishment, to this holy, hearty, and firm confidence
and assurance in the bounty and mercy of God, the name and title of diuillish
pride and presumption. And they go themselves mistrustfully, and send likewise
others in the troublesome chances that happen and come upon them, to others
besides him, for to be guarded, freed, and delivered therefrom, expressly
against the Scripture and the plain words of our Savior, by which he
inuiteth us so lovingly to betake our selves unto him, when we shall feel our
selves wearied and heavy laden with affliction and anguish, with a certain and
assured promise to ease us; imagining the whilst, and thinking that by the
means of this merely external worship, they are not only quitted and
discharged, and that they have well and fully satisfied their duty toward
God, but also, that for it he is beholden to them, and remains in their debt.
No, no: this is not that which he requires, demands, and seeks of them, but
rather their spirits and the affections of their hearts. God is a spirit (says
our Savior) and he that will serve, Ioh. 4.
honor, and worship him, he must do it in spirit and truth of heart: and such
are those whom he seeks, demands, and looks after. He is so far from being
pleased and delighted with this outward and merely corporal honor, service
and worship, that on the contrary he detests and hates it, and infinitely and
extremely abhorres it, as we have said. But how indeed can he like it, being
without heart, affection, devotion, or attention of the mind, which is that
which he loves, cherishes, commends, and esteems most in all of us? And
besides, it being for the most part nothing but a mere humane invention, not
only without his express word and commandment, (who notwithstanding ought
not to be served at the pleasure and discretion of men, but according to his
will revealed and manifested in his said word) but also expressly and formally
contrary to it, as is the Mass, and that which depends thereof, the invocation
of Saints, prayer in a language not common nor understood, and other the like.
And now let them freely go boasting that they have the love of God: No, no
(says our Savior) he that keeps not my words, he loves me not: He that
keeps not the precepts and commandments of God (says S. John) he is a lier,
Ioh 14.24.
and the truth is not in him. And then how can they love him, Eiusdem 2.4.
when they give him not the honor, the worship, and true service which they
owe him, and which he wills, requires, and demands of them, but do almost
wholly alter, corrupt and destroy it, and in stead of the truth, offer and
present unto him only a mere dead body and apparition?

How Papists want true charity toward their neighbor.
Now he that has not in him, and is deuoid of the love of God, how shall he
love and make much of his neighbor? No, no, (says S. John) if a man say I
love God, 1.4.20.
and hates his brother, he is a lier: why so? For (as he adds) he that
loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has
not seen? It is impossible: and he thus concludes; This commandment have we
from him, that he who loves God, love his brother also. The love of our
neighbor (says the Moralist S. Gregory) is produced and brought forth by
the love of God, and the love of God is nourished and maintained by the love of
our neighbor: and truly he that is negligent and careless in loving his
neighbor and Christian brother, knows not how he ought to love God, nay
loves him not at all. I need not strive and stand much upon the proof and
testimony of this truth in the most part of them of your Church: it is known
and appears well enough of it self, without laboring to bring it to light;
the Sun and the light being not more visible then this is clear and manifest,
that there is no more any love, charity, affection, good will, union, and
concord amongst them: there is nothing but divisions, dissensions, partiality,
envy, jealousy, murmurs, detractions, slanders, riots, disputes, bloody
hatred, and mortal rancour of the one against the other; no agreement, no
accord, no proportion, no respect and relation of piety or compassion toward
the afflicted, no charitable assistance in the behalf of the poor and needy,
in no wise at all. And if so be that some of them (as there are always some
particular honest and charitable men, and we must ingenuously confess it, and
give them this commendation and testimony for the truth) that give and impart
some of their goods and revenues, it will be to no good purpose, rather for to
found and cause to be said some Masses, services and offices, and sing leero
ways (that I may so say) and celebrated in poast-haste and for a fashion,
without any piety, devotion, affection, and attention of the heart and mind
whatsoever, but with a thousand irreuerent insolences, distractions, and
wanderings of the mind, with bad thoughts, being rather horrible and
detestable blasphemies, then prayers and orizons acceptable to God; for to
build Chapels, Monasteries, and Couents to feed and make fat the lazy
bellies of Monks, Religious and other voluntary poor men, idle droanes, and
unfit to do any good, but to dine, make good cheer, and sleep for their
ease; then to maintain and relieve the truly poor, needy, and shame fast
members of Jesus Christ, who die of hunger, either at their gates, or within
their houses, without having any care, pity, or compassion of them; they
thinking, being persuaded, and making themselves believe, that they are
discharged, and have well done in regard of their duty and obligation toward
God, when they have filled the wallets and bottles, and with good and dainty
messes covered and furnished the tables of the Capucins, Recollects, and other
the like begging Friars, the true thieves of alms, and deuourers of the
substance due to the truly poor and needy, whereof they shall give (both the
one and the other) a most strict account to God, and shall be most severely and
grievously punished. And if that sometimes (which notwithstanding happens but
seldom) they do any good, and bestow their charitable assistance upon the
truly poor and needy, upon the diseased, upon prisoners, and such like, yet it
is always joined with this leaven, that marres, makes sour, and corrupts the
whole lump, namely with an opinion and belief of meriting, and of making God
by the means of these things indebted to them: whereas we ought simply to
exercise the works of charity, piety and mercy, out of a pure and simple
affection and compassion toward our neighbor, and for to testify our love
and gratitude toward God for the infinite favors and benefits that we have
received and do daily receive from him.

Now all what is before said being thus, wherein I pray you can they testify
their love toward God, their zeal and affection to the observing of his
laws, commandments and precepts, seeing that that being the first, chief,
and as it were fundamental in respect of all the rest, yet they do not
observe it? But what do I say? nay they think not once of it, nor at all care
for it. By what can we know that they are the Disciples of our Savior? Ioh
13.35.
seeing that (as himself witnesses) this is the first mark and chief token
whereby to know them, yea to put a distinction between the good and the bad,
the elect and reprobate, the children of God and of the Devil, as says great
S. Austin: and S. John confirms it in the third chapter of his first Epistle;
Hereby are manifested the children of God, and the children of the Devil:
whosoever does not righteousness, and loves not his neighbor and Christian
brother, is not of God, and consequently of the Devil. Judge then what they
are, and you also consequently, and whether I have had just cause to withdraw
my self from you, for to unite and join my self with the children of God,
with the children of light, with the elect and predestined.

But these two chief and fundamental grounds of religion and salvation being
cast on ground, what will become of the rest of the edifice and building? I
mean of those heavenly and divine virtues that are needful and requisite to
the perfection of a good Christian. It must needs be that they also fall down,
and that in their stead do succeed and be erected a body of all vices and
sins, whereunto we see that the greater part amongst you do apply and give
themselves over. The remainder of that which S. Paul had said of the Gentiles
in the place before alleged of the Epistle to the Romans, being truly
fulfilled in them: For this cause God gave them up to vile affections, Verse. 26.
for even, etc.

But we need not wonder at it, seeing that those of whom you ought to receive
the precepts and doctrines of salvation, and who ought to be unto you as lights
and lamps for to guide and lead you through the obscure darkness of this
mortal life, into the way of virtue and heavenly felicity, I mean the
Pastors and Prelates amongst you, men that are dedicated, devoted, and
consecrated to Gods worship, are they that are your stumbling blocks, and
stones of offense, and thrust and carry you by their bad examples, perverse and
corrupt actions, disordered and irregular life, to the like enormities. It is a
thing too well known, avouched and confessed, so that we need not stay nor
stand any longer upon the proof thereof. As also it would be but a wronging of
chaste ears, offending heaven, and infecting the air by those abominable
stenches, filths, villainies, and pollutions more then infectious, deserving
rather to be covered and buried under the tomb of eternal oblivion, then to
be vented forth and brought to light for to see the day.

But yet I doubt that you will bring me (for an excuse and honest cloak of
these horrible and detestable impieties, and for an argument of my pretended
and objected wickedness and leuitie of mind) the religious piety, devotion
of mind, perfection of manners, complement of virtues, and holiness of life,
of those of the company and condition from which I am departed, and have
withdrawn and sequestered my self; and although that what is said of those
before be true, yet these being such (as all the world believes, and the
outward appearance testifies and bears record of as much) I had no lawful
pretense and occasion to do what I have done, seeing I might with facility
and ease (though elsewhere hardly) work out my salvation in that estate and
condition, which is so perfect and complete, and so far distant and removed
from the enormities and irregularities of all the rest of your Church.

This is that whereunto now I should need to answer in witness of the truth,
in defense of my own innocence, and for the simple peoples sake, who suffer
themselves to be deceived by these fair shows, outward appearances, fained
and dissembled perfections and holiness, to the end that I might enlighten them,
bring them out of error, and make them to see the truth in his own and
natural brightness. But because the shortness of this small declaration
cannot suffer me to stand upon it sufficiently, Against the orders of Friars,
and namely Capucins.
and so long as it would be expedient and needful, I refer that part to
another Treatise and particular discourse, which I will set out shortly (if God
permit) wherein I will cause plainly to be seen by the eye, and to be touched
with the finger of all the world, that which is the truth of it. In the mean
time I say in gross and general terms, that these are things disguised, and
full of mysteries, being not the same within which they are without, like to
Sacraments and Parables. The world sees only the crust, the bark and the
skin, and looks no further into it; whereupon it is and continues still
cousened and deceived. That sad and demure countenance, that pale face, that
lumpish visage, that ragged behavior, that hollow and low look, those
frowning brows, are but as a fair outside, a counterfeited stone, and a good
face set upon a bad pranke; as a Tragic show, wherein the King oftentimes
counterfets the beggar, the wise man the fool, the proud the humble, the rich
the poor; but within and in truth it goes quite otherwise. Under that course
cloth, that brown and gray habit, that rugged and contemptible garment, how
much pride, vanity, ambition, covetousness, desire and affection to honor
and glory, how much presumption, good thoughts and opinions of themselves,
contempt and rash judging of others, how much envy, jealousy, hatred and
rancour, and such like, are there covered and hidden? It cannot be conceived
and unfolded, nay it is incredible, and beyond all imagination to those who
have not the trial and practice thereof. They are very like to the tents of
Arabia, and the pauilions of Solomon, all black without, covered with the
furs and dirtie skins of dead beasts, ugly to behold, for rain, dust and
filth: but within all over gilded, flourished, shining with precious stones,
full of aromaticall odours; I mean, filled with pride, vanity, presumption,
arrogancy, and such like. But yet more fitly and more to our purpose may they
be compared to the Gods of the Egyptians: without were they engraven with
imbossements, with inlaying, gilded, carved, enammelled, and inlaide with
diverse colors, there could nothing be found so fair, pleasing and acceptable;
all the world did worship them, did reverence unto them, kneeled before them,
did offer and sacrifice to them all the fairest, richest, and most precious
things they had: but within were nothing but hay, chafe, and filth, a neast
for toads, adders, and serpents. Even so it is with these men without, and to
the outward appearance they seem to be mild, courteous, affable, peaceable,
modest, treatable, bountiful, humble; even mildness and goodness it self,
etc. Clothed with coarse and base cloth, with a contemptible habit, without
shirts, without hosen, or shoes, with a mortified look, and an orderly pace,
etc. and there is nothing so goodly and perfect in show, they seem to be
young Saints, I I will not say little gods: All the world respects, honors,
and worships them (if I may so speak) does reverence unto them, bends the knee
before them, yea offers and sacrifices unto them the fairest, fattest, and
best of all their goods and substance; but as for the inward, and that which is
within, O! what a store of dirt, filth, and villainy is therein! There is
nothing (as I have said) but pride, vanity, ambition, proud presumption,
arrogance, envy, jealousy, and a thousand other such like wickednesses and
mischiefs, altogether incomparable, inconceivable, yea (as I have said)
incredible and beyond all thought, to those that have not the trial and
practice hereof. I desire no other witnesses thereof, then their own
consciences, they know how it stands with them, and will acknowledge, I am sure,
and ingenuously confess (at least in their souls) that what I say is true:
But what? I do not say the tenth part of it, no not the hundredth of what might
be said: and the wisest, the most conscionable, and honest men amongst them
(for there are yet some such amongst them, and we must give them this
commendation, and confession to the truth) do not conceal this; but do say
with a loud and clear voice, and affirm amongst them, that if men did know
and take them to be such as they are, in stead of white loaves and wine,
wherewith they fill their wallets and bottles, they would fling stones and
flints at their heads, and throw them headlong into the water.

We will speak and discourse hereof, God willing, another time more
particularly and at large, to the end (as I have said) that I might enlighten
those simple folks, that suffer themselves to be deceived under these fair
shows and appearances, and fained and dissembled perfection and society, and
to make them to see the truth in his natural brightness.

Now all what before has been said, being as it is, and that no man as I
think, of judgment and reason, and that will never so little open his eyes to
the light, can be ignorant hereof, or call it in question, or honestly deny
it: Judge, (and that I pray you, without trouble and passion, but with a quiet
and settled mind, and in the serenitie of your conscience;) Judge, I say,
whether I have had any just matter and occasion, to do what I have done,
desiring to work out my salvation. And whether it be without cause that I
have separated and withdrawn my self from you and your company; for to unite
and join my self to the society of the faithful and true Disciples of our
Savior, and to the true Church, without the which there is no hope of
salvation. And I am certain and assured (as I have told you in the beginning)
that you shall find me as far removed from hastiness, precipitation,
inconstancy, and inconsiderateness of mind, and other the like things, which
inconsiderately and in somewhat too hot a mood you have objected to me, as I
come near to the truth.

Now may it please Gods supreme Majesty to enlighten lighten your minds with
the m^^de and p^^^^ing beam of his divine light, for to dispose you so, that
you may know it, and with me participate of the grace, favor, and heavenly
benediction, wherewith it has pleased his goodness and pure mercy, without
any merit of mine, to prevent me, satiate, and fill me so sweetly: this I
desire of him with all mine heart, and as far as the desires and affections
of my soul can attain unto; as also, that he will strengthen, confirm, and
encourage daily more and more my spirit, that I may against all the endeavors
and assaults of men, of the devil and hell, continue, persevere, and die
holily in this happy vocation. So be it.

Soli Deo Gloria.
Faults escaped thus to be amended.
Page 1. lin. 4. for de read du. p. 2. l. 7. r providence. p. 4. l. penult.
dele and. p 6. l. vlt. for I desire it, r. But be it so. p. 8. l. 11. after
wine interpose in the Sacrament of the Eucharist. p. 18. l. 19 r. Archangeli
Gabriel. p. 21. r. l. 29. for 23. r. 2.3. p. 22. l. 5. for 18. Ioh. 4. r. 15.
Ioh. 2. and 4. p. 34. l. 17. r if I would discover. p. 38. l. 24. in fine, r.
in. p. 41. l. 27. r. excellence. p. 43. l 2. r. for. l. 27. r. deceased. p. 44.
l. 11. for nf r. of. l 18. dele him. l. 19 r. infallible. p. 46. l. 7. in marg.
r. 1. Eiusdem. p. 47. l. 15. dele and. l. 16. r. sung.

A DECLARATION OF HENRY MARC DE Gouffier Marquise of Boniuet, Lord of
Creuecoeur, etc. Made in the Consistory of Rochell, in the presence of the
Pastors and Elders of the said Town; as also of Monsieur de la VIOLETTE and
THEVENOT, Pastors of the Churches of Marans and Benet, on Wednesday being the
third of August, 1616. The which very same protestation likewise has been
made by the said Lord Marquise in the presence of the whole Church of ROCHEL,
on Sunday being the seventh of the said month, after the morning Sermon in the
great Church.

At ROCHELL, Printed for H. HAVLTIN, by CORNELIS HERTMAN. 1616.

LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for Nathaniel Butter, dwelling near S.
Austens gate, at the sign of the Pide-Bull. 1616.

The French Printer to the Reader.
BEcause that otherwise this page had been left empty, I have thought good to
set in it the Epitaph of the late Lord of BONIVET, Admiral of France, as I
have found it in Du-Bellay.

LA France and le Piemont, and les Cieux, and les arts,
Les Solaats, and le Monde out faict comme six parts
De ce grand Boniuet: Car vne si grand chose
Dedans un seul tembeau ne pouuoit estre enclose.
La France en a le corpse qu elle auoit esleue,
Le Piemont a le coeur qu il auoit esprouue^,
Les Cieux en out l' esprit, and les Arts la memoire,
Les Soldats le regret, and le Monde la Gloire.
The English whereof is the very same which we find to be the Epitaph made
upon the death of our Countryman the noble and thrice-worthy Knight Sir Philip
Sidney: and therefore I have thought good to leave it as it was (mutatis
mutandis) the names only altered.

FRANCE and PIEMONT, the Heavens, and the Arts,
The Soldiers, and the World, have made six parts
Of noble BONIVET, for none will suppose
That a small heap of stones can BONIVET enclose.
His body FRANCE has had, for she it fed;
And PIEMONT his blood in her defense shed:
The Heavens have his soul, the Arts have his fame,
All Soldiers the grief, the World his good name.
THE TRANSLATOR to the READER.
COurteous Reader, I have made bold after this former Treatise yet a while to
trouble (or rather to delight) you with this ensuing shorter, yet no less
zealous, discourse. The neerenesse of both their arguments may in some sort
challenge a neerenesse of place, and I hope shall obtain at your hands a like
acceptance. I will say no more: only give me leave to add this observation
of Gods continual watchfulness over his Church. We have seen of late what
troubles, what broiles, what fears of a general deuastation have been (and
it is to be feared are scarce yet ended) in that our neighbor Country. Many
small Treatises and Pamphlets (that were daily througed as it were to the
Press) do give hereof a sufficient testimony: so that we might in a manner
say (as it is in the first chapter of Job often repeated) Whiles he was yet
speaking, Job 1.
another came, and said, etc. While one book of bad news was yet a printing,
another came and brought us worse news. Whilst the matters of their
Commonwealth stand thus, see how God on the other side prouides for his
Church, and daily adds to it such as shall be saved. Act. 2.47.
Not many months since we have heard of the happy conversion of the Duke de
Candale, one of the Peers of France, and with him of a many likewise that were
of his retinue. This news was scarce down, but behold this other Treatise
coming forth, declaring the conversion of a Gentleman, though not equal to
the former in birth, yet (if we may believe the Romanists) as far above him
in regeneration, as they esteem a spiritual vocation to exceed the
temporal. And whiles he was yet speaking, another came, I mean, whilst this
book (at least the translation thereof) was yet in the Press, another came,
namely this present Declaration of Marquise Boniuet, etc. So that we have
cause still to bless God for his goodness, who though (with those builders in
Nehemiah) he has for a while had his sword girded on his loins, Neh. 4.18.
for to strike by way of punishment his people, yet at the same time he kept
in the other hand the hammer and chizell for to square and fit these living
stones to the building of his spiritual Temple. But what do I? I must
conclude, lest mine observation should prove to be longer then the text it
self. In the mean time accept of that which is done for you, and be
thankful to God for that which he has done for his Church: and in particular
cease not to pray continually for the peace of the distressed Jerusalem which
he has in France. Farewell.

London, this last of August, 1616. Yours, E. M.

A DECLARATION OF HENRY MARC DE GOVFFIER, Marquise of Boniuet, Lord of
Creuecoeur, etc.
IF so be that piety and the knowledge of God were things hereditarie, and of
that nature that they could descend from the parents to the children, as well
as do the goods and possessions of this world; then should not I need at this
time to declare what I am, what is my belief, and what God has put into me:
for my baptism, mine education and bringing up would testify it; I having
been descended from such persons, whereof some have had the feeling of Gods
truth within them, and others the very confidence of professing it openly. But
the public calamities, which for so many years have afflicted this estate,
have brought to me in particular for my part this loss, (more to be lamented
then any other) that I could never have a taste of that good affection which
parents are wont to bear toward their children; and that those, from whose
care I might have looked for a faithful instruction in matters of salvation,
having been taken out of the miseries of this world, as soon almost as I came
unto it, there was left unto me no other light then for the body, and my soul
still continued in darkness and the shadow of death, and that in such manner,
that accordingly as I grew in age, so I daily proceeded in error, and straying
from Jesus Christ and his Gospel, I strayed likewise from mine own
happiness, and had been likely miserably to continue in that lamentable and
deplorable estate even unto this day, and so forwards, if God, who knows who
are his, and whose names he has written in his book of life, had not had
pity of me: and if the goodness of him, who shows mercy to whom he
shows mercy, had not prevented me, and formally opposed it self to the
mischief which was pleasing unto me, and to that curse, which being to me the
greatest of all, yet above all others was hugged and liked of by my soul. And
if the kindness of God toward me has been eminent in regard of the thing
it self, in that he has vouchsafed to deliver me from the power of darkness,
for to translate me to the kingdom of his well-beloued son; the means also
which it has pleased him to use for to bring to pass this happy effect, are
no less worth the considering, in that God of the means of my total
perdition (at least as they might seem likely to be) has made as many means
of my conversion to him, according as he is wont to draw sweetness out of
bitter things for his children, Romans 8.
and generally to make all things to turn to the best for those who are called
according to his determined purpose.

It is now twelve years ago when I was at Rome: (I will say no more) there
mine eyes saw wonders, but such as were quite of another nature then those
which heretofore the Apostles (being directed and animated by the holy Spirit)
brought forth for to authorize and confirm the doctrine of grace. And how
carefully and industriously soever I was nurtured in ignorance, and brought up
in the hatred of the Religion, and the love of Idolatry, yet I could never be
hindered from perceiving that there was a great disproportion between the state
of those, who at this day do domineere over the Church, and the condition of
them, who formerly did feed the flock of Christ that was committed unto them.
Yet that was scarce any more, then if I should have beheld the darkness of the
night, without being able to discern the brightness of the day: or if I did
begin to take notice, it was in that manner as men begin to see at the
break of day. That beginning, how small soever it was then, did not continue
unprofitable: the rising of the Sun drew nigh, the light increased, and was
strengthened in mine understanding; the abuses of Popery appeared unto me both
grosser and more; God left not in me his work imperfect, he did put me in
mind of inquiring a little further, and to be informed truly by himself in
his own word, whether of the two Religions that are received in this Kingdom
might have the upper hand in regard of the truth, or had more conformity unto
this word. This inquiry did make me to resolve about some three years since,
to forsake the service which I find condemned in the Scripture, and to embrace
that which I find therein commanded, and to come forthwith out of Babylon, for
fear that partaking longer of her known crimes, I should bring my self into
a manifest danger of partaking of her unknown plagues. Whilst I had this
resolution, which came to me from God, behold on the contrary many
considerations, which came from elsewhere: on the one side were presented to
mine eyes the luster, the pomp, the dignities, the greatness, the hopes of
the earth, and with all this ostentation of the glories of the world, as it
were a certain voice well-neere like to that which said sometimes to our Lord,
I will give thee all these things, if thou fall down and worship me: on the
other side, the poverty, the miseries, the ruins of houses, the hatred, the
contempt, and all what is most able to cause a distaste, which should be mine
assured lot in case of change. These two tentations, the one on the right, and
the other on the left hand, did make me suspend the effect of that will which
the spirit of God had insinuated into my spirit; I looked behind me a good
while, Romans 1.18.
I withheld the truth in unrighteousness, I made my self believe that by doing
much evil I should have good done unto me; I fled from the presence of God, but
God did make me at length feel that he deceiues himself, which thinks to
escape by swiftness from before him: he prepared for me a Whale for to swallow
me, but yet not for to destroy me; I was chastened by his hand, and that
through the same things in the which I had sinned: he took away out of mine
hands both that which I had, and that which I had not. And now my hopes were
cut off even at the root, now many things by me possessed were lost for me, now
my liberty (more precious then all the rest) was taken from me: but God be
praised, who having taken from me so many things, yet has given me so many,
that if he has sent me any evil, it was only for to send me some good; if
he has made me poorer, it was for to make me richer then ever I was before,
and that in better riches, in those namely that are the only true ones: if he
has made my body to be cast into prison, it was for to make my soul to come
out of thrall: if he has suffered me to fall into the hands of such men as
hated me, it was for fear that I should fall into his hands, yea into his
hands as he is a rigorous Judge, and yet to the end that I might fall into his
hands, as he is a kind and merciful Father, and that I might learn to my
cost (being I could not do it by the example of others) to fear him, to
reverence him, to give him the glory, and to consecrate to him whatsoever
belongs to me, without any reservation, as I acknowledge my self truly and
after an infinite number of sorts to be bound to do, and acknowledge likewise,
that it was the pure mercy of God that I was not consumed, because that his
compassions did not fail me. And seeing that God has done me that favor,
that his word does serve me at this day in stead of a lamp for my feet, and
of a light for my steps, to this word and to this Scripture, divinely inspired,
I purpose to keep me, without ever any more repairing to the traditions of
men, seeing that God has given Jesus Christ for to be the head to his Church
(of the which I am a member) for to be the only Mediator between him and
men, and our Advocate toward his Father; for to be the only Priest for ever,
for to have an everlasting Priesthood, and for to offer (as he has offered)
one only sacrifice for sins, for to be the Lamb of God, whose blood does
cleanse us from all sin, for to sit for ever at the right hand of God, and to
be held in the heaven until the time of the re-establishing of all things, and
until that he shall come from thence for to judge the quick and the dead: I
acknowledge from henceforth no more (to the prejudice of him) any ministerial
head of the Church on the earth, nor Advocate, taken from among either men or
Angels, nor any Priest sacrificing his body, nor Mass serving for a
propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the living and the dead, nor
Purgatory after this life, nor real presence of the body and blood of Jesus
Christ in the Sacrament under the kinds of bread and wine. And because that
the Spirit of God does teach me, that no flesh is justified by the works of
the Law, but only by faith in Jesus Christ, I will no longer forge unto my
self any merit of good works, and much less of supererogation; and I will
account the good works of the faithful to have been prepared by God, to the
end that we may walk therein, and will esteem them to be the way to the
Kingdom of heaven, and not the cause of reigning. And it is in this truth, and
in the profession thereof, that I desire, and that I promise here before God,
his Angels, and his Church, to be willing to live and to die, detesting with
all mine heart all Idolatries, superstitions and errors, which are contrary to
the confession of faith of the Churches of this Kingdom, and protesting to
submit my self wholly to that which concerns the order and discipline of the
Church. Thus signed, Boniuet.

FINIS.
THE COPY OF A LETTER, SENT from PARIS by an English Gentleman to his friend
in England, Wherein are briefly touched those occurrences which lately fell out
in Paris, about the Prince of CONDE, on the 22. of August, this present year,
1616.
Laus Deo, August, 22. 1616.
I Have with the first conueniency sent over unto you, the newest, and (here)
most known news, dated, as before; having received no letters from you since
the tenth of the same. And whereas, not only in many before, but especially in
your last, you seriously importuned me (knowing what winds blew here) to
give you intelligence of French present occurrences, as they shall happen; I
have done so, rather to satisfy your mind, desirous of novelties, than to
please my self in setting down the troubles of others, that have too many of
mine own. France (as you know) is to me nothing, in regard I am an Englishman
and a stranger to her factions. She is as one of her Vineyards, robbed by
Frenchmen in my sight, which stelth is no loss to me. I stand safe on the
shore, and behold her sides beating upon a rock, the wrack I feel not; yet
am I bound, in common humanity, to compassionate my neighbors sorrow, seeing
his house burning about his ears: And do therefore protest to you, that I
suffer as much, as if I were a natural Frenchman borne, in being present
within so goodly a City as Paris is, when she is full (at least looking
howrely to be so) of turmoiles, vproares, and civil combustion: and to see so
many thousands of the French (I mean the Parisiens) walk up and down with
such amazed, wild, and distracted faces; that if ten be in a troop
together, not three of them can safely swear, that a fourth man is his friend.
In every street, yea at every corner, the people flock in heaps, muttering
and murmuring, and whispering one to another; and nothing is more expected,
(nay more desired by some) than that a sword may be drawn, to the end that
pell mell they may fall to cutting of throats. The Towns of France are rich,
and spoils would now taste sweetly, especially to the Pesant, who wishes to
build upon his countries ruins, and to set an edge upon his fury, this
occasion gave advantage. For upon the twenty two of August, now present, (even
this day, in which I write unto you) the Prince of Conde being in Paris, well
accompanied, came to the Court, where he had not been long, but he was
surprised and carried prisoner to the Louure, why he came, and whether of
himself or sent for, is not in my knowledge, and if I should set down all
which I hear touching the causes of this surprizall (of whose true notice I
desire not to be guilty) you might think me, either very idle, to call
every shadow a substance, or else very busy to be so inquisitiue in the
affairs of a kingdom, when mine own are altogether private. I had rather
walk up and down the streets of Paris (albeit with some fear of danger) than
thrust my head into their Council chambers, and to meddle with Princes
matters, which no whit concern me. And therefore do I sparingly deliver you
these vproares, not searching into the ground and reaches of them, as hearing
various and inconstant reports: I give ear to many, but credit few, and dare
not (albeit I might) utter my own opinion, because I am as loath to wrong you
by this of mine, as that you should do the like to your friends in England, by
a second relation. The Prince of Conde being taken, the Duke of Vandosme
escaped. Others likewise fearing the same danger, met with the same happy
means of safety: For the Duke of Bouillon, with Tremouille, and many other
personages of note being at a sermon, having notice given, as they came from
Church, fled; and to make their side the stronger, the Duke Du Maine is joined
with them. How these Noblemen came to the knowledge of the Prince of Condees
surprizall, is (even here) doubtful. Some say by a French Page, who saw him
carried away, and that he was demanded to deliver up his sword, which he
refused to do: others otherwise: But howsoever it happened, it seemed a good
and miraculous deliverance of the rest, (who hold with him) if at least they
turn not that preservation of themselves, to the confusion of others. Which
the rather is to be feared, for that having (to avoid the blow) turned their
backs for safety, they now (as it is thought) arm their hands with weapons,
assembling themselves, and friends with all their forces at Soissons, to make
their party (for defense) as strong as they can. Now, whether in love to the
Prince of Conde, or in hate for any private respect they bear the Marquess d'
Ancres; a man famous enough in England and else where for exceeding favors,
done him by the Queen mother in France; or whether (as often it so happens)
a desire of doing something (though never so ill) set the common peoples
fingers on itching, I know not: But presently upon surprizall of the Prince (it
being noysd through Paris, that he was sent prisoner to the Louure) they ran
in heaps and height of fury to the Marquesses house, assaulted, entered, and
rifled it; making spoil of all that was in it, and when no other prey could
feed them, they spent their malice on the insensible walls (tearing and
beating the building down) which (if he could have been gotten) they swore
to execute upon himself. In this wavering estate the Kingdom still stands.
What the event of these troubles will be, lies in the hands of God only: the
occurrences whereof (as hereafter time shall deliver) I will (as these) send
unto you, expecting a return (by way of exchange) from you of some news out
of England. And so with wishes of your health, I bid you farewell, from Paris,
the 22. of August, 1616.

Resting yours most assured, R. M.


