LECTVRES UPON THE FOUR FIRST CHAPTERS OF THE PROPHECY OF HOSEA.

WHEREIN THE TEXT IS EXPOVNded and cleared, and such profitable instructions
observed, and applied, as naturally arise out of this holy Scripture, and are
fit for these times.

By JOHN DOWNHAM Bacheler in Divinity, and Preacher of Gods word.

1. TIMOTH. 4. 16. Take heed unto thy self, and unto learning, continue
therein; for in doing this thou shall both save thy self and them that hear
thee. AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for William Welby, and are to be
sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Greyhound. 1608.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, JAMES, BY GODS PROVIdence Lord Bishop of
Bathe and Wells: I. D. wishes all grace, prosperity, and true comfort in
this life, and eternal happiness in the life to come.
THe book of holy Scriptures (Right reverend father in God) is as the princely
Prophet David calls it, Alanterne to our Psalm. 119.
feet, and a light unto our paths; and as the Apostle Peter terms it, it is
As a candle shining 2. Pet. 1. 19.
in an obscure place, which so illuminateth the eyes of our minds, through the
inward operation of Gods Spirit, that we are thereby enabled in this vale of
darkness to make choice of the narrow path of righteousness, which conducteth
us to Gods kingdom, and to decline from the bywaies of sin and error, which
lead to destruction: yea it is a glorious and bright shining sun, which (as
it is said of Christ the author of this word) does give light unto them that
sit in darkness and in the shadow Matthew. 4. 2. Luke 1. 79.
of death, guiding their feet into the way of peace. But withal it is a
certain truth, that this heavenly light is in some places more resplendent, in
others more obscure; this candle sometimes shines so clearly, that it gives
light to the whole household, and sometimes it burns so dimly, that those only
discern it, who have better insight, and approach nearer unto it by diligent
study and meditation. This glorious sun in some places shines clearly, and
evidently shows it self by his own light; but otherwhiles it is shadowed
with the clouds of obscurity, and the foggie 2. Pet. 3. 16.
mistes of our ignorance, interposing between it and us, do hide it from our
sight. The which (no doubt) the holy Ghost has purposely affected, that
neither the great easiness of holy writ might cause in any idle neglect, nor
yet the inextricable difficulty might discourage any from reading of it; that
neither the simple plainness thereof might work in the wise and learned cause
of comtempt, seeing in many places they might have a fit subject, whereupon
they might exercise their greatest learning and deepest judgment; nor the
obscure profoundnes of it might make the simple despair of receiving any fruit
by their studies and labors, seeing a great part thereof is so plain and
easy, that it is within the compass of a child's capacity. And finally, as
he has provided milk for babes, so also stronger meat for those who are of
riper age, that none who are invited to this heavenly banquet might go away
with empty stomachs for want of convenient food, whereby they should be
nourished. Nevertheless the Popish crew (who because their works are evil,
love the darkness of ignorance better then the light of Gods truth) take
occasion hereupon to declaime against the obscurity of the Scriptures; and to
dissuade all the common people from reading of them; and lest the sight of this
heavenly food should sharpen their hungry appetite, and work in them a desire
to feed upon it, they carefully lock it from the^, over whom they have any
authority, in the dark closet of an unknown tongue, that so being out of
sight, it may also be out of mind; and in stead hereof they feed them with
their lying Legends, and with the poisonous hemlocke of their own traditions:
pretending that out of their great care, they keep the Scriptures from them,
lest they should pervert them to their destruction, and abuse them in their
ignorance unto heresies and errors. Wherein, what do they else, but like cruel
nurses, keep from Gods children the milk of his word, whereby they should be
nourished, for fear lest any thereof should drop upon their clothes? What
do they else, but like hard hearted stewards, deprive Gods family of their
allowance, and so starve them to avoid surfeting? And what do they by this
their either foolish or malicious course, but quite extinguish the light of
Gods truth, because it does not shine in all places with like clearenesse? But
we who profess our selves children of the light, and true disciples of the
school of Christ, must be otherwise affected, continually praying, that though
there be nothing but palpable darkness in all the dominions of the Romish
Pharaoh, yet this light may still shine in our Goshen, as long as the Sun is
in the firmament, and never be extinguished. And seeing our heavenly
schoolmaster, in his abundant mercy gives unto us this book of divine
knowledge, which alone is sufficient to make us wise unto salvation, let us
with the Prophet David, take our chief delight in this holy learning,
meditating therein day and night: and when we find our lesson clear to our
understandings, let us labor to imprint it in our memories, by the holy use
and practice which we make of it in our lives and conuersations: where it is
obscure and difficult, let us endeavor to inform our judgments in the true
meaning thereof, by diligent study and meditation, comparing one Scripture
with another, and clearing those places which are hard and dark, by others
which are more easy and perspicuous. Neither does this heavenly sun, when it
is covered with clouds of obscurity, need any earthly means to clear and
restore it to his brightness; seeing his own heat and light is sufficient to
dispell these foggie mists, and the wind of Gods Spirit so drives these dark
clouds of ignorance from before the eye of our understanding, that we shall need
no other help for our enlightening. But 1. Ioh. 2. 20. 27.
as all those who are scholars in Christ's school, ought to spend their time
in these holy exercises; so especially the Ministers of the Gospel, who being
placed (as it were) in the highest form, are enjoined by God, not only to
learn themselves the lesson of his holy and hidden mysteries, but also to
read a lecture Matthew. 2. 7.
of them, to those who are in inferior places, that they likewise may be
enlightened in the knowledge of Gods truth. The consideration whereof has moved
me, whom the Lord has called to this function, though far unworthy (I
ingenuously confess) of such high advancement, to undertake in conscience of
my calling, the expounding of a part of these holy Scriptures, namely, the
Prophecy of Hosea: which as it gives place to none of the writings of the
other Prophets in worth and excellency; so in regard of the abstruse depth,
and obscure difficulty thereof, it does as much as any other stand in need of
explanation. In handling whereof I have chiefly endeavored to clear the text
from all obscurity; and having laid open and discovered the hidden treasures
therein contained, to communicate and apply them to the enriching of all
those, who are willing to receive them by their reading and meditation. The
which my labors I desired should come forth into public view under your
Lordships patronage and protection, in respect of that great love which you
have showed to learning and religion, even from your tender youth. For
howsoever you were descended of a noble house, and from parents of great worth
and worship, yet you made choice of a scholars life, and of the profession of
a Minister of the Gospel; which howsoever it is in it self a calling most
honorable, and best replenished with happy contentment; yet is it so contemned
and under valued by the world and worldly men, that many, much your inferiors,
both in birth and means, do think this profession a great disparagement to
their state and credit. The which also would have discouraged you from entering
into this calling, had you not with eyes spiritually illightned, beheld the
inward dignity and glory thereof, through the ragged veil of worldly
contempt. And as your love to learning moved you to enter into this profession,
so the same love incited you to take such extraordinary pains in your studies,
that I may truly say upon mine own knowledge (being a poor member of that
College whereof you were once a chief ornament) that scarce any of the
poorest scholars (who had no other means but learning to advance either state
or credit) did go before you in unwearied pains and industrious labor. The
which your diligent studies the Lord so prospered with his blessing, that the
plentiful harvest answered and surmounted the greatest expectation which could
be had of such an hopeful seed time; insomuch that in the judgment of the
most judicious University, you were thought fit for the greatest honor, which
it could yield unto any, before the ordinary time, which you prevented not
only by nobleness of birth, but also through sufficiency and desert: and
since, have been thought the meetest by our Sovereign King, who is best able
to judge of those gifts wherein himself excels, to be his assistant in his
most learned studies; and after manifold experience of your great sufficiency,
to be advanced unto one of the chief preferments which our land affords to
those, whose gifts are of greatest eminency; whereby you, who have always been
a lover of learning, are now enabled to be a chief patron of the learned. Of
all which I now put you in mind, not in base flattery, which the searcher of
hearts knows my soul detesteth, nor to angle your affection by casting
before you the bait of your own praises; but rather to admonish you of your
duty toward God, which worldly prosperity causes us too often to forget;
namely, that with your whole endeavor you seek to honor him, who has thus
highly honored you; and to employ those rich talents of learning, authority,
honor and favor with your Sovereign, which your great master has bestowed
on you, to the advancement of Gods glory, and the good of his Church, over a
part whereof you are now made a steward and ouerseer. Otherwise, howsoever
these gifts may adorn you in this life, in the eyes of worldly men, yet they
will not profit you in the life to come, but rather the greatness of your
receipts will enlarge the bill of your accounts, in that great and last audit,
which you must make in the presence of God and his holy Angels. More
especially, I entreat your Lordship to labor, that in all places where you
have any authority and jurisdiction, God may be glorified in the propagation
of his truth, and in the diligent preaching of his Gospel, which is the
spiritual sword and scepter of his kingdom, whereby he reigns and rules
in the hearts of men; and to this end, that as much as in you lies, you will
endeavor to plant under you a godly, learned and faithful ministry, who may
instruct the people committed to their charge, in the true religion of Jesus
Christ; and to countenance and patronize them being placed, against wicked
Atheists, profane worldlings, and idolatrous Papists; that so under the shade
of your protection, they may comfortablie persist in the painful work of
their ministry, and be sheltered from the scorching fury of all opposers. So
shall the Lord enlarge his mercies more and more toward you, perpetuate unto
you an honorable name and memory amongst his faithful servants in this life
present, and crown you with endless glory and immortality amongst his holy
Saints in the life to come.

Your Lordships in the Lord to be commanded, JOHN DOWNAME.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
CHristian Reader, although the world is already so full of Books, that a man
may spend his whole time in reading titles and inscriptions; yet are there but
few amongst this multitude in our English tongue, which contain sound
expositions of the books of holy Scriptures; which are appointed by God to be
the object of our faith, and the rule and directorie of our life and manners.
In consideration whereof, as I did in the general think, that no man can
better spend his labors then in expounding and clearing these holy and hidden
mysteries; so more particularly, that it should be a profitable and acceptable
labor, to explain the Prophecy of Hosea; which as it is exceeding obscure,
and not by any (that I know of) expounded in our tongue, so also when it is
understood, most excellent, and of singular use for these times. And therefore
relying my self upon Gods assistance, I have undertaken this hard task, and
by his blessing have already proceeded unto the fifth Chapter. In handling
whereof, I have chiefly labored to clear this Scripture from all obscurity;
and then to inform the Readers judgment, by such instructions as naturally
arise out of the text; and to reform his affections, life and conversation, by
making thereof use and application. The which my labors (I may truly say) I
only intended for the benefit of mine own private charge, and never thought of
making them public by the press, till I had finished the three first
Chapters; when as being persuaded by some of my friends to set them out, for
the good of others, I began to resolve upon this course, yet with a purpose not
to diuulge any part till the whole were finished. But he who is at the charge
of printing this book, herein ouerruled me, persuading me to publish my
readings upon these Chapters first, for a taste of the rest. Unto which motion
I have condescended, with a purpose to take the like pains in those Chapters
which remain, by the assistance of God, if I shall in the mean while perceive
that this part finds good acceptance, and shall be thought profitable by
those who are of better judgment, for the advancement of Gods glory, and good
of his Church, which my desire is should be the maine end of all my labors.
Which that I may the better perform, I entreat, that as I endeavor to benefit
thee with my pains and studies, so thou will assist me with thy fervent
prayers, for the help and direction of Gods holy Spirit in these my
endeavors, who only can enable us to expound that, which was first preached and
written by his divine inspiration.

Thine in the Lord, I. D.

Faults escaped.
Page 18. lin. 35. read, fore-names. page 31. in marg. r. take unto thee. p.
32. l. 33. r. who was to be. p. 33. l. 2. r. Gods severe. Ibid. l. 15. such an
holy and high calling. p. 35. l. 14. r. eat a roll p. 40. l. 36. r. turn
unto him. p. 97. in 2. Alph. l. 13. r. (...) ibid. l. 14. r. (...).

LECTVRES UPON THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE PROPHECY OF HOSEA.
The Preface or Introduction.
BEfore I come to expound this our Prophet, I will prefixe somewhat, Why the
12. Prophets are called the lesser, the other four the greater.
both concerning the twelve Prophets, of which this our Prophet is one; and
also concerning the Prophet himself in general. Concerning the former, we
will consider in the first place, why they are called the smaller or lesser
Prophets, the other four the greater. Not because the other were before them
in time; for this our Prophet in this respect had the precedence of them all,
as afterward shall appear; nor yet because they excelled them in dignity and
authority, for in these respects also this our Prophet gives place to none of
the greatest: but because the books containing the prophecies of the other
four, are much more large then these which contain the prophecies of these
twelve. And therefore, because the dignity and authority of the books of holy
Scriptures is not derived from their length and greatness, but from God, who
is the Author of them, and from the truth which they contain, we are not to
make less account of the shortest then of the longest, nor of the smallest
Prophet then of the greatest.

In the second place let us consider, why all these twelve Why these were
joined in one vollume.
were originally joined in one book or volume: not because they lived,
prophesied and wrote in the same time, and so joined their works together; for
some of them were the first, some the last of all the Prophets, whose writings
are extant; some before, some in, and some after the captivity: but by Gods
all-ruling providence it came to pass, that their prophecies which were
written in diverse ages, and scattered in diverse books, should afterward be
collected into one volume, to this end, that they might be the better preserved
from losing and perishing, to which danger they would have been more exposed,
if they had been severed and scattered.

Where by the way, we may observe Gods vigilant care in preserving all the
writings of his Prophets, Apostles, and holy men inspired by his Spirit, which
were necessary for the instruction and salvation of his whole Church and every
member thereof. So that the Church of Rome has but a slender argument for
their traditions, when as they allege, that they are invented to supply the
defect of those books of holy Scripture which are lost and perished.

The third thing to be considered of, is, the several people unto which these
Prophets prophesied; for some prophesied Unto what people the several Prophets
prophesied.
to the Israelites, namely Hosea, Joel, Amos, Micheas; some to the Jews, as
Zophonias, Haggeus, Zacharias, Malachias; some to the Gentiles, as Jonas and
Nahum to the Ninevites; Habacuc to the Babylonians, Abdias to the Edomites: the
which consideration is very profitable, as bringing great light to the
understanding of their prophecies.

The last thing which I will consider, is the general subject The subject of
these prophecies.
or matter which the Prophets handle; the which is partly legal, and partly
Evangelical. For that which was briefly and somewhat darkely set down by
Moses in the Law, is enlarged and expounded by the Prophets. First therefore
they contain holy precepts, prescribed by God for the guiding and directing of
men in the ways of godliness and righteousness. To which are annexed
gracious promises of both outward, temporal, and also spiritual and eternal
benefits to those that yield obedience to Gods Commandments; for neither
would the Lord have men to serve him for naught, nor yet bestow his benefits
upon such as will not vouchsafe him their service: and therefore as on his part
he promises his graces and benefits, so he requires that those upon whom he
bestows them, should live in holiness and righteousness, as it becomes
the people of God.

Secondly, they contain reprehensions and severe threatenings of grievous
punishments against the transgressors of these holy precepts, and that both
temporal and eternal.

Thirdly, there are intermixed with these threatenings of common calamities,
special consolations for those who continue in their integrity, and are not
carried away with the universal deluge of wickedness which ouerfloweth the
land.

Lastly, they foretell the coming of the Messiah, who should be the Savior of
the world; for this was the maine end both of the Law and the Prophets, to
bring men to Christ, in whom (notwithstanding their imperfections and wants in
their legal obedience) they were to be justified, reconciled unto God, and
eternally saved.

And these are the maine subject, matter and scope of both Moses and the
Prophets. The differences which are betwixt The difference between the books
of Moses and the Prophets.
them are these: Moses expounds these things briefly and darkely; these more
largely and plainly, as being expositions of him. Moses sets down both the
threatenings and the promises generally and indefinitely, without limitation of
punishment, person, time, or place: the Prophets specially determine these
circumstances, setting down the particular punishments which shall be
inflicted, the persons against whom, the time when and the place where. Moses
generally and obscurely promises that the Messiah should come, saying, that a
Prophet should be raised by God from among the people, like unto himself,
etc. Deuteronomy. 18. 18. The Prophets particularly describe him, what kind of
Messiah he should be, namely, that he should be of the Tribe of Judah, of the
seed of David, borne of a virgin, in Bethlem of Jury, how he should live,
and how he should die for the people, etc.

And so much in general of these twelve Prophets: now we will add something
of this our Prophet Hosea. And That Hoseahs prophecy is authentical.
first concerning the authority of this prophecy. It is manifest that it was
indicted by Gods Spirit, and by his commandment delivered to the Church. First,
because it is cited and alleged by Christ and his Apostles, and so by them
approved for canonical Scripture. So Matthew. 2. 15. Out of Egypt have I called
my Son: spoken by Hosea, chap. 11. 1. Matthew. Matthew. 2. 15. Hos. 11. 1. Matthew.
9. 13. Hos. 6. 6. Romans 9. 25. Hos. 2. 23. 1. Cor. 15. 55. Hos. 13. 14.
9. 13. I will have mercy and not sacrifice: spoken by Hosea, chap. 6. 6. Romans
9. 25. As he says also in Hosea, I will call them my people which were not my
people, etc. Hose. 2. 23. 1. Cor. 15. 55. O death I will be thy death; O grave
where is thy victory? Hos. 13. 14.

Secondly, the authority of this prophecy is sufficiently approved by the
certainty of the event, which is a certain sign that it was inspired by God,
and an infallible note to distinguish true prophecies from those which are
false. Deuteronomy. 18. 21, 22. Deuteronomy. 18. 21, 22


The second thing to be considered, is the time in which he prophesied: but of
this I shall have occasion to speak in the first verse of this prophecy.

Lastly, we are to set down the sum of this prophecy, which consists in
these points: First, he severely reprehendeth The sum of this prophecy.
the sins of the Israelites, especially their sin of Idolatry: for whereas
the Lord had restrained his public worship and service to be performed in the
Temple at Jerusalem, these ten Tribes by the instigation of Jeroboam, made
choice of two other places, Dan and Bethel for this purpose, where they erected
golden calves and other Idols, and built strange altars, that they might (as
the Papists do in their images) worship God in these Idols, whereas in
truth, in stead of God, they worshipped the devil.

This sin of Idolatry the Prophet sharply reprehendeth, showing the
heynousnesse thereof, how odious it is in Gods sight, the miserable effects
which it produced, and the fearful plagues and punishments wherewith the Lord
would punish it.

Secondly, he exhorts and uses diverse arguments to persuade them to
repentance, that so they might escape these plagues and heavy judgments,
showing also how they should repent and turn unto God.

Lastly, he prophecieth of Christ and of his kingdom, for the comforting of
all those who did expect him, and did rest upon him for their salvation.

All which points are set down, partly under shadows and types, and partly
evidently, simply, and clearly.

And so much in general of this prophecy: now I will proceed The order in
this book observed.
to the more special handling thereof. Wherein I will observe this order;
first I will briefly set down the sum or maine argument of every chapter;
secondly, I will divide it into his general parts; thirdly, I will expound and
explane the particular verses; and lastly, gather out of them such doctrines
and uses as shall offer themselves to our consideration, and shall be most fit
for our instruction and edification.

Let us therefore come to speak of the first chapter, the The argument of the
first chapter.
maine argument whereof is this. After that he has prefixed the inscription,
wherein is contained the Author of this prophecy, his calling from God, and
the time of his prophesying, to the end that he might make the hearers and
readers more attenttiue, he accuses the people of Israel of their sins, and
namely of their grievous Idolatry, under the type of an infamous harlot and her
adulterous issue: setting down withal, comminations of heavy judgments which
the Lord would shortly execute upon them for their sins. To which he
adioyneth a singular consolation to the faithful; that notwithstanding the
sins and punishments of the rebellious people, the Lord would show himself
constant in his promises which he made to their forefathers, and would
multiply their spiritual seed in great numbers, making them not only his
people, but also his sons and children.

And this is the argument of this chapter, out of which we The parts of this
chapter.
may gather the several parts thereof, which are two: First, the inscription
of the prophecy, verse 1. And secondly, the prophecy it self, in the rest of
the chapter; the which may be divided into two parts: first, legal
comminations: secondly, Evangelical consolations. In the comminations is set
down, first the sin, verse. 2, 3. and secondly, the punishment, verse. 4, 5,
6, 8, 9. The consolations are first proper to the house of Judah, verse. 7. and
secondly, common to Judah and Israel, verse. 10, 11.

THe inscription is set down, verse, 1. The word of the Lord which came to
Hosea the son of Beeri, in the days of Vzzia, Iothan, Ahaz, and Hezechia,
Kings of Judah; and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Ioash, King of
Israel. This inscription is prefixed for these ends: First, to make the hearer
or reader attentive; in that it is not the word of Hosea himself, or of
mortal man, but of the everliving God.

Secondly, to gain authority unto, and to show the undoubted truth and
certainty of this prophecy; in that it is the word of the Lord, not the
device of man uttered after the things contained therein were come to pass,
but reueiled to Hosea, and by him to all the people long before the things were
accomplished, not in an uncertain time, but in the reign of these Kings here
named.

Thirdly, that hereby we might be helped and furthered in the understanding of
the whole prophecy; for knowing in what time and in whose reign these
prophecies were delivered, we may in the books of the Kings and Chronicles,
read the story of those times, and so come to the knowledge of the state of
the Church and Commonwealth under the government of these Kings, which will
give no small light for the understanding of the prophecy.

And these are the maine ends of this and the like inscriptions. Now let us
come to the words themselves, wherein are contained four things. First, the
principal efficient cause of this prophecy, namely Jehovah. Secondly, the
matter or maine argument thereof, that is, Gods word. Thirdly, the
isntrumental cause by whom this word was delivered, to wit, Hosea the Prophet.
Lastly, the time of the publishing of this prophecy, that is, in the reign of
these Kings.

Concerning the first, the principal author of this prophecy, The Author of
this Prophecy.
is Jehovah, who has his essence and being of himself, and gives being to
all creatures. The consideration whereof should make us attentively to hear,
and dutifully to perform obedience to the words of this prophecy, both in
fleeing the vices therein condemned, and practicing and performing the duties
therein commended and commanded unto us.

For it is Jehovah, who speaks unto us, who is infinite in wisdom, and
therefore his words are to be embraced and obeyed, as being most fit to guide
and rule us. Achitophels 2. Sam. 16. 23.
words were received as Oracles, because he was wise, though his wisdom was
mingled with sin and corruption, that is, with foolishness; how much more
then are we to hearken to God himself speaking unto us, whose wisdom is
infinite and most perfect?

It is Jehovah that speaks, who has his being from himself, and therefore
is eternal, so that he euerliueth to reward the obedient, aad punish the
rebellious.

It is Jehovah, who is immutable, and therefore the same faults which he
disliked amongst the people in the time of Hosea, he misliketh also now; the
same duties he required of them, he requires of us: and as then he multiplied
his mercies upon them who heard and obeyed him, and his judgments upon those
who were rebellious and obstinate in their sins; so has he now also the like
mercies and judgments in store for them who either hear and obey his word, or
wilfully neglect and contemn it.

It is Jehovah, who is omnipresent and omniscient, and therefore is an
eyewitness and beholder of all our actions, yea of our secret thoughts and
intentions; so that he takes a special view both of our obedience to reward
it, and of our disobedience to punish it. If a just Judge should always look
upon ye actions of a malefactor, it would restrain him from his wickedness,
because he that sees him has power in his hand to punish him. If a Prince
should always behold the service of his subject, he would perform his duty
with great diligence and chearefulnes in hope of reward. But our powerful Judge
looks on us, and therefore let us not offend him for fear of punishment; our
gracious King beholds our service, and therefore let us obey his word with
cheerful diligence, assuring our selves y^ he will not send us away empty
handed.

It is Jehovah that speaks, who is omnipotent and omnisufficient, and
therefore he is able to punish us if we neglect his word, be we never so
mighty; and sufficient to reward us and to protect us from all enemies and
other dangers, if we hearken unto it and obey it.

It is Jehovah, who is not only in himself infinite in all perfection and the
chief goodness, but also does communicate this his goodness unto his
creatures: for in him we live, and move, and have our being: Act. 1728. He
has created us of nothing, and redeemed us when we were worse then Acts 17. 28.
nothing: he has given us our being, and does preserve us that we may
continue to be, multiplying upon us all those benefits which are necessary
for our health, strength, and welfare; and when notwithstanding we made the end
of our being to be in endless misery, he has procured and provided for us by
the price of the precious blood of his best beloved, an eternal being in joy
and happiness. Seeing therefore Jehovah is our Lord by a treble right, both
because he has created and given unto us our being, and has redeemed us that
we might ever be in happiness, and provides all things for us needful at his
proper charges, protecting us from all enemies, and delivering us out of all
dangers: therefore let us attentively hearken to the voice of our Lord, and
diligently practice those duties which he inioyneth us.

Lastly, it is Jehovah that speaks unto us in this prophecy, who as he has
his being of himself, and gives being Exodus 6. 3.
to all his creatures, so especially to his word, and that both to his
promises, and also to his threatenings. And therefore if we will perform
obedience unto the words of this prophecy, then shall we be made partakers of
all the gracious promises therein contained. But if we will not hearken unto
them, nor submit our selves in holy obedience to walk in the^, but cast them
behind our back, and wilfully go forward in those vices, which in this book are
forbidden and condemned, then shall all those plagues and punishments which are
therein threatened fall upon us, for the Lord is most true of his word, and
immutable in the administration of his mercies and judgments unto al men, and
in all times and ages. And so much concerning ye principal cause and chief
author of this prophecy.

The second thing to be considered, is the matter of this The matter of this
prophecy, the word of the Lord.
prophecy, which he says, is the word of the Lord, that is, the Lords speech
or prophecy revealed to the Prophet Hosea. And this matter or argument is
common to all the Prophets, yea, to all the Penmen of holy Scriptures, and
therefore it is usually prefixed and often repeated in their writings; but in
diverse phrases: as, The word of the Lord, Thus says the Lord, The vision of
Isaiah. The burden which Habacuc did see, etc. which all signify the same
word of God, saving that the word respects the speaker, vision the hearer,
and burden signifies the denunciation of some heavy punishment.

Now the reason why the Prophets prefix these phrases, is, that they may gain
authority to their speeches, and move their hearers and readers to reverence
and attention, and unto holy obedience to those things which they deliver:
because they come not in their own names, but are sent of God, and have his
embassage put into their mouths: they speak not according to their own
conceits and inventions, but the pure and sincere word of God.

And to the same end do the Apostles likewise show their calling from God, and
that they speak not their own words, but the words of God. So Romans 1. 1. Paul
a servant of Jesus Romans 1. 1.
Christ, called to be an Apostle, put apart to preach the Gospel of God. Gal.
1. 1. Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but Gal. 1. 1.
by Jesus Christ and God the father. And verse, 11. he affirms that the
Gospel which he preached, was not of man, nor received nor taught of man, but
by the revelation of Jesus Christ. So the Apostle John, 1. Epist. 1. 1. That
which was from 1. John 1. 1.
the beginning, which we have heard, etc. that declare we unto you. And Apoc.
1. 1. The revelation of Jesus Christ, etc. Apoc 1. 1.


The doctrines which herehence we learn are diverse: first, Gods mercy in
seeking the conversion of sinners.
we may observe the endless and boundless mercy of God to his Church and
people; who being justly provoked to wrath against them for their sins, does
not suddenly power forth his judgments upon them, but gives long time of
repentance, and because he would not have them overtaken of his plagues,
sends his Prophets to allure them to obedience by gracious promises, and to
terrify them from sininng, by denouncing heavy judgments. And thus did he
deal with the Israelites in this place, etc. And the like mercy has he a long
time showed unto us, etc.

Out of which we may further gather, that so long as he sends his Prophets,
and vouchsafes his word unto a people, he has not utterly rejected them, nor
shut up the door of his mercy against them. For to this end he calls them by
his promises and threatenings, because he would not the death of a sinner, but
that he should repent and live. And Ezech. 18. 23. Ezech. 33. 10, 11.
therefore when the Israelites took occasion upon the threatenings of Gods
judgments denounced against them, desperately to go on in their sins,
because they thought it now too late to repent, because the judgments of God,
who is immutable, were already threatened; and therefore should certainly be
inflicted notwithstanding their repentance: the Lord sends his Prophet unto
them to tell them, that his threatenings were not absolute but conditional, and
that when he threatened, he aimed not at their destruction, but at their
conversion and salvation. And therefore exhorts them to repentance, that so
they might escape his punishments.

But when the Lord stops the mouths of his Prophets, and brings a famine
of his word, neither alluring his people to holy obedience by gracious
promises, nor restraining them from running on in the course of their sins by
severe threatenings, then are Gods judgments even at the door, and such a
people, though never so strong and secure, is nigh unto destruction. Of this
judgment the Lord speaks, Amos 8. Amos, 8. 11. Ezech. 3. 26.
11. Ezech. 3. 26. And I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth
that thou shall be dumme, and shall not be to them as a man that rebukes, for
they are a rebellious house. And chap. 7. 26. Calamity shall come upon
calamity, and rumor Ezech. 7. 26, 27
upon rumor; then shall they seek a vision of the Prophet, but the law shall
perish from the Priest, and counsel from the ancient. 27. The King shall
mourn and the Princes shall be clothed with desolation, and the hands of the
people of the land shall be troubled, and I will do unto them according to their
ways, and according to their judgments will I judge them: and they shall know
that I am the Lord. The accomplishment of which Prophecy we may see, Psalm. 74.
7. They have cast thy Sanctuary Psalm. 74. 7, 8, 9.
into the fire, and raced it unto the ground, and have defiled the dwelling
place of thy name. 8. They said in their hearts, let us destroy them
altogether, they have burnt all the Synagogues of God in the land. 9. We see
not our signs, there is not one Prophet more, nor any with us that knows how
long.

The use which we are to make hereof is, that whilst the Lord grants unto
us the ministry of his word, we praise his name for this benefit; and
persuading our selves that the Lord has not yet forsaken us, let us be moved
thereby to turn unto him by unfeigned repentance. But if the Lord cause the
Prophets tongue to cleave to the roof of his mouth, and take away from us the
ministry of his word, then let us certainly expect some fearful judgment,
etc.

Secondly, whereas he says, that the prophecies of Hosea The authority of
this prophecy.
are the word of the Lord, hence we observe, that they are of great authority
and above all exceptions, that they are true, certain, and most undoubtedly to
be believed, seeing they have God for their author. We are not therefore to
esteem these Prophecies as the conceits of men, but as the word of the most
true God, inspired into his Prophets by his holy Spirit. For we are to know
this, that no Prophecy in the Scripture is of private motion. For the
Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man; but holy men of God spoke
as they were moved by the holy Ghost. 2. Pet. 1. 20, 21. So it is said, Luke,
1. 70. That 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. Luke 1. 70. Acts 3. 18. 2. Tim. 3. 16.
God spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which were since the world
began. And the Apostle, 2. Tim. 3. 16. says, that the whole Scripture is
given by inspiration of God, etc.

And as we are thus to esteem the words of the Prophets; so likewise the words
of Gods true Ministers, truly expounding and giving the sense and meaning of
the Prophets, and gathering out of them either essentially or by necessary
consequence, sound doctrines for our instruction and edification, are no less
to be esteemed the word of God. And hence it is that our Savior Christ says
to his Apostles, and in them to all his true Ministers, Matthew. 10. 20. It is
not you Matthew. 10. 20.
that speak, but the Spirit of your father which speaks within you. And Luke,
10. 16. He that hears you, hears me, and he that Luke 10. 16.
despises you, despises me, etc.

Thirdly, whereas he says, that these prophecies are the word of God, we hence
gather, that they need not the confirmation and approbation of men, or of the
Church, seeing they are confirmed unto us by a greater authority, even of God
himself. As therefore Christ said of himself, John, 5. John 5. 34.
34. I receive not the record of man, so may we say of his word, etc.

Fourthly, we hence learn, that there cannot be a better interpreter of the
word of God then God himself, who is the Author of it, and therefore we are
not wholly to depend upon the interpretation of the Church or Councels, and
much less of the Pope, but to expound one Scripture by another; for every
author is the best expositour of his own work, every lawgiuer of his own
law: and therefore let us not derogate from God that prerogative which we give
unto men, etc.

Fifthly, seeing the Scriptures are the word of God, we hence gather, that they
are the best rule of our life and manners, and the surest foundation whereupon
we may build our faith: so that we are not to pin our faith upon the Churches
sleeue, because we have a most sure word of the Prophets, to which we must
take heed, as unto a light which shines in a dark place, etc. as it is 2.
Pet. 1. 19. And are built (not on the foundation of the Church) but of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus 2. Pet. 1. 19.
Christ himself being the chief corner stone; as it is Ephesians. 2. 20. Ephesians. 2. 20.


And these are the doctrines which concern all men in general. More
specially, the Ministers of Gods word may here That Gods word is the alone
subject of true preaching.
learn to deliver nothing to the people but the pure word, and what is
grounded on it, and warranted thereby; so as they may say with the Prophets,
The word of the Lord, Thus says the Lord, etc. And with the Apostle Paul, 1.
Cor. 11. 23. I have received from the Lord that which I also have delivered 1.
Cor. 11. 23.
unto you. And this the Apostle Peter requires, 1. Pet. 4. 11. If any man
speak, let him speak as the words of God. They must 1. Pet. 4 11.
not therefore deliver unto the people in stead of Gods word their own
inventions, their own frothy conceits of wit, which only delight and tickle
the ear, but neither inform the judgment, nor reform the affections, like
pleasing music or witty poetry, which are more fit for the stage then for the
pulpit: they must not when they deliver Gods embassage come with excellency of
words, or in the enticing speech of man's wisdom, which Paul disapproueth in
his own 1. Cor. 2. 1. 4.
practice, but in the plain evidence of the spirit and of power; which grave
manner of speaking best becomes the ambassadors of Jesus Christ. Neither must
they (unless it be sparingly and for special purposes) cite the authorities
of men, of the Fathers, Doctors, Councels, much less of Poets and
Philosophers, laboring to beautify the pure golden verity of Gods word, by
painting it over with the duskish colors of humane learning: whereby they make
no difference between the Prophets and Apostles and other writers, between
the authority of man's word, and the word of the eternal God.

The second special doctrine concerns the people, who may here learn, first
to hunger after the sincere milk of Gods word, as Peter exhorts, 1. Pet. 2.
2. and not (after the 1. Pet. 2. 2.
manner of those who have itching ears, and cloyed appetites) reject the word,
the food of their souls, because it is brought unto them in an earthen
vessel, their surfetted stomachs not suffering them to feed upon any thing
which is not sauced with humane learning.

Secondly, that when pure doctrine is delivered unto them by Gods ambassadors,
they do receive it and esteem of it with the Thessalonians, not as the word
of men, but as it is indeed 1. These. 2. 13.
the word of God, which is the power of God unto salvation to every one that
believes: as it is, Romans 1. 16. And therefore Romans 1. 16.
they are to hear it reverently, and not contemptuously; attentively, not
drousily, sleepily, nor carnally, having their minds distracted with worldly
cares and businesses; and conscionably treasuring it up in their hearts, that
they may practice it in their lives, not securely and carelessly, letting it go
(like the sand in the houreglasse) in at the one ear and out at the other.

And so much concerning the matter of this prophecy. Now we are to speak of
the isntrumental cause by whom it was delivered, expressed in these words:
That came unto Hosea That came unto Hosea.
the son of Beeri. Wherein is expressed the manner how this prophecy was
delivered, and the person to whom. The manner, in these words; which came: that
is, the word of the The manner of revealing these prophecies. Number. 12. 6.
Lord which was delivered unto Hosea in a divine vision, the which the Prophets
usually saw in their dreams whilst they slept: as appears, Numb. 12. 6. If
there be a Prophet of the Lord omongst you, I will be known to him in a
vision, and will speak to him by dream. So Zach. 1. 8. I saw by night, and
behold, Zach. 1. 8. Job 33. 15. Dan 7. 1.
hold, etc. But how then could the Prophets distinguish their divine visions
from ordinary dreams? I answer, first because the Lord who spoke unto them,
assured them that it was his own voice, as appears, Acts 16. 9. 10.
Secondly, because those who were not ordinary Prophets, had their dreams Acts
16. 9, 10. Genesis 37. 5. 9. 1 Samuel 3 4. Genesis 41. 32.
commonly reiterated; as Joseph's, Genesis 37. 5 9. Samuels, 1. Sam. 3. 4.
Pharaohs, as Joseph affirms, Genesis 41. 32.

Thirdly they left such a deep impression as could not be blotted out, as
appears in the dream of Pharaohs servants, Genesis 40. 6. 8. Pharaohs, Genesis 41.
8. Nebuchadnezzers, Dan. 2. 4. 2. And these are called somnia sigillata. Genesis
40. 6. 8. Genesis 41. 8. Dan. 2. 1. 4. 2.


And thus the Lord made known his will unto his servants in former times. But
now we are not to expect dreams and visions, for in these last times God has
spoken unto us by his Heb. 1. 2.
Son, Heb. 1. 2. The which is a far greater mercy unto us, then was showed
to our Fathers of old; for whereas they were feign to wait long for the
knowledge of Gods will to be revealed by vision, and oftentimes were not
satisfied, because for the sins of the people the vision failed, as
appears, 1. Sam. 3. 1. Psalm. 74. 9. we have Gods will manifested in his
written word, which at all times, and upon all occasions 1. Sam. 3. 1. Psalm. 74
9.
we may make our counselor.

The use which we are to make hereof is, that we do not phantastically desire
visions and revelations, but use the means which God has graciously granted
unto us for the attaining of knowledge, and praise his name for it; for they
who in the light of the Gospel desire visions, are like those who go out of
the sunshine to work by the light of a dim candle.

And so much concerning the manner. The person to whom this divine vision was
delivered, was to Hosea, whose name Of Hosea.
is added to manifest the truth of this prophecy; for when the writer
expresleth his name, it adds credit and authority to his works; and
therefore Hosea purposely professes his name; and the reign of the Kings in
whose time he wrote, that it might be manifest that his writings were not
forged and counterfaite, but the pure word of God.

The doctrine which we here learn, is, that as the Prophets have set down
many arguments to prove, that that which they have written, was inspired by
Gods Spirit; so we labor to acquaint and confirm our selves with them, lest
through ignorance we embrace as grounds of our faith, humane conceits for
divine prophecies. And to this duty the Apostle exhorts Timothy, 2. Tim. 3.
14. And the Apostle John, those to whom he writes, 1. John 4. 1. Especially
let us 2. Tim. 3. 14. 1. John 4. 1.
learn to put a difference between the apocryphal and canonical Scripture,
seeing the error is more dangerous, because they are in our Church, joined in
our books, and read promiscuously in the service of God.

But let us come to the name it self, the signification whereof is the same
which Jesus and Joshua, a Savior, the which Of the name Hosea.
name was given to this Prophet by his parents, directed by the special
providence of God; and does fitly agree unto him; first because he was a type
of our Savior Christ in his wife of fornications, as afterward shall appear;
secondly, because God used him as his means and instrument in saving the
people by bringing them unto God from their sins by true repentance, and to
their Savior Jesus Christ by a lively faith.

But how could his parents foresee this when he was in his infancy? I answer,
that it was the custom of the Hebrews to give unto their children significant
names, whereby either they expressed their own desires, that their children
should be such, and so virtuous as their names portended; or thereby were put
in mind of some notable work of God done about the time of their nativity, or
of some duty, which by them was to be performed. And so this name was given to
the Prophet by his parents, partly to signify their desire and hope that he
should help forward the salvation of the people, and partly to put him in
mind of the performance of this duty.

And thus have I showed the signification of his name, and the causes why it
was given him. The doctrines which hence we are to learn are these. First,
whereas this name by Gods all-ruling providence is given to his Prophet; hence
we learn how we are to esteem of Gods true Prophets, Apostles and Ministers,
namely, as petty or isntrumental Saviors, because God uses them as his
instruments and means for the conversion and salvation of his people: and this
the Apostle plainly sets down, 1. Tim. 4. 16. 1. Tim. 4. 16


But how far men are from this conceit of Gods Ministers, appears by their
utter neglect of them, neither yielding unto them the honor of reverence, nor
the honor of maintenance, etc. 1. Tim. 5. 17. The Elders especially which
labor in the word and doctrine, are worthy of double honor. 1. Tim. 5. 17.
And good reason, for if our carnal fathers are justly to be honored which
beget us in the flesh; how much more our spiritual fathers who beget us unto
God.

Furthermore, if Gods Ministers save us by the ministry of the word; and by
this lively seed regenerate us, without which regeneration there is no
salvation, John 3. 3. Hence John 3. 3.
we learn highly to prize the Ministry of Gods word, and with all reverence
to give heed unto it, seeing it is the only ordinary means of our
regeneration and salvation.

Secondly, we learn to give unto our children such names as may signify our
faith hope and earnest desire that they Fit names to be given unto children.
may be gracious and virtuous, and also put them in mind of some good duty,
which when they come to age they are to perform, according to the example of
the godly in former times; and not suffer them to be called by heathenish and
profane names, whom we desire should be godly and religious: no, though such
names be contained in the Scriptures: as Apollos, Fortunatus, Hermes, Tychicus,
Syluanus, and such like: for although such names being given, may lawfully be
used, because the chief end of a name is to distinguish one from another, yet
it is unlawful, or at least very inconvenient to impose them.

But here it may be demanded, whether it be not lawful to name our children by
our ordinary names, which have no signification. I answer, that although those
significant names before spoken of, be the best and fittest; yet I think these
not unlawful or inconvenient in some cases: as namely, when as they put us in
mind of some of our near and dear friends called by such names, who have
been, or are, virtuous and religious; for as the other names signify in
themselves some good grace or duty to be performed, so these put us in mind of
the like in the persons of our honest and godly friends, whose example we are
to propound unto our selves, for our imitation.

And so much for the Prophets name: he is further described by his parent, that
he was the son of Beeri. What this Beeri was, there is no mention in the
Scriptures. For whereas The son of Beeri.
as the Hebrews affirm that he was that Beera mentioned, 1. Chro. 5. 6. It
is without warrant; neither has it any great 1. Chro. 5. 6.
probability, seeing their names are diversely written. There is mention also of
one Beera, 1. Chro. 7. 37. of the Tribe of Asher; but neither can this be he,
if ancient writers truly affirm 1. Chro. 7. 37.
him to have been of the Tribe of Issachar. Leaving therefore to search in the
dark for that, which if we found, were not Hieron. in gl. ord. Isidor.
greatly material: let us further consider why mention is made here of one
Beeri. Some of the Hebrews affirm, because he was also a Prophet: the which
reason is grounded upon a common observation amongst them; that where the
father of the Prophet is named, we are to conceive that he also was a Prophet.
Where the grandfather is also mentioned, it is to signify the dignity and
honor of his stock. The like rule they have unto this; namely, that where no
mention is made of his country, we are to conceive that he was a Citizen of
Jerusalem. But these observations being pressed upon us without any reason, may
without reason also be denied: especially seeing it is their usual custom
stiffly to affirm that which they weakly, or not at all prove.

Others affirm, that mention is made of his father, because he was of famous
and honorable parentage, that hereby his 1. Cor. 1. 26, 27, 28.
prophecy might receive more authority and credit. But this likewise has no
ground; nay, contrariwise we know, that it is not the manner of Gods Spirit, to
seek authority unto his writings from the nobility of his penmen, but rather
shows his wisdom in man's foolishness, and his glory in man's baseness,
that God may be all in all.

Leaving therefore others opinions, who leave the light of Gods word, and grope
for the truth in the darkness of their own inventions, the likeliest cause
why the Prophets father is here named, is, that he might be distinguished
from others of his name; for four names being common to many, surnames were
added to put a difference between one and another, which amongst the Hebrews
were usually taken from their fathers and grandfathers, as the manner among the
Welchmen is at this day. So Simon was called Peter, Matthew. 10. 24.
to distinguish him from Simon the Cananite: James the son of Zebedeus, to
distinguish him from James the son Verse 2, 3.
of Alpheus. Whereby also it appears, that this was usual, not only when
they were of noble, but also of mean and poor parentage.

And so much concerning the isntrumental cause of this The time wherein Hosea
prophesied.
prophecy. In the last place we are to observe the time, wherein and how long
he prophesied, expressed in these words, In the days of Vzziah; and c. That
is, in the reign of these Kings of Judah and Israel, or in the years wherein
they In the days of Vzziah, etc.
reigned; which by a figurative speech common with the Hebrews, is called
days, because reigns, times, and years consist of days.

The Kings of Judah, in whose time Hosea prophesied, are four; Vzziah, Iotham,
Ahaz, Hezechias: of the Kings of Israel one only is mentioned, namely
Jeroboam, who is said to be the son of Ioash, to distinguish him from
Jeroboam, the son of Nabat, who first usurped the Kingdom of Israel. Not
that he reigned only all this time, for Hosea prophesied in the time of five
other Kings of Israel (if they may be all called Kings, seeing some of them
were tyrannical usurpers) to wit, Zachariah, Shalem, Menahem, Pekahiah, Pekah,
and as it is very probable in the days also of Hosheah: but mention is made of
him, that light might be given to the Cronologie, and that it might appear how
long Hosea prophesied, as we shall show afterward.

The causes why mention is here made of the reign of these Kings are. First,
to show the certainty of this prophecy, in that ye particular time wherein it
was delivered is specified.

Secondly, because in Cronologies no fitter course can be taken for the
numbering of times and years wherein things were done, then by the reigns of
Kings; because the time by this means is better observed and remembered; Kings
reigns, and the things done by them, being often repeated in common discourse.

Thirdly, because it gives light unto the understanding of the prophecy, by
having recourse to the history of these Kings; where understanding their
disposition, life, and actions, we may thereby guess at the state and
condition of the Regis ad exemplem, totus componitur orbis.
times and people over whom they reigned; seeing the subject either for fear
or favor, usually imitateth and conformeth himself to the nature,
disposition, and behavior of his Prince.

Fourthly, that it might appear that these prophecies were not delivered for
private ends and respects, but for the public use and profit, as well of
their people as of their Princes, that all with one accord, both by Gods sweet
promises, and severe threatenings, might be brought unto true repentance.

Lastly, that we might know how long the Lord used the constant ministry of
his Prophet, in moving the people to How long Hosea prophesied.
forsake their sins, before he would inflict the punishments which they
deserved; the which may be gathered out of this Cronologie of the reign of
these Kings of Judah and Israel. For Vzziah, who is called also Azariah, reigned
two and fifty years, in whose reign he began to prophecy: and lest we
should think that he began to prophecy in the latter end of his reign, he
adds also, that he prophesied in the days of Jeroboam, who reigned one and
forty years over Israel. 2. King. 14. 23. And in the seven and twenty year of
his reign, began Vzziah to reign over Judah. 2. King. 15. 2. King. 14. 23.
1. So that if we reckon but from the last year of Jeroboam, it 2. King. 15. 1.
will appear that Hosea prophesied in the time of Vzziah, thirty seven or
almost thirty eight years: to these if we add the time of Iothams reign,
which was sixteen years, 2. King. 15. 33. And of Ahaz, which was sixteen
years more, 2. King. 16. 2. it comes in all to 69. or 70. years. 2. King.
^^. 33. 2. King. 16. ^.
Now it is likely, seeing mention is made of Jeroboam and Hezekiah, that he
prophesied also in some part of their reign; and according to Ieromes
judgment, he prophesied five years under the reign of Ezechias. For as he
says of him, he did foresee the future, and bewailed the present destruction
of the Kingdom of Israel; which was effected by Salmanasser, in the sixth year
of Ezechias reign. To all which time, if we add some years of Ieroboams
reign, it will amount in all almost to eighty years.

For whereas some imagine, that the years of Iothams reign, are to be numbered
with the years of his father Vzziah, because in his time he being stricken
with leprosy, Iotham governed in his fathers stead; it is very probable, that
besides this time, he reigned after his fathers death sixteen years. For it
is not said, that he reigned as King while his father lived; but that he
governed his fathers house, and ruled the people of the land. 2. King. 15. 5.
2. Chronicles 26. 21. Namely, as Viceroy, or his fathers Lieuetenant or
Deputy. 2. King. 15. 5. 2. Chro. 26. 21


The doctrines which we hence gather are diverse. First, we Gods mercy in
affording to his people the means of salvation.
may observe Gods infinite mercy toward this people of Israel, who before he
would destroy them, as their sins deserved, he continued this and other of
his Prophets ministry for a long time together; to the end that they might be
turned unto him by true repentance, and so escape his just judgments
threatened. Of this mercy we have the like example in the days of Noah, before
the captivity of Judah; and the utter destruction of Jerusalem, in the times of
Christ and his Apostles; and in our own days.

Secondly, we may observe the obstinate wickedness, and inflexible obdurateness
of this people; who notwithstanding The hardness of the peoples hearts.
this mercy of God, and means of their conversion, continued in their sins
without repentance. The which obstinacy and rebellion, is not proper unto
them, but common with us in these times, wherein we stubbornely refuse the
like, or greater mercy, and make no profitable use of far greater means which
God has given us for our conversion. But if we continue in the hardness of
our hearts, let us not expect or hope for immunitie of punishment: for as in
the time of this Prophet, after the people had long contemned Gods mercy, he
brought upon them his fearful judgments: so will he deal with us, etc.

The use which we are to make hereof, is, that seeing our hearts are so hard
and inflexible, we do not only labor to bruise them by the hammer of Gods
word, and by applying unto them the threatenings of the Law: but seeing this is
not sufficient, in respect of their more then adamantine hardness, we are
often to implore the assistance of Gods holy Spirit; for that only is that
precious oil whereby they are suppled, softened, and made pliable to Gods will.

Thirdly, we may hear observe the painful diligence, The patience and
diligence of our Prophet.
and unwearied patience of the Prophet, who for the space of so many years
continued his laborious ministry, and that not with a religious and obedient
people, which might have yielded unto him some comfort and encouragement, when
as he did see the fruit of his labors; but with an idolatrous and stiff
necked nation, who scorned and despised his ministry.

The use hereof serves to stir us up to follow his example in our several
places and callings, though they seem tedious and toilesome unto us;
especially Gods Ministers have here a pattern of diligence and painfulness,
for their imitation: which that they may embrace and follow, they are often to
call to mind the recompense of reward promised. Dan. 12. 3. Dan. 12. 3.


So likewise the hearers of Gods word may here learn, patiently to harken to
the word of exhortation and reprehension; and not to wax weary and tired,
though Gods Ministers do for many years together inueigh against their
sins, and denounce Gods judgments due unto them; as the custom of many is,
who though they be never weary of sinning, yet they are presently weary of
hearing their sins reprehended.

Fourthly, we are to observe, that this our Prophet was sent as Gods
ambassador when he was but young, and continued No age exempted from Gods
service.
it until his old age. Whence we learn, that no age is exempted from Gods
service, nor any time so unfit, but that if it please the Lord to grant the
assistance of his Spirit, a man may in it advance the glory of God, and benefit
the Church. And therefore we may not excuse our selves by our youth, as though
it were not time for us to begin to serve God; nor by our age, as though that
should exempt us from Gods service, as being too painful and laborious; but
as we are to begin betimes, so we are to hold out to the end, seeing nothing
is more honorable then a gray head in the ways of righteousness. Pro. 16.
30. Prou. 16. 30.


More especially the people may here learn, not less to The youth of Gods
Ministers not to be despised.
esteem Gods embassage, by reason of the youth of the ambassador, seeing the
Lord has called both young and old, and fitted the one as well as the other
for this service; to the end that we should not rest and depend upon the person
of the Minister, but upon his own ordinance, the ministry of his word, and
on the blessing of his holy Spirit, whereby only it is made effectual for our
salvation. Jeremy was but a child, that is young in years, when he was called
to be a Prophet, Ier. 1. 6. but yet he must not be afraid to speak to Jer. 1.
6. 8.
the ancient and mighty, because God was with him to deliver him. verse. 8.
Timothy was called to be an Evangelist whilst he was young, but yet no man
might despise his youth. 1. Tim. 4. 12. 1. Tim. 4 12.
Hosea prophesied in his young days, but they were not excused hereby who
would not hear him; nor exempted from feeling Gods judgments.

Fifthly, we may here observe, that he did prophecy the ruin The ruin of
Israel foretold, when it most flourished.
of the kingdom of Israel, not in the declining state thereof, but in the
reign of Jeroboam, under whom it most flourished, when there was no appearance
of such future calamities, as were foretold by the Prophet; for Iehoash his
father had gotten the upper hand of Amaziah King of Judah, and had carried away
the treasures of the Temple and the Kings house; and Jeroboam himself having
obtained many notable victories against his enemies, enlarged the borders of
the kingdom to her ancient limits. So that now, the idolatry of those times
might be defended, in that it had more prosperous success, then the pure
worship of God in the kingdom of Judah: but in these times God sends his
Prophet, being young of years, to reprove King and people for their idolatry,
and to denounce and foretell the utter subversion of the kingdom.

Where first we may observe the undoubted truth of this prophecy, seeing he
could by no other means, but by the inspiration of Gods Spirit, attain to the
knowledge of the ruin of the Kingdom, when in respect of the present
flourishing estate thereof, there was nothing less feared or expected.

Secondly, whereas it is said, that the Prophet prophesied The Prophets courage.
in the time of Jeroboam; and in that flourishing estate of the kingdom
foretold the ruin thereof: hence we observe that notable boldness, and
courageous fortitude of this Prophet, who durst undertake and go through a
matter of such great difficulty and danger: For seeing the victorious King and
people, were made drunk with prosperity, exceedingly lifted up in pride in
their good success, and long hardened with their customable living in all manner
of wickedness, it may easily be guessed, with what scoffs and taunts, they
entertained the Prophet; and unto how many dangers he exposed himself, where
he prophesied of their destruction, which they not so much as feared.

The which serves to teach Gods Ministers in these times, boldly and
courageously to deliver Gods embassage, even before Kings and great Potentates,
when they are called hereunto; and not to be daunted with the face of man, when
they speak in the place of God; nor to be discouraged with scoffs, taunts,
and reproaches, difficulties and dangers, which they undergo in performing their
duty; for he that has set them on work, will give them their wages; so that
they shall not suffer the lest thing for his sake, which he will not recompense
an hundred fould.

Thirdly, we observe Gods marvelous and miraculous preservation of this his
Prophet, in the midst of all these Gods power in preserving his Prophet.
dangers, for the space of many years together; so that though he was
compassed about with wicked men; and was under the government of Idolatrous
Kings, against whose idolatry he inueighed, yet God delivered him in the
midst of all these perils, and brought him in peace in his very old age, unto
his grave, as Epiphanius writes.

The consideration whereof, should encourage Gods Ministers, to go on in the
performance of their duty, even through the midst of dangers, seeing the
special providence of God watches over them, and will preserve them in their
ways, though it seem never so impossible, so far forth, as God thereby may
be glorified, and their salvation furthered. Examples of this marvelous
preservation, we have in Noah, Lot, Moses, Elias, John the Evangelist, Martin
Luther, and many others.

Fourthly, in the example of this Prophet, Gods Ministers Vices are to be
reproved when they most prosper.
may learn, to set upon and inueigh against vices, not only when they are
discountenanced with Gods judgments, and under foot, but then most
especially, when they are entertained with most prosperous success, and do
seem to be approved by God, in regard of that peace and prosperity, which
does attend upon them.

Lastly, here we learn, that we are not to judge of Gods love and favor, nor
of the virtues, and religious godliness Prospertie no true sign of Gods love.
of a State, by their good success, and prosperous affairs; for under the
government of this King Jeroboam, such was the estate of this kingdom and
people; and yet the Lord sends his Prophet, to show them that they were out
of his favor, and that he would divorce them from him, for their manifold
adulteries: that their religion which was accompanied with prosperity, and all
worldly felicite, was false, idolatrous, and superstitious, and that they
abounded in all sin and wickedness.

ANd thus much concerning the inscription: now it follows that we speak of
the legal comminations: where first is set down their sin, and secondly their
punishment. Their maine and capital sin was idolatry, which is signified
under the typical marriage of the Prophet, with a wife of fornications, the
which is enjoined by the Lord, verse. 2. and undertaken by the Prophet, verse. 3.

Verse. 2. At the beginning, the Lord spoke by Hosea; and the Lord said unto
Hosea, Go, take unto thee a wife of fornications, and children of fornications:
for the land has committed great whoredom, departing from the Lord. In this
verse is contained the Lords commandment, and the reason thereof. In the
commandment is set down: 1. The time or order: 2. The commander: 3. The
person unto whom the commandment is directed: 4. The thing commanded.

The time or order in these words (At the beginning) The exposition. At the
beginning.
which some expound, that the Lord first spoke unto this Prophet, before he
spoke unto any of the rest, and sent him to prophecy unto the people, before
any of the other Prophets. But this being generally understood, is not true,
seeing before he had spoken to many, as to Abraham, Noah, Elias, Elizeus, etc.
And if more particularly we understand it of the Prophets of his time, whose
writings are extant, it is not probable that Hosea was first, but rather Jonas,
who prophesied in the beginning of Ieroboams reign, and did foretell all his
famous victories, as appears, 2. King. 14. 25. 2. King. 14. 25.
whereas it is very likely, that Hosea prophesied not until the latter end,
unless we would say that he prophesied 100. years, for so much it is almost
from the beginning of Ieroboams reign, to the beginning of Ezechias. And
moreover it is here said, verse. 4. that the judgments threatened by Hosea,
should within a little while be inflicted, which was not in Ieroboams reign,
but in his sons, and those who succeeded him. These words therefore, are
rather thus to be understood, that this was the beginning of the Lords speech
unto Hosea; or that the Lord thus began his speech unto Hosea, when he called
him to be his Ambassador unto the people: and this the Hebrew text will well
bear, for it may as well be translated thus: The beginning of the Lords
speech, as at the beginning the Lordspake, seeing the word may indifferently be
either noune or verb.

The Commander is Jehovah, who does not speak unto The Lord spoke to Hosea.
the people immediately by his own voice, but by his Prophet Hosea: the word
in the original signifies that the Lord spoke in Hosea; which some expound,
that the Lord spoke unto Hosea; some, that he spoke with Hosea; some, that he
spoke by Hosea: but somewhat more is here to be understood; namely, that he so
spoke by him, as that also he spoke in him, prompting him as it were by his
Spirit, what he should deliver from him to the people. In the first verse it
is said, that the word of the Lord came to Hosea: by which we are to
understand, not only that the Lord barely spoke unto the Prophet, for so the
Lord also speaks to all whom he instructs by his word; but that he spoke
unto him immediately by himself, and not as unto an ordidary man, but as unto
his Prophet, whom he sent as his ambassador unto the people, with his word in
his mouth, which he was to deliver unto them, as in Gods own person. Here it
is said, that the Lord spoke not only to him, and by him, (for he spoke also
by Balaams Ass unto his Master, using him as his instrument to reprove the
Prophets folly) but also that he spoke in him, because the Spirit of God
dwelling in him, directed his tongue; so that he delivered nothing according to
his own inventions, but the pure word of God. The like phrase is used, 2. Sam.
23. 2. Haba. 2. 1. Heb. 1. 1. (...) 2. Sam. 23. 2. Habbac. 2. 1. 2. Cor. 13. 3.
Matthew. 10. 20.
2. Cor. 13. 3. Seeing ye have experience of Christ that speaks in me. Matthew.
10. 20. For it is not you that spoke, but the spirit of your Father which
speaks in you. By all which places it appears, that God dwelling in his
Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers by his holy Spirit, does use them as his
instruments in his own stead, to deliver his word unto his people.

In the words following he adds; That the Lord said unto Hosea: which has
relation unto the special commandments which ensue. So that here is somewhat
more to be understood then was expressed in the first verse, namely, that the
Lord did not only speak unto the Prophet generally, but that he thus spoke
after this special manner, as follows.

And this is the meaning of the first words of this verse; the sum whereof
is this: that the Lord, when as he called Hosea to be a Prophet, put his word
into him, and spoke in him and by him, as his Ambassador, who represented his
own person: and for the beginning of his speech, caused him to use the words
following unto the people.

Now let us come to the doctrines and instructions which arise out of these
words. First, here we observe, that before Hosea to speak unto the people, he
first speaks unto the Prophet, and puts his embassage into God furnishes
all whom he sends on his Embassage.
his mouth, preparing and fitting him unto this great work unto which he
called him. From whence we learn, that all who are called of God to the work
of the ministry, are first by him so furnished with the gifts of his Spirit,
that they are in some good sort enabled to deliver Gods word and message unto
the people. And this is apparent through the whole course of the Scriptures:
for those who were after an extraordinary manner called, were also
extraordinarily furnished for this work; as the Prophets, and Apostles: those
who had an ordinary calling, were prepared by ordinary means, as in the
schools of the Prophets; as the use also is still amongst us at this day.

Whereby it appears, that those blind guides, and dumb Ministers which in
these times abound, were not sent of God: for if an earthly Prince will not
make choice of an ignorant and speechless Ambassador, much less will God,
infinitely wise, make choice of such messengers; especially considering that
he is in himself able to furnish any whom he sends, with sufficiency of
gifts fit for that calling unto which he calls them.

Secondly, we may observe, that the Prophet does not enter into the work of
his Calling, before he is after a special An outward Calling necessary for
Ministers.
manner sent from God, although he was furnished with gifts, and had his mind
illuminated by the Lord, speaking to him and in him. From whence we learn,
that we are not to thrust our selves into this Calling, though we had great
knowledge and learning, unless we be first called and sent by God; which
extraordinarily was done by God himself to the Prophets and Apostles
immediately; and ordinarily, by the Church, or those which by the Churches
consent are appointed for this purpose. For though Christ had instructed his
Apostles, yet they preach not till he sends them. Matthew. 10. 5. Though John
the Baptist was strong in the spirit, Matthew. 10. 5.
yet he remained in the wilderness as a private man, till the appointed time
came that he should show himself unto Israel. Luke 1. 8. Yea, though our
Savior Christ had the Spirit Luke 1. 8.
of God, and the gifts thereof without measure; yet he executed not his public
ministry till the day which God had appointed came, and til he was prepared
thereunto by his forty days fast. Matthew. 4. None of the Pastors and Doctors
Matthew. 4.
might take upon them to discharge the works of those callings, till they were
allowed of the Church by the imposition of hands. 1. Tim. 4. 14. 5. 22. Those
therefore* which are Gods true Prophets, as they are furnished with gifts, so
they 1. Tim. 4. 15. and 5. 22.
have Gods special warrant and calling, before they undertake the execution of
their office. And contrariwise, to speak before God sends, is a note of a
false Prophet, as appears, Ier. 23. 21. I have not sent these Prophets (says
the Lord) yet they ran, I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied. Ier.
23. 21. and 14. 13. 27. 15. 28. 8, 9. Gods love to his Prophets.
Ier. 14. 13, 14. 27. 15. 28. 8, 9.

Thirdly, we may observe, that before the Lord executed those punishments upon
the people which their sins deserved, he first reuealeth his will unto his
Prophets. Whence we learn Gods special love toward them and their dignity,
in that the Lord makes choice of them, to be as it were his privy
counselors, without whose knowledge he will do no work of great importance:
according to that, Amos 3. 7. Amos, 3. 7.
The Lord will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secret to his servants the
Prophets. The practice whereof we may see toward Abraham. Genesis 18. 17. Genesis
18. 17.


Fourthly, whereas the Lord uses the ministry of his The benefit of the
ministry to both Teachers and people.
Prophet, for the manifestation of his will; hereby he declares his great
mercy and goodness, both to the Prophets and people: to the Prophets, in that
he vouchsafes them this dignity, to be his Ambassadors and Ministers of our
reconciliation with God, and eternal salvation; which office belonged also to
his most dearly beloved Son. In which respect the Apostle says; that they
were co-workers with Christ. 2. Cor. 6. 1. To the people to whom he appoints
the ministry 2 Cor. 6. 1.
of man like unto themselves; because in respect of their sin and corruption,
they could not endure the glorious voice of God, unless this glorious majesty
were as it were veiled and shadowed with the ministry of man; as appears by
their suit made unto God. Exodus 20. 19. The which is graciously granted. Deu.
18. 16, 17. And because we could Exodus 20. 19. Deu. 18. 16. 17
not conceive and understand his glorious and most wise speech, he has
appointed his Ministers, that they, like nurses in their childish and broken
language, which is most fit for our capacity, might instruct us in the
knowledge of Gods will.

Fifthly, whereas it is said, that the Lord speaks in the Prophets; we learn,
with what fear, reverence, and attention Reverence required in hearing the
word.
we are to hear and receive the word of God; in that the Lord himself
speaks unto us by them, and uses their mouth and tongue as his instrument,
and as it were the interpreter of his mind: as it is, Luke 1. 70. And in that
they are Gods Ambassadors, representing unto us his person, Luke 1. 70.
and in Christ's stead bring unto us the glad tidings of the Gospel, and of our
reconciliation with God. 2. Cor. 5. 20. 2. Cor. 5. 20.
Whom if we receive, we receive Christ himself: whom if we contemn, we
contemn not man, but the everliving God: as appears, Luke 10. 16. Luke 10.
16.


Lastly, whereas he sends the Prophet with special commandments Gods mercy
in denouncing punishments.
to the people, to show unto them their sin, and to denounce such punishments
as by them they had deserved: We are to observe a double mercy of God toward
his Church. For first before he will punish them, he gives them warning, that
by their repentance they might prevent his judgments threatened. And secondly,
if they went forward in their sins, till the punishments were inflicted, they
might then call to mind who punished them; to the end, that then at the least,
they might forsake their sins, and turn unto the Lord by true repentance,
that so he might have mercy upon them. Where as otherwise (such is our
corruption) they would never look unto the hand of God correcting them, nor
consider the cause of their punishment, but ascribe all, either to chance and
fortune, or to some inferior cause, and so go forward in their sins, to
their destruction.

And so much concerning the commander, and the person Go take unto this a wife
of fornications.
commanded. Now we are to speak of the commandment it self, which is
enjoined unto the Prophet: which is, that he should go and take unto him a
wife of fornications, etc. where first we are to clear that question of great
difficulty which has troubled many; namely, whether the Whether Hosea was
commanded actually to marry an harlot; or but in vision only.
Lord enjoined the Prophet indeed and truth to take to wise an infamous
harlot; or whether it were a vision only, and to be propounded by the Prophet,
by way of parable to the people. Many think that it was enjoined by the Lord
to be done indeed, and that it was accordingly performed actually: to which
judgment, they are moved by the outward letter of the text. And amongst these
expositors are generally the Papists, whose custom is to expound things done,
by allegories: and allegories and parables as things done: though innumerable
absurdities follow thereupon. But that this was only showed to the Prophet by
vision, and enjoined that by way of parable he should declare it to the people,
it appears plainly by these reasons.

First, because God commands nothing which is contrary Reasons proving that
the Prophets marriage was only in vision.
to honesty, the law of nature, and good manners; but that the Prophet of God
should marry with an infamous and common harlot, is contrary to all these;
and therefore God did not command it actually to be done, but only by way of
parable.

But against this is objected, that God commanding it, it becomes honest and
lawful. I answer, that this is to beg that which is in question: neither does
God command evil and unlawful things, that so they may become good and
honest; but his will being the rule of goodness and justice, does only
command things good and just; and therefore they are so to be esteemed, because
not only they are good and just in their own nature, but also because he
wills and commands them.

But it is further urged that God commanded the Israelites, to spoil the
Egyptians of their gold, silver, and jewels: and therefore seeing the
commandment of God made that action lawful, which otherwise would have been
theft in the people of Israel; therefore the like commandment might make this
marriage of the Prophet lawful, which in it self was dishonest and unlawful.
To which I answer that there is great dissimilitude in these two examples: for
first God the sovereign Lord and chief owner of heaven and earth, and all
that in them is, in his own right and by his sole authority, might take that
which was his own from one, and give it to another. Secondly, this action was
lawful by the law of nature and nations, that those who had long served them
as bondmen, should have some reward for their labors; which because they
tyrannically withheld, the Lord like a Sovereign monarch and just judge,
righted the cause of the oppressed, and appointed unto them this wages for
their tedious servitude. And therefore there being no such equity in this
dishonest marriage; and seeing the Lord never by his sole authority commands
things unlawful and dishonest, this example makes nothing for their purpose.

Again, they object, that God commanded Abraham to sacrifice his own son;
which action in Abraham should have been unnatural and wicked. I answer, that
this commandment in Gods purpose, was a commandment of trial only, which he
meant not should be put in execution. Yea, but though Abraham had slain his
son, his action had been just and lawful. I answer that this also is most
true; for seeing God, who is absolute Lord of all creatures, and chief judge
of heaven and earth, has unlimited power of life and death: and seeing the
party was to be slame, howsoever he was innocent toward his father, yet had
deserved not only temporary, but also eternal death, in respect of his
sins against God; Abraham being commanded by God to be his minister of
justice in executing deserved punishment upon his son, was to set aside
fatherly affection, and to yield obedience to Gods service, but yet just
commandment. Nevertheless because the outward administration of this act
would have seemed unnatural and against the law of nature and nations, the
Lord only enjoined it by way of trial, and never purposed that it should be
put in execution; although being the father of spirits, it was easy for him,
to have raised him again from death to life. And therefore this semblable
commandment of a seeming unlawful thing, affords no color, to prove that
this dishonest marriage should be actually enjoined and performed.

Secondly, we may not give such an exposition of one of Gods Commandments,
which contradicts and crosses an other: but that one of such holy and high a
calling as this Prophet, should link himself in marriage with an infamous and
common harlot, contradicts and crosses other commandments; and therefore we
are not thus to expound it. The proposition needs no proof: the assumption is
manifest by these reasons: In that it was unlawful for the high Priest to take
to wife a divorced woman, a woman polluted, or an harlot; nay, he might not so
much as marry a widow: Leuit. 21. 14. In that the Lord gives special charge,
concerning Leuit. 21. 14. 1. Tim. 3. 11. Tit. 1. 6.
the choice of his Ministers; that their wives be honest, sober, and faithful:
1. Tim. 3. 11. and that they have faithful children, not riotous or
disobedient. And therefore it is not likely that the Lord, who has had such
special care of their marriages, would inioyne his Prophet to take unto him an
harlot, and her adulterous brood; and so make his house, which should be
undefiled, a stews or filthy brothell.

Thirdly, by such a marriage God should have made his Prophet contemptible, and
his ministry; and that true religion which he professed, should by this means
have been despised, and exposed to the slanderous reproach of unbelievers, who
are apt to take all occasions, whereby they may disgrace Gods Ministers and
their ministry.

Fourthly, whereas the Lord calls not only his wife, a woman of
fornications, but his children also, children of fornications: hereby it is
manifest, that this was not actually done, but in vision and parable: for if we
say, that they were her children before marriage, the text is plain against
it, which affirms; that she conceived after marriage, and bare these children
unto him: if we say, that the Prophet had them by her in lawful marriage; how
then could they be truly called children of fornication, though before
marriage she had played the harlot?

Fifthly, there was no necessity why this should be actually done; seeing, if
it only appeared to the Prophet in vision, and were delivered to the people by
way of parable, it were sufficient to convince them of their sin; which was
the maine end the Lord aimed at.

Sixthly, it should not have been so fit for Gods purpose, that this should be
actually done; seeing he could not marry her, and have by her three children
one after an other, in less time then almost three years: whereas the Lord
sends his Prophet, to the end that he should presently convince the people
of their sins, and reclaim them from their corruptions, which were so great
that they needed present cure.

Lastly, in the third chapter the Lord commands the Prophet to love, and take
unto him an adulterous harlot: but this the Lord would not have actually done;
for the Lord is a holy and pure Spirit, who hates and abhors adultery, and
all uncleanness; but only in type would have the adulteries of the
Israelites, which they committed with their false gods, discovered: from which
the great love, which he their Lord and husband had from time to time showed
unto them, could not restrain them. And therefore, seeing that is typically to
be understood; why not this also?

But it is objected, that in the text, this is plainly set down as an history
of things actually done. I answer, that this things done, for the
distinguishing whereof: and the true expounding of such places we are to
observe this rule, that where the litteral sense implies any impossibility, or
gross absurdity, or any thing contrary to the analogy of faith, or some
other plain place of Scripture, there we are to expound it as a type or
parable: but in this place if we take the litterall sense, it implies a
gross absurdity* and contradicts other places of Scripture, as I have
showed, and therefore it is to be understood typically and as a parable.

Neither are we to understand this place so only, but many other the like which
seem as plain histories of things done, as this here. So Esaias is said to have
walked naked and barefoote 3. years, Esa. 20. 2. 3. So Ezechiel is commanded
Esa. 20. 2. 3. Ezech 3. 1. 2. and. 4, 2. 5. 12.
to take a roll or book, Ezech. 3. 1. 2. to lay siege against Jerusalem, Chap.
4. 2. To sleep upon his left side 390. days, Verse. 5. To bake his bread in
the dung of man, verse. 12. So Jeremy is commanded to cast a book into the
midst of Euphrates, Ier. 51. 63. To hide his girdle by the Ier. 51. 63. and 13.
4.
river Perath, or Euphrates, Ier. 13. 4. when he was straightly besieged in the
city Jerusalem, and could not go out, but he must be taken by the
Babylonians. All which and many such like were not things done, but visions and
parables.

But it is further objected, that it should be to no purpose

As though he should have said: The Lord enjoined me, to the end that I should
in more lively manner set before you your sin of idolatry, to propound unto
you this parable, wherein he commanded me, to resemble himself unto me, who
should marry a harlot, and have by her adulterous children. For whereas the
Lord like a loving husband had espoused you unto him, you have played the
harlot, and have committed spiritual adultery with idols and devils, so that
now the land is become like unto a brothel or common stews. And therefore the
Lord is purposed to take with you that course which husbands do with their
adulterous wives, that is, to divorce and put you away from him.

And this is the general meaning of this parable. Now let us consider the
particular words. Go take unto thee a wife of fornications. That is, take in
marriage a wife which is an infamous and common harlot, which has not only
once, but often, not with one man alone, but with many committed fornication,
and that not only before marriage, but also after, and therefore not only an
harlot, but an adulteress also, as appears, Chap. 3. 1. By wife then of
fornications, Hos. 3. 1.
we are to understand a fornicating wife, or a wife which is a fornicatour; for
the Hebrews, by reason that they have few adjectives, do use the Genitive
cases of substantives, in stead of adjectives, as, A woman of virtue, for a
virtuous woman, Ruth 3. 11. A city of strength, for a strong city, Esa. 26.
1. The which Genitive case, if it be the plural number, it does Ruth 3. 11.
Esa. 26. 1.
aggrauate the thing, and is to be understood superlatiuely, as, A man of
bloods, that is, a most bloody man, Psalm. 5. 6. A Psalm. 5. 6.
man of griefs, that is, a man full of griefs, or extremely grieved: Esa. 53.
3. So here, a wife of fornications, that is, a common Esa. 53. 3.
harlot addicted to all manner of just and uncleanness.

And children of fornications. That is, beget of this unclean and filthy
wife, unclean and filthy children: which may be called children of
fornications, either because they are borne of an adulterous harlot; or because
when they come to years, they will resemble and imitate their mother in her
fornications.

And this is the meaning of the words. In which is propounded a parable to the
Israelites, wherein the Prophet represents the person of God; the wife of
fornications, the Church or Synagogue of the Israelites, or the ten Tribes; the
children of fornications, the particular men and women, which successively one
age after an other, committed spiritual fornication, forsaking God, their
first and true husband, and betaking themselves to the worship and service of
idols.

Where we may observe the great mercy and goodness of God, who vouchsafes to
match himself in marriage with his Church, which is far unworthy so great a
favor, and so excellent a dignity. Christ Jesus has espoused himself unto
us: but what were we before he made choice of us? Gods mercy vouchsafed his
Church in her espousals.
surely unclean fornicators, who had prostituted our selves to idols, wantons,
buggerers, thieves, covetous, drunkards, railers, extortioners; as the Apostle
speaks, 1. Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. And what are we after our espousals? surely
black through 1. Cor. 6. 9. Cant. 1. 4.
our corruptions, spotted with manifold infirmities, tanned with the sunshine
of wordly prosperity, and in no respect comely and beautiful, but only in
that we are decked and adorned with the glorious robe of Christ's
righteousness, and washed from our filthiness with his precious blood. And
that which is worst of all, the gracious goodness and entire love of our
husband, will not work in us the like love toward him again; but as before
we were exalted by his free choice to this high dignity, we played the harlot:
so, after that we are espoused, we commit spiritual whoredom, by setting our
hearts and affections, more upon the world and the pleasures thereof, then upon
our heavenly husband, for every small trifle prostituting our souls to sin,
which we should keep pure and undefiled. And yet notwithstanding all this the
Lord does not divorce us from him, but exhorts us to return, promising that
he will receive us into his former love and favor. Ier. 3. 1. 12. 14, 22.
Ier. 3. 1. 12. 14. 22. The Reason.


And so much concerning Gods Commandment. Now we are to speak of the reason
thereof. For the land has committed great whoredom, departing from the Lord.
By land, we are to understand the inhabitants of the land, by a usual
metonymie of the subject for the adiunct: that is, the ten Tribes of Israel,
which in times past were married to the Lord, by promising unto him alone,
their faith and loyal obedience. Has committed great whoredom. The Hebrew
text has it; Because the land whoring shall whore. By which manner of phrases,
wherein the word is doubled, the thing spoken is intended and aggrauated; as,
weeping he wept: that is, he wept exceedingly: rejoicing he rejoiced: that is,
he greatly rejoiced: going he went: that is, he went hastily and speedily: so
here; whoring it shall whore: that is, it will commonly, impudently, and with a
brazen forehead play the harlot: and that without intermission, successively
one age after an other; for so much is signified by the future tense here used:
by which usually is expressed a continual act of time; as though he would
say, that the Israelites had not in former times only, and presently did, but
afterward would continue in their spiritual whoredom.

Lastly, it is said, that they committed this whoredom, departing from the
Lord. The Hebrew text has it; From after the Lord: that is, forsaking the
Lord, and leaving to follow after him in the paths of true holiness and
righteousness, and cleaving unto their idols, following them in the bypath
of superstition and idolatry.

The sense therefore of these words is this; Go and propound unto the people
of Israel this parable, and thereby convince them of their gross idolatry: for
howsoever they may flatter themselves through self-love, yet the truth is,
they are no better then common harlots; for after that I have vouchsafed them
this dignity, to espouse them to my self, and they have plighted unto me their
faith, and vowed their obedience, they both forgetful of my mercy, and of
their own duty, have commonly, impudently, and continually committed
spiritual whoredom with stocks, stones, and devils, forsaking me their Lord
and husband, and refusing to follow me in the ways of my commandments, and
prostituting their bodies and souls to commit spiritual fornication with
their idols, according to their own inventions, and their burning and
unbridled lusts and appetites.

Where first we may observe, that the Lord intending to The use of parables, to
convince the sinner of his sins.
convince this people of their sins, does (before he plainly sets down
their sins) propound it unto them by way of parable; to the end that they, who
were blinded with self-love and partial Judges in their own cases, might
better see their sins in the person of others, and without partiality
condemn them, when they appeared like strangers, which they would suffer to
pass without any hard censure, if they discerned them to be of their familiar
acquaintance. And thus Nathan dealt with David: 2. Sam. 12. And our Savior
Christ with the Scribes and Pharisees: Matthew. 21. 33. 2. Sam. 12. Matthew. 21. 33.
And here in this place the Lord makes the people to condemn themselves and
their sins, in the person and practice of an adulterous harlot: and so
inticeth them (as it were) to wound and kill their beloved friend, whilst it
is masked and disguised in the habit of an enemy.

Out of which we may further gather, how far we are naturally in love with
our sins; so that we cannot be moved Our natural and corrupt love to sin.
to hate, condemn, and mortify them, so long as they bear our own names;
but rather are ready to mince, excuse, and defend them, until we view them in
the person of others, and see them enrolled under their names.

Secondly, we may note our too too great love of our selves, and too too small
love toward our neighbors; That self-love makes us exceeding partial.
which makes us easily to discern, and heavily and severely to censure other
men's faults; whereas we are ready to excuse or defend the same, or greater in
our selves: and therefore ^^^ Lord, when he would have us to see and condemn
our sins, does not offer them to our censure, as they are in our own selves,
whom we love too much; but in the person of others, whom for the most part, we
love not so much as we should: as appears in the former examples, and in this
place: wherein the Lord is feign to deal with us, as tender mothers deal with
their wanton and wayward children; whom when they would as willingly amend, as
unwillingly displease them, they use to chide and beat the standers by, and
sometime shadows and pictures, for those faults which their children have
committed; to the end, that so they may see and learn to dislike their faults
in others, which they would not so easily discern, nor so impartially condemn
in themselves.

Thirdly, we may observe, what exordium or beginning The thundering exordium of
the Prophet.
of speech the Prophet here uses; namely, he does not use fair words, and
sweet enticing allurements to make them attentive; he does not first sweeten
his severe and bitter reprehensions, and legal threatenings, with any
commendation of their persons, or mitigation of their faults; but by
propounding unto them this parable, whereby he labors to make them
impartial Judges of their own sinful and miserable estate; he accuses them
to be no better, then an adulterous generation, of adulterous parents,
adulterous children, and that by their often adulteries they had made the land
as it were a common stews: and therefore that the Lord would no longer bear
with their spiritual whoredoms, but would withdraw his love, and divorce them
from him.

So that now our Prophet comes not as an Ambassador, sent from God with
conditions of peace, and with gracious promises, to allure them to obedience:
but as a son of thunder, and like an Herald sent from the Lord to denounce
open wars against the people, for their gross idolatry and outrageous
rebellion, he begins his speech unto them.

The reason why the Lord causes his Prophet thus thunderingly to begin his
prophecy, was, because the Why the Prophet deals so roughly with the people.
people had a long time, even since the beginning of Ieroboams reign,
continued in their sins, especially their gross idolatry: notwithstanding
that the Lord had sent diverse of his Prophets, to reprove them for their
sins, of which their consciences were convinced by Gods law, and to draw them
to repentance: sometimes by propounding unto them Gods sweet promises of
gracious benefits, if they would turn unto them; and sometimes by threatening
punishments against those, who went forward in their sins. All which
notwithstanding, the people continued incorrigible, and grew worse and worse;
and therefore the Lord causes the Prophet to deal with them in this hot and
rough manner, because they had a long time lien frosen in the dregs of their
sins.

And this course have other of Gods faithful ambassadors used, when they had
to deal with such obstinate and incurable sinners. As John the Baptist with
the Saduces and Pharisees, Matthew. 3. 7. Peter with Ananias and Sapphira, Act.
Matthew. 3. 7. Act. 5. and 8. and 13. 10. Matthew. 21. and 23. Gods Ministers must
sit their speech to their auditory.
5. and with Simon Magus, Act. 8. Paul with Elymas, Act. 13. 10. And our
Savior Christ himself with the Priests and Pharisees: Matthew. 21. and 23.

Out of which examples Gods Ministers may learn, in the delivery of Gods word
spiritual discretion, in fitting their speech according to the condition of
their auditorie; and not to deal with ignorant and untaught men, after the
same manner that they deal with wilful and obstinate sinners; but as
Physicians put a difference in their patients, applying to ordinary sicknesses
ordinary remedies, and to desperate diseases, desperate physic, and as
Chirurgions to small cuts, apply healing plasters, and for the curing of
deep festered wounds use eating corrosiues and the sharp lancher: So the
Physician and Surgion of the soul for the curing of some desperate disease, or
healing of some festered sore which sin has made in men's consciences, must
use bitter potions, a rough hand, and desperate remedies.

Secondly, God begins here with legal comminations, The best method of
preaching for the converting ^f a sinner.
before he comfort them with any evangelical consolations, because this is
the best and fittest course for the conversion of a sinner. For first their
sores and festered wounds must be lanched, searched and drawn with the rasour
and corrosiue of the law, before they be healed with the plasters of Gods
promises in the Gospel; for otherwise the wound being not healed to the bottom
will break out again, and become worse then it was. First we must be beaten
down, before we can be raised up; we must first see our sins, and seeing
bewail them, before God will show unto us his saving mercy; we must be
nothing in our selves, before we can be something in Gods sight; we must labor
and groan under the heavy burden of our sins, desiring nothing more then to
be eased of this intolerable weight, before we will come to Christ, or he
relieve us; we must see our own nakedness, before he will clothe us with the
robe of his righteousness; our own emptiness, before he will fill us; our
own beggerlinesse, before he will enrich us; and our own sins before he
will pardon us. All which preparation is begun by the preaching of the law, and
therefore the Lord begins with it here, as also he took the same course
with our first parents, Genesis 3. and with his Church Genesis 3.
and people from time to time: so John the Baptist, and our Savior Christ
himself, whose example all his faithful Ministers are to imitate, etc.

The third thing which we are to observe, is, that he deciphereth Why idolatry
is called fornication.
the idolatry of the people under the name of fornication, whoredom, and
adultery; and that for diverse causes: first in that there is between them
great similitude and likeness. For as the man takes the woman to wife
(conjugal faith being on both sides promised) so the Lord has married unto
him the Church, and in Jesus Christ, the second person in Trinity, has assumed
man's nature into y^ Hypostaticall union, and so has inseparably joined us
unto himself, Jesus Christ also being knit unto us in that mystical union, and
so becoming our head and husband. And likewise there is a mutual contract
passed between us: for the Lord promises his grace, love, favor, protection,
and all the benefits of this life, and the life to come; and the Church for her
part promises her love to God, conjugal faith, and dutiful obedience. And of
this marriage mention is made, Hosea 2. 19. 20. Ier. 3. 1. 8. 20. 2. Cor. 11. 2.
Hos. 2. 19. 20. Ier. 3. 1. 8. 2. Cor. 11. 2.


As therefore the wife breaking her coniugal faith and promise, and withdrawing
her love, obedience, and body from her husband, that she may communicate them
to some other man, becomes an adulteress; so those who break their faith
and covenant made with God, and withdraw their love, obedience, and outward
service from him, that they may communicate them unto false gods and idols, do
go a whoring after them, and commit spiritual adultery with them. And this is
ye reason why in the Scriptures idolaters are usually called harlots,
fornicators, and adulterers, and idolatry, whoredom and adultery; as
appears, Exodus 34. 15. Exodus 34. 15. Leuit. 20. 5. 6. Deuteronomy. 31. 16. Psalm.
106. 39
16. Leuit. 20. 5. 6. Deuteronomy. 31. 16. Psalm. 106. 39.

Secondly, as the adulterers are so blinded with their burning lust, and blind
fury, that though they be naturally wise, yet they fall into sottish folly,
running headlong, and as it were blindfold in their unclean and filthy
courses, though thereby they impair their health, ruin their state, lose
their credit, shorten their life, and destroy their own souls: so Idolaters,
though never so wise, through their blind superstition are so infatuated, that
they believe more palpable lies and fall into more sottish follies, then little
children could be brought unto; not regarding their health, wealth, life nor
credit, and hazarding the loss of their souls, so that they may go forward
in their blind devotion.

The second cause why idolatry is called adultery is, to show the greatness
of this sin, and how odious it is in Gods sight; for as it is a most horrible
fault, and to any loving husband most abominable, if a wife should prostitute
her self unto others, and that in her husbands sight and presence: so is this
sin of idolatry no less grievous or odious, because the Idolaters do
prostitue themselves to idols, to commit spiritual whoredom with them, and
that in the sight and presence of God, who sees all things and is present
every where.

But it may be objected, that idolatry is a far greater sin then
adultery, and therefore when it is called by that name, the sin is rather
extenuated then aggrauated. I answer, first the grieuousnesse of this sin is
so much the greater, by how much more excellent the person is who is injured
and offended; and therefore when this adultery is committed against Gods
glorious Majesty, it is infinitely more outrageous and heinous then when man
is thus wronged.

Secondly, though idolatry is a far greater sin then adultery, yet when
it is called by this name it is aggrauated, not in it own nature, but according
to men's conceit and opinion; who make light account of the sins of the first
table, as idolatry, blasphemy, breaking the Sabbath, but think the sins of
the second table very heinous in respect of the other, as murder adultery,
theft and such like. And therefore the Lord calls them by the names of these
sins, which we can better judge of, to make them as they are odious and
heinous in their own nature, so also to appear unto us. As if a man having to
deal with a loving child, and intending to aggrauate the heinousness of this
sin of murdering the prince, should compare it to parricide, he should to
his conceit make it appear much more grievous, although it be a far more
heinous and pernicious sin to murder the prince, who is the father of the
country, then a man's own natural parent.

And these are the things which are to be observed out of Idolatry and
superstition know no limits.
the name. The fourth thing to be observed, is, that he says, they had
committed great whoredoms, and also continued in them: wherein we may note the
nature as of all other sins, so of this sin of idolatry. For if once it be
entertained, it knows no limits nor bounds; but with the heat of blind
fury, and ignorant superstition, it carries me^ as it were hoodwinckt into
all gross and abominable impiety: so that there is no creature in heaven or
earth so base and contemptible, which the Idolater in his blind devotion will
not worship in the place of God, as appears, Romans 1. 23. And this Romans 1. 23.
befalls them by the just judgment of God, that they should be carried away
in their sottish blindness into such gross absurdities, and more then
childish fooleries, because when God reuealeth his truth unto them, they will
not embrace and love it, but rather love their own will worship 1. These. 2.
11. The nearer man draws to idols, the farther he goes from God.
and follow the inventions of their own brain, 1. These. 2. 11.

Lastly, we may observe, that he says, whilst they committed spiritual
whoredoms, they departed from the Lord; so that the nearer man draws unto
idols, the further he goes from God, neither is it possible that any should
truly worship both together; as the Apostle shows, 1. Cor. 10. 21. 2. Cor.
6. 14. 16. The Idolaters pretend, that when they commit idolatry, they worship
God in the idol. But the Lord affirms, that then they depart from him. They
say, that they serve God when they use their own will worship, and follow their
own way. But the Lord, who acknowledges no worship, but when we follow
him in the ways of his Commandments, says; that when we walk in our own
ways, we go out of his way, and cease to follow him; we forsake him who is
our true husband, and after a whorish manner prostitute our selves unto idols.

Where by the way we may note the sottish folly of Idolaters, The folly of
Idalaters.
who leave the Lord, infinite in all perfections, and worship a base creature;
forsake the Lord, who is most wise, mighty, gracious, and in every respect
absolutely good, and betake themselves to the worship often times of stocks
and stones, who have neither understanding, sense, life, nor motion; neglect
Gods service, who has both power and will to reward their service with
eternal life; and spend their time in the service of idols, who have neither
ability, nor will to do them any good, but rather will be the means to plunge
them into everlasting destruction.

ANd so much concerning the first part of this type or parable: wherein the
Lord inioyneth the marriage. The second part follows, wherein is set down the
Prophets obedience, verse 3. in these words: So he went, and took Gomer the
daughter of Diblaim, which conceived and bare him a son. In which words, as
the Lord had enjoined a typical marriage; so he propounds typical names fit
for the purpose, The exposition.
both of the harlot and her parentage; that so the parable might in more lively
manner represent unto them their sin of idolatry.

It may be, that the first word Gomer, might be the name of some notorious and
infamous harlot which lived in those times: and it may be also, that it was
only a fained and imaginary name, invented of purpose to decipher such a one
as the Prophet here describes: for it signifies a thing whole and entire or
consummate, complete, perfect, and accomplished. Some understand it in the
first sense, and think that thereby is signified and represented the whole
body or nation of the Israelites, whom the Lord had taken unto himself in
marriage. Others in the latter signification, and imagine that it has relation
to the harlot, signifying such an one, either who was of perfect and
accomplished beauty, or such an one, as was thoroughly furnished with lascivious
allurements, and most expert in the art of venery: or finally, such an one as
was most absolute, consummate, and fully replenished with all wickedness and
filthy uncleanness.

The other name Diblaim, some take to be a patronymick, signifying the harlots
country, and not her kindred; that she was an inhabitant of that waste and
desolate wilderness Diblam, or Diblath, of which mention is made, Ezech. 6.
14. Ezech. 6. 14. Ier. 48. 22.
Ier. 48. 22. and that she was called a daughter of Diblaim, according to the
like phrase of speech used in the Scripture; as a daughter of Sion, of Israel,
of Tire, and such like.

From which they gather the harlots disposition; that she loved to frequent and
to live in desert and solitary places, where she might with more secrecy, and
without controlement, commit fornication with her lovers: and that hereby is
resembled the conditions of the Synagogue of the Israelites, who according to
the custom of the Gentiles, erected altars in groves, woods, and hilly places,
to the end they might commit spiritual whoredom with their idols; as
appears 2. King. 17. 8, 9, 10, 11. 2. King. 17. 8, 9, 10, 11.


And further, herehence they observe the great mercy and goodness of God, who
vouchsafes himself in marriage with his Church, who, before he aduanceth her
to such honor and dignity, is of most obscure and base condition, and like
unto this harlot here described: as it is most fully and excellently set down,
Ezech. 16. Ezech. 16.


Others think it to be the name of her father, whereby is signified two lumps
or masses of dried figs: from whence they gather, that she was the daughter
of pleasures, deliciousness, and effeminate daintiness; luxurious excess,
and wanton delicateness being the father and nurse of lust and venery.

And so much for the meaning of the words. The doctrines which from hence we
gather, are these.

First, we may observe the infinite mercy of God toward Gods mercy toward his
people.
this people; who though they were fully replenished with all sin and
wickedness, though like filthy harlots they had forsaken him, their true and
most kind husband, and given themselves to commit spiritual whoredom with
their idols; and though they were complete and consummate in this their
adultery; yet still he calls them unto him again by his Prophets, promising
upon their true repentance, mercy and forgiveness: so Ier. 3. 1. Jer. 3. 1.
Idolatry must be avoided in the beginnings and occasions thereof.


Secondly, we learn hence, that as we are most carefully to flee all sins,
and to subdue them at the beginning, before by custom and continuance they
have increased in strength: so especially we are to use this care and
watchfulness, in avoiding this spiritual fornication, and all means and
occasions thereof. For if we once entertain it with the least liking and
approbation, we shall never, or very hardly reclaim our selves, till like
common harlots, we be complete and fully replenished with this spiritual
filthiness. And therefore let us stop our ears against those shameless and
impudent men, who in this light of the Gospel dare show themselves to be
patrons of images; assuring our selves, that if casting Gods Commandment
behind our backs, which has as well forbidden the making, as the worshipping
of idols; we shall not stay here, but shall shortly fall from idol making, to
idol worshipping. We justly account pandors and bawdes to be odious and most
abominable, because they use all their wit and endeavor to allure others to
uncleanness, and to withdraw their hearts and affections from their own
husbands, that they may place them upon adulterers: and surely no less
abominable should these bawdes and pandors be, who employ their wit and
learning, that they may allure us to keep company with images and idols,
whereby our hearts and affections being alienated and stolen from the Lord our
true husband, we shall in the end be enticed to commit spiritual whoredom
with these polluted adulterers.

ANd thus have I spoken of the first part of the legal commination, wherein
their sin is expressed. Now The punishments threatened against Israel.
the second follows, wherein their punishment is threatened. And this is first
typically shadowed under the names which are given to the Prophets children,
and then plainly denounced in the reasons rendered of the names imposed.

The punishment it self is set down in three degrees, every one exceeding
other. The first is the overthrow of the State and Kingdom of Israel by their
enemies: verse. 4, 5. The second punishment is, that because the former
judgment could not bring them to repentance, he would never show mercy in
bringing them out of their misery, seeing they would ever continue obstinately
in their sins and rebellion: verse 6, 7. The third is, that seeing by no
means they would be reclaimed, he would utterly reject and cast them off; so
as they should be no longer his Church and people: verse. 8, 9.

The first punishment denounced, is set down typically in the imposition of
the first child's name, in these words, verse. 4. And the Lord said unto him,
call his name Izreel, or Iisrehel. For yet a little and I will visit the blood
of Izreel upon the house of Iehu, and will cause to cease the kingdom of the
house of Israel. In which words we are to consider two things: the name which
was by Gods commandment imposed upon The exposition.
the Prophets child; and secondly the reason why it was imposed. The name
signifies either the sowing or seed of the strong God, or ye dispersing and
scattering of the strong God: for it is derived from (...) seminauit, he has
sowed, or scattered, and (...) Deus fortis, the strong God. In the first
signification, the Israelites did arrogate this name to themselves, and
therefore called their metropolis and mother city of their kingdom by the name
of Izreel. To note and signify that they thought themselves the seed of God,
which he having sowed had so deeply taken root, that it could never be
removed, the vineyard of God which is right hand had planted, and should never
be destroyed, the sons and children of God, which were the only heirs of his
promises. And indeed so they were in respect of the covenant which was
between God and them, and therefore are so called in the Scriptures, Exodus 4.
22. Israel is my son, even Exodus 4 22.
my first borne. But they having broken the covenant, and rebelled against the
Lord; he does not in this signification call the child Iizrehel; but in the
latter, to show unto them that they should be such, as the Lord would scatter
and disperse amongst their enemies.

And this is the signification of this name, whereby these three things are
intimated and showed: first in an elegant paranomasie, he changes their name
from Israel to Iizrehel, to intimate that there was a change of their state and
condition, so that howsoever they bragged that they were of the seed and
posterity of Jacob, and after his name called themselves Israelites, yet in
truth they were so only in title and outward profession, seeing they were
wholly degenerate and altogether unworthy his name. For he was a prince of the
strong God, who wrestling with God in faith, prayers, and strong cries
prevailed with him; but these were apostataes from the faith, who had forsaken
the Lord, and ceased Hos. 12. 4.
to call upon him, and had betaken themselves to the worship of idols: and
therefore they were rather to be called Iizraelites, to show, that as they
were altered in name, so also in nature and conditions they were utterly
degenerate. And that as between these two names Israel and Iizrehel, there is
great similitude in sound, but great difference in signification; so although
in outward title, name and profession, there was great affinity between this
people, and the Patriarch Jacob, from whom they descended, yet they were
indeed and truth so much degenerate, that there was no similitude or
correspondence between their faith, life and manners.

Secondly, by this name the Lord foresheweth the punishment that he would
inflict upon them for their sins, namely that he would disperse and scatter
them amongst their enemies. They boasted that they were Iisrahel the seed of
God, which should take root in the land. And the Lord tells them that
indeed they should be Iizrahel, but in another signification; namely, that as
seed is scattered and dispersed in the field by the hand of the sower, so he by
his power would scatter and disperse them amongst their enemies, who should
overcome them, and lead them away captive into strange countries.

The which accordingly was effected in three several times, answerable to this
triple typical birth. First, when as the Kingdom was rent with seditions and
civil wars, when Shallum usurped the Kingdom, and destroyed the posterity
of Iehu. 2. King. 15. Secondly, when as the land was 2. King. 15.
wasted, spoiled, and part of the people carried away captive, namely, the
Rubenites, Gadites, and half the Tribe of Manasse by Tilgath Pilneeser King of
Asur. 1. Chron. 5. 26. 1. Chro. 5. 26.
Lastly, when as the Kingdom of Israel was utterly overthrown by Salmanasser
King of the Assyrians. 2. King. 17. 2. King. 17.


Thirdly, by this name he foretells in what part of the land this judgment
should begin, namely, in the vallie of Iizreel, where the posterity of Achab
were put to the sword by Iehu; which was a place of their chief strength, and
therefore as they thought most free from danger.

And these are the chief things which by this name are signified. 1. Sin and
punishment inseparable companions.
out of the connection, where presently after their sin is expressed, their
punishment is annexed, we may observe that these two, sin and punishment,
are inseparable companions; if the one go before, the other will follow,
either presently, or not long after. And therefore the pain should make the
pleasure loathsome, the bitterness of punishment should make us distaste the
sweetness of sin.

The second thing which we may here observe is, how 2. Our pronenesse to sin.
prone we are unto sin, and how easily we degenerate from our parents virtues,
though their corruptions and sins are entailed unto us as a perpetual
inheritance; of true Israelites, we become backsliding Iizreelites; and though
by the good example of our parents, by our virtuous education, and by many
other good means, we are helped forward, in climing up the hill of virtue; yet
if we at any time cease to strive and labor in this our course, we shall soon
be pressed down again, even into the gulf of wickedness, with the heavy
burden of our corruptions. And therefore, Let us cast away every thing that
presses down, and the sin that hangs so fast on, and let us run with
patience the race which is set before us: as the Apostle exhorts, Heb. 12. 1.
and according to Heb. 12. 1.
his example, Let us forget that which is behind, and endeavor our selves to
that which is before, and follow hard toward the mark, for the price of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus: as it is Phil. 3. 13. 14. The virtues of
our parents are not hereditarie, Phil. 3. 13.
but their vices; and their godliness will not privilege us from falling into
all wickedness, unless we strive and labor, non solum ad Ruborem sed
sudorem, with all pains and diligence to follow after them in their steps:
for through our own corruption we easily degenerate, and if at any time we
cease to become better, we then begin to become worse.

Thirdly, we may observe, that as it little auailed the people Outward titles
naught avail us without inward virtues.
of Israel to be the sons of Jacob according to the flesh, when they nothing
resembled him in the spirit, nor to be entitled with his name, when as they
disclaimed his graces and virtues; seeing notwithstanding all this, God now
threatens, and soon after inflicteth upon them most fearful punishments: so
it will little profit us to be entitled Christians, if we live as profanely as
infidels; to be called the Church of God, if in our conversation we resemble
the synagogue of Satan; to be counted professors of religion, and the children
of God, when in our lives we deny the power thereof, and spend our times like
the sons of Belial; to be the children and posterity of the godly, if we
degenerate from their Christian profession and holy practice. For God is not
pleased with shadows, but with substance, not with outward titles, but with
truth in the inward parts, neither will our parents virtues exempt us from
feeling Gods heavy judgments, if we like a degenerating offspring be evil and
vicious. And this appears, Ezech. 18. 10. 13. and in the examples of Cham,
Ezecb. 18. 10. 13
Esau, Absolon, Adoniah, Iehoahaz, and many others.

ANd thus much concerning the name; wherein the punishment of the people is
typically signified. Now we are to speak of the reason hereof, wherein this
punishment is plainly denounced. For yet a little and I will visit the blood
of Iisreel upon the house of Iehu, and will cause to cease the kingdom of the
house of Israel. Verse. 5. And at that day I will also break the bow of Israel,
in the valley of Izreel.

In which words are contained, first, the time of the punishment The exposition.
when it must be inflicted: yet a little: 2. the punishment it self, I will
visit: 3. the sin for which the punishment is inflicted; The blood of Izreel:
4. the object or subject of this punishment, which is threefold: 1. Iehu, and
his posterity: 2. the state of the kingdom of Israel: 3. the whole power and
strength of the Commonwealth: Lastly, the place appointed for execution, in the
vallie of Izreel:

The time is signified in these words, yet a little, whereby he intimates two
things; first, that the Lord would not presently inflict these judgments
threatened; but that he would yet give them some time of repentance, and for a
while defer his punishments, which long ago they had deserved. 2. That
though he spared them for a while, yet the time should not be long, unless
they prevented his judgments by forsaking their sins, and turning unto him.
For in all threatenings, though never so speedy, this condition is to be
observed: the which the Israelites neglecting, the punishment was accordingly
inflicted. For at the most the Prophet prophesied but 14. years before the end
of Ieroboams reign, and after that his son Zacharias had reigned but six
months, he was killed by Shallum, and so the kingdom 2. King. 15. 8. 10.
ceased in the house of Iehu; at which time God begun to visit the people: the
which his visitation, not only of the sins of Iehu, but of the house of
Israel, he accomplished in the reign of Hosea, when as the King and people
were led into captivity, by Shalmaneser, King of Babylon. So that the sense of
these words is thus much, as if he should have said, Although your rebellions
be great, and the measure of your sins full, yet such is your hardness of
heart and carnal security, that you promise unto your selves immunitie from
punishment, putting the evil day far from you, as though you should ever
escape: but do not thus flatter your selves, for assuredly the Lord will very
shortly visit you for your iniquities, and pay you home for all. It is true
indeed, that although your outrageous wickedness does cry out for present
vengeance, yet the Lord to show his patience and long suffering, and to leave
you quite without excuse, will a little defer his punishments, and expect
your repentance: but let not Gods delays and merciful patience cause you to
defer your conversion; for undoubtedly if you obstinately persist in your
impenitencie, the Lord will very quickly execute on you these judgments, which
he has caused me to denounce against you.

And this is the meaning of these words, yet a little. The 1. Gods patience and
long suffering.
Gods infinite mercy, patience and long suffering, in sparing of this
rebellious people, long after their sins cried for vengeance, in the mean time
sending his Prophets unto them, to inuit the^ to repentance, that so they
might escape his just punishments. He is long before he threatens, and rather
strives to master men's stubburnnes, and to incline them to obedience, by his
mercies and benefits; and after he threatens, he is long before he is drawn
to punish; and after that his justice urges him to resolve upon this, and that
the heinous sins of his people cry out in his cares, that it is more then
time that deserved punishment were inflicted, yet he spares a little, and
like a loving father, after he yt has taken his rod into his hand, and has
lifted it up to fetch his stroke, he yet pauseth and staieth his hand,
expecting our submission and repentance, that so he may spare us. And thus he
dealt with the old world, as appears, Genesis 6. 5. 12. 13. with Genesis 6. 5. 12
13.
the Amorits, who though they were most wicked idolaters, yet he deferred their
punishment 400. years, Genesis 15. 16. Genesis 15. 16.
And thus also has the Lord dealt with us. So that the Lord is content to
attend our leisure, being more loath to punish, then we to suffer punishment;
and therefore when the time is more then past, wherein justice b^ggeth for
vengeance; mercy entreats yet a little, that judgment may be deferred, yea
and after sentence is pronounced, that execution may be delaied, and we
reprieued, till the next assizes, that in the mean time by true repentance, we
may procure our pardon, and so escape deserved punishment. And this is notably
set down, Esa. 30. 18. Yet therefore will the Lord wait Esa 30. 18.
that he may have mercy upon you, etc.

Secondly, we may observe Gods infallible truth, in performing 2 Gods
infallible truth in performing his promises.
his promises, notwithstanding man's unworthiness of the least of them. After
that Iehu had executed Gods judgments upon the house of Ahab, the Lord
promised him that he would confirm the kingdom unto him, and his posterity
unto the fourth generation. Now after this promise made by God, Iehu who had
showed his hatred to Achabs person and posterity, showed notwithstanding his
love to his sins, forsaking the Lord and betaking himself to the worship of
idols. And in his steps did his progeny walk, adding one outrageous
wickedness to another: but yet never the less the Lord made good his promises
to him and his posterity. The consideration whereof may comfort those that are
cast down in the sight of their unworthiness, thinking that because they
deserve not Gods mercy, therefore they shall not be partakers of it; seeing we
have his gracious promises of grace and mercy, the which though there be no
cause in us, why he should perform, yet there is cause enough in God himself,
who is infinite in mercy, and infallible in his truth. Romans 3. 3, 4. Romans 3. 3.
4.


Thirdly, we may observe that this people at this time, 3. Pride goes before a
fall.
when as the Prophet threatens Gods near approaching judgments, were in the
top of their pride presumptuous and secure, fearing nothing less then such
dangers; and yet at this time destruction hasted, and vengeance watched at the
door to seize upon them. Whereby it appears, that when the wicked is most
proud, presumptuous, and secure, he is nearest to destruction; when he thinks
himself out Psalm. 37. 35. 36.
of the gunshot of all danger, then is he most ready to be overtaken of it; as
appears by the examples of Nebuchadnezzer, Haman, Herod, and many others.

Lastly, we may observe, that though the Lord spares for 4. Punishments
deferred, are in the end inflicted.
a time, yet he will not for ever defer punishment: for as sin increases,
judgment approaches; and though the Lord long delay to visit men's wickedness,
yet the time runs on and expireth, and that which remains in the end, will
be very short and little before vengeance be inflicted. And therefore let not
Gods patience and long suffering harden us in sin, and cause us to defer;
but rather hasten our repentance: let us lay hold of the acceptable time and
day of salvation, whilst it lasts; otherwise, if we delay our conversion,
the Lord within a little while, when we least look for it, will cause his
judgments suddenly to surprise us.

And thus much concerning the time: the punishment it self is expressed in
these words; I will visit. The which word The Exposition.
is of ambiguous signification: for it is sometime taken in the best part, when
as the Lord visits in mercy, to bestow a benefit which has been promised,
but somewhile deferred. So he is said to have visited Sara: Genesis 21. 1. And so
he promises to visit the children of Israel: Exodus 13. 19. And Luke Genesis 21.
1. Exodus 13. 19. Luke 1. 68.
1. 68. God is said to have visited and redeemed his people. Sometimes it is
taken in the worst part, and signifies to revenge and punish; as in the second
Commandment. So Exo. 32. 34. In the day of my vengeance I will visit their sin
upon Exodus 32. 34. Psalm. 89. 32.
the^. Psalm. 89. 32. I will visit their transgression with the rod. And in this
latter signification, it is to be understood in this place.

The doctrines which from hence we learn are these. First, 1. Gods merciful
justice, who examineth before he punish. Genesis 18. 20, 21. Esa. 26. 14.
the punishment: in which respect his punishments are called visitations. And
thus the Lord visited the Sdomites: Genesis 18. 20, 21. And so he is said, first
to have visited, and then to have scattered and destroyed the wicked: Esa. 26.
14. Whence we are not to gather, that the Lord needs any such visitation to
find out man's wickedness, or that before he can spy out our sins, he must
make a quest of inquiry, or privy search; for he is omnipresent and
omniscient; so that all things, though never so much cloaked and disguised, lie
open before him, and appear naked in his sight: as it is Heb. 4. 13. But by
such borrowed phrases God sets forth his orderly proceedings, and approves
unto men his just Heb. 4. 13.
judgments, in that they are not rashly executed, but with good advice and
deliberation; teaching them also in his own example to follow the like practice.

Here therefore Princes, Magistrates, Masters of families, and all superiors
are to learn their lesson; namely, that Superiors must visit before they
punish.
they visit before they punish, and by due examination find out the fault,
before they give sentence, or proceed to execution: for if God thus behave
himself in judgment, before whose eyes all things lie open; how much more
should men, who are often mistaken, and easily deceived, unless they use great
deliberation in their judicial proceedings? Let therefore all such consider,
that where there is the most power, there should be the least passion; that
rashness is a fault, in all dangerous, but in superiors pernicious: that
reasonable men should first judge before they punish, because punishment
deferred, may be inflicted, but being inflicted, cannot be recalled; that they
sustain the honorable place of a Judge, whilst they examine causes; but the
place of an executioner, when without judgment and advice they inflict
punishment: that they are Gods deputies, and represent his person; and therefore
are according to his example, first to visit, and then to punish, lest for want
of due examination, they punish the innocent in stead of offenders.

The second thing which hence we learn is, that though God does not rashly
punish, yet he will not suffer the wicked altogether to escape: for though the
Lord does not punish every day, yet in the day of his visitation he will not
spare. And therefore let us keep our selves undefiled from sin: or if we
have stained our consciences with sin, and have as it were in these books
registered up our faults; let us by a lively faith apply unto us the blood of
Christ, whereby these spots and writings may be washed away: for if they
remain until the day of Gods visitation, they will give in such witness and
evidence against us, as will convict and condemn us.

In the third place is set down the sin for which the Lord The exposition.
threatens to visit, in these words: The blood of Iizreel. The which words of
diverse men, are diversely expounded: but leaving to set down all men's
judgments, because many of them have little likelihood of truth, I will only
propound two which seem most probable. Some think that by the blood of
Iisreel, is understood the slaughter of Achabs family and posterity, Iesabel,
Ioram, and his seventy sons, which were all destroyed by Iehu. Others imagine
this cannot be the meaning of the words; because this was an action commanded
by God: 2. King. 9 6, 7, 8. and commended in Iehu, after it was by him
performed, and by God rewarded: 2. King. 10. 30. and done by Iehu in zeal of
Gods glory, as he professes, 2. King. 10. 16. And therefore they rather 2.
King. 9 6, 7. 2. King. 10. 30. 2. King. 10. 16.
think, that by Iisreel here is understood, not the City or valley of
Iisreel, but the people of Israel, which by Iehu and his posterity, were
continued in their gross idolatry, and so made obnoxious to the judgments of
God and their destruction. And this exposition does the rather please them:
First, because the name Iisreel signifies the seed of God, and therefore may
be taken for the people of Issreel: as appears, Exodus chap. 4. verse 22. And
secondly, Exodus 4. 22.
because the name blood, is taken sometime for destruction, either temporal or
eternal, of body or soul. So Ezech. 3. 5. Chap. 33. 6. Thirdly because some
Greek Ezech. 3. 5. Chap. 33. 6.
copies read it Israel, and not Iisrael; and those which read it Iisrael,
have prefixed before it, an article, not of ye feminine Gender, but of the
masculine, (...), understanding thereby, not the city of Iisrael, but the
people of Israel. Lastly, because the same word Iisrael, used, Hos. 2. 22. is
by Hos. 2. 22.
all understood of the people of Israel, and not of the city.

And this is the first exposition, which has in it great likelihood and
probability, without any absurdity or great force offered unto the text.
Which if we embrace, there arises from it this doctrine: that kings are
guilty of the destruction How princes are accessarie to the sins of the
people.
by their authority, commandment, or example, they draw their people from the
service of the only true God, to commit idolatry; and therefore in the day of
Gods visitation, he will require their blood at the princes hands, and will
severely punish them, not only for their own sins, but for the sins of
the people, into which they have been either drawn by their authority, or
allured by their example.

Others (as I said) expound these words of the slaughter of Achabs family and
posterity, Iezabel, Ioram, Ahabs 70. Exposition.
sons, Ahaziah, and 42. of his brethren: wherein they follow the plain
history, and the manifest words of the text without any change and alteration.
Which (as I take it) is the rather to be embraced; for where the exposition is
according to the plain words of the text, agreeing with the circumstances
thereof, the analogy of faith, the rest of the Scriptures, and contains
nothing improbable or absurd, there it is to be given and received, without
any further search for one further fetched, mystical and hidden. Yea, but
will some say, this fact of Iehues was commanded of God to be done, and
commended and rewarded when it was done; and therefore it is not likely that
God would punish him and his posterity for it. I answer, that we are to
consider in this fact two things: the outward fact it self, and Iehues doing
of it. The outward fact it self was good, and enjoined by God himself, as a
just revenge taken upon Achab for his tyranny, murder, idolatry, and other
outrages by him committed: and in respect hereof Iehu is commended, and
rewarded; because he was Gods minister and instrument, in performing a work in
it self commendable and acceptable unto God. But in respect of Iehu his doing
of it, it was wicked and unlawful: for he did it not in the sincerity and
uprightness of his heart, but with a corrupt mind, poisoned with ambition: as
appears, 2. King. 10. 31. He did 2. King. 10. 31.
it not in zeal of Gods glory, as he falsely boasted; but his maine end was
his own advancement; which when he had attained unto, he utterly neglected
the glory of God, and grievously dishonored him by his gross Idolatry. He did
not do it in obedience to Gods commandment; for then he would have made
conscience of the rest, which he transgressed, resting and contenting himself
like an hypocrite in this one outward act: he did not do it in detestation of
Achabs sin, but for self-love, for he continued in the same idolatry: and
although he destroyed Baals Priests and house, yet following Ieroboams policy,
he worshipped the golden calves in Dan and Bethel: whereby he clearly showed,
that al he did was not in hatred of idolatry, but for his worldly advantage. He
did not when he was seated in the kingdom, labor to restore Gods pure worship
and service, for which end and purpose he was stirred up of God to destroy
Achabs posterity; but having satisfied his ambitious desire, he labored to
confirm the kingdom to himself and his posterity, by following Ieroboams
policy, and living in his Idolatry, withholding his people from going to
worship the Lord in his Temple at Jerusalem, which was the place appointed by
God for his public service, lest they should again adioyne themselves to the
house of David. So that he only made show of religion and zeal, whilst it
stood with his own worldly benefit; but when it but seemed to cross that, he
shook hands with all, and became an Apostate. Howsoever therefore the fact,
as it was commanded by God, was good and lawful, and in respect hereof was
rewarded of God, who will not let any show of good go unrecompensed, that he
may not only hereby stop the mouths of the wicked, but also give certain
assurance unto his children, that he will much more reward their true and
sincere obedience: yet if we respect with what mind and purpose it was
performed by Iehu,, it was nothing but ambitious rebellion, and cruel murder:
which therefore at the hands of God (who respects not so much the outward
action, as the sincerity of the heart, the inward obedience of his
commandment, the causes and ends of our actions) it was sharply and justly
punished.

The doctrines which from hence we learn are these. First, that we do not
content our selves with outward works, What is required to the doing of a good
work.
circumstances do concur, they will be wicked and odious in Gods sight.
First therefore being assured that we do that which God has commanded, let us
do it in the love of God, which is the fountain of every good work, and in
obedience to Gods commandment. Secondly, let us propound, as the maine ends of
our actions, the glory of God, the good of his Church, and our own salvation.
Thirdly, let our outward obedience proceed from the inward obedience of the
heart, and be done in sincerity and in vprightnes. Fourthly, let all be done in
faith; which by applying Christ and his precious bloodshed unto us, does wash
away the corruptions and imperfections wherewith our best actions are stained.
For though our actions in themselves be never so good; yet if they be done in
self-love, for our own praise, pleasure, and profit, without the sincerity
of the heart, or true faith, they are but glorious sins which displease God,
and make us obnoxious to his judgments and punishments.

Secondly, we are here admonished, that we do not with Iehu and other
hypocrites, rest and content our selves in We must obey all Gods Commandments.
some one or two outward works, neglecting obedience unto the rest of Gods
Commandments: assuring our selves, that if our obedience be true and sincere,
it will be also whole and entire, both in respect of the subject and object,
that is, both in respect of every part of our selves who obey, and in respect
of al and every of Gods commandments, to which we are to yield obedience; for
true sanctification is not of one part alone, but of the whole man, and it
makes us to hate all sins, and to love all virtues with the like affection,
although not in the same proportion.

Thirdly, we here learn, not to make our religion, and the We must not make
religion a cloak to cover our sins.
commandments of almighty God a cloak for our corruptions, to cover our
ambition, malice, cruelty, morosity and other vices, as Iehu did. For if we do
for corrupt and worldly ends embrace and obey the^, then when they will not
further, but rather hinder us in these respects, we will cast them off, and
embrace the contrary sins and wickedness, according to the example of
Iehu,, and all other apostates, as appears daily by too too lamentable
experience. And so much for the sin of Iehu and his posterity. The fourth
thing is the subject or object of the punishment, which is threefold; first the
house of Iehu, by which is meant Iehu his posterity, which was destroyed by
Shallum, and so the kingdom taken from them; namely Zachariah, who was the
last king of this family, and the fourth from Iehu.

Here it may be demanded, how it could stand with Gods How the child bears
the fathers sins. Ezech. 18. 20.
justice to punish Iehues sin in his posterity, seeing he says that the
child shall not bear his fathers iniquity? Ezech. 18. 20. I answer, that the
Lord may justly punish the fathers sin in the child, by withholding his grace
from him, which he is not bound to give him: and so the child being destitute
hereof, and following his own natural corruptions lives in his fathers sin
and transgressions, and hereby justly makes himself obnoxious to Gods anger
and punishment. It is true that the child is never punished with any positive
punishment for his fathers faults, but for his own sins, into which being
deprived of Gods grace he falls; For if he sees his father sins, and
fears, and forsakes them, and indeuoureth to do the contrary works of
righteousness, his fathers sins shall not be imputed unto him, but he shall
live in his own righteousness, as appears, Ezech. 18. 14. which by Gods
Ezech. 18. 14.
infinite and unlimited mercy oftentimes comes to pass.

The use hereof, first concerns parents, that they be hereby Admonition to
parents.
moved to flee sin, if not for their own sake, yet at least for their
posterie, seeing the child unborn shall smart for their iniquities, if the
Lord, as he justly may, withhold his grace from them, and suffer them to be
carried away with their corruptions; the which he often does, as he also
threatens in the second commandment.

Secondly, the children of wicked parents may here learn Admonition to
children of wicked parents.
carefully to flee their fathers vices, and to endeavor to perform holy
obedience unto the Lord, that so they may be reconciled unto him: for if they
follow their fathers steps, the Lord will certainly punish in them, not only
their own, but also their parents sin, in the day of his visitation.

The second thing which here we are to observe is, that God threatens to
begin his visitation with the King and God severely punishes the sins of
princes.
his posterity, because their own sins were great and grievous, and also
because they were accessarie to the sins of the people; for whereas by their
authority and good example, they might have restrained them from their open
sins, and stirred them up to the profession and practice of righteousness
and holiness, they contrariwise both by their law licensing idolatry, and by
their practice living in it, drew the people to follow their example: and
therefore the Lord first begins to punish them, because they were the first
agents and moouers unto sin.

So that here we may learn, that it is not the great glory and power of
Princes, which will exempt them from punishment, when God visits. For
howsoever they are gods Psalm. 82 6. 7.
with men, yet they are but men with God, and as they shall die like men, so
shall they be punished like men, neither shall their great authority and high
place any thing privilege them. Nay, they above and before all others shall
surely smart for it, seeing they are seldom wicked alone, but with their
authority and example draw others into the like wickedness.

The use hereof concerns not only Princes, but also Magistrates and masters
of families, yea, all that are in any place of authority over others, that they
most carefully avoid all sins; especially such as are joined with scandal
of their inferiors, seeing against the day of Gods visitation they hasten and
redouble their punishment.

The second object of this punishment is the state and Exposition.
kingdom, in these words: And will cause to cease the kingdom of the house of
Israel. The which punishment the Lord begun to execute presently after the
overthrow of Iehues posterity, when as there were no lawful kings which
governed the Commonwealth, but such as usurped the kingdom by treason,
murders, and al outrageous cruelty: but it was fully accomplished 41. years
after the death of Zachariah, under the reign of Hoshea, when as all Israel
were carried away captive, and never more had any kings of their own to rule
over them.

Where first we are to observe, what a singular blessing Succession of lawful
Princes, is a great blessing to a land.
Princes; for it is the sinews of a State wherein consists her chief
strength, which, being cut off, either by death, or conspiracies, treasons and
seditions, the state and kingdom is miserably turmoiled with civil wars,
tumults, murders, and massacres; wherewith being weakened, it is laid open as a
prey to the foreign enemy: as it notably appears in this present example
of Iehu, and his successors. The like whereof, this land has had experience
of, in the time of those civil disscensions between York and Lancaster.
Whereby it further appears, that it is far better for a State to be
governed by a succession of Princes, which are not of the best sort, then that
there should be an anarchy, which is accompanied with civil wars, tumults,
murders, and innumerable mischiefs; seeing the most tyrannical government
does not subject a State to such and so great evils. Iehu and his posterity
were wicked and idolatrous Princes, but whilst the succession was continued in
his house, the Commonwealth in some sort flourished: but after that by treason
Zachariah was slain, then their land was miserably afflicted with civil
wars, the fruitful mother of all misery. And therefore a wise people, after
the succession is established, will endure many injuries, oppressions, and
insolences at their Princes hands, rather then they will by treason and
rebellion seek their overthrow, seeing the destruction of the Prince is
usually accompanied with the ruin of the kingdom.

The use which we are to make hereof is this, that with thankful hearts, and
bended knees, we praise the Lord; who when we were in danger of all these
miseries, has establishshed the kingdom, by giving unto us a religious
Prince, who has confirmed our peace, and continued the Gospel unto us, and
has not only given us assurance of these benefits for his own time; but also
(by Gods blessing) seems to promise the continuance hereof, by the
establishment of succession in his royal posterity.

The third object of punishment is the whole Commonwealth, and people of Israel
in these words, v. 5. And at that day I will break the bow of Israel in the
valley of Iizreel. The meaning whereof is this. By that day, we are to understand,
the The exposition.
day of Gods visitation, when as the measure of the peoples sin being full,
and come to ripenes, he would not only overthrow Iehues posterity, and the
state of the kingdom, but also bring the like destruction upon the whole
Commonwealth and body of the people.

By breaking of the bow, we are to understand the defeating and subuerting of
their whole power, by a usual synecdoch of the part for the whole: so Psalm.
44. 6. I trust not in my Psalm. 44. 6. 1. Sam. 2. 4.
bow. So that it is as much as if he had said, that he would destroy and
overthrow al their munition, warlicke furniture, and provision, yea all their
power and strength, in whatsoever it consisted, so as they should not be able
to resist their enemies.

From whence we learn, first, that although Princes and have not only sinned
themselves, but also by their authority The subject is not acquitted when his
Prince leads him into sin.
and example have drawn and allured their inferiors into like wickedness: yet
the subjects who have obeyed their lawful authority in unlawful things, and
have followed their example in evil, shall not be excused; but as they have
been partakers with them in their sins, so likewise they shall be partakers
with them in their punishments. For if authority be an argument to prevail
with them, then the authority of God, which is supreme, should be of greater
force to continue them in holy obedience, then the authority of man to draw
them to sin: if examples do strongly allure and persuade, then the example
of God himself, and of Jesus Christ, should more forcibly restrain us from
sin, then of the greatest Prince in the world to entice us to commit it.

The use hereof is, that we be not forced with any humane authority to fall
into sin: for when they have done their worst, they can but kill the body;
and blessed are they who choose rather to give their lives and dearest blood,
then to pollute their consciences with known wickedness: for by sinning
against God, they provoke his wrath against them, who is able to destroy the
body, and after to cast body and soul into eternal torments. Matthew. 10. 28.

Secondly, we may observe what was the estate of this Matthew. 10. 28.
kingdom when this threatening was denounced by the Prophet; No strength can
uphold that State which sin pulls down.
namely, so strong, flourishing, and prosperous, that the people feared nothing
less, then such approaching destruction: for they abounded at this time in
multitude, munition, walled towns, and strong holds; they had prosperous
success against their enemies, and had obtained many famous victories; so that
now they were lulled asleep in deep security, fearing no danger: and yet at
this time God threatens, and soon after brings upon them sudden
destruction. Whence we learn, that there is no strength nor power which will
uphold any State, when the sins thereof pull down Gods judgments upon it.
And therefore far be it from us to trust in our own multitude, power, and
munition, and so to be moved and encouraged thereby to go on in our sins;
for the Lord can easily break the bow, and turn all humane strength into
weakness; so that when it seeming greatest we trust therein, it shall most
fail and deceive us.

And so much for the subject of the punishment. In the last place is set down
the place, where this punishment should Exposition.
principally be inflicted; namely, in the valley of Iizreel: which was a
spacious plain, ten miles in length, situated by the Hierome.
City Iizreel, and extended it self near unto Samaria; where in a battle
fought between the Assyrians and the Israelites, the people of Israel were
overthrown.

Where first we may observe, that they were not overcome in a strange Country,
or in some place of disadvantage; Worldly helps vain when God opposes.
chief strength consisted, wherein they put such great confidence. Whence we
learn, how vain the best worldly helps are, when God opposes himself
against any people, etc. Which should teach us in our most flourishing estate,
not to trust in our own power and strength, but to rest upon Gods providence
and promised assistance, which will never fail us.

Secondly, as the Lord by overthrowing them in this chief place of their
strength, did teach them the vanity of their We must be admonished by the
example of others.
selfe-confidence: so does he hereby justly and fitly punish an other sin of
theirs; namely, the neglect of his former judgments: for in this valley the
Lord had brought a fearful destruction upon the family of Ahab, for their
gross idolatry: of which the Israelites should have made profitable use, by
flying their sins, lest they should be overtaken with their punishments: but
they neglecting this example, which the very sight and name of the place should
have continually called to their remembrance; and going forward in their blind
superstition and idolatry, the Lord in the very same place brought upon them
the very like destruction.

The use which we are to make hereof is this, that we take warning by the
example of others, and make profitable use of Gods judgments, which like a
gracious Judge he inflicteth on some, that others being hereby admonished, may
escape: which gracious warnings if we neglect, he will likewise make us
examples of his justice.

ANd so much concerning the first degree of the Israelites punishment,
signified by the birth of the Prophets first child. Now follows the second
degree; the withholding of Gods mercy from them. The which is first typically
shadowed under the name of the second child; and after manifestly expressed:
first, simply, in the reason why this name was imposed, verse 6. and afterward
amplified by way of comparison or dissimilitude: verse 7.

The second degree of their punishment is simply set down verse 6. She
conceived yet again, and bare a daughter. And God said unto him; Call her name
Lo-ruchamah: for I will no more have pity upon the house of Israel: but I will
utterly take them away.

Whereas the Prophet says, that his wife conceived yet again, he shows,
that there was a certain space or distance Exposition.
of time between the birth of the two children: by which he signifies, that
the Lord after that he had for their sins inflicted upon them the first
punishment, would not presently bring upon them his second and more grievous
judgment, but would give them some respite and time of repentance, that so
turning unto him, he might spare them and receive them to mercy. For if they
had, after they were overthrown and led captives, unfeignedly repented of their
sins, the Lord would have had compassion on them, and received them into his
love and favor. But when they obstinately continued in their impenitency, the
Lord refuses to show mercy unto them. And this he signifies by the birth of
the second child.

Secondly, by this second birth the Lord shows, that they made no good use of
his former judgments, but grew from bad to worse: and therefore his justice
required, that he should lay upon them a second punishment, much more grievous
then the former.

And these things are to be gathered out of her second conceptio^. It is
further said, that her second child was a daughter: by which he intimates
their declining, both in respect of their manners and state; the former whereof
was the cause of the latter. First, he shows their declination in manners:
for as the woman sex is more weak and inconstant then the man; so they were
declined from that strength of faith, virtue, and constancy that was in Jacob,
and the rest of their godly ancestors, and were become weak and inconstant in
all good things. Secondly, he shows their declination, in respect of the
state of their Commonwealth. For whereas their ancestors had valiantly
defended and enlarged the Kingdom against all their enemies, they were so
weakened, partly through their effeminatenesse, the daughter of peace and
plenty, and partly through seditions and civil wars, that they had made
themselves a fit pray for their enemies, being no more able to defend
themselves, then if they had been a Commonwealth of women. And this weakness
and infirmity is signified under the sex of women in the Scriptures. So when
God would signify that the Babylonians should not be able to stand in the hand
of their enemies, he says; that they should be like women: that is, weak and
impotent: Ier. 50. 37. Now this weakness in their state proceeded Ier. 50. 37.
from their weakness in grace, virtue, faith, and constancy: for when they
declined from holy obedience, and after a weak and inconstant manner, suffered
themselves to be withdrawn from God, and were enticed to serve idols, God
took away from them their valor, strength, and manly courage; and depriving
them of their hearts of men, gave them women's hearts, which caused them to be
so effeminate, timorous, and cowardly, that they durst not endure the least
encounter of their enemies.

And these are the things signified by the sex. The next thing to be
considered, is the name: Call her name lo-ruchamah. The signification whereof
is, without mercy, or, not obtaining mercy: or as the Apostle Paul expounds
it, Romans 9. 25. Not (through Gods mercy) beloved. The which name is Romans 9. 25.
given, to signify that the people of Israel, after they were led captive by
the Assyrians, should never obtain, either presently, or for the time to come,
Gods mercy, to be restored again into their Country.

And this is the meaning of these words, concerning the Gods mercy even in his
punishments.
hence are diverse. First, me may observe Gods gracious goodness, in his manner
of punishing men for their sins: after he has smitten them once, he does not
presently strike again; but he pauseth and gives time and respite, that they
may make profitable use of his former visitation, and amend their faults for
which they were punished, that so he may not be moved to redouble their
punishment; as it appears in his dealing with the Israelites in this place.
Whereby it is manifest, that he takes no pleasure in our pain and torment;
but in punishing aims at our amendment, that so we may be eternally saved:
and therefore, as he is hardly drawn to punish, so when he has begun, he is
loath to go forward; but having like a gracious father, given us a few stripes,
he lays the rod aside, expecting our amendment, that so he may no more punish
us. And thus he dealt with the Israelites in the time of the Judges, and in the
captivity of Babylon; and with us likewise, as at many other times, so
especially in the days of Queen Mary, and in our late visitation.

Secondly, we may observe in the example of the Israelites, That we quickly
forget Gods judgments.
how soon we forget Gods judgments when they are once past, making no good
use of them, nor amending those faults for which we were punished: but when the
affliction is once past, we securely go forward in sin, and become worse then
we were before; as though now God had emptied his quiver, and had not one arrow
of wrath and vengeance more to shoot at us. A notable example hereof we have
in Pharaoh; yea and in our own times: for how few is the number of those, who
have made any profitable use of Gods late visitation? Nay, how many are there,
who (as though having escaped that, they were priuileged from all others) are
grown worse and worse? This is a miserable evil, of which the Lord
complains, Esa. 1. 5. and the forerunner Esa. 1. 5.
of utter destruction. For as the father when he sees his child (after he
has often corrected him for his faults) grow thereby more stubburne and
disobedient, judges him past all grace, and without hope of amendment, and
therefore gives him over and thrusts him out of his house: So does God deal
with us all.

Thirdly, we may here learn, that if having one affliction or punishment laid
upon us, we do not make good use thereof If Gods former chastisements do not
amend us, he will inflict greater punishments.
of for our amendment, but casting Gods judgments behind our backs, become
more and more stubburne and rebellious, the Lord will surely increase our
punishment, if we increase in sin, until he have brought us to utter
destruction: for the pit of his vengeance can never be drawn dry, neither
will he ever want thunderbolts of his wrath of all sizes to dart against
sinners, sin they never so often; but after a plague, he can send a famine,
after famine the sword, after private evils public mischiefs, after
corporal, spiritual, and after temporary eternal punishments. And this
appears Leuit. 26. Deu. 28.
by the former examples of Pharaoh, the Israelites in the time of the Judges,
and in this place; and this we likewise shall find true by our own
experience, if we do not in this time of respite make use of Gods former
judgments. For the Lord has pulled back his hand to spare us if we repent,
but if we securely go on in our sins, he is in this time and space but
lifting up his hand, ye he may strike the greater stroke.

The last thing which we will here observe is, that if we decline in our
virtues, graces and manners, we shall also decline So much we decline in
courage and strength, as we decay in virtue.
in our strength and manliness; if we wax cold in the zeal of Gods glory,
he will also cool our courage; and if with effeminate inconstancy we turn
from him, he will also effeminate our minds, and take away our valor, strength
and fortitude; and so becoming weak, impotent and dastardly cowards, we shall
be made a fit pray for our weakest enemies. And those who heretofore tre^bled
at our names, whilst serving God he filled our hearts with courage, and our
hands with strength, shall after our defection, when our hearts are changed and
made effeminate, give us shameful foiles and obtain an easy victory. And
this appears in Jos 7.
the example of the Israelites, Joshua 7. in the time of the Judges: in the
reign of Saul and David, and the rest of the Deuteronomy. 28. 7. 25. Leuit. 26. 7. 8.
17.
Kings, according to the word of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 28. 7. 25. 32. 30. Ios. 23 10.
Leuit. 26. 7. 8. 17.

And so much for the second punishment, as it is shadowed under the name of the
Prophets child. Now we are to consider of it as it is plainly expressed in
the reason given why this name is imposed: For I will no more have pity upon
the house of Israel, but I will utterly take them away. The words in the
original, are, For I will not add, go forward, or continue Exposition.
to have mercy. By which he signifies, that howsoever heretofore he had
multiplied his mercies upon them, and after that he had cast them off for their
rebellions, had often received them again into his former love and favor; yet
now seeing they had abused his mercy and patience, he would not proceed any
longer to show mercy, but the acceptable time of grace being past, he would
inflict his judgments upon the^, which long ago they had deserved.

For I will no more have pity. The word here used signifies generally to have
mercy, but is fitly here translated pity: for whereas there are two kinds of
mercy, the one spiritual, the which especially shows it self in the
forgiveness of sins; the other temporal, whereby the Lord seeing the misery
of men pitieth them, and in his tender compassion delivers them out of
temporary affliction; the former kind of mercy God denies not to the
Israelites, seeing none are excluded from this mercy, who repent and believe;
but the latter, namely, freedom and deliverance out of their miserable
captivity.

Whereas therefore the Lord says, that he will no more have mercy upon them,
his meaning is, that he will not any more in pity and compassion deliver them
out of their enemies hands, as he had done in former times: as in the days of
Ioash, 2. King. 13. 23. 25. from the Aramites: and in the days 2. King. 13.
23. 2. King. 14. 26.
of Jeroboam, 2. King. 14. 26. 27. besides those manifold deliverances in the
time of the Judges; Saul and David; but that now their enemies should for ever
have the dominion over them.

It follows: But I will utterly take them away. The which words are diversely
translated. The Vulgar reads it, I will utterly forget them, as though this
should be the sense, I will be so far from pitying them, that I will not so
much as remember them. But this translation the Hebrew word (...) will not
admit, unless we would change the third radical (...) into (...) and (...)
into (...). Others read it, I will utterly take them away, namely, out of the
land of promise into captivity by their enemies; which will well stand with
the words, sense, and the event. Iunius reads it thus, I will not proceed
any more to have mercy one the house of Israel, that I should by any means
pardon them. The which translation also well agrees with the text, and with all
circumstances, for (...) when as (...) follows, it commonly signifies to
pardon, and (...) sometimes Genesis 38 15. Judge. 8. 6. Jer. 13. 14. Amos 7 8.
signifies, that: as Genesis 38. 15. Judge. 8. 6. And in this sense, we have the
like threatening, Ier. 13. 14. Amos. 7. 8.

And so much for the meaning of the words. The doctrines which from hence we
gather, are these. First, whereas he says, Gods former mercies abused, do not
exempt us from future judgments.
we learn, that it is a false inference which carnal and secure men make,
namely, that because the Lord has multiplied his mercies upon them in former
times, therefore they are sure that he will do so still, notwithstanding that
they continually abuse his mercy, and take occasion thereby to go on in their
sins without repentance. For this was the case of the Israelites in this
place, against whom he threatens that he would turn his mercies into
judgments. It is true indeed, that Gods faithful children may make such
conclusions, from their former experience of Gods mercies, in his spiritual
gifts and graces, for in them he is unchangeable: Romans 11, 29. And also
concerning temporal benefits, so Romans 11. 29.
far forth as they will stand with their spiritual good; as David did, 1.
Sam. 17. 37. But this is no sure ground whereupon 1. Sam. 17. 37.
secure men may build their presumption. For if Gods mercies will not move us
to fear and serve him, he will not always continue to be merciful toward
us, but as he has a time for mercy, so he has also a time for judgment,
wherein he will utterly take us away in wrath, and bring us to destruction. An
example whereof we have in this place, and before the flood: Genesis 6. 3. etc.

Secondly, whereas the Lord threatens that they should Genesis 6. 3.
Captivity is the fruit of rebellion.
for ever remain in captivity, under the rule and dominion of their enemies,
here we may observe a notable fruit of rebellion. For so long as the
Israelites served God, whose service indeed is the only true liberty, they
were freed from all servitude and bondage: but when they refused to serve God
as their Lord and master, and would not be ruled by his word and Spirit, they
were compelled to serve crueli tyrants in a miserable and perpetual servitude;
yea, which was worse, they were not only the captives of their enemies, but
the perpetual bondslaues of their arch enemy the devil, as many as did not
turn unto God and again betake themselves to his service.

Thirdly, whereas the Lord pronounces this definitive Release from temporal
afflictions does not always follow true repentance. Hos. 1. 10. 2. 20
sentence, that he would never have pity on them to deliver them out of their
bondage, and yet upon the true repentance of many of them, pardoned their
sin, and received them to mercy, as appears verse. 10. chap. 2. 20. hence
we learn, that upon the forgiveness of sin, and reconciliation with God,
there does not always follow release from temporal afflictions, which for
sin are inflicted upon the faithful. For the Lord after that he has
pardoned his children their sin, does oftentimes chastise them afterward for
them, that hereby he may weane them, for the time to come, from their
corruptions, and with this bitterness of affliction may move them to hate
those sins, which otherwise would be sweet and pleasant to their corrupt
flesh. An example hereof we have in David, 2. Sam. 12. 13. 18. 16. 12. And in
Moses, 2. Sam. 12. 13. 18. and 16. 12. Numb. 20. 10. 12.
Number. 20. 10. 12. The consideration whereof should make us carefully flee
sin, if not for fear of eternal torments, from which all the faithful are
delivered by Christ, yet at least of temporary afflictions, which have in them
more bitterness, then sin sweetness, etc.

ANd so much concerning their second degree of punishment: the which is
amplified by a dissimilitude, verse. 7. Yet I will have mercy upon the house of
Judah, and will save them Exposition.
by the Lord their God; and will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by
battle, by horses, nor by horsemen. In which words is contained a gracious
promise to the house of Judah, of that mercy, which in the former verse he
refuses to vouchsafe the house of Israel. Wherein we are to consider, the
party to who^ this promise is made, namely, the house of Judah: and secondly
the benefits which are promised, the which are two fold, first his mercy, and
secondly salvation, which is an effect thereof: unto which are annexed the true
means, whereby he would save them, to wit, by the Lord their God: and after
the false and insufficient means are removed, in which notwithstanding men
usually put their confidence; and will not save them by bows.

This gracious promise of mercy and salvation, is made to the Jews, not for
any excellency or worthiness, which was in them, which deserved such grace and
mercy; for they also oftentimes had grieuouslie rebelled against the Lord, and
had provoked his wrath against them with their manifold sins, which reigned
amongst them, especially by their gross idolatry, as may appear both by the
history in the books of the Kings and Chronicles, and in the writings of the
Prophets, which were sent unto them, to wit, Esaias, Jeremy, and the rest. But
this mercy is promised unto them, first, because they did not go forward in
these sins with such obstinacy and impenitencie as the Israelites did, but
under the government of their godly Kings Iehosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, and
the rest, oftentimes returned again to the Lord by true repentance, and
forsaking their idolatry, restored Gods pure worship and service; and after
they were led captive, they made profitable use of their afflictions, and
harkened unto the voice of God brought unto them by his Prophets: whereas the
Israelites, after their first defection under Jeroboam, never wholly turned
unto the Lord, but grew worse and worse in their rebellion and gross idolatry.
Secondly, God spared the Tribe of Judah, that he might perform his gracious
promise which he had made to David; that there should not be wanting one to sit
upon his seat, till the Messiah came, whose kingdom should be eternal: the
which could not be accomplished, if this Tribe likewise had been utterly
destroyed, or the kingdom altogether ceased.

Now the reasons why this our Prophet which was sent to the Israelites, makes
this gracious promise in the name of the Lord, of that mercy and salvation unto
the Jews, which was denied unto the Israelites, was, first, that he might
hereby awaken them out of their deep sleep of carnal security, and beat
down their pride and self confidence, into which their present prosperity had
brought them. For at this time the Kingdom of Israel exceedingly flourished
both in multitude, as containing in it ten Tribes, and in strength and all
warlicke provision; having obtained many great victories over their enemies,
and particularly against the Jews, whom they had overthrown and brought into
great extremity; in wealth also, which they had gotten by spoiling their
enemies, and namely the Jews, whose Temple they had robbed and carried away
all their treasures and vessels of gold and silver; whereas the Jews were but
a few in number, as being but one Tribe and a half, many of which were
miserably slain by their enemies, disfurnished of their warlicke munition and
means of defense; and lastly, spoiled of their riches and treasures, which are
the sinews of war; and so brought into miserable poverty. In all which
respects the Israelites despised the Jews, and proudly insulted over them in
their miseries; yea and which was worst of al, they combined themselves with
the Syrians, the enemies of God, and conspired how they might bring the poor
afflicted Kingdom of Judah to utter ruin; as appears, Esaias, 7. 5, 6. And
therefore the Lord, to beat down this Esa. 7. 5, 6.
pride and cruel insolency, sends his Prophet to foretell their destruction,
who were many, strong, and abounding in all riches: and contrariwise, the
preservation and salvation of the Jews, who were few, weak, and in want of
all things, but want of misery.

Secondly, because he was a Prophet sent, not to the Jews, but to the
Israelites: he does not meddle with their sins, which were many, nor
denounces Gods judgments against them; but leaving that to their own
Prophets, he applies himself to his own people, by all means seeking to
humble and bring them to true repentance: and because this promise of salvation
and mercy unto the Jews, was effectual to this purpose; therefore he recites
it, that their hearts being wounded with grief and emulation, and their pride
and insolency being beaten down, they might in some sort be prepared for true
repentance.

And thus much for the understanding of the first point. The doctrines which
from hence we learn, are these. First, That in common calamities God has
aspeciall care over the faithful.
that when the Lord exercises his judgments upon the wicked, he has in the
mean time a special care of the preservation of those that fear and serve
him, to deliver them out of the midst of common calamities; as appears in
this place: for though he suffered the people of Israel to be overthrown by
their enemies; yet he so curbeth them in with the strong rain of his
providence, that they could not enter into the next bordring country of Judah,
whom they hated with equal malice, albeit they were much fewer in number and
weaker in power, and in outward appearance altogether unable to make any
resistance. And this is manifest by many such examples of like deliverances out
of common evils. So was Noah preserved in the common deluge, Lot in the
destruction of Sodom, the Israelites from the plagues of Egypt. For the just
Judge of heaven and earth, will not destroy the just with the wicked: Genesis 18.
25. And the Lord knows to deliver the godly out of tentation, and to reserve
the Genesis 18. 25. 2. Pet. 2. 9.
unjust to be punished.

Secondly, we here learn, that though our sins be great, Gods mercy to those
that repent.
and our imperfections and corruptions manifold; yet this will not withhold
from us the course of Gods mercies, if we turn to God by repentance. The Jews
were not much behind the Israelites in rebellion, idolatry, and all wickedness;
and yet because they often forsook their wicked ways, either when they were
admonished by Gods Prophets, or exercised with afflictions, and turned unto God
by true repentance; therefore the Lord promises unto them mercy and
deliverance: whereas the Israelites, who continued obstinately in their
impenitency, were given over of God to utter destruction. The like example we
have in Saul and Manasse, Peter and Judas, and many others.

Thirdly, we learn, that it is a notable argument to move the Lord to spare a
people, when as they maintain amongst God spares those who maintain his pure
worship, though they be polluted with many corruptions.
them Gods pure and sincere worship and service, notwithstanding they are
polluted with many corruptions and imperfections: but when as true religion is
banished or despised, when Gods sincere worship is neglected, and idolatry and
superstition erected; this is a strong motive to cause the Lord to power down
his fearful judgments; as appears in the example of the Israelites and the
Jews. Whilst the wise continues her love and marriage fidelity toward her
husband, he is content to bear with many infirmities, and to put up many
injuries; but if she violate her faith, and place her love upon a stranger, he
is kindled with rage and jealousy, and will never endure such intolerable
wickedness: so whilst the Church, which is Gods spouse, continues in her
love, and observes her marriage promise, that she will obey and respect him
above all; he is content to spare her, though she be full of corruptions and
imperfections: but when she withdraws her love, and sets it upon idols,
and disclaiming her promised obedience, neglects his pure religion and
sincere worship and service; then will his jealousy burn like fire, and his
wrath will suddenly break forth and utterly consume her, being now no better
then an adulterous harlot. It is true indeed, that where Gods true religion is
established, and his Gospel sincerely preached; there, if the people do not
live according to their profession, and bring forth the fruits thereof, it will
not privilege them from afflictions and punishments; nay rather the Lord will
first visit them, because they are of his own family; as appears, 1. Pet. 4.
17. Ier. 25. 29. Heb. 12. 6. Apoc. 3. 19. But these visitations are in 1. Pet.
4. 17. Ier. 25. 29. Heb 12 6. Apoc 3. 19. 1. Cor. 11. 32.
mercy, that by his fatherly chastisements he may reclaim them, lest running
on in their sins, they should be condemned with the world; as it is, 1. Cor.
11. 32. But yet so long as they do not withdraw their love from God, nor
violate their faith, by neglecting Gods true religion, and his sincere worship
and service, and erecting idolatry and superstition, the Lord will not utterly
forsake them, nor altogether withdraw his mercy from them; as we may see in the
example of the Jews, and have sufficiently learned by our own experience.

Fourthly, we here learn, that no vice is more intolerable God abaseth the
proud.
in Gods sight, then when by our prosperity, and Gods gracious and free
benefits, we be puffed so up in pride and selfe-confidence, that we despise,
oppress, and insolently insult aver those, who are in affliction and misery.
For this was the cause which moved the Lord to withdraw his mercies and
benefits from the Israelites, when as they abused them to pride; and to bestow
them upon the Jews, who were contemned and oppressed by them.

And thus much for the first point. The second is the benefits promised to the
house of Judah, first, in general, that he Exposition.
will have mercy upon them, secondly, that he will in mercy save and preserve
them from their enemies. In which benenefits promised, there is a secret
antithesis, unto the judgment threatened against the house of Israel, in the
former verse, they should be lo-ruchamah, such as should have no mercy, but
the house of Judah should be ruchamah, that is, such as should obtain mercy:
they should be utterly taken away, and never return out of their captivity;
but these how they should also be led captive, yet they should continue but a
while in their servitude, and at the end of 70. years be again restored into
their own country.

The which benefits promised, were accordingly performed: First, in the days
of Ahaz, when they were delivered out of the hands of Rezin King of Aram, and
Pecah the son of Remaliah; as it is Isai. 7. 1. and also in the days of
Ezechias, when as the Lord gave unto them a marvelous deliverance, by sending
his Angel to destroy the host of Senacharib, even 185000. men, as appears,
2. King. 18. and 2. King. 18. and 19. Esa. 36. and 37.
19. and Esa. 36. and 37.

And secondly, when as being led captive into Babylon, he moved Cyrus and
Darius to have compassion on them, and to return them again into their own
Country.

And this is that which is meant by these benefits promised. All Gods benefits
included under his mercy.
these. First, that he includes all his benefits promised, under the name of
his mercy: to note unto us, that they do not come unto any by merit and
desert, but of free grace and Gods undeserved goodness; for mercy does not
presuppose merit, but rather misery, both in regard of sin, and the
punishment due unto it. And further, to assure us that if we have Gods mercy,
and be in his favor, we shall need no benefit, either for our maintenance, or
else our defense and preservation; whereas on the otherside, without this mercy
we can have no assurance of either.

Secondly, we may observe, that he knitteth these two together, Mercy the cause
of salvation.
mercy and salvation, and sets mercy in the first place, because it is the
cause of salvation, and the fountain from which this stream of our
deliverance flows. Whence we learn, that when the Lord saves and delivers
us out of the hands of our enemies, we do not ascribe our deliverance to our
goodness, works or worthiness, but to Gods free mercy and undeserved grace.

The third thing to be considered, is the means whereby Exposition.
the Lord would save them; which are described: first affirmatively, by the
Lord their God: and after negatiuely, where the false and insufficient means
are removed; And will not save them by bow, etc.

Concerning the first: by the Lord their God; we are to understand the true
Messiah Jesus Christ, the eternal Iehoua Genesis 19. 24.
with his Father and holy Spirit; who only saves and delivers his Church
out of the hands of their enemies, and procures for them eternal salvation
and happiness: first, as the meritorious cause; for his sake and merits we
have salvation, and all other benefits derived unto us from God the Father; who
if he should behold us out of his Son in our sins and corruptions, would in
stead of benefits, heap upon us plagues and punishments; and in stead of
salvation, would plunge us into everlasting death and destruction. And
secondly, as the efficient cause of our salvation: for the Father saves us,
but by his Son, who is his strong power, whereby he not only created us, but
also has redeemed and saved us.

Moreover he says, that he would save them by the Lord their God, rather then
that he would save them by himself: to the end that he might hereby signify,
not only that the house of Judah did make choice of him the true God, whom they
worshipped and served; but also that he was not the God of the Israelites,
seeing they had forsaken him, and betaken themselves to the worship of idols.

But here it may be demanded, how this can be true, that he was not the God of
the Israelites, but of the Jews only, seeing he professes himself to be the
God of all the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and also seeing the
Israelites at this time, professed that they served him in their idols? I
answer, that God accounts himself to be no God unto them, who had refused
him; and that they had in truth refused him, whatsoever show and profession
they made to the contrary, when as they did not worship him after the prescript
form of his word, but in hypocrisy and in idols; not in his temple, unto
which place he had limited and restrained his public worship, but in groves
and high places.

And this was the true means whereby he would save them. In the next place he
expresses and remooueth the false and insufficient means of their salvation:
And will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle, by horses nor by
horsemen. As though he should say, Although they be so weak, poor and
impotent, as that they may appear unto themselves and others to lie open for a
pray to their enemies, yet this shall be no means to hinder their salvation
and deliverance, seeing my purpose is not to save them by any power, riches or
means of their own, but by mine own might, which without all humane help,
is in it self omnipotent and omnisufficient.

Whereas then he says, that he will not save them by bow, nor by sword, etc.
his meaning is, that he would not save them by their own power and strength,
or by any humane and worldly means, but that their deliverance should wholly
come from, and by himself: the which accordingly was effected; first, in the
reign of Ezekias, when as being invaded with the mighty host of Senacharib,
he caused his Angel to slay 185000. of their enemies, and so without their
own bow, sword, or battle delivered them. And after that they were led
captive into Babylon, he gave the^ grace in the eyes of Cyrus and Darius; and
when otherwise they were altogether unable by force to relieve themselves, he
caused their enemies in pity and compassion to free them out of captivity,
and to restore them again into their own country.

Now the reason why the Lord excludes all their own strength and means, was,
first to beat down the pride and insolency of the Israelites, who thought it
impossible that the house of Judah, in regard of their weakness, poverty, and
small number should be delivered out of their hands, especially, having
combined themselves with the Syrians, to work their overthrow; and secondly,
to strengthen the Jews in the assurance of their deliverance, notwithstanding
they saw no possible means in regard of humane power; which was exceeding
needful, considering that through our naturally corruptions, we are ready to
doubt of our deliverance, when as we are abandoned of outward helps.

And this is ye meaning of these words. The doctrines which 1. That we have all
benefits from God in, and for Jesus Christ.
salvation of Gods Church and elect children, and all other benefits which they
receive, either spiritual or temporal, is in and for Jesus Christ alone; and
not from their own means, nor for their own merits. And this appears in
this place, where the Lord promises to save the Jews out of the hands of the
enemies, but not by their own means, but in the Lord their God, the promised
Messiah. And as this is true concerning our temporal deliverances, so
especially concerning our eternal salvation; for there is not salvation in any
other, etc. Act. 4. 12. And he is able perfectly to save all those who Acts 4.
12. Heb. 7. 25.
come unto God by him: Heb. 7. 25. The use hereof is, that we do not with the
Papists look for salvation elsewhere, not in our own merits, nor in the
merits and intercession of Saints; nor ascribe the glory hereof in part or
whole to any other, saving our only Savior Christ, etc.

The second thing which we observe, is, that the only true 2. Jehovah will be
their God alone, who worship him according to his word.
Jehovah is the God of those alone, who worship and serve him, after his will
revealed in his word: as for those that in stead of Gods revealed truth embrace
their own wil-worships, though they make never so glorious a profession of
their service to the true Ged, yet he esteems it not as done unto him;
neither will he acknowledge them his servants, nor himself their God, who in
stead of his will do their own wills, and in stead of his pure service, offer
unto him their own inventions. Whereas contrariwise, he vouchsafes to be
called the God of them, who worship him after his revealed will, though
otherwise their obedience be mingled with many corruptions and imperfections,
as appears in the example of the Israelites, and the Jews in this place.

Thirdly, we here learn whence we are to expect deliverance, 3. Salvation is
only from the Lord.
and salvation out of the hands of our enemies; not from our own strength,
munitio^, number, riches, friends, seeing our salvation comes not from our
selves, or from our own means, but from the Lord alone. And therefore when we
abound in these things, we must not trust in them (and so grow proud in our
own strength) but in Gods help and promised assistance: and when these things
are wanting, let us not despair of deliverance, seeing the Lord without,
above, or contrary to these means, can save and preserve us by his own
omnipotent power: as appears in the example of the Israelites, delivered out
of the captivity of Egypt, out of the hands of the Madianites, by Gedeon and
his 300. men: Judge. 7. from the power of Sanacherib, by his Judge. 7. 2. King.
19.
own Angel, and in the example of the slaughter of the Philistims by Jonathan
and his Armourbearer, 1. Sam. 14. 6. And so 1. Sam. 14 6.
in our greatest weakness and want of means, we may comfort our selves in the
Lords assistance which is all-sufficient, and say with Jonathan: It is not hard
to the Lord, to save with many, or with few, 1. Sam. 14. 6. and with Asa, 2.
Chron. 1. Sam. 14. 6. 2. Chron. 14. 11.
14. 11. O Lord, it is nothing unto thee to help with many, or with no power.

Whereas on the other side, all worldly helps are insufficient to deliver
without Gods assistance: for though the horse be prepared against the day of
battle, yet our salvation comes of the Lord, Prou. 21. 31. And if the Lord
do not Prou. 21. 31.
bless this means, A horse is but a vain help, and shall not deliver any by
his great strength: Psalm. 33. 17. And therefore Psalm. 33. 17.
when we abound in these means (although we may lawfully use them, and thank
God for them) yet let us put no affiance in them, but say with David, Psalm.
44. 6. I do Psalm. 44. 6.
not trust in my bow, neither can my sword save me, etc.

ANd so much concerning the second degree of the Israelites punishment. The
third follows, which is their utter and final reiection: verse. 8. Now when
she had weaned Lo-ruchamah, she conceived and bare a son. Verse. 9. Then God
said, Call his name Lo-ammi; for ye are not my people, therefore I will not be
yours. In which words the third punishment is first typically shadowed under
the child's name, and afterward plainly expressed in the reason rendered
thereof.

But before this third punishment is denounced, there is a certain space
interposed between it and the former, which is signified verse. 8. Now when she
had weaned Loru-chamah, etc. By the weaning of Loru-chamah, ye Prophet
typically shows, that because the people were not reclaimed with the former
punishments, the Lord would be so far from repealing his sentence of those
judgments before denounced, that he would now ratify and confirm it; yea,
and because their diseases were grown so desperate, that they were past all
cure, and seeing neither mercies nor judgments would reclaim them, he would
now inflict upon the^ a third judgment, more heavy then all the rest; namely,
he would reject them from being his people. But yet he would not do this
suddenly, but as the child is first weaned before it be taken from his nurse, so
they should be weaned and restrained from their nurses the Prophets, and from
the food of their souls, the milk 1. Pet. 2. 2.
of Gods word; of which the Apostle speaks, 1. Pet. 2. 2. and consequently
should be deprived of all the graces of Gods spirit, which are both begotten by
this spiritual seed of Gods word, and nourished and increased with this
heavenly food.

But howsoever the Lord goes forward in the denunciation of judgments, yet it
is not altogether without mercy: for before he utterly rejects them he
interposeth a convenient distance of time between this and the former
judgment, that in the mean while they might repent and so escape this last
punishment. And this also is signified by the weaning of Loru-chamah before
Lo-ammi is conceived. For though he had condemned them to perpetual captivity,
yet he does not presently exclude them out of that covenant which he had made
with their fathers, whereby they became his people, but for a time he patiently
waited for their conversion, that so they might still retain the name of Gods
people, and attain unto the salvation of their souls, though their bodies
were inthralled in a perpetual servitude.

But when as they made no use neither of Gods former judgments, nor yet of his
patience and long suffering, but obstinately and desperately went on in their
sins, they increasing in wickedness the Lord increases his punishments, and
finally casts them off from being his people. The which final reiection is
signified and shadowed under the name Lo-ammi, the signification whereof is, Not
my people, as it is expounded by God himself in this place: and after it is
plainly expressed in the reason: for ye are not my people: therefore I will
not be yours.

The Lord had in former times made choice of the children of Israel, amongst
all the nations of the world to be his Church and people, according to that,
Deuteronomy. 32. 9. For the Deuteronomy. 32. 9.
Lords portion is his people: Jacob is the lot of his inheritance: with them
he made his covenant, and upon them, as being his own peculiar people, and
proper family, he multiplied his benefits, with a more liberal hand, then
upon any other nation. But when Israel observed not the condition of the
covenant, but renounced the service of God, went a whoring after idols, and
when neither Gods mercies would move them to love him, nor his judgments to
fear him, nor both joined together could reclaim them from their wicked
ways, and bring them to repentance, the Lord casts them off as being a
desperate cure, and finally rejects them from being his Church and people.

Yet he does not presently execute this last punishment, after he had inflicted
the former; for after they were led into captivity, and lived as captives in
the land of the Medes under the Empire and government of the Assyrians, they
retained still amongst them some relics of their own manner of worship, and
used their ceremonies in their own assemblies, and in respect of this outward
service and communion which was amongst them, they had not altogether lost the
name of Gods people: but when as Deioce, the first King of the Medes, prevailed
against the Assyrians, they were driven out of the country of the Medes, and
scattered into diverse parts of the world, so as they could not any more
assemble together, nor exercise their own worship, nor use their own
ceremonies. And so mixing themselves in marriages with the Gentiles, and
embracing their religion, they were wholly excluded out of Gods covenant, and
losing both the name and privileges of the people of God, were numbered amongst
Pagans and infidels.

But here it may be demanded, how this can stand Judah, but of Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob; and how it can agree with the words following, that the children of
Israel should be as the sand of the sea, etc. I answer, that howsoever the
Jeroboam, who hated idolatry, and embraced the pure and sincere worship and
service of God, left their patrimonies and possessions in the kingdom of
Israel, and adjoined themselves to the house of Judah; as appears: 2. Chron.
11. 13. 16. 2. Chro. 11. 13. 16.
Some also in the reign of Asa fell from the Kingdom of Israel, and subjected
themselves unto his government, when they saw that God was with him: as it is,
2. Chron. 15. 9. Diverse 2. Chron. 15. 9.
others were united to Judah, in the reign of Ezechias; as appears, 2. Chron.
30. 11. 18. 25. of which number though 2. Chron. 30. 11. 18. 25.
some after the celebration of the Passover returned into their own country,
yet it is very likely that when the Prophets of God foretold their captivity,
when Gods religion was wholly rejected and profaned, and when the Assyrians
made cruel war against the kingdom of Israel, both they and many more, who
believed Gods word in the mouth of his Prophets, and expected the execution of
those punishments which were threatened against their country, left their own
habitations and adjoined themselves to the kingdom of Judah, and were led
captive with them into Babylon, and likewise with them returned out of their
captivity; as appears Ezra 2. Ezra 2.


Moreover, God no doubt had his number amongst those who were led captive by
Salmanasser; who though they lost the outward name of Gods people, and the
notes of a visible Church, the purity of doctrine publicly preached, and the
right use of the Sacraments publicly administered, yet they wanted not the
spiritual graces of his Spirit, not were excluded out of his Church invisible:
and howsoever they were rejected from the old covenant, yet they had their part
in the covenant of grace.

Lastly, for the future time, many of these who were scattered over the face of
the earth, after the coming and ascension of Christ, were by the ministry of
the Apostles and Gods Ministers, converted to the faith, and received together
with the Gentiles into the covenant of grace, and admitted as true subjects of
Christ's Kingdom. And yet notwithstanding all this, because the greatest number
of the people who were led captive, remained in their impenitency, it might be
said that Israel should be Lo-ammi, none of Gods people; the far greater part
giving the denomination to the whole.

In the last place, as he rejects them from being his people, so he denies
himself to be their God; therefore I will not be yours: the Hebrew has it, I
will not be unto you: the meaning is, that he would not be their God; which is
not expressed, but to be understood by mutual relation. So Ier. 11. 4. Jer. 11.
4.
Ye shall be my people, and I will be your God. But he uses this speech as
being more emphaticall, and does not only say unto them, that he would refuse
to be their God; but that he would not be unto the^: intimating thereby, that
they should have no manner of part or interest in him, nor any thing to do
with him for their benefit: so that though his being gives being and all
goodness and happiness to his creatures, yet this should not profit them,
because he would not be unto them, etc. As though he should say; seeing you
have ungratefully abused my benefits, and stubbornely contemned my judgments,
and notwithstanding all the means I have used to reclaim you, ye continue in
your rebellion, security, and hardness of heart, forsaking me your gracious
God, and neglecting my pure worship and service, and have made choice of false
Gods, and committed with them from time to time gross idolatry: therefore,
seeing you have refused me, I will likewise refuse you; seeing you reject me
from being your God, I will reject you from being my people; and howsoever my
being, being infinite in goodness, deriueth unto those that fear and serve me
all happiness; yet it shall not be unto you for your good and preservation,
but rather as your sins deserve, for your punishment and utter destruction.

And so much for the meaning of the words. Now we are to set down such
doctrines as do arise out of them. The first God inflicteth more heavy
punishments where lighter will not amend us.
the Lord goes forward unto the third, which was far more grievous then both
the other; because they did not only go forward in their former wickedness,
but also added this unto the rest, the neglect and contempt of Gods judgments.
So that this physic of Gods correction, either works upon the conscience,
and purges away the corruptions of sin; or if it have no operation, it
makes the party diseased worse then he was before, and moves the Lord our
Physician, to administer a purgation of greater force. And therefore let us
learn to make profitable use of lesser punishments, or else the Lord will
inflict those which are more grievous, either till he have amended, or else
destroyed us. Examples hereof we have in Pharaoh, the Jews, and many others.

Secondly, we may observe, that the more heavy the judgment is which is
denounced, the longer the Lord deferreth The greater the judgment is, the more
loath the Lord is to inflict it.
to inflict it; as though he were loath to use extremities, if man's wickedness
did not deserve it, and his justice require it, seeing lighter punishments will
not prevail. When Iizreel was borne, Lo-ruchamah was soon after conceived:
but she conceiueth not Lo-amni, whereby the utter reiection of the people was
signified, before Lo-ruchamah was weaned: all which time the Lord gave them to
make use of his former judgments, and expected their amendment with admirable
patience, that he might not utterly reject them. Wherein the Lord behaueth
himself like unto a good and tenderhearted Surgeon, who leaves no good means
unassayed, before he will cut off the member which is ill affected, etc.

Thirdly, we may note, that before the Lord does utterly God takes away his
liuerie before he turn men out of his service.
reject them from being his people, he first weaneth them from the milk of his
word, and food of his Sacraments, debarring them of all their public
assemblies, and the means of his worship and service, and taking from them all
their privileges and prerogatives, which they inioyed whilst they were his
people. Like unto Noble men, who upon the ill behavior of their servants,
first pull off their livery before they turn them out of service: not only
because they are unworthy of any such credit or protection, as it might cause
unto them; but also because they should not by abusing themselves in such
habits, dishonor their Lords who have rejected them.

Fourthly, we may here observe the greatness of this punishment, That it is a
fearful punishment to be rejected from being Gods people.
which may be considered in the inestimable benefits, whereof they were hereby
deprived, and in the intolerable evils and miseries into which they were
plunged: whilst Jehovah was their Lord and King, they were under his
protection, and so secured from the danger of all enemies; they were provided
for by his all-sufficient providence, and therefore sure to want nothing; endued
with many noble titles, prerogatives and privileges, as being his servants,
children, heirs, yea his spouse, partakers of many invaluable benefits,
temporal and spiritual, his word, Sacraments, and such like; and after a
short time of their service here on earth, they were assured to receive for
wages, an immortal Crown of glory and eternal felicity and happiness in
his Kingdom. But as soon as they are cast out of his Kingdom, and rejected
from being his people, they were stripped of those benefits, exposed to the
danger of their enemies, sin, Satan, and the world, who speedily assault, and
easily overcome all those who are out of Gods protection: and so taking them
captive, inthrall them in a miserable servitude, the wages whereof for the time
present is misery, horror of conscience, and desperation, and in the life to
come eternal death. Romans 6. 23. As therefore we judge their case most
wretched, Romans 6. 23.
who having been the subjects and servants of some gracious Prince, under whom
they have inioyed all the benefits of a peaceable and well governed kingdom,
are for their crimes and misdemeanors, banished into a Country in it self
uncomfortable, and amongst the midst of cruel enemies: so, and much more
miserable is the state of those who are banished out of the kingdom of grace,
where is all good and felicity, and live in the kingdom of Satan, where is
nothing but all woe and misery.

And this is that punishment which here is threatened. Now let us further
consider upon whom it is inflicted: even Gods former mercies privilege not a
rebellious people from future judgments.
upon the people of Israel, the chosen people of God, unto whom in former
times, he had bestowed innumerable benefits. Whereby it appears, that though
a people have in former times been partakers of never so great privileges, and
never so much enriched with Gods benefits, though God have made his outward
covenant with them of his grace, and the continuance of his favor; yet if they
break their covenant, which interchangeably they have made with God, denying
unto him their obedience, and living in all sin and wickedness; all this will
not privilege them from Gods fearful punishments, no not from final
reiection and destruction. And therefore let us not think it enough that God
has outwardly made his covenant with us, unless it be also written in our
hearts, and we perform, at least in our holy endeavor, that part thereof which
concerns our selves; for unless we live like his people and servants, he will
not acknowledge us for such, but will cast us off as he did the Israelites.

Now the sins for which especially the Israelites were Idolatry and
impenitencie, the cause of the peoples reiection.
rejected, were, first, their gross idolatry whereby they had forsaken God,
and betaken themselves to the service of idols; and secondly, their obstinacy
and impenitencie in their course of rebellion, from which they would not be
reclaimed, neither by Gods bountiful benefits, nor by his severe threatenings,
nor yet by his chastisements and more grievous punishments, which first like a
tender father and after like a just Judge he inflicted on them, but rather grew
worse and worse, and more and more intolerable in their wickedness. For this
is the last course and means which the Lord uses for the conversion of a
sinner, which when it will not prevail, he gives them over as being past all
help, seeing they are past all grace. If the skillful surgeon find that healing
salues are not fit to heal a deep festered wound, he uses drawing corrasiues
and the lancher, but if he sees the part diseased, notwithstanding all good
and fit means used to be past cure, he will no longer lose his labor and
cost, but cutteth it off. The gracious Judge, when he has for the offenders
first fault, given him some fatherly admonition, or threatened some severe
punishment; if he offend again, he punishes him with a whip, or with a burning
iron; but if all these chastisements and punishments will not reclaim him, he
condemns him to exile or death, as being past hope of amendment. And so the
Lord, when he sees that neither the healing plaster of his gracious promises,
nor the sharp corrasiue of his threatenings and punishments will cure a people
of the deep festered sores of sin; when he sees that neither admonition
nor gentle chastisement, nor seuerer punishment will restrain the sinner from
outrageous wickedness, then does he cut and cast them off as men of a
desperate estate and past all cure. And this was the estate of the Israelites
in this place; and of the Jews, of whom the Lord complains, Esa. 1. 5. and
of Pharaoh, Saul, Esa. 1. 5.
and many others.

The use which we are to make hereof is, that we do not neglect Gods
merciful visitations and fatherly corrections, lest the Lord seeing us
incorrigible, likewise reject us, as he did the Jews, for If God spared not
the natural branches, let us take heed lest he do not spare us, who are but
wild branches, as the Apostle reasons, Romans 11. 21. Romans 11. 21. The Prophets
holy bouldnes in delivering his message.


Fifthly, we are to observe, that when the Prophet threatens against the people
their final reiection, they were in a most flourishing and prosperous estate,
and therefore no doubt giving small credit to the Prophets words, it was an
embassage exceeding dangerous, exposing him to the malice and outrages of an
insolent people. But yet notwithstanding remembering who had sent him on his
message he overcomes all these difficulties, and faithfully delivers the
word of God which was put into his mouth.

Sixthly, we may here learn, that though their present estate Outward things no
true sign of Gods love or hatred.
were very prosperous, yet they were out of Gods favor, and even marked to
utter destruction: whereby it appears, that we cannot rightly judge by
outward things, either of Gods love or hatred, seeing these things come alike
to all, and the same outward condition is to the just, and to the wicked, as
the Wiseman speaks, Eccles. 9. 1. 2. Nay oftentimes Eccles. 9. 1. 2.
the wicked most flourish for a time, and the godly are afflicted, as appears
in the example of Esau and Jacob, the Egyptians and the Israelites, Saul and
David, the Pharisees and Jesus Christ himself and his Apostles. And therefore
if we judge them in Gods favor who are in a flourishing estate, and condemn
them as miserable who are in affliction, we shall justify the wicked, and
condemn the generation of Gods children, as it is Psalm. 73. 15. Psalm. 73.
15. God rejects not his people before they reject him.


Lastly we may here observe, that God rejects not this people, before they
had first rejected him, neither does he refuse to rule and protect them as
their Lord, before they had refused to obey him as his subjects. And this may
appear by the order of the words, where he says, Ye are not my people,
therefore I will not be yours. Howsoever therefore in Gods eternal decree he
reprobateth whom he pleases for the manifestation of the glory of his
justice, yet in the administration of this decree he never rejects any, who
do not first forsake him. And therefore leaving Gods secret counsels unto
himself; let us embrace his revealed will, and according thereunto let us
conform our selves unto holy obedience, and live like the people of God,
submitting our selves to be ruled by his word and spirit; and so we may be
assured that the Lord will continue to be our gracious God, and will never
cast us off, seeing he refuses none who do not first refuse him, neither
denies his favor to any, who do not deny unto him their obedience.

ANd thus much concerning the Legal comminations. Evangelical consolations.
Now follow the Evangelical consolations: for our Prophet Hosea having in the
former part of the chapter (according to the usual method of the Prophets)
first set down their sins, and then the judgments of God, and the punishments
due unto them, does not end his Sermon, before he had comforted Gods faithful
children who were dejected with the former threatenings, by assuring them of the
enlargement of the kingdom of Jesus Christ, the promised Messiah, and the
propagation of the Church through the mercy of God forgiving their sins, and
reconciling them unto himself in his Son, unto whom they are united by Gods
spirit and a lively faith.

Where Gods Ministers may observe in Gods own practice, The best method of
converting a sinner.
what is the best method and order for the converting of a sinner, namely,
first to bring men to a sight of their sins; secondly to set before them the
anger of God, the curse of the law, and all those fearful punishments
temporal and eternal, which by them they have deserved. And when thus by the
preaching of the law, they are thoroughly humbled in the sight of their own
misery, then they are to raise them up again by the preaching of the Gospel,
containing in it Gods gracious promises of mercy and forgiveness in Jesus
Christ. For this is the order which the wisdom of God has thought most fit; as
appears in this place, and in all the writings and sermons, not only of the
Prophets, but also of the Apostles. Acts 2. 23. 37. 38. Romans 1. 2. 3.
So Peter, Act. 2. 23. 37. 38. And Paul, Romans 1. and 2. and 3. etc.

But let us come to the words themselves: verse 10. Yet the number of the
children of Israel shall be as the sand in the sea, which cannot be measured
nor told. And in the place where it was said unto them, ye are not my people;
it shall be said unto them; Ye are the sons of the living God.

Verse 11. Then shall the children of Judah, and the children of Israel be
gathered together, and appoint themselves one head; and they shall come up out
of the land: for great is the day of Izreel.

In which words is contained a sweet consolation for all Gods afflicted
children, taken from the flourishing estate of The exposition.
Gods Church, under the Kingdom and government of Jesus Christ. The which
their prosperity and happiness, is first described in the 10. verse, and part
of the 11. verse, and then magnified in the last words: for great is the day of
Izreel. It is described by four arguments. The first is their multitude; that
they should be in number numberless. The second is their dignity; that they
should be not only Gods people, but also the sons of the living God. The
third is, their unity and unanimity; that they should be gathered together,
and appoint unto themselves one head, under whom they should jointly be
governed. The last is, their liberty and full redemption; that they should come
out of the land polluted with idolatry, and should be adjoined unto the true
Church of God.

The first argument of consolation taken from the multitude of Gods Church, is
contained in these words: Yet the number of the children of Israel shall be as
the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured nor told. Whereas he says; Yet
the number, etc. he meets with an objection of the hypocritical Israelites;
and withal, comfort Gods children, who were dejected with the former
threatenings. For the Prophet having showed, that the Lord would reject the
people of Israel from being his people, the hypocrites among them would be
ready to charge the Prophet, that his prophecy Abraham, that he would multiply
his seed as the stars of heaven, and as the sands by the sea side; the which
he should not perform, if now he should reject and cast them off. To which the
Prophet answers, that though God did reject, all these rebellious Israelites,
which were the seed Abraham according to the flesh; yet he would be as good as
his promise: which is to be understood of the seed of Abraham, not according
to the flesh, but according to the spirit: that is, both of the Israelites, and
also the Gentiles, which should in great numbers be gathered into the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ, and be true members of his Church.

Secondly, whereas the faithful might have been overwhelmed The multiplying of
Gods Church, by joining together the Jews and Gentiles.
with sorrow, and troubled with many doubtings, when they heard of the utter
reiection of the Israelites; as though the Church of God should thereby come to
ruin: the Prophet comfort them, and strengthens their says against such
doubtings, by assuring them that the Lord would make good his promise,
concerning the multiplying of Abraham's seed as the stars of heaven; and that
this reiection of the rebellious Israelites, should be so far from hindering of
it, that he would in his infinite wisdom, make it an occasion of accomplishing
his promise, and multiplying his Church; because in regard of his promise made
to Abraham, he would in the ministry of the Gospel by his Apostles and
Ministers, call into his Kingdom of grace; first the Israelites, and then by
occasion of them, the Gentiles, amongst whom they were scattered; and so of
both, the relics of Abraham's posterity, according to the flesh, and of the
believing Gentiles his children, according to the spirit, he would multiply the
number of his Church, like unto the stars of heaven, and sands by the sea side
in multitude.

But let us come more particularly unto the words of the text: Yet the
children, etc. Here the Prophet joins those things which in their own nature
seem to differ: as though he should say; The former threatenings which I have
denounced, may seem to contradict Gods promise made to Abraham, concerning the
multiplying of his seed; but notwithstanding that the Lord will execute those
judgments which I have denounced, yet he is not unmindful of his promise, but
will, though he cast off the rebellious Israelites, multiply the true sons
and children of Abraham, consisting not only of the believing Israelites, but
also of the believing Gentiles, which by the preaching of the Gospel shall be
converted unto the faith, and so adjoined to the Church, as the stars of
heaven, and like the sands by the sea side in number. And therefore the wicked
Israelites have no reason to insult in their security, as though Gods Church
could not stand if they fall, but must needs be overthrown in their ruin;
and as if God could not be true of his word, unless they were preserved and
multiplied; seeing the Lord in his infinite wisdom and power, can of stones
raise up children unto Abraham, and of unbelieving Gentiles, make believing
Matthew. 3.
Christians.

Yet the number of the children of Israel, etc. By children of Israel, we are
to understand the whole Church of God, under the government of Christ,
consisting of all believers, both Jews, Israelites, and Gentiles. For Israel
in the Scriptures ^ diversely taken: sometimes for the whole people which were
the posterity of Jacob, according to the flesh; and sometimes for the ten
Tribes alone, and that both elect and reprobate, believers and unbelievers:
sometimes it is taken for them only who were Israelits according to the flesh
by natural generation; and not according to the spirit, borne by spiritual
regeneration, neither children of the promise made to Abraham, because they
were not endued with the faith of Abraham. Of such the Apostle speaks, Romans
9. 6. All are not Israel which are of Israel. 7. Neither all children, because
Romans 9. 6, 7.
they are of the seed of Abraham, etc. And 1. Cor. 10. 18. Behold 1. Cor. 10.
18.
Israel which is after the flesh. Of these the Prophet here speaks not,
because they were not members of the Church of Christ; but rather these are
those whom in the former verses, the Lord threatened to reject and to withdraw
all mercy from them.

Sometimes it is taken for those, who like Nathaniel, are true Israelites
indeed, both in regard of their natural generation, and also their spiritual
regeneration; the children of Abraham, both because they issued out of his
loins, and likewise because they were endued with his faith. And of these
Christ speaks, Matthew. 10. 5. Go not into the way of the Matthew. 10. 5. 6.
Gentiles. 6. But rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And Matthew.
15. 24. Matthew. 15. 24.


Sometimes it is taken for those which are not the sons of Abraham according to
the flesh, but according to the spirit, borne unto him not by nature, but by
grace, and according to the promise, Genesis 17. 5. which were all the believers
Genesis 17. 5.
amongst the Gentiles that embraced the faith of Abraham. And of both these
latter kinds of Israelites, is this prophecy to be understood: first, of the
believing Israelites, which from the coming of Christ to the end of the world,
should be effectually called by the preaching of the Gospel: neither are they
here excluded (as some have imagined, who expound this prophecy only of the
calling of the Gentiles) seeing our Savior professes, that he was sent in the
first place to them: Math. 15. 24. And the Apostle, Romans Matthew. 15. 24. Romans
11. 25, 26.
11. 25, 26. That Israel likewise shall be saved, when the fullness of the
Gentiles is come in; and seeing many also by the ministry of Christ and his
Disciples, were converted to the faith.

But howsoever this prophecy is to be understood of them in the first place,
yet not of them only, but likewise of the believing Gentiles, which were added
to the believing Jews, and became one Church with them; as appears Ioh. 10.
16. And this is manifest; first because otherwise, the promise John 10. 16.
here made of multiplying the Israelites like the sands by the sea side in
number, could not be verified, if it should be understood only of the children
of Abraham, according to the flesh, whereas it is fully accomplished, if it be
understood of his children according to the spirit; as the Apostle also
shows, Rom, 4. 16, 17, 18. Romans 4. 16, 17, 18.


Secondly, the Apostle meeting with an objection which might arise from the
comparing of the small number of those who did believe, with the promise made
to Abraham, concerning the multiplying of his seed as the stars and sands,
which also is repeated in this place) affirms, that Abraham's children should
have their name in Isaac, Romans 9. 7. Romans 9. 7, 8.
and expounding himself, verse 8. he says; that they which are the children
of the flesh, are not the children of God, but the children of the promise are
counted for the seed. So that all the elect of God, endued with the faith of
Abraham, are to be accounted his children, and the only true Israelites. And
this is signified when as it is said, that his children should be called in
Isaac, who was not borne unto Abraham, according to the course of nature; for
Abraham was almost an hundred years old, and Sara was likewise stricken in
years and barren; Romans 4. 19, 20.
but his birth was rather to be ascribed to the free promise of God,
apprehended by the faith of Abraham, and not to natural strength and ordinary
generation. And hence it is that he is called the child of the promise, and not
the child of the flesh, as Ismael was, who was borne according to the ordinary
course of nature; and likewise according to his example, those are reputed the
true children of Abraham, who are the children of the promise, begotten not
according to nature, but Gods free grace, endued with the faith of Abraham, and
not like Ismael, his children only according to the flesh.

And this may further appear by plain testimonies of Scripture: Romans 4. 11,
12. the Apostle says; that Abraham Romans 4. 11, 12.
was the father not only of the circumcised, but also of the uncircumcised,
who believe and walk in the steps of his faith. The which argument he more
fully handles, verse 13, 14, 15, 16, Gal. 3. 7.
17, 18. Gal. 3. 7. They which are of faith, the same are the children of
Abraham.

Lastly, the Apostle Paul, who was endued with the same spirit of God, that our
Prophet was, and therefore most fit to interpret his meaning, expounds this
prophecy of all the faithful, both Israelites and Gentiles; as appears Romans
9. 24, 25, 26. so Pet. 1. Epist. 2. 10. Romans 9. 24, 25.


And thus it appears, whom we are to understand by the children of Israel. In
the next place we are to consider the number of the Church, which is expressed
comparatively: as the sand in the sea, which cannot be numbered nor told. In
which words, he alludeth unto the promise of God made to Abraham, Genesis 22. 17.
Therefore I will surely bless thee, and Genesis 22. 17.
will greatly multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand
which is by the sea shore, etc. so Genesis 15. 5. and withal, Genesis 15. 5.
expounds that promise, showing of whom it was meant; namely, of the whole
Church of God, Israelites and Gentiles, who being endued with the faith of
Abraham, were alone to be esteemed his seed; as the Apostle likewise
interprets it, Romans 4. 18. The like place unto this we have, Ier. 33. 22.
Romans 4. 18. Jer. 33. 2.


By all which is signified, that the Church of God, after the coming of
Christ, gathered together by the preaching of the Gospel, should be in numbers
numberless, even like unto the sands by the sea side: which, howsoever God,
infinite in knowledge; can number, yet unto man they are innumerable. And not
only so, but that also it should not, as in former times, be contained within
the narrow limits of Canaan, but extend it self very spatiously over the face
of the earth. For here he uses two words; the first is referred to a continued
quantity of place; which cannot be measured: the other to a discrete quantity,
that is, to the number or multitude, which cannot be told. By both which joined
together, he shows, that the Church of God and Kingdom of Christ, should be
so spacious, that it should be contained in no limits, and so many in
multitude, that it should be defined with no number.

But here it may be demanded, how this can stand with the saying of our Savior
Christ, who calls his Church a little flock. I answer, that Christ speaks
of it being compared with infidels and worldlings which are not of the church;
in respect of whose huge multitude, ye true church of Christ is but a little
flock; but yet being considered in it self, the number thereof is great, even
like the stars of heaven, and sands by the sea shore, which cannot be
measured nor told.

And thus much for the number of the Church. In the next place is set down the
time in which this increase of Gods people should be; not in the time present,
but in the time to come, even after the coming of Christ, when by the
preaching of the Gospel, the Gentiles should be called and joined to the
Church of the Jews. So that first the children of Israel, who were the
children of Abraham according to the flesh only, must be cast off, before his
children, according to the spirit, should be received into the covenant: first
the natural branches of the Olive must be broken off, because they were
unfruitful, and then the wild branches must be grafted in; and therefore
their reiection should be so far from bringing Gods Church to ruin, that God
after their casting off, would exceedingly multiply and enlarge it.

And thus have I showed the meaning of the first point. The disposition of
hypocrites to boast themselves in outward titles.
who boast themselves of their outward titles, shows, and ceremonies, whereas
they are destitute of al correspondency in substance, sincerity, and truth: and
together, how we may beat down their pride, and answer their vain brags. The
Israelites resting in the outward titles, of the posterity of Abraham, the
Church and people of God, and in performing some external worship, consisting
rather in ceremonies, then in substance, in vain shows and shadows, and not
in spirit and truth; were hereby so puffed up in pride, and lulled asleep in
such deep security, that they imagined God could not be true of his word,
unless they were preserved, and that there was no way, but the Church must
needs utterly perish, if they were overthrown and rejected: and therefore
against all the threatenings of the true Prophets, they opposed these titles and
shadows, that they were the posterity of Abraham, the Church of God, his
chosen people, who were in the covenant, and such as had the Temple, Arc, and
Law amongst them; and with these bucklers they fenced and bore off all
threatenings of their ruin and destruction, and kept them from wounding their
consciences with unfeigned sorrow for their sins; and withal, were moved
hereby to condemn the Prophets to be liars, who spoke not from the Lord, but
according to their own melancholy fantasies, and discontented conceits. To
these our Prophet by a Prolepsis answers, that though they were the
posterity of Abraham and Jacob, yet they were not true Israelites, but
degenerated Iizreelites, such as had only outward titles, shows, ceremonies,
and external prerogatives, but that they were not the children of Abraham,
according to the spirit, not in the covenant of grace, which they had often
broken, not the true Church and people of God, seeing they had forsaken him,
and in stead of his true worship, which ought to be performed in spirit and
truth, they offered unto him a false worship, according to their own
inventions, and in the hypocrisy of their hearts. And therefore though the
Lord should reject them, yet this should be no impeachment to his truth in his
promises, nor bring any damage to the Church, for as much as he would in their
stead, who were hypocrites, rotten members, and the sons of Abraham only
according to the flesh, make choice of sincere professors, true believers, and
the sons of Abraham according to the spirit, unto whom he would make good
his covenant and promise, and multiply them in innumerable numbers.

The like objection at this day is made by the Papists in The Papists like the
idolatrous Israelites. 1. Tim. 3. 15.
their pride and security, against those who charge them with their errors
and apostasy. For, say they, the Church of Christ cannot err, seeing it is
the pillar of truth, 1. Tim. 3. 15. nor fall away in life or doctrine, seeing
Christ has promised to lead it in all truth, and to continue with it, ruling
and guiding it by his word and spirit unto the end of Math. 23. 20.
the world: but we (say they) are the Church of Christ, as may appear by our
unity, universality, antiquity and succession of Bishops; and therefore if
we fall away, the Church falls away, and consequently Christ cannot be true
of his promise. But unto them we may answer, as the Prophet to the Israelites,
that they are the Church only in name, and not in deed; seeing they have
forsaken the pure worship of God described in his word, and in stead thereof
have embraced their own will worship, superstition and idolatry; and therefore
they are not now the spouse of Christ, but adulterous harlots, which are for
their whoredoms divorced from him; they are not the true Church of God,
notwithstanding those outward titles and notes thy brag of, seeing they want
the chief and only infallible notes of the true Church, Gods word sincerely
preached and his Sacraments purely administered. And though they be rejected,
yet this will not infringe the truth of Gods promises made to his Church;
neither will God want a Church, though they be cast off: seeing in their places
he has, and will multiply his faithful children, the true posterity of
Abraham, as the sands by the sea shore, unto whom he will accomplish his
promises of his presence, protection, and direction in all truth.

The like objection also is made by carnal gospellers, and secure hypocrites,
who professing religion, do in their lives deny the power thereof; and
drawing near unto God with their lips, whilst with their hearts, they go
far from him, and therefore we may fit unto them the like answer, etc.

The second thing which we are to observe is, that the The execution of Gods
judgments no hinderance to the performance of his promises.
execution of Gods threatenings, is at no time any hinderance to the performance
of his promises; nay, rather he uses the one as an occasion of the
accomplishing of the other: as in this place the reiectio^ of the idolatrous
Israelites, for the fulfilling of his gracious promise concerning the
multiplying of his Church, the true posterity of Abraham, according to the
spirit. And therefore when Gods faithful children hear his fearful
denunciation of judgments denounced against the wicked, let not them doubt
that this will be an impediment to stay the performance of the gracious
promises which are made unto them; for although they be not accomplished in
that manner, and by those means which they expected; yet the Lord will not
fail to perform them, so as in his infinite wisdom he knows most fit for
his own The multitude of Gods people in the time of the Gospel.
glory, and their salvation.

The third thing to be observed, is the great multitude of Gods people and
children under the kingdom of Jesus Christ, in the time of the Gospel, for it
is here said, that God would multiply them as the sands and stars. The
Israelites supposed that if they should be rejected, God would want a Church
and people to worship and serve him; but they were wholly deceived, for upon
the occasion of their reiection, who were but hypocrites, he multiplied the
number of his faithful servants. And as the river when the course thereof is
stopped in his own channel, breaks over the banks, and ouerfloweth the
whole country, making it fruitful which in it self was dry and baren: So
the streams of Gods saving mercies, which in former times plentifully flowed
in the land of Canaan, as in their proper current, being stopped, and as it
were dammed up, with the huge heap of their grievous sins, and traitorous
rebellions, ran over the banks and borders of Jury, and ouerflowed the whole
earth; making the Gentiles, who formerly had been barren in all goodness,
fruitful in his sanctifying graces and holy obedience. And this our Savior
signified in the parable of the great Supper, to which the Jews, who were the
invited guests, refusing to come, upon the occasion of their refusal, the
servants are sent into the streets, hedges, and highwaies, to inuit the poor,
maimed, halt, and blind Gentiles, that they might supply their rooms, as
appears, Luke 14. Luke 14. The pride of hypocrites reproved and beaten down.


The consideration whereof, may serve to beat down the pride of hypocrites,
who think God beholding to them for their profession and service; imagining
that he will never reject them for his own honors sake, seeing if they were
cast off, he should want servants to worship and glorify him. But let such
know, that God, who is in himself absolute, and infinite in all perfections,
stands in need of no man; and though it were supposed that he did, yet not
of them, who by their serving him, do dishonor him; for he is able of stones
to raise up children to Abraham, Matthew. 3. 9. He can destroy Matthew. 3. 9. Job.
34. 24.
the mighty, and set up others in their stead, as it is Job 34. 24. When the
Jews forsake him, he can make the Gentiles serviceable; when the ancient by
their praises do not glorify him, he can give strength to babes and
sucklings to perform this duty which they neglect, Psalm. 8. 2. and though
Psalm. 8. 2.
they likewise should say nothing, yet the heavens, with their dumb eloquence,
would declare the glory of God, Psalm. 19. 1. Psalm. 19. 1.
Yea, and if all these should hold their peace, yet the stones themselves would
become the heralds of Gods praises. Luke 19. 40. And therefore let not
hypocrites securely go Luke 19. 40.
on in their sins, thinking that for their outward service and professions
sake, God will not reject them; for (as the Lord spoke of Coniah the son of
Iehoiakim, Ier. 22. 24) Ier. 22. 24.
though they were the signet of his right hand, yet he will pluck them off.

Secondly, whereas it is said, that the Church of Christ The dotage of the
Brownists confuted.
should be multiplied like the sands by the sea side; this serves to confute
the dotage of the Brownists, who imagine that there is no true Church but
themselves, and such as are reformed according to their own fantasies: an
example whereof is not to be found in all Christendom, as may appear by their
own practice, who have refused to join with those Churches which are most
reformed. For if in the time of the Gospel the Church of Christ must be
multiplied like the sands in number, then certainly it cannot be restrained to
their conuenticles, scarsely deserving the name of a congregation.

Lastly, here we may observe the certainty of the calling The certentie of the
calling of the Gentiles.
of the Gentiles; for the Israel of God must be multiplied like unto the
stars and sands in number: but this cannot be understood of the sons of
Abraham according to the flesh, whose number since the coming of Christ is not
multiplied, but exceedingly diminished: and concerning them God says, that
though the children of Israel were as the sands of the sea* yet shall but a
remnant be saved: Isai. 10. 21. Esaias. 10. 21. Romans 9. 27.
Romans 9. 27. and therefore it must needs be understood of the whole Church of
God, both Jews and Gentiles gathered together, by the preaching of the
Gospel. The like testimonies we have concerning the calling of the Gentiles,
Psa. 2. 8. Psalm. 2. 8.
where God the Father promises to his son that he would give him the heathen
for his inheritance: and Esa. 2. 2. it is said, Esa. 2. 2. and 65.
that all nations shall flow unto the house of God. So Esa. 65. 1. 1. Amos 9.
11. 12. Ioh. 10. 16. The calling of the Gentiles ministers matter of joy and
thankfulness.
Amos 9. 11. 12. Ioh. 10. 16.

The consideration whereof, as it ministers unto us all sound matter of
consolation, in that the wall of separation is broken down, so that the
mercies of God have as free a course unto us as ever they had to the Jews: so
it should fill our hearts with true thankfulness, and our mouths with praises
and thanksgiving to God, who has now effectually called us and reconciled us
unto himself, which were not only strangers but also enemies, unworthy of his
least favor, nay worthy of his eternal wrath and displeasure; seeing we went
forward in our sins, in the blindness of our minds and hardness of our hearts, not
so much as desiring grace and reconciliation.

And so much concerning the multitude of Gods Church. In the second place is
set down the dignity thereof: And in the place where it was said unto them,
Ye are not my people, it shall be said unto them, Ye are the sons of the living
God. Where Exposition.
first is set down the amplitude of the place, which should receive this
inestimable privilege. Secondly, the parties or persons who are exalted to
this high dignity. Thirdly, the means or instrument, whereby it should be
conferred. Lastly, the dignity and prerogative it self.

The amplitude of place is described in these words: And in that place where it
was said unto them, ye are not my people. Others read it thus: Et pro eo quod
dicebatur, etc. and for that, or in stead of that, etc. understanding it only
of the change of speech, and not of amplitude of place: as Pagnine and
Tremellius. But for as much as the other translation agrees with the
original, with antiquity, with their own translation of the like phrase,
Leuit. 4. 24. Ier. 22. 12. and seeing also the Apostle Paul inspired with the
same spirit, retains Leuit. 4. 24. Ier. 22. 12.
the same, Romans 9. 26. therefore I rather embrace it then the other. The
meaning of this phrase is this, that God Romans 9. 26.
would gather unto himself a Church, not out of Canaan only: but out of al
places, and from amongst al nations, which were not called in times past the
people of God, or which were called, Not my people. Now in all places and
nations of the world it might be said of them before the coming of Christ,
that they were not Gods people, saving in Judea only: and therefore God here
promises, that his Church and the world should have the same limits, and that
he would gather it out of all nations, which in times past had not been his
people.

The truth of which exposition, may appear by the manner of speech here used;
for it is not in the original as in our translations; in the place where it
was said; but, in the place where it shall be said: not restraining it to the
land of Canaan, where they now were, but extending it to all the nations
amongst whom the Israelites were afterward scattered; when, and not before,
they were excluded from the name and privilege of Gods people.

The second thing to be considered, is, the parties who are exalted unto this
high dignity; namely, they to whom it was That we are called the people of God
three ways. Romans 11. 2.
said; ye are not my people. Now we may be said to be, or not to the people of
God three ways: first, in respect of his eternal decree of predestination: so
Romans 11. 2. God has not cast away his people whom he knew before. Secondly, in
respect of admission into the covenant of works; in which respects the
Israelites were called peculiarly the people of God: Deuteronomy. 7. 6. 14. 2, 26. 18.
Exodus 19. 5, 6. Thirdly, in respect of our Deuteronomy. 7. 6. 14. 2. 26 18. Exodus 19.
5, 6. Hos. 2. 1. Tit 2. 14.
admission into the covenant of grace: so Hos. 2. 1. Tit. 2. 14.

In the first sense we are not to vnderdand this place; for those that are
rejected in Gods eternal council from being his people, shall never be called
his sons, seeing his decree is unchangeable. Neither are we to understand it
of the inward admission into the covenant of grace; for this covenant can never
be broken between God and his people, because it is so written in their hearts
by his holy spirit, that they cannot depart from it; and those whose sins God
forgiueth, he will never remember; as appears Ier. 31. 32, 33, 34. But it is
to be understood of the covenant of works; in Ier. 31. 32, 33.
which respect, both Jews and Gentiles were said, not to be Gods people. The
Jews, because breaking the covenant, they were rejected from being Gods
people; as appears in the 9. verse. The Gentiles because they were never
admitted into it.

Whereby it appears, who they are that are exalted to be the sons of the
living God; namely, both Jews and Gentiles, seeing of both it was said, yt
they were not Gods people; of the Israelites, because they were rejected; of
the Gentiles, because they were not admitted. And thus the Apostle Paul
expounds it, Romans 9. 23, 24, 25, 26.

But howsoever this is spoken of both Jews and Gentiles, Romans 9. 23. 24.
that they should be called the soones of the living God; yet not of all and
every of them: neither must we imagine that these two; not my people, and the
sons of the living God, are alike general; as though all and every man
amongst them, of whom it might be said, not my people; of them it should be
said, that they were the sons of the living God: but it is to be understood
of Gods elect only, who should be called from amongst them both, and added to
the Church. For many were eternally rejected; many who never heard of the
Gospel and of Christ; many outwardly called by the ministry of the word, who
were not called effectually, and so neither justified, nor made Gods soones by
adoption and grace.

The third thing which is signified in these words, is the isntrumental cause
or means, whereby they should attain unto this dignity; namely, by the
preaching of the Gospel: the which is implied by the phrase of speech here
used: for he does not say; they shall begin to be, or they shall be made, or
they shall be adopted the sons of God; but, it shall be said unto them, Ye
are the sons of the living God: to wit, in the preaching of the Gospel,
which is the strong power of God to salvation, unto all that believe: Romans 1.
16. and the only ordinary means of begetting faith: Romans 10. 17. by which
Romans 1. 16. 10. 17. John 1. 12. 1. Cor. 4. 15.
faith, we attain unto this prerogative of being the sons of God: John 1.
12. And this the Apostle plainly shows, 1. Cor. 4. 15. where affirming
himself to be the Corinthians spiritual father, who had begotten them unto
God, he shows likewise whereby they were begotten and regenerate; namely,
through the preaching of the Gospel. Furthermore it is to be observed, that it
is set down absolutely, it shall be said unto them; without expressing by whom:
but we are to understand it of God himself, who had said, ye are not my
people: for he only after their reiection from being his people, could make
them his sons: notwithstanding we are not to understand it, that this should
be spoken by God himself immediately; but as he said, ye are not my people,
by the ministry of his Prophet; so he says, ye are the sons of the living
God, by the ministry of his Apostles and Ministers, in the preaching of the
word.

The last thing to be considered is, the dignity or prerogative it self,
expressed in these words; Ye are the sons of the living God. Where we are to
note, that he does not observe a perfect antithesis between these and the
former words, which should have bin thus expressed; In the place where it was
said, ye are not my people, it shall be said unto them, ye are the people of
God* but in stead thereof, he says; ye are the sons of the living God. The
reason whereof is this: first, because he would hereby signify, that through
Christ in the covenant of grace, we have a far more excellent estate then under
the law by the covenant of works; for then they were but the people or subjects
of God, but now they are his sons adopted in Jesus Christ, and being sons,
they are likewise Romans 8. 17.
heirs and coheires with Christ: as the Apostle speaks, Romans 8. 17. Then
they were the people of God on the condition of their perfect obedience to the
Law; which when they observed not, they lost this dignity, and were rejected
from being Gods people; but now they are sons on the condition of faith, and
heirs of an inheritance immortal, undefiled, and that fades not away; as the
Apostle speaks, 1. Pet. 1. 4. because 1. Pet. 1. 4.
they shall never fall from the covenant, nor forsake, or be forsaken of God,
seeing his seed remains in them. 1. John 3. 9. 1. John 3. 9.


Secondly, by this phrase he excludes in the work of our salvation, all kind
of merit, and shows that it is wholly to be ascribed to the free grace of
God. If he had said, ye shall be called Gods people, it had not so fully
excluded all merit, seeing there may be some desert in a people which moves
the Prince to take them for his subjects: but when he says, Ye shall be called
sons, it shuts out all merit; seeing no son can deserve of his father to
be begotten of him, before he has his being.

Thirdly, he uses this phrase of speech, because it contains All the
benefits of the Gospel comprised under this title, The sons of God.
in it, the sum of those benefits, which are offered and bestowed in the
Gospel, and is as it were a brief abridgement of the whole work of our
salvation; for those who are sons, are likewise predestinate to eternal life,
seeing he has therefore predestinate us to be adopted through Jesus Christ
unto himself, as it is Ephesians. 1. 5. If we are sons, then need we not Ephesians. 1.
5.
to doubt of the love of our heavenly father; if we are sons, then are we
called to this high dignity, seeing before our calling, we were strangers and
enemies; if sons, then are we justified in Gods sight, freed from sin, and
endued with righteousness, and so fully reconciled unto God, seeing the Lord
infinite in justice, would never admit any into such a high degree of favor,
who were yet polluted in their sins, and destitute of righteousness. If we
are sons, then have we received the spirit of adoption, which leads and
rules us, mortifieth our corruptions, and quickneth us in the inner man,
raising us up from the death of sin to holiness and newnes of life. Finally, if
we are sons, then also we are heirs and coheires with Christ of the kingdom
of glory. Romans 8. 17. Romans 8. 17.


Lastly, as hereby he expresses the inestimable benefits of The name of sons
stirs us up to all Evangelical duties.
the Gospel, so also does he hereby stir us up to all Evangelical duties;
for sons more believe, trust, hope in, love their fathers, then people their
governors, and with more alacrity and diligence perform obedience unto their
commandments; and therefore if we be the sons of God, we must be
mindful to perform these duties to our heavenly father.

The last thing to be considered in this royal dignity is, that they shall
be called the sons of the living God; whereby the greatness of this benefit
is amplified, as though he should say, Ye shall be the sons of a God, not
like unto the idols, and Gods of the heathen, which either never lived, or but
for a short time, but of the eternal and ever living Jehovah, who is and will
be ever willing, and able to defend and provide for you, who are his children.

And as hereby is signified the eternity of our heavenly father, so there is
implied also the eternity of us his children; For, as Christ says, God is not
the God of the dead, but of the Matthew. 22. 32.
living, so may I say, he is not a father of the dead, but of the living: And
if we his children should not live together with him, though he is a God, yet
he should not be a father, saving of his only begotten son Jesus Christ,
seeing there is a mutual relation between a father and children.

And thus much for the meaning of the words. The doctrines The largenes of Gods
Church.
the amplitude and largenes of Gods Church in the time of the Gospel; seeing
it is not now confined within the borders of Canaan, but extends it self
over the whole earth to all nations and countries without any restraint or
exception; For in every nation he that fears God, and works righteousness
is accepted of him, as it is, Act. 10. 35. Act. 10. 35.


Secondly, we are to observe, yt there first goes an exclusion Our adoption
and salvation is of Gods free grace.
from being Gods people, before an admission to the being his sons: by which
order the Lord would signify that our adoption and salvation comes of his
free grace and goodness, and not of any worthiness and merit in us: the
Israelites were so wicked that they were thrust out of Gods service, and the
Gentiles so profane and sinful, that they were altogether unworthy to be
admitted into it, and therefore both far from meriting any thing but death and
condemnation; and yet such was Gods infinite mercy, that when they were in this
case unworthy of the least glimpse of his favor, he caused the bright beams
of his love with full rays to shine on both, by the death of his son
reconciling them unto himself, who before were strangers and enemies. And this
the Apostle notably shows, Romans 3. 23. There is (says he) Romans 3 23. 24.
no difference, namely, between Jew and Gentile, for all have sinned, and are
deprived of the glory of God. 24. And are justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. If the Israelites had still
been retained in the covenant of works, they would have ascribed their
salvation to their works and worthiness; God therefore when they had many
times broken this covenant excluded them out of it, that so they might be
received into the covenant of grace, and learn to attribute their salvation
not to their legal obedience, but to the free mercy and undeserved grace of
God.

Thirdly, we learn what is the instrument and means, whereby The ministry of
the word, the instrument of our adoption.
we become the sons of God; not by our own works, or any thing which we could
do, but by ye ministry of the word, and preaching of the Gospel, which being
made effectual by the inward operation of Gods spirit, begets true faith,
whereby we lay hold upon Christ, and are ingrafted into his mystical body, and
so in him who is the natural son of God we become the sons of God by adoption
and grace. The consideration whereof should move us highly to esteem this
precious pearl, and with all care and conscience to receive and lay it up in
our hearts, seeing it is the only ordinary means whereby we become the
adopted sons of God, and heirs of everlasting life. If therefore we highly
value the means of our worldly advancement to some momentany patrimony, how
should we esteem of the preaching of the Gospel, which intitleth us to this
dignity of being the sons of the everliving God, and heirs of his glorious
kingdom? And if this estimate were made by all, then would neither the people
for small occasions refrain from hearing the word preached; neither would the
Ministers of the Gospel for their worldly ease and pleasure, live idly and
unprofitable in their Ministry; nor for any inconveniences (sin only
excepted) leave their callings, and desist from preaching Christ crucified,
seeing it is the only ordinary means of the salvation of souls, and of
adopting men to be the children of God.

Fourthly, we may observe, unto what dignity and high degree of excellency we
are exalted in the new covenant, under the kingdom of Jesus Christ, when as we
are admitted, not only the people and servants, but the sons and heirs of
the glorious King of heaven and earth. The which prerogative is not now
appropriated to the Jews, but common unto al nations, and all sorts of men,
who receive Christ by a lively faith, Ioh. 1. 12. As many as received him, to
them John 1. 12. 2. Cor. 6. 18.
he gave right to be the sons of God. 2. Cor. 6. 18. I will be a father unto
you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord almighty. Gal.
3. 26. Ye are all the sons of God by Gal. 3. 26. 4. 6.
faith in Christ Jesus. Chap. 4. 6.

Where we may note the infinite mercy of God, who takes God takes occasion
of men's sins to show his goodness.
occasion even of men's sins, and his own punishments to show and extend unto
them his bounty and goodness; for he rejected the people of Israel out of the
covenant of works, that he might receive them into his covenant of grace; he
casts them off from being his people, that he might entertain them to be his
sons; and not them alone, but together with them the Gentiles also. And for
this purpose he scatters them amongst the Gentiles, that by occasion of
calling them unto the kingdom of Christ, by whom the lost sheep of the house
of Israel were to be gathered together, he might with them call the Gentiles
likewise: for the Israelites by a certain right, in regard of Gods promises,
made to their forefathers, were to have the first ofter of Gods mercies, and in
the first place to be called into the covenant of grace; and therefore God in
his infinite wisdom and mercy, scatters them amongst all nations, that
upon the occasion of their calling, he might call the Gentiles together with
them.

Whereby the infiniteness of Gods bounty, and his unsearchable Gods mercy in
judgment.
wisdom appears: he executes his punishments, that he may enlarge his
mercies, he abaseth his people, that he may exalt the^ to higher dignity, he
diminishes the number of his Church, that he may the more increase their
multitude; and like the good husbandman, he scatters his seed, the natural
sons of Jacob, over the face of the whole earth, that they may multiply and
return unto him with great increase, the Gentiles being added unto them. He
shuts them out of the covenant of works, that he may receive them into the
covenant of grace, and denies them to be his people and servants, that he may
make them his sons and heirs. In a word, he shuts all both Jews and
Gentiles in unbelief, and in the state of condemnation, that he may have
mercy on all, and derive unto them eternal salvation: Romans 11. 32. And
therefore we have just occasion to Romans 11. 32. 33
exclaim with the Apostle: verse. 33. O the deepenes of the riches, both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God, etc.

And this is Gods usual course in all his judgments toward his servants: so
he suffered Adam to fall into sin, that he might have more ample occasion
of showing his mercy; he banished him out of the the earthly paradise, that he
might receive him into the kingdom of glory; he punished him and his
posterity with a temporary death, that it might be an entrance into eternal
life; he subiecteth their bodies to weakness and corruption, that they may
rise in power incorruptible and immortal; he lays upon them light and
momentarie afflictions, that they may cause unto them a superexcellent and
eternal weight of glory, as it is 2. Cor. 4. 17. The consideration whereof
should make us 2. Cor. 4. 17.
patiently to submit our selves when we are afflicted, unto Gods good will and
pleasure, seeing his judgments end in mercy, and seeing in respect of his
infinite wisdom and almighty power he can, and in respect of his love and
fatherly kindness, he will raise benefits out of punishments, and make those
things turn to our good and eternal salvation, which in their own nature,
seem to bring destruction and utter damnation: Heb. 12. 9. Heb. 12. 9. B^^n^
adopted the sons of God, we must walk according to our high calling.


Secondly, as hereby we are put in mind of Gods mercy; so also of our own
duty, namely, that being exalted to this high dignity of being the sons of
God, we walk according to our high calling, and demean our selves like Gods
children: for as it is an indecent thing, that one who is raised from base
estate, or taken out of the galleys, and advanced to be the adopted son and
heir of some great Monarch, should now behave himself according to his former
base condition; so much more uncomely is it that one exalted to this high
dignity of being son and heir to the King of kings, should be have himself
like a child of Satan and bondslaue of sin, living as in former times in the
blindness of mind, perverseness of will, uncleanness of affections, and in
the lusts of the Gentiles, in a base sort suffering his mind to lie groueling
on the earth, wallowing himself in the filthy puddle of worldly vanities, in
ye mean time forgetting his high calling, whereunto he is advanced to be the
son of the living God. For honors should change our manners, and as soon as
we are advanced to this high dignity, we should like Saul, have another heart,
and not suffer our selves any more to be ruled with our own base lusts and
concupiscences, but being the sons of God, we ought to be guided and
directed wholly and only by his spirit: otherwise we can have no assurance
that we are admitted to this glorious state and condition; for they who alone
are led by Gods spirit are his sons; as appears, Romans 8. 14. Romans 8 14. The
difference between God and idols.


The last thing which we are to consider is the difference between the true
God, and the false gods of the Gentiles, for he is the everliving Jehovah,
whereas they are either without life, dead or mortal. The consideration
whereof may serve first to restrain us from transgressing the commandments of
our God, seeing he euerliueth to take punishment on us for our sins;
secondly, it is a strong inducement to holy obedience, seeing our Lord and
Master euerliueth to reward our service; and lastly, it ministers to all Gods
children matter of sweet consolation, in that they have a God in respect of
his power almighty, in respect of his love and good will always ready, that
euerliueth to give unto them the good things which they desire, and to deliver
them from the evils which they fear; and as he has life in himself, so he
will give life unto them, that together with him they may reign in all
happiness and eternal felicity in his kingdom. For as he has given to his
first borne Jesus Christ to have life in himself, so he has given unto us
John 5. 26.
his adopted sons in Christ, that we should have life in him; as it is, Col.
3. 3. Col. 3. 3.


ANd so much concerning the dignity of the Church and people of God. In the
next place is set down their unity and unanimity, verse 11. Then shall the
children of Judah, and the children of Israel be gathered together, and appoint
themselves one head. In which words he alludeth unto Exposition.
their separation and division which was between the Israelites and the Jews,
when as for the sins of Solomon, 1. King. 11. 11, 12
they were disunited and disioyned in the reign of Rehoboam, into two several
Ringdomes, under the government of their two Kings: and likewise to their
scattering and dispersing amongst the Gentiles, in the time of their captivity,
when as they wandered like sheep without a shepherd: showing that at the
coming of the Messiah, they who were disioyned should be reunited; and they
which were dispersed, should be gathered together: and whereas in former
times, they were either without a King, or divided under the government of two
Kings, upon which followed bloody wars, desolation and misery; now they
should be gathered together into one Kingdom, under the rule of Christ their
only King; under whose government they should enjoy peace, happiness, and
abundance of all blessings; as it is plainly set down, Ezech. 37. 22, 23, 24.
Ezech. 37. 22, 23.


But let us come to the words more particularly: where first is set down their
reunion into one Kingdom, who by discord and dissension had been disunited.
The which is signified by this phrase of gathering together: for whereas the
people of Israel and Judah, had like sheep gone astray, and had dispersed
themselves amongst the Gentiles, as in a waste wilderness, the Lord promises,
that by the great Shepherd of our souls, Jesus Christ, they should be
recollected and gathered into one flock and one sheepfold.

The parties then who being dispersed, should be gathered together, are the
Israelites and the Jews, where (as before) by Israelites, we are to understand
the sons of Abraham, according to the Spirit: that is, all the faithful and
true believers, both Israelites and Gentiles; and by Judah, the people of the
Jews, who also belonged to Gods election, and were endued with the faith of
Abraham; neither were all the Jews, according to the flesh, added unto Christ's
Kingdom, but only the true Jews, who were children of the promise: for as
the Apostle says; All are not Israel which were of Israel; Romans 9. 6. so he
says; he is not a Jew which is one outward, but he is a Jew wihch is one
within: Romans 2. 28, 29. so Romans 9. 6. Romans 2. 28. 29. Apoc. 2. 9.
Apoc. 2. 9.

Now the order of their gathering together, may be observed out of the order of
the words; for the Jews have the first place, because they were still the
Church and people of God, and were not rejected out of Gods covenant, but were
as yet in and about the sheepfold; as appears, Luke 1. 68. and 7. 16. and
then the Israelites, who by a certain kind of right, in regard of Gods
promises, made to their forefathers were to be gathered together, and added to
the Church: and lastly, the Gentiles, who by occasion of their calling, were
together called with them; as appears, Romans 1. 16.

The time when they should be gathered, was not present, but to come; and this
is signified by the future tense here used: that is, not in the time of the
Law, but of the Gospel, when the true Messiah should be exhibited.

The person by whom this union should be made, was not themselves, who rather
were ready more and more to wander and go astray, but Jesus Christ their great
and only true shepherd: and therefore he says, not that they should assemble
themselves; but that they should be gathered together, namely by another; that
is, Christ: so Esai. 11. 12. He shall set up a sign to the Nations, and
assemble the dispersed Esaias 11. 12.
Israel, and gather the dispersed Judah from the four corners of the world.
John 10. 16. Other sheep I have also which Ioh. 10. 16. 11. 52. Ephesians. 2. 14.
are not of this fold; them also must I bring, etc. John 11. 52. Ephesians. 2. 14.

The meritorious cause of this union, is the death and merits of Christ,
whereby both Jews and Gentiles were reconciled unto God, and made his Church
and family. For he therefore died, that by his death he might gather together
in one the children of God, which were scattered: John 11. 52. John 11. 52.
And Christ says; that if he were lift up from the earth (that is, crucified)
he would draw all men unto him: so Ephesians. 2. 13. Ephesians. 2. 13.


The means are either external or internal. External, the preaching of the
Gospel, whereby we are called to the knowledge of Christ, and the mystery of
our redemption wrought by him. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. He therefore gave some to be
Apostles, and some Prophets, etc. for the gathering together of Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
the Saints. Internal on Christ's part, is his holy Spirit; on our part a true
and lively faith, whereby we all are united unto Christ our head, and one with
another, as fellow members of the same body.

The manner of this collection is either spiritual, or corporal and local:
the spiritual union or gathering together, is the communion of all the Saints,
when as they are united and knit together in one mystical body, in one spirit,
in one hope, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father; as the
Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6. And this union and collection Ephesians. 4. 4, 5,
6.
is not hindered by distance of place, seeing the spirit of God, which is the
bond of this union, fills all places, and unites the faithful of all
countries and nations into one body, whereof Christ is the head. And this
collection is here principally understood.

The other is corporal and local; when as the Saints of God united in that
spiritual union, are also gathered together in the same place, country, and
congregation; the which of all the faithful is exceedingly to be desired, for
the mutual comfort and edification one of another, which comes unto all
them, who being united by the same spirit and faith, are also knit together in
the same company and fellowshippe.

And this is the meaning of these words. The doctrines which arise from them,
are these. First, whereas the promises That we ought not to malign the people
of the Jews.
of God, concerning the gathering together of his Church, are made both to the
Jews, Israelites, and Gentiles; and unto the Jews in the first place. Hence
we learn to lay aside that ancient enmity which is in worldly men toward that
Nation, and to love those which are converted to the faith as brethren; and
likewise to pray for those which are not yet called, that they may be added to
the Church. The malice of men toward this nation has bin such, that it is
grown into a prouerbiall speech; to hate one as they hate a Jew: the which,
howsoever it is a just judgment of God upon the Jews, for their obstinacy in
their infidelity and unthankfulness; yet it is a sin in them, seeing this
people have in diverse respects deserved well at our hands; in that they were
for a long time together, faithful treasurers of Gods divine oracles, the Law
and Prophets; in that they were our mother Church, unto which we were added,
from whom we have received our light and knowledge; and in that by their fall,
salvation is come unto us Gentiles: Romans 11. 11. And therefore Romans 11. 11.
let us not boast our selves against the natural branches, who were branches
of the wild Olive tree. For if God spared not them, let us take heed lest he
also spare not us: Romans 11. 21. Yea, but will some say, they crucified the Lord
of life, Romans 11. 21.
and therefore deserve to be hated of all. I answer, that we are rather to
turn the edge of this hatred against our own sins, which were the
principal cause of Christ's death, whereof they were but instruments, and as it
were our executioners. Besides, God in his exceeding mercy and goodness, has
turned this their cruel fact to our exceeding good, even to the redemption and
salvation of our bodies and souls: and therefore if this were a sufficient
cause to appease Joseph's anger toward his brethren, because God turned their
malice to all their good, even the advancement of Joseph, Genesis 50. 20.
and presetuation of their whole family: then surely the like reason should
pacify our wrath toward our elder brethren the Jews, seeing God has in his
infinite goodness made their hatred and rage, a means of our redemption and
eternal salvation, by Christ's death and bloodshed.

Secondly, we here observe, who is the chief and principal Christ principally
gathers us into the Church.
cause of our gathering together into the Church; namely, our Savior Christ;
for we were like wandering sheep gone astray in the wilderness of the world,
continually under the power, and at the command of the spiritual wolf Satan,
who at pleasure might pray upon us, notwithstanding any resistance we were able
to make: out of which dangers we could by no means quit our selves, seeing the
eyes of our minds were so blinded with ignorance, that we could not find the
way to our sheepfold, the Church of God, where only is safety and security;
nay rather we were ready more and more to wander and lose our selves in the
Labyrinth of our own errors; and though we had got some small glimpse of the
right way, yet we were so entangled in the brires of our sins and
corruptions, that we could not have travailed in it. And in this fearful
condition we remained, till Christ our good shepherd came to seek us, and
having found us, carried us on his shoulders into his sheepfold of grace and
happiness.

Thirdly, we are to observe the means whereby Christ Christ's bloodshed, the
means of our gathering into the church.
gathered us into his Church; namely, by shedding his blood: for sin which
excluded us out of it, and scattered us abroad, could not be done away, but by
Christ's death, whereby Gods justice was to be satisfied, and his wrath
appeased. The consideration whereof, as it should make us most thankful to our
good shepherd Christ, who has not spared to give his life for his sheep; so
it should make us most careful to walk in the ways of Gods Commandments,
and to avoid the bypath of error and sin; lest after we are gathered
together, and brought into Christ's fold, we wander again and go astray, and
so fall into the jaws of the spiritual wolf, who daily seeks to devour
us. For if we neglect the pains and labor, yea the loss of the precious
blood of our good shepherd, which he spilt in seeking us, that he might free
us from danger, and bring us safe to his sheepfold, and suffer our selves to be
allured with every vain triffle, to leave his flock, and to wander in the
deserts of the wicked world, till we are again lost and subject to the former
dangers from which he freed us: let us take heed lest he also basely account
of us, as being unworthy of a second labor in seeking of us.

Fourthly, we are to observe, that the means whereby he The ministry of the
word the means of applying Christ's benefits unto us. John 10. 27.
applies the former benefit unto us, making it effectual for our gathering
into his Church, is the ministry of his word, his holy spirit, and a lively
faith; and therefore we are carefully and conscionablie to hear Gods word,
which is the voice of our shepherd, whereby he gathers us into his
sheepefold. And forasmuch as we are dull of hearing, and slow in coming, both
in respect of the stiffenesse of our limbs, and stubbornness of our wills;
therefore let us continually implore our good shepherd, not only to call us
with his voice, but also to send his holy spirit to assist us; for he alone
opens our deaf ears, suppleth our stiff joints, and mollifieth and
inclines our stubborn wills, making us both able and willing to come unto
him, when he in the ministry of the word calls us. And seeing we also
before we can come unto Christ, must be endued with a lively faith; therefore
let us use all good means ordained of God, to attain unto it, and not cease
begging of it at the hands of our heavenly father, seeing it is not of our
selves, but we have it only by his free gift, as appears, Ephesians. 2. 8. Ephesians.
2. 8. Gods spirit the bond of our union with Christ and one with another.


Lastly, we are to observe, that this collection of Gods people is spiritual,
because the spirit of God is the bond of this communion, which is amongst the
saints; and therefore it cannot be hindered by distance of place, because the
spirit of God fills all places in heaven and earth. The which serves
notably for our comfort, in that we have by virtue of this spiritual and
inseparable union, part with all the saints in all their fastings, prayers, and
al good exercises, and holy duties of Gods worship and service, though we
should be exiled into the uttermost parts of the world, because we are united
unto them by the same spirit.

But besides this spiritual communion, there is also a local That there ought
to be a local gathering together of the Church
and corporal gathering together in the same visible Church and congregation;
which as much as in them lies is to be desired and attained unto of all the
faithful; for they are the sheep of Jesus Christ, and therefore they are not
wild beasts to be scattered and singled every one from another in his own
den, but to flock together in their own sheepfold, that they may jointly
perform service to the great shepherd, in hearing his word, receiving his
Sacraments, praying for those things they want, and praising him for those good
things which they have received: that also by this outward collection of their
bodies, they may testify the the inward conjunction of their minds and souls;
and not only testify, but also confirm and increase it, by performing all
mutual duties one to another, as instructing the ignorant, helping the
distressed, relieuing the poor, comforting those that mourn, defending the
weak, and exhorting one another to all holy actions of piety and
righteousness. Neither must they consort themselves with wolves, goats,
bears and such wild beasts; that is, with worldly and wicked men, who either
will seduce, or else destroy them; seeing it is the nature of the true sheep
of Christ to flock together, and to sequester themselves from all other
company, as much as they can in this worldly wilderness, wherein oftentimes
necessity, and not choice intermingleth those which should be severed.

And thus much for the unity of the faithful. The second The unanimity of
the faithful.
thing expressed, is their unanimity, which appears in their joint consent,
and general agreement in the choice of their head and governor. For after
they are called by God, and gathered together into the Church and kingdom of
Christ, then being thus chosen to be Christ's people and subjects* they
likewise make choice of him to be their king and head, And this is signified in
these words: And shall appoint (or as the decorum of the matter requires, and
the words may well bear) choose, or set over themselves one head, that is, one
king, and supreme governor, namely, the Lord Jesus Christ. For he alone is the
great King of his people, the great shepherd of his flock, the head of his
members, which is his Church, as appears in many places of the Scripture: So
Ezech. 34. 23. 24. 37. 22. 23. 24. Ioh. 10. 16. 1. Cor. 11. 3. Ephesians. 1. 22. 5.
23.

But here it may be demanded, how this here is ascribed (...) Christ is ^et
over his Church, as head by God, and how chosen by the faithful. Ephesians. 34.
23. Ephesians. 1. 22.
to the Church, to set over them a king and head, seeing in other places this
is attributed unto God himself: as Ezech. 34. 23. Ephesians. 1. 22. To which I
answer, that God the father first and principally does appoint Christ head and
king over the Church; and the people of God do set Christ over themselves, when
as they give their mutual assent to Gods appointment, and by a lively faith
receive Jesus Christ for their king and head, promising unto him their
allegiance and obedience. Thus Saul was appointed and anointed King over
Israel by God, 1. Sam, 10. 1. And the people also 1. Sam. 10. 1. 1. Sam. 11. 15.
are said to have made him king over them in Gilgal: 1. Sam. 11. 15. So that it
is not enough, that Christ should be appointed of God to be our king and head,
unless we receive him for our sovereign, yielding unto him our faith and
obedience: which if we neglect, notwithstanding God has appointed him king and
head over his Church, yet he is not so unto us.

Now the Church receives Christ to be their king: first, The Church receives
Christ for their king by faith.
when as with free consent of will and by a lively says, they do acknowledge
and embrace him alone, for their king, head and Savior, resting wholly upon
him, and upon no other whatsoever for their protection, preservation,
redemption and salvation; promising and vowing unto him alone their allegiance
and obedience, as being their only Sovereign. For by true faith we are
joined and united unto Christ, as subjects to their king, and members to their
head, and when we do believe in him, we do as it were with our suffrages
and voices, choose and embrace him for our king and head.

And secondly, when as believing this in their mind and heart, they are ready
with their tongues openly before men, to make confession and profession
thereof; assembling Romans 10. 10.
themselves as his subjects in the public congregation to worship and serve
him their Lord and king, in hearing his word, calling on his name, and
receiving his Sacraments.

He further says; that they shall set over themselves a head. Whereby he
signifies, one should not choose a head for another, but every man for his
own self. For as the just shall Habac. 2. 4.
live by his own faith, and not by another man's: so by his own faith, and not
another, he receives and imbraceth Christ for his King, head and Savior.

But what then shall we think of infants, who have not How infants come to
have part in Christ. Mark. 10. 14. 16.
actual faith; are they therefore deferred from having Christ their head and
Savior? I answer no; for Christ blesses and prays for them, affirming that
the kingdom of heaven belongs unto them. And the promises of God are made
not only to the faithful, but unto their seed also: Genesis 17. 7. Act. 2. 39.
in all which they could have no part, Genesis 17. 7. Act. 2. 39.
unless they were united unto Christ, in whom alone is salvation. What then,
are they saved by the faith of the Church, or of their parents? I answer, no,
for every man lives by his own faith: unless we understand it thus; that
the Church or their parents, grounding their faith upon the promises of God
made to the faithful and to their seed, do by their prayers obtain faith,
or the seed and spirit of faith, for their children, whereby they live.
Neither must we imagine, that they have actual faith, before which goes
illumination, and knowledge of Gods promises made in Christ, which the believer
applies unto himself; seeing then they should lose it again before they come
to age, which is not incident unto true faith, which once had is never lost.
But we are to know, that the ordinary course of uniting them to Christ by
faith, not agreeing to their age, which is not capable thereof, God uses
extraordinary means, supplying all things needful for this work, by the
inward operation of his holy Spirit, whereby he regenerateth and sanctifies
them, as he did Jeremy and John the Baptist in their mothers womb, as
appears Iere. Ier. 1. 5. Luke 1. 15.
1. 5. Luke 1. 15. and unites them unto Christ their head, it being the chief
bond of this union, and so being members of his body, they have part in the
righteousness and merits of Christ their head, whereby they are justified and
saved.

Furthermore, speaking of the Kingdom of Christ over Christ the only head of
the Church.
his Church, he does not say, that they should set him over them for their
King, but for their head; which he purposely does, to show the near union that
is between Christ and his Church; for there is a far more near conjunction
and union between the head and the body, then is or can be between the King
and his subjects.

Now this so agrees to Christ to be the head of his church, as that it agrees
to no other besides him; for it was necessary that the head of the church
should be both God and man: for if he had bin God alone, there could have bin
no proportion, and consequently, no communion between the head and the
members; if man alone, he could not have quickened his body, which was dead in
sin, nor offered to God the Father a sufficient price for the redemption
thereof, nor vanquished the spiritual enemies of our salvation, the devil,
the world, sin, death, and the grave. It was necessary therefore that our
head should be of both the divine and humane nature, that he might be united
unto us, and unite us unto God: and so as the Father is his head, so he might
be head of his Church; as the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 11. 3. 1. Cor. 11. 3.


Christ then alone is the head of the Church, and consequently the Pope does
falsely arrogate this title unto himself; for as the Church is but one body, so
it has but one head; otherwise it should be a monster. And this the Prophet
here shows, when as he says, that they should set over them one head, and
not be like the Kingdom of Israel and Judah, who were rent and divided under
the government of two heads.

Neither is Christ an idle head, who has referred all the government of his
body the Church, to his visible and ministerial head the Pope; but he is in
every respect a true head indeed: for he it is from whom we derive our life,
sense, and motion, in all the actions of holiness and righteousness; he it is
that quickens his body dead in sin; he it is that provides for it, and
protecteth it from all dangers, and the malice and power of all enemies; and he
also it is who by the scepter of his word, and the direction of his holy
spirit, guides and governs it; as he promised, John 16. 13. John 16. 13.


And this is the meaning of the words. The doctrines That God chooses us before
we choose him.
which from hence arise are these. First, out of the connection of this with the
former point, we learn, that we are first gathered together by God into his
Church, effectually called and chosen to be Gods people, before we choose Christ
to be our King and head, or will submit our selves to be ruled by the scepter
of his word and Spirit: whereby it appears, that we are not causes of this
spiritual union with Christ, nor of those royal dignities, and excellent
benefits, which hereby are derived unto us; but the free grace and mercy of
God, which before we have any desire of attaining hereunto, preuenteth us with
his love, calling and choosing us to this glorious and happy estate, when we had
neither ability nor will to aspire unto it. God therefore did not choose us for
his subjects, because first we made choice of him to be our King and head; but
as the Apostle says, of his love, we loved him because he loved us first: 1.
John 4. 19. so may we speak of the 1. John 4. 19.
fruits of his love; we come unto him, because first he called us; we choose him
for our King and head, because first he chooses us for his subjects and
members; we submit our selves to his government, because first he rules and
ouer-ruleth us by his spirit, with the inward working thereof inclining us to
holy obedience, who naturally are stubburne and rebellious: so that all our
works and duties toward God, are but the effects of his gracious working in
us, and nothing but inferior motions of that first mouer, and as it were but
reflections of those heavenly beams of Gods grace and goodness which shine
upon us.

The second thing which we are to observe is, that as That as soon as God has
chosen us into his Church, we choose him.
soon as we are gathered into the Church, and chosen by Christ to be his
subjects and members; then presently do we choose him to be our King and head,
submitting our selves to be ruled and governed by the scepter of his word and
holy Spirit. For God does not work upon us as upon stocks and stones, but as
upon reasonable creatures, who being first set a work by his holy Spirit, do
work together with him. Whereby we may learn, whether God has chosen us and
effectually called us, to this high dignity of being the members of Christ; not
by entering into Gods secret counsels, but by descending into our selves,
searching and examining our own hearts, whether we have made choice of Christ
to be our head and governor: for if we have so done, then assuredly he has
called and chosen us, seeing our choosing of him to be our head, is but an
effect of his choosing of us to be his members. Now further we may know,
whether in deed and truth we have chosen Christ to be our head, by examining
our own hearts, whether we have submitted our selves to be guided and directed
by his holy Spirit. Which if we have not done, then certainly whatsoever we
profess, we have not chosen Christ to be our head, and consequently, we can
have no assurance, that we are chosen by Christ, to be the members of his body.

Thirdly, we are to observe, that the Church does not only after a general
manner, set over them Christ to be their Every true member of Christ applies
him unto himself by his own faith.
head; but every member thereof does particularly make choice of him to
himself: whereby we learn, that neither the faith of the Church, nor the
faith of our parents is sufficient to make us true members of Christ's body,
unless we particularly appropriate him unto our selves by our own faith; for
as no man is rich, wife, or learned by the riches, wisdom or learning of
another man, but by his own; so is no man faithful by another faith, unless
himself believe. The consideration whereof, should make us not to content our
selves to be reckoned outward members of a faithful congregation, or to be the
children of most faithful and religious parents; seeing every man is united
unto Christ, justified and saved by his own faith, and not another man's; and
therefore every one is earnestly to labor by all means to attain unto this
gift of God, that he may not only say generally with the Church, we believe,
but particularly, I believe, as in the Creed also we profess.

Fourthly, as every one is to choose a head unto himself, so but one only
head Jesus Christ, seeing a body with two or many heads, is of all esteemed
monstrous. And therefore That the Pope is to be renounced.
we are to renounce the Pope from being our head, and to keep us to our only
head Jesus Christ, submitting our selves wholly and only to be guided and
directed by his word and holy Spirit.

Lastly, we are to observe what kind of head our Savior Christ is our head in
the highest degree of all perfection.
Christ is unto us, not an idle head, or in title only; but such a one as in
deed and truth has in him the nature and disposition of a head, in the highest
degree of all perfection. For he is such a head as entirely loves us, as being
the members of his own body; he is an almighty and most powerful head, who is
able to protect and defend us from all dangers and malice of enemies; he is a
most vigilant and provident head, who observes all our wants, and by his
al-ruling providence, provides for us: and finally, he is a most wise head, to
govern and guide us in all our ways, not only illuminating us, and giving us
sight to discern which is the best course; but also deriuing unto us strength
and motion, whereby we are enabled to walk in it. And therefore seeing we
have a head so absolute and perfect in the highest degree of all excellency;
let us take heed that we make not choice of any other, nor of our selves to be
our head, but renouncing all other, keep us wholly and only unto him. And
seeing he is a most loving head, let us rejoice in his love, and return love
unto him again: and as the arm offers it self to be cut off, rather then
the head should be wounded; so let us, who are the members of Christ's body, be
ready to endure blows, wounds, yea death it self, rather then any wound of
dishonor should be inflicted on our head Christ. And seeing he is an almighty
head, let us trust wholly in his power, resting and relying upon him alone for
deliverance out of the midst of all dangers, and from the raging violence of
all enemies; and seeing he is our careful and most provident head, let us not
rest so much upon our own provision, industry and labor, which will often
fail us, as upon his all-sufficient, al-seeing, and al-ruling providence, who
knows all our wants, better then we our selves, and never fails either in
will or power to supply them. And lastly, seeing he is such a head as is
infinite in wisdom, and all knowledge, let us submit our selves wholly and
only, to be instructed, governed and guided by him; not following others
directions and traditions, nor our own inventions. For he is the light of the
world, and he that follows him, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have
the light of life: Ioh. 8. 12. Which John. 8. 12. 12. 35.
light being taken away, there remains nothing but palpable darkness, Ioh.
12. 35. He is his fathers dearly beloved son, whom we must hear, Mat. 17. 5.
He is our only master and teacher, of whom we must be instructed, Matthew. 23.
8. 10. In a word, he is our only head, and therefore as the members Math. 17.
5. and 23. 8. 10.
do not guide, direct and govern themselves, but submit themselves to be
guided and directed by their head; so must we not direct and rule our selves by
our own wisdom, but wholly give over our selves to be lead and ruled by
him. And this is lively set down by the Apostle, 1. Cor. 11. 3. 1. Cor. 11. 3.
Christ is the head of every man, and the man is the woman's head; and God is
Christ's head. That is, as Christ did nothing of himself, but by the counsel
and direction of his father, so ought every man to do nothing by his own
wisdom and direction, but as he is guided and ruled by Christ his head; and
so likewise the woman is to follow the direction and counsel of her husband,
who behaueth himself toward her, as Christ to his Church, and not her own
conceit. And if we thus give our selves to be ruled and directed by Christ
Christ is our only wisdom.
our head, and abandone our own wisdom, we thus becoming fools in our
selves, shall be wise in Christ: 1. Cor. 3. 18. Whereas contrariwise, if we
will not submit our selves to 1. Cor. 3. 18.
be guided and governed by Christ, but follow our own inventions, and be
directed by our own wisdom, then though we be never so wise in the world, we
shall be infatuated, and whilst we labor to be wise in show, we shall become
fools in truth: Romans 1. 21. 22. As therefore without the direction Romans 1. 21.
22.
and government of the head, all the members are out of order, and perform
their functions and actions amiss, the foot stumbleth, the tongue balleth out
follies, the hand fails in all actions; so if we be not guided by Christ
our head, we shall stumble and fall into all errors, heresies and sins; when
we think to speak most wisely, we shall but blurt out our own follies; when
we purpose to perform glorious and good actions, we shall do such things as
in themselves are wicked, or after so ill a manner, and for such ill ends, as
that our actions which we deem best, shall be odious, and displeasing in the
sight of God.

And so much concerning the unity, and unanimity of the Church. The fourth
point expressed, is the liberty thereof out of their captivity; in these
words: And they shall come up out of the land, or, They shall ascend from the
earth, etc.

Some expound these words of the liberty of the Jews Exposition.
and Israelites out of their corporal captivity, and of their return into
the land of Canaan out of Assyria and Babylon. But this interpretation cannot
stand, because the Israelites never returned out of their captivity, as
appears by the second judgment before threatened, verse. 6. and also by the
event, as histories bear witness; neither is it here said, that Funccius
comment. lib. 1. page 23.
they shall ascend out of Chaldea, Assyria or Medea, or that they shall come up
to Judea or Chanaan, but indefinitelie that they shall ascend out of the land.
Moreover, the children of Judah came up out of their captivity of Babylon, long
before the coming of the Messiah, whereas the Prophet here speaks of the
coming up of the people after his coming, by virtue of that union which
should be between them and their head: and therefore it cannot be understood of
that corporal liberty and local coming out of Babylon.

Seeing then these words cannot be understood of a carnal and corporal
liberty, and deliverance out of a worldly and temporary captivity; it
follows necessarily that we expound them of spiritual liberty and
deliverance of the whole Israel of God, his Church and faithful children,
consisting of all nations, Jews, Israelites, and Gentiles, out of the
miserable servitude and captivity of sin, Satan and the world, effected by
Jesus Christ their Savior, and most perfect Redeemer.

And this exposition agrees well with the context and The freedom of the
Jews compared with our freedom by Christ.
circumstances of the place: for having in the former words showed, that the
Church and faithful people of God, belonging to his eternal election, should
be effectually called, and being collected and gathered out of the world,
should be joined to the Church and kingdom of Christ, he acknowledging them
for his subjects and members, and they acknowledging him for their head and
king; now he shows that these who were thus effectually called, should by
their Savior Christ be justified, sanctified, and in the end perfectly
glorified. All which he signifies by this phrase of coming up out of the
land, wherein he alludeth to the corporal and local coming up of the people of
Judah, out of Babylon to Jerusalem. For as they were set at liberty out of the
hands of their enemies, and came up out of their captivity unto the land of
Canaan: so the faithful being united to Christ, and having made choice of him
to be their king and head, are by him redeemed and set at liberty out of the
hands of their spiritual enemies, and come out of the land of their
captivity, and out of the dominion of their tyrannous Lords, sin, Satan, the
world and the flesh, and so ascend into the spiritual Canaan, and new
Jerusalem, that is, first, into the kingdom of grace, and then into the
kingdom of glory, where they enjoy the perfect liberty of the sons of God.

The land therefore out of which the Church and people of God ascend, is the
land of darkness, the kingdom of Satan, sin and the world; the place
whereunto they ascend, is the kingdom of Jesus Christ, first the kingdom of
grace, and then the kingdom of glory; for as soon as Christ has chosen his
Church to be his subjects and members; and they have chosen him to be their
king and head, then the will of their sovereign is, that being elected his
subjects, they should no longer live in the kingdom of sin and Satan, where
they were captives, but that they should be admitted into his own kingdom,
that where he their king is, there they his subjects should be also: as it
is, Ioh. 17. 24. 12. 26. Ioh. 17. 24. 12. 26.


Now they are said to ascend out of the land, because the kingdom of sin and
Satan is worldly, earthly and below; whereas the kingdom of Christ is
spiritual, heavenly and above; and therefore they who will come unto it, must
not lie groueling upon the earth, but must ascend unto it. And of this the
earthly Jerusalem was a type, which was situated in a hie place; in regard
whereof the children of Judah, when they came out of the land of their
captivity, were said to ascend out of the land. And to this the Prophet here
alludeth, as also the Prophet Esaias, Chap. 2. 2. Esa. 2. 2.


The Church then, and people of God, after that they are redeemed and set at
liberty by Christ, must not abide below in the kingdom of darkness, but they
must ascend into the kingdom of Christ, the kingdom of grace, where they are
to live like Gods subjects, and do service to their Lord and Savior, who has
redeemed them to this purpose; 1. Cor. 6. 20.
and then to the kingdom of glory, where they shall receive a rich reward for
their service, even a crown of glory, and everlasting happiness.

First then they must ascend out of the kingdom of darkness, Of our coming
out of the power of darkness by vocation and justification.
sin and Satan, into the kingdom of grace: which is done first, when as
Jesus Christ has effectually called them, gathered them into his Church, and
united them unto himself, making them members of his own body, by virtue of
his holy spirit, and the fruit thereof a lively faith. By which union they have
right and propriety unto the righteousness, death and merits of Christ their
head, whereby they are justified in the sight of God: for the justice of God
being fully satisfied by the death and merits of Christ, and the debt of our
sins being discharged, they are pardoned and done away, and we being clothed
with his righteousness and actual obedience, are accepted and reputed of God
as just, and so reconciled unto him, and adopted for his sons in Christ. And
this is the first kind of our ascending out of the land and kingdom of
darkness, when as we are freed and delivered out of the power of Satan and
sin, in respect both of the guilt and punishment thereof; so that now it
cannot condemn us, nor any longer detain us as prisoners under the arrest of
the law, in the prison of death and utter darkness. And of this ascension the
Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 2. 4. 5. 6.

Secondly, they ascend out of the kingdom of sin and Satan, Ephesians. 2. 4. 5 6.
Our cumming out of the power of sin by sanctification.
into the kingdom of Christ, when as being united unto him, they have part in
his death and resurrection, by the virtue and power whereof sin is mortified
in them, and they raised from the death of sin, to holiness and newness of
life: so that now their hearts and affections, their words and actions, their
life and conversation is quite changed; for whereas whilst they lived in the
land of darkness, under the kingdom of sin and Satan, they were wholly
earthly, carnal and diabolical: now being ascended out of the land into the
kingdom of Christ, they are spiritual and heavenly: their heart and
affections which in former times did lie groueling on the earth, minding
nothing but worldly and carnal things, are now mounted aloft, so that though
their bodies be on the earth, yet their conversation is in heaven, from whence
they expect their Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, Phil. 3. 20. And being risen
with Christ, they do not Phil. 3. 20.
seek those things which are on the earth, but those things which are above;
as the Apostle speaks, Col. 3. 1. And as Col. 3. 1.
they rise aloft in heart and affections, so also in words and actions, which
are not as in former times carnal and earthly, but spiritual and heavenly. Of
this ascension the Apostle speaks, Romans 6. 4. 5. 6. And this is that first
resurrection, of Romans 6. 4. 5. 6.
which John speaks, in which whosoever have their part are blessed, because
on such the second death has no power: Apoc. 20. 6. Apoc. 20. 6.


And thus the Church and people of God ascend out of the land of darkness,
and the kingdom of sin and Satan, first by their justification, whereby they
are freed from the imputation, guilt and punishment of sin, so that it cannot
Romans 8. 33. 34.
accuse and condemn them; and secondly by their sanctification, when by virtue
of Gods spirit dwelling in them, and applying unto them the death and
resurrection of Christ, they do by little and little subdue and mortify the
power of sin, so that it does no longer reign and rule in them as Romans 6. 12.
in former times; and having lessened and abated the corruption, do begin to
rise from the death of sin to newness of life, yielding voluntary obedience
to Gods commandments.

The second manner of the Churches going up, or ascending, Of our ascending out
of the land of darkness, into the kingdom of glory.
out of the land of darkness, the kingdom of sin and Satan, is, when they
ascend into the kingdom of glory; whereof there are three degrees; the first
whereof is in this life, which is only in hope, and in respect of the certain
assurance of their full and perfect deliverance out of the kingdom of sin
and Satan, and of their entrance into and possession of the kingdom of heaven.
The which their hope and assurance is grounded upon their union with Christ;
for being assured that Christ their head, clothed with their flesh is ascended
into heaven, they have no less assurance that they his members shall also
ascend thither, seeing the union between them is inseparable. And this is that
ascension of which the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 2. 4. 5. Of which in respect
Ephesians. 2. 4. 5.
of the certainty of faith, Gods people have such full assurance, that they
are said not only to hope for it, but already to have entered into it, and to
have taken possession of it, Ioh. Ioh. 3. 36.
3. 36. He that believes in the Son, has everlasting life. So 1. Ioh. 3.
14. We know that we are translated from death to life, 1. Joh. 3. 14.
because we love the brethren.

The second degree of their ascension out of the kingdom of sin and Satan,
into the kingdom of glory, is at the time of their dissolution, when their
bodies resting in the grave, their souls have entrance into a real possession
of the heavenly joys. And of this the Wise man speaks, Eccles. 12. 7. And
dust returns to the earth as it Eccles. 12. 7.
was, and the spirit returns to God that gave it. And the Apostle Paul thus
desires to be dissolved, that his soul might be with Christ: Phil. 1. 23.
Phil. 1. 23.


The last degree is their full and perfect liberty, which shall be at the day
of the general resurrection, when as body and The last degree of our liberty.
soul shall be united together, and being fully freed from the power of Satan,
sin, death and corruption, shall for ever inherit the unspeakable joys of
Gods Kingdom. And this also they attain unto by virtue of that union which
they have with Christ, whereby their bodies and souls being inseparably joined
unto him, they by virtue of his spirit dwelling in them, and applying unto them
the power of his resurrection, are also raised and ascend into heaven, that
where he their head is, there they his members may be also. And of this the
Apostle speaks, Romans 8. 11. But if the spirit of him Romans 8. 11.
that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you, he that raised up Christ
from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, because his spirit
dwells in you. And this is that full liberty and perfect redemption of which
our Savior speaks, Luke 21. 28. When these things begin to come to pass,
then look Luke 21. 28.
up and lift up your heads, for your redemption draws near.

And this is the meaning of these words. The doctrines which from hence arise
are these. First, we may observe, that That as soon as we are united to
Christ, we ascend out of the kingdom of darkness.
have by a lively faith chosen and embraced him for their King and head, then
presently they ascend out of the land of darkness, the Kingdom of sin and
Satan; and that in respect both of their justification, whereby their sins
being not imputed, they are freed from guilt and punishment, and are accepted
as righteous, being clothed with the righteousness of Jesus Christ; and in
respect of their sanctification, whereby they are freed from the power and
corruption of sin; when as the Spirit of God dwelling in them, applies unto
them the virtue of Christ's death and resurrection, whereby their sins are by
little and little mortified and subdued, and they raised from the death of
sin, to holiness and newness of life. Whosoever therefore are gathered into
the Church, and have chosen Christ for their head, they may be assured that
they are justified in Gods sight, and so freed from the guilt and punishment of
their sins; and also that they are sanctified, and in some measure freed from
the power and jurisdiction of sin, so that it shall no longer reign in their
mortal bodies; for these go inseparably together, so that having one, we may
be assured Romans 6. 12.
that we have all the other, and that wanting one, we want all the rest.

Secondly, we may observe, that the Church being set at liberty out of the land
of darkness, does ascend into the The true members of the Church are not
carnal but spiritual.
Kingdom of God; first into the Kingdom of grace, and then into the Kingdom
of glory. So that the Church of Christ, and all the true members thereof, are
no longer earthly, carnal, and worldly, but spiritual and heavenly; they are
no more citizens of the world, but of the new Jerusalem which is above; their
hearts are not now groueling on the Phil. 3. 20.
earth, but they have their conversation in heaven, minding not earthly but
heavenly things. For after that our Savior Christ our sovereign Prince,
having overcome our spiritual enemies, in whose bondage we were inthralled,
has pronounced the sentence of our liberty, we then begin to shake off the
bolts and chains of our sins and corruptions, and to come out of the prison
and power of sin and Satan; neither will we then make a stay there, but make
all haste possible to get out of their kingdom and dominion, lest again we
should be overtaken and inthralled in their bondage: and because no other place
can secure us from this danger, therefore we ascend into the kingdom of
Christ, desiring his aid and protection, who alone is able to defend us: and
forasmuch as whilst we continue in the suburbs of this kingdom the Church
militant, although we be never overcome, yet we are continually assaulted with
our spiritual enemies; therefore we continually desire and hope to enter
within the walls of the heavenly Jerusalem, the Church triumphant in heaven;
where not only we shall be free from danger of being subdued, but also from
assault and molestation: in the mean time, settling our minds and hearts not
upon things present, but upon those future joys, of which we are assured when
we shall be admitted citizens of Gods kingdom of glory, and attain unto our
full redemption.

And these are the steps and degrees whereby we ascend out of the land of
darkness, into the kingdom of glory, The degrees whereby we must ascend out
of the land of darkness.
the highest whereof none can attain unto, but they who begin at the lowest:
for first we must be subjects of the kingdom of grace, before we be subjects
of the kingdom of glory; we must first be members of the Church militant,
before we be members of the Church triumphant; first we must enter into the
suburbs, before we can come into the city; first we must have assurance of
our heavenly inheritance by faith and hope, before we shall enjoy the actual
possession: and lastly, we must have our minds, hearts, and affections
transported into our heavenly country, or else our bodies and souls shall
never ascend thither. So that in this point also, one of these steps and
degrees being ascended, it gives us assurance that we shall still ascend till
we come to the highest; and on the other side, if we begin not at the first, we
shall never ascend to the last, namely, the glorious joys of Gods kingdom.

The last thing to be considered, is, by what virtue and power we ascend out of
the land of darkness, into the kingdom By what virtue and power we ascend out
of the land of darkness.
of glory; to wit, not our own, but Jesus Christ's; for he alone is it, who by
his death and merits, has set us free out of the land of darkness, and
delivered us from the guilt and punishment of our sins; and he only it is,
who by virtue of his Spirit, applying his death and resurrection unto us, does
enable us to ascend out of the power of sin, and to subdue and mortify the
corruptions thereof. And none but he raises up our minds from the earth and
earthly things, and giving us entrance into his heavenly joys by faith and
hope, does transport our hearts and affections thither, whither our souls and
bodies shall afterward ascend. In a word, it is he alone, who by virtue of the
same spirit, uniting us unto him as members of his body, does cause us to
ascend in soul at the hour of death, and in body and soul joined together at
the general resurrection, and gives them full and actual possession of Gods
kingdom. And therefore let us beware, that we trust not to ascend up into
heaven by the broken ladder of the merits of Saints, or our own works and
worthiness, for so shall we rob Christ of his glory, and our selves of all
comfort in this life, and happiness in the life to come: seeing these rotten
and broken steps will most fail us when we most rest upon them; but let us
look to ascend by Christ alone, who is the only sound and strong ladder, upon
which the Angels descend to carry us up with them into Abraham's bosom, John 1.
51. and the true and straight John 1. 51.
way whereby we may ascend out of this vale of misery, into the Kingdom of
everlasting glory: as himself speaks, John 14. 6. John 14. 6.


And thus much concerning the description of the Churches happiness, under the
government of Christ their head. In the last place, this their felicity is
amplified in these words; for great is the day of Izreel.

The which words by others are otherwise translated and The exposition.
expounded. Some read them thus: When as the great day of Izreel shall be, or
shall have been: some thus; Although great shall be the day of Izreel. Both
understanding by day of Izreel, the day of the calamity of the people, when
they were overthrown in the valley of Izreel, and so led captive by their
enemies. According to which translation, they make this to be the sense of the
place; that after this great destruction, the Lord would cause this great
deliverance; or although this great calamity should certainly befall them, yet
this should not hinder the performance of Gods promises, concerning the
prosperous estate of the Church, under the government of Christ their head.

But as I take it, we are not to understand here by this great day of Izreel,
the day of their great affliction and calamity, but the day of their great
felicity and happiness, not the day of their overthrow and captivity, but of
their restoring and deliverance out of their enemies hands: for in the fifth
verse he had spoken of this judgment, and now he speaks only of mercy
and deliverance, whereby he would comfort Gods people, who were dejected with
the former threatenings: as appears by that both which went before, and that
also which follows.

Now it is called the great day, because it should be a day wherein the Lord
would show the greatness of his mercy, power, wisdom, and goodness, in the
deliverance of his people, and the destruction of their enemies: and because it
should be a day of great rejoicing and triumph to the Church, when as they
should be gathered together under their head and King Jesus Christ, and by him
be delivered out of the land of darkness, and kingdom of Satan, where they
were inthralled; and so ascend into the Kingdom of God, the kingdom of grace
first, and afterward the kingdom of eternal glory. And it is called the day
of Izreel, because it is a day of their redemption and salvation: so Luke 19.
41. 44. Where by Izreel we are to understand the Luke 19. 41. 44.
seed and sons of God; not as in the fourth verse, the seed which God would
scatter and disperse, but which in the time of the great harvest, he would
reap and gather into his garners of grace and glory.

And this is the meaning of the words. The doctrine which from hence arises
is this. Here we may observe, what What is the chief day of our rejoicing.
we are to esteem the day of our great rejoicing, and as it were our solemn
festival; not wherein we attain some worldly riches, or temporary
preferment, or wherein we are freed from some corporal calamity, although in
some measure we may lawfully rejoice in these respects: but the day of our joy
and triumph is, when as we are delivered out of the bondage of Satan, and are
gathered into the Church of God, and are ruled, protected, and governed by
Christ our head, seeing in this day we are freed from the greatest evils, and
advanced to the greatest dignities and preferments. And therefore let us say
with the Prophet David upon an other occasion; This is the day which the Lord
has made, let us rejoice and be glad in it: Psalm. 118. 24. And that we may
show Psalm. 118. 24.
and testify this our joy and gladness, let us solemnly assemble together to
praise Gods name, and to render thanks to God, as for all other his benefits,
so especially for this great work of our deliverance.

FINIS.
LETCVRES UPON THE SECOND CHAPTER OF THE PROPHECY OF HOSEA.
THe argument of this chapter is like The argument.
unto the former; for herein the people of Israel are accused, and sharply
reproved for their sins of idolatry, and unthankfulness toward God, and
withal Gods fearful judgments are denounced, both against the whole
Synagogue, and Church of Israel, and also against the particular members
thereof. With which threatenings, lest the faithful and true children of God,
should be too much amassed and beaten down with excessive grief, for the
downfall of the Church; he raises them up again with sound comfort,
preaching unto them the glad tidings of the Gospel, wherein he foretells
their reconciliation with God, the espousals of the Church to her husband Jesus
Christ, and the manifold benefits which should accompany this happy contract.

And this is the maine argument of this chapter. Out of The analysis.
which we may observe the parts thereof, which are two: first, legal
threatenings: secondly, Euangelical promises. The first part begins, verse. 2.
and continues to the 14. Wherein is set down both their sin and punishment,
and these are intermixed one with another. Their sin is twofold: first, their
idolatry: secondly, their ignorant ingratitude, which also consists of two
branches: first, their ascribing of all the benefits which they inioyed to
their idols, verse. 5. Secondly, their not acknowledging God to be the author of
them, verse. 8.

Their idolatry is set down in the 2. 3. 4. and 5. verses. Wherein is
contained, 1. a denunciation of a divorce between God and the Church of Israel,
verse. 2. And the cause thereof, namely, her spiritual whoredoms, verse. 5. The
dinorce is first enjoined that it should be denounced, and then the causes or
ends of the denunciation are expressed; which are two: First, that the Church
of Israel taking notice of it, might lay it to heart, and be moved thereby to
repent of her spiritual whoredoms, verse. 2. And secondly, that she repenting,
the Lord might not be moved in his just displeasure to punish, neither her,
verse. 3. nor her children, verse. 4.

And this is the general resolution of this chapter. Now let us come to the
words themselves. Verse. 1. Say unto your brethren, Ammi: and to your sisters,
Ruchamah. In the last verse Exposition.
of the former chapter, the Prophet had showed that the faithful which
appertained to Gods election should be gathered together, and should set over
themselves one head Jesus Christ; and so becoming subjects of his kingdom,
and members of his body, should by virtue of this union ascend out of the
kingdom of sin and satan, into the kingdom of grace and glory: Now he
exhorts them to congratulate one another, in respect of these great benefits
received, and with mutual encouragements to stir up every man his neighbor
and brother, that with a godly care, and earnest desire and endeavor, and
with a lively faith they would receive and apply to themselves this grace of
God and most merciful benefits, which in Christ are offered unto them; and not
only so, but being themselves made partakers of these inestimable benefits, he
exhorts them not to rest contented with their own happiness, but to labor,
that it may be communicated to their brethren; and being escaped out of their
miserable servitude into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, he moves
them to persuade others, to participate of their freedom; and being converted
to the faith, and added to the Church themselves, he stirs them up to labor
for the conversion of others, and consequently for the propagation of the
Gospel and kingdom of Jesus Christ.

So that (as I take it) this verse is as it were an appendix or consectarie
unto the two former, containing in it a duty, which those that were converted
and added unto the Church, ought to perform to their neighbors and brethren,
both according to the spirit, and also according to the flesh; namely, that
being themselves ascended out of the vallie of darkness into the mountain of
God, they should by their exhortations and encouragements congratulate these
benefits one with another, upon whom they were bestowed, and move others to
ascend with them. The which duty the Prophets Esaias and Micha foretell should
be performed of the faithful, in the time of the Gospel, as appears, Esa.
2. 2. 3. Mich. 4. 1. 2. And therefore seeing this verse depends Esa. 2. 2. 3.
Mich. 4. 1. 2.
upon the former, containing in it a consequent duty of those gracious
benefits, which through Christ, God bestows upon the faithful, I think it
may well be referred and adjoined to the former chapter.

But let us come to the words themselves, wherein two things are to be
considered: first, the parties to whom this duty is enjoined: secondly, the
duty which by them is to be performed. The parties who must speak to their
brethren, are those of whom he had spoken in the former verse, namely, such as
were gathered into the Church, united unto Christ, and had ascended out of the
land of darkness into the kingdom of grace; they being ascended themselves
must persuade their brethren to ascend with them. For before our selves are
called, united unto Christ, justified and sanctified, we neither can nor will
exhort others to participate of these benefits, because we have had no taste
nor feeling of them; nay, rather we are ready to draw others from ascending
to the mountain of God, into the land of darkness, that together with us
they may have the fruition of the pleasures of sin, and wallow in the filthy
puddle of worldly delights, which we deem the greatest happiness, because we
have had no sense nor relish of better things. But when once our minds are
enlightened, and we discern, that the pleasures of sin are in themselves
base and vain, and also in the end bring death and utter destruction; and
withal perceive the excellency of Gods spiritual benefits, which he
bestows upon the faithful, and have our selves attained unto some assurance
of them; then do we not only for our own part contemn those things which
we so highly prised in former times, but also persuade others to scorn and
loath them; then do we not only our selves enjoy our heavenly happiness, but
exhort others to congratulate our joy, who already are partakers of it, and to
persuade those who have not as yet tasted of it, that they will labor to
attain unto it.

The duty which by these is to be performed, is, that they speak unto their
brethren, that is, that they would exhort and stir them up, either to begin
to ascend into the kingdom, if they have not yet ascended; or if they have, to
congratulate with them in this great happiness, and so with mutual
encouragements to move one another with all care, alacrity and diligence, more
and more to ascend out of the land of darkness, and to adioyne themselves
more firmly and nearly unto the kingdom of Christ.

In which duty of exhortation and encouragement, we are to consider two
things: first, the persons to whom it is directed, and secondly the matter of
the speech it self. The persons are their brethren and sisters, that is, all
that belong to Gods election, whether they be called already, or to be
called; for these are to be exhorted that they ascend, the other to be
encouraged in their course, that with alacrity they may more and more ascend.
And because none preciselie knows who amongst those who are not yet called
belong to the election of God, therefore all our neighbors and acquaintance,
are to be exhorted and invited that they would ascend with us. And to this
duty we are bound by the law of charity, whether we respect our love toward
God, or toward our neighbors; for our love toward God binds us to seek
the advancement of his glory, by the enlarging of his kingdom; the which we
do, when as by our exhortations and holy example, we gain men to Christ.
Again, we ought to love our brethren as our selves; which if we do, then
being escaped out of the kingdom of Satan, and ascended into the Kingdom of
God, we will use all our care and endeavor, that they likewise may be
delivered and ascend with us. And this is done either when one private man does
exhort, persuade, and encourage an other, both by word, and holy example of
life, to become a true member of the Kingdom of Christ; or when Gods Ministers
by their public preaching perform this duty; which is of all other means
most effectual, as being Gods own ordinance, instituted for the gathering
together of the Saints, and Ephesians. 4. 11. 22 Romans 1. 16.
his strong power unto salvation to every one that believes.

But howsoever all men are to be invited and exhorted to ascend into the
Kingdom of Christ, yet this is effectual only to those, who are indeed
brethren and sisters: that is, such as belong to Gods election, whether they be
called or not called. Neither does it hence follow, that because others are
called in the ministry of the word, Ammi and Ruchamah; that is, the people of
God who have obtained mercy; that the word of God should be false, or they
deluded; seeing there is no cause in the word, why indeed they should not be
the people of God, and partakers of his mercy, but in themselves, namely, their
own infidelity: for if they would believe this speech of the Gospel, they
should in truth be Gods people; whereas not believing, they lose this title and
dignity, and so as much as in them, give God the lie; as the Apostle speaks,
1, John 5. 10. But God is true of his word, 1. John 5. 10.
for the voice of the Gospel is general and indefinite, and never
particularly applied but by the faith of the hearer; and therefore being
delivered to a multitude, though many reject it, yet of some amongst them it
may be said that they are the people of God; namely, those who receive it by a
lively faith.

And so much for the persons who are to be exhorted. The matter of the speech
which contains in it the maine arguments, whereby the exhortation is
enforced, is in these two words, Ammi, Ruchamah: that is, ye are my people, ye
have obtained mercy; or, O ye my people, O thou who have obtained mercy. The
which is the voice and glad tidings of the Gospel, containing effectual
motives, to move all to ascend into the kingdom of Christ, if they be not
already ascended; or more and more to ascend, if they be already gone up.

For the first, those that are the people and subjects of God, are not to dwell
in the land of darkness, under the government of sin, Satan, and the world,
but to ascend into the kingdom of their own King: but we are now become the
people and subjects of God; for though in former times our sins moved the
Lord to reject us from being his people, and to exile us out of his kingdom,
suffering us to be dispersed as captives in the land of darkness, and in the
bondage of Satan; yet now Christ our head has satisfied Gods justice for our
sins, appeased his wrath, reconciled us unto him; so that now again he is
content to admit us for his people and subjects: and therefore let us no longer
abide in the land of darkness, and in the captivity of Satan, from which
Christ has freed us, but being delivered and admitted Gods subjects and
people, let us now adioyne our selves unto his kingdom, and obediently submit
our selves to his government.

So those that have already begun to ascend, may be hereby moved more and more
to go forward in this course, and that both in respect of their faith, and in
respect of their affections; for if they be admitted the people of God, and
have obtained his mercy, why should the huge weight of their sins weigh them
down, and keep them from ascending in the assurance of faith, seeing God is
gracious unto his own people and inheritance, and in his mercy has done away
all their sins? and therefore, seeing they have obtained Gods infinite mercy,
they have a sufficient medicine for their greatest misery.

If they be the people of God, who have obtained mercy, then may they be moved
hereby to ascend in their affiance, trusting in the providence of their
all-sufficient and most bountiful King; and not suffer their minds to be tied
unto earthly means and secundary causes, presuming in their abundance, and
despairing in their want. If they be Gods people, then may they ascend in
hope, that they shall, being his subjects, be admitted into his kingdom both
of grace and glory, and be made partakers of the riches and royal benefits of
them both, and not suffer transitory trifles to be the end and top of their
hopes, seeing they are advanced to higher dignities. Then also are they to
ascend in their fear; for if they be the people and subjects of God, then are
they to fear the anger and displeasure of their Sovereign, as the greatest
evil; and in regard hereof, to be much more careful and fearful lest they
offend him, then any mortal man. And so likewise in their love; for if they be
Gods people, who have obtained mercy and assurance of Gods kingdom, then what
sottish folly were it, to place their love upon the vanities of the world,
which are of no value nor continuance, and not rather on God, heaven and
heavenly joys, which are most excellent and permanent?

And this is the meaning of these words. The doctrines which from hence arise
are diverse. First, here we learn, that That we ought to rejoice in the
fruition of Gods benefits.
calling and union with Christ, our redemption, justification, sanctification,
and eternal salvation, more to rejoice in them, then if we were made owners of
the whole world: neither must we smother this joy in our selves, but with
mutual congratulations communicate it with our brethren. For this is a
consequent duty and effect of the former benefits received; as appears in
this place, as also Romans 5. 1, 2, 3. To which Romans 5. 1, 2, 3.
duty we shall easily be moved, if we often call to mind our passed misery and
present happiness. For if beggars when they attain to great riches, bondmen
when they are redeemed out of miserable servitude, and every one who escapes
out of desperate and deadly dangers, are even so ravished with such tickling
joy, that their hearts, like too strait and weak vessels, would break to
contain it, unless they did unburden them by communicating them unto others;
then if we consider our former beggerlinesse and baseness, and our present
honors and preserments, our cruel and miserable servitude under sin and
Satan in time past, and our glorious and happy liberty, unto which we have now
attained; the great and mortal dangers of plagues and grievous punishments,
the anger of God, the curse of the law, and eternal death and condemnation;
all which we have fully escaped, being not only delivered from the evil which
we feared, but possessed in the certainty of assurance, of such happiness that
we could not hope for, nor so much as conceive and wish for: how can our hearts
contain such rauishing joys? how can our tongues be silent, and not unburden
our minds, by congratulating them with those who are made partakers of the
like happiness? And if thus we not only joy in our selves, but all rejoice
with others, then shall we hereby be stirred up to praise the Lord, who is the
chief and only cause of all our joy and happiness; and by this holy exercise
of our thankfulness, we shall more and more confirm our assurance of the
former benefits; for these are mutual causes one of an other. Whereas
contrariwise, our not praising God, argues our little joy, and our small joy
our little assurance, and base esteem which we make of this unspeakable
happiness.

Secondly, as we are to congratulate this our joy with those That we ought to
persuade others to communicate with us in our joy.
who are partakers of it; so are we by our persuasions and exhortations to move
others who have not yet tasted of it, that they labor to attain unto it; for
this the law of charity requires at our hands, our love toward God, which we
manifest when as we labor for the advancement of his glory in the enlarging of
his kingdom; and our love toward our neighbor, which is principally showed
in seeking their conversion and eternal happiness. With which charity
whosoever is endued, he cannot choose but perform this duty; for as the Sun
cannot keep unto it self his light, but communicates it to the good and
comfort of other creatures; and as the wood which is kindled and inflamed, does
also kindle other wood which joins unto it: so they who are illuminated with
the light of knowledge, cannot keep it from shining unto others; and those who
are inflamed with the zeal of Gods glory, and love of their brethren, cannot
choose but labor to make those who are about them like unto them, and partakers
of those benefits which they enjoy. Examples hereof we have, John 1. 41. 45.
and chap. 4. 28, 29.

Thirdly, we are to observe, to whom this duty does appertain; namely, to all
those who are made members of the That all the faithful must labor to gain
others to the Church.
church, whether they be public or private persons; for there is none which
are in respect of their meannesse of gifts exempted, seeing there is not any
who has received such a small talent, but that if he will profitably employ
it, he may thereby gain some glory to his Lord and master, and in some
respect or other, bring some benefit to his brethren, either by instruction,
consolation, exhortation, or holy example of life. But howsoever this duty
belongs to all, yet especially to Gods Ministers, who are appointed of God,
both to be the spiritual fathers by whom men are begotten unto God, and
converted to the faith; and also to be the nurses, who by the milk of the word
are to nourish and bring up in their spiritual growth, those who are
regenerate and added to the Church. And therefore they are with all care and
diligence to preach the word, in season and out of season, instructing the
ignorant, exhorting those that are backward, persuading the obstinate,
confirming the weak, and comforting and encouraging those which are ready to
faint, and by all means laboring, that those who are not converted, may be
gained unto Christ; and likewise, that those who are already added to the
Church, may be more and more strengthened and confirmed in their spiritual
union with Christ, and communion with the Saints.

Fourthly, we are to observe, to whom this duty is to be performed, namely, to
our brothers and sisters, that is, those who are already, and those that may be
hereafter our brethren and sisters: and in y^ we do not know who these are,
because Gods That we must labor to inform all in Gods truth.
secret counsel and decree of election is known only to himself, therefore we
are to exhort, instruct, and persuade all to become members of ye Church, so
far as in regard of our state and calling we possibly can: for the Spirit
blows where it lists, and can easily cause Lions, Tigers, and Cockatrices,
to become the sheep of Christ; he can make idolatrous Abraham the fether of
the faithful; bloody and barbarous Manasses, an humble convert; a persecuting
Saul a preaching Paul; and a leaud chief a holy confessor: and therefore say
not in thy heart, I will spare my labor, because this or that man is too
wicked, too worldly, too covetous, too proud to make a Christian, seeing the
Lord is able of stones to raise up children unto Abraham, to humble the most
proud and obstinate, and to sanctify the most profane; neither is he only
able to do it, but also often does it, to show the infinite riches of his
wisdom, power, mercy and goodness, and that our salvation is not for our
own works or worthiness, but of his own free grace and undeserved love, that
so he may be all in all, and have the whole glory of his own work.

Fifthly, we are to observe the maine arguments which the The arguments which we
must use for the conversion of others.
faithful are to use, that they may persuade others to ascend with them, out
of the land of darkness, into the kingdom and Church of Christ: namely,
because they were the people of God, and therefore they are to ascend into the
kingdom of their Lord and redeemer. And lest their sins, and Gods justice
and wrath, should discourage them, it is further said, that they have obtained
mercy and remission of their sins, and are now reconciled unto God in
Christ. Whence we learn, what is the strongest inducement, and most forcible
argument to move any to leave the kingdom of darkness, and to adioyne
themselves unto the Church of God, namely, when they hear, and hearing
believe, that they who were aliants and strangers, are now in Christ become
Gods subjects and servants; that they whom the law for their grievous sins
excluded from all mercy, and made obnoxious to Gods wrath, are now in Christ
made partakers of Gods mercy, whereby they have the remission of their sins,
and are so reconciled to their Lord and Sovereign. So long as a malefactor,
who has deserved death, knows that his Prince is justly displeased with him,
and intends to prosecute the law against him, he flees his kingdom, and
lives in voluntary exile: but if he hear that the princes son favors
him, and has obtained his fathers pardon, and reconciled him unto him, this is
a strong motive to persuade him to leave the strange country where he lives,
and to return again into the kingdom of his Sovereign. So we (who are
grievous malefactors; which by transgressing Gods law have made our selves
subject to to his wrath, and obnoxious to the punishment of the law, eternal
death, whilst we remain in this case) flee from Gods presence, and as much
as in us lies (though it never lies in us) we banish our selves out of his
kingdom and jurisdiction; but when we hear that Christ his dearly beloved
son has obtained our pardon, and reconciled us to his father, then, and not
before, we approach his presence, and adioyne our selves to his kingdom. It is
then the preaching of the Gospel which gathers us into Christ's kingdom. For
it is Gods strong power unto salvation to all that believe, whereby he
persuades us to come out of Satan's kingdom, and to adioyne our selves unto
his Church. And therefore those who seek the conversion of others, they must
not only denounce legal threatenings against sin, for this will make men
rather flee from God, then come unto him, but having by the law brought them to
a sight of their misery, in regard of the curse thereof, the anger of God,
death and condemnation which they have deserved, then they are to preach the
glad tidings of the Gospel, whereby they may be assured of the remission of
their sins, and reconciliation with God; and so be moved to come unto Christ,
and to adioyne themselves to his Church. Examples hereof we have: Act. 2. 38.
39. 2. Cor. 5. 18. 19. 20. Act. 2. 38. 2. Cor. 5. 18. Gal. 3 26. That we must
continually labor to convert others to the faith.
Gal. 3. 26. 27. 28.

Now we are further to observe, that we are not to deliver this glad tidings of
the Gospel, for the conversion of those who are not yet called, once or twice,
or diverse times; but continually till they be converted, we must teach them,
persuade and exhort them to ascend out of the land of darkness, into the
kingdom of Christ: for he does not define and determine a certain number,
but indefinitely and absolutely commands us that we should speak unto them.
For God calls not all at the same hour, but some at one time, and some at
another, neither does he make the word effectual for the conversion of all
sinners at the first hearing, but in some he lets it often outwardly sound in
their ears, before by the inward working of his Spirit he opens them, and
inclines their hearts to believe and embrace it; lest we should ascribe the
whole praise of our conversion unto the ministry of man, which is principally
due to his holy spirit, who is the chief cause thereof. As therefore the poole
of Bethesda did not at all times cure diseases, but only when the Angel
descended and infused virtue into the water, and yet nevertheless the people
at all times watched that they might be ready to put in their friends when the
opportune time came; so these rivers and streams of the Gospel, which run
from the sanctuary, have not always virtue and power in them to heal our
diseases and sores of sin, but then only when the spirit of God descends,
and by his secret working infuseth virtue thereunto; and therefore we are
continually to watch for this time, in the mean while using the means
continually appointed by God to this purpose.

Neither does he determine the presence, before whom, or the place where this
duty must be performed, but indefinitely and absolutely he inioyneth us to
speak unto our brethren and sisters. Whence we learn, that there is no
presence or place exempted from this duty, but we are to exhort all in all
places to come unto Christ, and to leave the kingdom of darkness; publicly
in the ministry of the word, and in private conferences, at home and abroad,
in the congregation, and in our chambers, as occasion shall be offered for
gaining our brethren unto Christ's kingdom. For as the spirit of God is
restrained to no time, so neither to any place, but he conuerteth both when he
will, and also where he will.

The sixth thing to be observed, is the change of the names, Great difference
between the effects of the law and the Gospel.
Lo-ammi, into Ammi, and Lo-ruchamah into Ruchamah; whereby is signified that
there is a great change in the time of the Gospel, from the state of things
under the law: for those whom the law scattered, the Gospel gathers; those
whom the law made strangers and enemies, the Gospel makes subjects and
friends; those whom the law debarred of mercy, are by the Gospel received to
mercy; those who^ the law condemned, the Gospel justifies and saves: so yt
now enmity is turned into friendship, judgment into mercy, death and
condemnation into life and eternal salvation, in and by Christ our Savior. The
consideration whereof as it should fill our hearts with sound comfort, so also
with true thankfulness, and our mouths also with Gods praises, who has caused
this happy change, and turned our grief and sorrow into joy and gladness.

Lastly, whereas God inioyneth us, to inuit others unto Man's misery, the
laws impotencie, and Christ's sufficiency.
Christ, by calling them Ruchamah, that is, such as have obtained mercy, he
herein includes their misery, the laws impotencie in freeing them from it,
and that through Gods mercy, and Christ's merits alone we have salvation. For
the first, it is include in the word, mercy; for mercy does presuppose
misery, both in respect of our sins, and also the punishment which for them
was due unto us; and the laws impotencie, for if we could have obtained
salvation by the law, then should we not have needed mercy, because we
should have been saved by our own merits; and lastly, that we have not
salvation of or by our selves, but in Christ and for his merits; for when God
was displeased, there must be some means to pacify him; when we had excluded
our selves from Gods mercy, there must be some other way to recover it, which
could not be any means of our own, for we in stead of pacifying God for our
old sins, were continually ready to anger him with new, and in stead of
mercy, we by our new transgressions heaped upon our selves new punishments;
and therefore in Christ alone, Gods mercy is obtained, who has satisfied his
justice and appeased his wrath by discharging our debt, bearing our sins, and
suffering that punishment which we by them had most justly deserved.

ANd so much for the consequent duty to be performed of the faithful, after
themselves are made partakers of the Evangelical benefits. In the next place
the Prophet returns to the legal threatenings; in these words: Verse. 2.
Plead (or, contend) with your mother, plead with her, for she is not my wife
(or, as the word is sometimes taken, that she is not my wife) neither am I her
husband; but let her take away (or, that she may take away) her fornications
out of her sight, and her adulteries from between her breasts. Where the Lord
commands that a divorce should be proclaimed between him and the Israelites,
and withal shows the cause or end of this denunciation, namely, that they
might repent and turn from their spiritual whoredoms.

But let us come to the exposition of the words, and after Exposition.
observe the doctrines which arise out of them. Plead with your mother. These
words may seeeme to contradict the former: for there the Lord promises, that
he would gather his Church, and unite them unto Christ, that he might be her
head, she his members, he her husband, and she his spouse; and now presently he
threatens that he will give her a bil of divorce, and break off the marriage
between them. But we are to know, that the former words were an Euangelical
promise, which was not presently to be performed, but in the time of the
Gospel, after the coming of Christ: but in the mean time because the
Israelites were not terrified with ye former threatenings, nor allured to
repentance by Gods gracious promises, therefore having by y^ former consolations
comforted Gods children amongst them, who were truly humbled; now he
begins again to thunder out Gods threatenings against the obdurate and
impenitent, showing that notwithstanding God would extend such mercy to the
faithful in the time of the Gospel, yet this should be no privilege to
exempt them who lived in impenitencie from Gods judgments, but he would for
their sins certainly reject them, unless they speedily repented of them.
And this is usual with the Prophets, to intermixe mercy with judgments,
consolations with threatenings, yt neither the humbled may despair, nor the
obdurate and impenitent presume: as also to mingle their prophecies which
concerned the present time, with those which concerned the kingdom of the
Messiah, in the time of Gospel; for as their maine end was to point at Christ,
that at his coming their prophecies being fulfilled in him, he might be
received; so they were not to neglect their present auditorie, but by showing
their sins and Gods judgments, to bring them to God by true repentance. And
if this be observed it will give great light to the understanding of them,
whereas contrariwise the not observing hereof causes great confusion and
obscurity.

But let us come to the words themselves. Plead with your mother, etc. Where we
are to consider, who they are whom the Lord commands to plead as children:
secondly, who this mother is, that is to be divorced: and thirdly, the divorce
it self. Concerning the first, diverse are of diverse judgments, some
understand it of the faithful in the time of the Gospel, that they after they
were added to the Church should plead with their mother the Church of the
Jews, that laying her sins to her charge they might bring her to repentance.
But this cannot agree with the rest that follows; for they are commanded to
accuse her for her idolatry, in forsaking the Lord and worshipping the Heathen
gods, which sin was not committed by the Church of the Jews in the time of
the Gospel, nor after their return out of the captivity of Babylon.

Others understand it of the two Tribes of the kingdom of Judah, that every one
of them who were faithful, should admonish their mother; that is, their Church
and synagogue, that she should take example of the ten Tribes, and forsake her
idolatry, lest she should likewise be divorced and rejected. But this is not
likely, seeing the Prophet was not sent to the Jews, but to the ten Tribes;
and therefore to them he directs his speech for their conversion, and not
unto the other, who were not belonging to his charge.

Others expound it of the faithful who lived in the Prophets time amongst the
Israelites, especially the Prophets and Priests called to this public office,
that they fearing God, and hating the wickedness of the times, should reprove
the Church and Synagogue of Israel for her spiritual whoredoms. The which
their exposition though I reject not, yet I think an other more probable, and
better fitting the circumstances of the place.

And that is of those who expound it generally of the rebellious and
hypocritical Israelites, who when they were reproved for their sins, and
heard Gods judgments denounced against them by the Prophet, in stead of laying
them to heart, that they might be humbled thereby, were ready to plead against
God himself, and to condemn him of untruth and cruelty. For whereas the Lord
had threatened that he would utterly reject them, they were ready to object;
first, that this could not stand with the truth of Gods promises, made to
Abraham concerning the multiplying of his seed. To which objection the Prophet
answers in the two last verses of the former chapter, as I have showed.

Now because the Prophet had deferred the accomplishing of that promise unto
the time of the Messiah, the hypocrites would be ready in the second place to
object; that God had promised perpetually and continually to be their God, and
that they should be his people; and therefore if he did reject them, though it
were but for a time, he must needs be untrue of his promise. To this the
Prophet answers, that this imputation was not to be laid upon God, but upon
their mother the Synagogue and Church of Israel: for whereas the Lord had
joined her in marriage unto himself, a mutual stipulation being made between
them; on the Lords part, that he would acknowledge her as his spouse, protect
her, and multiply his benefits upon her; on her part, that she would keep her
conjugal faith plighted unto him, and wholly and only reserve her self for
his worship and service; she had broken her covenant and falsified her faith,
by forsaking the Lord, and prostituting her self unto idols, and had most
unthankfully ascribed unto them, all those benefits which the Lord had bestowed
upon her. And therefore their divorce was not to be ascribed unto any
inconstancy or cruelty in God, but to their own whoredoms and unthankfulness.

By the children then who are to plead with their mother, we are to understand
all those amongst the Israelites, who upon the hearing of the divorce and
reiection of the Church, were ready to expostulate with God, and (to excuse
themselves) would not stick to lay the fault of their reiection upon him.

Secondly, by their mother in this place, we are to understand the Synagogue
and Church of Israel, and more especially their rulers and governors both
ecclesiastical and civil: for whereas they above others should have
maintained Gods pure worship and service, and contained their inferiors in
holy obedience; they were the first who did forsake God, and betook themselves
to the worshipping of idols, drawing others by their authority and example into
the like wickedness; and that in a twofold respect: the first concerned their
religion, when as they were mislead by the false doctrine of their
ecclesiastical governors, and drawn from God to their idols: the other
concerned their policy, when as by their civil rulers, they were moved to
join themselves in league and in near friendship with idolatrous Nations,
whereby also they themselves were corrupted and seduced.

Now we are further to observe, that he redoubleth the word, plead, or
contend: whereby he implies the importune impudency of the people, which was
such, that their mouths would not easily be stopped, but still they would
calumniate Gods justice and truth; and therefore with greater earnestness
(which is often expressed by such redoubled speeches) he bids them to plead
against their mother again and again, and to lay the fault where it was, not
upon God, but upon themselves. As if he should have said; Do not plead and
expostulate with me, in that your mother is divorced, and you rejected as an
adulterous issue; for the husband is not to be blamed for putting away an
adulteress, but she rather for her filthiness and unfaithfulness: and
therefore, seeing your mother has forsaken me, and prostituted her self to
idols, acquit me of all wrong and injury, and contend and expostulate with her,
in that by her unfaithfulness and uncleanness, she has moved me justly to
divorce her from me, and to reject you as being an adulterous issue of an
adulterous mother.

The third thing to be considered, is the divorce it self between God and the
Church of Israel, expressed in these words; for she is not my wife, neither am
I her husband. Which that we may understand, we must know what the marriage
between them was; namely, a contract and mutual stipulation; on Gods part
that he would be her Lord and husband, to love, protect, and provide for her,
multiplying his gracious benefits from time to time, as he should see most for
her good; on her part, that she would forsake all others, and cleave only and
wholly unto the Lord, loving, obeying, worshipping, and performing all holy
duties unto him; and finally, keeping this her faith plighted unto him
inviolable. They are therefore said to be divorced, when as this contract is
broken off, and the covenants not performed; as when the Lord not acknowledging
her for his spouse, does cast her off, and cease to defend and provide for
her; and when she withdrawing her love from God; and fixing it upon idols,
breaks her marriage faith, refusing to worship and obey the Lord her true
husband, and prostituting her self by spiritual whoredom unto false gods.

Now that the cause of this divorce was not in the Lord, but in the Church of
Israel, appears by the order of the words: where first it is said, that she
was not his wife; and then, that he was not her husband: for the Lord did not
forsake her before she forsook him, he did not deny to be her husband,
before she refused to be his wife; he did not cease to perform his covenants
which he made with her, of grace, protection, and preservation, before she
withdrew her love, falsified her faith, denied her service and obedience, and
went a whoring after strange gods. And therefore there was no cause, why for
this divorce they should expostulate with God, and impute any fault unto him;
but rather they were to lay the blame upon themselves, who by their spiritual
fornications had broken off the marriage knot, and had refused to be the Lords
spouse; so that he was constrained to proclaim this divorce, because she had
first refused him.

The like place unto this we have, Esaias 50. 1. Thus says the Lord; Where is
the bill of your mothers diuorcement, whom I have cast off? or who is the
creditour unto whom I have sold you? Behold, for your iniquities are ye sold,
and because of your transgressions is your mother forsaken. Where the Lord
expostulateth with the Jews concerning the cause of their reiection, and
shows that the cause was not in him, but in themselves: and this he proves
by an old rite and custom under the Law, which was, that those who were put
away by the husband, had a bill of divorce given unto them; and that Deuteronomy. 24.
1.
parents which were deeply indebted, sold their children to satisfy their
creditors; as appears, Exodus 21. 7. 2. King. 4. 1. But I (says the Lord)
never put you away; for if I did, where Exodus 21 7. 2. King. 4. 1.
is the bill of diuorcement? neither did I sell you, for where is the creditour
to whom I stand indebted? And therefore the fault is not in me, but in your own
iniquities, and in the transgressions of your mother, why you are sold, and
she divorced. So Ier. 3. 8. Ezech. 16. Jer. 3 8 Ezech. 16.


And this is the meaning of the divorce, which the Lord commands should be
denounced. The doctrines which The Law and the Gospel must be intermixed in
the ministry of the word.
hence arise are diverse. First, out of this mixture of Legal comminations,
with Evangelical consolations, Gods Ministers may learn spiritual
discretion, neither only to thunder out the threatenings of the Law, nor wholly
to stand upon Evangelical promises, but in their sermons to mix the one with
the other, that whilst they beat down the pride and presumption of secure
hypocrites, they do not altogether exanimate and deiect those who are truly
humbled; and contrariwise, that whilst they comfort and raise up Gods children
who are afflicted in mind and dejected, they do not confirm proud hypocrites
in their security and presumption. Neither is this course profitable alone in
respect of hypocrites, and secure worldlings, but also in respect of Gods dear
children: for being partly flesh, and partly spirit, as in respect of their
spiritual part, they have need to hear the sweet comforts of the Gospel
for the confirmation of their faith; so had they in regard of the flesh need
to hear often of the threatenings of the Law, to restrain them from sin, to
beat down pride, presumption and security, and to contain them in holy
obedience.

Secondly, we may observe the nature of hypocrites, who The nature of
hypocrites to expostulate with God.
when they suffer the punishment due unto their sins, are ready to
expostulate with God, and to calumniate his justice of cruelty, as though
their punishment were either altogether undeserved, or else at least far
greater then their sins. To this purpose they use all frivolous pretenses to
excuse their faults, laying them of themselves upon others, yea rather then
fail, they will not stick to accuse God that they may excuse themselves. And
therefore the Lord is feign oftentimes to expostulate the matter with them, to
clear himself from all imputation of fault, and to convince them of their
sins, that they may be brought to true repentance. An example hereof we have
in our first parents: Genesis 3. 12. Genesis 3. 12. 4 19 Ier. 2. 35. Mal ^. 8. 1.
King. 18. 17. Math. 25. 24.
13. In Caine, Genesis 4. 13. In the Jews: Ier. 2. 35. Mal. 3. 8. In Ahab. 1.
King. 18. 17. In the unprofitable servant, Mat. 25. 24. 26.

Thirdly, we here learn, when we suffer affliction, or bear We must not
murmr against God in our afflictions.
our punishment, that we do not murmr and expostulate with God, as though he
dealed more severely and rigorously with us then we have deserved; but let us
descend into our selves, and examine our own hearts and consciences, and so
shall we find that not the Lord, but our selves are in fault, that our
punishment is far less then our sins, and that it is the great mercy of
the Lord that we are not utterly consumed, as the Church confesses, Lament.
3. 22. And this Lament. 3. 22.
course must be taken of every one of us, before we will ever be truly
humbled, and brought unto God by unfeigned repentance, or before the Lord will
ever be moved to pardon our sins, or release our punishment. For none will
ever sorrow for those sins, of which they think they are not guilty, there
is none will lay them to heart and be humbled under the weight of them, so long
as they pretend excuses, and seek to put off their burden from their own to
others shoulders, and so long as we content our selves with these fig-leaues,
we will never look after a better garment to hide our nakedness. Again, the
Lord will never absolve us before we condemn our selves, he will not pardon
our sins till we setting aside all excuses, ingenuously and freely confess
them; he will never case us of this burden, whilst with false pretenses we
seek to unload our selves; neither will he ever make us partakers of his
mercy, till we acknowledge that we have deserved the extremity of his justice,
as may appear by the former examples.

Fourthly, we are to observe, that the children are commanded That particular
men may expostulate with their mother the Church.
to expostulate, not only one with another, but also with their mother the
Church, that so both the particular members, and the whole Church in general,
coming to a sight of their sins, and condemning themselves for them, they
might be brought to true repentance. Whence we learn what duty is owed by
children to their parents, and by particular members to the whole body of the
Church, namely, they are so to honor them, that God be not dishonored, so to
excuse them, that God be not accused, so to hide their faults from others,
that they do not ignorantly foster them in themselves. The Papists cry out
upon us for discovering the nakedness of their Church, which they falsely call
our mother; they will not endure, that her sins should be reprehended, and
affirm it to be impudent sauciness, for the children to reprove the parents
faults. But first we answer, that she is not our mother, but a common
strumpet, who long ago was divorced from God, for her spiritual fornications.
And secondly, though she were our mother, yet she were to be reproved for her
faults, that so she might be brought to a sight of her sins, and turn unto
the Lord her husband whom she has forsaken by her whoredoms.

Fifthly, we may observe, the grieuousnesse of the sin of Idolatry a grievous
sin.
idolatry, which appears in the greatness of the punishment, which is utter
reiection and separation from God: other sins move the Lord to afflict his
spouse, but this causes him to divorce her; other sins provoke the Lord to
correct his children, but this moves him to disherit them. Now what more
fearful punishment can be imagined, then to be divorced from God, to be
excluded from his grace, protection and preservation? al which idolaters
incur through their spiritual whoredoms. The consideration whereof should
make us to flee this sin, that so we may escape the punishment.

The last thing which we are to observe, is out of the order God rejects not
the Church, before she rejects him.
of the words: namely, that the Lord never rejects his Church from being his
spouse, before she has cast him off from being her husband; he never
withdraws his grace, mercy and protection, and providence from watching over
us, till we alienate our minds from him, denying unto him our faith, obedience
and allegiance: and therefore let us cleave unto the Lord, and he will most
certainly cleave unto us; let us keep our faith and covenant with him, and
he will never fail us; let us ever acknowledge him for our husband and
father, and he will acknowledge us for his spouse and children.

And so much concerning the divorce. Now the end why the Lord would have it
denounced, is twofold, first, that hereby they might be moved to repent of
their wickedness; and secondly that repenting, they might escape punishment;
verse. 3. The first end is expressed in these words; that she may take away her
fornications out of her sight, (or from her face) and her adulteries from
between her breasts. In which Exposition.
words the Lord shows the cause, why he would have the divorce between him,
and the Church of Israel proclaimed, namely, not for any hatred of her person,
but that being brought unto a sight of their sins, they might repent of them,
and so forsaking their spiritual whoredoms, they might be received again of
the Lord as his spouse, as it is in the latter part of the chapter.

But let us come to the meaning of them. Some understand by fornication of the
face, external idolatry, and by the adultery of the breasts, that idolatry
which is in secret committed. But as I take it the Prophets purpose here, is to
show that the people were grown impudent in their sins, so that they made an
outward profession of them, not caring who beheld them. For before he had
showed that the Lord had divorced them, and consequently, that they had
committed adultery, and played the harlots, for in other cases divorces are
not by God approved; and now he intimates that they had the conditions and
qualities of an harlot; for as harlots in continuance of time grow past shame,
so that they do not only in secret commit adultery, but publikelie make
profession of it, as of their trade, decking themselves with such gorgious and
garish apparel, as beseems not honest matrons, glauncing with wanton eyes
at their lovers, painting their faces, and laying out their naked breasts, that
they may not only profess themselves wanton and lascivious, but also with
these baits allure others to commit wickedness with them: so the Church of
Israel, living in spiritual whoredom, grew to that impudency in sin, that
she was not content to commit it in secret, but also to profess it, yea to
defend and boast of it; and because she would be known to be an harlot, who
had forsaken the Lord, and given her self over to commit this spiritual
uncleanness, therefore in every corner they erected images and idols, they
adorned them with gold and precious ornaments, they in most impudent manner
prostituted themselves unto them, to commit spiritual whoredom in the sight
of all the world, worshipping and serving them in stead of the true God; and
like shameless harlots, they did not only themselves commit this wickedness,
but also allured others to go a whoring with them.

These words then are metaphorical, borrowed from the practice of harlots, who
that they may display the filthy uncleanness of their minds, and allure
others to unlawful lust, do seek to entice them by wanton looks, painting
of their faces, and laying out their naked breasts: and hence it is that the
Prophet attributes fornication to the face and eyes, and adultery to the
breasts; because unto harlots these parts are the instruments of their
uncleanness, whereby they testify, and as it were proclaim, that they are
ready and willing to commit whoredom, and also allure others to join with
them in their beastliness. So the Apostle Peter says of some, that their eyes
were full of adultery: 2. Pet. 2. 14. because by their eyes they discovered
their adulterous 2. Pet. 2. 14.
hearts.

Now in these words the Prophet aims at three things: first, he closely
intimates what was the cause of their divorce; namely, their idolatry, which
he calls adultery and fornication, which they committed with all audacious
impudency openly and in the sight of all.

Secondly, he clears God of all imputation of fault, in that he divorced
them not for any hatred to their persons, nor for small transgressions, but for
their gross idolatry and spiritual whoredoms; and therefore there was no
cause why they should contend with him, but with their mother. For if she
would leave her sins, and return unto him by unfeigned repentance, he would
receive her to mercy, and acknowledge her for his spouse; as he after shows.

Thirdly and principally, he labors by earnest exhortation, to move her to
leave her spiritual whoredoms, and her professed audaciousnesse and
shameless impudency, in prostituting her self unto idols, and forsaking him
their Lord and husband, not in a secret corner, but in the view of all the
world.

And this is the meaning of these words. The instructions which from hence we
gather are these. First, we may observe, That the sins of the people are
often to be reprehended.
the people for their spiritual whoredoms in the former chapter, and
denounced his fearful judgments against them; yet because they did not
repent, but obstinately and impudently continued in their idolatry, the Lord
contenteth not himself with once reproving of them, but causes his Prophet to
beat again and again upon the same point, that at least by his importunity
he might bring the^ to repentance. Whence we are to learn, that it is not
sufficient, either in the public ministry of the word, or in private
conference, to reprehend and beat down sin once only, but considering how
many shifts and devices the hypocrisy of man's heart finds to hide, excuse,
and extenuate their sins, and how soon they forget and cast behind them the
remembrance of their sins, and Gods judgments due unto them, it must not be
thought much, either of public or private persons, oftentimes to use the same
admonitions and reprehensions, and to denounce again and again the same
judgments of God against the same sins, which are not as yet forsaken by
true repentance.

Secondly, we may observe the infinite mercy of God, who when his spouse the
Church, had innumerable times Gods mercy in inuiting the people to repentance.
committed spiritual whoredom with idols, and professed her filthiness like
an impudent harlot openly to all the world, yet labors to bring her to
repentance, that so he might receive her to grace and fouour again: for to
this end he causes her sins to be laid before her, and the divorce between
him and her to be denounced; not because he hated her, or was delighted with
her reiection and destruction, but that she might forsake her idolatry, which
so impudently she professed, and return unto him her Lord and husband, that so
he might receive her to grace, and pardon her former wickedness. And therefore
when we hear our sins sharply reproved, and the judgments of God denounced,
let us not think that this is done for want of love either in God or in his
Ministers; but to this end, that we should hereby be brought to true
repentance, and so be received into Gods grace and favor.

Thirdly, out of the metaphors and borrowed speeches here used, we may observe,
that the sin of uncleanness, is Of the fornication of painted faces and
naked breasts.
not only committed in fact, but that also there is a fornication of the face,
and an adultery of the breasts, when as harlots with glancing and wanton
looks, by painting of their faces, and laying out of their breasts, do not
only by these signs testify the adultery and uncleanness of their hearts,
but also with these baits of lust, endeavor to allure others to commit
filthiness, and to inflame their hearts with the fire of unlawful
concupiscence. Whereby may appear, how common this sin of adultery and
uncleanness is in our times, wherein the signs and means thereof do so
abound; seeing not only those who are harlots by profession, but even such as
would be reputed pure virgins and chaste wives, show these outward signs of
their inward filthiness, and use these baits to catch the foolish in the nets
of uncleanness, by painting their faces and setting forth themselves with
adulterate beauty, and by laying out their breasts after a whorish manner to be
seen and touched: for is it likely, that those who lay the^ out to ye show,
would have them only seen? Neither has this corruption of manners entered into
the court alone, where wantonness and immodesty challenge unto themselves a
place by the right of prescription and long custom; but it is crept also into
the City and Country, amongst those that should be modest virgins and grave
matrons, and examples of sobriety unto others. Even here natural beauty is hid
with a painted vizard, and naked breasts are laid out to the view; if at least
they may be called naked which are commonly covered with false colors, or
uncovered when as they are masked in a net.

But as there is no sin so vile, which makes not some kind of Apology for it
self; so this, against which I inueigh, wants An excuse of vain women
answered.
not her excuses: for when those who are vain and wanton in their attires, have
their immodesty laid to their charge, they are ready to say, that whatsoever
they seem in show, yet their hearts are chaste and honest. But to these I
reply, that if they have the hearts of honest and chaste matrons, what have
they to do with the habit of an harlot? why do they Ezra 3 9.
disguise themselves under the vizard of a false beauty, unless they meant to
deceive and allure? why do they make show of their wares, unless they would
offer the^ to sale? why do they display the banners of lust, unless they meant
to be at defiance with chastity and all honesty? why do they play the
hypocrites by appearing that they are not? if they be honest in deed, why should
they seem harlots in show? if they be dishonest in show and truth, why do
they slander and disgrace the name of honesty and chastity, by intitling
themselves unto it? In a word, if either they are pure virgins; or chaste
matrons, and would have others so to judge of them, let them take away their
fornications from their face, and their adulteries from between their breast.

But they further answer, that though in their own judgment they like not of
these practices, yet they yield unto A second excuse taken away from those who
paint their faces and discover their breasts.
them in regard of the fashion, because they must be like others of their sort
and rank. To which I answer, that if this be a fashion, it is the fashion of
harlots, who first invented it, and most commonly practice it: and therefore
why should this move any that are honest women to embrace it, and not rather to
detest it? that we are commanded by God, not to fashion our selves to the
world, nor to follow a multitude in that which is evil; that if they will
follow the fashion, they must set themselves to work wickedness, seeing no
fashion is more common; that those who for fashions sake are thus immodest and
impudent, would become far worse if it were the fashion; that those who
profess themselves Christians, should fashion themselves according to the
example of those who are modest, sober, and religious, and not of the wanton
and lascivious; for otherwise they will plainly discover themselves, that
their hearts are corrupt and wicked, seeing they like and embrace rather the
fashion of profane worldlings, then of the faithful and virtuous. And lastly,
that if they sin for company, they are like for company sake to suffer the
punishment of sin in hell fire.

But they will say, that they do not thus adorn themselves, A third excuse
taken away.
either to show their own lust, or to provoke it in others, but that their
beauty (which in it self is good and commendable) may be liked and praised of
the beholders. To this I answer, that vn^ si qua placet, culta puellasat est:
grave Propert. lib. 1. eleg. eleg. 2.
matrons are to think themselves beautiful enough, when they please and
content their husbands; that by these wanton and lascivious ornaments, they do
not more commend their beauty to the eye, then disgrace the deformity of their
minds to any sober judgment; that they do not hereby grace and adorn, but
rather disgrace and deforme themselves: for whereas by their creation they are
Gods beautiful and excellent workmanship, by their painting and dawbing, they
make themselves but like walking pictures, and talking images; that if beauty
be a good, it is such an one as is not bettered by communicating; that they are
not hereby liked and praised of the good and virtuous, but of those (if of any)
who like themselves are vain and wanton. Yea but they thus set forth
themselves, that they may be liked and loved of their husbands, unto whom they
cannot make themselves too amiable. I answer, that no wise husband would have
his wife set out to sale, if he would reserve her to his own proper use; that
this is but a false pretense to excuse a false beauty. For as the Satyrist
says; moechis foliata parantur: Juuenal. sat. 6.
they use these wanton arts, not to please their husbands, but to inflame the
adulterer; that the habit and behavior of an harlot cannot be pleasing and
amiable unto any husband that desires to have an honest and chaste wife; that
they must not so labor to please men, as that in the mean time they displease
God; for their wanton behavior and habit is offensive, and at least evil in
appearance, and therefore to be forborne of Christians; they derogate from
Gods wisdom, by altering and adding to his workemanshippe, which kind of
injury an ordinary artificer cannot patience brook: and therefore seeing they
are new creatures of their own making, quite altered from their first creation,
it is not likely that the Lord will own or acknowledge them for his work. In a
word, they break and transgress the seventh Commandment, both by showing
the signs of wanto^ uncleanness, and using the means to kindle and inflame lust
both in themselves and others.

The last thing to be observed is, that as all kinds of idolatry, Sins
openly professed and defended, most odious in Gods sight.
and of all other sins are odious and loathsome unto the Lord; so especially
those which are of the face and breast, that is, such as are openly professed,
and impudently defended. Whilst sin lurketh in the secret corners of the
heart, not daring to show it self in the face and outward actions, it makes
the sinner but like a poor fugitive, who having offended his Prince, through
self guiltiness shunneth his presence; but when it grows so presumptuous,
that it dare show it self in the face, words, or external actions, and not
only so, but also vaunt it self to the public view, daring Gods justice, and
provoking him as it were to his face; then the sinner becomes a proud rebel,
who regards not his Princes presence, and contemns his authority; or like
unto an impudent adulteress, who not contenting her self with her secret
whoredoms, does prostitute her self to her lovers in the sight of her
husband; and like Absalon, pitcheth a pauilion even at noone day upon the top
of the house, that he may be seen of all men. This is the height of sin,
when as men do not only consent unto it, but also act it; not in a corner,
but in the face of the world; not as blushing and being ashamed at it, but
impudently defending it, boasting and glorying in their wickedness. And as it
is the height of sin, so it shall be plagued with the height of punishment,
even with the divorce and separation from God: and therefore let all that would
be Gods spouse, above all other sins flee these; and though they fall
through infirmity humanie frailty into sin, yet at least let them take it
away from their face, and from between their breasts, that is, let them not
defend it, and much less vaunt and glory in their wickedness.

ANd so much concerning the first end of the denunciation of the divorce,
namely, the repentance of the people. Now concerning the second end, which is
a consequent of the former, that is to say, their freedom from punishment, upon
their unfeigned repentance: and this either respects the whole Church or the
particular members thereof. The first is expressed, verse. 3. Lest I strip her
naked, and set her as in the day that she was borne, and make her as a
wilderness, and leave her like a dry land, and slay her for thirst.

In the former verse the Prophet showed, that the Lord The exposition.
had divorced the Church of Israel, but howsoever he had inflicted on her this
judgment, yet such was his infinite goodness, that in wrath he remembered
mercy; for although he might justly (as husbands used to do in such cases)
when he divorced her, have stripped her of all his gifts and benefits, yet in
mercy he did not thus far proceed in punishing of her, but though he had put
her away, he suffered her still to enjoy the good things which he had bestowed
upon her, at least in some measure: and that to this end, that they might
remain with her as pledges of his love, not altogether as yet extinguished,
and as undoubted arguments to assure her that as he had not divorced her for
any hatred of her person, but for her sins, so if she would repent of them,
he would be ready to receive her again into his former love and favor.

But because she abused the mercy of God, and continued in her impenitencie,
therefore he threatens that unless she would seriously repent of her sins,
he would not only divorce her, but also strippe and spoil her of all those his
gifts and benefits, which he had bestowed upon her, and which as yet she
inioyed. Wherein the Lord alludeth to the behavior of kind husbands, who
having put away their wives for their whoredoms, do notwithstanding allow
unto them liberal maintenance; with which benefits, when they are not
restrained from their sin, and brought to amendment, but rather abuse their
gifts as means to further them in Ezech. 16. 16. 17
their uncleanness, and by bestowing them on their lovers; they threaten to
strip and spoil them of all those benefits which they enjoy, and to leave them
destitute of all maintenance. As though he should have said, Although upon your
divorce justly caused by your whoredoms, I might also have deprived you of all
my benefits, which I have bestowed upon you, yet such has been my mercy, that
I have spared you hitherto, and suffered you to enjoy them, in hope of your
amendment; but do not continue to abuse my patience and mercy, for unless
you repent, and take away your fornications and adulteries, which with such
audacious impudency you commit, I will strippe you of all my benefits, which
as yet you enjoy, and leave you as naked and beggarlie as you were, when I
first took you in marriage.

Now the benefits which the Lord threatens to spoil the people of Israel of,
were either temporal and corporal, or else spiritual; of the first sort were
their peace, kingdom, protection from enemies, plenty, and abundance of all
worldly profits and delights; of the other were the law, the priesthood, some
relikes of Gods worship in the ministry of the word, in the use of the
Sacraments, and prayer; the favor of God and pardon of their sins; from
which they were not as yet utterly excluded, as it may hereby appear, in that
the Lord labors to recall them by his Prophet unto repentance, and
forewarneth them of these judgments, that repenting they might escape them.

And these are the benefits, of which he threatens to spoil them. Now the
manner and nature of their stripping and spoiling is further described and
illustrated by diverse comparisons; for first he threatens to strip them, and
to leave them as destitute of all his benefits, as they were at the day of
their birth, in these words; and set her as in the day that she was borne.

By the day of the children of Isreal's birth, we may either understand the day
of their forefather Abraham his calling out of an idolatrous nation, that he
might be the father of the faithful; or the day of the peoples deliverance out
of the bondage of Egypt, which I take to be the more probable, because he
speaks not here of the birth of one man, but of the whole nation. Now this
day of the peoples birth was a time wherein they were in great misery,
poverty, impotencie and manifold extremities, and therefore not unfitly
compared to a child's birth, seeing in many things it resembles it, in regard
of the wretchedness thereof, and that both in respect of their persons, and
also in respect of their state. And first for their bodies, as the child is
borne so impotent that it is unable to resist the weakest enemy; so they came
out of Egypt weak, unskillful, and unarmed, altogether unable to resist their
enemies the Egyptians. And so in respect of their souls, as the child is borne
defiled in his blood, as it is described, Ezech. 16. 6. so Ezech. 16. 6.
they were defiled with their sins, especially their gross idolatry which
they learned of the Egyptians: as the child is borne destitute of wisdom and
actual understanding; so they were ignorant, and without the saving knowledge
of God and his true religion. In respect of their states likewise there is
great similitude: for as the child is borne poor and naked; so they came out
in great poverty, being not only destitute of the heavenly gifts of Gods
Spirit, but also of glory, power and riches: as the child lives as it were
imprisoned a close prisoner in the strait prison of the womb; so they were
held in a strait and miserable servitude, till God delivered them: and as in
the birth it is in greatest danger and extremity, so that it no sooner
breaths the air, but it cries out with sense of pain; so they howsoever
they had formerly endured many miseries, yet they were in greatest extremity
of all, even as it were in the very birth and deliverance, when as they were
pursued by their enemies, and beset on all sides with unavoidable dangers, so
that in anguish of soul, they cried out for fear. Lastly, as the child Exodus
14.
being borne is unable to help it self, either in respect of defense from
outward injuries, or of provision of food and necessaries: so they being
brought into the wilderness, were unable to defend themselves from the
injuries of the weather, either by day or night, and had no other provision of
food then the Lord provided for them after a miraculous manner.

And this was the miserable condition of the people of Israel, at the day of
their birth and deliverance out of Egypt, the which is excellently and largely
described by the Prophet Ezechiel, Chap. 16. Out of which base estate the Lord
advanced them to the greatest and highest dignity; for after Ezech. 16.
that he had led them into the wilderness, he espoused this people unto him
for his wife, he loved and protected her, he fed and nourished her, he decked
and adorned her, he multiplied his benefits upon her both spiritual and
temporal, induing, and, as it were, endowing her with riches, glory,
pleasures and all happiness; he gave unto her his law containing the covenants
of marriage between them, he gave also a Priesthood, a kingdom, a land
flowing with milk and honey, a Tabernacle, a Temple, his word and Sacraments,
and all things needful both for soul and body. But she being surfetted
with pleasures, ungratefully forgot Deuteronomy. 32. 14. 15.
her former base condition, and also him who had advanced her to this great
dignity and happiness; and forsaking her Lord and husband who had been thus
gracious unto her, went a whoring after false gods: and therefore the Lord is
feign to put her in mind of her former wretched estate, and to threaten her,
that unless she repented and turned unto him, he that had raised her would
pull her down, and make her as poor, contemptible and miserable, as when he
first met and matched with her.

And this is the first comparison, whereby he describes and aggrauateth the
misery which he threatens to bring upon them. The second is, that he would
make her as a wilderness, or the wilderness, as the article prefixed
portendeth; where he alludeth to the desert wilderness, in which the children
of Israel were led 40. years. Others resolve it rather thus, And will place her
as in the wilderness, that is, bring her into the same condition wherein she
was in the wilderness. But the other translation better pleases me, seeing it
is without addition of any word: and seeing it is likely he threatens here a
far worse state then that, which at this time she lived in, because then she
inioyed Gods presence, she was his spouse, she was led and fed, defended and
sustained by the Lord her husband. And therefore I think rather he threatens
to make her like that wilderness, that is, to make her self desert and
barraine of all his gifts and graces, temporal and spiritual, to suffer her
to be inhabited of her vices and corruptions, as it were with so many wild
beasts, to lay her kingdom, country and cities waste like a wilderness,
being ouerrunne, burnt and spoiled by their enemies: as the Lord threatens,
Deuteronomy. 28. 51. Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy 28. 15. Leuit. 26. 31. 32*
31. 32.

Thirdly, he says that he will leave her like a dry land, that is, he will
deprive her of all her comforts, pleasures and delights, like a dry and
schorched ground, where for want of moisture all the pleasant herbs and sweet
flowers wither and fade away.

Lastly, he threatens that he will flay her with thirst, that is, he will
ouerwhelme her with the greatest miseries; for water is more easily come by
then food, and therefore the extremity of their want is hereby in a lively
manner described, when as they should want even water to quench their thirst,
and save their life. Where he also alludeth to the state of the Israelites in
the wilderness, who had no water but what the Lord brought out of a rock in a
miraculous manner. Neither does he only aim at this bodily thirst for want
of water, but also at the thirst of the soul, for want of the water which
flows from the sanctuary the word of God, of which Amos speaks, Chap. 8.
11. 13. And of the Amos 8. 11. 13.
water of life, of which whosoever drinks, shall never more thirst, even the
Spirit of God, of which our Savior speaks: Ioh. 4. 14. 7. 38. 39. Ioh. 4. 14
7. 38. 39. The scope of the Prophet.


And so much for the meaning of the words: wherein the Prophet aims at these
four things principally: first, he sets forth the admirable and infinite
patience, love, clemency and bounty of God, who when his spouse the Church of
Israel had often and impudently played the harlot, and for her whoredoms was
divorced from him, yet he did not (according to the just custom of husbands in
like cases) take his gifts and rich benefits from her, which he had bestowed on
her, but suffered her to enjoy them still: and this he implies, when as he
wills her to repent, lest he should spoil her, noting thereby, that as yet
he had not done it.

Secondly, in these words he intimates, that if she would repent, he was
ready to forgive her, and to suffer her still to enjoy his benefits; for he
had not as yet spoiled and stripped her as he justly might, and was loath to go
about it, and therefore he exhorts her to turn from her sins, that he might
not be urged to do it in his just displeasure.

Thirdly, he labors to work in her true repentance, by forewarning her of
an increase of punishment, namely, that if that great punishment of divorce
and separation from God would not move them to turn from their sins, he
was ready to inflict other punishments upon them, which though they were not
so great as the former in their own nature, yet perhaps they were far more
grievous in their opinion and apprehension. For where he wills her to take
away her sins lest he spoiled her, he implies, that unless she repented,
he would not content himself with that punishment of her divorce, but would
most certainly spoil her of all the ornaments, gifts and benefits which he
had bestowed on her.

Fourthly, because pride and true repentance will not stand together, therefore
he seeks to humble her, both by putting her in mind of her miserable and
base estate, wherein she was before he advanced her; and by assuring her that
if she did not humble herself, forsake her sins, and turn unto him from her
idols, he would leave her as he found her, deprive her of all his gifts, and
ourwhelme her with an unsupportable load of woe and misery.

And these are the maine things at which the Prophet aims God denounces his
judgments that we may repent.
cause why the Lord denounces his judgments against his people; to wit, that
they may repent of their sins, and that repenting they may escape punishment,
which his justice urges him to inflict upon them continuing in their sins. So
he causes the divorce to be proclaimed, that they may take away their
adulteries, and that repenting of them, they might not be stripped of all the
gifts and benefits which as yet they inioyed. So that the end of Gods
threatenings is, that we may repent, and of our repentance that we may escape
punishment; and the end of one punishment is, that making good use of it, we
may escape an other. Whence we may observe, that God even in wrath remembers
mercy; for he threatens that he may not punish, and punishes that he may not
destroy; he punishes unwillingly after a sort, and therefore before hand he
gives warning that we may escape it; and having inflicted it, he labors to
apply it to our senseless hearts, that by our obstinacy we do not urge his
justice to proceed in punishing. And therefore let us not by our stubburnnesse
and impenitency make Gods end frustrate, and turn mercy into justice; but when
he threatens, let us repent that we may escape punishment; or at least let us
turn unto him when he punishes, that we do not move him to deal more
severely with us.

The second thing to be observed is, that after the Lord God does not always
strip a people of al his benefits after he has rejected them.
has rejected a people, he does not always presently upon the divorce,
withdraw his gifts and benefits from them; but leaves them with them for a
time to be inioyed, that this his love, patience, and bounty may move them to
forsake their sins, that so they may be received into his former love and
favor. Whereby, as we have occasion to admire and praise the indefatigable
patience, and infinite bounty of our gracious God, so may we hereby be
admonished, not to judge of Gods love and favor, nor of our own happiness by
outward benefits, whether they be civil or spiritutuall; as namely, peace,
plenty, a flourishing estate, the word, Sacraments, etc. seeing after the
divorce he vouchsafes to the divorced such benefits for a time; as appears
in this place. The like example we have in Caine, who being banished Gods
presence, flourished in the world: and in Saul, who though he were rejected,
yet the Lord suffered him a long time to enjoy the Kingdom: and in Ahab, whose
destruction was long determined before it was effected.

Thirdly, we may observe, that because the Church of Israel did not repent upon
the hearing of the divorce proclaimed, If one judgment will not reclaim us,
God will send another.
therefore the Lord threatens an other punishment, namely, that he would strip
and spoil them of all his gifts. So that although in his love and patience he
does not presently after he had divorced them, deprive them of his benefits,
but gives them a time to make use of his former punishment; yet his justice
will not ever suffer him to wink at their sins; but if his first judgment
will not reclaim them, he will go forward to a second, which usually is more
grievous then the first. Notwithstanding in this he first denounces the
divorce, which is the greater punishment, and after the withdrawing of his
gifts, which is the less; for separation from God is infinitely a more heavy
judgment then to be deprived of all other happiness. And this he does,
because howsoever these things are in their own nature, yet to worldly men and
profane hypocrites, the loss of God is more lightly esteemed then the loss
of his gifts; for so they may enjoy their worldly glory, riches, and delights,
they can be content to live deprived of Gods favor, and to be divorced from
him. And therefore the Lord fitteth his speech to them, showing that if this
heavy judgment of separation from himself, would not touch them with any
sense of their misery, he had an other judgment in store for them, which he
knew they would feelingly apprehend; to wit, the withdrawing of his gifts and
benefits from them, which they far better loved then himself.

Fourthly, we may observe, that the abuse of Gods graces The abuse of Gods
gifts moves him to strip us of them.
and benefits, does move him justly to spoil and strip us of them; as
appears here in the example of the Israelites: for therefore the Lord
suffered them to enjoy still his gifts, which with a liberal hand he had
bestowed upon them, that his mercy and bounty might lead them to repentance,
and might move them with all earnestness to seek reconciliation with him,
who had been so good and gracious a God unto them: but when as contrariwise,
they the rather forsook the Lord, and impudently committed spiritual
whoredom with their idols, abusing Gods benefits as means to harten them in
their sin, and spending their wealth upon their false gods, the Lord
threatens that if they would not speedily repent of these sins, he would
strippe them of his gifts rather then they should be thus abused. If therefore
we would have Gods benefits continued unto us, let us take heed that we do
not abuse them to pride, wantonness, forgetfulness of God, insulting over our
brethren, or by mispending them upon any evil uses to further us in any sin;
nay, not only this, but also let us be careful to employ them well, to Gods
glory, the good of our brethren, and for our own furtherance in all virtue and
godliness; for though we do not abuse them, yet if with the unprofitable
servant we hide them in a napkin, and do not use them, the Lord will take his
talent from us, and not only strip us of his gifts, but also cast us into
utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; as appears,
Matthew. 25. 30. Matthew. 25. 30. God puts us in mind of our natural baseness
to humble us.


Fifthly, we may observe, that in the Lords threatening, whereby he
indeauoureth to bring the Church of Israel to repentance, he puts them in
mind of their former baseness, misery, and nakedness, not only to work in
their hearts a true love and reverent respect toward him, who from such a
contemptible condition had advanced them to such high dignity, but also to
beat down their pride, with which in respect of their present prosperity
they were puffed up, and to humble them with the remembrance of their own
natural vileness. As if a Prince having taken to wife a mean servant, and
(perceiving her to wax proud and insolent toward him, and to neglect him who
had advanced her, setting her love upon others) should after this manner say
unto her: There is no reason why thou should be so proud and insolent; for
howsoever I have now advanced thee, thou wast when I found thee poor, base and
beggarly; especially considering that I who have raised thee up, have power in
my hand to pull thee down, and to place thee in as base condition as thou wast
in former times, if thy preferments puff thee up in pride, and move thee in
thy insolency to neglect and despise me, who have been the only cause of thine
advancement. And hereby it may appear how easily by Gods grace and bounty we
are made insolent, wanton, and forgetful of God; how odious a vice this is in
Gods sight, in that he uses such means to draw us from it; and that there is
no better course to bring us to repentance, then by beating down this our
pride, by calling to mind what we were before the Lord called us and advanced
us, namely, base, poor and miserable, destitute of all good, and replenished
with all evil.

Lastly, we may observe the manifold miseries and calamities, The miseries
that God brings on those who forsake his true worship.
which the Lord brings upon those, who forsake his pure worship and service,
and give themselves over to commit idolatry; for he not only diuorceth them
from himself, but also unless they repent, he strippeth them of all his gifts
and benefits, which he had bestowed upon them; he takes from them the light of
their understanding, and suffers them to be deluded and infatuated in their
own imaginations, as appears, Romans 1. 21. 22. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. Romans 1. 21.
22. 2. These. 2. 11. Matthew. 21. 43.
He takes from them the sunshine of his word, and suffers them to walk in
darkness, and in the shadow of death; he strippeth them of al his gifts both
of body and mind, and leaves them in their natural nakedness, defiled with
sin, ugly and deformed; he takes from them the name of his servants, children
and spouse, and leaves them as he found them, the slaves of Satan, the
children of wrath, and heirs of perdition. He makes them like a desert
wilderness, barren of all grace and goodness, and inhabited with their own
lusts, corruptions and passions, which like wild beasts torment and even rent
them in pieces; yea, he makes whole cities and countries of idolaters waste
and desolate, exposing them to the common spoil of their conquering enemies,
as our Savior threatens the Jews, Matthew. 23. 38. In a word, he depriueth
their souls of all true joy and sound Matthew. 23. 38.
comfort, and lets them perish in the extremity of their want. So that the
end of idolaters, who having known God, and do renounce his pure worship and
service, is worse then their beginning, For better had it been for them not to
have known the way of righteousness, then after they have known it to turn
out of it, as the Apostle speaks, 2. Pet. 2. Pet. 2. 20. 21. Matthew. 12. 45.
2. 20. 21. So Matthew. 12. 45.

ANd so much concerning the punishment of the adulterous mother, the whole
Synagogue and Church of Israel. In the next place he forewarneth her of the
punishment of her children, verse. 4. And I will have no pity upon her children;
for they be the children of fornications. In which words are contained The
exposition.
two things, first the punishment, and secondly the cause thereof. In the first
we are to consider, first, against whom this punishment is threatened, and
secondly, the punishment it self.

The persons against whom this punishment is denounced, are the children of the
adulterous mother; And I will have no pity upon her children. Whereas he
says, And I will, etc. by this connection he signifies, that unless his
adulterous spouse whom he had divorced, would take away her fornications and
adulteries by true repentance, he would not content himself with her divorce
and spoil, but he would go forward in his course of just vengeance, to
inflict the like punishments upon her children.

Where as by mother, we are to understand in general the whole Synagogue and
Church of Israel, especially their magistrates, superiors and goueruours, both
ecclesiastical and civil; so by the children we are to understand the
particular members of this Church, especially subjects and inferiors. For the
Lord contenteth not himself with a general denunciation of his heavy
judgments against the whole Church; but he descends to particulars, and
specially applies his threatenings to every particular member of this body,
that so he may bring the mother and the children, the whole body and the
several parts, superiors and inferiors unto true repentance. Superiors when
as they consider, that not only they themselves shall have the greatest
measure of punishment inflicted on them, because by their authority and example
they have bin the ringleaders unto al wickedness; but also that the poor people
committed to their charge (whom they ought as tenderly to love as the kind
mother her dear children) shall through their bad example and ill government,
fall into the like sins, and so be made obnoxious to the like punishments. So
likewise inferiors may be drawn to repentance, when as they consider that
their following of the example of their superiors, and obeying their authority
in evil, will not privilege them from Gods judgments; but being partakers
with the^ in sin, they shall also be partakers of their punishments.

And so much for the persons. The punishment it self is, that the Lord will
have no mercy or pity upon them; not that the Lord will utterly and
absolutely exclude them from mercy, but only on this condition, if they
perseuered in their sins without repentance: neither does he debar them of
all mercy in regard of their eternal salvation, but in respect of their
temporary reiection, from being his people and children; as may appear by the
latter part of the chapter. The meaning therefore of these words is this, that
as he had denied to have pity upon the mother, and had divorced her, stripped
her, and made her like a wilderness, etc. so neither would he have any
compassion of the children to to spare them; but would bring upon them the same
punishments which he had denounced against their mother.

And this is the punishment here denounced. The cause moving the Lord to
inflict it is expressed in these words; For they be the children of
fornications. In which words is contained a twofold cause of the childrens
punishment: the first, because they are the children of fornications; that is,
the issue of an adulterous mother: or more plainly thus; because they are
members of an idolatrous Church, who by their governors civil and
ecclesiastical are nuzled and nursed, brought up and instructed in idolatry
and a false religion.

The first cause therefore why the Lord rejects the children, is in the
mother; that is, in the whole Church, especially their governors and rulers,
both ecclesiastical and civil; because by the former they were taught not a
true, but a false and idolatrous religion; and by the other were not restrained
from idolatry and false worship, and urged to worship the true God after a true
manner, but rather by their example enticed, and by their authority forced to
forsake the true God and follow idols.

But here it may be demanded, whether the sin of the How God punishes the
sins of governors in the people.
governors is a just cause to move the Lord to punish the subjects. To which
I answer, that there are two sorts of punishments: the first corporal and
temporal: the second, spiritual and eternal. In respect of temporal
punishments, it is just with God to punish the sins of parents in children,
and of governors in the subjects; because in respect of the whole body, they
are parts and members belonging unto them as the chief and principal; and
therefore whilst the children and subjects suffer punishment, the parents and
governors are punished in them. 2. Sam. 12. 14. 24. 12. 17. 2. Sam. 12. 14.
and 24. 12. 17.


But in respect of spiritual and eternal punishments, the Lord does not
inflict them upon the children and subjects for the sins of the parents and
governors positiuely, unless they likewise partake with them in their sins,
and follow their wicked example; howsoever he may justly for Ezech. 18.
their sins, lay upon them privative punishments, by withholding from them his
grace, and the gifts of his holy spirit, which he is not bound to give; of
which they being deprived, run into sin, and so make themselves obnoxious
to positive punishments. Now these children of which the Prophet speaks, were
not only borne of an idolatrous mother, but also they themselves lived and
continued in that idolatry in which they were bred and instructed.

And this is the more principal cause why these children are punished, because
they liked and approved, embraced and lived in the idolatry of their mother;
for not simply to have been the children and members of an idolatrous Church,
nor to have been brought up and instructed in her idolatries, is a cause which
moves the Lord to reject any; if afterward they hate and forsake the idolatry
of their mother, and love and embrace the pure and sincere worship of God. The
which was the state of many of Gods children in the common apostasy of the
Israelites; and is the state of many who have come out of the spiritual
Babylon, being begotten unto God by the immortal seed of his word.

But these of whom the Prophet speaks, had not only in times past been, but
presently were the children of fornications; they were not only brought up in
idolatry, but still they liked and lived in it: and this he implies when as he
faith; not that they had been, but presently were the children of fornication.

And this is the meaning of these words. The doctrines to be observed out of
them are these. First we may note, that That particular application is
necessary in the ministry of the word.
the Lord contenteth not himself with a general denunciation of his
judgments against the whole Church of Israel; but also applies them specially
to the particular members thereof. The which example is to be imitated of Gods
Ministers, especially considering that such is the selfeloue, pride,
hypocrisy, and security of men, that they will make no application of general
reprehensions and threatenings unto themselves, so long as they can shift them
off, and apply them unto others. An example hereof we have in the secure
Israelites, Esa. 28. 15. and in the Priests and Pharisees: Matthew. Esa. 28. 15.
Matthew. 21. 41.
21. 41. yea David himself made no use of the general parable for his
humiliation till it was particularly applied, 2. Sam. 12. 7. And therefore
because that which is spoken to all, is 2. Sam. 12. 7.
spoken to none; it has been the custom of all Gods true Prophets and
Ambassadors, to make particular application of their general doctrines, to the
special use of their own hearers: so Nathan to David, 2. Sam. 12. 7. Peter to
the Jews, 2. Sam. 12. 7. Acts 2. 23.
Act. 2. 23. all the Prophets to their several peoples, to whom they were sent.
And this duty is to be performed of all faithful Ministers, for they are Gods
stewards, and therefore they are not to suffer every one to rush into the
storehouse of Gods word, and to take what pleases them; but they must give
every man his own portion in season; as it is, Luke 12. 42. Luke 12. 42.
They are the Churches Surgeons to cure their spiritual wounds and sores of
sin; and therefore they must not only make good plasters, but also they
must apply them to their sores and wounds, for otherwise many are so senseless
that they feel no pain, and therefore desire no help; many so wayward and
impatient, that they will rather let their spiritual wounds putrify through
security and presumption, then abide the cure, fearing the plaster more then
the wound.

Secondly, we may observe, that the idolatry and other grievous sins of the
whole Church, especially of the governors God punishes the sins of governors
in the people.
both ecclesiastical and civil, being not repented of, do move the Lord, not
only to punish the whole body, but also the particular members; that is,
subjects and inferiors, if not with spiritual, (as when they are not
partakers with them in their sins) yet at least with temporal punishments;
because being one body, the sin of superiors is not only punished when the
punishment is inflicted on themselves, but also upon the inferiors, as being
parts of them, and members of the whole body. But besides corporal
afflictions, they make them also obnoxious unto Gods wrath and eternal
punishments, when as by their false doctrine, authority and evil example,
they move and allure them, to embrace their idolatry and other sins. An
example whereof we have in the papacy, where because the whole Church is
idolatrous, especially their Magistrates and Clergy, therefore private men
being by their false doctrine, authority and example nuzled and instructed in
idolatry, are together with them divorced from God, and overwhelmed in the
common destruction. So that the first and more remote cause of this their
punishment, is in the whole Church and governors thereof, the next and
immediate cause is the idolatry of every particular man, which himself
committed being seduced by the false doctrine and evil example of their
adulterous mother. The consideration whereof should make superiors most
careful to acquaint themselves with Gods truth, and to embrace and profess
his true religion, to forsake and detest all manner of false worship and
idolatry, and to avoid all other grievous and open sins; or if they have
fallen into them speedily to repent of them; seeing hereby they do not only
draw upon themselves the heauiest measure of punishment (for the mighty shall be
mightily tormented) but also by their sins not repented of, do make their
Wisd. 6 7.
subjects and inferiors which they should love as their children and parts of
their own body, guilty of their sins, and obnoxious to their punishments:
2. Sam. 24. 17. 2. Sam 24. 17. That it is not sufficient to conform our
religion to the religion of superiors.


Thirdly, subjects, inferiors, and private men may here learn, that in respect
of their religion it is not sufficient to conform themselves to the religion
of their governors, nor in respect of their faith, to believe as the Church
believes, nor in respect of their manners to live according to the example of
their superiors, but every one ought to inform himself of Gods true
religion, and to be assured out of Gods word, that he worshippeth the true God
after his revealed will; and to lead his life not according to the example of
others, but according to Gods precepts, with which he is thoroughly to be
acquainted; for it will not excuse us to say, that we have bin seduced by false
teachers, mislead by ill governors, allured by the wicked example of
superiors, seeing every man is to live by their own faith, to be directed by
his own knowledge, and to be approved or condemned by his own life and
actions. And therefore the only privilege which he shall have by the false
religion, idolatry and wicked examples of his superiors, is, that having
sinned with them for company, they shall have their company also in suffering
punishment.

Lastly, we may here observe, that the Lord will not reject That former
idolatry repented of, does not cause God to reject us.
us because we have bin the children of an adulterous mother in time past, so
that we hate and forsake her fornications, and leaving her as an adulterous
harlot, do cleave unto our heavenly father; for it is not said here that the
Lord would exclude them from his mercy because they had been, but also
presently were the children of fornications, that is, not only borne of an
adulterous harlot, but also approouing and following her spiritual whoredoms.
The consideration whereof serves for the comfort of those, who having been
borne and brought up in popery and idolatry are converted unto the truth; for
howsoever if they had continued with their mother the great whore of Babylon,
and committed Apoc. 18. 4.
with her spiritual whoredom, they should have been forsaken, and so perished
together with her; yet being now come out from Babylon, they shall not be
partakers with her in her sins and punishments, but being regenerate and
borne anew unto their heavenly father, by the immortal seed of his word and
Gospel, they shall be exempted from her plagues, admitted as legitimate, and
made capable of that heavenly inheritance which God rescrueth in store for all
his children.

ANd so much concerning the divorce between the Lord and the Church of Israel.
In the next place is the cause thereof expressed, to wit, the sin of the
people; especially their idolatry and vnthankfulnnsse; and afterward the
punishments due unto their sins are threatened. The first is contained in
these words: Verse. 5. For their mother has played the harlot; she that
conceived them has done shamefully: for she said, I will go after my lovers,
that give me my bread and my water, my wool and my flax, mine oil and my
drink. In which words are contained, first their idolatry and spiritual
Exposition.
whoredoms, and secondly their ingratitude. Their idolatry is first plainly
expressed, and afterward aggrauated. It is expressed in these words: For their
mother has played the harlot. Where still he continues the allegory, of
marriage, adultery and divorce; showing and proouing that there was just cause
why the mother was divorced, and the children rejected, because the mother had
played the harlot, and so her children were an adulterous issue. Neither had
she only before or after committed whoredom, but even in the generation of
these her children she had conceived them of the seed of fornication; for
otherwise howsoever she was a harlot, yet her children should have been
legitimate, and therefore unlawfully disinherited: but they were not only
borne of an harlot, but also in adultery, and therefore they were the children
of fornication.

Now as they are rightly called bastards, which are not begotten of the lawful
husband, but of the seed of a stranger: so the Lord in respect of the
spiritual generation, accounts them bastards which he has not begotten by
the immortal seed of his word, made powerful by the inward 1. Pet. 1. 23.
opperation of his Spirit. And therefore those who are begotten unto the Church
by false doctrines and lying spirits, and according to their birth are so
brought up, they are to be accounted the children of fornications.

But such was the birth and bringing up of these children, for their mother the
Church of Israel, under the reign of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, committed
spiritual whoredom, when as forsaking the Lord, she worshipped the golden
calves in Dan and Bethel; and whilst she played the harlot, the posterity
which came of her were borne unto the idols, when as being brought up in
ignorance destitute of ye knowledge of God and his religion, they were
instructed in false doctrine and idolatry, and so became as gross idolaters
as their predecessors. And therefore being in adulterous issue of an adulterous
mother, both she and they were justly rejected.

And this was the first and chief sin for which the mother was divorced, and
the children disinherited; namely, because she played the harlot, and the
children were begotten in her adultery. Now this their sin is aggrauated;
first by her shameless filthiness therein showed: and secondly, by her
impudent and obstinate resolution to commit it. The first is expressed in these
words; she that conceived them has done shamefully. The Hebrew text has it;
She that conceived them is affected or confounded with shame: whereby is not
meant, that she was shamefast or ashamed of her sins; for this agrees not to
the disposition of an harlot, especially to such a shameless harlot as this,
whose fornications were in her face, and her adulteries between her breasts,
and who impudently professed that she would go after her lovers, but that she
had committed such shameful actions, and had lived so filthily and infamously,
that she had exposed her self to all shame and reproach. The meaning therefore
of these words is this, that she had not fallen into her sins of infirmity,
or after she was fallen, carried her self after any moderate manner, but that
she often committed these sins, and defiled her self with so many kinds of
idolatry and superstition, that she was grown infamous, and justly reproched
of all who heard of or saw her abominable filthiness.

Now this he proves, and with all further aggrauateth the greatness of her
sin, by giving a particular instance of her wickedness, in these words; for
she said, I will go after my lovers, etc. Whereas he says that she thus said;
he implies that she did not follow her lovers and forsake the Lord through
infirmity, ignorance, or as one overtaken at unawares; but advisedly,
wilfully, upon a deliberate and settled resolution she determined to do it;
and not only so, but in an impudent manner she professed, that renouncing God
her lawful husband, she would follow her lovers.

Where by her lovers, we are to understand her idols and false gods, which are
compared fitly unto lovers: for as lovers, that is adulterers, allure and
entice men's wives, to withdraw their hearts from their lawful husbands, and to
fix it upon them; to break their conjugal faith, and to commit whoredom by
offering unto them gifts and pleasures. So the spouse of God is allured and
enticed by idols, to forsake the Lord, and to set her heart upon them, and to
violate her marriage says by leaving his pure worship and service, and
prostituting her self to commit spiritual whoredom with them, when as they
seem to offer unto her as a reward, some profit or delight.

And this also appears in the reason which she yields of her apostasy, in
the words following: that give me my bread and my water, my wool and my
flax, mine oil and my drink. In which words is also contained the exceeding
great unthankfulness of the people in ascribing all the benefits which they
inioyed unto their idols and false gods, whereas the Lord alone was the author
and fountain of them. The which their sin was so much the more inexcusable,
because in the Law the Lord had promised all these gifts unto them, to the end
that they should expect them from him alone, and having received them, they
should ascribe the whole praise unto him only of his own gifts: Leuit. 26. 4,
5. Deuteronomy. Leuit. 26. 4, 5. Deuteronomy. 28. 2, 3.
28. 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.

Now under these particulars here named, he understands all kind of benefits
necessary either for their sustenance and preservation, or for their pleasure
and delight. For by bread and water in the Scriptures is usually signified all
kind of meat and drink, food and sustenance, as appears, Exo. 34. 28. Deuteronomy.
23. 4. 1. King. 13. 17. Esa. 3. 1. By wool and Exodus 34. 28. Deuteronomy. 23. 4. 1.
King. 13. 17. Esa. 3. 1.
flax is understood all kind of clothing, apparel, and furniture made of
them. By oil and drink is understood all their pleasures and delicacies; for
oil in those hot countries was used for pleasure, ornament, smell, agilitie
and strength: and by drink is meant not ordinary drink, for that he
comprehends under the name of water, but their drinks which were most costly
and delicate: and further the word here used is of the plural number, and
derived from such a root, as signifies to drink abundantly, whereby is
understood their plenty of such delicacies.

And so much for the meaning of these words. The instructions Sin the cause
of all punishment.
which hence arise are these. First, we may observe what was the cause of all
those punishments before denounced both against the Church of Israel and her
children, namely their sins, especially their idolatry and unthankfulness.
For because the mother played the harlot, and her children were begotten in her
adulteries; and not only so, but also liked and approved, embraced and
followed the whoredoms of their mother, therefore joining in sin, they were
joined in punishment. And indeed the sin of man is the cause of all the
miseries and evils which he suffers, for God who is the chief goodness,
takes his delight in doing good, and in multiplying his benefits upon his
creatures, according to that, Psalm. 145. 9. The Lord is good to all, and Psalm.
145. 9.
his mercies are over all his works; and that of Micah, Chap. 7. verse. 18. He
retains not his wrath for ever, because mercy Mich 7. 18.
pleases him. Neither does he punish but when men's sins urge his justice,
and draw upon themselves his judgments. Whence we learn, when we are
punished, not to murmr against God, nor to look to inferior means, but
rather to examine our own consciences, and to search out our sins Psalm. 51. 4.
which are the cause thereof, that so we may clear God and accuse our selves.
And likewise if we would have the punishment removed, we must not use evil
means, for the evil of sin will not remove the evil of punishment; nay
rather it will redouble it, as being the chief cause thereof: but if we would
have our punishment taken away, let us first take away our sins by unfeigned
repentance, for if the cause be removed, the effect will cease.

Secondly, we here learn, that the Church does only so The Church remains
the spouse of Christ only so long as she keeps her marriage faith.
long remain the spouse of God as she keeps her marriage faith, loving and
obeying, worshipping and serving him aloue: but if she plaieth ye harlot,
either by forsaking the true God and worshipping idols, or by so worshipping
the true God as she worshippeth idols; that is, after an idolatrous manner, and
not after the prescript rule of his word, this causes the Lord to divorce her
from him, and to strip her of al his benenefits. So that it is not sufficient
for a Church, that she has been the spouse of Christ, that she has plighted
he faith unto him, and worshipped him according to his word, unless she
persevere in her faithfulness, love, and sincere and pure obedience; for this
was the estate of the Israelites who were divorced for their apostasy. So that
the Church of Rome does in vain pretend her long continuance and succession of
Bishops, to prove her self to be the spouse of Christ: seeing they have made
an apostasy, breaking their faith, forsaking Gods pure worship, and embracing
their own will-worshippes and inventions, worshipping in stead of the true
God, their breaden god, Saints, Angels, crosses, crucifixes and images. And
therefore having played the harlots, the mother together with the children,
they were long ago divorced from God, and stripped of his spiritual benefits.

Thirdly, we may observe, that after men have forsaken the No moderation in
idolatry and will worship.
Lord and his pure worship, and given themselves over to commit idolatry, they
can contain themselves in no moderation, but behave themselves most
shamefully, infinitely multiplying their superstitions, and kinds of idolatry,
according to the variety of every man's invention. An example whereof we have in
the old Egyptians, in the Gentiles, Romans 1. In the Papists at this day, whose
idolatries are manifold, and their superstitions innumerable: for they do not
only make Idols, but they also worship them, by kneeling and praying unto them,
offering unto them incense and oblations, consecrating unto them Churches,
going on pilgrimage, ascribing unto them power to do miracles and forgive
sins. The consideration whereof should make us most carefully to avoid all
will worship, and to restrain our selves unto that worship which God has
revealed in his word.

Fourthly, we may observe the impudency of idolaters, The impudency of
idolaters.
and their resolved obstinacy in their sins: for they do not only fall of
ignorance and infirmity, nor content themselves with their idolatries in
secret committed, but like shameless harlots they make a trade and open
profession of their sins, not sticking openly to say that they will follow
their lovers. An example whereof we have in this place, as also in the Papists,
who not only in secret, but also in their Churches, market places and open
processions bear about their Idols, and make open profession of their
idolatry and apostasy.

Fifthly, we may here observe the palpable ignorance and The ignorance and
unthankfulness of idolaters.
wilful blindness, the gross ingratitude, and carnal worldliness of
idolaters; their ignorant blindness, in ascribing their prosperity and
plenty unto their sin of worshipping Idols, which is the cause of their
misery, poverty and nakedness; their unthankfulness, in attributing the
praise of all those benefits which they enjoy, through the free mercy and
bounty of God, unto their lovers, that is, their Idols and false gods, which
are no causes of their blessings, but of their punishments; their carnal
worldliness, in that they make choice of their religion, not for the love of
God and of his truth, but for worldly benefits, pleasures and preferments. So
the idolaters here in their ignorance and unthankfulness ascribe their riches
and pleasures to their lovers, professing that therefore they will follow them,
because they were benefited by them. Thus they ascribed their deliverance out
of Egypt to the golden Calfe, Exodus 32. 4. and to their Calves in Dan and
Bethel, 1. King. 12. 28. Thus the men of Judah impudently Exodus 32. 4. 1. King.
12. 28.
and stubbornely refused to hear the word of the Lord, by the mouth of
Jeremy, and stiffly affirmed that they would do sacrifice to the Queen of
Heaven, because whilst they committed this idolatry, they had plenty of
victuals, and were well and felt none evil, etc. Iere. 44. 17. 18. Iere. 44.
17. 18.
19. And thus many in these days, through their gross ignorance and
unthankfulness, approve and justify, like and live in the idolatrous religion
of the Papists, because whilst they worshipped the Queen of Heaven, the
Virgin Mary, and their Saints and Images, they had plenty of victuals, and all
things good cheap. But as the Apostle says of such, Their end is damnation,
whose god is their belly, and whose glory is to Phil. 3. 19.
their shame, which mind earthly things, Philip. 3. 19. Thus also do they
offend, who ascribe the benefits which they enjoy, not to the free mercy and
bounty of God, but to their own wits, industry and labor, sacrificing to
their own nets, and burning incense unto their yearne, because by them their
portion is fat, and their meat plenteous, as the Prophet Habacuc speaks,
Hab. 1. 16. But most grievously of all in Hab. 1. 16.
this respect do the Papists offend, who rob and spoil the Lord of the praise
of his gifts, by ascribing almost every particular benefit which they enjoy, to
some Saint or Idol, as the peculiar patron, author, and preserver thereof,
unto whom they pray and go on pilgrimage, when they stand in need of any of
these benefits, and unto whom they offer oblations and praises when they abound
with them.

Lastly, as it is the nature and disposition of idolaters, out Idolaters
approve their religion by their prosperity.
of their religion to seek their gain and profit, and accordingly to esteem
that religion best and truest, whereby they may reap unto themselves the
greatest harvest of worldly benefit; so if they be put to the proouing and
justifying of their religion, the maine argument which they commonly use for
this purpose, is their worldly prosperity, and abundance of pleasures, riches
and preferments, thinking themselves most approved of God, and their religion
most true when they most abound in these worldly things. This we see in this
place, in the example of the Jews in the time of Jeremy, Iere. 44. 17. 18.
And in the Papists at this day, who Iere. 44. 17.
approve their religion, by the outward pomp and prosperity of their Church,
especially of their Pope, Cardinals and Bishops.

ANd so much concerning the peoples sin of Idolatry, and the first branch of
their unthankfulness, in ascribing their benefits to their Idols. In the next
place he denounces threatenings against them for their sins in these words:
Verse. 6. Therefore behold I will stop thy way with thorns, and make a hedge,
that she shall not find her paths. Or thus: Therefore behold I will hedge thy
way with thorns, and will make a wall, etc. Verse. 7. Though she follow after
her lovers, yet shall she not come at them; though she seek them, yet shall
she not find them. Then shall she say; I will go and return to my first
husband, for at that time was I better then now. Or thus, And she shall follow
her lovers, and shall not come at them, and she shall seek them, and shall not
find them, etc.

In which words are contained two things: first a punishment The exposition.
denounced, and secondly, the effects of this punishment in the people. In the
first we are to consider the parties, against whom it is denounced, and the
nature and quality thereof. The parties are those amongst the idolatrous
Israelites, who (though they were not yet called) belonged to Gods election:
for though the Prophets speech be directed to all those idolatrous Israelites,
who said, I will go after my lovers: yet it is to be understood
Synecdochically, of those alone amongst them, whom it was Gods purpose to
convert and save. For not only the reprobate, but also the elect fall into this
sin of idolatry, sometimes of ignorance, and sometimes of infirmity, being
either drawn with fear, or allured by profit, pleasure or preferme^t: and
such were these unto who^ the Prophet speaks, who said yt they would go after
their lovers, telling them, that the Lord would cross them in their
resolution, and stay them in the midst of their course.

And that it is to be understood of the elect only, it may appear, first,
because the Lord does not lay thorns in the way of the reprobate, to
discourage and hinder them from their idolatry, and other wickedness, but
leaves them to their own wills and lusts, to run on without impediment in the
broad way, which leads to destruction; but he crosses those in their wicked
designs, who belong to his election, and either first or last he hinders
the^ in their wicked ways, not suffering them to run on in their course of
sin, into which their corrupt flesh leads them. Secondly, it is said in the
7. verse. that being thus crossed in their purposes, they should, having come to
a sense and feeling of their misery, return unto the Lord by true repentance;
which cannot be understood of the reprobate idolaters, but only of the elect.

And so much for the persons. In the punishment it self is expressed, first
the cause thereof, secondly the quality of the punishment, thirdly, the end
why it is inflicted. The cause in these words, Therefore behold: which have
relation to the former verse, and point out the sin, which was the cause of
this punishment; as though he should say, Because you have bin so obstinate and
impudent in your idolatries, as that you have not stuck to say openly, that
you would still go after your lovers, therefore you shall not have your wills,
nor be able to perform your wicked purposes; for I will lay thorns in your
way, and so hinder you, that you shall not go forward in your course.

The quality of the punishment is expressed in these words: I will hedge thy
way with thorns, and make a wall; (for so the original text reads.) Where
he continues the allegory, showing, that if they like harlots, wander abroad,
and run after their lovers; he will keep a more strait watch over them, and
restrain them, will they nill they, from gadding abroad: or else (which I
rather think) he alludeth to the custom of husbandmen, who when their beasts
will not keep in their own pasture, do make strong their fence, and hedge them
in; and if this will not contain them, they make walls of mud or stone, to
make them sure for leaping over. So the Lord threatens, that if they will not
be contained in his Church, but will leap over unto their Idols and false gods,
he will provide a hedge, and a wall to keep them in.

Now this hedge of thorns and strong wall, of which he speaks, are crosses
and afflictions, as the diseases of the body, sorrow of mind, war, famine,
poverty and such like, which are compared to thorns: for as when thorns lie
in our way, they prick, molest and grieve us, keeping us from going forward,
unless it be with great pain and difficulty: so in the way of our
pilgrimage, these thorns of afflictions vex and trouble us, by tormenting the
body, and wounding the mind. And in this sense is the word taken, Ios. 23.
13. where the Lord threatens, that the cursed nations, whom Josh. 23. 13.
the Israelites had not cast out, should be as whippes on their sides, and
thorns in their eyes, that is, causes of their great affliction and
molestation. So Ezech. 28. 24. The Lord promises, Ezech. 28. 24.
that the Zidonites should be no more a pricking thorn to the house of Israel.
Whereas therefore the Lord threatens, that he would stop their way with
thorns, and with a wall, the meaning is, that he would keep them from
following their Idols, by afflictions; and if lesser afflictions would not
contain them, he would inflict upon them such grievous calamities, as like a
strong wall should keep them in and hinder them from following their false
gods. By which, as he understands in general, all the afflictions and
miseries which he sent amongst them; so especially, their siege and captivity
by the Assyrians: for when they were besieged by them, and when being
vanquished, they were led away captive; then they were hedged in, and compassed
with a strong wall, so as they could not as in former times, go to worship
their golden calves in Dan and Bethel.

The end why the Lord thus deals wirh them, is expressed in these words, That
she should not find her paths: whereby is meant, that the Lord would therefore
hedge and wall them in with afflictions, that they should not go forward in
their ordinary course of committing idolatry: the which is called her paths,
because, as by often going in the same way, a path is made by the continual
treading of men's feet; so she so usually and commonly frequented her Idols,
that her idolatries seemed as her path and common way, wherein she daily and
continually walked.

And this is the meaning of these words. The instructions God stops the
elect in the course of their sin, with the hedge of afflictions.
that we are to gather out of them, are these. First, we may observe, that
howsoever the Lord does often suffer the wicked and reprobate to go forward in
their sins, without any check and controlement, and to have a prosperous
course, and wished success in their wicked designs, without any let or
hinderance; yet he deals not thus with those that belong unto his election:
but if they, through the corruption of the flesh, either of ignorance, or of
infirmity, resolve to prosecute wicked courses, though he may suffer them for
a time, yet in the end he will lay in their way the thorns of crosses and
afflictions, to hinder them from atchieuing their wicked ends; that so being
stayed, they may return back again unto him by true repentance. So he
suffered the Gentiles to go forward without stop, in their idolatries: but when
the Israelites forsook him, and followed idols, he laid continually thorns of
affliction in their way, to cause them to desist in their course, and to
return unto him, as appears in the history of the Judges, and the Kings:
the like examples we have in Jonas, in David, 2. Sam. 11. 12. in reprobate
Jeroboam, 2. Sam. 11. and 12.
and elect Manasses, in the Scribes and Pharisees, and the Apostle Paul, Act.
9. in the rich Glutton, and the prodigal Act. 9. Luke 15. and 16.
son, Luke 15. and 16. Whereby it appears, that the Lord will not suffer
those which belong unto him, to be so evil as they would be: but when they
resolve to go forward in sin, he lays in their way a hedge of thornie
afflictions, either trouble of mind, or sickness, or loss in their state, that
so they may not go on in the paths of sin, but return again by true
repentance. Whence we may gather a notable sign, whether we belong to Gods
election, or be in the number of the reprobate; for if we go forward in our
wicked courses, without stop or hinderance, with ease and prosperity, it is a
sign that we belong not to God, for then he would not suffer us to go on in
the way of perdition: but if we no sooner resolve upon some wicked design, but
straight we are either crossed in it, or afterward afflicted, that we cannot
proceed in it as we purposed, surely it is a sign that the Lord has a care of
us, in that he holds us back from running headlong to everlasting
destruction.

Secondly, because, though the Lord lay these thorns in our way, yet through
our negligence and security, though We do not acknowledge Gods hand in our
afflictions.
we see the hedge, and feel the pricks of affliction, pearcing our souls and
bodies, we oftentimes neither consider who has set this hedge in our way, nor
for what cause, but are ready to ascribe our afflictions to chance and
fortune, to our own want of providence, to the malice of our enemies, or some
secondarie cause; therefore the Lord wills them to behold, and to consider,
that he it was that set this hedge in their way, and for this cause, in that
they had resolved to go forward in their sins, that knowing the meritorious
cause of their punishment to be their sins, they might labor to take them
away by true repentance; and knowing the Lord to be the author of them, they
might humble themselves under his hand, and implore mercy and forgiveness.

Thirdly, we may here learn, that it is impossible for Gods elect to perish,
for he will not suffer them to go on in sin to their perdition; yea though
they will desire and resolve to live in wickedness, the Lord will find means
to pull them out of it: for his will is above their wills, his eternal purpose
and decree, which is unchangeable, causes a change in their wicked designs
and unlawful purposes, so that they shall not atchieue them according to their
settled resolutions: as we may see in the example of Jonas, David, Paul, and
many others. So that Gods elect may certainly be assured, that seeing their
sins are insufficient, therefore nothing else is effectual to separate them
from the love of God in Christ Jesus. Romans 8. 38. 39.

Fourthly, here we learn most carefully to take heed, that We must not leap
over the hedge of afflictions.
we do not when the Lord sets this hedge in our way to restrain us from
sin, leap over it: for if the fence be not strong enough he will make it
stronger, and in stead of an hedge he will set a wall to restrain us, that is,
if lighter afflictions will not withhold and stay us from going forward in the
course of sin, he will inflict those which are heavier and more intolerable.

Lastly, we may here observe the great benefit which our afflictions cause
unto us, for they serve for sharp thornie Afflictions restrain us from sin.
hedges and strong walls to contain us in the ways of Gods commandments,
and to keep us from leaping over into the pleasant pastures of sin and
wickedness, where we should but be fatted to the slaughter; the Lord lays
in our way these thornie afflictions, not to kill us, but to prick us, and by
pricking to restrain us from going the broad way that leads to destruction:
for when we are thus judged, we are chastened of the Lord, because we should
not be condemned with the world, 1. Cor. 11. 31. He corrects us not because
he hates 1. Cor. 11. 31.
us, but because he entirely loves us, even as his own children; not for our
hurt, but for our profit, that we might be partakers of hie holiness, Heb. 12.
7. 10. And though no chastening Heb. 12. 7. 10. 11.
seems to be joyous, but grievous for the present: yet afterward it brings
the quiet fruit of righteousness unto them which are thereby exercised, Heb.
12. 11. Though these afflictions be bitter and unpleasant to the flesh, yet are
they profitable to the spiritual part: for whilst the outward man perishes,
the inward man is renewed daily, 2. Cor. 4. 16. Though these thorns 2. Cor. 4.
16.
prick us, yet they do not mortally wound us, only they let out the wind of
vainglorie, and humble us that we be not exalted out of measure. Though they
seem tedious and intolerable 2. Cor. 12. 7.
and tending to our destruction, yet in truth they are but light and
momentanie, and cause unto us a superexcellent and eternal weight of glory:
2. Cor. 4. 17. 2. Cor. 4. 17.


But yet we are not to imagine that affliction in it own Afflictions not good
in themselves, but through Gods blessing.
nature works al these benefits; but by the secret operation of Gods Spirit
inwardly applying it unto our hearts, and teaching us to make a holy use of it:
for such is our obstinate stubbornness, that we will like untamed and wild
beasts rush through this hedge of afflictions, that we may still continue our
course in sin: and such is our senselessness in our security, that either we
feel not ye pricking of these thorns, or at least are not by the smart moved
to sorrow for sin, as being the cause thereof; or to flee unto God by true
repentance that we may have ease, unless the Spirit work together with our
afflictions, making them effectual for these purposes. As we may see in the
example of Saul, Jeroboam, 1. King. 14. 1. 2. the Israelites, Esa. 1. 5. and in
our own late experience.

ANd so much concerning the punishment denounced. The effect of this punishment
in the people is twofold. The first is expressed in these words: And she shall
follow her lovers, and shall not come at them; and she shall seek them, and
shall not find them, etc. In which words are contained two things: first, the
behavior of these idolaters, when as God The exposition.
had hedged them in with the hedge of afflictions, namely, they follow and
seek after their lovers, and that with great anxietie of mind, care and
earnest endeavor; for so the word here used signifies. The second is, that God
makes frustrate all their labor, so as they follow and seek after them in
vain.

Concerning the first* after these idolaters were afflicted for their sins,
and so hedged in with troubles and inextricable miseries, that they could not
tell what course to take, nor which way to turn themselves; yet they do not
presently turn unto the Lord and repent of their sins, nay rather they
endeavor to flee from him, and to seek help of their Idols; and as though all
these afflictions had betided them, because they had been no more zealous and
devout in their superstition and idolatry, therefore they double their
diligence, and with greater care and endeavor they worship and serve their
Idols, hoping and expecting deliverance from them* as a reward of all their
pains.

Wherein the Prophet alludeth to the practice of adulterous wives, who when
they are restrained in their wicked courses by their husbands jealous and
watchful eye, or by some rougher and stricter course, do not presently
forsake their lovers and amend, but rather study and invent out means how
they may escape out of their husbands custody and again come into their
lovers company: or else to the manner of beasts and cattle, who being
restrained with a new fence from their old haunt, do not presently feed quietly
in their own pasture, but range along by the hedge side to find a gap, or
some easy place where they may leap over or burst through into those fields
into which they have ranged in former times: so this idolatrous spouse being
restrained with the chastisements of her husband from following Idols, does not
at first forsake her sin, and turn unto the Lord by true repentance, but
with greater madness she endeavors to proceed in her adulteries,
superstitions and idolatry, and seeks help of her lovers and Idols, that
thereby she may be freed from those afflictions which God has laid upon her.

So that here the sin of these idolaters is further aggrauated, in that they
made no use of Gods afflictions, but rather behaved themselves more impudently
then in former times: for whereas this adulterous spouse though she were
resolved to live in uncleanness, yet rather should have been sought unto by
her lovers, then to seek after them, she contrary to all womanhood so far
exceeded the bounds of modesty, being transported with the blind fury of her
lust, follows after them when she is neglected, and seeks them when she is
not sought.

But here it may be demanded, how she can be said to follow and seek after her
lovers, when as he says in the former verse that she was so hedged and walled
in that she could not find her paths? I answer, that he here describes,
potius adulterae affectum quam profectum, rather the affection then the action
of this harlot; it is true that she could not attain unto her desire, but
still notwithstanding she desires; she was hedged in, but nevertheless she
wandreth about to find a gap; she could not indeed find or come at her
lovers, but yet she rangeth in the pursuit, and seeks to come into their
company.

And this appears by the second point which I propounded, namely, the
frustrating of her labor: for it is said, that though she followed her
lovers, yet she should not come at them; though she sought them with all care
and diligence, yet she should not find them. In which words, the Lord shows,
that though this adulterous spouse, and untamed heifer, would endeavor to break
through the hedge of afflictions, which he had set about her, to the end that
she might again with like prosperity, as in former times, follow her lovers,
and live in her whoredoms; yet she should not be able to accomplish her
desire; though she should seek her Idols, with more then ordinary devotion,
praying, profering unto them sacrifices and oblations, to the end, that by
their help she might be freed out of her afflictions, and attain unto her
former prosperity, which in her blind ignorance and superstition she ascribed
unto them, yet she should spend all her labor in vain, seeing her Idols
sought should not be found, that is, she should not find them any ways able to
remove her afflictions, or to help her out of her misery and distress.

Whereby he aggrauateth the wretchedness of her estate, and in a most lively
manner sets forth the desperatenes of her misery. For though one be in
misery and distress, yet if they have hope that they may have access to such
friends, unto whom when they have made known their case, they shall find them
both able and willing to relieve them; this is a strong argument to work in
them patience: but if either they cannot come at them, whom they most trust and
rely upon, or else find them altogether unable to do them any good, then the
frustrating of their hope being added to the weight of their misery and
afflictions, ouerwhelmeth and presses them down, and makes their burden
unsupportable.

And this is the first effect of the Churches afflictions. The second is
expressed in these words, Then shall she say, I will go and return to my first
husband, for at that time was I better then now. In which words is contained
the Churches repentance, and the reason moving her hereunto. The first is
expressed in these words, Then shall she say, I will go and return unto my
first husband: that is, after she sees her self crossed in her wicked
courses, and so hedged in with afflictions, that she cannot follow her Idols,
and enjoy her former prosperity, after she has long in vain sought for help
and deliverance at the hands of her Idols, and has now no hope by their
means, either to come out of her present misery, or to enjoy her former
prosperity, being destitute of all other help; then she shall say, that is,
she shall resolve and determine, yea and also profess this her purpose and
resolution, that she would no longer sit still in this misery, and suffer her
self to be swallowed up of grief, and desperation; but she would go, and
forsaking her lovers, and adulterous Idols, return unto her first husband, who
indeed alone deserved the name of a husband, seeing the other were but lovers,
seducers, and adulterers.

The reason moving her to make this return unto her husband, is expressed in
these words: For at that time was I better then now: that is, I will now at
length forsake these Idols, and return unto the Lord, because I plainly see,
and sensibly discern, that my state and condition was far better, and more
happy, when I cleaued unto the Lord, my only true husband, with all my heart,
loving, serving, and obeying him alone, and performing unto him that pure and
sincere worship, which is described in his word, then it has bin since I
forsook him, and prostituted my self, to commit spiritual uncleanness with
Idols: for by this my apostasy I have moved my loving husband, in his just
displeasure to reject me, and to strip me of al those benefits which he had
bestowed on me: I have deprived my self of al true comfort, joy and peace of
conscience, and am now filled with horror, fear, and anguish of mind; and I
have plunged my self into a sea of misery, and innumerable afflictions, out
of which my lovers, in whom I trusted, and whose help I have implored, cannot
deliver me. And therefore what remains, but that I forsake my lovers, and my
sins with them committed, seeing they are miserable comforters in my greatest
need, and distress, and return and reconcile my self unto my husband, who is
infinite in mercy and compassion?

And so much for the meaning of this verse. The doctrines Idolaters in their
afflictions, fly unto their Idols, and not unto God.
them for their idolatries, do not repent of their sins, and return unto the
Lord, craving mercy, forgiveness, and release of their punishments: but rather,
have their recourse unto their Idols, with more then ordinary devotion:
serving them with their Pilgrimages, Vows, Inuocations, Oblations, and other
rites and ceremonies, wherewith they imagine they may be best pleased;
supposing that their slacknes and remissenes in these superstitious devotions,
has bin the cause of all their afflictions: whereas in truth their
superstitions and idolatry, is the chief cause of all their miseries, and
therefore the multiplying of them does not release them of their punishment,
but rather redoubleth it. An example whereof we have in this place, in Micha,
Judge. 17. 13. Ahaziah, 2. King. 1. 2. and in the Papists, who when the Lord
Judge. 17. 13. 2. King. 1. 2.
punishes them for their idolatries, seek freedom and deliverance from the
evils they suffer, by their vows, pilgrimages, prayers, and oblations to their
Idols and Images; as though they could dry themselves being wet, by leaping
into a river, or ease themselves being burnt, by leaping into the fire, Esaias 1.
28. 29. Esaias 1. 28. 29. Our natural pronenes to Idolatry.


Secondly, we may observe our natural pronenesse unto idolatry, for not only
we easily fall into it, but being fallen, we are hardly recovered and recalled
from this sin: no, though the Lord to his word showing his truth, and the
falsehood and abominablenes of idolatry, do also add his rods of afflictions,
that at least sense of pain may make us weary of our sins. And therefore it
is not to be wondered at, that the most part of the world do forsake Gods pure
worship, and live in idolatry, seeing man's nature is so inclined thereunto,
that though he smart for it, he will not leave it: and how much more then will
he embrace it, when he is allured and drawn unto that, which of his own
nature he is prone unto, by pleasures, profit, and preferments? for the Lord
does not hedge in all with afflictions, which resolve to follow their lovers,
but only those, whom it is his purpose to convert, as belonging to his
eternal election.

Thirdly, we may observe that affliction in it self, is not sufficient to make
us forsake our sins, and to turn unto the Affliction, if it be not sanctified,
does not turn us unto God.
Lord by true repentance, unless it be sanctified and made effectual for
this purpose, by the inward working of Gods Spirit. For though the Lord had
hedged his people in with afflictions, that they might not go forward in their
idolatries: yet it is said here, that notwithstanding all this, they the more
followed and sought after their lovers. So Pharaoh the more he was punished
the more he was hardened, the more the children of Israel were afflicted in
the wilderness, the more they murmured; the more they were smitten, the more
they fell away, Esai. 1. 5. But I shall not need to go far Esai. 1. 5.
for examples, seeing we have a present example amongst our selves, who have
made no use of Gods late visitation, etc. And therefore when we are afflicted,
let us earnestly desire the Lord to sanctify our afflictions unto us, and to
join with his outward corrections, the inward working of his Spirit, whereby
we may be moved to lay them to heart, and to humble our selves under the hand
of God.

Fourthly, we may observe the corrupt nature of sinful Corrupt man seeks
all other means, before he flies unto God.
man, who when he is in trouble and affliction, assayeth all other means for
his deliverance, before he flies unto God for help: so here the Israelites
being hedged in with afflictions, flee unto their Idols. So Saul went to the
witch, Asa to the Physicians, the Papists to their Saints and Images. And thus
many make gods unto themselves, for their deliverance, of their friends,
riches, or of their own power and policy: when as being in trouble and
affliction they do not in the first place flee unto the Lord for help, but
rest upon these means, until they be altogether deprived of them, or have
experience of their insufficiency in yielding unto them any help.

Lastly, we may observe, that the Lord takes from those, God frustrateth other
means, that we may rest upon him.
which he purposes to convert and save, all these Idols in whom they trust,
and these outward means whereupon they rest, or at least, teaches them by
lamentable experience, that they are altogether insufficient to deliver them
out of their afflictions. So he threatens here, that his elect people
following after their lovers, should not come at them, and seeking them (to the
end they might be by their help delivered out of their afflictions) they
should not find them, that so being made frustrate of their wicked hopes, and
abandoned of all outward means, wherein they trusted, and despairing of all
other help, might hereby be driven to flee unto the Lord for mercy and
deliverance. And therefore, when being in affliction, or any distress, we are
disappointed of our hopes, and deprived or forsaken of those means, wherein we
trusted for deliverance; let us persuade our selves, that the Lord hereby does
chastise our vain confidence and carnal affiance, whereby we trust and rest
upon, rather the creature, then upon him our Creator; and withal does beat us
from those worldly hopes, that we might flee unto him for succor, and rest
upon his promises and providence for our deliverance.

And these are the doctrines which arise out of the former God does not suffer
his to remain always in their sin and idolatry.
part of this verse, containing the first effect of the peoples afflictions.
Now out of the latter part, wherein is showed the second effect, namely, their
forsaking their Idols, and turning unto the Lord, these instructions are
further to be observed.

First, we learn, that howsoever those that belong to Gods election, may for a
time leave Gods pure worship, and follow Idols, yea and be so blinded in their
superstitions, that when they are afflicted for their sin, they do with more
earnestnes embrace idolatry; yet the Lord will not so leave them, but at
length he will open their eyes, that they shall see their sins, and sensibly
discern that they are the causes of their punishments; though for a time in
their ignorance and superstition they prefer idolatry before his true
worship, yet at last he illuminateth their judgments, so as they may see how
much better it is to follow him, then to follow idols, to embrace his true
religion revealed in his word, then to follow their own invention. Examples
hereof we have in Abraham, in the Israelites coming out of Egypt, and in the
time of the Judges, and in many at this day, who have forsaken the idolatries
of the whore of Babylon, and have embraced Gods true religion.

Secondly, we may observe, that as soon as they spy their As soon as the
faithful see their errors and sins, they reform and forsake them.
errors, they do not go on further in them, but they return into the way of
truth; as soon as they see their sins they forsake them, as being the causes
of their misery; when they see the vainenes of their idols, then they return
unto the Lord their true husband, neitheir is it enough to see our sins, if we
continue in them, nay rather this will redouble our punishment; it is not
sufficient to know truth and error, unless we Luke 12. 47.
embrace the one, and forsake the other: it will not profit us to see our
former grossness in following idols, unless Matthew. 11. 21.
hereby we be moved, not only to forsake them, but also to return unto our
husband, the Lord our God, worshipping him according to his will. So that here
we learn what is the practice of true repentance, it consists not in the
knowledge only, or acknowledgment of our sins, for thus far did Pharaoh and
Saul proceed, thus did Judas, and thus do many worldlings repent: but we must
so see our sins, as that with the sight of them, we be exceedingly
displeased with our selves; we must so acknowledge them, as that withal we
unfeignedly bewail them; we must when we behold them, also hate and detest
them, and not only forsake our sins, but also return unto the Lord, with full
purpose of heart, resolving and endeavoring to serve and please him, in
holiness and newnes of life.

Thirdly, we may observe the profit of afflictions, when as The profit of
afflictions.
they are sanctified unto us by Gods Spirit; for whereas prosperity makes us
blind through pride, self-love, and security, so as we can neither see our
sins, nor Gods approaching judgments; adversity opens our eyes, and
rectifieth the judgment, so as then we not only see our sins, but are ready
also to condemn our selves, justly to have deserved those evils, which we
suffer, yea and far greater, if the Lord should enter into judgment with us:
for when as the light of nature, our own conscience, and the written Word of
God teach and convict us of this, that God is the chief goodness, most
gracious, most merciful, and in his own nature not apt and ready, to hurt
and punish any of his creatures, but rather to extend his bounty, and multiply
his benefits upon all, when we fall into miseries and calamities, we must needs
justify God in his judgments, and condemn our selves, who^ Lam. 3. 22.
we know to be full of all corruption, and wickedness. An example whereof we
have in Iosephes brethren, Genesis 42. 21. in Genesis 42. 21.
the Israelites under the Judges; in David, Psalm. 51. 4. yea in Psalm. 51. 4.
Exodus 10. 16. 17
Pharaoh himself, Exodus 10. 16. 17. Where as prosperity makes us dissolute
and licentious in our ways, affliction serves in stead of a thornie hedge to
stay us from running on in the course of sin to our perdition. Whereas
prosperity makes us negligent in performing the duties of Gods worship and
service, misery and affliction makes men zealous, forward and devout;
according to that, Esa. 26. 16. O Lord in Esa. 26. 16.
trouble they have visited thee, they powered out a prayer when thy chastening
was upon them. And because men at such times are most fit and ready to
perform such duties, therefore then the Lord especially requires them, Psalm.
50. 15. Lastly, whereas Psalm. 50. 15.
prosperity makes us to forget God and to flee away from him, affliction
makes us to remember him, and by true repentance to turn unto him. An example
we have in this 2. Chron* 33. 12. 13.
place, in the Israelites in the time of the Judges, in Manasses, and the
prodigal son. Luke 15.


Lastly, we may observe the motives, persuading the The motives which persuade
the Church to turn unto God.
Church to return unto God: the first whereof is contained in the word
husband, for therein she gathers unto her self some assurance of his love:
for although for her sins she was divorced, yet upon her true repentance, she
might gather certain hope, that she should be pardoned and received into
former grace, seeing she had not to deal with an enemy or stranger, and an
ordinary friend, but with a most loving and gracious husband, who was as
ready to forgive as she to ask forgiveness, Ierem. 3. 1. 12. 22. The second
motive Iere. 3 1. 12. 22
is the assurance of the bettering of her estate; for she could speak by
experience that her estate whilst she served the Lord, was much better then
when she followed Idols, and by the assurance of faith and hope she was
assertained, that repenting she should be received to grace, and restored to
her former state and condition. The like example we have in the prodigal
son, who returned unto God because he knew him to be his gracious father,
and was assured that being reconciled unto him, he should be delivered out of
his present misery into a state of happiness.

Where we may learn, that true faith is the cause of unfeigned repentance: for
until we have some assurance of Gods love and mercy in Christ, we flee from
him as from a severe Judge: but when we know that Christ our Mediator has
satisfied for our sins, and reconciled us unto his Father, then do we bewail
our sins, because we have by them dishonored and displeased our gracious
Father; and having repented of them, we go boldly unto the throne of grace,
craving mercy and forgiveness: Heb. 4. 16. 10. 22. Heb. 4. 16. 10. 22.


ANd thus much concerning the punishments which the Lord threatens against the
people for their idolatry, and the first kind or degree of their
unthankfulness; as also concerning the effects of these punishments. Now
follows the second degree of their unthankfulness, together with the
punishments denounced against them for it. Their ingratitude is expressed,
Verse. 8. And she did not know, that I gave her corn and wine and oil, and
multiplied her silver and gold, which they bestowed upon Baal. In which words
he accuses The exposition.
her of double ingratitude: first, that she did not know, or knowing did not
acknowledge the Lord to be the author of all those benefits which she enjoyed:
secondly, in that she did not use these benefits to the glory of God, but
bestowed them upon her Idols.

The first is expressed in these words: And she did not know that I gave her
corn, etc. By this conjunction copulative he knitteth these words with the
former, and shows that God justly punished them, seeing to their other sins
they added another kind of gross ingratitude: as though he should say, And
moreover, besides the sins before spoken of, she has showed her self grossly
ungrateful, both in not acknowledging God the author of the benefits which she
enjoyed, and in abusing them to Gods dishonor in the service of her Idols, and
therefore it is just with God to afflict her with the former and following
punishments, that she may learn to ascribe unto God the praise of his own
gifts, and may desist to abuse them by bestowing them upon Baal.

And this is the coherence of this verse with the former. Now let us come to
the words themselves, in which is expressed the party offending, and the sin
committed: the first in this word, And she, which has an emphasis in it, and
serves to aggrauate the sin. For though the Heathen nations should not have
known or acknowledged the Lord to have been the giver of the benefits which
they enjoyed, it had been no such great wonder, seeing they had only the light
of nature, and the book of the creatures to look upon; but that the people of
Israel should be ignorant hereof, was more then blockish senselessness and
blind ingratitude, seeing they had the book of God wherein it was revealed
unto them, that they had all the benefits which they enjoyed from the mere
blessing of God, that the Lord gave them this land flowing with milk and honey
by his own omnipotent power, casting out their enemies before them; that from
him they had the first and latter rain, whereby their land was made fruitful;
and seeing that they were entered into possession of al these benefits whilst
they served the Lord alone, before they worshipped their Idols, so that they
had no show of reason to ascribe Gods gifts unto them, which they already
enjoyed before they served them: and therefore the Lord might justly take up
that complaint against them: Esa. 1. 2. 3.

The first branch of their sin was, they did not know that Esa. 1. 2. 3.
God gave unto them their gifts which they had received: whereby we are not to
imagine that the Israelites were so blind and ignorant, as to think that they
had all these benefits from their Idols only, and not from Jehovah, the God of
Israel; for many of the Heathens though they worshipped Idols and petty gods,
yet by the light of nature knew that there was a chief and superior power who
was the original fountain of all goodness, and therefore the people of God
could not be hereof ignorant: but they are said not to know that God gave them
these gifts, because they did not know and acknowledge him alone to be the
author of them, but joined Idols and petty gods with him, and so robbed him of
part of his praise, they did not know that they had received these gifts of
Gods free grace and mere goodness, but for their golden Calves and other
Idols, and for that new devised worship which they offered unto God in them,
which they thought was more acceptable unto him then the service prescribed in
his word. So Iere. 44. 17. 18. the Jews said Ier. ^^. 17. 18.
they would worship the Queen of Heaven, that is, the Sun, because hereby they
had plenty; not that they were so brutish as to think, that they had these
benefits from the Sun only, but because they ascribed this power and virtue
unto the Sun in it self, rather then unto Gods blessing and providence, and
so offered sacrifices and divine worship unto the Sun, as being a joint cause
with God of these benefits, whereas it is only his instrument which does
nothing of it self, but by his appointment.

The second branch of their sin was, that they bestowed and spent the gifts
which they had received of the Lord upon their Idols, expressed in these words:
which they bestowed upon Baal. For the understanding whereof, we are to know
that this word Baal, is in the Scriptures either taken generally, for all Idol
gods, in respect of the general signification thereof, which is as much as a
Lord or Patron; and in regard that in the Punicke tongue from whence it is
taken, it signifies a god; or else specially for a particular Idol of the
Sidonians, which was called by that name; whose original was after this
manner: Ninus who first reigned in Asia, and built that famous city, which was
called Nineue, after his own name, was the son of one Belus, whom in his
pride, according to the practice of Heathen Tyrants, he deified, and built a
Temple unto him, wherein he appointed that he should be worshipped. And this
Idol amongst the Sidonians was called Baal, and with the Babylonians Bell, and
was worshipped amongst them as their god. Now this Heathen god did Ahab
worship, and built a Temple and erected an altar unto him in Samaria, to
gratify hereby Ithobal, or Eth-Baal his father in law, who was King of the
Tyrians and Sidonians, 1. King. 16. 31. Lib. 9. antiq. cap. 6.
as Josephus records; of which also we may read 1. King. 16. 31. And
although this Idol god Baal was one and the same, yet sometime the word is
used in the plural number (Baalim, or Baals) either when it is taken in the
general signification for all Idols, or in respect of the diverse statues, or
images, erected in the honor of this Idol, a^ Baalpeor, Numb. 23. 2. King. 4.
2.
or Baal-phigor, Baal-zebub.

In this place, as I take it, we are to understand it in the general
signification, for all their petty patrones and Idol gods; because we read
that Baal the Idol, so specially called, and his Temple were destroyed by
Iehu, neither do we 2. King. 10. 27.
find that any after him did restore him, or reedifie those ruins.

The sense therefore of these words is this, that the Israelites bestowed that
wealth which they had received from God, upon their Idols and Images, making
them of their gold and silver, as it is Hos. 8. 4. or else by decking and
adorning them Hos. 8. 4.
with rich ornaments, and all costly furniture, as appears 2. Chron. 24. 7.
or by maintaining their priests, and offering 2. Chro. 24. 7. 1. King. 18. 22.
sacrifices and oblations unto them, as we may see, 1. Kin. 18. 22. 26. Whereby
the sin of this people is much aggrauated, in that they did not only not
glorify ye Lord in his own gifts, by giving unto him the first fruits, and
offering unto him oblations and sacrifices, which he required in his law; but
also spent these his gifts to the dishonor of God, in bestowing them upon
their Idols, Gods arch-enemies. Like unto adulterous harlots, who spend the
goods which they have received of their husbands in the maintenance of their
lovers, etc. The like place unto this we have, Ezech. 16. 17. Ezec. 16. 17. 33
18. 33.

And so much for the meaning of the words. The doctrines which we are hence to
observe are these. First, we learn that That ignorance is a grievous sin.
it with sharp afflictions even in his own Church and people. The which sin
is committed when either through ignorance we know not, or through wilfulness
will not acknowledge; or both knowing and acknowledging, yet through negligence
do not return thanks and praise unto the Lord for all his benefits: and
secondly, when as in whole or in part, we attribute the praise of the gifts
which we have received from the Lord, unto any other, as authors and principal
causes thereof. And thus do men offend when as they ascribe extraordinary and
unexpected blessings to chance and fortune, and not to Gods providence; when as
they ascribe their wealth to their own wit, labor, or friends, and do not
know and acknowledge the Lord to be the chief author and bestower of the riches
which they enjoy, or else do not return thanks and praise unto him for his
benefits; when as they ascribe their health in the first place to their good
diet, or to the Physician, and not to the Lord who is the chief preserver and
restorer thereof. But most grievously in this respect do they offend, who rob
the Lord of those thanks and that praise, which is due unto him for his
spiritual benefits. For the greater the gifts are, the greater praise and
thanks is due to the bestower, and consequently the greater injury and
ingratitude when he is robbed of his right. And thus do those offend who
ascribe the praise of these benefits unto the intercession of Saints, and so
rob Christ of his glory, who alone by his intercession obtains them for us
at his fathers hands: thus do they offend, who ascribe their justification and
salvation either in whole or in part, to their works and worthiness, or unto
the merits of Saints, which is to be attributed only to Gods free mercy and
Christ's all-sufficient merits: thus do they offend who do not know, or
acknowledge, that it is the blood of Christ alone which washes away all our
sins, but think that they have remission, by Masses, popish pardons, penance,
pilgrimages, oblations, Saints relikes, holiwater and such like. All which and
all other of the like kind are esteemed as idolatrous unthankfulness in Gods
sight.

Secondly, we here learn, that ignorance does not excuse Ignorance does not
excuse sin, nor exempt us from punishment.
our sins, nor exempt us from Gods judgments, nay so far is it from excusing
other sins, and from exempting us from punishment, that it self is a sin and
deserves punishment, as appears in this place. Which notwithstanding, is not
to be understood, of that ignorance which is natural and necessary, for want
of the means of knowledge, for though this be not only the punishment of sin,
but also a branch of our original corruption, yet does it extenuate our sins,
and mitigate our punishments, as appears, Luke 12. 48. Act. 3. Luke 12. 48.
Act. 3. 17. 17. 30. 1. Tim. 1. 13.
17. 17. 30. 1. Tim. 1. 13. but of that ignorance, which is either through
negligence, or obstinately affected, notwithstanding God grants unto us
plentiful means of knowledge; which is so far from excusing other sins, that
it self is esteemed by the Lord a grievous sin, and is severely punished, as
being not only a heinous sin in it self, but also the chief root of all
other sins, either of omission, or commission.

Thirdly, we may here learn, that as ingratitude is a grievous Ingratitude is
most heinous in the members of the Church.
sin in all; so especially in those who are members of the Church, as it is
emphatically signified in these words: And she knew not, etc. For they not
only receive from God the greatest benefits, and therefore should return unto
him the greatest thankfulness, but also are sufficiently instructed, both by the
word of God, and by their continual experience, that they have all these
benefits from the Lord, and that of his mere mercy and grace, and therefore
it is more then brutish ignorance, and impious ingratitude, either not to know
and acknowledge the Lord to be the sole author of all these benefits, or not to
return unto him continual thanks and praise for them. The which sin is too
too common in our times, even in the clear light of the Gospel, both in
respect of all other benefits which we enjoy, and especially in respect of our
daily food, which men (as not knowing, or not acknowledging God to be the giver
of it) do usually receive, without praising God or giving thanks, in which
respect they are far worse then the ox or ass, as Esaias 1. 3. Not to
acknowledge the Lord the sole author of his gifts, is not to acknowledge him at
all.
the Prophet speaks, Esaias 1. 3.

Fourthly, we here observe, that not to acknowledge the Lord to be the sole
author of his gifts, nor to yield unto him the whole praise of them, is not to
know, or acknowledge him at all, as appears in this place; for though the
Israelites did in part, ascribe their benefits received unto God, yet because
they did not acknowledge him the sole author of them, but joined with him
copartners in his praise, because they did not acknowledge, that they had
received them of his mere mercy, but for their new worship which they offered
unto him in their idols, therefore the Lord condemns them of ignorant
ingratitude, as though he were not acknowledged at all. The reason is, because
the Lord cannot endure any sharing or halting in his service, he cannot abide
to have any partners of his praises, which are due to himself, and therefore
he will have all or none: for well the Lord knows, that they who serve and
praise him to the halues, will in the end neither serve, nor praise him at all.
Whereby it may appear, that the service of the Church of Rome, which they
perform unto God, is no better then abominable idolatry, and their praises
odious in his sight, as sauouring of gross ingratitude; for though they serve
God indeed, yet not in spirit and truth, but in their Idols; though they
acknowledge, and praise God as the author of his gifts, yet not him alone, for
they join with him the virgin Marie, and innumerable Saints, many whereof are
of their own making, as petty gods and patrones, unto whom they yield a
chief part of their thanks and praise; though they acknowledge God to have
given unto them the benefits which they enjoy, yet not of his mere mercy and
grace, but for their own merits, and through the intercession of Saints. But
the Lord esteems these half praises to be dishonors, and this party and
shared thankfulness, to be no better then gross ingratitude, 2. King. 17. 32.
33. 41. 2. King. 17. 32. 33. The excessive cost which idolaters do bestow upon
their idols.


Fifthly, we may observe, what excessive cost idolaters are ready to bestow
upon their idols and images: for though they highly esteem their gold, silver,
and jewels, yet do they willingly bestow them upon Baal, that is, for the
making and adorning of their idols, and for the furthering of their
superstitions; though they will hardly part with the least trifle in obedience
to Gods Commandment, to the advancement of his glory, and furthering of his
pure worship and service, yet they think their whole substance little enough
to be bestowed upon their own will worship, and for the maintenance of their
idolatry. An example whereof we have in this place, and in the Israelites,
Exodus 32. 3. Ezech. 16. 16. to 21. And in the Papists, who care not what they
Exodus 32. 3. Ezech. 16. 16. 21.
bestow upon the making and adorning of their images, in maintaining their
Clergy, the Priests of Baal, in building Monasteries and Nunneries, in Copes,
vestiments, oblations, in procuring pardons, and such like their superstitions.
The which their bounty in their will worship and idolatry, should make us
ashamed of our base niggardliness, in furthering, setting forth, and
maintaining Gods pure worship and service, which is enjoined in his word: for
what a reproach is this to our Christian profession, that they should so much
exceed in their blind zeal and forwardnes unto idolatry, and we be so cold
in Gods true religion: that they should bestow such excessive cost in building
Churches, in honor of their Saints, and we be so backward in repairing of God
house: that they should so liberally maintain such swarms of locusts, and
innumerable numbers of the Priests of Baal, and we suffer Gods true Prophets,
which in comparison are but few in number, to live in want, that idolaters
should endow the Church with goods and lands; and professors of Gods true
religion, should rob and spoil it of necessary maintenance? Surely their
fruitful ignorance shall condemn our barren knowledge; their superstitious
devotion, our coldness and slackenesse; their liberality in evil, our
niggardlines in that which is good; and their great love unto their idols and
idolatry, shall rise in judgment against our little love to God and his truth.

Lastly, we may observe, that it is a grievous sin to abuse That it is a
great sin to abuse Gods gifts to his dishonor.
the gifts which we have received from God, to other or contrary ends, then
those for which the Lord has given them; for this is here condemned in the
Israelites, in that they bestowed their gold and silver upon their idols, which
they should have employed to the glory of God, and good of his Church. Thus
the Papists offend, who bestow their wealth upon their Images, Copes,
Monasteries. Thus carnal Gospellers offend, who spend their riches upon
gorgeous attire unfitting their calling, upon excessive cheer and vain
pleasures, which they have received from God, to this end, that out of their
superfluity, they should relieve the penury of their poor brethren. Thus do
they offend, who use their tongue to the blaspheming of Gods name, which is
given them to glorify him. And thus do they offend, who abuse their wits and
learning, for the nourishing of contentions, and the maintenance and upholding
of injury, oppression, and injustice, which were given them to make peace,
right wrongs, and further justice, as it is the usual fault of the Lawyers of
our times, etc. All which, being not only unprofitable servants, in not using
the Lords talents, but also wicked and malicious enemies, who abuse them to his
dishonor, shall if they persevere in this sin without repentance, have their
portion in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone.

ANd thus much concerning the sin of the people of Israel. In the next place
he sets down their punishments for whereas he had, verse. 6. in general
threatened, that he would hedge her in with afflictions: now he proceeds to
specify the particular kinds thereof: First, that he would deprive her of al
those necessary benefits, which appertained to the preservation of their life,
verse 9. Secondly, that he would discover her shame in the sight of her lovers,
and expose her to reproach and contempt, verse. 10. Thirdly, that he would cause
to cease all her solemn festiuals, and take away all cause of mirth and
rejoicing, verse. 11. Lastly, that he would destroy all her pleasant gardens,
and fruitful vineyards, and turn them into a vast wilderness, verse. 12.
After which comminations he repeateth again their sins, which were the causes
of the punishments, namely, their unthankfulness, in the latter part of the 12.
verse, and their idolatry, verse. 13. and so he concludes the first part of
this Chapter.

But let us come to the particulars. Verse. 9. Therefore I will return and take
away my corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof, and will
recover my wool and my flax, lent to cover her shame. In which words he
threatens, that because The exposition.
the Israelites would not acknowledge the Lord, to be the author and bestower
of those manifold benefits, which they enjoyed, but ungratefully ascribed the
praise of them to their idols, therefore he would strip them of all his
blessings, to the end, that they who could not learn in the time of their
plenty, that the Lord had bestowed upon them these his gifts, might at least
learn this lesson by the want of them.

I will return and take away, etc. Some resolve these words thus: I will
receive, or resume my corn: because the former verb in the Hebrew phrase,
has in it sometimes the nature of an aduerbe. So Genes. 26. 18. Isaak
returning, dug the Genesis 26. 18.
wells of water, which they had dug in the days of Abraham, etc. that is,
he redigged them. But as I take it, the word in this place has a greater
emphasis in it, and signifies thus much; that howsoever the Lord seemed by his
long deferring of punishment, and by the continuance of his mercy in suffering
them still to enjoy his gifts, either to approve, or at least not to regard
their wickedness, and gross abuse of his benefits, yet now he would take a new
course with them, so as they should see that he was a just God, who would not
let sin for ever go unpunished. In former times the Lord had multiplied his
gifts upon them, as their corn, wine, oil, etc. and that oftentimes beyond
all hope and expectation, in respect of natural causes, that so they might not
rest upon the stars and planets, nor fear the signs, according to the
custom of the Gentiles, but rely upon his all-sufficient providence, as
himself commands them, Ier. 10. 2. And having Jerem. 10. 2.
his blessings powered upon them, as it were with his own immediate hand, they
might learn hereby to acknowledge and praise him, as the author of these his
gifts. But when notwithstanding all this they would not learn hereby to praise
the Lord, as being the cause of all their benefits, but ascribed them to their
Idols, the Lord threatens that he would return and alter his former course,
by depriving them of all his blessings, even when in respect of inferior
causes and means they seemed most assured of them; that so if his
extraordinary manner of bestowing them would not, yet his extraordinary
taking them away, might move them to acknowledge that he alone was the bestower
of them.

Now the things of which the Lord threatens to deprive them of, are their
corn and wine, their wool and flax, all which before they had ascribed to
their Idols, and abused to their service; under which particulars here as
before, we are to understand not only all things appertaining to their food
and apparel, but all other commodities belonging to this life: So 1. Tim. 6.
8. When we have food and raiment, let us therewith 1. Tim. 6. 8.
be content.

And further, we are to note that the Lord calls these things his, my corn
and my wine, etc. whereby he meets with the erroneous conceit of the
Israelites, who imagined that these blessings of God were given unto them by
their Idols, as a reward of their service; and therefore that they were so
become their own, that they might use or rather abuse them at their pleasure,
verse. 5. But the Lord tells them, that they were not their Idols gifts, but
his blessings; which because they did not hold of him, as of the grand Lord and
owner of them, therefore he would (as he justly might) take away from them
these things which were his own, unto which they had no right; that so they
might learn to give unto him the praise of his own gifts.

The time also when the Lord threatens to resume his gifts is expressed; I
will take away my corn in the time thereof, that is, in the time of their
harvest, and my wine in the season thereof, that is, in the vintage; as though
he should say, When most especially they expect these benefits, I will
frustrate their hope, and so make their affliction more intolerable, because it
shall come unlooked for, and in such a time wherein they made sure account of
plenty. And I will bring such a scarcity amongst them of these blessings,
that there shall be a want of them even in the time of harvest and vintage, when
they usually most abound: and therefore if they wanted in the time of their
greatest plenty, how great was their penury like to be, when that small store
they had was spent and consumed? The which dearth was caused, either by the
curse of God upon their land, so as it could not yield her increase, which is
threatened, Leuit. 26. 20. or through the abundance Leuit. 26. 20.
of caterpillars, grasshoppers, worms, drought, of which we read, Deuteronomy. 28.
23. 24. 38. 39. etc. Joel 1. 4. or by their enemies, Deuteronomy. 28. 23. Joel 1. 4.
who usually at the time of harvest go into the field, because then they may
most endamage them against whom they make war, by wasting their country, and
furnish themselves with all provision, which the Lord threatens, Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy.
28. 33. Joel 2. 3.
28. 33. Joel. 2. 3.

And I will recover my wool, etc. The word here used signifies, with strong
hand to pluck away from one that which he unjustly possesses. It is used,
Genesis 31. 9. where Jacob says, Genesis 31. 9.
that God had taken away Labans substance, and given them unto him, because it
was wrongfully possessed by Laban, seeing it belonged unto Jacob, as a reward
of his painful service. So the Israelites are commanded to take away the
Egyptians goods and to spoil them, because they wrongfully withheld them in
their hands from the Israelites, seeing they were due to the^ for their great
pains and tedious bondage, Exodus 3. 22. Others translate it thus: I will free
and set at liberty my Exodus 3. 22.
wool and my flax, etc. which comes all to the same end: for when the
creatures of God are unjustly possessed and abused to other ends, then those
for which God has given them, they may be said to be in a kind of bondage,
from which they are freed when God plucketh them from such Rom 8 22. Hab. 2. 11.
unjust owners. So Romans 8. 22. Hab. 2. 11.

The meaning therefore of these words is, that the Lord would pluck out of the
hands of the idolatrous Israelites these his blessings, because they unjustly
possessed them and abused them to wicked purposes. They possessed them
unjustly, because they did not acknowledge them, as held of the Lord the true
owner of heaven and earth: for as he has no right to his lands, which are held
in capite of the Prince, who will not acknowledge him his grand Lord, but
rather some foreign enemy, and therefore is justly dispossessed; so in this
case. And as he who having received either authority or riches from his King,
that hereby he may the better be enabled to serve him; if he abuse his Princes
gifts by using them against him and serving his enemies, is justly stripped of
all: so here, etc.

Lent to cover her shame. The word here used signifies, her nakedness, and
more especially the nakedness of the secret parts. Whereby some understand
that these idolaters abused the gifts of God to cover their spiritual
nakedness, and did hide their sins under the veil of Gods benefits. But, as
I take it, the more simple and plain interpretation is best, and most
agreeable to the text, namely, that the Lord would take away from her, his
wool and flax, because whereas he had given unto them these things, that
they might with them apparel themselves and hide their nakedness, they abused
them for the decking and adorning of their Idols. As it may plainly appear, if
we compare this verse with the former, and with Ezech. 16. 16. 17. 18. So that
these words are added, to show the lawful use of these benefits, for which God
gave Ezech. 16. 16. 17.
them, that their gross abuse of them might the better appear.

And this is the meaning of these words. Out of which we Impenitencie moves
the Lord to turn mercy into judgment.
and in stead of them gives unto us the fruition of manifold benefits; yet if
this his mercy will not move us to fear him, and to repent of our sins, he
will not for ever spare us, but he will return and alter his course, stripping
us of all his benefits, and turning mercy into judgment. An example whereof
we have in the Israelites in this place; in the time of our Savior Christ: as
also in the primitive Churches of Rome, Corinth, Galatin, etc.

Secondly, we learn that our unthankfulness in not ascribing Our
unthankfulness moves the Lord to strip us of his gifts.
of Gods benefits unto him, or in ascribing them to other causes besides him,
or jointly with him does move the Lord to take his gifts away from us, that so
if we cannot know and acknowledge him the Lord and owner of them when they
abound, we may learn this duty by the want of them. For such is our
corruption and ignorant unthankfulness, that we are more ready to
acknowledge the Lord the author of all the good things which we enjoy, when he
takes them away, then when he bestows them; he is better known and
acknowledged to be the feeder of his creatures in the time of dearth, then in
the time of plenty; to be the author of health in the time of sickness, then
when we are whole and sound; to be the giver of riches in the time of
poverty, then in abundance; to be our preserver rather in the midst of
dangers, then when we are most secure. So that Gods gifts make us forget the
giver, and with forgetfulness is joined his usual companion unthankfulness.
And this is one special cause why the Lord takes them from us, because his
judgments do better teach us then his mercies. And therefore if we would not
be stripped of Gods benefits, let us learn to acknowledge him the fountain of
them, whilst we enjoy them, and yield unto him the whole praise of his own
gifts. And to this end let us remember the example of Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar,
Herod, etc.

Thirdly, we here learn that the Lord is the true and absolute The Lord is the
absolute owner of all the good things which we enjoy. Psalm. 24. 1.
owner of all the benefits which we possess; for so he calls them here, my
corn, my wine, etc. so that we are not absolute Lords of those things which we
usually call our own, but only the Lords bailiefs and stewards, and therefore
shall one day be called to a reckoning, how we have used and employed them. The
consideration whereof should move us, to use the Lords goods to the glory of
the owner and the good of our fellow servants, as he has commanded us; neither
must we imagine that we have absolute authority over the things we possess to
do with them what we list, seeing the Lord has chief interest in them. And
if this were well thought of, men would not be so close handed to their poor
brethren: for what steward can answer it to his Lord, if he suffer his
fellow-seruant to pine for want, withholding from him his portion which his
master has allotted him? neither would they be so open handed, to mispend Gods
gifts to his dishonor, by gaming, gluttony and excess, bravery in apparel
and such like abuses. For this will be but a bad reckoning in the day of our
general accounts, when we shall say, so much laid out on unlawful pleasures,
so much spent in gorgeous attire, so much consumed in law, to have my will upon
my neighbor, etc. For this will be thought far worse, then with the
unprofitable servant, to have hid our talent in a napkin, etc.

Fourthly, we learn, that there is no certainty, nor sufficient That there is
no certainty in the possession of temporary benefits.
cause of security, in these worldly and temporary benefits; seeing God
oftentimes depriues us of them, when we think our selves most assured to
enjoy them. Innumerable be the unlooked for accidents, which may spoil the
fruits of the earth, both in seed time, winter, spring and summer, as too much
rain, too much drought, worms, cankers, caterpillars, blastings, mildewes and
such like. But though they escape all these, yet can they promise unto us no
certainty of enjoying them: seeing the Lord for our sins can take away our
corn in the time of harvest, and our wine in the vintage, either by
unseasonable weather, or the invasion of our enemies. He can sincke the ship in
the haven, as well as in the midst of the ocean: and he can pluck back his
benefits from us, even when we are ready to stretch out the hand to receive
them. The consideration whereof, should make us never to promise unto our selves
security and certainty of these benefits, so long as living in our sins
without repentance, we justly provoke the Lord to strip us of them. And
secondly, we may hereby be moved, not to put our trust and confidence in these
worldly things, for our preservation, seeing they are most uncertain; but to
place our whole affiance in the Lord, who will never fail them in time of
need, who rest and rely themselves upon his providence.

Fifthly, we may here observe, that all those, who do not Those are usurpers of
hold the benefits which they enjoy, as from the Lord, but ascribe them to
their friends, their own wit, labor, and industry, Gods gifts, who do not
acknowledge that they hold them from him.
they are unjustly possessed of them, because they hold them by an unlawful
tenure, and therefore may at the will of the grand-Lord of heaven and earth, be
justly every minute dispossessed of them. And though he suffer them for a time
to hold them in their custody, yet they are not to be esteemed true owners,
but usurpers and intruders into that which belongs not unto them; and
therefore in the great day of assizes they shall answer for it, etc.

ANd so much concerning the first punishment here denounced. And now will I
discover her leaudnes in the sight of her lovers, and no man shall deliver her
out of mine hand. In which words the Lord The exposition.
meets with a corrupt conceit, and wicked hope of the Israelites, namely,
that though the Lord should oppose against them, yet they might be relieved
and delivered out of his hands by their lovers, that is, their false goods;
showing that their joining with them, should not hinder the course of his
judgments: for so far was he from fearing their succouring of them, that he
wuld inflict these his punishments upon them, even in the presence of their
idols, neither should they be able to relieve or deliver them out of his hands.
So that still he alludeth to the practice of insolent and impudent
adulteresses, who when their husbands threaten, that for their whoredoms, they
will strip them of all the gifts which they have bestowed on them, they are
ready to deter them from such severe courses, by telling them that they have
friends in store, who will revenge their wrongs, and not suffer them to be so
evil entreated; unto whom their husbands being men of spirit and courage, will
return answer, that they are so far from fearing their lovers, that they
will not stick thus to use them even in their presence.

But let us come to the words themselves: in which is expressed, first the
time, when he would inflict his punishments: And now will I, etc. where he
shows, that because his patience and long-suffering had made her insolent and
secure, he would no longer make delays, but presently execute his judgments
upon her: and this he does to make her rouse up her spirits, and speedily to
turn unto him by true repentance. Eccles. 8. 11. Eccles. 8. 11.


Secondly, he sets down the punishment it self, to wit, that he would
discover her lewdness, etc. The word here used signifies, either foolishnes,
or filthiness: in the first sense it is taken, 1. Sam. 25. 25. Psalm. 14. 1.
Deuteronomy. 32. 6. in the latter, Genesis 34. 7. Deuteronomy. 22. 21. If we understand it in
the former signification, 1. Sam. 25. 25. Psalm. 14. 1. Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Genesis 34. 7.
Deuteronomy. 22. 21.
the meaning is, that by stripping her of all his benefits, he would show, that
she had done foolishly, in ascribing them to her lovers, seeing they were his
gifts; and in forsaking him, a God most gracious and almighty, that she might
follow after her lovers, who had neither will nor ability to relieve her
wants. But the coherence with the former words is better, if we understand it
in the latter signification, for in the former verse, the Lord threatens, that
he would strip her of his benefits, and namely, of her clothes, which he had
given her to cover her nakedness: and here he shows that he would not strip
her in a corner, but even in the sight of her lovers, that they might also
behold, and detest her abominable filthiness. And this interpretation I rather
embrace, then the other, because it agrees with the like places of Scripture,
as Ezech. 16. 37. Ier. 4. 30. Ezech. 16. 37. Jer. 4 30.


Now this her punishment is aggrauated, in that he says, he would strip her in
the sight of her lovers; for as men are impatient of all disgraces, so
especially of those, which are offered them in the presence of their most
respected friends: but they grow altogether intolerable, when as their friends
in whom they most trusted, shall to their shame and reproach see their
wretchedness, and unclean filthiness, and not be able to make any apology for
them, or to defend them against the accuser. But this the Lord threatens,
should be the condition of the Church of Israel, namely, that he would strip
her of all his benefits, and discover her natural filthiness and uncleanness,
her poverty, misery, sin and gross corruptions, and that in the sight of
her lovers; that is, when she depended upon her idols, and most assuredly
hoped, that they were present to help and relieve her.

Lastly, because while they conceived any hope of help in their idols, they
would easily neglect and contemn Gods threatenings, he takes away from them
this vain confidence, in these words: And no man shall be able te deliver her
out of my hands: as though he should say, It may be she will hope, when I have
taken from her my benefits, that the sun, stars, planets, and her other idols
will supply her wants; it may be she may think, that when I have discovered
her filthiness, her lovers will relieve her miseries: but all in vain; for who
amongst the gods is able to help, when I who am almighty take in hand to
punish her? Well may they behold her abominable filthiness, to her further grief
and disgrace; but they shall only look upon her, and not be able to afford her
any relief.

And this is the meaning of these words. Out of which we Punishments deferred,
shall be inflicted, unless we prevent them by repentance.
may first learn, that howsoever the Lord in his mercy, does long defer our
justly deserved punishments, as he did the Israelites, of whom the Prophet
speaks here: yet if his patience and long-suffering do not move us to
repentance, the time will come that the Lord will say, as he does in this
place; And now I will discover your lewdness, etc. For as there is a time for
mercy, so there is a time for justice, and though the Lord be slow to anger
and vengeance, and swift in the course of his grace and goodness, yet he goes
forward as surely and certainly in the way of justice, as in the way of mercy,
if we do not meet him in the way, and turn his course by turning unto him by
unfeigned repentance. Examples hereof we have in the old world, in the
Sodomites, Cananites, Israelites, etc. And therefore let us seek the Lord
whilst he may be found, etc. Isay 55. 6. let us take hold of the acceptable
Esaias 55. 6.
time, and day of salvation, and whilst it is called to day, let us hearken
unto his voice, and not harden our hearts, Psalm. 95. 7. 8. For though the Lord
now hide our sins under the veil of his mercy, blessings and benefits, yet
the time Psalm. 95. 7. 8.
will come, unless we repent, when as he will strip us, and discover our
filthiness, etc.

Secondly, we may observe, ye the Lord oftentimes punishes our vain
confidence in worldly things, by making them God punishes vain confidence in
creatures, by making them insufficient to help.
ineffectual, and insufficient to satisfy our desires, in those things for
which we most trusted in them, and that when they most abound, and seem to
promise us most assured help. So here he strippeth the Israelites in the
presence of their idols, in whom they trusted for deliverance, and discovers
their filthiness even in their sight, when as they seemed in regard of their
presence, to give them the greatest hope of their assistance. Thus he overthrew
Pharaoh, Senacherib, Benhadad, in the midst of their great armies;
Nebuchadnezer in his greatest pride and power. Thus he destroys idolaters in
the presence of their idols: thus he makes the covetous to feel the smart of
his punishing hand, when as their riches wherein they trusted, cannot yield unto
them any comfort, etc.

Thirdly, we may observe, that howsoever our sins in man's Sin makes us ugly
in Gods sight.
carnal judgment, do exceedingly grace and adorn us, as beautiful
ornaments; yet in truth they defile both our bodies and souls, and make them
filthy and ugly in Gods sight, yea and in our own too, when as we come to a
true view and sensible feeling of them. As for example, ruffinlie oaths,
scurrilous jests, which are but the scumme and excrements of the wit, pride,
gorgeous attire unfitting our callings, painting the face, and discovering the
breasts, luxurious niceness and excess in diet, furious thirsting after
revenge upon the least show of a disgrace offered, and such like sins, which
are used of worldlings, as ornaments to commend them, but in Gods sight, they
make them to appear deformed, filthy and abominable.

Fourthly, we may observe, how prone we are to trust in Our pronenes to trust
in worldly means.
worldly means, and in regard of our vain confidence, how apt we are to
shrowde our selves under these vain shields, imaging that by them we shall be
secured from Gods judgments threatened against us: so the Israelites here
trusted for deliverance from all evils which were denounced against them, by
the help of their Idols. And therefore the Lord to beat them from this vain
confidence, tells them, that he will inflict his judgments upon them, though
their lovers looked on, neither should they be able to deliver them out of his
hands. Thus the Israelites trusted to the outward presence of the visible Arc,
1. Sam. 4. 3. 4. to the help of the Egyptians, 1. Sam. 4. 3. 4. Esaias 31. 1. 3.
Hos. 10. 13. Ierem. 49. 16.
Esai. 31. 1. 3. to the visible Temple, Ier. 7. 5. to their multitude of strong
men, Hos. 10. 13. Thus the Idomeans trusted to the strength of their seat, Ier.
49. 16. And thus in our times, men in dearth trust to their own provision, in
war to their strength, in sickness to their flight, preseruations and
medicines; and when the thundering threatenings of Gods judgments sound in
their ears, they hide themselves from them under the shadow of those outward
titles, the Gospel, the Church, and profession of Gods true religion. But the
Lord will inflict his judgments, even in the sight of our lovers, and those
things wherein we trusted, shall not be able to deliver us in the day of his
visitation.

ANd so much concerning the second punishment. The And I will also cause all
her mirth to cease, her feast days, her new moons, and her Sabbaths, and all
her solemn feasts. Although the people of Israel worshipped The exposition.
God not according to his word, but according to their own inventions, not in
spirit and truth, but after an idolatrous manner in their idols, not in the
place which he had appointed, to wit, his Temple, but in Dan and Bethel; yet
they exceedingly pleased themselves in their outward worship and external show
of their new devised religion, as though they had done unto God that service
which he required, imagining it could not go ill with them, so long as they
observed some outward ceremonies of the law, notwithstanding they declined in
substance from Gods true religion revealed in his word. And therefore the Lord
here threatens, that he would pluck away from the^ the visard of their
outward profession, and stop the current of their superstitious devotions, by
taking from them their corrupted ceremonial worship, wherein now they so much
delighted and gloried: that so they might the better see their miserable estate
when as there remained unto them not so much as an outward show of religion,
nor an external manner of worshipping God; and having nothing to rest upon,
might at length be moved to forsake all their superstitions, and to worship
the Lord according to his revealed will.

But let us come to the words themselves. And I will also cause all her mirth
to cease. Where the Lord threatens that he would take away all joy and
recioycing which they took in their ceremonial worship, and the outward pomp
of their religion, especially in their feasts and solemn assemblies. Yea but
this mirth and rejoicing in their solemn feasts was commanded by God: Deuteronomy.
16. 14. Thou shall rejoice in thy feast, etc. And therefore the day of their
feasting was called Deuteronomy. 16. 14. Number. 10. 10.
a day of gladness, Numb. 10. 10. why therefore does the Lord threaten to take
this mirth from them which himself enjoined? I answer, because they did not
rejoice in him but in their Idols, neither did they rejoice with a spiritual
joy, with thankful hearts lauding and praising God, which the Lord, under the
type of their external mirth, especially required, and therefore their outward
worship which was also idolatrous, being severed from the inward worship of the
Spirit, was odious in Gods sight: as appears by the like places, Esa. 1. 13.
14. Amos 5. 23. 8. 10. Her feast daies] As Esa. 1. 13. 14. Amos 5. 23. 8. 10.
the feast of blowing Trumpets, which was celebrated in the first day of the
seventh month, as appears Leuit. 23. 24. The feast of Expiation in the 10.
day of the seventh month, as we may see, Numb. 29. 7. Leuit. 16. 30. Her new
Moones] Leuit. 23. 24. Numb. 29. 7. Leuit. 16. 30. Numb. 28. 11. Leuit. 23. 24.
and 25. 4.
Which were in the first day of every month, Numb. 28. 11. Leuit. 23. 24. Her
Sabbaths] Which were either the seventh day from the creation, or every seventh
year, Leuit. 25. 4. And all her solemn feasts] Which were principally three:
1. The feast of the Passover, or of unleavened bread, Leuit. 23. 5. The feast
of Pentecost, or of weeks, Leuit. 23. 15. 16. Leuit. 23. 5. 34. 35.
The feast of Tabernacles, of which read, verse 34 35. etc.

Now by these particulars he understands all their ceremonial worship, and
external service, in which they gloried and rejoiced; of all which, together
with the joy which they took therein, the Lord deprived them when as he
caused them to be led captive by the Assyrians.

And so much for the meaning of the words. Out of which Hypocrites may rejoice
in the outward service of God.
we may observe, that men not truly religious, may in the hypocrisy of their
hearts, or the ignorance of their minds, rejoice and delight themselves in
some external service, which they perform unto God, severed from his pure
worship in spirit and truth; as appears in the example of the Israelites in
this place, who rejoiced with great mirth in their Sabbaths, new Moons, and
solemn feasts appointed by God; as also in the parable of the seed falling
into the stony ground, Luke 8. 13. In the Papists, who exceedingly delight
Luke 8. 13.
in their outward and pompous religion, in their sweet music, odoriferous
perfumes and masking shows; and in worldly men, who content themselves with
their outward worship in hearing the word, calling upon God, and receiving the
Sacraments. But all those who would be truly religious must go further, and
join with the ceremonies the substance, with the outward worship of the body,
the inward worship of the soul: for if we rest in the outward action and
deed done, God will esteem no better of us then of hypocrites, and our service
of him though it never so much please our selves, yet will it be odious and
abominable in his sight, as appears Esa. 1. 13. 14. 29. 13. 66. 3. Mich. 6.
6. 8. Esa. 1. 13. 14. 29. 13 66. 3. Micha 6. 6. 8. It is not pleasing to God to
embrace some part of his worship only.


Secondly, we may observe, that it is not acceptable in Gods sight to perform
some part of his worship and service, unless we embrace the whole, and that in
such manner as he has revealed in his word. The Israelites, as we may see in
this place, retained some parts of Gods worship, but because they neglected
others, and in stead thereof did offer a service unto God, according to their
own inventions, therefore the Lord threatens that he would take from the^
those relikes which remained. The same may be observed in the Church of Rome
at this day, etc. and therefore though in many points concerning Gods worship
they agree with us, yet we may not join with them, nor listen to any
pacification or reconcilement of our religions, unless they would altogether
forsake the abominations of the whore of Babylon, and their own will worship,
and wholly conform their service of God in respect of the substantial parts
thereof, according to his will revealed in his word.

ANd so much concerning the third punishment. The fourth is expressed in these
words: Verse. 12. And I will destroy her vines, and her fig trees, whereof she
has said, These are my rewards that my lovers have given me, and I will make
them as a forest, and the wild beasts shall eat them. In which words is set
down their punishment, together with the cause thereof: their punishment was,
that he would strip them of The exposition.
his temporal and corporal benefits, and bring their land to utter
desolation. For whereas he says that he would destroy her vines, and fig
trees; under these specials he does by a Synecdoche generally understand, that
he would utterly spoil their pleasant gardens, and fruitful orchards and
vineyards, yea and all their fertile country, with all the increase thereof.
So that here he denounces a far more heavy judgment, then that contained
in the ninth verse, namely, that he would take away their corn and wine, that
is, the fruits of the earth: for though there had been a dearth of them
through one years scarcity, yet their gardens, orchards, fields and vineyards
remaining untouched of Gods punishing hand, the fruitfulnes of the following
year might have supplied the want and defect of his foreruiner: but when they
also were wasted and destroyed, there remained no hope of any relief. And this
he threatens, because as they ascribed the fruits of the earth to their
Idols, so also even their fields, orchards, trees, and vines themselves
according to the custom of the Heathen. The which their sin was the more
inexcusable, because the Lord had taught them, not only by continual
experience, but also by his written word, that all these were his blessings and
benefits, and therefore the praise of them was due unto him alone: Deuteronomy. 8. 7.
8. Deuteronomy. 8. 7. 8.


But notwithstanding all this, they in the blindness of their superstition,
thought, and with great impudency did not stick to speak and profess it,
that al these were the rewards which their lovers had given them. The word here
used signifies the hire which the harlot receives, for prostituting her self
to the adulterer, whereby is signified, that they had, after the manner of
impudent harlots, committed spiritual adultery with their Idols, and
afterward boasted that they had received all these benefits of their false
gods, for that idolatrous worship which they had performed unto them.

And therefore because they robbed God of that glory and thankfulness, which
was due unto him for his own gifts, the Lord threatens to take them away, that
so by their want of them, they might learn to acknowledge the Lord to be the
author of them.

Moreover he says, that he would make them, namely their vines and fig
trees, their orchards, gardens and vineyards, waste and desert, like unto a
forest which is barren and fruitless: in which words he threatens, that such
should be the desolation of the land, that their fruitful orchards and
vineyards should be turned into a vast and desert wilderness.

And lastly he says, that the wild beasts should eat them: the which words
may be understood either literally thus, that their country should by their
enemies be so dispeopled, and al husbandry intermitted, that wild beasts
should make their dens, and feed in their vineyards and orchards; or
allegorically, that their enemies the Assyrians, should like wild beasts make
spoil and havoc of all, not only eating their fruits, but also destroying
their orchards and vineyards. Whereby their utter subversion and desolation is
implied: for when the enemy spares the trees and gardens, he does not intend
the destruction of a country, but the enlarging of his own Empire and
dominions, as we may see Esa. 36. 16. but when he destroys these, and makes
hauock Esa. 36. 16.
of all, then he intends the utter subversion and ruin of that state and
people.

And this is the meaning of those words. Out of which we may observe how the
Lord threatens one punishment after That God fitteth his chastisements for the
conversion of all the elect.
disposition, and draw all unto God by true repentance. One is touched with the
lighter chastisements, others not moved unless they hear of more heavy
judgments; one is affected with one kind of punishment, another with such an
one as is of a diverse quality; some with poverty, some with shame, some with
spiritual, some with corporal afflictions: and some are not moved at all
unless they hear of utter desolation and destruction; and therefore according
to the variety of men's minds the Lord varieth his threatenings, as appears
in this place. Whereby we may learn, how impenitent and hard hearted we are,
seeing the Lord is feign to use so many means, and to try (as it were) so
many conclusions for our conversion: and also we may here observe Gods
infinite goodness and mercy, which he shows not only in his promises, but
also in his threatenings. For whereas he might justly when we sin utterly
destroy us, he gives us warning by his threatenings, that being moved thereby
to repent, we may escape his punishments; yea and that not some few times, for
he threatens often, but seldom punishes, he denounces many kinds of
judgments before he inflicteth any one of them: whereby it manifestly
appears, that in his threatenings he aims at our conversion, and not at our
subversion and destruction; and that he is not willing to punish in his own
nature, unless we force him thereunto by our stubborn impenitencie.

Secondly, we here learn, not to trust in the fruitfulness We must not trust
in the fruitfulness of our country for our sustenance.
of our country for our provision and sustenance, notwithstanding we
continually provoke the Lord unto anger by our sins; for though it abound
with vines and fig trees, with corn and wine, with pleasant orchards and
fruitful fields, yet the Lord can easily find means, either by laying his
curse upon the land, or by giving us over to the spoil of our enemies, to make
the most fruitful places a desert wilderness. And therefore let us so live as
his children and servants, performing obedience unto his will, and then we may
rest boldly and securely upon his never failing providence: otherwise our best
means will not preserve us, when with our sins and wickedness we provoke his
anger, and move him in his just displeasure to strip us of all his benefits; as
appears in this place, in the example of Sodom and Gomorrah: so Joel. 2. 3.
And this is that which the Psalmist speaks, Joel 2. 3. Psalm. 107 34.
Psalm. 107. 34. A fruitful land he makes barren, for the wickedness of them
that dwell therein.

Thirdly, we may observe, that howsoever these idolaters Idolaters usually
plead their merits.
do ascribe unto their idols, all the benefits which they enjoyed, yet not as
their free and undeserved gifts, but as rewards and hire, which they had
bestowed upon them for that idolatrous worship and service, which they had done
unto them; and this is the disposition of all idolaters and superstitious
persons, to share with their idols, in the praise of the benefits which they
enjoy, imagining indeed, that they have bestowed them upon them, but for their
deserts and merits. And as the Heathen idolaters dealt with their idols, so
after the same manner at this day, deal the Papists with God himself, sharing
with him in his glory, by ascribing part of the praise unto him, and part unto
their own works and merits.

Lastly, we may here observe, that howsoever the Lord Affliction ends in
destruction, without repentance.
threatens before he punishes, and when he begins to correct, proceeds
by degrees, from lighter to heavier punishments, that his mercy, goodness, and
long-suffering, may appear in his so long sparing us; yet is neither his
threatenings, nor more easy corrections will reclaim us, nor mollify our
stony hearts with true contrition, his judgments will end in our utter
destruction and desolation. When his vineyard is fruitless, first he uses the
pruning knife of affliction, he diggeth and dungeth it, and then expects
fruit; but if still it be barren and unprofitable, he takes away the hedge,
and breaks down the wall, and lays it waste and desolate: as it is, Esaias
5. 5. 6. If the knife will do no good, to Esai. 5. 5. 6.
make the tree fruitful, by pruning the branches, he will lay the axe to the
root, and cut it down, Mat. 3. 10. Luke 13. 6. 9. Matthew. 3. 10. Luke 13. 6. 9.
If his husbandmen, with their much laboring in the vineyard, cannot make it
to yield her grapes, the Lord will let the wild boore out of the wood destroy
it, and the wild beasts of the field to eat it up: as it is, Psalm. 80. 13. So
in this Psalm. 80. 13.
place, etc. And this appears in the example of Pharaoh, and the Egyptians,
and of the Jews, Matthew. 23. 38. Luke 19. Matthew. 23. 38. Luke 19. 43. 44.
43. 44.

ANd so much concerning the punishments, which particularly are threatened
against the Israelites. In the last place he concludes the former part of the
chapter, with a repetition of their sin of idolatry, and the punishment
which he would inflict upon them for it; Verse. 13. And I will visit upon her
the days of Baalim, wherein she burnt incense to them, and she decked her
self with her earings, and her jewels, and she followed her lovers, and
forgate me, says the Lood. In which words he repeateth their sin and
punishment, that hereby The exposition.
he might the more aggrauate their sins, and confirm the certainty of their
punishments, that by hearing the often repetition of both, they might be the
rather moved to serious repentance.

The denunciation of their punishment is expressed in these words: I will
visit. Where the Lord shows, that he would no longer defere his punishments,
nor seem to wincke at their sins: but now he would begin to inflict his
judgments on them, which their wickedness deserved; yet not rashly, but
advisedly, and upon mature deliberation, as he notes by the word visit, of
which I have more largely spoken, when I handled the fourth verse of the first
chapter.

Their sin is first generally signified in these words, The days of Baalim.
By which we are to understand the days of their idolatry, or all the time
wherein they had worshipped idols, since the Lord had made his covenant with
them, and had married them unto himself, which was soon after their coming
out of Egypt. So that here he threatens to visit upon them, not only the
idolatry which in their own time was committed, but the idolatry of their
forefathers, of which we may read, Exodus 32. 1. and verse. 34. Numb. 25. 1. 3.
Exodus 32. 1. 34. Numb. 25. 1. 3. Jud. 10. 6.
Iud. 10. 6. etc. because they did not forsake their sins, but approved,
liked, and lived in them. According to that in the second Commandment, For I
am the Lord thy God, a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon
the children etc.

Secondly, he sets down their progress in the particular kinds of their
idolatry: first, that they burnt incense, that is, performed unto them
idolatrous service, in offering unto them sacrifices and oblations: secondly,
that they were so bewitched with that pleasure and delight, which they took in
their idolatry, that they thought no pomp, cost, decking with precious
ornaments, sufficient to set forth their idolatry, in these words, And she
decked her self with her earings, and her jewels: where he still alludeth to
the manner of harlots; for as they being to come into the company of their
lovers, do use all their art and skill in setting themselves forth, by putting
on their richest ornaments, that by these baits, they may more forciblie allure
them to commit uncleanness with them: so these idolaters, when as they were to
celebrate their solemn festiuals, in the service of their idols, placed a
great part of their superstitious devotion, in decking and adorning both
themselves, and their idol gods, that so they might take greater pleasure in
their idolatry; and with these pompous shows entice others to join with
them, in committing this spiritual whoredom. And here we are further to
observe, that he calls them her jewels, and her earings, to note unto them,
that they had not received this whorish and idolatrous manner of worship from
the Lord, but that it was their own, not enjoined by God, but hammered out in
the forge of their own inventions, and cast in the mould of their own brain.

Thirdly, he says, that she followed her lovers: whereby is signified their
obstinate persistance in this their sin; for they did not once or twice fall
into this sin, through error or infirmity, but they followed their idols,,
and went on in the course of their superstitions, walking in their idolatries,
as in their usual path, and common high way. So verse. 6.

Fourthly, he says, that their hearts were so wholly set upon their idols, and
that they followed them with such great earnestnes and intention of mind, that
they forgate the Lord; like unto harlots, who are so bewitched, and wholly
transported with a fury of blind love, or rather lust toward their lovers,
that they altogether forget their lawful husbands, and all the benefits which
they have received from them. So that here he aggrauateth the impious folly,
and more then brutish blockishnes of this people, who were so blinded, and even
drunken in their idolatrous superstitions, that neither Gods word, nor his
works, neither his blessings and benefits, nor his judgments and punishments,
would put them in mind of God, and of those duties which they owed unto him.
But how could the Israelites be said to have forgotten God, seeing still they
professed themselves his people, and performed some kind of service unto him? I
answer, they are said to forget him, because they did not remember him to be
such a God, as he had revealed himself in his word; namely, that he was a
Spirit most holy, most pure, and infinite in all perfections, but figured and
represented him in a little image, whom heaven, and the heaven of heavens
cannot contain; and because they forgot to perform unto him that pure
worship, which he had enjoined unto them in his word, and in stead thereof,
offered unto him their own wilworship, and the idolatrous inventions of their
own brain: and thus one is said to forget another, when they forget to
perform those things, which the one required, and the other promised.

And these are the degrees of their sin of idolatry. Now in the last place
the Prophet concludes all the former reprehensions of their sins, and
denunciations of punishments, by telling them, that all he had spoken, was not
of or from himself, but the word of Jehovah: and this he does to gain
authority unto the former prophecy, to confirm the undoubted certainty
thereof, and to move the people to receive it with reverence, and to lay it
more nearly to their hearts, that thereby they might be moved to turn unto
God by true repentance.

And so much concerning the meaning of these words. The Lord causes his
messengers to repeat the same reprehensions.
his messengers and Ministers to repeat again and again the same
reprehensions of sin, and the same punishments which are due unto them; and
this he does partly in respect of our incredulity, whereby at first we give
no credit to his word, and therefore to confirm the truth thereof the better
in our hearts, he causes the same things to be again repeated, and the same
speeches to be as it were with greater vehemency redoubled; and partly in
regard of our negligence, security, and forgetfulness, whereby we either do
not attentively mark, or conscionably apply, or fruitfully remember his word
at the first hearing. And therefore when we hear the same reprehensions and
threatenings delivered often by Gods ambassadors, let not these repetitions
cloy us with sacietie, but rather sharpen our attention, persuading our selves,
that the Lord causes us to hear the same things repeated, either because
through our negligence we have not learned, or through our security and
forgetfulness have not applied nor made profitable use of them at the first
hearing; or finally that he meets with our incredulity by confirming his
word with a second repetition.

Secondly, we may observe, that the same things which the The estate of the
Church of Rome like the Church of Israel.
Prophet here condemns in the Israelites, are at this day practiced by the
Church of Rome. For first they have their Baalims, their petty gods and
patrons, whom they religiously serve and worship; they offer unto them incense,
vows, oblations; they deck and adorn not only their Idols, but also
themselves, when they solemnize their feasts, and approach into their presence,
placing a great part of their holiness and devotion, in their outward pomp
and bravery, which are not prescribed by God, but invented by themselves, and
therefore may fitly be called their own. All which decking and adorning of
themselves, and their Idols, they like impudent harlots use, that with these
baits of outward pomp and beauty they may allure others to go a whoring
with them after their Idols: they have also a long time lived in their
spiritual adulteries, with great impudency and obstinacy, boasting and
glorying in their sin; and finally they have so set their hearts upon their
lovers, and are so intent and earnest in their service, that they may be truly
said to have forgotten the Lord, because they do not so remember him as he has
revealed himself in his word; because they have forgotten to worship him in
spirit and truth, and in stead thereof offer unto him their own inventions;
and also because they use much more care and diligence, and spend much more
time and labor, in the service of the Virgin Mary, Saints, Angels, Images, and
other Idols, then in the service of the true and everliving God. From whence
we may assuredly gather, that the Lord will visit upon them the days of
Baalim, though for a time to show his own patience, and to make them the more
inexcusable, he defer their justly deserved punishments. And therefore let
al those come out of Babylon, who would not be partakers of her plagues. Apoc.
18. 4. Apoc. 18. 4. We must not place our religion in outward pomp.


Thirdly, we may hence learn, to avoid the foolish superstition of idolaters,
who place their religion in outward pomp and sumptuous shows, and to worship
the Lord in spirit and truth according to the prescript form of his word.
Wherein many amongst our selves may justly be reproved, who think they have
done God good service, if on his Sabbaths they come to the Church in their best
apparel, outwardly decked and adorned, when in the mean time they come with
their workaday souls, full of worldly distractions and cogitations, and
altogether unprepared and ungarnished, without all care or conscience, zeal or
devotion. But such are to know, that the Lord will not be pleased with the
worship of an Idol, for little regards he the outward habit, if the heart
and soul be defiled, beggarly and naked.

Fourthly, we may, out of the order which the Prophet here The idolaters
progress.
observes in setting down their idolatry, note the progress which idolaters
make in their sin, ascending from one degree to another till they come to the
highest. First he says, that through the natural inclination which is in
every man, they are drawn to worship and serve their Idols. Secondly, more and
more doting in their fond love toward them, they deck and adorn both their
statues and images and themselves, being to perform worship unto them, with
gold, silver, jewels and precious ornaments, that hereby they may themselves
perform service unto them with greater pleasure, and also allure others to
join with them in their idolatry. Thirdly, having thus bewitched themselves
with their own sorceries, they go forward in their idolatry with great
pertinacie and wilful obstinacy. And lastly, they so inebriate themselves
with drinking in this golden cup of fornications, and are so wholly intent and
devoted unto their blind superstitions, that they quite forget the Lord and
his true worship. All which are noted in this place in the idolatrous
Israelites by the Prophet, and may be observed in the practice of the Papists
in our own days. The consideration whereof should move us to flee ye first
allurements unto idolatry, and the beginnings and first degrees of this sin,
for one step will bring us to another till we come to the highest, namely,
forgetfulness of God and utter neglect and contempt of his pure religion.

Fifthly, we may observe, that the worship of the true God, The worship of God
and idols will not stand together.
and the service of Idols will not possibly stand together: for as soon as we
begin to offer incense unto Baal, we forget Jehovah; when we love Idols, we
cease to love the Lord; when we depend upon them, we distrust God: and this is
that our Savior teaches us, Matthew. 6. 24. No man can serve two masters, etc.
and the Apostle tells us, that we cannot drink of Matthew. 6. 24.
the cup of the Lord and the cup of devils, etc. 1. Cor. 10. 21. That 1. Cor.
10. 21.
there is no concord between Christ and Belial, and no agreement between the
temple of God and idols, 2. Cor. 6. 15. 16. The 2. Cor. 6. 15. 16. 1. Sam. 5. 2.
ark of God and Dagon cannot stand together, 1. Sa. 5. 2. There is no halting
between God and Baal: but if God be God, serve him; if Baal be god, serve him,
1. King. 18. 21. And therefore 1. King. 18. 21.
let us not hearken unto those who would reconcile together Christ and
Antichrist, Michael the Archangell and the Dragon, the whore of Babylon and the
spouse of Christ, Gods true religion and popish superstition, and so make a
hotch potch of religion, like unto the religion of the Samaritanes, condemned
by God, 2. King. 17. 33. 41. Let us take heed that 2. King. 17. 33. 41.
we do not to make peace on earth, proclaim war against heaven, and join
in league with men, to fight against God and his truth; assuring our selves
that light and darkness, righteousness and unrighteousness, God and Belial,
may as well be reconciled together, as Christ's true religion with the
superstitious idolatries of the Romish Babylon.

Sixthly, we here learn, that not to remember the Lord to They forget the Lord
who do not remember him according to his word.
be such an one as he has revealed himself in his word, is altogether to
forget him; as appears in the example of the Israelites, of whom the Lord
complains, that they had forgotten him, notwithstanding they still outwardly
professed that he was their God and they his people, because they remembered
and worshipped him in their Idols. So they who forget any of Gods attributes,
whereby in his word he has made himself known unto us, forget God himself,
for his attributes are his essence; as the wisdom of God is the wise God, the
infinitenes of God is the infinite God, the love of God is the loving God, etc.
And therefore, that God which they remember is not the true Jehovah, but an
idol of their own making. If then we only remember, that God is merciful,
and do not remember that he is also just (as it is the custom of carnal
secure men) we make an idol unto our selves, but forget the true God; and so
in like manner we forget the Lord, if with desperate sinners we remember his
justice, and forget his mercy. And the like may be said of his omnipotence,
omnipresence, al-sufficiencie, providence, and the rest of his attributes.

Lastly, we may here observe that the Prophet concludes The authority of Gods
word countena^ceth his Ministers in their embassage.
all his reprehensions of their sins and threatening of punishment, by telling
them that whatsoever he had delivered, was not his own, but the word of the
Lord; whereby he confirms his former denunciations of judgments, and
certainly assures them, that how unlikely soever they thought them, yet they
should most undoubtedly come to pass, seeing it was the word which truth it
self had spoken: and therefore if they would escape them, there was no dallying
nor delaying of the time, but speedily they must prevent them, by turning unto
God by true repentance. And secondly, hereby he auerteth all their malice and
displeasure from himself, seeing these heavy tidings were not the devices of
his own brain, but the word of the Lord, of which only he was the
Ambassador: and therefore if they would without taking any exceptions,
patiently hear an Ambassador sent from an earthly King, denouncing war
against them, because injury or violence offered to an Ambassador is condemned
by the law of nations; how much more should they hear him without all malice
or prejudice, seeing he only delivered the embassage, which the Lord of hosts
had put into his mouth?

From which example Gods Ministers may learn to deliver nothing to the people,
but the pure word of the Lord, which they are boldly to utter, though it seem
never so improbable to flesh and blood; for as much as he who has spoken it
will most surely accomplish it; otherwise they shall commit the sin of Jonas,
who when the word of the Lord was put into his mouth, durst not deliver it, but
being sent to Niniue, fled to Tarshish, and in this respect make less
conscience of their calling, then Balaam, as appears Numb. 24. 13. Numb. 24.
13.


And so likewise the people may here learn with patience to hear Gods
Ministers, though they denounce Gods heavy judgments against their sins, if
they deliver nothing but that which they have warrant for out of Gods written
word, seeing they are bound in conscience of their calling to deliver their
embassage, and seeing in resisting them, they rebel against God himself;
neither is it possible that any should be obedient unto God, who malign his
messengers for his message sake.

And secondly, when Gods judgments are denounced out of his Word against them
for their sins, they are not to neglect them, but to lay them to heart, that
thereby they may be moved to unfeigned repentance, notwithstanding they see no
appearance of danger, or any likely means whereby such punishments may be
derived unto them, seeing the Lord, whose Word it is which we hear, is able to
effect it, though to us it seem impossible.

ANd so much concerning the first part of this Chapter, containing in it legal
threatenings, denounced against the people of Israel, for their sins. Now we
are to speak of the second part, containing in it Gods gracious promises of
diverse excellent benefits, which he would bestow upon his Church and people,
the true Israel of God in the time of the Gospel. The first whereof, is their
effectual calling and conversion unto God, whereby they are freed out of the
spiritual captivity of Satan, chosen out of the world, and made Gods Church
and peculiar people. The second is true consolation, wrought in their hearts by
the glad tidings of the Gospel, made effectual by the inward working of his
holy Spirit. Both which are contained, Verse. 14. in these words: Therefore
behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak
friendly (or confortablie) unto her. Where the The exposition.
Lord shows, that howsoever being provoked unto wrath by their sins, he
would execute upon them all those punishments before threatened, yet he would
not retain his anger for ever, but in the end, when he had laid upon them such
afflictions as were sufficient, measuring their proportion by the rule of his
fatherly love, and not according to the hainousnes of their sins, he would
turn all their chastisements to their good, and gathering them into his
Church, multiply his mercies upon them.

But let us come to the words themselves; wherein we are to consider first the
context, and secondly the benefits promised: the context in these words,
Therefore behold. This may seem a strange kind of consequence; for in the
former verse he had set down their obstinacy in their gross idolatry, and
that they were so wholly devoted to their Idols, that they had quite forgotten
the true God,: and now he presently infers hereupon, that therefore he
would allure her, and speak comfortablie unto her. But howsoever this may
seem but a bad inference, if we regard their sins, upon the recital whereof
it should rather have followed, that therefore they should have such
punishments inflicted upon them as their sins had deserved; yet it has good
dependence, if we respect Gods infinite mercy, and his eternal purpose,
whereby he has of his free grace and undeserved goodness, ordained to call
them, who belong to his election, out of their sins, that being converted
they may also be saved. As though he should have said, Seeing they follow
their idols with delightful obstinacy, and have altogether forgotten me: and
seeing their hearts are so blind and obdurate, that all my punishments will not
reclaim them: and finally, seeing it is not my purpose to give them over to
destruction, and to suffer them to run headlong to condemnation; therefore I
will not let them go forward in their own courses, nor be ruled by their own
obstinate wills, for then they would never return unto me, but I will work upon
their hard hearts, by my Word and Spirit, alluring and persuading them to leave
their idols and false worship, and to return unto me, that they may worship me
according to my revealed will, and submit themselves unto me in all holy
obedience.

And because this is a wonderful mercy of God, far above all humane
conceit, and therefore not lightly and negligently to be passed over, hence it
is that the note of attention is added, Therefore behold, that we might more
carefully observe, and observing praise and magnify this unspeakable goodness
of God, who by our sins is moved rather to pity, then to punish us.

And so much for the context. The first benefit here promised, is their
effectual calling, whereby working upon their hearts with his Word and Spirit,
he would allure and persuade them to forsake their idolatry, and to come out
of the service of sin and Satan, that they might become true members of his
Church, and live in holy obedience unto his will, as his true subjects and
servants. All which is contained in these words, I will allure her, and bring
her into the wilderness: where he alludeth to their first delivery out of the
captivity, and from the blind idolatry of Egypt, when as first he allured and
persuaded them, by his servants Moses and Aaron, to desire earnestly to come
out of that bondage, that they Exodus 4. 30. 31.
might become his servants and people; and having so inclined their hearts, he
brought them out with a strong arm, and led them into the wilderness, where
he made his covenant with them, and afterward brought them into the land of
promise, where he multiplied upon them his manifold benefits, as it follows
in the next verse.

So the Lord by his servants and Ministers does work in the ignorant minds and
stubborn hearts of those that belong to his election, a desire to come out of
the thraldom of the spiritual Pharaoh, Satan; and having thus inclined and
allured them by his powerful Spirit, applying unto them the benefits of
Christ's death and obedience, he delivers them out of this miserable bondage:
notwithstanding, he does not presently bring them from Egypt to the heavenly
Canaan, but causes the^ to pass first through the wilderness of this wicked
world; where, howsoever he provides for them, and causes their safety by
his almighty protection, so that they are now in far better estate, then
whilst they lived in the spiritual captivity of sin and Satan, yet they
are there afflicted with many miseries, hunger, thirst, heat, cold, sickness
and diseases, with inward mutinies and sedition amongst themselves, and with
the outward malice and violence of the spiritual Cananites, their worldly and
wicked enemies; with which having a while exercised and humbled them, and
withal wrought in their hearts an earnest desire to come into their heavenly
country in the end he brings them into the spiritual and new Jerusalem. The
like allusion the Prophet Esaias has, speaking of this spiritual deliverance
through Christ: Esa. 11. 15. 16. Esa. 11. 15. 16.


Whereas then he says, I will allure her; the meaning is, that by his word
and holy Spirit, he will bring them to true repentance, effectually persuading
them to leave the bondage of sin and Satan, and to adioyne themselves to his
Church and family; and more specially that he will incline them and change
their obstinate resolution in following their idols, and make them pliable to
holy obedience, that forsaking their false gods and idolatrous worship, they
may worship the only Jehovah in spirit and truth. Where still he continues
the allegory of marriage, as though he would say, Her lovers, that is, her
idols have enticed her, with many baits to commit spiritual whoredom with
them; but they shall no longer seduce and abuse her, for I her loving husband,
offering unto her innumerable benefits, and eternal happiness, will allure
and persuade her, to forsake her lovers and to return unto me. And whereas he
says that he will bring her into the wilderness; the meaning is, that they
shall not pass presently out of their miserable servitude of sin and Satan
into the heavenly Canaan, but shall for a time make their abode in the wilderness
of this world, where they shall be tried with many calamities and afflictions,
wherewith being thoroughly humbled, they shall enter into their heavenly
country, according to that, Act. 14. 22. We must Act. 14. 22.
through many afflictions enter into the kingdom of God.

Others translate these words thus; I will allure her after I have led her into
the wilderness: as though the time were herein implied, when the Lord would
persuade and convert his people, namely, after he had first brought them into
the wilderness of affliction, and thereby thoroughly humbled them. But
howsoever this exposition may be thought not repugnant to any thing in the
text, yet I rather embrace the other, as being more plain and simple, without
the changing of any word from his own signification, and also because it more
fitly answers to the deliverance of the people of Israel, unto which it is
manifest he here alludeth: and lastly, because it well agrees with the like
place, Ezech. 20. 34. 35. 37. where the same allusion is used. Ezeth. 20. 34.
35.


And this is the first benefit. The second is expressed in these words; and I
will speak friendly, or comfortably unto her. The original has it thus; and
I will speak unto her heart: by which is signified that he would speak unto
her such pleasant and acceptable words, as should replenish her heart with true
joy and comfort, though they were in the midst of the wilderness of
affliction. And thus this phrase is used, Esa. 40. Esa. 40. 1. 2. Genesis 34. 3.
Iud. 19. 3. Ruth 2. 13. Ioh. 11. 19. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
1. 2. Genesis 34. 3. Iud. 19. 3. Ruth 2. 13. And so in the new Testament, whereas
it is in the Greek, they comforted any, the Syriacke has it, they spoke with
their hearts. So Ioh. 11. 19. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 11.

The meaning therefore is, that as when he had brought his people into the
wilderness, he spoke unto them, delivering his law, unto which were annexed
manifold promises of his great benefits, by which the people for the present
were somewhat comforted in the midst of the afflictions which they suffered
in the wilderness; so he would in the time of the Gospel, after he had
delivered his people out of the thraldom of sin and Satan, speak comfortably
unto them whilst they were vexed and molested with manifold afflictions in the
wilderness of the world, that so being filled with consolation, they might
patiently and cheerfully through the midst of these miseries march toward
their heavenly country. Now this speech of comfort of which he here speaks,
is nothing else but the glad tidings of the Gospel, wherein we are assured of
our deliverance out of our spiritual thraldom unto sin and Satan, of the
free pardon and remission of all our sins, of our peace and reconciliation
with God, and of everlasting happiness which Christ by his death and merits
has purchased for us. The which speech of the Gospel is much more effectual
for our comfort and consolation, then the speech of the Law. For then the Lord
spoke to the ear, but now he speaks to the heart; that comfort was but for
the present, because being grounded upon the condition of their obedience to
the law, that proving impossible their comfort was changed into horror and
despair; but this is eternal, having his foundation not in our own works
and worthiness, but upon the free mercy of God, and merits of Christ,
apprehended by a lively faith. And lastly, because the Gospel offers unto us
far greater benefits, then we are promised in the Law, and therefore fills
our hearts with greater comfort. And of this consolation the Apostle speaks,
2. Cor. 1. 3. 4. 5. 7. 6. Act. 9. 31. 2. Cor. 1. 3. 4. 5. and 7. 6. Act. 9. 31.
Luke 2. 25.
Of which our Savior Christ is the principal cause, and therefore he is called
the consolation of Israel: Luke 2. 25.

And so much for the meaning of the words. The doctrines The Lord does not
retain his anger for ever.
the sins of the people, does not only threaten his judgments, but also
inflicteth deserved punishments, yet he does not retain his anger for ever,
nor yet delights in the afflictions of his Church; but having with his
fatherly chastisements humbled them and brough them unto unfeigned repentance,
he turns his frowns into smiles, his threatenings into promises, his
judgments into mercy, and withdrawing their afflictions and punishments, he
multiplieth upon them his gracious benefits: For he is slow to anger, but
abundant in goodness and truth, Exodus 34. 6. 7. He will not always Exodus 34.
6. 7. Psalm. 103. 8. 9.
chide, neither keeps he his anger for ever, Psalm. 103. 8. 9. And though he
afflict us, yet he deals not with us after our sins, nor rewards us
according to our iniquities, as it is verse 10. neither retains he his anger
for ever, because mercy pleases him, as it is Mic. 7. 18. An example whereof
we have in this Micha 7. 18.
place, where after his sharp threatenings he adioyneth gracious promises:
likewise in the Israelites in ye time of the Judges; in the Jews lead captive
into Babylon, and afterward restored: but there needs but few examples to
confirm that, of which we our selves have so manifold experience, etc.

Secondly, out of the connection of this with the former The mercy of God
infinitely exceeds the mercy of man.
verse, we may observe how infinitely the mercy of God exceeds the mercy of
man: for whereas man being offended makes this conclusion, because he has
injured me, therefore I will revenge my self upon him, the Lord contrariwise
in this place concludes, that because the people had grievously provoked his
anger by their obstinacy in their idolatry, and forgetfulness of him,
therefore he would allure them to repentance by his benefits and speak
comfortably unto them; as though he should say, Though they be so peeuishly
obstinate, that they care not wilfully and desperately to go on in their sins
to their utter destruction, yet I will not set my wisdom against their folly,
nor suffer their stubborn wills to cross my will and eternal counsel, but
I will now begin to take care of them, seeing they will take no care of
themselves; and because they have nothing profited by all my threatenings and
punishments, I will mollify their hard hearts, and incline their stubborn and
rebellious wills with my gracious promises and merciful benefits. So that the
Lord behaueth himself like a tender hearted father, and we demean our selves
like stubborn children; though our stiff hearts relent not under his
corrections, yet his heart yearneth at our pain, and he is sooner weary of
punishing, then we of suffering punishment; and when his chastisements will not
overcome our malitiousnesse, he labors to overcome us with his goodness
and kindness: and as the careful and loving Physician is not moved by the
desperate wilfulness of his impatient patient, both refusing that which is
good for him, and eagerly seeking that which is hurtful and pernicious, to
give him over to himself, but uses the greater care and diligence, by how
much the less he sees that he cares for himself; and when he hears for
all his love and labor nothing but distempered and railing speeches from his
patient, is rather thereby moved to pity then revenge: so deals the Lord
with us who are sick in sin, etc.

The use which we are to make hereof is, that we not only praise the Lord for
this his mercy and goodness, but also that we strive to follow his example,
not seeking revenge when we are injured, but striving to overcome evil with
goodness, as the Apostle exhorts, Romans 12. 19. 21. and so Romans 12. 19. 21.
shall we indeed approve our selves to be the children of our heavenly
father, as our Savior teaches us, Matthew. 5. Mat. 5. 44. 45.
44. 45.

Thirdly, we may here learn, that neither Gods terrible The Lord only leads
to repentance.
threatenings, nor sharp afflictions, are available to work in our hearts
true repentance, unless the Lord allure and incline our hearts with the inward
operation of his holy Spirit, for the more God punishes, the more naturally we
repine and murmr; and our steely hearts like the anuill, with more blows do
wax the harder, and sooner will we break then bow, unless the Lord incline
us: as appears in the example of Pharaoh, Saul, the Israelites, Esaias 1. 5.
and in our own experience. Esaias 1. 5.


Fourthly, we here learn, that the Lord is the principal and The Lord is the
sole cause of our conversion.
sole cause of our conversion, for until he incline and allure our hearts to
leave our sins, and to return unto him, neither his promises nor his
threatenings, neither his benefits nor his punishments will work in our hearts
unfeigned repentance. And as this is manifest in this place, so also in diverse
other places of Scripture. Jeremy tells us, that the Black-moore may as well
change his skin, or the Leopard his spots, as we can do good, that are
accustomed to evil, Ier. 13. Jer. 13. 23.
23. And therefore the Lord when he would convert his people, says, that he
will give them a new spirit, and taking the stoheart out of their bodies, will
give them a heart of flesh, Ezech. Ezech. 11. 19. 36. 26.
11. 19. so Ezech. 36. 26. And our Savior Christ teaches us, that no man can
come unto him, except the Father draw him, Ioh. 6. 44. the Apostle likewise
says, that before our conversion, John 6. 44.
we are not only sick, but even dead in our sins, and therefore no more able to
raise up our selves from the death of sin, to the life of righteousness, then a
dead man to rise out of his grave, Ephesians. 2. 1. Ephesians. 2. 1.


But it may be demanded, that if this be so, to what purpose serves the
ministry of the Word, and exhortations to repentance, seeing he speaks in
vain, that persuades a dead man to rise to life? I answer, that the
ministry of the Word, is the means of our conversion, which the Lord by the
inward operation of his holy Spirit, makes effectual for this purpose, in the
hearts of all his elect. These exhortations therefore unto repentance are not
in vain, seeing the Lord works not upon men, as upon stocks and stones, but
as upon reasonable creatures, whom he exhorts to repentance, and withal
working upon their hearts, by his holy Spirit, inclines them to perform that
unto which he exhorts them; and as he outwardly commands, so inwardly he
inclines, and enableth them to do that which he commands: and hence it is,
that our Savior says, that the words which he spoke were Spirit and life,
Ioh. 6. 63. because Ioh. 6. 63.
they were not like the law, which only commanded, and did not enable to yield
obedience, but being made effectual by the Spirit, which gave life unto them,
they both enjoined and wrought in us true obedience.

And this the Prophet implies, when as he says, that the Lord will allure or
persuade them to turn unto him; so that his word is the instrument, whereby he
does not only move us, but thoroughly persuade us to true repentance: and this
we may see verified, Act. 13. 43. in the example of Lydia, Act. 13. 43. 16. 14.
18. 4. 28. 23.
chap. 16. 14. 18. 4. 28. 23.

The use which we are to make hereof is, that we yield unto him the whole
praise of our conversion, and not with the Papists share with him, ascribing
part of the glory unto him, and part to our selves.

Secondly, seeing it is the work of God alone, we must not rest in our own
power and strength, for the effecting of this great work, but we must call
upon God for this grace, saying with the Church, Lament. 5. 21. Convert us O
Lord, and Lament. 5. 21.
we shall be converted: much less are we to defer our conversion from day to
day, as though it were a matter which we can easily perform at our own
pleasure, but considering it is the Lords free gift, let us receive it when he
offers it, and turn unto him, when he allureth and persuades us to
repentance.

And so likewise because it is the Lord alone, who allureth and turns the
heart, it behooves al those who would convert others, not to rest too much in
the force of their own eloquence, or the strength of their own reasons, but
to join with their earnest labor and endeavor, humble and hearty prayers
unto almighty God, desiring the assistance of his holy Spirit, by which alone
their persuasions are made effectual to persuade.

Fifthly, we here learn, not to expect presently upon our We must not expect
secure peace after our conversion.
conversion unto God, and adjoining to the Church, secure peace and flourishing
prosperity: for after the Lord has allured and persuaded us to turn unto
him, he leads us into the wilderness of affliction, before he brings us to
rest in our heavenly Canaan. The world that hated our head Christ, will also
hate us which are his members, as our Savior has told us, Ioh. 16. 18. 19.
Satan continually assayleth Ioh. 16. 18. 19.
us, laboring to regaine us into his thraldom: and though we had no outward
molestation, yet our inbred enemy the flesh will not let us want combersome
trouble and vexation. And therefore let us not look for a paradise in this
world, which was appointed for our pilgrimage, nor expect victory and triumph,
before we have undertaken and finished our warfare, neither let us imagine
that we shall be conformable unto Christ in glory, before we have been
conformable unto him in his afflictions, or that we shall reign with Romans 8.
17. 18.
him, before we have suffered with him; or finally, that we can pass into the
kingdom of heaven, but by many afflictions and tribulations. Examples hereof
we have in Adam, Act. 14. 22.
Abel, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, and in the Apostles, yea in our Savior
Christ himself, who first suffered, and so entered into glory. And this is that
which our Savior has forewarned Luke 24. 26.
us of in many places, Mat. 10. 17. and 26. 38. 16. 24. 24. 9. John 15. 20. and
16. 20. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 3. 4. 2. Tim. 3. 12. And therefore before we give our
names unto Christ, and make profession of his Gospel, but let us, as he
counsels us, sit down, and with the wise builder count the cost, lest
having begun this great work, and not being able or willing to finish it, we
expose our selves to derision. Let us with Luke 14. 28. 2. Cor. 6. 8.
the Apostle resolve to go forward in our Christian course, by honor and
dishonor, evil report and good report, and make full account, if we will be
followers of Christ, to wait upon him with our cross on our backs:
otherwise, if we embrace Christ and his Gospel for worldly respects, we will
be ready to forsake him when we see our hopes frustrate, with Judas, Simon
Magus, and Demas. And though for a time we hear the Word with gladness, and
bring forth the blade of a glorious profession, yet when the sun of
affliction arises, it will wither, and in the time of temptation we shall fall
away, Luke 8. 13. Luke 8. 13.


And these are the doctrines, which we are to observe out The Lord is the sole
author of all true comfort and only gives it to the converted. 2. Cor. 1. 3.
4. and 7 6. Romans 15. 5.
of the first benefit promised in the former part of the verse. Now out of the
second benefit, namely, the comfort and consolation of the Church, promised in
the latter part of this verse, these things are to be observed.

First, we here learn, that the Lord is the author of all true comfort, which
he imparteth only unto those, whom he has first allured and persuaded, that
is, effectually called: for where there is no peace with God, nor peace of
conscience, there is no sound comfort; but there is no such peace till we be
converted, and reconciled unto God, according to that, Esa. 57. 21. Howsoever
therefore worldlings may laugh Esaias 57. 21.
from the teeth outward, yet they have no sound comfort, till the Lord convert
them, and speak comfortablie unto their hearts, their mirth being continually
checked with the pangs of an evil conscience, which continually summoneth them
to appear before Gods judgment seat. No Traitor being condemned, can
heartily rejoice, till he have his pardon, etc.

The use which we are to make hereof, is, that we do not seek for joy and
consolation in worldly vanities, in the mean time being destitute of the
comfort of Gods Spirit; but first let us labor for assurance of our true
conversion, and then being at peace with God, we shall be replenished with the
joy of the holy Ghost. And secondly, seeing there is no true comfort till God
the author of consolation speak unto our hearts, let us not seek it
elsewhere, but with the Apostle beg it at Gods hand by prayer: 2 Thessalonians. 2. 16.
17. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 16. 17. God afflicts his, but does not ouerwhelme them with
miseries.


Secondly, we here learn, that howsoever the people of God after their
conversion are lead into the wilderness of affliction, yet they are not left
desolate to be overwhelmed with their miseries: for though all other helps
fail, the Lord himself will speak comfortably unto them, and keep them from
fainting or sinking under the heauiest weight of affliction. Neither in truth
is there any misery so intolerable, but it may be borne with patience and
ioyfulnesse of them, unto whom the Lord has spoken by his word and Spirit,
assuring them that they are reconciled unto him, and in his love and favor,
that they have their sins pardoned, and have escaped condemnation, that all
things shall work together for the best; and that these momentanie and light
afflictions 2. Cor. 4. 17.
shall cause unto them a superexcellent and eternal weight of glory. Examples
hereof we have in Abraham, Jacob, David, Elias, in the Apostles, Act. 5. 11. in
the Thessalonians, Act. 5. 11. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6.
who received the word with much affliction, and with joy of the holy Ghost, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6. And finally in all the faithful, who being justified through
faith, and being at peace with God, do not only rejoice under the hope of the
glory of God, but also in tribulation, Romans 5. 1. 2. 3. Romans 5. 1. 2. 3.


And therefore when we hear of, or feel sharp affliction for the profession
of the Gospel, let us not be daunted or discouraged, for the Lord when he
has brought us into this wilderness will speak comfortably unto us, he will
not suffer us to be tempted above our power, but will give a good issue to all
our trials, and will so arm us with inward comfort, 1. Cor. 10. 13.
that we shall easily endure all outward afflictions. So that when we are
brought into the wilderness of affliction, so far are we to be from doubting
of Gods love and favor, and of the comfort of his Spirit, that then above all
other times we are surely to expect them.

Thirdly, we are to observe the means whereby this comfort The means whereby
God comfort us.
is derived unto us, namely, by Gods speaking unto us; the which speech is
twofold, the outward speech of the Gospel, containing the glad tidings of our
reconciliation with God, and all the gracious promises of life and salvation in
Christ; and the inward speech of the Spirit, crying in our hearts, Abba,
Father, and testifying unto our spirits that we are Romans 8. 15. 16.
the sons of God. And hence it is that the Spirit is called the Comforter,
Ioh. 16. 7. and our spiritual comfort the consolation Ioh. 16. 7.
of the Spirit, Act. 9. 31. If then we would have this inward Act. 9. 31.
joy and comfort, let us with all diligence and attention, hearken unto the glad
tidings of the Gospel, and earnestly desire the Lord, that with the speech of
his word he will join the speech of the Spirit, and with them both replenish
our hearts with this sweet consolation.

Fourthly, we may observe, when the Lord speaks comfortably God does not
speak comfortably unto us till we be humbled.
unto us, namely, not whilst we live in impenitencie and carnal security,
but after that he has brought us into the wilderness, that is, after that
we are by manifold afflictions thoroughly humbled; when he has brought us to a
true sight and sense of our sins, so that we groan under them as under a
heavy but then; and when he has lead us as it were into a desert of
desperation, by causing us to apprehend his anger, and the manifold punishments
which are due unto us, etc. Where Gods Ministers have an example for their
imitation, not to speak the comfortable and glad tidings of the Gospels to
those who sit by the flesh pots of Egypt, living in their carnal delights,
with all sensual security, until first they be brought into the wilderness
of affliction, and be humbled in the sight and sense of their sins.

Lastly, we may learn that it is the duty of Gods Ministers, Gods Ministers
must speak comfort to the heart, and not to the ear alone. 1. Cor. 2. 4. 5.
when they would replenish any with sound comfort, not so much to speak to the
ear with witty conceits, humane eloquence, and in the enticing speech of man's
wisdom, but they must speak to the heart in the plain evidence of the
spirit, and of power; otherwise their comforts will be but like David's music
to Saul: for as whilst David played Saul was eased, but when he ceased, the
wicked spirit returned and vexed Saul: so whilst one afflicted in conscience
hears their sweet tunes of consolation, which rather delight the ear, then
touch the heart and conscience, though for the present they may bring some
refreshing, yet when the sound cease, the comfort vanishes, and their
terrors and doubtings return, and vex them no less then in former times.

ANd so much concerning the second benefit, which is the consolation of Gods
Spirit. Now in the third place he promises that he will not only be
reconciled unto her, receiving her into his love and favor, and giving unto
her the inward comfort and peace of conscience, but that he will also give
further assurance of his favor and her reconciliation, by multiplying his
temporal benefits upon her, the which shall not only in their own use be
comfortable, but much more in respect that they are offered by God, and
received by the Church, as pledges of Gods eternal love, and earnest-penies of
her heavenly happiness in Gods kingdom; with all which she shall be so
replenished with joy and true thankfulness, that she shall with all
cheerfulness sing the praises of God, the author of all her welfare and
felicity. All which is contained, verse. 15. in these words: And I will give
her her vineyards from thence, and the valley of Achor for the door of hope,
and she shall sing there as in the days of her youth, and as in the day when
she came out of the land of Egypt. In which words is contained, first a benefit
which God promises The exposition.
to the Church: and secondly the Churches thankfulness, which she returns
unto God for it. In the benefit promised is set down: first, the benefit it
self: secondly, the time when God bestows it: and thirdly, the end why it is
given and received. The benefit it self is expressed in these words, I will
give her her vineyards, and the valley of Achor. Where the, Lord opposes his
benefits here promised to the punishments before denounted, verse. 12. for there
he threatens to take away her vines and fig trees, and here he promises to
restore them again, and that with advantage, as is signified by the change of
the word: for there he threatens to take away her vines, and here he
promises to give her vineyards, which consist of many vines; the which also
is expressed in the plural number, to intimate their multitude and abundance.

Now under this one kind synecdochically are to be understood all other
corporal benefits, of which before he had threatened to strip them, and all
other of like nature, as before I have showed: and much more by these types and
shadows we are allegorically to understand Gods spiritual gifts and graces,
which under them are usually signified, the Lord applying himself to the
rudeness and ignorance of the Church in the time of her infancy, who could
not conceive of Gods spiritual benefits, unless they were after a palpable
manner described and shadowed unto them.

And amongst many particulars he especially promises vineyards, the better to
express Gods large bounty and the Churches great plenty: for bread and food
are necessary for the preservation of life, but wine abounds, the use
whereof serving not only for sustentation, but also for comfort and delight; as
the Psalmist shows, Psalm. 104. 14. 15. there he says, that God gives
herbs and bread for the use Psalm. 104. 14. 15
of man* and wine to make glad his heart. Whereas therefore he promises to
give them vineyards, the meaning is, that he would measure out his benefits
with a large and plentiful hand, so as they should have abundance, and that
not only for the relieuing their necessity, but also for delight and comfort.

He says further, that he will give her the valley of Achor. Where he still
continues the former Allegory, alluding to the deliverance of the people of
Israel out of Egypt, who after that they had been tried a long time in the
wilderness, they were at last brought into the borders of Canaan, and overcame
the city Jericho, where Achan stealing the excommunicate thing, was by Joshua
and the people brought into a valley near adjoining, where he and his family
were stoned; which valley afterward Joshua named the valley of Achor, because
the people of Israel being overthrown by the men of Ai, were exceedingly
troubled, so that their hearts melted like water, as appears, Ios. 7. 5. the
which reason of Ios. 7. 5. 25. 26.
the name, Joshua himself gives, verse. 25. 26. as it also signifies, being
derived from (...), turbauit.

But howsoever this valley of Achor, was to the people of Israel for a time a
valley of trouble, yet afterward it was unto them a place of great joy and
comfort, both because they obtained victory against their enemies, the men of
(...), and also because they enjoyed this valley, which was exceeding fertile
and fruitful, especially of vines and fruitful trees.

Whereas then the Lord promises to give unto his Church the valley of Achor,
the meaning is, that as the people of Israel, after they had wandered in the
wilderness 40. years, destitute of corn, wine, oil, and all other benefits,
saving those which the Lord miraculously bestowed; and in this respect,
howsoever they were preserved by God, yet had they still the image of death
before them, and after they had been tried, and humbled by many afflictions,
were in Gods appointed time brought into the confines of the land of Canaan,
the country of Jericho, and the valley of Achor, where they enjoyed all these
blessings with great comfort and contentation; so that in respect of the great
and sudden alteration they seemed newly transported from death to life: So the
Church in the time of the Gospel, after she is reconciled unto God, and has
passed through a wilderness of affliction, for her trial and humiliation, is
not only sustained in the midst of all her troubles, with the inward comfort
of Gods Spirit, but also is further assured of Gods love, by the outward
testimony of his manifold benefits, wherewith she is replenished with such joy
and consolation, that she seems unto her self restored from the death of
sorrow and misery, to the life of comfort and happiness.

But yet whilst she remains in the valley of Achor, and but in the borders
of the heavenly Canaan; howsoever she has great cause of joy and contentment,
in regard of the manifold benefits which God bestows upon her, yet is her joy
often intermixed with sorrow and trouble, through that cursed Achan the flesh,
which eagerly coveting the pleasures of sin, and the golden baits of
wickedness, is thereby allured to sin, and to provoke Gods wrath, by seasing
upon unlawful pleasures and profits accursed by God: by which inward rebel
she is betrayed unto her outward enemies, those cursed Cananites, the world
and the devil, so that for a time they prevail against her. But yet in the
end she has an happy issue out of all her afflictions: for as when Achan was
stoned, Israel having hereby appeased Gods wrath, obtained a famous victory
against the men of Ai, so when the flesh is mortified which betrayed us, we
obtain a glorious victory over the world and the devil, and so enter into a
full possession of the heavenly Canaan.

And thus appears the great similitude, which is between the passage of the
children of Israel out of Egypt, into the land of promise, and our passage out
of the spiritual Egypt, the kingdom of sin and Satan, into the heavenly
Canaan, the true country and inheritance of all the Saints, which moved the
Lord allegorically to allude unto it in this place, as also Esaias 65. 10. Esaias
65. 10.


And this is the benefit here promised. The second thing specified, is the time
when the Lord would bestow it, in this phrase, from thence, which in the
Scriptures is sometimes referred to the time, and sometime to the place, and
accordingly here it is diversely interpreted, by some, of the place, referring
it to the desert; namely, that as soon as they came out of the wilderness of
affliction, they should enter into this valley of pleasure: by others, of the
time, understanding it thus; from thence forward, or as soon as I have brought
her through the wilderness, and have replenished her with the inward comfort of
my Spirit, I will give her a real assurance of my love, and not only speak
comfortablie unto her heart, by my word and Spirit, but also in effect and
deed, assure her further of my love and favor, by multiplying upon her my
mercies and manifold benefits. The which interpretation is not much different
from the other, but the rather to be embraced, because it has better
dependancie with the former benefit: for as soon as the Lord has inwardly
comforted his people by his word and Spirit, then presently he gives them a
true sense of his love and favor, by bestowing upon them innumerable benefits,
spiritual and temporal.

The third thing here expressed, is the end why God gives, and the Church
receives these his gifts and graces, not only that she may have by them joy
and comfort in their present use, but that they may serve as pledges and
earnest penies, to confirm their hope and assurance of the possession of
eternal happiness, the which is signified by this phrase, For the door of
hope. For that is said to be the door of hope, which gives entrance unto
hope, by offering some assurance that we shall obtain the thing hoped for. As
therefore the Lord gave to the people of Israel the valley of Achor, that it
should be unto them a door of hope, because the possession of the borders was
a pledge unto them, that they should enjoy the whole land of promise: so the
manifold benefits which the Lord bestows upon the faithful, whilst they be
in the borders of Canaan, the Church militant, are unto them a door of hope,
being assured pledges, that after we have a while fought with our spiritual
enemies, we shall have full possession of the heavenly Canaan, and the new
Jerusalem.

And these are the benefits which are here allegorically promised. Now the
reason why the Lord speaking of the spiritual deliverance and happiness of his
people, alludeth to their temporal deliverance out of Egypt, and entrance into
the land of Canaan; was first, that hereby he might strengthen their faith in
the full assurance of his promises, seeing they had already experience of his
truth, power, mercy, and goodness in their former deliverance, when as the
grievous sins, and great unworthiness of their forefathers, could not move him
to change his purpose, nor frustrate his word, because his covenant was
grounded, not upon their deserts, but upon his own undeserved love, and mere
good will. And secondly, in promising new benefits, he does by this allusion
put them in mind of the old, that by the remembrance of these, and hope of the
other, they might be moved to true thankfulness and obedience.

The second thing to be considered in this verse, is the Churches joy and
thankfulness, in the present fruition of Gods gifts, and future hope of
greater benefits, signified in these words, And she shall sing there as in the
days of her youth, and as in the day when as she came up out of the land of
Egypt. In which words is expressed the Churches joy and thankfulness, together
with the place or time thereof; their joy and thankfulness is signified by their
singing of praises unto God, the author of all these benefits, which continuing
in the former allegory and allusion, he compares to that rejoicing, and
praising God, which the Israelites used after their deliverance out of Egypt,
when as they saw Pharaoh and his army drowned in the red sea, of which we may
read, Exodus 15. under which special we are generally to understand all Exodus
15.
their rejoicing and songs of praises, for all Gods benefits, especially when
they were in the valley of Achor, and had entered into the possession of the
land of promise.

Whereas then he says, that she shall sing as in the days of her youth and
childhood: we are hereby to understand the time of her coming out of the
Egyptian servitude, which is fitly compared to the birth and infancy of the
Church, as before I have showed in verse. 3. and therefore the words following
are added, exegetic^s, by way of exposition plainly expressing what is meant by
the time of her childhood, namely, the day when she ascended out of the land of
Egypt.

The meaning therefore of these words is this, yt as the people of Israel after
their deliverance out of the Egyptian bondage, and after that they enjoyed Gods
manifold blessings in the valley of Achor, did rejoice before the Lord, and
expressed their joy by singing his praises: so the true Israel of God, in the
time of the Gospel, after they are delivered out of the spiritual bondage of
sin and Satan, and are made partakers of all Gods manifold blessings, both
spiritual and temporal, being filled, not only with joy, but also with
thankfulness, having nothing else to return to the Lord for all his benefits,
they burst forth into praises and thanksgiuings.

The time or place when the Church shall perform this duty, is expressed in
this word, there: whereby is signified, that they shall thus rejoice and praise
God in the valley of Achor, whilst they were in the vineyards, which God had
given them. Where he alludeth to the custom of grape-gathers in ancient time,
who whilst they gathered their grapes and trod in the Wine Press, sang
praises unto God; unto which custom the Prophet alludeth, Esa. 16. 10. whereby
Esa. 16. 10.
is signified, that great should be the Churches alacrity in praising God, so
as she should not defer this duty, or slothfully go about it, but even in the
fruition of Gods benefits she shall be so filled with joy and comfort, that not
being able to contain her self, she shall presently burst forth into his
praises; and that not after a vulgar manner, as those who have received
ordinary benefits, but like unto those who are raised from death to life, from
sorrow and misery to all joy and happiness.

And so much for the meaning of the words. The doctrines We must labor after
true conversion, if we would enjoy Gods benefits.
his word and Spirit, that is, after that he has converted and brought us to
repentance, and given unto us inward comfort, peace of conscience, and joy in
the holy Ghost, then does he give unto us further assurance of his love, and
our reconciliation, by multiplying upon us not only corporal but also
spiritual benefits.

Whence we learn, first, that if we desire to be made partakers of Gods
temporal benefits, we do above all things labor after true conversion, and
to feel the kingdom of Jesus Christ erected in our hearts, and the inward joy
and comfort of Gods Spirit, and then will the Lord also give us vineyards and
the valley of Achor, that is, abundance of his benefits, not only sufficient
for our necessary sustenance, but also for our honest delight: according to
that, Matthew. 6. 33. Matthew. 6. 33.
Yea but the faithful sometimes want these things. I answer, if the Lord
withdraw temporal benefits, in stead of them he bestows more excellent
gifts, even his spiritual graces, faith, hope, patience, etc. as appears in
the example of Job. And though they have no superfluity, yet they have
sufficiency, which they enjoy with great comfort and contentation: for either
the Lord fitteth their state to their minds, or their minds to their state;
as appears in the example of the people of God, fed daily with Manna, and
water springing out of the rock, of Elias fed with Ravens, of the poor widow
sustained by her cruise of oil and handful of meal. Yea and how little
soever the faithful have, yet are they better provided for then the wicked in
the midst of all their abundance: for this may fail, be spent, or taken
away, but Gods providence will never fail in providing for his, neither will
the fountain of his bounty be ever dry, although it do not at all times
flow alike plentifully and with a full stream: Psalm. 37. 16. 17. Psalm. 37. 16.
17 Our graces no cause of our conversion.


Again, whereas under these vineyards and valley of Achor, are promised not
only corporal benefits, but also spiritual graces; hence we learn, that we
are first allured and converted before these gifts of Gods Spirit are bestowed
upon us; and therefore our inward graces and virtues are no causes moving the
Lord to convert and call us, but effects of our vocation; neither does the Lord
allure and call us because we are furnished with these graces, but he therefore
furnishes us with them, because he has called us: Romans 8. 30. Rom 8. 30.


And lastly, from hence we learn, not to expect full assurance of Gods love
and our reconciliation all at once, but Full assurance of Gods love not to be
expected all at once.
by one degree after another: for first God allureth us, and then speaks
comfortably unto us by his word and Spirit, assuring us that we are his
children, the which assurance is more and more confirmed when he gives unto us
the portion of his children his spiritual graces and temporal benefits.

Secondly, we may here observe, that howsoever the Lord God mingleth benefits
with crosses.
gives unto the faithful plenty of vineyards, and the valley of Achor, that
is, innumerable benefits both spiritual and temporal, yet not without the
mixture of many crosses and calamities. For as long as we are in this life,
our prosperity is mingled with affliction, our joy with sorrow; and so long as
we are but in the borders of our heavenly Canaan, this valley of pleasure shall
be unto us also Achor, that is, the valley of trouble; partly in regard of our
treacherous flesh, which being allured with unlawful pleasures and profits
does move us to offend God, whereby we are hindered in our journey toward our
heavenly country; and wanting the feeling of our assurance of attaining to our
eternal rest, we are turmoyled with fear and doubting, and afflicted with
much sorrow and heaviness of spirit: and partly in respect of those cruel
assaults which the cursed Cananites, the world and the devil make against us,
wherewith we are sometimes foiled, and always troubled. But yet we are not
hereby to be discouraged, for the Lord will give a good issue to all our
trials, and in the end will grant unto us a glorious victory over all our
enemies; and changing this valley of trouble into a valley of triumph, will so
bring us into full possession of our heavenly Canaan, where we shall obtain
comfort, without mixture of affliction, joy without sorrow, and eternal rest
from the assaults of all our enemies.

When as then we are in any affliction, let us remember, that though the Lord
for a time seem to frown upon us, yet in the end he will turn unto us his
gracious countenance, and whilst we are in the confines of Gods kingdom the
Church militant, let us patiently bear our cross, remembering that ere long
we shall have full possession of our heavenly Canaan, where we shall enjoy a
perpetual rest from all troubles, and be fully replenished with all joy and
happiness.

Thirdly, we here learn, that the Lord bestows his temporal Gods temporal
benefits are to ye faithful earnest penies of those which are eternal.
benefits corporal and spiritual, upon the faithful, not only for their
present use and comfort, but also for the confirming and increasing of their
faith and hope, in the assurance of far more excellent gifts, even the
invaluable treasures of his eternal kingdom; for he gives the valley of
Achor for the door of hope, that is, the benefits of this life, that they may
be pledges and earnest penies, to assure us of all his benefits belonging to
the life to come. The which as it may be understood of all Gods gifts bestowed
upon the faithful, so especially of the inward graces of Gods sanctifying
Spirit, namely, charity, zeal, patience, humility, love to the Gospel,
sanctification of life, and the rest: so that whosoever find themselves endued
therewith, they may be assured that they have so many pledges and earnest
penies of their eternal happiness, and that it is not possible that their
hope should become void and frustrate, which the Lord has confirmed with so
many seals. The consideration whereof should make us to labor above all
things for these spiritual gifts and graces, whereby this door of hope may be
opened unto us, and we confirmed in the assurance of our election and
salvation: unto which duty the Apostle exhorts us, 2. Pet. 1. 10. especially
let us by all means seek to obtain 2. Pet. 1. 10.
the gift of Gods Spirit, which gives unto us an assured testimony that we
are his children and heirs of eternal life, Romans 8. 16. 17. seals up this
assurance in our hearts and consciences, Romans 8. 16. 17. Ephesians. 1. 13.
Ephesians. 1. 13. and also is the pledge and earnest penie of our heavenly
inheritance, 2. Cor. 1. 22. 2. Cor. 1. 22. We must meditate upon Gods blessings
new and old, to increase our thankfulness.


Fourthly, whereas the Lord making new promises, does shadow them out under the
allegory of ancient benefits, to the end that our assurance of future
blessings, by experience of his former goodness and truth, may be ratified and
confirmed, and that in remembrance of pasted benefits, in the fruition of his
present blessings, and in assured hope of his future goodness we may be
stirred up to true thankfulness and obedience: let us learn hereby, seeing we
stand in need of all these helps, to make this profitable use of them, that
is, first let us call to mind Gods mercies of old, of which our selves have
had experience, as also his goodness, truth, and power, which he has showed
toward others, in preserving, sustaining and defending them, and so shall we
with greater affiance and confidence depend upon his never failing promises,
and all ruling providence in the midst of all extremities. And secondly, let
us not only think upon those benefits, which we presently enjoy, but let them
serve also to call to our remembrance Gods former goodness toward us, as also
those more excellent blessings and rich treasures of his heavenly kingdom,
whereof all these are but pledges and earnest penies, that so this threefold
cable of Gods gracious benefits, being as it were twisted together in our
memories, may more strongly draw us to true thankfulness and obedience, and that
this infinite flame of his love toward us, may at least kindle in our hearts
some sparks of love toward him again.

And these are the doctrines to be observed out of the benefits Whosoever have
part in spiritual blessings, are filled also with joy, gladness and
thankfulness.
here promised. Now out of the Churches duty, we may further observe, that
whosoever are made partakers of the former benefits, they are also hereby
filled with joy and gladness, the which they express by singing Gods praises,
not only with the voice, but also with the heart, and by glorifying Gods name,
not only with verbal thankfulness, but also with the fruits of holy obedience,
in the whole course of their lives: for as certainly as God promises our
reconciliation, conversion, and all other his benefits; so does he likewise
promise, that those that are possessed of them, shall laud and magnify his
name. And therefore whosoever have not this inward joy and gladness in their
hearts, nor express the same by lauding and magnifying Gods name, it is
certain they have no true taste of Gods spiritual benefits. For this inward
fire of joy and thankfulness will not be smothered in the heart, but the flame
thereof will burst out into praises and thanksgiving. Now because every one may
say, that he is filled with inward joy, and may feign and strain out a verbal
thankfulness, therefore we must labor to approve them by our outward actions,
and a continual course of holy obedience, to be true and sincere, and so they
will give us assurance that we have indeed our part in all the former benefits;
which otherwise we cannot have, seeing the Lord gives the one as well as the
other, and to this end bestows his benefits, that we may glorify his name by
thankfulness and obedience, as appears, 1. Pet. 2. 9. 1. Cor. 6. 20. 1. Pet.
2. 9. 1. Cor. 6. 20. We must not defer our thankfulness.


Secondly, we may observe, that this our thankfulness is not to be deferred,
but presently to be expressed, even whilst we are in the vineyards, that is,
whilst our hearts are replenished with joy, in regard of the comfortable use
of Gods present benefits, and our assured hope of those greater mercies in the
time to come; for negligent delays cause forgetfulness, which is also the
mother of the grossest kind of unthankfulness. But contrariwise, then will our
praises and thanksgiuings be most zealous and fervent, when they issue from a
heart presently inflamed with the joyful sense of Gods benefits. An example
hereof we have in David, 2. Sam. 7. 18. 2 Samuel 7. 8. Exodus 15. 1. Luke 1. 46.
in the Israelites, Exodus 15. 1. in the Virgin Marie, Luke 1. 46.

Thirdly, we may here observe, that as the joy, so the praises The praises of
the faithful must not be slight, but great and fervent. Esaias 9. 3.
and thanksgiuings of Gods people are not slight and ordinary, but exceeding
great and fervent, not only like unto the joy in harvest, that is, in the
fruition of Gods common benefits; but like the joy wherewith men rejoice after
some famous victory obtained against their enemies, yea and such enemies as
have in former times held them in most servile and slavish servitude: for this
was the joy of the Israelites, unto which the Prophet compares here the joy
and thankfulness of the faithful. Yea in truth, so much our joy and
thankfulness should exceed theirs, as the greatness of the benefit of our
spiritual deliverance, out of the miserable captivity of sin and Satan,
exceeds the deliverance of the Israelites out of the bondage of Egypt. We
must then rejoice and be as thankful as those ought to be, who have passed
from death to life, from the greatest misery to the highest happiness, and are
exalted from being the firebrands of hell, to be the sons of God and heirs
of heaven.

ANd so much concerning the second benefit. In the third place the Lord
promises, that he will give grace to his Church and people, that they shall
embrace his pure worship and service, and abolish all idolatry and
superstition, in these words, Verse. 16. And at that day, says the Lord, you
shall call me Ishi, and shall call me no more Baali. Verse. 17. For I will take
away the names of Baali out of her mouth, and they shall no more be remembered
by their names. In which words the Lord The exposition.
promises two things, first, that he will restore his sincere worship:
secondly, that he will root out all idolatry. The former, in these words, And
at that day, says the Lord, shall you call me Ishi. Where is set down, first,
the time when the Church should perform this duty: and secondly, the duty it
self. The time in these words, And at that day; that is, when the Lord has
effectually called her, spoken comfortablie unto her, and multiplied his
benefits upon her, then should she in love and thankfulness, show her self
zealous in offering unto God his pure worship, and in abolishing all relics
of idolatry.

The duty which the Lord promises she shall perform, is, that she shall call
him Ishi, that is, my husband: where the Lord alludeth to the covenant which is
made between him and his Church, wherein the Lord promises, that she shall be
his spouse, and she promises that she will acknowledge the Lord alone to be
her husband, and perform all duties of a wife unto him. As though he should
say, Howsoever in former times thou have run after thy lovers, yet when I have
called and converted thee, thou shall remember the covenant of marriage between
us made, and so forsaking thy idols, thou shall acknowledge and profess, that
I alone am thy husband. Now whereas he says, that she shall call him Ishi, we
are first hereby to understand, that the Church mindful of her covenant, shall
embrace him as her only husband, not verbally alone, or with an idle show, but
in deed and truth behauing her self toward him, as it becomes the Lords
spouse, that is, first in general, she shall worship and serve him purely and
sincerely, according to his will; more specially, that she shall observe
conjugal fidelity, love him above all, depend upon him alone, with a true
affiance for all blessings, and call upon his name: the which duty is implied
in the text, for it is not said, she shall call me husband, but Ishi, O my
husband, namely, inuocating his name by prayer.

Secondly, he shows here, that the Church shall not only internally worship
the Lord, as her only husband in Spirit and truth, but also that she shall
outwardly make profession hereof; which is implied in that he says, she shall
call him husband, and not only acknowledge him so to be in her heart and mind.

And this is the first duty which the Lord promises that the Church shall
perform. The other is, that as she should be careful to advance his pure
worship, so she should show the like zeal in abolishing all relics of
idolatry; signified in these words, And thou shall call me no more Baali, or,
O my Baal; that is, As I would not have thee to join idols with me in my
worship, so I would not have thee to worship and call upon me in an idol, or
after an idolatrous manner, but in spirit and truth, purely and sincerely. Where
the Lord shows, first, that the Church shall not only worship him, but also
that she should worship him alone, and renounce all her idols and false gods.
Secondly, that she shall not worship him after an idolatrous manner in images
and idols, as it was the manner of the Israelites, who worshipped God in the
idol Baal, as appears in this place, but shall come unto him immediately, and
not by a substitute or inferior patron, and call upon him who is a Spirit
spiritually, and not in an image.

But the image of Baal being abolished, why would not the Lord be called upon
by the name of Baal, seeing it signifies a god, lord, or patron, and sometime
also a husband, as well as Ish? I answer, the Lord would be called Ish, rather
then Baal, first, because Baal being a name of empire and dominion, brought
with it some servile fear; the other name Ish signifying properly a husband,
offers nothing to our consideration but love, fidelity, grace and
protection; and therefore the Lord refuses the former name, in the time of the
Gospel, as being too austere, sauouring only of authority and Lordship, and
will be called by the amiable name of Ish, or husband, to show that he has
renewed his covenant, is reconciled to his Church, and is now become most
loving and gracious unto her.

The second cause, which I take to be the more principal, is, that he might
hereby show his detestation of idolatry, in that he would not endure to be
called by the name of an idol, though otherwise good in it own signification.
And this his detestation he further shows, when as he says, that they should
be so far from worshipping idols, or him in them, that they should not so
much as name them: Verse. 17. For I will take away the names of Baali out of her
mouth, etc. Verse. 17.
Where is set down, who it is that thus purges the Church from all the
relikes of idolatry, namely, the Lord himself, I will take away. Secondly,
the manner or degree, how it must be purged, to wit, from all the relikes of
idolatry and superstition, so that it shall not be lawful for the people of
God so much as to name an idol, unless it be as they name the devil with
hatred and detestation. The like places unto this we have, Exodus 23. 13. Ye
shall make no mention of the name of Exodus 23. 13. Deuteronomy. 12. 2. 3.
other gods, neither shall it be heard out of thy mouth. Deuteronomy. 12. 3. Ye shall
utterly destroy all the places wherein the nations which ye shall possess,
served their gods upon the high mountains, etc. 3. Ye shall hew down the
graven images of their gods, and abolish their names out of that place. An
example whereof we have in David, Psalm. 16. 4. 5. Their offerings of blood
will I not offer, nor make mention of their names with my lips. Psalm. 16. 4. 5.


Thirdly, he expresses the end why he would not have them so much as name
idols, to wit, that they may no more be remembered by their names, that is, that
having nothing to do with idols, neither in deed nor word, the memory of
them may perish, and men may be freed from all danger of falling into
idolatry; which being preserved, there remains a continual bait to entice
us, which in regard of our corruption and pronenesse to idolatry, we are apt
to swallow, to our perdition.

And this is the meaning of these words. The doctrines we may observe, that as
soon as we are converted and assured Assurance of Gods love makes us zealous
in his service.
of Gods love by the inward testimony of his Spirit, confirmed by innumerable
his gracious benefits, which are so many earnest penies and pledges of his
favor and our reconciliation, then does the Lord also give us this grace to
show our selves forward in the duties of his worship and service, and in
rooting out all superstition and idolatry. If therefore we be truly converted
and endued with Gods Spirit, and with the graces thereof, then will we also be
zealous and devout in performing service unto God, in hearing his word, calling
upon his name, receiving the Sacraments, etc. as also in purging our selves
from idolatry and superstition, and in removing all false means of his
worship: but if this care and zeal be wanting, it is manifest, that as yet we
are not converted, nor have tasted of the comfort of Gods Spirit, and the
graces thereof: for when God has bestowed these, then at that day also he
stirs us up to love and serve him, as our Lord and husband, forsaking all
idols and idol worship, as appears in this place.

Secondly, we may observe, that those who are truly converted Those who are
truly converted, openly profess their conversion.
and endued with Gods Spirit, they do not only inwardly serve the Lord as
their only husband, but also outwardly make a confession hereof to the glory
of God and edification of others: for it is not said here that the Church and
members thereof should only in heart acknowledge, but also by voice profess,
that God was her husband, and forsake and disclaim with the like open
plainness idols and idolatrous worship. And surely this is a singular fruit
of our says and unfeigned repentance, when as we do not only serve the Lord,
and embrace his true religion in our hearts and souls, but also make an
outward profession hereof to all the world, though thereby we expose our
selves to the scoffs and contempt, obloquie and slander, malice and violence
Matthew. 5. 16. 1. Pet. 2. 12. and 3. 13. Romans 10. 10. Psalm. 22. 22. Ioh. 9. Act.
5.
of profane and wicked men. Which holy duty is commended to Gods servants in
many places: Matthew. 5. 16. 1. Pet. 2. 12. 3. 15. Romans 10. 10. An example
whereof we have in David, Psalm. 22. 22. in the blind man, Ioh. 9. in the
Apostles, Act. 5. in Paul, Act. 24. 14. With which holy profession whosoever
Act. 24. 14.
glorifieth God, the Lord will give glory unto him, by professing and
acknowledging him for his son and heir of heaven: Matthew. 10. 32. Matthew. 10.
32.


Thirdly, we may observe, that the Prophet speaking of Our spiritual marriage
compriseth al conjugal duties.
those duties which the Church being converted and reconciled unto God should
perform unto him, comprehends them all under this one, that she should call
him husband, because indeed it contains all the rest, as being the fountain
from which they spring. For if we embrace the Lord as our husband, then have
we given him both our heart and hand, then have we plighted unto him our faith,
and then do we also love him above all, fear his displeasure, depend upon his
providence, and show our selves zealous in performing all good duties unto him.
Of which inward graces and outward obedience, whosoever are destitute, they are
not espoused unto God, etc.

Fourthly, we here learn, that it is not only unlawful to It is unlawful
to worship God in Idols.
worship idols, but also to worship the true God in them. Neither did the
Israelites worship the image of Baal, or the false god Baal, thereby
represented, but in the idol they worshipped the true Iehoua: for he does not
here forbid them to worship Baal, the god of the Sidonians, but that they
should call him any more Baal, that is, call upon and worship him in the image.
So that the Papists excuse, under which they mask their idolatry, is vain
and frivolous: for they say that they worship not the images, before which
they fall, but God in them: and likewise when they worship Saints departed,
they affirm that they worship God in and by them. The which their assertion is
false, as appears by their falling down before them, their making of vows,
offering oblations, and their going on pilgrimage unto them: and though it were
true, that they did not worship them, but God in them, yet hereby they are not
cleared, seeing they commit the same idolatry which God here condemns in the
Israelites.

Lastly, we here observe, that the Lord is now no more to be esteemed of the
Church a severe Lord or fearful Judge, The Lord is a gracious husband of the
Church.
but as a gracious and loving husband. The consideration whereof serves, first
to replenish our hearts with all joy and comfort, in that we who were enemies
and strangers, are admitted into so near league of friendship, and into so
inviolable a bond of love and amity with God, as is between a most loving
husband, and his beloved spouse. Secondly, it serves notably for the
confirming our says and affiance in God, in the midst of all wants, dangers
and extremities, in that we have a husband who is most able and ready to
protect and provide for us. Thirdly, it serves to confute the doctrine and
practice of the Papists, who dare not go directly unto God by prayer, but by
the mediation of Saints: for if Christ be espoused unto us, to whom may we
prefer our suites with greater boldness and confidence, then unto our
gracious husband? or who is more near unto us, then Christ, or more dear unto
Christ then we, his beloved spouse, that we should make choice of, to be out
Mediator between us and him? And lastly, here we learn how we should
perform our obedience unto God, not seruilely for fear, as unto a terrible
and straight master, but with love and reverence, as unto a gracious husband,
whose will we perform, rather to avoid thereby his displeasure, then for any
hope of gain, or fear of punishment.

And these are the doctrines to be observed out of the 16. The Lord purges his
Church from all idolatry and superstition.
verse. Out of the 17. verse we may further observe, who it is that purges
the Church from all idolatry and superstition, and restores Gods true and
sincere worship and service, namely, the Lord himself, I will take away; So
that it is not in the will and purpose, nor in the power and policy of man, to
work this great alteration and reformation first and principally; for man in
his own nature is prone to idolatry and superstition, and when he is once
entered into it, in stead of returning out of this puddle, he is ready, being
over ye shoes, to plunge himself over head and ears; but it is the Lord
himself, who illuminateth our eyes with the knowledge of his truth, and
inableth us to discern the sottishnes of superstition, and the filthiness of
our spiritual whoredoms, and moves our hearts to loath and detest them, and
to embrace his true religion and sincere worship. And therefore, when as we
would have the house of God clearly purged from all relics of superstition,
we must not only every man in his place and calling, further as much as in us
lies this good work, but principally we are all in general to join
together in prayer unto God, desiring his assistance for the effecting of it,
for he is the chief cause thereof, and the greatest Potentates of the earth
are in this work but his instruments and deputies, whom he can easily incline
to effect it, when so it pleases him: Prou. 21. 1. Prou. 21. 1.


Secondly, we may observe, that there cannot too great There cannot too great
diligence be used in purging the Church from idolatry.
preciseness, care and diligence be used, in purging the Church from all
relics of idolatry and superstition, and in restoring the purity of
religion and Gods true worship, according to the prescript rule of his Word; as
appears in this place, where the Lord refuses to be called by the name of
Baal, though good in it own signification, because it had been abused to
idolatry, and enioyneth his people not so much as to mention the name of an
idol. The like places are those before quoted, Exodus 23. 13. Deuteronomy. 12. 2. 3.
Psalm. 16. 4. 5. to which we may add Zach. 13. 2. I will cut off the names Zach.
13. 2.
of the Idols out of the land, and they shall no more be remembered: and Esaias
30. 22. Ye shall pollute the covering of the images of Esaias 30. 22.
silver, and the rich ornament of the images of gold, and cast them away as a
menstruous cloth, and you shall say unto it, get thee hence.

This rule then is to be observed of all, who reform the Idolatry must be
rooted out, both head and tail.
Church, that they root out idolatry and superstition, both head and tail, in
substance and ceremony, and not suffer an idolatrous or superstitious name to
remain: yea they are not only to remove things out of the Church, which are
idolatrous and superstitious in their own nature, but also such indifferent
things, as being lawful in themselves are abused to idolatry; because through
the corruption of our nature, all means and occasions, to put us in mind of
idolatry, are so many traps to catch us, and so many baits to allure us to
fall into this sin again. So here the Lord will not have his people to name
Baalims, because he would not have them so much as remembered. But lest it might
be objected, that these idolatrous names are originally evil, we shall also
find, Ier. 23. 36. that the Lord forbids to call his Word, Jerem. 23. 36.
the burden of the Lord, notwithstanding that it was his own phrase by the
mouth of his Prophets, because it was now grown amongst the people into
obloquie and contempt. And Ezechias is commended for breaking the brazen
serpent, which was made by Gods appointment, because the people abused it to
idolatry, 2. King. 18. 4. Yea but 2. King. 18. 4. Princes and supreme
Magistrates must reform the Church.
who has this authority to purge the Church from all relics of idolatry? I
answer, chief Governors, Princes, and supreme Magistrates, who are appointed
by God to be the nursing fathers of the Church; neither may private men
intermeddle with public reformation, but only the Governors of the Church, as
we may see it confirmed by innumerable presidents in Gods word. And they, as I
said, are to root out idolatry and all relics thereof; for this is a
singular duty belonging unto them, which is so much commended in those godly
Magistrates and Kings, Moses, David, Ezechias, Josias, and the rest: the
neglect whereof, we shall find condemned in other Kings, though virtuous and
religious, who restoring Gods true religion, yet suffered the groves and high
places to remain.

But if this duty be neglected by Magistrates, how are private Private men
must not intermeddle with public reformation.
men to behave themselves? I answer, they must contain their courses within
the compass of their calling, and in the first place they must seek to
reform themselves, and those under their private charge, purging and
preserving them as from all other sins, so especially from all manner of
idolatry and superstition; and for the public reformation they are to further
it, as private men, by petition, the help of their friends, and best means,
especially they are to commend Gods cause into his own hands, by fervent and
continual prayer, who is able to bring it to pass, by just and lawful
courses.

But may they join themselves to such Churches as are Ceremonial
imperfections of the Church must not cause a separation.
spotted with imperfections? I answer, there are some corruptions which are
substantial and undermine the foundation of religion, and these may justly
cause a separation: but there are others in ceremonies and circumstances only,
the substance and parts of religion and Gods worship remaining sound and
unshaken; and these are not causes sufficient to make a rent from the Church,
seeing there was never any Church without her wants and imperfections: and
seeing where the foundation remains sure (as it does where the Word is purely
and sincerely taught, and the Sacraments administered according to Christ's
institution) there we may be built up in Christ, and attain unto eternal
salvation.

And as the people are not for these wants and imperfections to leave the
public service of God, so neither (as I take it) are Gods Ministers to forsake
their ministry, without the help whereof, the people cannot publicly worship
God, nor be built up in Christ, and edified in their holy faith, rather then
they will undergo some rites and ceremonies, though very inconvenient, if it
cannot be proved that they are in their use simply evil and unlawful:
Neither do I think any inconvenience so great, as the neglect of preaching
Christ crucified, etc. 1. Cor. 9. 16. 1. Cor. 9. 16. The profane practice of
Poets condemned.


Thirdly, whereas God says, that his people shall not so much as name idols,
unless it be with hatred and detestation, here is condemned the profane
practice of our Poets, who think their poems are not artificial, and in the
right poetical vain, unless they be stuffed with the names of Heathen
idols, as Jupiter, Apollo, Pallas, Venus, Cupid, and such like; sometime also
in a profane devotion, inuocating their help, for the perfecting of their
poesy: but accursed be that vain, wit, or eloquence which sacrilegiously
robs God of his honor, and bestows it upon idols, whether it be done in
jest or earnest. So likewise here is condemned their practice, who swear by
the idol of the Mass, by the Rhood, and such like idols; for what is this but
to renew their credit by an honorable remembrance of them, and after an
idolatrous manner to seat them in Gods place, which we are not so much as to
name, without branding them with some note of hatred and detestation?

ANd so much concerning the third benefit which the Lord promises to the
Church. The fourth follows, which is peace, tranquillity, and immunitie from
dangers. Verse. 18. And in that day will I make a covenant for them, with the
wild beasts, and with the fowls of the heaven, and with that that creeps
upon the earth; and I will break the bow, and the sword, and the battle, out
of the earth, and will make them to sleep safely. In which words the Lord
promises, that he will The exposition.
so watch over his Church and people with his providence, that they shall have
security and peaceable rest, though they be compassed about with dangers and
manifold evils; and amongst others he makes choice of two, to signify all the
rest, namely, that he would deliver them: first, from the brutish rage and
violence of unreasonable creatures: and secondly, from the force and violence
of men, who shall oppose against them. The first is expressed in these words, I
will make in that day a covenant for them with the wild beasts. Where the Lord
shows, that when his people were converted and reconciled unto him, he would
not only bestow upon them his benefits both spiritual and corporal, but also
defend them from dangers, so that no evil should come unto them: and
particularly, he promises to protect them from unreasonable creatures, which
are all referred to three sorts: first beasts, as Bears, Lions, Tigres,
Wolves, etc. secondly, the fowls of heaven, by which he understands all
ravenous and harmefull birds; thirdly creeping things, as serpents, canker
worms, locusts, caterpillars, and such like.

All which creatures before the fall were by Gods appointment under man's
lordship and dominion, yielding unto him voluntary and free obedience, but
after by his sin and rebellion, man had made God his enemy, he lost his
sovereignty, the creatures rebelling against him, who was a rebel to their
great Lord and Creator, and pulling their necks out of the yoke of their
subjection; and whereas before they peaceably obeyed him, now they were willing
to be the Lords ready instruments to inflict deserved punishments, and bring
man to destruction; the water to drown him, as it did the whole world; the
fire to burn him, as it did Sodom; the air to poison and infect him, as in
the time of the pestilence; the earth to swallow him, as it did Dathan and his
followers; the bears to devour him, as 2. King. 17. 25. Numb. 21. 6.
they did the 42. children at the prayer of Elisha; the lions to destroy him,
as they did the Samaritanes; Serpents to sting him, as they did the Israelites;
yea even the basest creatures have both will and power enough when God gives
sign of battle, as frogs, caterpillars, lice, as we may see in the plagues of
Egypt, and in the example of Herod devoured by lice. Act. 12.


And therefore when the Lord mustereth and marshalleth up together his army of
judgments, wherewith he punishes the rebellion and sin of man, cruel and
noisome beasts are one choice band wherewith he assaulteth him, as appears
Leuit. 26. 22. Ezech. 14. 15. But when as man in Christ is Leuit. 26. 27.
Ezech. 14* 15.
reconciled unto God, then also the Lord begins to restore unto him his
dominion over the creatures, and makes a covenant with them for man, that is,
causes them to become harmless, so that they shall not be either willing or
able to hurt any of his children. And this is that which the Lord promises to
those that fear him, Psalm. 91. 13. Ezech. Psalm. 91. 13. Ezech. 34. 25.
34. 25. So also Eliphaz speaks notably to this purpose, Job 5. 22. 23.
Howsoever therefore Gods children are compassed Job. 5. 22. 23.
about with dangers, yet they shall be safe under the shadow of his wings,
Psalm. 91. 1. 4. And in the midst of turmoyles Psalm. 91. 1. 4.
and molestations, their soul shall dwell at ease, as it is Psalm. 25. 13.
Psalm. 25. 13.


But it may be demanded how this promise is accomplished, How ye faithful have
peace with the brute creatures.
seeing the godly man has these beasts in subjection no more then the wicked,
and oftentimes they are alike hurtful and pernicious unto both. I answer,
first, that the Lord does perform this promise as he does all other
concerning worldly and temporal benefits and deliverances, namely, not
absolutely, but conditionally, so far forth as they will stand with his
glory and the good and salvation of his children: and if at any time it fall
out otherwise, then though he inflicteth upon them the contrary afflictions,
troubles and dangers, yet he sanctifies them for the accomplishing of these
maine ends, the furthering of his own glory and their salvation, so as they
are not hurtful, but exceeding good and profitable unto them. And thus the Lord
performs his promise of preserving his children from brute beasts and such
like dangers, so that either they may be assured of deliverance from them,
which usually the Lord grants, as we may see in the example of Daniel in the
lions den, and Dan. 6. Act. 28. 5.
Paul whom the viper could not hurt; or otherwise if they be overtaken of these
dangers it is for their good, seeing all things, even afflictions themselves,
work together for the best to Gods elect, Romans 8. 28. Romans 8. 28.


Secondly, we are to know, that the Lord does usually in the old Testament,
under the promises of temporal benefits and deliverances, with which the
people were best acquainted, shadow out unto them his spiritual grace and
protection; and so here particularly he promises protection and deliverance
from brute and savage beasts, with which the Israelites were much vexed and
endangered, that by this benefit which they could feelingly apprehend, he might
lead them as it were by the hand, and bring them to a full assurance of his
protection and careful providence, always watching over them for their
deliverance out of all dangers, especially from the fury and malice of our
spiritual enemies, sin, Satan, and the world, who never cease assaulting of
Gods elect. 1. Pet. 5. 8. 1. Pet. 5. 8.


Thirdly, this covenant of peace and harmelesnesse may be said to be made
between all creatures and Gods children, because after they are reconciled
unto God, and become his sons by adoption and grace, then is their ancient
title and right of dominion and rule over all the creatures renewed, which was
lost by the fall; into the possession of which right they enter in this life,
but enjoy it not in full perfection until ye life to come; for the subjection
of the creatures unto us depends upon our subjection and obedience to God,
and therefore because this is but begun and imperfect in this life, theirs also
to us is imperfect and but in part.

And this is the first part of our peace and security, which respects the
brute creatures. Now because there is no greater enemy to man then man,
according to the proverb, Homo homini lupus, therefore the Lord likewise
promises his Church peace and security, in respect of those manifold dangers
which men might cause unto them; And I will break the bow and the sword, etc.
Where under these instruments of war, the sword and bow, we are to understand
war it self; as though he should say, I will not only make peace between
my Church and the brute creatures, but also between men themselves, so that all
war, hatred and contention shall cease, and flourishing peace and tranquillity
shall be established upon the earth. The like places unto this we have, Esa.
2. 4. and 11. 6. 7. 8. 9. and 32. 17. 18. Esa. 2 4 and 11. 6. 7. 32. 17. 18.
How God performs the covenant of peace unto the Church.


Yea but the Church is not freed from wars, nay rather as soon as we
profess our selves Gods servants, we are sure to have the world to be our
enemy, who bends all her force against Gods Saints, and labors both by
secret treason and by open force to bring them to destruction. And again, our
Savior has taught us, that he came not to bring Matthew. 10. 34.
peace but war, even between nearest friends; and that in these latter times
we are especially to expect wars, vprores, and co^tentions; how therefore is
this promise accomplished? I answer, it is performed either in respect of an
outward and worldly, or an inward and spiritual peace. If we understand it in
the first sense, then this promise of a worldly peace (being a temporary
benefit) is to be understood with the condition and limitation before prefixed,
namely, of Gods glory and our spiritual good.

Secondly, God thus performs his promise, not by freeing them altogether from
wars, but by defending and delivering them in the day of battle, so as the
force and fury of their enemies shall not hurt them: and this is signified by
the phrase here used, for he does not say that he will take clean away the
bow, sword, and battle, but that he will break them, that is, weaken,
abate, and ouerrule their force and power, so as they who depend upon him shall
not be destroyed by them.

Thirdly, this promise is accomplished among the faithful themselves, which
howsoever before their conversion they are one to another as cruel and hurtful
as lions, tigers, bears, yet after they join themselves to Gods Church, they
lay aside their malice and brutish nature, and perform all mutual duties of
love and Christian amity, as appears Esa. 11. 6. Esa. 11. 6. The spiritual
peace of the faithful.
But especially under the type of this outward peace, we are to understand
that Evangelical and spiritual peace, which is inwardly seated in the heart
and conscience, after that we are assured of our reconciliation with God
through Jesus Christ, which the Angel first proclaimed, Luke 2. 14. and our
Savior afterward promised to all the faithful, who are truly humbled, Luke
2. 14.
and have subjected themselves to bear his yoke of holy obedience, Matthew. 11.
29. of which the Apostle also speaks, Matthew. 11. 29. Romans 5. 1.
Romans 5. 1. and so often wishes to the Churches unto whom he writes. And
this peace is twofold, peace with God, and the fruit thereof peace of
conscience, with which whosoever are endued, they have tranquillity and
Christian security in the midst of their worldly enemies, who though they rage
never so furiously against them, yet they cannot disturb this peace, much
less take it from them, but in the midst of all garboyles and fiery
afflictions, they may joyfully triumph in this their peace with the Apostle,
Romans 8. 31. Romans 8. 31.
to the end of the chapter: If God be on our side, that mattreth it who oppose
against us? etc. So that this spiritual peace may well stand with our worldly
troubles and persecutions, of which our Savior has forewarned us, and
therefore he joins them together: Ioh. 16. 33. In me ye shall have peace, in
the world ye shall have affliction. So Ioh. 14. 27. Peace I leave Ioh. 16. 33.
Ioh. 14. 27.
with you, my peace I give unto you, not as the world gives, give I unto you,
etc. And the Prophet David shows, that howsoever the bodies of those that
fear the Lord are tossed and turmoiled, yet their souls shall dwell at ease,
Psalm. 25. 13. Psalm. 25. 13.


And this is the peace both outward and inward, which is here promised to the
faithful in the time of the Gospel; both which are but begun in this life and
imperfect, as all other The security of the faithful.
our gifts and graces are, which we have received, and shall be fully perfected
in the life to come. Now in the last place, he sets down an effect of this
peace, namely, that being protected from the danger of the brute creatures, and
also of men who oppose against them, He will cause them to sleep safely or
securely. Whereby we are not to understand, that the faithful in the time of
the Gospel, shall be slothful and careless, as though they were exempted from
all danger; but that in the midst of all troubles and dangers, they shall be
so comforted with the feeling of their inward peace, and so assured of Gods
protection and providence watching over them, that they shall be freed from
that terror and desperate fear, which wholly possesses the wicked in the time
of danger: and howsoever they carefully watch and ward, and diligently prepare
themselves to endure the assaults of their enemies, in regard of their own
frailty, and their great power and malice; yet not with any distempered and
tumultuous passion, but so as in the midst of their fear they quietly
sleep, and peaceably rest under the shadow of Gods protection. An example
whereof we have in David, Psalm. 4. 8. Psalm. 4. 8.
I will lay me down, and also sleep in peace, because thou Lord only make
me dwell in safety. So Peter, though he were in prison, loaded with chains,
watched with soldiers, and destinated eue^ the next day to the slaughter, yet
in the midst of all these imminent dangers, resting upon Gods providence, he
also took his natural rest and sleep, so that the Angel that was sent to
deliver him, was feign to smite him on the side, that he might awaken him, Act.
12. And Paul Act. 12.
and Silas being in the like danger, although they are not said to have slept,
yet they rested quietly and peaceably upon Gods providence, spending the night
not in mourning and weak lamentation, but in prayer, rejoicing, and singing of
Psalms, Act. 16. 25. Act. 16. 25.


And this is the meaning of these words. The instrustions Sin deprived us of
the dominion and use of the creatures.
dominion, use and benefit, which we had by creation, over and by all the
creatures; namely our sins; for this privilege was granted unto man, upon the
condition of his obedience unto God, which because he observed not, therefore
he lost his rule and dominion, right and interest he had unto them; so that
what rule he has over them, and use of them, whilst he continues in the
state of disobedience, he enjoys it not by any lawful right, but by
tyrannical usurpation, under which thraldom the creatures groan, earnestly
desiring to be delivered from it, Romans 8. 22. So that howsoever in the Romans 8.
22.
creation, all the creatures were made for man, subjected unto his government,
and appointed for his use, and man only was made for God and his service; yet
after man by his fall had disabled himself, so as he neither could nor would
serve his Creator, the creatures were freed from the subjection and slavish use
of man; and in stead of serving and obeying him, they are ready every one in
their place, to be the executioners of Gods just judgments, inflicted for his
sin and rebellion: like servants who set themselves against their master,
when he traitorously sets himself against his Prince, who is the chief
Lord and Sovereign over them all. When as therefore we hear of losses and
spoils by fire or water, of the hurt or death of men by the brute beasts, and
serpents, of dearth and scarcity caused by too much rain or drought, cankers,
caterpillars and such like, all and every of these are so many remembrancers to
put us in mind of our sins and rebellion against God, and so many monitors to
warn us, that we forsake our wicked courses, and turn to the Lord by unfeigned
repentance.

Secondly, we here learn, when man is restored to his When our dominion over
the creatures is restored.
right of ruling, and using the creatures, without sin in respect of God, and
tyranny in respect of them, namely, when he is reconciled unto God in Christ,
and being adopted for his son in him, becomes heir and lawful owner of all
the creatures; for when the Lord has renewed his covenant with us, then does he
also renew the covenant between us and the creatures, which is set down, Genesis
1. 28 29. The consideration Genesis 1. 28. 29.
whereof should move us earnestly to labor after the assurance of our
reconciliation with God, and our adoption; for until then we have no right
unto any of Gods creatures, but theeuishly and tyrannically usurp upon that
which belongs not unto us: and for this cause the blood of ye creatures,
which for our use is spilled, the clothes which which we put on, the bread
which we eat, yea and the very Habac. 2. 11.
stones and timber of our buildings cry loud in Gods ears for vengeance, and
shall be sufficient matter (though we had no other sins) of inditements for
our theft, at the great assisses. Again, until the Lord have renewed this
covenant between the creatures and us, they are all our enemies, which are
ever ready when God suffers them, to revenge the dishonor which by our sins
we have done to their Creator, and the injury and oppression which we have
offered unto them; if we be at home, the fire threatens us, if abroad, the
beasts, if God permit them, are ready to assault us, the water is ready to
drown us, the earth to swallow us, the air to infect us, yea as we walk in
the street, the tyles upon the houses are ready to brain us, in our gardens,
snakes and adders are ready to sting us, and at our tables, every crumbe of
bread is ready to choke us: all which Gods creatures are ready to serve us,
and to offer unto us a safe and comfortable use of them, when upon our
reconciliation with God, they are also reconciled unto us.

Thirdly, we may here learn, what is the best means to The best means of
obtaining a well grounded peace with men.
obtain and enjoy a sound and well grounded peace with men, or at least
entertain a just and safe war, namely, by turning from our sins, and
seeking earnestly reconciliation with God in Christ; for the cause of inward
rebellions, and outward invasions, is our sins, which provoke the Lord to just
displeasure, and move him to raise up against us, enemies at home and broad, to
the end they may execute his just judgments against us. The way therefore to
settle peace, and prevent war, is to take away this cause, to wit, our sins
by true repentance, and to labor that we may be at peace with God, and then he
will give us peace with men, or at least a prosperous war, wherein he will
assist and protect us against our enemies. Whereby it appears, that that
peace which is grounded upon worldly policies, and has not this peace with God
for the foundation thereof, howsoever it may last for a time, yet in the end it
will prove rotten and unsound. For example, some think it the best course to
settle a peace by tolerating Popery and idolatry, some by utter forsaking
Gods true religion, and by conforming our selves to the world, both in
profession and life; some by joining in near leagues with neighbor Princes,
and by many such other devices: but seeing the Word plainly teaches us, that
the only sure foundation of our peace, is our reconciliation with God, and holy
obedience to his Commandments; how can we hope to obtain it by taking such
courses, as will cause the Lord to be our enemy, and by transgressing his
Commandments, the breach whereof the Lord threatens in so many places to
punish with war, and those innumerable miseries which do accompany it? So
Leuit. 26. 25. Deuteronomy. 28. Leuit. 26. 25. Deuteronomy. 28 49. 1. King. 8. 33. Jer. 5.
15. 19.
49. 50. 1. King. 8. 33. Ier. 5. 15. 19.

The use which we are to make hereof, is, that when we hear of our enemies
preparations, we do in the first place consider, that our sins is the cause
of this war intended against us; and therefore before we resolve upon any
other course for our defense, let us repent of our sins, and labor to be at
peace with God, and so he will change their minds, or use their malice for
their own destruction.

Fourthly, we may here observe, what is the chief cause of The Lord is the
chief author of our peace.
our peace and tranquillity, namely, not our own power and policy, or
strength of near adjoining friends, but the Lord himself; and therefore when
we do enjoy it, as we have done for many years, let us ascribe the whole
praise and glory unto God who is the author thereof: and let us Esa. 45. 7. 2.
Chron. 14. 6.
make this use of our great peace and tranquillity, with more diligence to do
God service both privately at home and publicly in the congregation, which is
the chief end why the Lord has given this peace unto us.

Lastly, we may here observe a notable mark of those that Christian security
a true note of our conversion.
are truly converted unto God, and reconciled in Christ, namely, when as with a
Christian security we can rest upon Gods providence and protection, after we
have attained unto some assurance of the pardon of our sins, not only when
the world promises safety, but also in the midst of troubles and dangers:
for there is no such peace to the wicked, who Esa. 57. 21.
howsoever they are bold and confident in their prosperity, yet when they are
overtaken with any unexpected danger, faint with fear, and are perplexed with
a guilty astonishment; whereas they who are at peace with God have the inward
peace of a good conscience, which makes them (as the Wise man says) confident
as a lion, knowing that Gods Prou. 28. 1.
providence watches over them, which will either deliver them from danger and
evil, or turn them to their everlasting good.

ANd so much concerning the fourth benefit. The fifth follows, which is that
near and inseparable union that is between Jesus Christ and his Church,
expressed in these words: Verse. 19. And I will marry thee unto me for ever,
yea and I will marry thee unto me, in righteousness, and in judgment, and
in mercy, and in compassion. 20. I will even marry thee unto me in faith, and
thou shall know the Lord. Where the Prophet proceeding in his former allegory,
compares The exposition. The union between Christ and his Church resembled to
marriage. Psalm. 45.
the union which is between Christ and his Church unto marriage, because no
other similitude does more lively and fully express it, whereof it is that
this spiritual and mystical union is usually in the Scriptures represented
unto us, under this type of marriage, wherein Christ Jesus is the husband and
his Church the spouse. So Psalm. 45. the union of Christ and his Church is
shadowed under the type of Salomons marriage with Pharaohs daughter, the whole
book of Canticles contains nothing else but the doctrine of this spiritual
marriage. The Prophet Esaias speaks of it, chap. 54. 5. For he that made thee is
thine husband, whose name is the Lord of hosts, etc. Esa. ^4 5. 6. and 62. 5.
Ezech. 16. 8.
v. 6. chapter 62. 5. The Prophet Ezechiel likewise, chap. 16. 8. etc. And our
Savior Christ in the new Testament calls himself the Bridegroom of the
Church, Matthew. 9. 15. And chap. Matthew. 9. 15. and 22. 2.
22. 2. God the Father is compared to a King who married his son, that is,
Jesus Christ with the Church. The Apostles also use the same similitude, to
signify this union: So Paul, 2. Cor. 11. 2. I have prepared you for one
husband, to present you 2. Cor. 11 2. Ephesians. 5. 23 25. Apoc 19. 7. and 21. 2. 9.
as a pure virgin to Christ. And Ephesians. 5 23. 25. 32. And the Apostle John, Apoc.
19. 7. Let us be glad and rejoice and give glory to him, for the marriage of
the Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready. So chap. 21. 2. And
I John saw the holy city the new Jerusalem come down from God out of heaven,
prepared as a Bride trimmed for her husband: and verse. 9.

Seeing therefore this union between Christ and us, is in The great similitude
between our spiritual union with Christ and marriage.
so many places resembled to marriage, let us in the next place consider the
great similitude which is betwixt them, that so we may the more plainly
conceive of this excellent mystery, which is the ground and foundation of al
our good and happiness.

First, as unto every lawful marriage, there is required that the parties
married be of the same kind and nature, so it is in this spiritual marriage;
for the Son of God the second person in Trinity took upon him our nature
and was made flesh, that so he might be a fit husband of the Church; and the
Church is regenerate and purged from her sins and corruptions Ioh. 1. 1.
of nature, that so being made like Christ in holiness and vnblame ableness,
she might become a fit spouse for Christ: as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 5.
25. 26. 27. So that if Ephesians 5. 25. 27
we speak properly, neither God the Father, nor God the holy Ghost is the
husband of the Church, but God the Son, who alone took upon him our nature,
and became like unto us: and therefore both this and all the like places of
Scripture, which speak of the marriage between the Lord and the Church, are to
be understood properly of God the Son.

And as these persons being of the same nature ought to be of a different sex
male and female: so in this spiritual marriage Christ is the man or husband,
the Church is the woman or spouse; who was taken out of the side of Christ in
his deadly sleep, as Eua out of Adams, and therefore may be said to be bone
of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, of whom he begets by the seed of his
word and holy Spirit many faithful children unto himself.

Secondly, as in marriages there ought to be only two joined together, one man
with one woman, according to that Matthew. 19. 5. And they two shall be one
flesh: so in this spiritual Matthew. 19. 5.
marriage there are but two, one husband, Christ, and one spouse, the Church:
for although the faithful are many in number, yet they make but one entire
body, seeing they are conjoined and quickened by the same Spirit, as diverse
members make but one body, being quickened by the same soul.

And as in our ordinary marriages special regard is to be had, that we be not
unequally yoked, the godly with the wicked, the believer with the infidel, as
the Apostle charge us, 2. Cor. 6. 14. So in this spiritual marriage, Christ
the husband, most just and holy, has had a special care not to choose, 2.
Cor. 6. 14.
but to make his spouse, being chosen, glorious, and without any spot or
wrinkle, holy and unblameable, by washing away Ephesians. 5. 26. 27.
her sins and corruptions with his blood, and that first in her
justification, whereby her sins are pardoned, and hid out of Gods sight, with
the rich robe of Christ's righteousness: and secondly by sanctification,
whereby she is freed from the power, dominion, and corruption of sin it
self, and made pure and holy; the which work is begun in this life, and
finished in the life to come.

Seeing therefore all who are married unto Christ are also justified and
sanctified, hence it follows, that those in who^ sin not only lives but
also reigns, are not espoused unto Christ: for he who requires at our hands
that we be not unequally yoked, will much less match himself thus unequally.

Thirdly, as in all marriages there is required a double consent, first of the
parents, and secondly of the parties themselves: so in this spiritual marriage,
there is first the consent of God the Father, who has given the Church to
Christ, that he might redeem and save it; and Christ likewise unto the Church,
that he might be the head and husband thereof: the which his consent and free
good will, in this mutual donation he has made known unto us in the Gospel,
and does more and more confirm us in the assurance thereof by the Sacraments
of Baptism, and the Lords Supper. So likewise there is a mutual consent
between the parties: for first our Savior Christ took our nature upon him,
and was made like unto us in all things, sin only excepted, that he might
become our husband, head and Savior: and this his inestimable good will he
has made known unto his spouse, in that he was content for her sake not only
to abase himself, by taking upon him the form of a servant, but also therein
to suffer so many miseries, ignominy, reproach, whippings, buffetings,
reuilings, crowning with thorns, and death it self, yea the cursed death of
the cross, and the anger of God more bitter then all the rest, that hereby he
might purge his Church from all her sins, adorn her with his righteousness,
and so make her a fit spoule for such an husband.

So the Church also gives her consent to this spiritual marriage, when as she
acknowledges Christ alone for her Lord and husband, and rests and relieth
upon him only, by a true and lively faith for her provision of al necessaries,
protection from all dangers, and for eternal happiness and salvation; and
when also she endeavors to approve her self the spouse of Christ by her
holy obedience and subjection unto his will.

Fourthly, as in marriage there is not only a verbal or imaginary conjunction,
but also a real and substantial union, not of the body alone, but also of
their hearts and minds, so as they are no more two but one flesh: so in the
marriage of Christ and his Church, the union between them is real and
substantial, and that in respect of their whole person, body with body, and
soul with soul; neither is the Church united unto Christ's humanity alone,
but to the whole person God and man, for such is the inseparable union between
the two natures of Christ, that they who are conjoined with the one, are knit
to the other likewise. So Ioh. 6. 56. Ephesians. 5. 30. Joh. 6. 56. Ephesians. 5. 30.
1. Cor 10. 16. 17. and 6. 17.
1. Cor. 10. 16. 17. and 6. 17.

But first of all, the union begins between the Church and Christ's humane
nature, and then by means hereof, it is united to the divine nature likewise;
for seeing there was no proportion between us and God, because he was
infinite, and we finite, therefore there could be no union, but by our mediator
Jesus Christ God and man; but being united unto the manhood of Christ, we are
hereby also united to his Godhead: neither can distance of place hinder this
real and substantial union, seeing it is spiritual, the chief bond of this
union being the holy Ghost, who fills all places; and seeing in an earthly
marriage, distance of place cannot frustrate or take away the union which is
between man and wife, much less can it break off this heavenly and
spiritual union between Christ and his Church.

Fifthly, as there are diverse special ends of the marriage between The ends of
our spiritual marriage.
man and wife: as 1. For their mutual good and comfort, man being the head and
guide of his wife, and the wife being a helper to her husband: 2. For the
avoiding of fornication: 3. For generation of children: So likewise our
spiritual marriage with Christ has the same ends. For it is instituted by God:
first, for their mutual good, namely, for the good of Christ, because it is
good for the husband to be with his spouse, it is profitable for the head to
be joined with the members, it is for the glory of a King to be near his
subjects, it tends to the perfection of the foundation, to be joined with the
rest of the building: it is good also for the Church to be joined in marriage
with Christ, because in him she has all her good, the pardon of her sins,
reconciliation with God, sanctification, and eternal life and happiness.

Secondly, for the avoiding of spiritual whoredom, whether we understand it
specially of idolatry, or generally of all other sins, wherewith we defile
both body and soul; the which end respects not Christ our husband, who is
pure and free from all sin, but the spouse, who being naturally inclined co
commit spiritual whoredom with sin and Satan, is restrained by virtue of
this spiritual union with Christ; whereby being made partaker of Gods Spirit,
these her lusts and concupiscences, are mortified and subdued, and she
contrariwise is inclined to keep her self unspotted and undefiled, and to
perform holy obedience to Christ her husband.

Thirdly, this spiritual marriage was instituted, that Christ of the Church
might beget a holy seed, by his word and Spirit, even every faithful man, and
all the particular members of this body. For these in diverse respects, may be
called both the spouse and children of Christ: his spouse as they are joined
unto him by a lively faith in marriage; his children as they are begotten unto
him of the Church, by his word and Spirit.

Sixthly, as between married persons, many duties are mutually Duties to be
performed in our spiritual marriage.
to be performed, some whereof are commune to both, and some proper to either
party; so the like duties are performed by Christ and his Church. The commune
duties are principally conjugal love, faithfulness, cohabitation, communication
of persons and goods; all which on Christ's part are performed in the highest
degree of perfection: for first, he has sufficiently manifested his love to
his Church, in that he was content to give his life for her redemption, Ephesians.
5. 25. Secondly, he is so faithful in keeping his covenant with Ephesians. 5. 25.
her, that her unfaithfulness and infidelity cannot make his promise vain, and
his faith of none effect, Romans 3. 3. 4. Thirdly, he dwells with her even to
the end of the world, protecting Romans 3. 3. 4.
her by his power, and guiding her by his word and Spirit, Matthew. 28. 20. Ioh.
14. 16. Fourthly, he communicates Matthew. 28. 20. Joh. 14. 16.
his person with us, and all his goods and benefits; so that he is now become
ours, and all that belongs unto him: his merits are our merits, his
satisfaction our satisfaction, his obedience our obedience, his righteousness
our righteousness, his holiness our holiness, his wisdom our wisdom, his
kingdom our kingdom. And so likewise these commune duties are performed by
his spouse the Church, in her measure and proportion; for she loves her
husband Christ, and sets her heart and affections upon him, so as she can be
content for his sake to forsake the world, yea even her own self. She desires
to keep her marriage faith, abhorring all spiritual whoredom, and laboring
to reserve her self for her husband holy and undefiled; she dwells with
him, and rangeth not abroad into the world, but keeps her self within her
bounds and limits; she communicates her self, and what she has unto him, and
having nothing else worth the gift, she gives him her heart, praising and
rendering unto him all possible laud and thanks for all his benefits, and
offering unto him with a sincere heart his pure worship and service, by whose
treasures alone she is enriched.

The same similitude is between their special duties, belonging Special
duties between Christ and his Church. 1. Pet. 3. 7.
peculiarly to either party: for as the husband being the head, is to rule and
govern his wife, to instruct her as a man of knowledge, to direct and counsel
her, to protect and defend her, to cherish her as his own flesh; to provide
according to his power all things necessary for her, and to tolerate and bear
with her infirmities, as being the weaker vessel; So does Christ Jesus behave
himself to his spouse the Church: for he governs, instructs, counsels,
and rules her by his word and Spirit; he protecteth her by his almighty power
from all dangers, and the fury and malice of all her enemies; he provides for
her by his alsufficient providence, he cherishes and nourishes her as his
own flesh, yea with his own flesh and precious blood unto everlasting Ephesians.
5. 25.
life: and though she be full of infirmities and imperfections, he bears with
her as being the weaker vessel: for as the Psalmist says, He knows whereof
she is made, and remembers that she is but dust, Psalm. 103. 14. Psalm. 103.
14.


And so likewise as the wife subiecteth her self to her husband, as to her
head and governor, obeying him in all things which are honest and lawful, as
she regards him with reverent respect, and ingenuously fears his
displeasure; and in a word, as she demeaneth her self in all her words and
actions, modestly, soberly, humbly and quietly, so as she may be most amiable
to her husband: So the Church submits her self unto Christ, as unto her
only Lord and husband, she performs unto him absolute obedience, she
reuerenceth him with awful love, and fears his displeasure above all worldly
loss; and to conclude, in all her carriage and conversation, she demeaneth her
self humbly and dutifully, desiring nothing more then to appear lovely and
amiable in Christ's sight.

But yet in the degree and measure of performing these mutual duties, there is
to be observed a difference; for Christ performs them all most absolutely,
and in the highest degree of all perfection. The Church performs them also,
but yet in her measure and proportion: that part of the Church indeed which is
triumphat, performs these duties to her husband Christ, in such a degree of
perfection, as the creature is capable of, yet far short of that measure and
degree, in which her husband performs them: but the Church militant with much
more weakness and imperfection, for whereas she is partly regenerate, and
partly unregenerate, the spiritual part labors to perform all good duties
unto Christ, but the flesh rebelleth and disobeyeth, she delights to obey her
husband in the inner man, but she finds another law in her members rebelling
against the law of her Rom 7. 22. 23.
mind, which oftentimes leads her captive to the law of sin, whereby it
comes to pass that all the duties which she performs, are so mingled with
corruptions, and stained with imperfections, that were not her husband Christ
infinite in mercy and compassion, they would rather deserve his hatred then
his love, and punishment rather then reward: but such is his abundant goodness
toward his spouse, that her imperfect obedience is accepted of him as perfect,
he respects not her deed but her will, and regards not her actions but her
affection, and so that she earnestly desire and painfully endeavor in the
integrity and uprightness of her heart to perform all duties of love and
obedience unto him, he pardons her infirmities, and washes away the stains
and spots of her corruptions and imperfections with his own most precious
blood.

And this is the marriage between Christ and his Church of which the Prophet
here speaks. Now let us more specially entreat of the words themselves, and
of those points concerning this spiritual marriage contained in them. And I
will marry thee unto me for ever, etc. Wherein are contained two principal
points: first, the espousals of the Church unto The author of our spiritual
marriage.
Christ: and secondly, the adjuncts or properties appertaining to this happy
contract. In the first is expressed, first, the author of this marriage:
secondly, the act of espousing: thirdly, the parties contracted. The author of
this marriage is God himself, and if we speak properly God the Father, who
joins his Son in marriage with the Church by his holy Spirit, so yt this is
not a match of our own seeking, or making, for in our own natures we are
alienated and estranged from God, but God loves us first before we love him,
and our Savior 1. Ioh. 4. 19.
Christ wooeth the Church, and with his gracious promises of innumerable
blessings and benefits he wins her heart, and moves her to affect him:
Ezech. 16. 8. Ezech. 16. 8.


Now the isntrumental cause or means whereby God makes this marriage, are his
Prophets, Apostles, and faithful Ministers, who are Gods ambassadors, whom he
sends to persuade and effect it, as the Apostle shows, 2. Cor. 5. 20. 2.
Cor. 5. 20.
Now then are we ambassadors for Christ, etc. And therefore Paul says, that
he had prepared the Corinthians for one husband, to present them as a pure
virgin to Christ, 2. Cor. 11. 2. 2. Cor. 11. 2.


Secondly, the act of espousing is contained in these words: The act of
espousing.
I will espouse thee. Whereby it appears, that howsoever the Prophet utters
these words unto the idolatrous Church of Israel, yet his meaning was not, that
God would make this new covenant of marriage with them, but with the whole
Church in the time of the Gospel, consisting of all the faithful both Jews
and Gentiles: for seeing they had been of old married unto God, and were
divorced and cast off for their spiritual whoredoms, it could not be fitly
said of them, that the Lord would espouse or contract them to himself, seeing
they only are properly said to be espoused, who never before were taken to
wife, but rather he should have said of them, that he would again be
reconciled to her, and receive her to grace.

So that hereby we are not to understand, that the Lord The properties of our
spiritual marriage. 1. it is not te^porarie but perpetual.
would renew or confirm the old covenant of works, between himself and the
Church of Israel, for that was made frustrate by their spiritual whoredoms
and rebellion, for which they were divorced and rejected, but that he would
make a new covenant between himself and all the faithful in the time of the
Gospel, receiving them into this near bond of marriage as pure and undefiled
virgins, the which is inuiolably to continue for ever and ever.

Thirdly, the parties contracted are Christ and his Church, signified in these
words, I will marry thee unto me. Where by (thee) we are not to understand
the people of Israel according to the flesh, but according to the spirit, that
is, all the faithful both Jews and Gentiles; and by (me) we are to
understand Jesus Christ, who in this spiritual marriage is united to his spouse
the Church, essentially and substantially, body with body, and spirit with
spirit, as before I have showed.

And so much for the contract it self. The adjuncts hereof are, first the
perpetual continuance of this marriage: and secondly the conditions thereof,
which are as it were the marriage bands, wherewith it is held inviolable. The
perpetual continuance is noted in these words, for ever: where the Lord makes
a secret opposition between the covenant of works, made between him and the
Israelites, and the covenant of grace, made between him and all the faithful;
for that former marriage was not perpetual, but temporary, and of short
continuance, because the Church of Israel perfidiously violated her marriage
faith, and persisted not in her love and obedience toward the Lord her
husband, but forsaking him prostituted her self to commit spiritual whoredom
with false gods, and therefore was justly divorced from him, as before we have
showed; but the new covenant of this spiritual marriage between Christ and the
faithful, shall be perpetual and inviolable, because he will write the laws
and conditions thereof, not in tables of stone, but in the fleshie tables of
their hearts, and will so rule and ouerrule them by his gracious Spirit
dwelling in them, that they shall never break their covenant, nor depart from
the Lord their husband. The like places of Scripture, which may serve for an
exposition of this, we have Esa. 54. 8. With everlasting mercy have I had
Esa. 54. 8. 9. 10
compassion on thee, says the Lord thy redeemer. verse. 9. For this is unto me
as the waters of Noah, for as I have sworn, etc. verse. 10. For the mountains
shall remove, and the hills shall fall down, but my mercy shall not depart
from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace fall away, says the Lord
that has compassion on thee. Ierem. 31. 31. Behold, the days come, says the
Jere. 31. 31. 32
Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the
house of Jacob. 32. Not according to the covenant I made with their fathers,
when I took them hand, by the hand, to bring them out of the land of Egypt, the
which covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto them, says the Lord.
33. But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel,
After those days, says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and
write it in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people,
etc. So chap. 33. 20. 21. 22. 25. 26. Iere. 33. 20. 21. Ezech. 16. 59. Iere.
32. 38. 39.
Ezech. 16. 59. I will confirm unto thee an everlasting covenant: Ierem. 32.
38. 39. 40.

By all which places it is clear and manifest, that the covenant between the
Lord and the faithful is permanent and perpetual, and that both in respect of
God and of the faithful; and not only on Gods part, as the Papists would have
it, who affirm, that we may have certain assurance of the continuance of this
covenant, in respect of God, because he for his part will most certainly
perform the conditions thereof, Iere. 31. 32.
howbeit there is cause of doubting, that it will be violated and made
frustrate by the faithful, because they may lose their faith, and all other
graces, and so forsake the Lord; but according to this doctrine there should be
no difference between the old covenant of works, and the new covenant of
grace, in respect of the perpetuity thereof, for that also on Gods part was
most firm and permanent, seeing there was not one tittle of his promises which
was not accomplished; nevertheless on the part of the Israelites, it was made
void and frustrate, because they performed not the condition of faith and
obedience. Whereas the Lord promises that his covenant with the faithful,
should be perpetual and everlasting, not only on his part, but also on the
faithfuls, because he would by the finger of his Spirit write his laws in
their hearts, Iere. 31. 33. and because he would also put his fear Iere. 31.
33. and 32. 40.
into their hearts, so as they should not depart from him: as it is Iere. 32.
40.

And so much for the perpetuity of this spiritual marriage. The means whereby
the covenant of our spiritual marriage is made perpetual.
In the next place he sets down the manner how, and the means whereby he
would make his covenant perpetual and everlasting; namely, by removing all
causes and means whereby it might be violated; and by tying the faithful unto
himself by such inviolable bands, as it should not be possible for any thing
whatsoever to cause a divorce and separation. All which is signified in these
words; I will marry 1. The church is married in righteousness.
thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, etc. Where the Lord shows
first, that whereas sin and unrighteousness might be a sufficient cause to
make a divorce, and break off the perpetuity of the Churches marriage with
him; for what communion has light with darkness, righteousness with 2. Cor.
6. 14.
unrighteousness? he would therefore marry the Church unto him in
righteousness, that is, he would make her righteous, first by washing away her
sins with his own most precious blood, and imputing unto her his
righteousness, full satisfaction, and perfect obedience. Of which the Apostle
speaks, Esa. 54. 14.
Romans 5. 17. 19. And secondly, by working in her inherent righteousness, that
is sanctification, integrity, sincerity, and Romans 5. 17. 19.
vprightnes of heart, whereby it should come to pass, that howsoever she might
fall through infirmity, yet she should never fall away; though she may offend
her husband, by her corruptions and imperfections, yet she should never forsake
him, nor desist in her faith and holy obedience. So that neither her sins past,
nor her sins to come, should be able to separate her from the Lord her husband:
not her sins past, because they should be blotted out of remembrance, and
washed away by Christ's blood, nor her sins to come, for as much as she
should be endued with such sincerity and indignity of heart, that she should
never sin with full consent of will, nor ever leave the Lord to commit
spiritual adultery with sin and Satan. Neither should want of righteousness
cause her to be rejected, seeing she should be adorned with the glorious robe
of Christ's righteousness imputed unto her; and also by virtue of Gods Spirit
dwelling in her, she should be enabled to walk before the Lord in the
integrity and vprightnes of her heart, indeauouring to perform all duties of
holiness and righteousness unto him.

Secondly, whereas error and blindness of judgment, is a 2 The Church is
married unto Christ in judgment.
cause of divorce and separation, seeing thereby the wife is moved to prefer
an adulterer before her lawful husband; therefore that this may not be a cause
of separation between him and his Church, the Lord promises that he will
endue her with a clear and wise judgment, whereby she shall be able to
discern between good and evil, right and wrong: and how much more profitable
will it be for her to embrace the Lord, as her only husband, loving,
reuerencing, and obeying him in all things, than to forsake him, and to follow
after her adulterous lovers, that is, idols, the world, Satan, and the
pleasures of sin, which last but for a season, and in the end bring
everlasting destruction; and how much better it is to embrace his pure worship
revealed in his word, then to follow humane traditions and her own inventions?

Thirdly, the wife is moved to break her conjugal fidelity, 3. The Church is
married to Christ in mercy and beneficence.
and to leave her husband, and follow her lovers, when as she is brought into
doubt of his love and good will, in respect of his illiberall carriage toward
her, and when as by his niggardly restraining her of necessaries, she is
brought into extremity and want; for then being hopeless at home, she rangeth
abroad, and seeks help of strangers, when her husband neglects her. Whereas
contrariwise, when she has assured testimony of his love, by his readiness to
supply all her necessities to the uttermost of his power, it is a notable
means to work in her love toward him, and to preserve her faith inviolable.
And thus it fares in this spiritual marriage, when we doubt of Gods love and
favor, and are brought into extreme exigents, through our spiritual or
corporal wants, then our corrupt nature inclines us to leave trusting and
depending upon the Lord, and to follow Idols, Saints, Angels and Images,
looking for by them a supply of that wherein we think that the Lord is
defective. And therefore he here promises, that he will also marry her unto
himself in mercy, or as the word may more fitly in this place signify, in
benignity and beneficence, that is, that he will so multiply upon her mercies
and benefits, as thereby she shall have full assurance of his love and
providence watching over her, and shall by his bounty be so furnished with all
necessaries, that she shall not need to depend upon any other. The which
promise is accomplished, both in respect of corporal and spiritual benefits;
for if the first be wanting, the Lord gives the other in such plenty and
abundance, that in the midst of worldly wants, she shall have little cause to
doubt of Gods love and liberality, seeing he does bestow upon her these rich
treasures, and gifts of greatest value. And thus have we this prophecy
expounded, Ier. 32. 40. I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I
will never turn away Jer. 32. 40. 41.
from them to do them good, etc. 41. Yea I will delight in them to do them good,
etc.

Fourthly, because when the husband is of an austere, rigorous, and impacable
nature, so as he will not bear with his 4. The Church is married to Christ's
compassion.
wives infirmities, but punishes every fault in all bitterness and
extremity, it is a notable means to work in her alienation of mind, and to
move her to affect others more then him: and contrariwise, compassion and
readiness to pardon faults, and pass by infirmities, is a singular means to
nourish love and fidelity; therefore the Lord promises in the next place,
that he will marry the Church in mercy and compassion; so that though through
frailty she fall, and by her sins offend him, yet this shall be no
sufficient cause to move her desperately to forsake and flee from him, seeing
he is so full of mercy and compassion, that she can be no more ready to
repent, then he to forgive, nor to ask pardon, then he to grant it. And that
not only for light and venial sins, nor for offenses seldom committed, but
for all her sins most grievous and innumerable: and this is implied in that
he here uses the plural number, saying, that he will marry her in mercies,
to note the multitude of his mercies, whereby he is ready to forgive a
multitude of sins. The like place unto this we have, Ier. 31. 34. For I will
forgive their iniquity, Jer 31. 34. Esaias 54. 10.
and remember their sins no more. So Esaias 54. 10. The mountains shall
remove, and the hills shall fall down, but my mercy shall not depart from
thee, etc.

Fifthly, because all love and benefits cannot restrain an 5. The Lord
marries his Church in faithfulness.
inconstant woman, who is naturally addicted to lust and uncleanness, but that
upon every occasion she is apt to forsake her husband, and follow her lovers:
therefore in the next place the Lord says, that he will marry his Church in
faithfulness; whereby we are to understand, that not only the Lord himself will
continue faithful and constant in his love to the Church, but that also he
will by his holy Spirit, wherewith his Church and he are joined in marriage, so
rule her affections, mortify her natural lightness, and pronenesse to
spiritual adultery, and confirm and strengthen her in constancy and
fidelity, that she shall ever keep her marriage faith inviolable, and reserve
her self for him alone pure and undefiled.

Where we may further note, that he does the third time repeat these words, I
will marry thee unto me, to this end, that we might by this his redoubling of
his speech, be the more undoubtedly assured of the certainty of this holy and
heavenly contract, of which we are easily moved to make some question, in
respect of Gods glorious Majesty, and incomprehensible greatness, and in
respect of our own base vileness and unworthiness.

Lastly, the wives ignorance of her husbands perfections, 6. The Lord marries
his Church in knowledge.
whereby she neither knows nor acknowledges his excellencies and good
parts, and whereby as she is often ready to undervalue his worthiness; so also
with an ouerweening conceit, to ouerprize the gifts and qualities of strangers,
is a notable means to alienate her mind from her husband, as being unworthy
of her love, and to move her to affect others: so the ignorance of the spouse,
the Church, of Gods excellency, mercy, goodness, and all perfections, is a
chief cause that moves her to leave the Lord, and to follow her lovers; for
if she did but know the Lord, she should need no other arguments to ravish her
heart with his love, nor any further inducement to move her to forsake all
others, and to embrace him alone with constant affection. And therefore the
Lord in the last place promises, that he will eternize the marriage between
him and his Church, by illuminating her mind with a true knowledge of him;
whereupon it must necessarily follow, that she will prefer him above all
idols and false gods, seeing she clearly perceives that he infinitely
excels them all, in goodness, perfection, and all true worthiness.

The like promise we have, Esaias 54. 13. And all thy children shall be taught of
the Lord, Ier. 31. 34. And they shall teach Esaias 54. 13. Jer. 31. 34.
no more every man his neighbor and every man his brother, saying, know the
Lord, for they shall all know me from the least of them to the greatest of
them, says the Lord. So Joel. 2. 28. 29. which was accomplished, Act. 2. 17.
Joel. 2. 28. Act 2. 17.


Now this knowledge of which he here speaks, is not so much what Christ is in
himself, namely, most infinite, most mighty, most wise, etc. but especially
what he is unto us, to wit, a careful head, and a most loving husband, who
has not only created us, but also redeemed us with his precious blood shead,
and hereby obtained for us the pardon of our sins, reconciliation,
sanctification, and eternal salvation, who gives unto us also all benefits
spiritual and temporal, and protecteth us from all dangers. With which saving
knowledge whosoever are endued, it is impossible they should forsake Christ
their husband, or prefer a strange love before the love of him, who has so
dearly loved them.

And thus have I showed the meaning of the words and Gods covenant is grounded
upon his undeserved grace and goodness.
this contract of marriage we may observe, that the covenant of grace between
God and his Church, is grounded upon Gods free mercy and undeserved goodness,
without any condition of our own works and worthiness. Neither is it here
said, that he would marry the Church if she were just, holy, faithful, and
worthy his love; but he absolutely promises, without all conditions that he
will marry her, and being married, will endow her with righteousness,
judgment, pardon of her sins, faithfulness; so that these are not the
causes moving the Lord to espouse the Church, but because in his free love he
has married her, therefore he will prosecute her with his love, and bestow
all these graces and benefits upon her. But this most clearly appears,
whereas he says he will marry her in benignity and mercy, for benignity
presupposes the Churches want and poverty, and mercy presupposes her
misery, neither if she were rich in her self should she need the Lords
beneficence, nor if she were in happy estate should she need mercy and
compassion.

Secondly, we may observe that the Lord alone is the author of this spiritual
marriage: for when we neither seek nor desire it, he wooes us, and also
inclines us to grant his suite. And therefore let the Lord have the whole
glory of his own work, and let not us rob him of any part thereof by
ascribing it to our own free will, merits, or worthiness.

Thirdly, we here leanre what is the great dignity and excellency The
dignity of the faithful.
of the Church, and of every faithful man: for howsoever they are basely
esteemed of in the world, and accounted the very ofscouring of al things, yet
in truth there is none equal with them in honor and worthiness, seeing it
has pleased the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings to espouse them unto
himself. When Saul offered David his daughter in marriage, he thought it such
an high degree of honor, as he was altogether unworthy of; so that in sight
of his own meannesse he cries out, What am I, and what is my life, or the 1.
Sam. 18. 18.
family of my father in Israel, that I should be son in law to the King? how
much more then may we filled with rauishing, wonder, exclaim, what are we dust
and ashes, miserable and wretched men, that we should be advanced to this
royal dignity, as to be the spouse of the glorious King of heaven and earth.

The use which we are to make hereof is, that if we are not We must desire the
spiritual honor of the faithful.
as yet invested with this honor, we labor to attain unto it; for if we do
(as it is the nature of all men) desire honor and preferment, why do we
follow a shadow and neglect the substance? why do we like children run after
the bubble of vain and momentanie glory, and in the mean time never seek
after that superexcellent and eternal glory of being espoused unto God?
especially considering that worldly honor is uncertain, both in getting and
in the keeping; and seeing if we labor after this honor of being married
unto God, we shall most surely attain unto it; for the Lord himself
publishes and offers this contract, and there can no impediment hinder it,
unless we our selves forbid the banes. And secondly, those that are advanced
already unto this height of honor, must never forget to be truly thankful
unto him, who is the author of their advancement, when they deserved by their
sinner ignominy and disgrace.

Fourthly, we may here learn, that the poorest faithful The poorest
faithful man richer then the wealthiest worldling.
man is in better estate, and possessed of more rich treasures, then the
wealthiest Mammonist in the world; for they have Christ himself, and all his
benefits; they are true owners of the treasures of his righteousness and
obedience; yea and by virtue of this spiritual marriage, they have right and
interest not only to all the temporal benefits of this life, but they also
have the ioynter of Gods kingdom assured unto them.

Fifthly, being espoused to God, let us ever remembering this We ought to behave
our selves as it becomes the spouse of Christ.
honorable advancement unto which we are preferred, so behave our selves as
beseems our high place and calling. A Prince will not seruilely drudge for
day wages, nor sell his honor for a small trifle, nor set his mind upon base
objects; no more should we, who by virtue of this royal marriage are called to
higher honor, then the whole world affoordeth, spend our sweat and labor to
obtain uncertain richer and filthy pleasures; we should not dim our
glory, and impeach our honor, by behauing our selves like the slaves of sin
and Satan, nor affect with the highest pitch of our desires worldly toys, and
base trifles, seeing things of far greater excellency are reserved for us.

Lastly, as hereby we may be put in mind of our honor We must perform
conjugal duties unto Christ.
and dignity: so also of our duty, namely, that being married unto Christ,
we labor to perform unto him all duties, required of a good wife, seeing he
is wanting in nothing which belongs unto a most gracious and kind husband;
that is, let us love him above all the world, and show our love by our
readiness to lay down our lives for his sake, who is our loving husband,
seeing he has laid down his for us, even whilst we were his enemies. Let us
yield unto him voluntary and absolute obedience, and submit our selves to be
ruled and guided by his word and Spirit. Let us keep our conjugal fidelity,
reserving our selves pure and undefiled, as from all other sins, so
especially from idolatry and superstition. Let us who have communion both in
Christ and all his benefits, not grudge to give our selves and the best things
we have unto him for the advancement of his glory, and the furthering of his
worship and service; especially let us give unto him our hearts, which he so
much desires. Let us reverence him as our heavenly husband, fearing his
displeasure as the greatest evil, and mourning for no loss so much as for the
loss of his favor. Let us rest and wholly rely on his providence, for the
supply of all our wants, and for protection from all dangers. In a word, let
us labor to perform all duties which belong to such a husband, and to deck
our selves with all graces, which may make us appear amiable in his sight; and
so we shall confirm our selves in this assurance, that we are espoused unto
Christ, and shall be made partakers not only of himself, but also of all his
benefits.

And these are the doctrines which are to be observed out Nothing can frustrate
the covenant between God and us.
of the contract it self. Now follow those which arise out of the adjuncts and
properties of this marriage, and first out of the perpetuity thereof. Where
first we may observe to our singular comfort, that it is impossible for any
thing whatsoever to break off the covenant between God and us, or to make a
separation after he has once contracted us to himself in this holy marriage,
nor all our spiritual enemies, Satan, the world, the flesh, nor all the power
of hell joined together, no nor yet our own sins past, present or to come,
for the Lord has here promised, that he will espouse us unto himself for
ever. Who therefore would not labor with his whole endeavor to attain unto
this most honorable estate, accompanied with such inestimable benefits, seeing
they are infinitely more excellent in their own nature, then all the glory
and riches of the world, and besides they are eternal and never to be taken
from us. He that is in honor to day, may be in disgrace to morrow; he that is
now rich, may within a while be brought to extreme poverty: but who so is
advanced to this spiritual honor, of being espoused unto God, shall never be
deprived of it, neither in this life, nor in the life to come.

Secondly, seeing the union between Christ and us is perpetual, and seeing
the bonds of this union is the Spirit of God, and a true and lively faith;
hence we learn that Gods Spirit and this faith, after we are married unto
Christ, shall never be taken from us, for then the marriage bonds being broken,
the marriage also should be dissolved, which is contrary to the promise of God
in this place.

And these are the things to be observed out of the perpetuity Whosoever are
married unto Christ are made righteous.
of this marriage. Out of the properties and conditions thereof, we may further
note these instructions. First, whereas the Lord promises, that he will
espouse the Church in righteousness: hence we learn that whosoever are married
unto Christ, they are also made righteous, that is, they are not only clothed
with the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness imputed unto them, by which
they are justified in Gods sight, but also are made righteous by the
sanctification of his Spirit, dwelling in them; the which their righteousness
consists in the integrity and vprightnes of their hearts, and in their
earnest and sincere desire, and endeavor to perform obedience unto Gods
Commandments; the which their obedience is in this life mingled with manifold
infirmities and imperfections, but shall become perfect in the life to come.

Secondly, we learn, that though this righteousness be Our righteousness
constant and perpetual.
weak and imperfect, yet shall it be perpetual, even as our marriage with
Christ is perpetual and eternal. And therefore although we must work out
our salvation with fear and trembling, and labor earnestly to have this our
righteousness more and more strengthened and increased; yet when we feel our
slow progress in the paths of righteousness, and find it mingled with our
great corruptions and imperfections, like a few grains of corn in a heap of
chafe, let us not be utterly discouraged, as fearing lest this little spark
of righteousness will be altogether quenched with the flood of our corruptions,
seeing the Lord has promised, that as this his covenant of marriage with us
shall be perpetual, so also that it shall for ever continue in righteousness,
etc.

Thirdly, whereas the Lord promises, that he will marry Our righteousness is
not the cause of our union with Christ.
his Church in righteousness, not by choosing her being righteous, but by making
her righteous being chosen; hence we learn, that our own righteousness is not
the cause of this holy and happy union, but that this union is the cause of
our righteousness: for after we are united unto Christ by the Spirit of God,
then this Spirit dwelling in us, does apply unto us the virtue of Christ's
death, which purges us from, not only the guilt and punishment of sin, but
also from the corruption, power, and dominion thereof; and the virtue of his
resurrection, whereby we also are raised from the death of sin, to holiness
and newnes of life. And this notably appears, Ezech. 16. 8. 9. 10. 11. etc.
Ezech. 16. 8. 9.


Secondly, whereas the Lord says, that he will marry his Church in judgment:
hence we learn, that whosoever are Those who are married unto Christ have a
sound judgment.
espoused unto God, they are so enlightened, and have their judgments so
informed by his word and Spirit, that they can discern between truth and
error, religion and superstition, God and an idol, and far prefer the
sincere worship of God revealed in his Word, before their own wilworship and
humane inventions; so yt it is not possible yt they should be seduced and
withdrawn from God and his pure service, to idols, and idolatrous worship, by
all the slights and subtilties of Satan, the world, Antichrist, and all his
false Prophets, as our Savior teaches us, Matthew. 24. 24. because the Lord
Matthew. 24. 24.
has married them unto himself in judgment, whereby they are moved to prefer
the excellency of their husband Christ, and his revealed will, before all
their lovers, and all their alluring baits, with which they endeavor to draw
them from him. Whence it appears that they who are drawn unto idolatry, or
wedded to that common strumpet the world, and the vanities thereof, are not
endued with this sound judgment, and consequently were never married unto
Christ, 1. Ioh. 2. 19. 1. Joh. 2. 19.


Thirdly, whereas he promises, that he will marry his Christ's benefits
should cause us to love him.
Church for ever in benignity: we learn hence, what use we are to make of
Gods manifold benefits which he bestows upon us, namely, that they serve as
helps to eternize our marriage with Christ, by knitting our hearts unto him in
true love and entire affection. For what wife would not dearly love a husband
so bountiful and gracious, who never is weary in bestowing upon her benefits,
and in seeking by all means her good and happiness? especially considering,
that he requires nothing else at her hands, but her heart and loving
affection. But alas such is our corruption, that we cannot afford him thus
much, yea rather as some wives by their husbands benefits, do wax so wanton and
insolent, that they begin in the pride of their hearts to contemn him, of whom
they have all their ornaments and* advancement: so do many of us deal with
Christ, etc.

Fourthly, whereas he says, that he will marry his Church Our sins must be no
cause to alienate our minds from Christ.
in his mercies: hence we learn, that there is no cause, why our sins should
alienate our minds from Christ, seeing so manifold are his mercies, that he is
always ready upon our repentance to forgive us. It is a Machiauellian
principle, put in practice by too too many in our days, that whom they have
offended, those they will never forgive, because in their self-guiltie
consciences, they expect from him whom they have injured deserved revenge, and
therefore to such, one degree of wrong is an occasion unto another. This
hellish policy so odious in the sight, even of a civil man, our corrupt
nature is inclined to use toward Christ, for when we have offended him, in
stead of flying to him, and seeking reconciliation, we are ready to flee from
him, and in guiltines of conscience to distrust of his favor, and to seek for
help of Idols, Images, Saints, Angels, Popish pardons, and such like wicked
means, therein making amends for our former sins, by adding others unto them
much more grievous. But little cause have we to be thus Italianate toward
Christ, seeing his mercies are infinite, so that he is always ready freely to
forgive, and after reconciliation will never bear a secret grudge, nor watch
for opportunity of revenge.

Fifthly, whereas he says, that he will marry us unto himself Our natural
unfaithfulness, and faithfulness through grace.
in faithfulness: hence we learn, first, that by our natural disposition we
are unfaithful, and ready to break the bond of marriage, by forsaking the
Lord, and following idols, till the Lord give unto us this singular gift of
fidelity. And secondly, being endued herewith, it is impossible there should
be a divorce and separation between us, seeing the Lord for his part is most
faithful in keeping his covenant with us, and seeing we also being endued with
fidelity, shall keep our covenant with him, and shall never depart from him,
as it is Ier. 32. 40. Jerem. 32 40. We are naturally ignorant. Luke 1. 78. 79.


Lastly, whereas he promises that she shall know him: hence we learn, that
naturally we walk in the dark vale of ignorance, till God illuminate our
minds with knowledge, and that we are thus illightned by virtue of our
spiritual union with Christ, whose Spirit dwelling in us does with his bright
beams dispell the darkness of our minds, so as we are enabled in some measure
to know God and his truth, as appears, 1. Ioh. 2. 20. 27. Ioh. 16. 13. 1.
Joh. 2. 20. 27. Joh. 16. 13.


Secondly, we here learn, that all those who are truly married Those who are
married unto Christ are endued with saving knowledge.
unto Christ, are endued with the knowledge of God, seeing this is one of the
conditions of this happy contract, and that not only with a bare and idle
speculatiue knowledge, whereby they are able to discourse of the nature of God,
his persons, attributes, and works, seeing the devils also can do this as well
as they; but with a true saving and sanctifying knowledge, whereby knowing we
believe, and believing apply unto our selves, and make profitable use of those
things which we know, concerning God and his truth, not only for the
rectifying of our judgments, but also for the sanctifying of our affections,
life, and conversation; as when knowing Gods justice and power, we be made
thereby afraid to offend him; knowing his mercy, we are moved thereby to
love and obey him; knowing his all-seeing and all-ruling providence, we be
moved hereby to trust and depend upon him; knowing his omnipresence, we
always walk before him, and so behave our selves as in his presence, etc. So
knowing that Christ is a Savior, we also know that he is our Savior, and
wholly and only rest upon him for our salvation; knowing that he has suffered
death, satisfied Gods justice, vanquished Satan and all the power of hell, etc.
we also believe that he has done all this for our sakes: for as it helps
not the Physician being sick, that he has skill to make sovereign medicines,
not only for curing himself, but also others affected with the like diseases,
unless he make use of his skill, and apply his medicines to himself; so it
will little avail us, though we have such a great measure of knowledge, that
we are able to inform our own judgments in the greatest difficulties, and to
instruct others also who are ignorant, unless we make use of our knowledge for
our own benefit; it will little profit us, that we have skill enough to cure
others, of their diseases of sin, by the precious potion of Christ's blood,
and the sovereign baulme of his merits, unless we do apply them likewise unto
our own souls and consciences, for the recovery of our health, etc.

The use hereof serves for the refuting of a twofold error: Ignorant idiots
and carnal hypocrites confuted.
the first of secure worldlings, who living in their ignorance and natural
blindness, content themselves with their good meaning: the other of hypocrites
and carnal Gospellers, who think it sufficient if they have knowledge enough
to discourse of religion, though they make no use of their knowledge, either
for the sanctifying of their affections, or the reforming of their life and
conversation. The first sort are to know, that whosoever are espoused unto
Christ, they are also endued with knowledge of him, and his truth; of which
being utterly ignorant, they cannot challenge Christ for their husband, and
consequently can make no claim to any of his goods, blessings, and benefits.
Neither can they have any assurance yt they are of the Church, howsoever they
are in the Church, seeing the Lord has certainly promised that every member
thereof shall know him from the least to the greatest of them, Iere. 31. 34.
And the other are to remember, that Ier. 31. 34.
Christ has not only married his Church unto himself, in knowledge, but also
in righteousness, and faithfulness, that he has not only espoused unto
himself our tongues and lips, but also our hearts and hands: and therefore
they who are unfaithful, destitute of righteousness, impure in their hearts,
and profane in their actions and conversation, they have no title or interest
in Christ, nor in any thing which belongs unto him.

ANd so much concerning the fifth benefit, which is the marriage of Christ with
his Church. The sixth follows, which is, that being joined unto Christ in
this near bond of marriage, he will graciously hear all her suites, grant her
requests, and supply all her wants with the riches of his benefits. Verse. 21.
And in that day I will hear, says the Lord, I will even hear the heavens,
and they shall hear the earth. 22. And the earth shall hear the corn, and
the wine and the oil, and they shall hear Israel. The which words do well
depend upon The exposition.
the former: for as the wife by virtue of that near union between her and her
husband, may justly challenge a favorable hearing of her suites and requests
in such things as are lawful and convenient, and take upon her the rule of the
family next and immediately under her husband, and the use of his goods with
which he has endowed her: so Christ being married unto the Church promises to
hear her suites; and seeing he is Lord of heaven and earth, to grant unto her
rule over his creatures, so as they shall become serviceable unto her, and be
ready to supply all her wants. So the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 3. 22. 23.
All are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ Gods. 1. Cor. 3. 22. 23.


But let us come to the words themselves, wherein is set down the time when
God would endow his Church with these benefits, In that day; that is, in the
time of the Gospel, when he had made with her his new covenant of grace, and
had knit her unto himself in this near union of marriage.

Secondly, the author of these gifts, namely, the Lord of hosts, under whose
rule and conduct all the whole army of the creatures are subjected.

Thirdly, here is expressed the benefit promised, namely, that he will make all
his creatures both in heaven and earth to become his instruments and means to
derive his blessings and benefits unto his spouse the Church; in these words, I
will hear the heavens, etc. Where he alludeth to the contrary curse threatened
against the transgressors of the law. Deuteronomy. 28. 23. And the heaven which is
over thy head shall be brass, and Deuteronomy. 28. 23. 24
the earth that is under thee iron. 24. And the Lord shall give thee for rain
of thy land, dust and ashes, etc. And shows that after he has made his new
covenant with his Church, and is reconciled unto her in Christ, his curse shall
be turned into a blessing. Now under this particular of hearing his Church in
the time of dearth, he does synecdochically promise, that he will hear and
relieve her in all her wants and necessities, according to that, Ioh. 16. 23.
And under these special benefits Joh. 16. 23.
of corn, wine, and oil, are understood all temporal benefits necessary for
the use and comfort of Gods Church: so Psalm. 4. 7. Yea under them we are
typically to understand all Psalm. 4. 7.
spiritual gifts and graces: for it was usual in the time of the law to
prefigure the kingdom of Christ under the kingdom of David, spiritual peace
under worldly peace, eternal life under old age, the riches of heaven under
the riches of the earth, our heavenly patrimony and inheritance under the
possession of the land of Canaan and the earthly Jerusalem.

Fourthly, here is set down the manner how and the means whereby he would
derive these blessings, by a notable gradation; I will hear the heaven, and
the heaven shall hear the earth, etc. Where it is implied, that the means of
obtaining the^ shall be prayer, the which by an hyperbolical metaphor, and
wonderful loftiness of speech, is ascribed to unreasonable and insensible
creatures, though it properly appertain unto man, that it might after a more
emphaticall manner move the minds of the faithful. The like figure is used in
many other places: as Psalm. 93. 3. 98. 8. 107. 21. 27. Hab. 2. 11. Psalm. 93. 3.
and 98. 8. and 10^. 21 Hab. 2. 11. Romans 8. 22. Esa. 1. 2.
Romans 8. 22. Esa. 1. 2. So here the Prophet brings in man calling for corn,
wine and oil; these praying to the earth, the earth to heaven, and heaven to
God.

For the understanding whereof we are to know, that man is said to call upon
food, when as there is dearth and scarcity; and corn, wine and oil are said
to hear him, or as the word here used signifies hearing to answer him, when
as they offer themselves unto him for the supplying of his wants, in great
plenty and abundance: And corn, wine and oil are said to call upon the
earth, when as the earth does not bring them forth, but through her
barrenness makes a scarcity of them: and contrariwise the earth is said to
hear them, when by her virtue, strength and moisture, she affoordeth store of
these blessings. And so the earth is said to pray unto the heavens, when as
wanting moisture she gapeth, and as it were earnestly desires the first and
latter rain, whereby she may become fruitful; and the heaven is said to hear
the earth, when accordingly she distilleth her seasonable and pleasant shewers,
whereby the earth and the fruits thereof are refreshed. The heaven is said to
pray unto God, when as her clouds and vapors are dried up, or restrained, so
as she cannot gratify the earth with her moisture; and the Lord is said to
hear her, when as he gives unto her virtue to gather clouds and vapors, and
open her windows and floodgates, so as she may distill her sweet drops to
water the earth.

The last thing here expressed, is the persons upon whom the Lord will bestow
these benefits, namely, all his elect and faithful ones, whom he has
espoused unto himself, and these are comprehended under the name Iizreel; the
signification of which word is here changed, neither is it here taken in the
evil part, as it was Chapter 1. 4. to wit, for the seed of God, whom he would
scatter and cast away, but in the better sense, for the seed of God whom he
would gather into his Church, and store up in his garner of everlasting
happiness. By which change of the signification the Lord would show that his
wrath was changed into mercy, and his judgments into benefits in the time of
the Gospel.

And that this name is so to be taken it appears by the verse following,
where the Lord following the allegory, says, that he will sow her, that is,
this Iizreel his holy seed: as also in that he changes both the other names
Lo-ruchamah into ruchamah, and Lo-ammi into ammi; No mercy, into Mercy, and
Not my people, into Thou art my people.

And this is the meaning of these words. The doctrines The Lord is the author
of all blessings.
and spiritual, namely, the Lord himself; for he it is that gives us our
corn, wine and oil; he it is who causes plenty and makes dearth, and out
of the garners of his all-sufficient providence we have all our provision and
sustenance. The eyes of all wait upon him, and he gives them their meat in
due season, and if he shut his hand, they all hunger and pine for want; if he
open it, all things living are filled with plenty; as it is Psalm. 145. 15. 16.
Psalm. 145. 15. 16.


The consideration whereof should move us, rather to depend upon the Lord for
our plenty and provision, then upon the heavens, the earth, or the seasons of
the year, seeing he is the principal cause, and these but his instruments and
inferior means which he uses for our good. Secondly, if we abound in these
blessings, let us praise the Lord in the fruitio^ of them, and be ready out of
our abundance to relieve the want and penury of our poor brethren, as the
Lord has enjoined us; for all these temporal benefits, though good in
themselves, are not good unto us, unless they be received with thanksgiving,
and sanctified to our use by the word and prayer, as it is 1. Tim. 4. 5. And if
abounding with them we do 1. Tim. 4. 5.
not communicate them with the poor, we commit the sin of the Sodomites, as
appears Ezech. 16. 49. and consequently Ezech. 16. 49.
make our selves obnoxious to their punishments.

Secondly, we may here observe the time, when the Lord The new Covenant is the
fountain of all our good.
bestows these benefits upon his Church, expressed in these words: And in
that day, that is, in the day of her espousals, when she is married unto Christ
in righteousness, judgment, etc. and by Christ reconciled unto God; for before
this day we are not only strangers, but also enemies, and so remaining subject
to Gods wrath, we have all the creatures opposed against us: but when we are
married unto Christ, and in him reconciled unto God, then all things work
together for our good, and nothing is wanting unto us, which is profitable Romans
8. 28.
for us to receive. From whence we learn, that this new covenant of grace
between God and us, and this spiritual marriage with Christ is the fountain,
from which all blessings and benefits spring and flow unto us. And therefore if
we would have no good thing wanting, which we can desire; the^ let us in the
first place seek to be espoused unto Christ in righteousness, judgment,
benignity and compassion, and then the Lord will supply all our wants, and
give us plenty of corn, wine, and oil, and all other his benefits. And let
us avoid the practice of worldly men, who in the first place seek for glory,
riches, houses, lands, and pleasures, and in the mean time never seek to be
espoused unto Christ, or in him to be reconciled unto God, deferring this, as a
matter of least importance, to old age, or the end of life; but rather let us
In the first place, seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, Matthew. 6.
33.
and then all other things shall be cast upon us, as our Savior has promised,
Matthew. 6. 33. Let us first labor to be received into the covenant of grace,
and to be espoused unto Christ Jesus, and then he will enrich us with the
dowry of all his temporal and spiritual benefits.

Thirdly, we here learn, that whatsoever virtue and strength The creatures
have all their virtue from God, whereby they benefit us.
is in any of the creatures to benefit, sustain, and nourish us, they have it
wholly from the Lord, as appears by this notable gradation, for we cannot
ordinarily live without corn and food, we cannot have these unless the earth
bring them forth for our use, the earth is barren and unfruitful, unless it
be watered with the dew of heaven, the heavens have no power to distill their
fruitful and pleasant shewers upon the earth, unless the Lord give this
virtue unto them. So that he is the principal cause and first mouer, who
sets all inferior means on work, and gives them motion and strength to
derive his blessings and benefits upon man; neither can a drop of rain fall
upon the earth, nor the earth bring forth one grain of corn, but by Gods
providence and appointment: and therefore we may conclude with the Apostle, that
In him we live, move, and have our being, Act. 17. 28. Is then Act. 27. 28.
the earth fruitful? let us ascribe the whole glory unto God; have we a
fertile soil? let us not rest upon it, but upon Gods providence, for he that
has given it this power and virtue, can take it away and make it barren. Is
there a dearth and scarcity Psalm. 107. 34.
in the land? let us not look so much to the heavens, clouds, and weather, as
unto God the ruler and disposer of them all, expecting and begging plenty at
his hands, and so he will hear the heavens, and the heavens the earth, the
earth the fruits, and the fruits will hear us, etc.

Fourthly, we here learn, that howsoever the Lord is the God bestows his
blessings by inferior means.
principal cause, and chief author of all the benefits which we receive; yet
we are not to expect them from his hand immediately, but mediatly, by inferior
causes and instruments, as appears by the gradation here used: and therefore
we are not idly to expect food from Gods immediate providence, neglecting the
subordinate means, as observing the seasons, and husbanding the ground with
labor and diligence: for though he be bountiful in bestowing his benefits,
yet he gives them not to idle loyterers, but to painful laborers, Genesis 3.
19. Genes. 3. 19.


Fifthly, we may observe the infinite wisdom of God, who Gods wisdom an making
his creatures to stand in need of one another help.
has lincked his creatures together in such excellent order, as they have need
of one another help, and all depend upon him, as upon the first mouer. Man
needs food, food is not provided without the help of the earth, the earth is
not fruitful without the dew of heaven, that heavens cannot send their rain
without Gods blessing and appointment. Where we may note, that man who is Lord
of the creatures, stands in need of the meanest of the^, that whereas his
sovereignty might puff him up in pride, his necessity which makes him stand
beholding to the basest creature, might teach him humility.

Sixthly, we may observe, that the chief means which the Prayer the chief
means of obtaining all blessings.
Church is enjoined to use for obtaining of all benefits, is prayer; as is
implied by the manner of speech here used, And I will hear says the Lord,
etc. For howsoever the Lord has determined to multiply his mercies upon the
faithful, yet not without the means of prayer and invocation. Because if we
did not first see and feel our wants, if seeing the^, we did not earnestly
desire to have them supplied, and if to have our desire satisfied, we had not
our recourse unto God by prayer, we would never know nor acknowledge that we
had received these gifts from God, nor be thankful unto him for them, nor for
the time to come depend upon his providence. And thus do earthly parents deal
with their children; although they are willing to supply al their wants, yet
first they will be entreated, that hereby their love and affection toward them
may be endeared, and that they may learn obedience and reverence, seeing their
own want of their parents help, and their readiness in granting succor and
relief.

Seeing then prayer is the means of obtaining all blessings We must pray
continully.
from God, the conduit whereby the clear streams of graces and benefits are
derived from God, the fountain of all goodness, and the hand wherewith we fill
our empty souls in the storehouse of Gods rich mercy, let us continually
exercise our selves in this holy duty; and seeing our wants are continual,
Let us pray continually, as the Apostle exhorts us, 1. These. 5. 17. Are we 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
destitute of Gods blessings? prayer obtains the^, Ioh. 16. 23. 24. Ioh. 16.
23.
have we them in abundance? prayer sanctifies them to our use, 1. Tim. 4. 5.
do we employ our selves in our business? prayer brings a blessing upon our
labors, Genesis 24. 12. do we cease 1. Tim. 4. 5. Genes. 24. 12. Numb. 10. 36.
from them? prayer blesses our rest, Numb. 10. 35. are we merry, prayer
seasoneth our mirth: are we sorrowful? prayer eases our grief, Iam. 5. 13.
are we in trouble? prayer obtains Jam. 5. 13. Psalm. 50. 15. and 107. 10. 13.
deliverance, Psalm. 50. 15. are we in any manner of extremity? prayer brings
relief, Psalm. 107. 6. 13. 19. 28.

Seventhly, whereas he says, not that God will hear Iizreel, Our corruption
in depending upon inferior means.
but that he will hear the heavens, etc. and that the corn, wine, and oil
shall hear Iizreel, he does here intimate our corruption and imperfection,
which causes us in the time of our wants, in the first place to think upon
the inferior means and secondarie causes for the supplying our necessities,
as upon the corn, wine, and oil, before in our cogitations we ascend unto
God, begging for help and relief at his hands: the which our infirmity the
Lord tolerateth, if we do not rest in their inferior means, but ascend from
one to another, until we come to the supreme cause of all blessings, God
himself: as when being in want and penury, we think we must needs starve,
unless we have corn and food, then we must also remember that we cannot have
the^, unless ye earth yield the^, nor ye earth yield the^, unless the heavens
make the^ fruitful, nor yt the heavens can do this, unless the Lord enable
the^. And therefore finding that he is the chief cause and first mouer, who
sets al ye rest on work, let us chiefly labor by our prayers, to move him
to succor us, assuring our selves, yt when he is inclined to help and relieve
us, there will be no want in the inferior means; and as thus we are to ascend
unto God, that we may call upon him, so being possessed of his benefits, we
must likewise to ascend to return him thanks.

Lastly, we here learn, that all Gods gifts and benefits are All benefits
bestowed upon man for the faithfuls sake.
granted unto mankind at the suite of Iizreel, that is, for the faithful and
elects sake, and if it were not for them, the heavens would be as brass
without rain and moisture, and the earth as iron, barren and unfruitful.
Iolatrous Laban is enriched for religious Jacobs sake, and Putiphar has a
blessing upon his whole Deuteronomy. 28. 23.
house, because Joseph is one of his family. The murmuring Israelites gather
Manna sent from heaven, because the faithful Israelites should not want; the
whole people fares the better, because they have a Moses amongst them, who in
his fervent prayers commends their suits unto God. And contrariwise, when the
godly are severed from the wicked, there is nothing to be expected but plagues
and punishments. When Noah is entered into the Arc, the sloud drowneth the
whole world. When Lot is gone out of Sodom, it is soon after consumed with
fire and brimstone: When Gods people have severed themselves from Corah, the
earth swalloweth up him and his followers. And when Josias is gathered to his
fathers, then sinful Israel must expect captivity and desolation.

Notwithstanding such is the blind pride of wicked men, and The wicked impute
all their evils unto the faithful.
their inueterate malice toward the faithful, that they are ready to ascribe
their prosperity unto themselves, and their calamities unto the godly. Ahab
thinks himself innocent, and condemns Elias to be the troubler of Israel.
Saul supposes that neither he nor his posterity could prosper, unless David
were murdered: and the Scribes and Pharisees shame not to affirm, that if
Christ were suffered all would believe in him, and that hereupon must needs
follow their destruction and the desolation of their country: Ioh. 11. 48.
Ioh. 11. 48.


ANd so much concerning the sixth benefit. The last follows, which is the
propagation and multiplication of the Church in the time of the Gospel: Verse.
23. And I will sow her unto me in the earth, and I will have mercy upon her
that was not pitied, and I will say unto them which were not my people, thou
art my people: and they shall say, thou art my God. In which words is set
down, first, the multiplication of the Church: and secondly, The exposition.
the means whereby it should be multiplied. The first in these words; And I
will sow her unto me in the earth. The which speech is allegorical borrowed
from the practice of husbandmen, who desiring increase of their corn do sow
it in the ground; so the Lord promises that he will sow his Church, that is,
he will multiply and exceedingly increase it, as the seed is multiplied which
is sown in the earth, so that it shall no longer be contained within the
narrow borders of the land of Canaan, but be propagated far and wide over the
whole face of the earth. Where he alludeth to the name Izreel, signifying the
seed of God, of which he had spoken in the former verse, although the word
(her) being of the feminine gender has relation unto the spouse: for whereas
his meaning was that he would sow Izreel, his seed, he says he will sow her,
because all this while he had spoken of his Church and faithful people under
the name and title of a wife.

But besides the multiplying of the Church, here is also, as I take it,
promised the continual stabilitie thereof, for so this word sowing or planting
signifies: as appears, Ier. 24. 6. I will plant them, and not root them
out: Psalm. 92. 13. 14. Ier. 31. 27. 28. 42. 10. Iere. 24. 6. Psalm. 92. 13. 14.
Iere. 31. 27. and 42. 10.


Further he says, that he will sow her unto himself, where he notes the end
why he would multiply his Church and people, namely, that they being chosen
and called, might glorify his name by serving and obeying him; and this is the
maine end not only of our calling, but also of our creation and redemption: 2.
Cor. 6. 20. Ephesians. 1. 4. Tit. 2. 14. 2 Cor. 6. 20. Ephesians. 1. 4. Tit. 2. 14.


Again, whereas he says, that he will sow her in the earth, without any
special restraint unto any particular place, the meaning is, that he would sow
her thorowout the whole earth, and no longer confine her within the limits of
Canaan; the which promise was accordingly accomplished, when Christ gave
commandment to his Apostles and Disciples, that they should go teach all
nations, Matthew. 28. 20. the which they also performed, as appears in the Acts
of the Apostles. Matthew. 28. 20.


And this is the promise concerning the multiplying of the Church. Now the
means whereby he would increase it to so great a number is expressed, whereas
he says that he will have mercy upon Lo-ruchamah, and will call Lo-ammi his
people; whereby he understands the calling not only of the ten tribes, but
also by occasion of them the Gentiles amongst whom they were scattered; as the
Apostle plainly expounds this prophecy, Romans 9. 24. and 1. Pet. 2. 10. for
of whom it might be said, Romans 9. 24. 25. 1. Pet. 2. 10.
that they were without mercy and not Gods people, of the^ he promises that
he would have mercy, and choose them for his people: but this might be said,
not of the Israelites alone, but also of the Gentiles, as the Apostles
testify; and therefore of them also this prophecy is to be understood.

And these are the means whereby the seed of the faithful is multiplied. In
the last place he sets down the disposition, affection and duty of the
Church being called, in these words: And they shall say, thou art my God. Where
there is implied the entire love of ye Church toward God, in that she uses
here the vocative case (as the original has it) and by a certain kind of
hearty acclamation, cries out, O my God: which brief manner of speech does
most pathetically express the otherwise inexpressible affection and passion of
the heart. So Thomas ravished with Christ's assured presence cries out, My Lord
and my God, Ioh. 20. Ioh. 20. 28.
28. and Mary, v. 16. Rabboni, Master, Romans 8. 15. Secondly, that Romans 8. 15.
she shall not only believe that the Lord is her God, but also acknowledge and
make profession hereof, for she shall not only think it, but also say it.
Thirdly, that she shall invoke and call upon his name, as is signified in
this phrase of speech, O my God.

And this is the meaning of these words. The doctrines which The Lord is the
principal cause of multiplying the Church. Ephesians. 2. 5.
the multiplying of his Church, by his word and Spirit, and not our own
inclination and free will; for we are as seed in the hand of the sower, unless
he husband us, we will ever remain unfruitful, Ephesians. 2. 5. And this the
Apostle affirms, namely, that the faithful are not borne of blood, nor of
the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, Ioh. 1. 13. John 1.
13. God multiplieth his church for his own glory. 1. Pet. 2. 10. 11. 12.


Secondly, we learn here, yt the Lord does sow or multiply the Church unto
himself, that is, for his own glory, worship, and service, and yt the Church
being chosen to be a royal Priesthood, and holy nation, may abstain from
fleshly lusts, and have their conversation honest, yt so God may be glorified
even of those that are without. And therefore seeing the Lord has made choice
of us for this purpose, let us labor to attain unto our end, otherwise we can
have no assurance that we are in the number of Gods people, seeing it is
impossible yt he should be frustrate of his end.

Thirdly, by this change of names; no mercy into mercy, and no Gods anger
turned into love.
people into a people: we learn, that in the time of the Gospel, Gods anger is
turned into love, judgment into mercy, punishment into reward, and
condemnation into life and salvation, by virtue of Christ's merits and
mediation. The which serves notably for the consolation of al those, that
mourn in Sion, when as being beaten down by the apprehe^sion of Gods anger,
the sight of sin, and the curse of the law, they consider that Christ has
freed them from them all, reconciled them unto God, and procured for them
remission of their sins.

Fourthly, we here learn that the wall of separation is broken The Jews and
Gentiles gathered into one Church.
down, and both Jews and Gentiles admitted into one and the same Church, so
that as our Savior speaks, there is now but one sheepfold and one shepherd,
Ioh. 10. 16. See p. 125. 133. 135.

Fifthly, we here learn, that our vocation was altogether free and undeserved;
for when as we were without mercy, deserving Our vocation is of free grace.
rather judgment and condemnation, the Lord had mercy upon us; and when we
were no people, but aliants and strangers, yea enemies unto God, the Lord of
his free grace made us his people yea of his own family: and this the Apostle
plainly shows, 2. Tim. 1. 9. As therefore no conceit of our own worthiness
should 2. Tim. 1. 9.
make us to derogate any from Gods free grace, and undeserved love, so neither
ought our unworthiness cause us to doubt of the^, seeing without respect of our
deserts, the Lord has chosen us.

Sixthly, we here learn, yt our salvation has his beginning in Gods mercy; for
by reason of our sins, we are in misery, and in the Gods mercy the beginning
of our salvation.
state of condemnation, the which our miserable condition is so much the more
miserable, in that of our selves we cannot possibly come out of our misery;
but God in mercy pardoning our sins, for Christ's merits, freeth us from our
wretched estate, and aduanceth us to all glory and happiness.

Seventhly, this serves notably for the consolation of every The faithful
are consident in Gods mercy.
true member of the Church, in yt they are assured yt they have obtained Gods
mercy: so yt though they have fallen through infirmity, they need not with Adam
to hide themselves from Gods presence, but in confident assurance of pardon and
forgiveness, go boldly unto the throne of grace, that they may receive mercy and
find grace to help in the time of need: as it is, Hebr. 4. 16. 10. 22. Hebr.
4. 16. 10. 22. As God chooses us, so we choose him.


Lastly, we here learn, yt as ye Lord makes choice of us to be his people, so
we answerably must make choice of him to be our God; as he shows his love
toward us, so we must be ready to express ours toward him, by our holy
obedience and zeal of his glory; as he professes yt we are his people, above
and before al other nations not called, so we must not only inwardly know and
believe yt he is our God and in our hearts perform service unto him, but we
must say with the Church in this place, O my God; that is, acknowledge and
confess that he is our Lord and Savior, openly and in the sight of me^, and
publicly perform unto him his pure worship and service, which he requires in
his word, and that not only when by our profession glorifying God we grace our
selves, but also when we incur thereby shame and reproach, affliction, and
persecution. In a word, we must with the Church here in all our need and
necessaries, invoke and call upon Gods name, and wholly depend upon, and
expect from him all things necessary for this life, and the life to come.

FINIS.
LECTVRES UPON THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE PROPHECY OF HOSEA.
IN this Chapter the Lord shows, that The argument of the Chapter.
howsoever the Church of Israel had grievously offended him by her Idolatry,
unthankfulness, and voluptuousness; yet he did not cease to love her, and in
his love to seek her conversion and salvation; and therefore because fond and
cockering love would but cause her to continue in those her sins to her utter
destruction, his purpose was, to afflict and chastise her with a miserable and
tedious captivity, wherein she should live in a poor and contemptible
estate, under the tyranny of her enemies, without her own laws, magistracy,
or any form of government, and without the public means of worshipping
either God or her Idols. Howbeit least she should desperately sincke under the
weight of this tedious and grievous affliction, he promises that in the end,
after that by his chastisements he has humbled her, he will convert and turn
her unto himself, by true repentance and so receive her into his former grace
and favor.

And this is the maine argument of this Chapter, out of The general parts.
which we may observe the parts thereof, which are two: The first is a
testification of Gods love toward the Church of Israel, verse 1. The second
is an approbation of this love by a twofold fruit thereof: the first is by
inflicting on her fatherly chastisements, that so she might be restrained from
running on in her sins to her perdition: The second is the sanctifying of
this affliction to her use and benefit, namely, for her true Repentance and
conversion to God.

And these are the general parts of this Chapter. Now the maine drift and
scope of all is, that the Lord might contain The scope of the Prophecy.
the people in an even course, so as they should neither presumptuously and
securely go on in their sins without repentance, nor desperately sinck under
the guilt and punishment of them. For whereas their present prosperity might
cause them securely to promise unto themselves immunitie from punishment, and
Gods former promises of enriching and multiplying the Church of Israel, might
cause them to imagine, that though the Lord suffered them to be led into
captivity, yet he would in some short time deliver them, and speedely advance
them to all happiness, by multiplying upon them the former benefits; the Lord
meeting with this their security and presumption, assures them that he would
not so easily forget their grievous sins, whereby they had so long and often
provoked him, but before he would be reconciled unto them, his purpose was,
severely to correct them with a miserable Captivity, wherein they should be
grievously afflicted with pinching poverty, and base contempt, and that not for
a short space, but for a long time, even until the coming of the Messiah.

And on the other side, whereas when they were grievously afflicted they might
easily be moved to doubt of gods love, and to think their estate desperate,
both because misery and calamity does cause men more clearly to see, and more
sensibly to feel the haynousnesse of sin, and to apprehend the wrath of God
due unto them; and also in that they found and felt the fruits of Gods anger,
loading them with afflictions, and withal might doubt that they should never
again be reconciled unto God, or be made partakers of any of his gracious
promises, seeing they were so long deferred, and their punishments so tediously
continued: therefore the Lord gives them some comfort in the midst of
trouble by assuring them, that notwithstanding their manifold sins, yet he
loved them, that in love he did chastise and correct them for their conversion
and amendment, and that howsoever their afflictions were grievous and tedious,
yet they should not continue for ever, for after he had by them, made them to
forsake their Idolatry and other sins, he would admit them to be his Church
and people, and continue them in his fear and pure worship.

ANd this is the maine scope and chief end of this Prophecy. In the next
place we are to speak of the special parts thereof: And first, of the
testification of Gods love toward the Church of Israel. Ver. 1. And the Lord
said unto me, go yet and love a woman, beloved of her husband, and was an
harlot; according to the love of the Lord toward the children of Israel, yet
they looked to other Gods and loved the wine bottles. In which words the love
of God is typically propounded, The exposition
and afterward plainly expounded: it is typically shadowed under another
vision, not much unlike unto the former. Chap. 1. 2. wherein the Lord
commands the Prophet to love an adulterous and ungrateful harlot, not that
indeed he would have him to set his affection upon such an one, seeing it was a
thing unlawful and dishonest for the Prophet of God to love an Adultresse;
being another man's wife, but that he having received this commandment by
vision, might propound it as a Parable unto the people, that hereby they who
were dull of conceit, might see both the love and mercy of God, and their own
wickedness and unworthiness represented as in a clear glass or plain
picture. As though he should say, go yet again unto the Israelites and
propound this parable unto them: that the Lord is like unto a husband, who
continues to love his wife, though she neglecting his love and forgetting his
benefits, have forsaken him, committed whoredom with her lovers, and given
over her self unto all voluptuous pleasures.

But let us come to the words more particularly: And the Lord said unto me,
that is, after I had delivered the former Prophecy, the Lord again spoke unto
me by vision, saying: go yet again, that is, content not thy self to have
spoken once of my mercy, love and gracious benefits, and of the wickedness
and unworthiness of this people: but again repeat and reiterate these things
unto them, that so either they may be moved at the second hearing, or that
their obstinacy and hardness of heart may be manifested, and they left
without excuse. And love a woman beloved of her husband and was an harlot: that
is, by propounding unto them this Parable, show them that I am a gracious
Husband, in that notwithstanding their manifold whoredoms, I continue to love
them, and withal convince them of their gross wickedness and unthankfulness,
in that all my love and gracious benefits will not restrain them from
committing Idolatry and spiritual adultery with false Gods.

In which Parable, under the husband we are to understand God himself, who
loved his people from all eternity, and continued constant in his love even
after the people had broken their marriage faith, plighted unto him in mount
Sinai, and committed spiritual whoredom with false Gods. By the wife we are
to understand the people of Israel, and not the people of Judah, as some have
imagined; for first, in this first verse here mention is made of the children
of Israel: and secondly, it is not true of the Jews, that they should be
without Magistrates and government, for the Scepter might not depart from Judah
till the Messiah came. Genesis 49. 10 Genesis 49. 10.
But is was verified in the ten tribes, who had no Magistrates of their own in
the time of their captivity.

Yea, but the ten Tribes were divorced from God, excluded out of the covenant
and for ever debarred of mercy; how then could it be said of them, that God
loved them as his spouse, and that they should, being converted, seek the Lord?

I answer that we are not to understand these words generally of the whole
people of Israel, but of those only amongst them, which belonged to Gods
election, for of these alone it could truly be said that God loved them, and
that being converted they should seek the lord. And understanding it of them,
we may easily answer the former objections, for though they were excluded out
of the covenant of works, yet this hinders them not from being admitted into
the covenant of grace; though they were debarred of mercy in respect of their
deliverance out of a temporal captivity, yet they obtained mercy in regard of
their spiritual freedom out of the captivity of sin and Satan; though they
were for ever exiled out of the earthly Canaan, yet being reconciled unto God
in Christ, they might nevertheless become Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem.

Lastly, by the Prophet, who is commanded by God to love this Adultresse
beloved of her husband, we are to understand Jesus Christ, who loved these
elect Israelites which were exculded out of the covenant of works, and married
them unto himself, by making with them the new covenant of grace; and this
appears in that he wills him to love her with such love as the Lord loved
her, namely, with a constant, most infinite, and eternal love, which properly
can be ascribed to no other, saving to our Savior Jesus Christ alone.

And this is the meaning of this parable: The exposition follows: According
to the love of the Lord toward the children of Israel; yet (or when as) they
looked to other Gods, and loved the wine bottles. In which words the Lords love
is amplyfied by the wickedness and unworthiness of the people, and the
peoples sin aggrauated by the love and goodness of God toward them. The
Lords love is hereby commended, in that he did not only love this people
whilst they loved him, kept their conjugal faith, and served him according to
his word, but even when they despised him, forsook him, violated their faith,
and committed spiritual whoredom with false Gods; the which he could never
have done had not his love been infinite, most constant, and eternal.

Secondly, their sin and wickedness is exceedingly aggrauated, in that they
were so ungrateful and obstinate in their Idolatry, that neither Gods love,
nor all his manifold benefits which he had multiplied upon them, as pledges of
his endless love, could move them to love him again, nor contain them in
their fidelity, nor restrain them from committing spiritual fornication with
false Gods. If a wife do not love her husband who loatheth her and behaueth
himself toward her cruelly and inhumanely, though this does not altogether
take away her fault, yet it does much extenuate and excuse it; but if she love
not such a husband as entirely loves her, nor will be restrained by his great
kindness and manifold benefits, from breaking her faith and following her
lovers, her fault is so heinous that it admits of no excuse; but such a
loving husband was the Lord to this Church of Israel, and such a rebellious
and unfaithful wife was she to him, and therefore her wickedness was so much
the more grievous and intolerable.

But let us come to the particular branches of their sin: the first whereof is
expressed in these words: Yet they looked to other Gods: by which phrase, with
the Hebrews is usually signified love and desire, hope and trust reposed in
that thing which they are said to look after. Whereas therefore they are said
to look after other Gods, the meaning is that they set their hearts and
affections upon them, and hoped and trusted in them, and in these respects had
their eyes and minds always fixed upon them.

Secondly, he says that they loved the wine bottles; whereby we may either
generally understand that besides their sin of Idolatry, they were also
addicted to all manner of unlawful pleasures and luxurious excess, as
surfeiting and drunkenness, lasciviousness and wantonness (for with the
corruption of Religion is usually joined corruption of manners, Piety and
Honesty, being such twins as both live and die together) And if we take the
words in this sense, then we are to understand them Synecdochecally;
dunkennesse being put for voluptuousness and all corruption of manners, of
which he makes special choice that he may persist in the former Allegory,
seeing Adultery and Drunkenness are commonly joined together, and are mutual
causes one of another.

Or else we may take them more specially and properly, for that drunkenness and
those voluptuous delights, which they used in their Idolatrous feasts, for with
their Idolatry they usually joined feasting and reuelling, as may appear.
Exodus Exodus 32. 6.
32. 6. Judge. 9. 27. unto which custom the Prophet Amos alludeth. Judge. 9. 27.
Chap. 2. 8. They drinck the wine of the condemned in Amos. 2. 8.
the house of their God. The which custom lasted unto the Apostles time, as
appears. 1. Cor. 10. 21. and this as I take 1. Cor. 10. 21.
it, is the more natural and proper sense of this place, namely, that the
people of Israel did not only commit Idolatry, but also by their drinking,
feasting and reuelling, showed the exceeding great delight which they took in
their sin.

And this is the meaning of these words: The doctrines Our pronenesse to fall
into desperation or presumption.
which arise out of them are diverse. First we may observe out of the general
scope of this Chapter our exceeding pronenesse to run into two extremes, secure
presumption, and abject desperation, in respect of our diverse estate and
condition: when we are in prosperity we are deaf to all reprehension, admonion
and threatenings, we flatteringly persuade our selves, that this Sun of Gods
favor will ever shine upon us, notwithstanding that our sins continually
ascend, and as a thick cloud interpose themselves between us and the beams of
Gods love; and when we hear Gods curses, we bless our selves in our hearts
saying: I shall have peace although I walk Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
according to the stubbernenesse of mine own heart, adding drunkenness unto
thirst, as it is, Deuteronomy. 29 19. Yea when the Lord begins to punish, we are
ready in the security of our hearts to promise unto our selves immunitie, and
to say with those wicked men. Esaias. 28. 15. We have made a covenant with Esaias.
28. 15.
death, and with hell we are at agreement, though ascourge run over, and pass
through, it shall not come at us, etc. And on the other side, when God
withdraws from us his gracious countenance, and taking away our prosperity,
in stead thereof lays upon us affliction and adversity, then we are as ready
to fall into the contrary extreme, concluding that God has utterly rejected
us, and cast us off for ever, foolishly imagining that when our Sun of
comfort is once set, and the night of sorrow and adversity has ouershadowed
us, that it will never arise again and replenish our hearts with joy and
consolation. An example hereof we have in the Israelites, in this place, and in
David. Psalm. 30. 6. 8. The consideration whereof should move all Gods Ministers
according to the practice of the Prophet in this place, wisely to intermixe
comminations with consolations, judgment with mercy, threatenings with
promises, and the Law with the Gospel, that they may keep men in an even
course, and in the golden mean, neither presumptuously going forward in sin,
in regard of Gods mercies and benefits, nor desperately sincking under the
weight of sin and punishment, when they are overtaken of Gods judgments.

Secondly, whereas the Lord commands the Prophet That Gods ministers must
often inculcate their instructions and admonitions.
yet again to put the people in mind of his mercyes, and their own sins
and unworthiness; hence we observe that it is not sufficient for Gods
Ministers once alone to stand upon these points, but considering how forgetful
men are of Gods benefits, and how obdurate and obstinate in their wicked
courses, they must repeat, and beat upon these things again and again;
never thinking any duty sufficiently taught, which is not also sufficiently
learned. Neither must they seek to please the itching ears of fantastical
hearers, who are impatient in hearing the same things twice delivered, nor
seek to delight such surfetted and cloyed appetites as cannot endure oftener
then once to taste of the same food, no nor yet take pleasure though variety of
food be offered unto them, if it be brought in the same dish, desiring only
variety, and to hear continually new matter, out of a new Text: but they must
like good Surgeons apply the same salues to the same sores till they be
perfectly cured, they must speak again and again of the same mercyes of God
till they be remembered, teach the same doctrines till they be learned, exhort
to the same duties till they be practiced, and reprove the same sins till
they be amended. And like good house-holders, as they are to avoid the glutting
of the family, by the continual use of the same meat: so also they must
oftener then once set before them that spiritual food, which they know is good
and wholesome, and think it no disgrace and disparagement to their plenty and
hospitality, if they feed twice of the same dish.

Thirdly, we may observe that the Lord propounds his The use of Parables.
mercyes and the peoples sins, by way of Parable, that so he might in a
lively manner, and as it were, with real words represent these things to their
understanding, as it were in a plain picture; that so he might hereby more
effectually approve his own undeserved goodness, and convince them of their
unworthiness, and this form as it is always delightful, so is it sometimes
most profitable, as when Gods Ministers are to deal with Magistrates, or with
obstinate and impudent sinners, who will not know nor condemn sin, unless it
be in another man's person. See Chap. 1. Ver. 2.

Fourthly, we may observe that the Lord intending to The assurance of gods
love our chief comfort in afflictions.
arm his children with such patience as might enable them to bear those
grievous afflictions which he purposed to lay upon them, does in the first
place assure them of his love, notwithstanding he severely corrected them for
their sins: yea that he therefore did chastise them because he loved them,
and would not suffer them to go on in their sins to their destruction;
whence we learn that to attain patience in afflictions and adversity, the
best way is, earnestly to labor that we may discern with the eye of faith the
beams of gods love and favor, through the cloud of our sins and
chasticements, and not only to look upon the rod, but also upon the hand of
our loving father, who beats us that he may correct and amend us. For if we
be persuaded with Paul, that afflictions cannot separate us from the love of
God. Romans 8. 35.
Romans 8. 35. Then shall we also with Paul, rejoice in tribulations. Romans 5. 3.
And conclude with Job, that though he kill us, yet we will trust in him. Job.
13. 15. If in our greatest extreamities we have this hope and assurance that we
are beloved of God it will be a sure anker-hold to preserve us from making
shipwreck of our souls upon the sands of desperation, though we be tossed and
turmoyled with the tempests of tribulations and the surging waves of troubles,
it will be a sure pillar to underprop our fainting souls, so as they shall
not ruinously sincke under the weight of affliction, and an impregnable fort,
into which being retired as our last place of refuge, we shall easily bear off
and beat back the most violent battery that affliction and adversity can make
against us.

Fifthly, we may observe how heinous and odious this sin of Idolatry is in the
sight of God, in that he compares it to The heinousness of Idolatry.
Adultery, for as nothing can be more detestable in the eyes of a loving and
jealous husband, then that his wife should affect others more then him, and
prostitute her self to commit whoredom even in his sight and presence: so
nothing can be more odious in the sight of God, then that his church should
thus desile her self with spiritual Adultery, even in his presence. See Chap.
1. Ver. 2.

Sixthly, in the example of the Israelites we may behold our exceeding great
ingratitude, in that being dearly beloved Our ingratitude.
of God we do not love him again, but are ready to prefer Idols and Images
before him. Who would not wonder at the unthankfulness of such a woman, who
being base and beggarly, deformed, diseased and full of ill qualities, should
be chosen and espoused to a prince of great worth, and dearly beloved of him;
if notwithstanding his excellency and love, she should defile her marriage bed
and prefer some base groom before him? but such is our ingratitude, if being
advanced from such a base condition, to such high dignity by our husband Jesus
Christ, we set our minds upon Idols more then on him.

Seauenthly, we may here observe the Constancy of The Constancy of Gods
love.
Gods love toward his elect, in that notwithstanding their grievous sins and
great unworthiness he continues to love them; for though the Israelits after
they were espoused unto God committed spiritual whoredom, and forsook the
Lord, yet he sends his Prophet to assure them of the continuance of his love.
So neither the fall of our first parents, nor the original corruption which
was propagated from them unto us, nor our own manifold actual transgressions,
could break off his love, wherewith he had loved us from all eternity, but
that still even whilst we were sinners, he sent his son to dye for Romans 5. 8.
10.
us, and whilst we were enemies unto him he reconciled us unto himself by the
precious death and bloodshed of our Savior, as John 3. 16.
the Apostle shows. Romans 5. 8. 10. Ioh. 3. 16.

The consideration whereof serves notably for our consolation, when as we
labor and groan under the heavy burden of our sins, for if the Lord so
dearly loved us even whilst we were enemies, how much more will he continue
this love, when we are made friends? If when we were wicked and unrighteous he
would not ouerwhelme us with his just displeasure, much more then being
justified by his blood, we shall Romans 5. 9
be saved from wrath through him, as the Apostle reasons Romans 5. 9. If he so
loved us when as we were wholly wicked, that our sins could not change the
constancy of his love, how much more will he now continue constant when we
are made perfectly righteous, through the righteousness of Christ, imputed
unto us, and have true inhaerent righteousness and sanctification begun in us by
his holy spirit, whereby at least we desire and endeavor in the uprightness
of our hearts to serve and please him? If he loved us whilst like rebellious
enemies we neither could nor would obey him, how much more will he love us when
like children we would willingly do his will, although we often fail of our
desire, through our weakness and imperfection?

Eighthly, we here learn that if in our necessities we flee unto Affiance in
creatures is Idolatry.
the creatures, as unto Idols, Images, Saints, Angels, gold and riches,
trusting and depending upon them for help and deliverance more then upon the
Lord, we may truly be said with the Israelites to look after idols, and to
commit spiritual adultrie with them, for that we make our God, upon which we
most depend for relief in time of want, and for protection in time of danger:
and hence it is that not only those who worship Images are called Idolaters,
but also the covetous man, who puts more affiance in his gold then in his
God. Ephe. 5. 5 Ephe. 5. 5.


Lastly, we may here observe, that with contempt of Religion Contempt of
religion and corruption of manners inseparable companions.
and Gods pure worship, neglect of honesty and corruption of manners, with
idolatry and superstition, drunkenness and all manner of voluptuousness are
joined together, for as soon as men look after Idol Gods, they also love the
wine bottles. And this comes to pass principally through Gods just
judgment, that they who worship the creatures and forsake the creator, not
regarding to know him nor his truth should be given over of God, unto vile
affections and a reprobate mind whereby they run headlong into all manner of
wickedness, as the Apostle shows* Romans 1. 2. 1 to 31. Romans 1. 21.
Partly also through the violence of our corruption, which if it be not
bridled and curbed in with true piety, the fear of God, and conscience of our
ways, carries us swiftly into all manner of sin; and partly through the
malicious subtlety of the chief ringleaders unto idolatry, who either
inioyne as lawful, or permit as tolerable, or dispense with as venial, all
manner of voluptuousnes and unlawful pleasures, that with these baytes which
are so delightful to the flesh, they may catch the more, and allure them to
join with them in their idolatry and superstition.

A notable example whereof we have in the Papists, who The Papists patrones of
licentiousness.
either allow or dispense with all manner of voluptuous pleasures, that so they
may gain the more to the embracing of their Religion; for have they not
brought even into the service of God, whatsoever may be pleasing and
delightful to the senses, as goodly shows, sweet music, odoriferous smells?
etc. Is it not the chief solemnity of their festiuals and holy days, to spend
the whole time in reuelling, masking, dicing, carding, surfeiting and
drunkenness; and least they should not run fast enough into all manner of
disorders, do they not allow of their Lords of mis-rule, who have for the time
a large Patent to lead them into all licentiousness? and these are their
religious exercises for their solemn feasts. That I may say nothing of the
permission of their stews, their sanctuaries for malefactors, their wincking
at blasphemy, profanation of the Sabbath, Adultry, as though they were but
venial sins, by all which their wicked courses they greatly increase their
number, seeing hereby all adioyne themselves unto them, who would be voluptuous
and licentious by law and privilege of Religion.

And so much concerning the testification of Gods love The Analysis of the rest
of the Chapter.
toward the adultresse harlot, the people of Israel. Now follows the
approbation thereof: first, by his inflicting on her fatherly chastisements,
that thereby she might be restrained from running on in her sins, and
provoked to turn unto God by true repentance, verse 2, 3, 4. Secondly, by
sanctifying this her affliction for her conversion, verse. 5. The afflictions
which he intended to correct her with, are typically represented and shadowed
in the Prophets vision, verse. 2, 3. And after, this vision is in part expounded
verse. 4. Concerning the former, he shows first the end wherefore he
afflicted her, that is, that thereby he might buy her, and so possess and
keep her for his own use, in these words: So I bought her to me: and secondly
he sets down the affliction it self; where first he shows with what
kind of affliction he meant to chastise her, namely with captivity, signified
in this phrase of buying her: and secondly he expresses the quality of this
captivity, to wit, that it should be exceeding grievous, and that both in
respect of the greatness of their miseries, which they should suffer in their
captivity, and also in respect of their long continuance. Their miseries
consisted partly in the evils which they suffered, and partly in the
deprivation of such benefits as they had formerly inioyed, namely their
political and ecclesiastical government, verse. 3, 4.

The evils which she suffered were base contempt, signified by her price, of
15. pieces of silver, wherewith she was bought; and pinching poverty and
want, signified by the Homer and a half of Barley.

But let us come to the words themselves, Verse 2. So I bought her to me for
fifteen pieces of silver, and for an Homer of Barley and an half Homer of
Barley. In which words is contained both the peoples punishment, and the love
of The exposition
God, who inflicted it: the punishment is, that they should become captives in
a strange country; and this is signified by this phrase of buying, for no free
people, but only captives, slaves and servants were bought for money. So that
the meaning of this part of the vision is this; as the Prophet buyeth an
adultrous wife as though she were a captive: so the children of Israel shall
be led into captivity, and bought and sold for money.

Yea but the Prophet was commanded to love this adultresse, and here no
mention is made of his love, but only that he bought her, that is, brought her
into the base estate of a slavish captive; how then does this signify the love
of God, seeing it seems rather an effect of hatred? I answer if we respect
Gods end, which was the profit, conversion and salvation of the Israelits, this
was a singular note of gods love. For when they abused their liberty to all
licentiousness, God caused them to live in captivity, but to this end, that
by this misery he might reclaim and regaine them unto himself. So that the
Lords severity was exceeding profitable and necessary to reform this
adultresse, and to make her keep her marriage faith inviolable for the time to
come, when as she felt the smart of her uncleanness. If a husband laying aside
his right of superiority and rule, do basely cocker and flatter his adultrous
Wife, and suffer her at pleasure to raunge abroad and company with her lovers,
his fondness will harten her in her wicked courses, and cause her the more to
scorn and contemn him; the Lord therefore like a wise husband deals
otherwise here with this adultresse, that is, he retayneth his authority, he
handles her roughly, and restrayneth her of her liberty, but yet inwardly he
loves her, for he does all this to cool the heat of her lust, and to make her
chaste and faithful, that so being reclaymed, he may receive her into his
wonted favor.

The Next point to be considered is the baseness of their estate in their
captivity, signified by the price here given for the Adultresse, to wit,
fifteen pieces of silver. What was the precise quantity of this sum it is
uncertain, neither is it material to the understanding of the Prophets
purpose, only this we are to know, that the Prophet makes mention of a
certain price given, that he might in more lively manner set forth this vision
as a thing done, and hereby more feelingly affect his hearers: and secondly,
that this Adultresse was bought at a very low rate, seeing there is such a
slender price paid for her, as fifteen silver pieces.

For there was three sorts of silver coin in use amongst the Israelites, the
Shekell of the Sanctuary, which was about two shillings four pence in value,
and this had on the one side Aarons rod, and on the other, the pot of Manna:
the common or half Shekell, amounting to fourteen perice; and the Gerah or
Obolus, which was about the value of our three halfe-pence. Now we are not to
understand these words of the Shekell of the Sanctuary, which was only the
price of holy things, and therefore not of an adultresse; and if we understand
them of the common Shekell, then the whole price amounted but to the sum of
seauenteene shillings and six pence, which was given for this Adultresse:
whereby the base estate and contemptible condition of this harlot is showed, in
that she is valewed at less then a slave or captive. For if an Ox gored a
servant, the owner was bound to give to the master thirty Shekels in
recompense, as appeateth, Exodus 21. 32. and here this Adultresse is prized but
at Exodus 12. 32.
half so much, whereby is signified that the people of Israel should be
contemned and exceeding basely esteemed of in their captivity. And this
agrees with the complaint of the faithful. Psalm. 44. 12. Thou sellest thy
people without gain, and Psa. 44. 12. 13
do not increase their price. 13. Thou make us a reproach to our
neighbors, a jest and laughing stock to them that are round about us, etc.

And this is the first part of the price: the other is expressed in these
words: And for an Homer of Barley, and half Ezech. 45. 11.
an Homer of Barley. The Homer, or Chomer contained ten Ephaes, as appears.
Ezech. 45. 11. and the Epha was almost a pottle less then our bushel, whereby
is signified, first the slavish condition of the people in their captivity, for
Barley was eaten only of slaves and captives, and not of free women: secondly
their poverty which is noted by the small quantity of this course fare,
allotted unto them as their only sustenance for a long time; so that their fare
was both course and sparing: thirdly here is employed the Lords love in that he
gave them some maintenance for the preservation of life, and but a sparing
measure of course food, that hereby he might humble and reclaim them.

The meaning then of this part of the vision is, as the Prophet bought the
adultresse, so shall the people be bought and sold, and live like slaves and
servants; as he bought her at a low and base rate, even for half the price of
a servant, so they shall be basely esteemed and meanly valued more like vassels
and slaves then the spouse of God; as he does not give unto her Wheat but
Barley, and that in small quantity, so the Lord will afflict them with course
diet, whereof they shall not eat unto saciety but sparingly by measure, as if
the Lord should have said; seeing you have abused your liberty unto
licentiousnes, and when the reign was laid on your own necks have run away
from me like unruly colts, therefore I will bridle and curb you in with
captivity, and make you to return unto me; seeing every base trifle has
moved you to sell your selves to be slaves to sin, I will also cause you like
slaves to be bought and sold at vile rates; seeing you have abused your
honorable estate, unto which I called you, namely, to be my Church and people,
and have thereby been puffed up in pride, I will humble you with your enemies
contemptible and disdainefull usage of you; seeing your plenty and prosperity
has made you to forget and neglect me, I will rub your memory with poverty
and want, but yet I will not leave you comfortless, for I will not utterly
forsake you and suffer you to perish in your penury, but will allow unto you
some poor maintenance, and by my hard usage I will not destroy you, but buy
you that is, reclaim and reduce you again under my government.

And this is the meaning of the words: The instructions hence to be gathered
are these. First we may observe that the Lord approves his love to the people
of Israel, by Afflictions a sign of Gods love.
those afflictions which he lays on them, to the end that he may reclaim
them from their sins. For as there is no greater sign of Gods hatred and our
rejection, then when the Lord gives us over unto our selves, to do what we
list, to prosper in our sins, and without any check to run forward in the
ways of wickedness, to our destruction; so can there not be a more evident
sign of his love, then when like a careful father he corrects us, that he
may not disinherite us, and makes the pleasures of sin loathsome unto us, by
mingling them with the Wormwood of afflictions.

And hence it is that the Apostle says, that whom the Lord loves he
chasteneth, and he scourges every son whom he receives. Heb. 12. 6. Apoc.
3. 19.
Heb. 12. 6. So Apoc. 3. 19. For the Lord aymeth not at our hurt and
punishment, but at our good and profit, that we might be pertakers of his
holiness. Heb. 12. 10. And Heb. 12. 10.
when we are judged we are chastened of the Lord, because we should not be
condemned of the world, as it is, 1. Cor. 11. 32. 1. Cor. 11. 32.
The Lord bridleth us with afflictions, that we may not run headlong in the
course of sin, and like a good scholemaister he corrects us, that he may
teach us in his ways, and make us more diligently apply our lessons. And this
David well knew by his own experience, and therefore he says, Psalm. 119. 67.
Before I was afflicted I went astray, but Psa. 119. 67. 71
now have I kept thy word. And verse 71. It is good for me that I have been
afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes. When our heavenly Physician dyeteth
us from the pleasures of sin, which we love better then out meat and
drink, and gives us the bitter pills and loathsome potions of afflictions, it
is a sign that he intends the cure, and that there is some hope of our
recovery; but when he lets us have whasoeuer we lust after, and lets our
appetite be the only rule of our diet, it is a shrewde token that he has
given us over as being a desperate cure: when our father suffers us to go on
in all wicked and licentious courses, it is a sign he neglects us, and
means to disinherite us: when our Lord and master lets us neglect all
duties without controlement, and suffers us to go on in our stubbornenesse
and disobedience, without any reproof or correction, he makes it manifest
that his purpose is to turn us out of his service; and when he lets us feed at
will in the pleasant pastures of sin, it is more then probable that he has
destinated us to the slaughter.

The use which we are to make hereof is: first, that we The uses.
faint not in our afflictions, imagining that they are signs of Gods hatred,
and our rejection; but bear them with patience, considering the Lord hereby
shows his love and care over us: especially let us be not only patient, but
also joyful and thankful, when the Lord crosses us in our sins, and
restrains us from going forward in any course of wickedness; for such
afflictions are blessed which preserve us from Gods eternal curse, and that is
a sweet chastisement which keeps us from being condemned with the world.

Secondly, seeing the Lord in love corrects us, that he may reclaim us from
our sins, let us, when we suffer any affliction, labor to find out our
sins, bewail them, and turn from them unto the Lord by true repentance; and
then the same love which moved the Lord to correct us, will also move him when
we are reformed, to ease us of our affliction, neither will he cause us any
longer to drink these bitter potions, when he has already recovered us of our
health.

Thirdly, we learn to judge charitably of those whom the Lord exercises with
afflictions, and not to imagine that because any are extraordinarily afflicted,
therefore they are more then ordinary sinners, as the Jews did. Luke. 13. 1. 2
Luke 13. 1. 2.
And the Barbarians. Act. 28. 4. For then we shall condemn Act. 28. 4.
the generation of Gods children. Psalm. 73. 15. Yea even the Son Psalm. 73. 15.
of God himself, as it is. Esa. 53. 3. 4. Esa. 53. 3. 4.


Secondly, we may here observe what fearful punishments The punnishment of
Idolatry.
the Lord inflicteth upon those Idolaters whom he purposes to convert and
save: first, Captivity under their enemies; for when they will not serve the
Lord who loves them, the Lord will make them serve their foes who hate them.
Secondly, Ignominy and base contempt, for those that dishonor God by their
Idolatry and unthankfulness, the Lord will cause them to be dishonored,
scorned, and reproched. Thirdly, Poverty and want, for those that will not be
thankful to the Lord for his benefits, nor employ them to his glory; he will
deprive them of them, and by their penury teach them to acknowledge him, the
author of them: Those that forget God by reason of their fullness, he will
cause them through emptines and want, to call him to their remembrance. Where
we may note how the Lord fitteth his punishments to their sins, because they
refused to use their liberty to gods glory, in worshipping and serving him, but
rather abused it to the service of sin and Satan, the Lord made them
Captives and slaves to their enemies; because they were not moved by that high
degree of honor of being Gods peculiar people, to give glory unto God; but
grew hereby proud and disdainful, the Lord deiecteth them into a baser estate
then the usual condition of a servant or Captive: because by their fullness
and luxurious excess in all dainties and delicateness they were grown
wanton, forgetful of God, and unthankful, the Lord cures their surfeit, by
allotting them course and slender diet.

And so much concerning the first part of their misery, consisting in the
evils which they suffered. The second part respects the good things whereof
they were deprived, which was their communion with God, and the comfortable
fruition of his presence, and also of the outward signs thereof, both in the
Ecclesiastical and political government, and in his public worship and
service. And this is set down typically. Verse 3. Where the Prophet continuing
in the former Allegory or Parable, compares the deprivation of Gods presence,
and the outward signs thereof, unto the widdow-hood of the Adultresse. And
afterward this Type is expounded. Verse 4.

THe Type is contained in these words: And I said unto her, thou shall abide
with me (or rather thou shall abide unto me, or wait for me) many days: thou
shall not play the Harlot, and thou shall be to no man, and I will be so unto
thee. The which words are the speech of the Prophet unto the Adultresse, after
that he had bought her unto him, wherein he tells her, that howsoever in
love to her, he had bought her, yet considering that she was an Adultresse, his
purpose was, for a time to keep her single and separate both from himself and
all others, that so he might make trial whether indeed she did truly repent
of her former wicked courses, and so upon sufficient experience of her
reformation, he might take her again to wife.

But let us come to the words. And I said unto her: that is, after I the
Prophet had bought the Adultresse in my vision, I did likewise in vision say
unto her, Thou shall abide me: The words are, Thou shall sit for me: which in
this phrase of speech have this sense, Thou shall wait for me. So Exodus Exodus
24. 14.
24. 14. the same phrase is used, Sit for us here, that is, tarry and wait for
us. The meaning is, I will not marry thee presently, but thou shall wait my
leisure, for as yet thou art not fit to be my spouse, seeing thou art not
cleansed from thy Adultries, neither as yet have I had sufficient experience of
thine unfeigned repentance. Where he alludeth to the rite in the old Law. Deuteronomy.
21. 13. which required that those Deuteronomy. 21. 13.
who had taken Captives, and desired to make them their wives, should not
presently marry them, but keep them in their house a Month, till they were
after a Legal manner purged from their Gentillisme.

He further adds: Thou shall not play the Harlot, that is, thou shall not
live in thy adultries and uncleanness with thy lovers as thou have done in
former times, but thou shall wholly weane thy heart and affections from them,
that thou may fix it wholly upon me. And thou shall be to no other man, or,
thou shall be to no man: that is, thou shall remain like a desolate widow,
and spend thy time in sorrow and mourning for many days, without either lover
or husband, for neither will I my self be married unto thee, neither will I
suffer thee to marry with any other man, but thou shall abide single and
solitary, till I see fit time to take thee to wife. Now because it might seem
some wrong, if the Prophet restraying this adultresse from all others, should
in the mean while reject her and make choice of some other wife, therefore to
comfort her that she might bear her widdow-hood with greater patience, he
assures her that in the mean time he will make choice of no other, but
remain single and alone as well as she. And this he signifies in these words,
And I will be so unto thee, that is, as thou shall not come at me nor match
thy self with any other, so I will neither join my self unto thee as yet,
nor in the mean time, reject thee utterly and make choice of any other, but I
will remain single as well as thou, that when thou have given sufficient
testimony of thine unfeigned repentance, I may again join thee unto my self
in marriage.

And this is the meaning of the words being understood typically, of the
Prophet and the adultresse, which being fitted unto the Lord and the Church of
Israel (which are the parties represented in this type, by the Prophet and the
Harlot) do signify thus much; that howsoever the Lord so loved this harlot
the people of Israel that he took care of her conversion and salvation, and
to this end used means, that she might forsake her idols and spiritual
whoredom, yet so horrible and odious were her adultries and unthankfulness in
his sight, that he would not be reconciled unto her and admit her into the
former communion of marriage, till by many trials and much experience, she had
given assured testimony of her unfeigned repentance. And therefore his purpose
was to afflict her with a tedious captivity, wherein he would restrain
himself from her and have no communion with her, either in respect of
political or ecclesiastical government, for neither should she have any form
of a common wealth, wherein he should rule as their King, nor of a Church,
wherein he should be worshipped as their God, with such public service as he
required in his word: and as he would restrain them of the public means of
his worship, so also he would not suffer them to forsake him, and to make
choice of other Gods and so to commit spiritual whoredom with their idols, as
they had done in former times, but they should keep themselves from idolatry,
waiting the Lords leisure, till in his son Jesus Christ he would be
reconciled unto them, and again contract them unto himself in marriage.

Now because this tedious captivity and confused anarchie should not be
without comfort, therefore the Lord gives them some testimony of his love, by
assuring them that he would as well wait for their true conversion, as they
for his mercy, and that in the mean time he would not reject them, and make
choice of some other people to be his Church, but would stay his choice till
upon their true repentance he might receive them into his former love and
favor.

And this is emphatically signified in these words, And I will be so unto thee:
where the Lord not does explicate his meaning at large, but (like those whose
minds are exceedingly perturbed with grief, indignation, or some singular
commiseration) he uses this abrupt and broken speech, as though it so much
grieved him to defer reconciliation, and to withhould the outward testimonies
of his love from his people, that he was not able to pronounce this his
definitive sentence at large, but in these abrupt and broken speeches. So that
here is Judgment mixed with Mercy: Judgment in that he with-houldeth from
them the signs of his love for a time; Mercy in that he with-houldeth them
not for ever; Judgment in that he would not as yet admit them to be his
people; Mercy in that for their sakes he will make choice of no other, but
expects their repentance, that thereupon he might be reconciled unto them.

But against this there may be made two objections; first An answer to a
twofold objection.
that this testimony of Gods love, and hope of their future reconciliation,
will not stand with Gods former threatenings, namely, that he would no more
have mercy upon them; Chap. 1. Ver. 6. That they should not be his people, nor
he their God. Ver. 9. That he had utterly divorced and rejected them. Chap. 2.
Ver. 2. And secondly, that it will not stand with the event, seeing the Lord
did never after espouse this whole people, nor yet them alone. Both which
objections are taken away with one answer: namely, that this Prophecy is not
to be understood of the whole body of the people, but of the faithful amongst
them, which belonged to Gods Election; of which it is truly verified, so as it
may well stand with the former Prophecy, and the future event. For though he
rejected the whole body of this people, yet he reserved a remnant, according to
the Election of grace, Romans 11. 5.
whom after their repentance and conversion he did espouse to him: and for
these he reserved his grace, so as he would not after the people were excluded
from the outward covenant, admit of any other, neither before the coming of
Christ, nor after he was come, till he had called and reconciled them; and so
upon occasion of their calling and conversion, he called also and converted
the elect Gentiles, amongst whom they were scattered, and to them both, who
only were the true Israelites, according to the spirit, he made good his
promises of mercy and grace: and this appears. Math. 10. 5. 6. 15. 24. 26.
Act. 13. 46.
Mat. 10. 5, 6. and 15. 24, 26. Act. 13. 46.

And so much for the exposition of the words: the doctrines which from hence
arise are these. First, whereas the Lord says, that he will not presently be
reconciled unto the Length of affliction no sign of our rejection.
Church of Israel, but she shall wait his pleasure, and be content to live
in an afflicted estate, until he saw fit time of giving unto her assurance of
his love and favor: hence we learn to arm our selves with patience, when our
afflictions are tediously continued, and not desperately to cast aside all
hope, as though the length of our afflictions were a sign of our utter
rejection; for as it appears in this place, the Lord causes the afflictions,
even of those that belong to his Election, to endure for a long time together,
and makes them to wait and expect, till he sees the fit time for their
deliverance. Examples hereof we have in the captivity of Egypt, and Babylon,
in David, Job and many others.

The use hereof is, that though our afflictions be of long We must wait upon
God for deliverance from our afflictions.
continuance, we wait the Lords leisure, and possess our souls with
patience; and so in the end we shall be assured of deliverance. An example
hereof we have in David, Psalm. 40. 1. I wated patiently for the Lord etc. In
the faithful grievously Psalm. 40. 1. and 123. 2. Esaias. 8. 17.
afflicted. Psalm. 123. 2. Esaias. 8. 17. in Jacob Genesis 49. 18.

Which duty that we likewise may perform let us consider: first, that the
Lord inioyneth and requires it at our hands. Psalm. 37. 34. Wait thou on the
Lord, and keep his Psalm. 37. 34.
way.

Secondly, that the Lord wayteth upon us, that he may find us fit to receive
his mercy, that is, humbled in the sense and feeling of our own misery and
want, and earnestly hungring after his grace. Esa. 30. 18. Yet therefore will
the Lord Esaias. 30. 18.
wait, that he may have mercy upon you. Seeing then the Lord wayteth on us to
show mercy, great reason have we to wait, that we may receive mercy; for
waiting and attending better becomes suitors then benefactors.

Thirdly, let us wait upon the Lord, because the holy Ghost commends it unto
us, as a good thing. Lamen. 3. 26 Lamen. 3. 26.
It is good to trust and to wait for the salvation of the Lord.

Fourthly, if being afflicted, we do not only watch, but also wait in
prayer, it is a good argument, to confirm our faith in this assurance, that
our prayers shall be heard, and our petitions granted; and therefore the
Church uses this reason for the strengthening of her faith. Esaias. 33. 2. O
Lord Esa. 33. 2
have mercy upon us; we have waited for thee. And Mich 7. 7. Mich. 7. 7.
she joyneth these two together, I will wait for God my savior: my God will
hear. Of this David had experience Psa. 40. 1. Psalm. 40. 1.
I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me and heard my cry.

Fifthly, because our waiting and patient abiding the Lords leisure, shall
assuredly have a good issue: for he will not suffer those that wait upon him to
go away ashamed. Esaias. 49. 23. And howsoever the hope of the afflicted may be
Esa. 49 23.
deferred, yet it shall not perish for ever. Psalm. 9. 18. But those Psa. 9. 18.
that attend the Lords leisure, in the end shall be exalted, and have the land
in possession. Psalm. 37. 34. They shall be saved and delivered Psalm. 37. 34.
from all evil. Pro. 20. 22. Yea they shall be eternally Pro. 20. 22
blessed. Esaias. 30. 18. The Lord is the God of judgment; blessed Esa. 30. 18.
are all they that wait for him. Howsoever therefore the hope of the afflicted
being deferred, is for the present, bitter and irksome, yet in the end their
patient abiding shall be gladness, as it is. Pro. 10. 28. Pro. 10. 28.


The second thing to be observed is, that the Lord will not presently be
reconciled with his people, and show unto God tries our Repentance by
afflictions before he restores us to favor.
them the wonted signs of his favor, till he has taken trial of their
repentance by manifold afflictions; and this he does not so much to approve
their unfeigned repentance to himself, for he searches the heart and reigns,
and therefore needs not these outward signs; but first that by these signs,
their own faith may be assured, that they are truly converted, seeing they
endure the trial with patience, because they have sinned. Secondly, that he
may show his detestation of sin, in that he will not easily be reconciled,
even with those whom he dearly loves, when they have grievously offended
Thirdly, that by these corrections he may make them careful for the time to
come, that they do not again by their sins provoke his displeasure; for he
that with a wounded conscience and broken spirit, has long sought and sued for
mercy, and has spent many a bitter sigh and grievous groan before he could
attain unto the assurance of gods favor, having obtained it will not easily
be allured again by his sins to hazard and loose it. Fourthly that hereby he
may glorify his name, by approving his justice and righteous judgments even
to those that are with out, when as they see that he will not wink at sin,
no not in his dearest children; who otherwise would take occasion upon their
sin and impunitie to blaspheme. 2 Samuel 12. 14. 2 Samuel 12. 14.
Lastly, that he may hereby teach the wicked what they are to expect, for if
the Lord so corrects those sins in his children which of infirmity they
have committed, how will he punish the sins of wicked men which they commit
with full consent of will? If he be displeased with the faithful, and will not
presently assure them of his favor, after they have repented, then what can
they look for that continue in their sins without repentance, but that he
will pour upon them the full viols of his wrath? If he so severely chastises
sin in his sons and friends, how grievously will he punish it, in slaves
and enemies? examples hereof we have in Adam, David, Ezechias, the people of
Israel, and Christ himself.

The use hereof is, that we carefully take heed that we do not wound our
Consciences, by committing against our knowledge grievous sins, seeing we are
assured if we belong unto God that he will sharply chastise us for it; and
will not suffer the beams of his love comfortably to shine upon us, till we
have approved our repentance by many trials, and have endured much more grief
and sorrow, through our crosses, and the restraint of his love, then our
pleasure and delight was in the committing of our sins; and therefore let us
not to please the flesh wound the spirit, nor purchase a dram of carnal
delight, with a pound of sorrow.

Secondly, this may serve to comfort and refresh us, when as we are ready to
sincke under the weight of sin, and heavy burden of affliction, and in
regard hereof are ready to conclude that we are cast out of Gods favor; for
then we are to remember that the Lord oftentimes restrayneth the signs of his
favor, and continues the afflictions of those, whom notwithstanding, he
dearly loves for the causes above said, etc.

Thirdly, whereas the Lord says, that she shall stay for God afflicts us
for sin that we may learn to hate it.
him in her afflicted estate, and shall not play the harlot, etc. hence we
learn, that the reason why the Lord continues to restrain his favor, and to
afflict his people, is not because he hates them, but that hereby they may be
moved more seriously to repent, and to fly from their sins with greater
detestation, when they see these miserable effects that follow them. If our
heavenly father, when we grievously offend, should cocker us, and show no
sign of his displeasure, or being somewhat offended, should presently be
reconciled us; we finding no bitterness neither of Gods anger, nor of
affliction, which might cause us to distaste the sweet pleasures of sin, would
never soundly and seriously repent of them: but when we apprehend his heavy
displeasure, and cannot with much entreaty be assured of reconciliation; when
we feel the smart of sharp afflictions, and can by no means find ease, then
we call our sins to remembrance, and are grieved at the heart that we have
committed them; then we hate and detest them, as being the fountain from which
do flow these waters of bitterness; and then we resolve with our selves, that
if our heavenly father will but this once forgive, and be reconciled unto us:
if he will but cause the wonted beams of his favor to shine upon us, and ease
us of the heavy burden of our afflictions, we will never again be persuaded
so by our sins to provoke his displeasure, though all the profit, pleasures,
and preferment of the world were offered unto us.

The use which we are to make hereof is, that when the Lord does exercise us
with afflictions, we exercise our selves in repentance, and make the day of
tribulation, the day of humiliation; for this is the maine end why the Lord
afflicts us, which when he has attained, he will put an end to our
afflictions: and therefore the way to ease our selves of the burden of
punishment, is to cast away the burden of our transgressions; the best means
to lighten our souls with saving comfort, is to load them with bitter sorrow
for sin; if we would have God well pleased with us, we must be displeased
with our selves; and if ever we mean to come unto the palace of joy, we must
travail unto it by the path of mourning. For blessed are they that mourn, for
they shall be Mat. 5. 4. Luke. 6. 21.
comforted. Blessed are they that weep, for they shall laugh.

Fourthly, whereas the Lord says, Thou shall not play the God only
restrains us from running headlong into sin
Harlot, not so much by way of prohibition, teaching them what he would not
have them do, as by actual restraint, showing what he would cause and enable
them to refrain, notwithstanding their pronenesse thereunto, through their
natural corruption: hence we learn what is the chief cause whereby we are
withheld from running headlong into all manner of sin; namely, Gods
powerful word, which as it says, Thou shall not sin, so it enableth us
through the secret operation of his spirit, to yield obedience. For in our own
natural disposition, we are ready to draw sin unto us, as with Cart-ropes,
and to drink iniquity like water, Esaias. 5. 18.
our thoughts are only evil, and that continually. Genesis 6. 5 Genesis 6. 5.
We are not able so much as to will that which is good Phil. Phil. 2. 13.
2. 13. And instead of being restrained by Gods Law from sin, it takes
occasion by the commandment, to work in us all manner of concupiscence. Romans
7. 8. But it is only Romans 7. 8.
Gods Evangelical and spiritual word, whereby we are restrained from sin, and
enabled to perform obedience; when as the spirit gives life and power to the
dead and weak letter, and by the secret operation thereof, makes it
effectual for the working of that grace in us, which it requires, and to the
stirring of us up to perform that duty which it enjoyneth. John. 6. 63. John.
6. 63.


The use which we are to make hereof is: first, that we yield unto the Lord
the whole praise of our obedience, and of restrayning us from committing those
sins into which we see others f^l, for he alone makes the difference between
us and them. Secondly, that we do not presumptuously trust in our own
strength, thinking that we are able to stand when others fall: but let us
work out our salvation with fear and trembling, and whilst we think we
stand, let us take heed of a fall. As the Apostle exhorts. Phil. 2. 12. 1
Cor. 10. 12. And wholly distrusting in our own strength, let us solye rest upon
the Lord, and the power of his might. Ephesians. 6. 10. And Ephe. 6. 10.
to this end let us remember the example of Peter, Mat. 26 Mat. 66. 33. 74.
33. 74. And think with our selves, that if this rock were shaken with the
tempest of tentation, that we who in comparison are but reeds, cannot stand
steady in our own strength. Lastly, considering that Gods powerful word and
spirit vpholdeth us from falling into sin, we learn continually to crave the
Lords assistance, and to make that prayer which Christ has taught us: O Lord
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, and then shall we find
the Lord true of his promise. 1. Cor. 10. 13. For he knows how 1 Cor. 10. 13.
to deliver the godly out of tentation, etc. 2. Pet. 2. 9. 2 Pet. 2. 9.


Fifthly, we may observe how the Lord mingleth Mercy with Judgment, and even
in his corrections shows his God mingleth Mercy with Judgment.
fatherly love and compassion: he will not presently receive them to mercy, but
yet he does not exclude them from it for ever, he corrects them for a time,
but least they should faint, he promises an end to their afflictions; he
restraines his favor and as it were banisheth them his presence, not that he
intends utterly to reject them, but that they may be moved hereby more
soundly and seriously to repent; he diuorceth them from him, but in the mean
while he reserueth himself for them, and waits for their repentance that he
may restore them into his former favor. How infinite therefore are Gods
mercies, seeing his judgments are so full of compassion? how sweet and
comfortable is his love, bounty and goodness, seeing the actions of his anger
and justice are not without the mixture of such comfortable sweetness? and if
he be so gracious when he punishes, how gracious will he appear when he
rewards? Many examples hereof we have in the book of God: when he cast
Adam out of Paradise, he gives him hope to inherit heaven, Genesis 3.
and when he threatens him with labor and sorrow, he promises him a Savior,
in whom he should have joy and eternal rest. When he threatens captivity to
the posterity of Abraham, he limiteth the time, which being expired he Genesis 15.
13. 14
promises deliverance. He denounces against David 2 Samuel 12.
temporal punishments, but first he pardons his sin and releaseth him of
those eternal torments which he deserved. He lays upon Leui a curse, that
he should be scattered amongst his people. as though he were not a Tribe, and
had no portion amongst his brethren. Genesis 49. 7. but in this Genesis 49. 7.
curse was included a blessing, for he therefore scattered them that he might
gather them unto himself, and deprived them of other portions, that he
himself might be their portion and reward. Deuteronomy. 10. 8, 9. He caused Manasses
to be led Deuteronomy. 10. 8. 9.
captive, and to be bound in chains, but his captivity was to be preferred
before his liberty; his dungeon before his stately palaces; and his chains
of iron, were better unto him, then his chains of gold and most rich
ornaments; for 2 Chro. 33.
God used his Captivity, as a means to free him out of the captivity of
sin and Satan, his chains to preserve him from the chains of darkness,
and his dungeon to keep him from running headlong into the dungeon of hell,

The use hereof serves to comfort us in afflictions, when as we consider that
they not only proceed from love, but also are so tempred with mercy and
compassion, that they cannot hurt us: they are bitter indeed and unpleasant
unto the taste, but yet they are not poisons to kill us, but wholesome potions,
which our heavenly Physician has wisely tempered to cure us of the diseases of
sin, and to purge away our corruptions: and howsoever they may make us sick
whilst they are in operation, yet this sickness tends to the recovery of
continual health, and to the attaining of eternal life.

ANd so much concerning the Widdow-hood of the Church of Israel Typically
propounded: Now we are to speak of it, as it is plainly expounded. Verse 4.
For the children of Israel shall remain many days without a King, and
without a Prince, and without an Offering, and without an Image, and without an
Ephod, and without a Teraphim.

Where he shows: first, who shall remain in this estate of a mournful
widow, namely, the children of Israel, by which we are to understand the ten
Tribes, who in the land of their Captivity, were without Priest or Magistrate;
and not the people of Judah, who had both: neither yet is it to be understood of
the whole body of the people, but only of the elect Israelites: for they only
remained for a time, without Civil or Ecclesiastical government, and without
public means of worshipping either the true God or Idols; for these they
would not worship, nor communicate with the Gentiles in their Idolatries; and
God they could not worship after that public manner prescribed in his word,
seeing they were exiled from the Temple: until Christ came, who was their
King, Priest and Prophet, which took away the difference of places, and
restored unto the converted Israelites, the public means of serving God:
whereas the reprobate Israelites ever remained without the true worship of God,
and not only unto a certain time: and were not without Images and Idols,
seeing they communicated with the heathen in their Idolatryes.

Secondly, he sets down the time, wherein they should remain in their
widows estate, namely, for the space of many days, that is, even to the
coming of their Messiah Jesus Christ: which from the sixth year of Ezechias,
wherein the Israelites were led captive into Assiria by Salmanaser, was 680.
years.

Thirdly, he implies the sorrow and mourning of the people, by this phrase of
sitting; which usually in the Scriptures is ascribed to those, who are in
grief and heaviness: for not knowing which way to ease themselves, nor having
any appetite, when they are oppressed with sorrow, to go about any thing, they
sit down and bewail their misery. So it is said of Jobs friends, that they
sat down to mourn with him, when they could not help him. Job. 2. 13. Of
Nehemiah, that Job. 2. 13.
he sat down and wept, and mourned for certain days. Nehe. Nehe. 1. 4.
1. 4. Of Jerusalem, that she sat solitary like a widow, mourning and
lamenting her afflictions. Lamen. 1. 1. 2. And Babylon Lamen. 1. 1. 2.
says of her self, that she would not sit as a Widow. Esa. 47. 8.
Esaias. 47. 8.

Fourthly, he shows wherein her widdow-hood consists: namely, in being
deprived of the outward signs of her communion with God, both in regard of
Civil and Ecclesiastical government, and of the means of Gods pure and
public worship: as also in being restrained from worshipping and serving Idols
and false Gods. All which are expressed in these particulars, Without a King,
and without a Prince, that is, without any Magistrate of their own nation, or
any public form of government, whereby Gods presence is represented in the
common wealth. And without an Offering: that is, they should not offer
Sacrifices and Oblations; for neither was it lawful to erect an Altar, or
offer a Deuteronomy. 12. 13. 14.
Sacrifice any where, saving at Jerusalem, the place appointed for Gods public
worship. And without an Image: namely, made to represent Gods presence, such as
were the Images erected by Jeroboam in Dan and Bethell. 1 King. 12. 28, 29. 1
King. 12. 28.
and those spoken of 2 King. 17. 10. And without an Ephod: 2 King. 17. 10.
of which there were two kinds: the one made of Gold, blew Silk, Purple,
Scarlet, and twined Linen: in which were the two Onix stones, wherein were
graued the name of the twelve Tribes, and the Vrim and the Thummin; and this
was proper to the high Priest, of which we may read. Exodus Exodus 28. 6.
28. 6. etc. The other made of Linen, of which we may read. 1 Samuel 2. 18. 2 Samuel 6. 14. The meaning is, that they 1 Samuel 2. 28.
should be without a Priesthood, which should instruct 2 Samuel 6. 14.
them, and ask counsel for them of the Lord. Lastly, he says, that they
should be without a Teraphim: that is, they should have nothing to do, with
the Idol Gods of the heathen: for the Teraphims were Images which the
Idolatrous Heathens worshipped, of which kind were those Teraphims or Images,
which Rachell stole from her Idolatrous father Laban. Genesis 31. 19. and that
Teraphim in Michaes Genesis 31. 19.
house. Judge. 17. 5. Judge. 17. 5.


So that hereby it appears, in what the widdow-hood of the Church of Israel
consisted; namely, that she should have no sign of Gods presence, in the
ciuell government, for she should have no King nor Magistrate; nor yet in the
Church, for she should have no offering, nor Ephod, that is, no Priesthood, nor
public means of worshipping God, according to his word. Neither yet should
she follow her lovers, and commit Idolatry with them; for she should not
worship the true God after a false manner, as Jeroboam did in images; nor the
heathen idols, for she should be without a Teraphim.

Now the Lords end in all this was, that he might weane the elect Israelites
from their vain hopes, by withdrawing from them all those things wherein they
trusted, that so having no other hope of being delivered out of their misery,
they might turn to the Lord by true repentance, and so expect from him alone
freedom from their afflictions. For as long as they had any Kings and
government, or any form of a common wealth, whilst they had any show of
Religion, or any outward means of worshipping God, though they were never so
much depraved and corrupted, they rested, nay they boasted in it, as though
they were in good estate: and therefore to beat them from this vain conceit,
the Lord threatens to bring upon them a confused anarchie, and to deprive them
of all show and outward appearance of a Church, that so being humbled in the
sight and sense hereof, they might be moved laying aside all other hopes, to
expect salvation in Jesus Christ, and be the better fitted to receive him when
he was exhibited, as their only King, Priest, Prophet, and Redeemer.

And this is the meaning of the words: from whence we That the beams of Gods
favor are often clouded with afflictions.
may observe these instructions. First, whereas he says that the people of
Israel shall sit waiting in heaviness, without any outward signs of gods
comfortable presence; hence we learn that even Gods dearest children oftentimes
have the beams of Gods favor so clouded from them in their afflictions, that
they seem unto themselves desolate, and utterly forsaken of God, as appears
in this place. So Job complayneth, Chap. Job. 13. 24.
13. 24. Wherefore hydest thou thy face, and take me for thine enemy. And
David Psalm. 13. 1. How long will thou forget me O Lord, for ever? how long
will thou hide thy face from me? Psalm. 13. 1.
And 88. 14. Lord why do thou reject my soul, and hidest Psalm. 88. 14. and
46. 89.
thy face from me? 89. 46. So Esaias complains in the name of the faithful,
Chapter 45. 15. Verily thou O God hidest thy Esa. 45. 15.
self. The Church likewise, Lamen. 5. 20. Wherefore do Lamen. 5. 20.
thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long time? Yea this was the
complaint of the son of God himself, when as he bore our iniquities, Math.
27. 46. Not that indeed the Lord Math. 27. 46.
does ever forsake those whom he has once chosen, but only for a time
with-houldeth the outward signs and inward feeling of his comfortable
presence, that he may move them more seriously to sorrow for sin, more
earnestly to beg and pray for the return of his favor, and more preciously to
esteem of it being restored unto them, when they perceive how barraine of all
comfort and joy their souls are, as soon as the Sunshine of Gods favor is
ecclipsed from them.

The use hereof is, that if ever the Lord seem thus to withdraw himself from
us in our afflictions, we be so humbled hereby, as that in the mean time we
sincke not into desperation, as though we were utterly rejected: and to this
end let us remember that this has been the lot of the dearest of Gods
children; and therefore let this comfort us, that the same afflictions have
been accomplished in other of the faithful. 1 Cor. 10. 13. 1 Pet. 5. 9.
Secondly let us call to mind times of old, wherein the Lord gave us sure
testimonies of his love, and so from the immutabilitie of his love, mercy and
goodness, we may receive comfort. So David. Psalm. 77. 11. Psalm. 77. 11.


Secondly, we may observe how the Church behaueth her self when she seems
left and forsaken of God, namely, she sits down like a desolate widow, and
spends her time That we must not be careless and senseless in the time of
affliction.
in mourning and lamentation: whence we learn not to make light of this heavy
affliction, nor to walk under this weighty burden, with stiff and stretched
out necks: but when God in the time of affliction seems to estrange and
absent himself, we must humble our souls with mourning and lamentation, watch
and wait for his return, and continually cry and call upon him by hearty
prayer, desiring nothing in the world so much, as that he will hasten his
coming, and re-assure us of his favor. And if we thus behave our selves, then
shall we find Gods promise verified. Esa. 54. 8. For a Esaias. 54. 8.
little while have I forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I gather
thee. And by this means also, shall we gather unto our selves assurance, that
we are indeed espoused unto God, when as the Lord our husband, having absented
himself in some displeasure, we do not like strumpets rejoice in his absence;
or if there be any little grief, seek to put it off by haunting the company
of vain persons, and by passing the time in sports and pastimes: but like
loyal and loving wives bewail his absence and displeasure, taking delight in
nothing, till we enjoy his love again, in whom our soul delights.

Here therefore two extremes are to be avoided: for as we must not sincke and
fall down flat under the burden of Gods displeasure: so we must not stand
upright with stiff and stretched out necks, casting it aside without care or
sorrow, but we must take the middle course, that is, we must stoop and buckle
under our burden, as being weary of bearing it, we must sit down and mourn
like a widow, forsaken and desolate, delighting in nothing till we feel and
find that God deligheth in us, and is reconciled unto us. An example hereof we
have in the Church. Psalm. 137. 2. 3. Psalm. 237. 2. 3.


Thirdly, we are to observe Gods wise mixture of Mercy and Judgment, that the
Church might neither be secure Gods wise mixture of Mercy and Judgment.
and careless, nor yet comfortless and without hope: for whereas he says,
that she shall sit mourning for many days, herein is employed, that her
afflictions should neither be very short, nor very long. First, he shows
that they should not be very short, for they should last for many days: and
then that they should not be very long, for they should not last for many ages,
or many years, but only for many days. He does not reckon the time by
minutes or hours, for then they would have been secure and wretchlesse, and
so taking no care to arm themselves with patience, they would have been
altogether unprepared, when contrary to their hope their afflictions were
tediously continued; nor yet by years or ages, least whilst he sought to arm
them with patience, he should disarme them of hope, which is our chief stay
to keep us from sincking under affliction.

The use which we are to make hereof is, that when we are in affliction, we
do neither expect present deliverance, nor yet imagine that God will forsake
us for ever. For if our hopes be frustrate we shall grow impatient, and if we
have no hope at all we shall grow desperate.

Fourthly, we may observe, that he says the Israelits should That our
afflictions are momentanie howsoever they seem tedious to the flesh.
continue in their afflicted estate many days, whereas in truth they
continued diverse ages, even six hundred and fourscore years. So he says
that the Church of the Smirnians should have tribulation for ten days. Apoc.
2. 10. And that the Church should be fed in the wilderness of affliction a
thousand two hundred and threescore days. Chap. 11. 6. By which computation
he teaches us how we are to account of the time of affliction; namely,
howsoever to the flesh it seem long and tedious, yet it is to be judged short
and momentanie, in comparison of that eternal glory which attends for us,
after we have finished the short skirmish of afflictions. When as therefore
our troubles and crosses, seem so tedious, as though they would never end; let
us comfort our selves with this consideration, that they are in truth but
light, short and momentanie, in respect of that superexcellent and eternal
weight of glory, which is reserved for us. 2 Cor. 4. 17. 2 Cor. 4. 17.


Fifthly, whereas the Lord describing the widdowhood of the Church of Israel,
and the separation between him and her, does after-wards expound himself, and
shows that it consists in the taking away of their King, Magistrates and
The Magistracy and Ministry signs of gods presence.
civil government, and the means of his public worship and service: hence
we learn, that Princes wisely ruling in the common wealth, and godly and
faithful Ministers publicly executing their functions, which concern gods
pure and sincere worship in the Church, are notable signs, representing unto
us Gods own presence. So that where the Lord has established a lawful and
wise Magistracy, and a godly, learned and faithful Ministry, there himself
is present, joined in a near communion with that church and commonwealth;
where these are wanting, from thence the Lord may be said to have withdrawn
himself and to have made a separation, leaving such a people in the estate of
an afflicted widow. And this appears not only in this, but also in diverse
other places of scripture. For first for Kings and Magistrates, they are said
to be breathing and mortal gods, and the children of the most high, who in
their government after a more peculiar manner resemble their heavenly father,
Psalm. 82. 6. 7. In whose assemblies God stands and Psalm. 82. 6. 7.
judges righteous judgment, ver. 1. God stands in the assembly of gods, he
judges among gods. And for the ministry, and public service of God, we
have Christ's promise, That where two or three are gathered together in his
name, there is he in the midst of them Mat. 18. 20. And howsoever Mat. 18.
20.
being infinite he fills heaven and earth with his presence, yet after a
more peculiar manner, he walks in the midst of the seven golden
candlestickes. Apoc. 1. 13. that is, he is present in his Church to rule,
defend and preserve it. And hence it is, that when David was banished from
the Temple, and debarred of the public means of Gods worship, he complayneth
that he was banished from Gods presence, and cast Psalm. 42. 2. and 84. 1. 2.
out of his sight. Psalm. 42. 2. and 84. 1. 2.

The use hereof is: first, that we highly value and esteem these outward
signs of Gods presence; namely, a civil and That the magistracy and
ministry are highly to be esteemed.
peaceable government in the commonwealth, under a lawful Prince, and a
faithful and painful ministry in the Church, by whose means we enjoy the
public worship and service of God. For vvhilest both these are settled amongst
us, we have assured testimonies that God has joined himself unto us in a
near communion. And on the other side, when these for our sins are taken
away, then does the Lord hide his face from us, and makes a visible separation
between us and him. The consideration whereof should make us rejoice, and
magnify the name of the Lord, when we enjoy these invaluable blessings; and
to sit down and mourn like a desolate widow, when we are deprived of them.

Secondly, this serves for the reproof, first of Popish Popish traitors
reproved.
Traitors who are ever plotting and contriuing the death of Christian Princes,
and continually labor to disturb and overthrow all peaceable and well settled
government, that so bringing in all disorder and confusion, they may have
better opportunity of fishing in these troubled waters. For what do they else
herein, but even offer violence unto Gods own person, when as they hurt
Princes, whom he has placed, as his lively Images, to represent his presence
in the common wealth? What do they else, but as much as in them lies, sever
that communion which is between God and the people, and bring their country
into the mournful estate of an afflicted Widow. How far are these from the
precept of the Apostles. Romans 13. 1. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 17. And from the Romans 13.
1, 5. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 17.
practice of David, whose heart throbbed because he had but cut the garment of
the Lords anointed, though he were already rejected of God, and himself
chosen to his place. 2 Samuel 24. 6.
2 Samuel 24. 6.

Secondly, hereby are reproved sedicious Mal-contents, Seditious mal-contents
rebuked.
who never think nor speak of the manifold blessings and benefits which the
land injoyeth by the government of their lawful Princes, as Peace, Plenty,
Safety, the Preaching of the Gospel, and such like: but are ever talking of
the infirmities of their governors, and of the defects and imperfections of
their government; the which seditious murmurings work no reformation of things
amiss, but incense the Prince and discontent the people.

Lastly, hereby is condemned the practice of the Brownists, who deprive
themselves of the outward signs of Gods presence, the Ministry of the word,
and the outward means of his public worship and service, because of some
blemishes and corruptions remaining in the Church, from which the Church in no
age was ever perfectly purged.

ANd so much concerning the first fruit of Gods love, whereby he approves it
unto the people: namely, by inflicting upon them his fatherly chastisements:
now follows the second fruit, which is the sanctifying of these afflictions
for their conversion. Verse 5. Afterward shall the children of Israel convert
and seek the Lord their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord,
and his goodness in the latter days. In which words is set down the
conversion of the people of Israel, and the time thereof. Their conversion it
self is first expressed, and then a twofold effect thereof: their conversion
in these words, Afterward shall the people of Israel convert, or rather,
shall be converted. The which words have relation to their former afflictions,
as though he should say, after they have been long exercised with grievous
afflictions, at length the Lord will so sanctify them to their use, as that
hereby they shall be truly humbled, converted, and brought to unfeigned
repentance. The which promise tended to the singular comfort of the afflicted
Israelites, when as being almost overwhelmed with miseries, they were assured
not only that at length they should have an end, but also that they should
bring forth this notable fruit of their true conversion.

The effects of their conversion are showed in the words following: first, That
they shall seek the Lord their God and David their king. Where, by this phrase
of seeking the Lord, we are to understand, that having bewailed their former
apostasy, and forsaken their sins by true Repentance, they should labor to
be reconciled unto God in Christ, worship and serve him according to his Word,
invoke his Name, make profession of his true Religion, and embrace the true
Jehovah as their only God, by a lively faith. And this large signification
has this phrase of seeking the Lord, not only here, but also else where. So
Psalm. 24. 6. and 27. 8. Esaias. 55. 6. Psalm. 24. 6. and 27. 8. Esaias. 55. 6.


It is further added: And David their King. In which words are employed two
things: First, that the Israelites had formerly made a defection from the
kingdom of David: namely, under the reign of Rehoboam. 1 King. 12. And
secondly, 1 Kings. 12.
that now they should make up this breach, by readjoyning themselves as
obedient subjects to this kingdom. Where by David we are not to understand the
son of Ishai, who was long ago dead: but our Savior Jesus Christ, who
usually in the Prophets was called David, as appears. Ezech. 34. 23. 24. And
I will set up a Shepherd over Ezech. 34. 23. and 37. 24.
them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David. And 37. 24. David my
servant shall be king over them, etc. Ier. 30. 9 Jeremy. 30. 9.
They shall serve the Lord their God and David their king. The reason hereof
is: first, because David was a Type of Christ: secondly, because he came out of
his loins, and in this respect is usually called the son of David: thirdly,
because the promise made to David, concerning the eternity of his kingdom, was
known commonly to all the people, of which they are here put in mind, for the
better strengthening of their faith.

So that by seeking the Lord and David their king, is meant, that they should
know and acknowledge, worship and serve, both God the father, and his son
Jesus Christ: according to that, John. 17. 3. This is life eternal, that they
John 17. 3.
know thee, the only very God and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. For as
when they were said to have made a defection from David, the meaning was not
that this defection was made from his person, seeing he was dead many years
before; but from his kingdom established in his posterity: so when they are
here said to seek David their king, the meaning is, that they should not seek
his person which was dead, but his kingdom established for ever in his seed
Jesus Christ.

The second effect of their conversion is expressed in these Morrall.
words: And shall fear the Lord and his goodness, or as the Hebrew has it,
shall fear unto the Lord. Whereby we are not to understand that they should
perform that morral duty of fearing God, as our English translation seems
to import: but that they should fearfully hasten unto the Lord and his
goodness, that is, being affrighted with the sight and sense of their sins,
the curse of the law, the anger of God, death, and damnation due unto them,
they shall with all possible speed fly unto the Lord, and to his goodness, and
by a lively faith lay hold upon gods mercy offered unto them in Christ, and
rest wholy thereupon for their salvation, So that this seems to be a
Metaphor taken from Birds, which being suddenly feared do fearfully fly
unto their retiring places of greatest safety. And thus this word is taken,
Chap. 11. 11. Hosea. 11. 11.
They shall fear as a sparrow out of Aegipt, that is, being affrighted they
shall fly with great have. And in this sense the Latin word trepidare is
used, as Liuij annalium 23. Moxque in sua quisque ministeria discursu trepidat
ad prima signa. Virgil. Aeneid. 9. Ne trepidate meas Teucri defendere naues,
(id est, ne festinate.) Neue armate manus, etc.

And the rather do I thus expound the words: first, because it is an improper
manner of speech to express the morrall duty of fearing God, by this phrase
of fearing unto God. Secondly, we are not said to fear Gods goodness, but
rather his justice and judgments. True it is that God is feared for his
goodness, according to that, Psalm. 130. 4. Psalm. 130. 4.
namely, as a gracious father, whom for his goodness toward us we are loath
to displease, but his goodness it self is not fearful or terrible, but
sweet and comfortable. Thirdly, because the word is so taken in other places.

The meaning therefore of these words, is briefly thus much, that the people
of Israel being terrified and affrighted with the sight and sense of their
sins, and the punishments due unto them, should fly speedily unto the Lord,
as being their protector and sure defense, comforting themselves in the assured
hope of his grace and goodness; whereby they should be assured that their
sins shall be forgiven them, and they freed from them both in respect of
their guilt and punishment.

And these are the effects of their conversion. The time is expressed in these
words, in the latter or last days: that is, after that Jesus Christ the true
Messiah is exhibited in the flesh, which usually in the Scriptures is called
the last days. Deuteronomy. 4. 30. Esa. 2. 2. Micha. 4. 1. Heb. 1. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 20. 1
John. 2. 28. The which time is specified. First, to show their obstinacy in
their sins and corruptions, seeing these tough humors could no otherwise be
purged away, but by the long working potions of tedious and bitter afflictions.
Secondly, that they might prepare themselves patiently to bear these miseries,
thus tediously continued, when as they were forwarned of them, for praemonitus
praemunitus. Thirdly, that they might hereby be refreshed with some comfort,
when as they were assured that howsoever their troubles were tedious yet at
length they should have a happy end, seeing they should bring them unto God by
true repentance and a lively faith.

And this is the meaning of the words: the instructions God sanctifies the
afflictions of his Elect for their conversion.
which from hence arise are many: first, we here observe, how the Lord
sanctifies the afflictions of the Elect for their conversion and true
repentance, for after that the people are grievously afflicted, at the length
they are humbled in the sight of their sins, and turn unto the Lord. The
like examples we have in David; the Israelites in the Judges time; Manasses;
the prodigal Son; and many others, and this is that which the Prophet
speaks, Esaias. 26. 16. O Lord Esaias. 26. 16.
in trouble they have visited thee, they have poured forth a prayer when thy
chastening was upon them. So that affliction humbles them whom prosperity
puffs up with Pride, it softneth those whom prosperity hardened, it
conuerteth into the ways of righteousness, those whom prosperity made to
wander into the by-pathes of sin. But yet they work not these good effects
in all, but only in those, unto whose use they are sanctified by Gods spirit,
as we may see in example of Pharaoh, Saul, Jeroboam, etc. who the more they
were hammered and beaten upon with afflictions, the more hard and obdurate they
waxed.

The use hereof, serves to comfort all the faithful in their greatest
troubles and miseries, seeing they may be assured that the Lord will
sanctify their afflictions for their humiliation, conversion and salvation.
For well may we be contented to be beaten, that we may be betred; to be put
into the furnace of affliction, that being purged from the dross of our
corruptions, we may like pure gold be treasured up in the treasury of eternal
happiness: to be pruned, that we may become more fruitful: to be hammered,
that our hard hearts may be made contrite, and not only with patience, but
also with joy, and love may we kiss that rod, which makes us to run unto God
for mercy and forgiveness.

But forasmuch as the tree of affliction brings forth no such fruits, unless
it be watered with the sweet dew of gods spirit: therefore let us also make
this use hereof, that when we are afflicted, we earnestly pray unto God, that
he will sanctify our miseries to our use and benefit: and out of this poison,
gather for our good, this sweet honey of humiliation and obedience: that is,
that our poverty may turn to our spiritual enriching with the gifts of his
spirit, that our trouble may tend to eternal rest, our shame to glory, our
sense of pain, to the increase of our sense of sin, and that our light and
momentanie afflictions may cause unto us a superexcellent 2 Cor. 4. 17.
and eternal weight of glory.

Secondly, we learn that the Elect in their afflictions go directly unto the
Lord, by his Son Jesus Christ, that they may be reconciled unto him, and be
received into grace, and not unto Saints and Angels, as it is the custom of
the Papists, who when they are in any danger or trouble make their prayers and
vows unto the Virgin Mary, Peter and other Saints.

Thirdly, whereas he says, that they shall seek Jehovah and Christ is true God
coequall with his father.
David their king, that is, Jesus Christ: here we observe that the same divine
worship is ascribed unto Christ, which also is attributed unto God; and
consequently he is not mere man, but God coequall with his father, for unto
God alone belongs divine worship, and this Christ chalengeth to himself.
John. 5. 22. 23. Where he shows, that the father has John. 5. 22. 23.
committed all Judgment unto the Son, that all men might honor the Son,
as they honor the Father. Christ true man.


Secondly, we hence gather that he is not God alone, but man also, for as this
divine worship yielded unto him proves him to be God, so his name David
implies that he is man, descended of David's posterity.

Again, from the conjunction of these two, seeking God and David; we gather
that God is then alone worshipped God is to be worshipped in Christ.
aright, when as he is worshipped with his son and in his son. For in him
alone the father is reconciled and well pleased. Mat. 3. 17. In him alone we
are graciously accepted. Ephe. 1. 6. Math. 3. 17. Ephesians. 1. 6.
In him he will be worshipped and served, and whosoever vvorshippeth not God
the father in his son Christ, they do not worship the true Jehovah, but an
idol of their own framing, for whosoever has not the son has not the
father. 1 Ioh. 2. 23. Because howsoever they are distinguished 1 John. 2. 23.
in persons, yet they are one in substance, of the self same nature
coessentiall and coeternall.

Where it appears that howsoever the Jews and Turks do profess that they
worship God the Father, yet in truth they do nothing less, seeing they neither
know nor acknowledge his son Jesus Christ as their only Savior and redeemer.

Fourthly, whereas he calls Christ by the name of David, The Royal dignity
of the faithful.
we may here observe the great and royal dignity of the faithful, in that
the Lord vouchsafes to call himself by their name, and to call them after his
name. Because David faithfully served him in his life, therefore he honors
him after his death, reviving his memory and eternizing his name by taking it
upon himself; and so because we profess his religion, and worship him
though with much weakness and imperfection, he vouchsafes us this
dignity, that according to his own name we should be called Christians.
Thus he honored the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Exodus 3. 15.
Jacob. Exodus 3. 15. And his people Israel, in that though he were the God of
the whole Earth, yet he would be called after a peculiar manner the God of
Israel.

The use hereof is, that we zealously serve the Lord, and If we honor God he
will honor us.
seek his glory, in honor and dishonor, evil report and good report, not
fearing any whit at all that we shall be reproched, have our names traduced,
and loose that reputation which we have in the world, by being over forward and
precise in performing the duties of Gods worship and service; for let us assure
our selves, that whilst by our Godly conversation we honor God, he will not
only cause us to be honored in our lives, but even after our death our names
shall live, and be kept upon record in the honorable roll of his holy
Servants, and be calendred amongst the Saints. Whereas on the other side, the
name of the wicked, though it be never so glorious in their lives, yet shall it
be ignominious in their death, and putrify in the air as fast as their bodies
in the earth, as the wise man shows. Prou. 10. 7. The Prou. 10. 7.
memorial of the just shall be blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot.

Fifthly, we may observe, that when the people of Israel, That we never fly to
God, before we are thoroughly humbled.
are affrighted and terrified with the sight and sense of their sins, and
those miseries which do accompany them, they do then, and not before, fly
unto the Lord for grace and mercy: in whose example we have a notable
president of our own disposition and practice; whilst we continue in our
carnal security and hardness of heart, we never desire mercy and
forgiveness; whilst we think our selves whole and sound, we never seek to
our heavenly Physician, to be cured of our spiritual Leprosy and sickness of
sin; whilst we think our selves rich, and have no sense of our poverty and
nakedness, we never labor after the riches of Gods mercy and Christ's merits,
nor to be clothed with the glorious garment of his innocence and obedience;
whilst we have no sense of our own unrighteousness, we will never hunger
after Christ's righteousness; whilst we think our selves already highly in
gods favor, we never seek to Christ our Mediator, to reconcile us unto his
father: but when our hearts are broken and contrite, and our consciences
wounded, then do we earnestly desire the oil of Gods mercy, and the precious
baulme of Christ's blood, that thereby we may be cured; when we see our own
poverty, we labor after the riches of his merits, and in a word, when we are
terrified with the sight and sense of sin, and labor under it as a heavy
burden, then do we fly unto the Lord for comfort, and sue unto Jesus Christ,
that according to his gracious promise, he will ease and release us. Of the
former we have Math. 19. 16. 20. Luke 18. 11. 14. Job. 41. 6. Luke 15. and 18.
Acts. 2. 37.
examples in the young Iusticiarie. Mat. 19. 16. 20. The Pharisie. Luke. 18.
11. 14. And in the Pharasaycall Papists. Of the latter in Job, Chap. 41. 6. In
David, Psalm. 51. In the prodigal son. Luke. 15. In the poor Publican. Luke.
18. And in the Jews. Act. 2. 37.

Sixthly, we may observe, that howsoever the Elect are affrighted Son-like fear
makes us to draw near unto God.
and terrified with the sight and sense of sin, and the apprehension of Gods
displeasure, yet this their fear does not make them to fly Gods presence, but
moves them with all possible speed to have unto him, and his goodness: for
they are not like unto slaves, who having offended, and being without any
assurance of their masters love, do for fear of the whip run away; but like
ingenious and well nurtured children, who having by their faults displeased
their father, do not fly his presence, but rather run unto him, and fall
down at his feet, acknowledging their fault, promising amendment, and
imploring pardon and forgiveness. For howsoever the apprehension of his
displeasure greatly fears them, yet the persuasion of his love moderateth
their fear, and begets in them some hope of remission and reconciliation.
So that here we have a plain difference between The difference between
son-like and servile fear.
the Son-like fear of the faithful, and the desperate and servile horror of
the wicked: for that causes them with awful reverence to fly unto the Lord
for mercy and forgiveness, because of the experience which they have of his
goodness: and the other causes the wicked to fly from God, by reason of the
fearful expectation which they have of Gods just vengeance. Of the former we
have examples in David, Psalm. 51. In Daniell, Chap. 9. 5. And in the prodigal
Psalm. 51.
son. Luke 15. Of the latter, in Saul, Judas, and in the Dan. 9. 5.
reprobate. Apoc. 6. 16. Luke. 15.


Seauenthly, whereas he says, that being affrighted with Apo. 6. 16.
the sight and sense of sin, they should have unto Gods goodness: here we
learn what is our best place of refuge, Gods mercy our best refuge to flee
unto.
when our sins terrify us: namely, Gods free and undeserved goodness, for
the shade of Gods mercy is our best shelter, when as we are scorched with the
heat of his wrath: and our best course when we are pursued by his Justice, is
to fly to the throne of his grace and goodness for pardon and forgiveness.
When therefore our consciences accuse us for sin, let us not fly unto our
own righteousness, merits, and satisfactions, for whatsoever we have done it
was but our Luke. 17. 10.
duty, and no man discharges one debt by paying another; nor yet to the
merits of Saints, for they could merit nothing for themselves, much less for
others; neither have we any propriety unto them, nor they sufficiency to make
satisfaction for the least sin; but we must fly unto Gods goodness, and
expect pardon only through his free and undeserved mercy, and Christ's all
sufficient merits. An Example hereof we have in David, who having sinned, does
not seek for pardon by pleading that he had been in former times, a man
according to Gods own heart, or by promising to make satisfaction by his
future obedience, but disclayming all opinion of desert, he only relyeth
himself upon Gods mercy. Psalm. 51. 1. Psalm. 51. 1.


Eighthly, out of the time of the accomplishing this promise, concerning the
conversion and deliverance of the afflicted Long afflictions often necessary
for our humiliation.
Israelits; namely, that it should be after that they had a long time been
tried with afflictions, and in the last days: hence we observe, first that
such is the obstinacy and hardness of heart, even sometimes of those that belong
to Gods election, that they had need for their humiliation and conversion to
be afflicted, not only with grievous but also long lasting miseries. And
therefore it is not always expedient for us to have quick deliverance out of
our afflictions, unless they have wrought that good work in us, for which
they were inflicted, that is, humiliation and unfeigned repentance: for it will
little avail us to have our souls, wounded with sin, once or twice dressed,
if they be so left before they be perfectly cured, because they will again
ranckle and become as dangerous as they were before; it will nothing profit us
to have been cast into the fiery furnace of affliction, if presently we be
taken out before we be purged and purified from the dross of our corruptions.

Secondly we may observe, that howsoever the afflictions The Lord delivers
out of tedious afflictions.
of gods elect, being tediously continued, do seem to threaten their utter
destruction, yet in the end the Lord will grant deliverance, and cause them to
further their conversion and salvation; it may be whilst we defer our
repentance, the Lord will delay his help, as though he had utterly forsaken
us, but we may assure our selves, that though he be long in coming to our
aid, yet at length he will come and grant unto us a good issue out of all
our trialls. Examples hereof we have in the Israelits in the Egyptian
captivity; in Babylon, and Assiria; in the three Children; Daniell in the
Lions den, and many others.

LECTVRES UPON THE FOVRTH CHAPTER OF THE PROPHECY OF HOSEA.
THe Prophet having in the former Chapter The argument.
testified and approved the love of God toward the people of Israel, to the
end that those who were long to continue in a grievous Captivity, might in the
midst of their miseries be supported with some comfort: does now again
direct his speech to the Israelites of his own times, accusing and conuincing
all states and conditions, of diverse grievous and enormious sins, which
reigned and ruled in the whole land; and withal intermixeth such just and well
deserved punishments, as the Lord was purposed to inflict upon them, unless
they prevented them by their unfeigned repentance. And least the people of Judah
by following their practice, should make themselves subject to the like
miseries, he admonishes them not to communicate with them in their sins,
that they might not be pertakers of their punishments.

And this is the maine argument of this Chapter: the parts The general
Analysis of the Chapter.
thereof are two. The first is an accusation or sharp reprehension of the
people of Israel, for their manifold heinous sins, from the first Verse to
the fifteenth. The second is an admonition to the people of Judah, to avoid
their sins, that they may escape their punishments; from the fifteenth Verse,
to the end of the Chapter. The first part is expressed in a judicial form of
proceeding, wherein the people of Israel are summoned to appear, and arraigned
before the Tribunal of Gods Judgment, to answer such things, as should be
laid to their charge: namely, that they had by their capital crimes and
enormious sins offended against their sovereign Lord, the king of heaven and
earth, and so breaking his Laws, had made themselves guilty and obnoxious to
those punishments, which were therein threatened. All which their offenses were
comprised in four several bills of indictment, of which being convicted, there
is annexed to every bill a form of condemnation, to suffer such punishments,
as they had justly deserved. The first bill of indictment is contained Verse.
1. and 2. the sentence of condemnation is affixed Verse 3. The second bill
Verse 4. the sentence in the 5. The third bill and third sentence are
intermixed, Verse 6. 7. unto the 11. The last bill, Ver. 12. 13. the sentence
of Judgment, in the latter part of the 13. Ver. and in the 14.

And these are the special branches of this first general The maine scope of
this Prophecy.
part. Now the general scope of the Lord, in all this is, that the people who
lived so securely in their sins, that they little or nothing regarded either
the person of the Prophets, or their threatenings, might at least be awakened
out of their spiritual Lethargy, when as they heard themselves summoned
before Gods Judgment Seat, and perceived that the Lord would no longer suffer
his word to be contemned in the mouth of his servants, but would plead in his
own cause, and examine and try the transgressors of his laws, before his
own Tribunal Seat of Judgment, and so proceed to the condemnation and
execution of those whom he found guilty.

But let us come to speak of these special parts more particularly: the first
whereof, is contained in the three first verses: wherein the people of Israel
are by law convicted, and then by Gods just sentence condemned. They are
convicted in these words, verse 1. Hear the word of the Lord, ye children of
Israel: for the Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants of the land,
because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land. verse
2. By swearing, and lying, and killing and stealing, and whoring, they brake
out, and blood touches blood.

Where is set down: first, the summons and araignement of the people; Hear
the word of the Lord ye Children of Israel. Secondly, the cause hereof, which
is a controversy between the Lord of heaven and earth, who is the party
offended, and both the plaintiff and the judge; and the Israelites who are the
delinquents and parties offending. For the Lord has a controversy with the
inhabitants of the Land. Thirdly, the crimes whereof they are accused and
convicted, which are the causes moving the Lord to pursue them with his
justice, because there is no truth, etc.

In the handling of which points I will observe this order: First I will
expound the words. Secondly observe out of The order observed in handling
these verses.
them such instructions as they naturally offer unto us. Thirdly I will apply
them to our own times.

Concerning the First, we are first to note the context, and so come to show
the meaning of the words themselves. In The context.
the former chapter, the Lord under certain types and Parables, comforted
those Israelits which were to be afflicted, in a grievous and tedious
captivity, by assuring them of his love, and that their miseries were but the
chastisements of a loving father, for their good and conversion, and not the
punishments of an enemy for their hurt and destruction. Now lest the secure
Israelits of his own times, should take encouragement unto them, by the former
doctrine of consolation, to be moved thereby to continue in their
impaenitencie; he shows that howsoever the Lord was purposed to be gracious
unto his elect Israelits in after ages, yet he would in the mean time punish
severely those heinous and enormious sins as reigned amongst them, unless
they prevented his judgments by their unfeigned repentance.

And this is the context: now let us come to the meaning The peoples summons.
of the words. Hear the word of the Lord ye children of Israel. Wherein the
Prophet summoneth the people to appear before the Lord, to answer unto such
things, as should be The exposition
objected and laid to their charge. For as, judges, before they suffer any to
be accused or condemned, do cause their clarke or crier to summon and call
forth the party, to see what he can answer for himself; so does the Lord
take the same judicial course with sinners, for the approouing of his
righteous judgments; that is, he cites them before he accuses them, and
accuses them before he condemns them. The which summons he pronounces
sometimes immediately by himself, as when he cited Adam to appear before him
Genesis 3. 9.
in Paradise, Genesis 3. 9. And thus he summoneth men when as he speaks unto
their hearts and consciences by his judgments and punishments: And sometimes by
his Ministers, and that either men or Angels: by men as by his Prophets and
ambassadors, an example whereof we have in this place: the like whereof we have
Esa. 1. 18. Ier. 2. 4. 5. Mich. 1. 2. Esaias. 1. 18. Iere. 2. 4. 5. Mich. 1. 2.
and 6. 1. 2. 3.
and 6. 1. 2. 3. etc. By Angels either in this life, when he makes them his
instruments and ministers of his afflictions, judgments and punishments, or at
the end of the world, when as the arch-Angell with the sound of his trumpet,
shall summon all men to appear before the tribunal seat of Gods judgment;
of which we may read Math. 24. 31. Mat. 24. 31. 1. Cor. 15 52. 1. These. 4. 16.
The drift of the summons.
1 Cor. 15. 52. 1 These. 4. 16.

Now the maine drift of these summons is, to move the people to hear with
greater reverence, care and conscience, the reprehensions and comminations
which after follow: for howsoever they might have some reason to neglect and
contemn them, if they regarded the Prophets person and the meanness of his
quality and condition, yet there was great cause why they should hear them,
not only with reverence but also with fear and trembling, if they considered
that he was but a crier, who summoned them in the name and at the appointment
of the supreme judge of heaven and earth; and but a mean ambassador, who
delivered unto them not his own words, but the embassage of his glorious and
most mighty king, from whom he is sent.

But let us more specially consider of those arguments The arguments here used
to move attention
which are contained in these summons, proclaimed by the Lords Crier, whereby
he moves them to receive his message with attention, fear and reverence: The
first is taken from the manner of his speech, which is used when matters of
great weight and importance follow, and therefore is not to be hearkened unto
negligently, or lightly to be regarded. The second is taken from the person of
him, from whom this message is delivered; namely, because it is Jehovah that
speaks unto them, who created them, and continually preserved them, who is
all-sufficient to reward those who harken unto him, and almighty to punish those
who neglect his word: who had given unto them many testimonies of his love, and
multiplied upon them all his benefits, above all other nations of the earth;
who did not reprehend and punish them for malice to their persons, or other
sinister respects, but that he might preserve them from utter destruction, if
they would repent and forsake their sins, or glorify his justice in their
punishments, if by no means they would be reclaimed, but obstinately persist
in their sins, after they had so often warning. The third reason to move them
to hear and obey the voice of the Lord summoning them by his Prophet, is taken
from their own persons, to whom the message is delivered; in that they were
the people of Isel, descended of the holy Patriarchs, chosen amongst all other
nations to be Gods peculiar Church and people, with whom God had made a
covenant, and had on his part most absolutely performed it, preserving them
from their enemies, and multiplying upon them all his benefits.

And this is the peoples summons, where by they who had The controversy
between the Lord and the people of Israel.
a long time neglected the word of the Lord in the mouth of his Prophets, were
now cited to answer their contempt before the Tribunal seat of Gods
Judgment. Now follows the cause of this summons, which is, for the trial of
a controversy between the Lord and the people of Israel. For the Lord has a
Controversy with the Inhabitants of the Land: Where first, we are to consider
the nature of this controversy, and secondly, the parties between whom it is
controuerted. Gods controversies with a people are either verbal or real:
Verbal, when as by his word, either immediately pronounced by himself (as we
may see in the example of Cain) or by his Ministers he reproves, conuinceth,
and condemns a people for their sins, and threatens his Judgments due
unto them: Real, when as a people notwithstanding Gods reprehensions and
threatenings continuing in their impenitencie have deserved punishments
inflicted upon them. Of both which kinds of controversies this place may be
understood, but yet principally as I take it, of the latter. For whereas the
people had long contemned Gods verbal contentions, by the Prophets, and
continued in their impenitency, without any amendment, the Lord now threatens
that he will contend with them after another manner: namely, by inflicting upon
them his real Judgments, seeing words would not prevail with them.

The like place to this we have. Genesis 6. 3. Therefore the Genesis 6. 3.
Lord said, my spirit shall not always strive with man, because he is but
flesh, and his days shall be an hundred and twenty years: The meaning is, that
because the world was rooted in a desperate wickedness, and would not be
reclaimed by his spirit preaching unto them by righteous Noah, therefore he
would no longer contend with them in verbal controversies, seeing they were
wholly carnal and corrupt: but would bring upon them real punishments, and
that within the space of an hundred and twenty years, unless in the mean
time, they prevented his Judgments by turning from their sins by true
repentance. So here the Prophet tells them, that because Gods word was of no
force with them for their amendment, the Lord would no longer thus strive with
them, and seeing his Prophets and their reprehensions were derided, neglected,
and contemned, therefore he would take his own cause into his own hand, and
contend no longer verbally, but really with them, proceeding from words to
blows, from threatenings to punishments.

The parties between whom this debate is, are the Lord The parties between
whom the controversy is.
and the people of Israel, which are here called the inhabitants of the land;
whereby he implies, First that the Lord himself was now become their
adversary, seeing there is no controversy or contention but between
adversaries; as though he should say; the contention shall not be hereafter
between you and the Prophets, because ye contemn their persons as weak and
base men, and deride and neglect their admonitions, reprehensions, and
threatenings, as though they were false and rediculous; but between the Lord
himself and you, who is most wise to find out your sins, and most just to
punish them. And this controversy shall be begun in the Court of Conscience,
before the Tribunal Seat of Gods Judgment, where by the law which you have
transgressed you shall be convicted, and after shall be fully determined when
as he shall inflict upon you, such real punishments as your sins have
deserved.

Secondly, he hereby implies that the Israelites are guilty of enormious
sins, and grievous transgressions, when as he says, that the Lord has a
controversy with them; for such is Gods exact justice, that he sueth none, but
such as are indebted unto him, neither contendeth he with any, but only such
as have wronged and offended him.

Thirdly, whereas he says, that the Lord had this controversy with the
Inhabitants of the Land: hereby first he conuinceth them of their breach of
Covenant, which they had made with God; for howsoever the Lord had made good
his promise, in driving out the Canaanites, and giving unto them the Land in
possession: yet they had broken their promise made to God, violated their
faith, forsaken Gods true Religion, and denied their obedience unto his laws.

Secondly, he aggrauateth their sins and gross ingratitude, in that after the
Lord had cast out the Canaanites, the ancient inhabitants of this country, for
their Idolatry and other sins, and given this land to the people of Israel
for their possession, that therein they might make profession of his true
religion, and glorify his name by worshipping and serving him according to his
will; they nevertheless neither remembering gods judgments inflicted upon the
Canaanits, nor his mercies multiplied upon themselves, forsook the covenant of
their God, broke his laws, committed idolatry, and all other outrageous
sins, and so defiled the land with the same sins for the which the
Canaanits were expelled, in the which gods true religion, holiness of life,
and righteousness should have reigned and flourished.

And this was the cause or matter of their indictment; in all which the Prophet
aymeth at this, that he might bring the people to true repentance upon some
hope of their reconciliation; for whereas he says that the Lord had a
controversy with the people, he does herein include a secret admonition, that
seeing the Lord was not only far mightier then they, but also had the law and
equity on his side, therefore they should labor after reconciliation, by
turning unto him by unfeigned repentance, for other means there was none to
escape his just judgments. And this is indeed the maine end at which the Lord
aymeth in all his threatenings, namely that those his people whom he threatens
hearing of his judgments, might prevent and escape them by their repentance.
For as a loving father when he threatens his child, shows that he has no
desire to punish him, seeing by threatening he gives him warning to desist
from his faults, that so he may escape: so our gracious and heavenly father,
threatens his judgments in the ministry of the word, that heareing them we
may avoid them, by forsaking our sins and humbling our selves before him, and
this end of the Lords contending with his people is plainly Esaias. 1. 18. Eze.
33. 10. 11. Ier. 18. 7. 8.
expressed. Esaias. 1. 18. Ezech. 33. 10. 11. Ier. 18. 7. 8.

And so much concerning the cause why the Israelits are arraigned: Now we are
to speak of the particular crimes The sins whereof the Israelits are accused
and condemned.
whereof they are accused, convicted and condemned; and these are of two sorts:
the first privative or sins of omission, verse. 1. the second positive or
sins of commission. verse. 2. The sins of omission whereof they are
accused, either respect their neighbor or God himself: those that respect
their neighbor are reduced to two heads. First sins of injustice under the
word truth. Secondly, neglect of mercy. The sins which respect God are all
included under one, namely that there was no knowledge of God in the land, and
consequently no religion, no faith, no obedience.

The first sin whereof he accuses them is, that there The first sin, that
there was no truth in the land.
was no truth in the land: for the understanding whereof we are to know, that
truth respects either the mind and heart, and then it is called simplicity or
integrity, or else the outward carriage and behavior, and that either in our
words or speeches, which properly is called verity; or else in our works and
actions, which is called justice or upright dealing.

Whereas therefore he charge them that there was no truth in the land, the
meaning is, that there was no simplicity or integrity in their minds and
hearts, no verity in their speeches, nor justice in their actions: and because
virtues and vices are contraries without mean, so that the denying of the one
in a subject capable of it, is the affirming of the other; therefore hereby he
implies when he says there was no simplicity in the land; that it was full
of hypocrisy and dissimulation; and when he affirms that there was no
verity, he implies that there was lying; and when he accuses them to be
without truth or justice in their actions, he intimates also that they were
full of all manner of fraud and deceit.

The second sin whereof he accuses them is, that they The second sin, that
they wanted mercy.
were without mercy; the word signifies either benignity or beneficence, and
in the former signification it is referred to the mind and heart, and so is
called mercy and compassion; and in the latter to the words and works, and then
it is called beneficence, and comprehends in it all works of charity and
christianity: as when in our words we are ready to help and benefit our
brethren by exhortation, counsel, consolation, admonition and reprehension:
and in our works, by defending them with all our power, and relieuing them
with our riches. Whereas therefore he charge them to be without mercy, his
meaning is that they were destitute of all these virtues, and neglected all
these christian duties; and contrariwise he implies, that their minds were
full of malice and cruelty, their words rotten and unsavory, their works
replenished with oppression, violence and barbarous inhumanitie.

And these were the sins which respected their neighbors, and the breach of
the second table: their sins which immediately respected God are all
comprehended in this, that there was no knowledge of God in the land: under The
third sin, no knowledge of God.
which particular he compriseth the neglect of all the duties enjoined in the
first table, and of all religion and piety; for as from the true saving
knowledge of God, as from the root of all graces, there springs Faith,
affiance, hope, love, the fear of God, obedience, and all true worship of God:
so contrariwise ignorance is the root of all impiety, infidelity, diffidence,
presumption, despair, hatred of God, contempt, disobedience, superstition and
idolatry. And therefore whereas he charge them that they were without the
knowledge of God, he necessarily implies that they were utterly destitute of
all grace, piety and all true religion, and guilty of the breach of all the
commandments of the first table: for where the root is dead there the
branches must needs perish.

Now these their sins are aggrauated, in that he says, that there was no
verity, mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land. First, in that it was a Land
which God in great mercy had bestowed upon them, to the end, that therein they
should worship and serve him; a land wherein he had protected and preserved
them; a land wherein he had plentifully afforded unto them the means of
attaining these graces of truth, mercy and knowledge: namely, his Word and
Sacraments.

Secondly, in that this impiety and neglect of Religion, did not only lurk
in some few corners, but ouerspread the whole land: neither were there only
some few men tainted with these vices and corruptions, but generally the whole
body of the people. So that they did not only hide these sins as being
ashamed of them, but being come to be as it were a common fashion, they
impudently professed and defended them.

And so much for the meaning of this first Verse: the That the Lord himself
will contend with those who contemn the ministry of his Prophets.
doctrines which are to be observed are these. First, we here learn that if
Gods Prophets have long contended with a people in Gods cause, as his
advocates, and do not prevail with them, by causing them to humble themselves
before him by true repentance, then the Lord will take his cause into his own
hands, and ceasing to contend with them any longer by his word and spirit, will
prosecute his controversy with them by afflictions and punishments; and if
having often sent his Ambassadors with reasonable conditions of peace, men
neglect them, and refuse to hearken unto their embassage, then will this
powerful king march against them with an army of his judgments, and never
cease encountering them with his plagues, till he has either humbled or
destroyed them. And this appears in this place, as also Genesis 6. 3. In the
example of the Jews, led captive into Babylon, Genesis 6. 3.
and afterward destroyed by the Romans. So that God first deals with men
by his word; and then if this will not prevail, by his chastisements; and
lastly, if these will not reform them, by his destroying plagues and
punishments. Would we therefore escape his corrections? then let us suffer our
selves to be reformed by his word: would we not be destroyed by his fearful
punishments? then let us labor to profit by his gentle chastisements.

The use hereof serves for the comfort of Gods faithful A comfort for Gods
ministers.
Ministers, when their persons are disgraced and contemned, and their
Ministry neglected and dirided by wicked men; then they are to remember that
they being the Lords advocates to plead his cause against an impenitent
people, are sure to be strongly backed by the Lords own power, whereby those
shall be brought under, who would not submit them selves to be ruled by the
scepter of the word.

Secondly, it serves for the terror of all those scoffers A terror for
contemners of Gods word.
and desperate wicked men, who contemn and deride those threatenings, which
they hear denounced in the ministry of the word against them for their
sins: for let such know, that if they will not be reclaimed from their wicked
courses, by the ministry of Gods Prophets, the Lord himself will follow his
own cause, and ceasing any longer to contend with them with his word and
spirit, he will prosecute them by his judgments and punishments.

The second thing to be observed, is Gods judicial course The just
administration of Gods judgments.
of proceeding in the execution of his Judgments: although being infinite in
wisdom, power, and justice, he might suddenly inflict his punishments upon
sinners, as soon as they have offended, yet first (to approve the justnes of
his judgments) he does in the Ministry of his word summon them before his
seat of Justice, arraigne and convince them; that so they may be moved to sue
for a pardon, by turning unto God by true repentance, and hereby prevent
deserved punishments. So he sent Noah to the old world, before he brought the
Deluge: Lot to Sodom, before he destroyed it with fire and brimstone: Moses
to Pharaoh, before he drowned him in the red sea: The Prophets to the Jews and
Israelites, before he brought them into Captivity: and our Savior Christ and
his Disciples, before their utter destruction and desolation. All which as it
serves to commend Gods merciful justice; so also to condemn the hardness of
men's hearts, and to leave them without excuse, who will not after so manifold
warnings turn from their sins, by unfeigned repentance, that so they might
escape these fearful punishments.

Thirdly, whereas he calls this summons to Judgment, That the ministry of
the word is Gods own voice.
the word of the Lord, which notwithstanding was pronounced not by the Lord
immediately, but by the Prophet: hence we learn that the voice of Gods
messengers in the Ministry of the word, is to be esteemed as the voice not of
mortal men, but as the voice of the everliving God, Luke. 1. 70. Heb. 1. 1. 2
Pet. 1. 21.
speaking by them. So it is said, Heb. 1. 1. that in old time God spoke by his
Prophets. And our Savior Christ says that they who hear his Disciples and
Ministers, do hear him; and they who contemn them, contemn him. Luke. 10.
16. And Luke 10. 16.
thus have the faithful always esteemed the Ministry of the word, even as
the voice of God himself. So the Church Esaias. 2. 3. Cornelius. Acts. 10. 33.
The Thessalonians. 1. These. Esa. 2. 3. Acts. 10. 33. 1 These. 2. 13.
2. 13. And so are we also to esteem of it, if ever we mean to find it to be
the strong power of God to salvation unto us. When therefore in the ministry
of the word, we hear sweet consolations offered to all that mourn, we mourning
are to be comforted hereby, even as if the Lord himself from heaven should
speak comfortably unto us: when we hear Gods Judgments denounced against all
unrepentant sinners, we living in our impenitencie, should no less be
terrified hereby, then if the Lord even with his own thundering voice should
proclaim them against us, etc.

Fourthly, whereas he says, that the Lord had a controversy Gods mercies no
just cause of security.
with the inhabitants of the Land, upon which he had bestowed so many benefits:
hence we learn, that Gods former mercyes, multiplied upon a people, should be
no motive to persuade them securely and presumptuously to continue in their
sins without repentance, as though they were exempted from Gods Judgments:
nay rather the experience of Gods goodness should work in them amendment;
otherwise they are to assure themselves that if they abuse gods grace, unto
wantonness, impenitency, and forgetfulness of him, the Lord will more speedely
and fearfully punish them then any other. If the Lord have given us pleasures,
and we abuse them, the greater shall be our torments. Apoc. 18. 7. If he Apoc.
18. 7.
give us power and authority, and we thereby become more insolent, proud and
rebellious, our Judgments shall be the more increased, for the mighty shall
be mightily tormented. Wisd. 6. 7. If his Gospel and true Religion, and we
bring Wisd. 6. 7.
forth no fruits thereof, neither live according to our holy profession, it
will not delay but hasten our punishments. 1 Pet. 4. 17. Ier. 25. 29. 1 Pet. 4.
17. Iere. 25. 29.


And secondly whereas the Lord denounces his judgments against the
inhabitants of the land generally: here we learn that a general defection,
shall be punished with a general punishment: for it is not with God as with
men, Vbi multitudo peccantium tollit poenae locum, with whom the multitude of
offenders does cause impunitie: but he inflicteth God punishes national
sins with national punishments.
upon national sins, national punishments: for it as easy with him to
punish a whole country as one private man* And therefore let us take heed,
that we do not follow a whole multitude unto evil, nor suffer our selves to
be carried away in the common stream of sin, least the Lord also sweep us
away in the universal deluge of his punishments.

Fifthly we may here observe, what is the cause of all controversies That sin
is the matter of controversy between God and us.
between the Lord and the inhabitants of any land; namely their sins whereby
his law is transgressed. If therefore we would not have the Lord, to be our
enemy and adversary, if we would not have him to summon and arraigne us
before his judgment seat, and being convicted to condemn us to punishment;
let us fly sin, or having sinned let us sue for pardon and reconciliation,
by turning unto the Lord and bewayling our sins by unfeigned repentance. It is
the wise man's counsel, that we strive not with a Eccles. 6 10. Eccles. 8. 1.
mighty man, least we fall into his hands. And our Savior advises us to agree
with our adversary quickly, Math. 5. 25. Math. 5. 25. 1 Cor. 10. 22.
What folly then is it in us, by our sins to make God our adversary, who is
omnipotent, and not our adversary only to accuse us, but also our judge to
condemn us? or if we have caused a controversy between us by our sins,
what madness is it to defer the seeking of our reconciliation with him, by
turning from our sins by unfeigned repentance? For if it be a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of a mighty man, how terrible is it to fall into the
hands of the everliving God? As the Apostle speaks Heb. 10. 31. If Heb. 10.
31.
one man sin against another the Judge shall judge it, but if a man sin
against the Lord who will plead for him? as Ely speaks 1 Samuel 2. 25.
to his sons. 1 Samuel 2. 25.

And these are the doctrines to be observed out of the may be gathered out of
their particular indictment, and out of the special crimes laid to their
charge, which are either sins of omission in this verse, or of commission in
the next. Where first we are to observe, that to neglect a duty commanded, To
neglect a duty is as well a sin as to commit a vice forbidden.
is reputed in Gods sight a grievous sin, as well as to commit a vice
forbidden; and that we make God our adversary, when he finds us empty of
goodness as well as when we are replenished with evil: that though we never
actually committed any sin, yet if we have omitted those duties which God
requires it will be sufficient matter for our condemnation. Meroz was cursed,
not for fighing against gods people, but because they did not assist them in
the battle against the mighty. Judge. 5. 23. Dives was tormented in hell not
for taking away food from Lazarus, but because seeing him in want he did not
relieve him. Luke 16. The unprofitable servant was cast into utter darkness,
not for mispending Gods tallent, but because he had not well used it to his
masters advantage. Mat. 25. 27. 30. The foolish Mat. 25. 27. 33
Virgins were shut out of the marriage chamber, not because their Lamps were
full of false light, deceit, rapine and cruelty, but because they were emptye
of the oil of faith, charity and a good conscience. Mat. 25. 3. And the
reprobate are condemned at the day of Judgment, not for taking the meat from
the hungry, but for not feeding them; not for dislodging the stranger, but for
not entertaining him; not for stripping the clothed, but for not clothing the
naked, not for hurting and iniuring the sick and prisoner, but for not
visiting and comforting them. Verse 41. 42. etc. The reason hereof is, because
we being the Lords servants, it is not sufficient Mat. 41. 42.
that we do not serve Gods enemies, or that we spend our time in idleness,
and serve no body; but we must do faithful service to him our Lord and
Master, for which end he has created and redeemed us, and spend our lives not
only in abstayning from evil, but also in doing of good. Moreover virtue and
vice being extremes without mean, hereof it follows that the absence of the
one, in a subject capable of it, argues the presence of the other: so that if
we be destitute of virtue, we are replenished with vice: If our houses be
clean swept and empty of Gods graces, they become forthwith fit habitations
for unclean spirits: if we be Mat. 12. 44.
not endued with knowledge, we are blinded with ignorance: if we be destitute
of faith, we are full fraught with infidelity: if we cease to do good,
immediately we begin to do evil. And therefore our sins of omission,
being always accompanied with sins of commission, are sufficient matter of
indictment, for our just condemnation whenever the Lord shall summon us to
appear before him.

The use hereof is, that we do not with simple idiots That we must not bless
our selves in our harmlesnes.
bless our selves, because we are harmless and do no man wrong, and because
we abstain from such gross impieties, as we see others commit; for the Lord
requires that we not only refrain from evil, but also that we do good: so
that it is not sufficient that we do not scorn Gods worship, if we do not
also religiously serve him; nor to abstain from biaspheming Gods name, if we
do not also glorify it; nor to forbear doing wrong to our neighbor, unless
also we be ready to perform the duties of justice, charity and christianity
toward them.

Secondly, out of the order which the Prophet uses in The duties of Justice
the true Touchstone of the duties of Piety.
reprehending the peoples sins, we may observe that he first conuinceth
them of their sins against their neighbors, and then of their sins committed
against God: and this method is usual in the Scriptures, which the holy Ghost
observes: first, that he may beat down the pride and vain boasting of
hypocrites, who are ready to brag of their knowledge, faith, love of God, and
other hidden graces, though they be destitute of the love of their brethren,
and barren of good works. And therefore he brings such as these, who make a
golden show of spiritual and inward graces, in respect of God, to the true
touchstone of outward obedience, and the external works of charity and mercy
toward their brethren; to the end that if they will not abide this trial, it
may appear, that though they make never so glittering a show of spiritual and
hidden graces yet they are nothing but dross and Copper guilt. And this is the
Touchstone which Christ gives us, to discern a Hypocrite from a sound
professor, namely, by their fruits, Mat. 7. 16. By their fruits ye shall know
them. And the Apostle James. Chap. 2. 18. Show me thy faith, by thy works. The
Apostle John likewise. 1. Ioh. 4. 20. If any man say I love God, and hate his
brother, he is a liar, etc. And Chap. 2. 4. He that says I know him, and
keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. Verse 9.
So our Prophet knowing how ready the hypocrites of his time, were to brag of
their Religion toward God, does convince them of the want hereof, by laying
open their injuries and cruelties toward their neighbors. Secondly, this is
done for the behoof and benefit of Gods children, who by reason of their
natural blindness, and self love, cannot easily spy out their secret and
hidden corruptions, but contrariwise are ready to flatter themselves, with an
opinion of a great measure of their spiritual graces: these also are to
examine themselves by this touchstone, for their love of God is not much, if
their love of their neighbor be but a little: their faith is not strong, if
their obedience be but weak: their knowledge is not great, if their practice
be but small, and their Religion is rootelesse, if it be but fruitless.

Thirdly, whereas he includes the breach of the first table, The true know
ledge of God the fountain of all sound Obedience.
and all manner of impiety against God, under this one particular, that there
was no knowledge of God in the land: hence we gather, that as true knowledge of
God, is the fountain of all true obedience: so contrariwise ignorance is the
cause of all neglect of Religion, of all impiety and wickedness. And this may
further appear, both by reason, and Ignorance the root of all sin.
also by manifold examples. By reason, for they that know neither God, nor his
will, they are ignorant of that which pleases him and displeases him, and
therefore though they had some good intention to serve God, yet they must needs
displease him, through ignorance and error. Again whosoever sins, he also
erreth according to that. Prou. 14. 22. Prou. 14. 22.
Do they not err that imagine evil? and those that err do err either
through ignorance or wilful maliciousness.

Thirdly, for this cause sinners are called (...), that is, such as are
ignorant, and through ignorance are deceived. And sins are called (...), that
is, Ignorances. Heb. 5. 2. and 9. 7. Heb 5. 2. and 9. 7


So also this appears by examples. For this was the cause of Adams
transgression; because he knew not Gods truth, both in his promises and
threatenings. Genesis 3. Of the sin of Genesis 3.
the Israelites; for the Lord himself renders this reason, why his people
erred, because they had not known his ways. Psalm. 95. 10. This made the Jews
to err because they knew not Psalm. 95. 10.
the Scriptures. Mat. 22. 29. This caused them to crucify the Lord of life.
Act. 3. 17. And to become proud iusticiaries, testing Act. 3. 17.
in their own righteousness, because they knew not the righteousness of God.
Romans 10. 3. This was the cause of the Romans 10. 3.
Gentiles Idolatry. Gal. 4. 8. But when ye knew not God, ye Gal. 4. 8.
did service to them which by nature were not Gods. And of Paul's persecuting
Gods Saints. 1 Timothy 1. 13. 1 Timothy 1. 13.


And as this Ignorance is the cause of all vice and sin, Ignorance turns
good inclinations into sin.
so it makes all our inclinations which are good and virtuous, being guided
with the light of knowledge, to degenerate and become evil: for example,
Religion joined with ignorance brings forth Idolatry: devotion joined with
Ignorance, begets superstition: hope blinded with Ignorance, becomes
presumption: and fear hereby is turned into desperation, etc.

Secondly, we here observe, that as ignorance is the fountain Ignorance the
cause of punishment.
of all sin, so also it is the cause of all punishment, for when a land is
destitute of the knowledge of God, then does the Lord proclaim, that he has a
controversy with that people, and that he will after a real manner plead
against them, till he has destroyed them with his Judgments. And indeed many
are the evils which in the Scriptures are threatened against men for this sin
of Ignorance: as for example, the Lord threatens that he will laugh at their
destruction, and stop his cares at their prayers, who hate knowledge. Prou. 1.
28. He punishes it with Captivity, Esaias. 5. 13. Pro. 1. 28.
Therefore my people is gone into captivity, because they had no Esaias. 5. 13.
knowledge. With desolation Esaias. 27. 10. The defensed city shall become
desolate etc. 11. For it is a people of none understanding; Esaias. 27. 10. 11
therefore he that made them shall have no compassion of them. It brings
destruction and moves the Lord to forsake us. Hos 4. 6. It makes men subject
to the curse and wrath of God; and therefore the Prophet bouldly prays Hos.
4. 6.
that the Lord would pour out his wrath, upon them that do not know him.
Iere. 10. 10. Psalm. 79. 6. It makes them strangers Iere. 10. 10. Psalm. 79. 6.
Ephe. 4. 18.
from the life of God. Ephe. 4. 18. and also from life everlasting; for as he
that is ignorant of the way, cannot come to the iourneyes end, so they who are
ignorant of the means of coming to eternal life can never attain unto it.
In a word it makes men subject to gods vengeance at the day of judgment; for
the Apostle tells us. That the Lord will come in flaming fire, to render
vengeance to those that do not know him. 2. These. 1. 8. 2. These. 1. 8.


The use of this doctrine serves first, to refute the practice of the Papists,
who use all means to extinguish the light of Popish patrones of ignorance
reproved.
knowledge, and to bring into those lands wherein they have any authority,
more then Egyptian darkness, and barbarous ignorance. To which purpose they
take away the preaching of the Gospel, the only ordinary means of begetting
faith, yea they cannot endure that the people should enjoy the sunshine of the
scriptures, but interpose between it and their understanding, the dark cloud
of an unknown tongue; they cannot abide that they should behold this radient
Pearl, and most precious diamond, which would send forth his bright rays in
the darkest night of ignorance, but keep it close hidden and fast locked from
them, under the lock of an unknown language, persuading the people that they
may be most devout, when they are most ignorant, and that being destitute of
any true faith of their own, they are notwithstanding in good case if they
have only an implicit faith, whereby they believe as the Church believes,
though they know not what. But let all such know who have wilfully suffered
themselves to be hudwinckt with this thick veil of ignorance, that these
Romish shauelings, do notably abuse the people to their perdition, seeing they
take away knowledge, the root and foundation of all grace, virtue and
obedience, and bring in ignorance the fountain of all error, sin and
wickedness; and consequently make whole nations and countries liable to Gods
judgments, because the knowledge of God and his true religion, is banished
from amongst them.

Secondly, it serves for the reproof, of those ignorant Ignorant idiots
reproved.
idiots, and secure worldlings, who content themselves to live still in
ignorance, being utterly destitute of the knowledge of God and of his religion,
and imagine that they are religious enough, if they have a good meaning, and
that they are exempted from gods judgments, and highly in his favor, if they
be of a civil conversation and honest behavior; though in the mean-time they
remain wilfully blind, shutting their eyes against the light, and contemning
or at least carelessly neglecting all means of knowledge. But let such know
that being destitute of knowledge, they are also destitute of all saving grace,
and that living in ignorance, they live also in their sins; and consequently
have God their adversary, who will contend with them, and unless they
repent adjudge them to deserved punishments.

Lastly, this serves to stop the mouths of those, either Slaunderers of the
Gospel refuted.
foolish, or malicious slaunderers; who accuse the preaching of the Gospel,
as the cause, which has impaired the state of the land, both by making it more
to abound with sin, and also more liable to Gods judgments. It was never
good world say they, since this new religion came in, and since there was so
much preaching. Never so much infidelity, hypocrisy, dissimulation, fraud,
oppression, and cruelty. Never such want and scarcity, plague and sickness,
and all sorts of miseries. But let such know that not the preaching of the
gospel, is the cause of all this, but the neglect and contempt of the Gospel
preached; and because vvhilest the light of Gods word shines, yet men love
darkness more then light, and therefore are justly given over of God to a
reprobate sense. It is not our too much knowledge, which is the cause of our
sins and punishments, but our great ignorance, notwithstanding the Lord has
a long time granted plentiful means of knowledge: and as well may we say,
that the light of the Sun causes men to stumble, and go out of the way:
that the faithful surgeon and good salve do make the sore: that the Judge
makes the thief: or that the Law does make transgressors: as that the word
of God, or the knowledge thereof, should be the cause, either of our sins, or
of our punishments.

And so much for the doctrines which are to be observed Application.
out of this first verse. Now in the last place, let us apply that which has
been said, to our own times, for our own use and benefit. And to this purpose
let us examine, what similitude there is between the land of Israel, as it
was in the time of Hosea, and our own Country in these days; and whether we
are not guilty of the same sins, whereof they are here convicted: to the end
that if we prove clear and innocent, we may have the comfort hereof in our
own consciences; or if we be found alike faulty, that we may humble our
selves by unfeigned repentance. Otherwise let us assure our selves, that if
there be between us similitude of manners, there shall also be similitude of
punishment, if we be guilty of the same sins, the Lord will take the same
course with us; that is, he will summon and arraigne us before his Judgment
seat, where being convicted, we shall be condemned to suffer the like, or
greater punishments.

The first sin whereof he accuses them is, that there Truth greatly fails
amongst men.
was no truth in the land: in which respect, if we examine the state of men
in these days, we shall find that there is but too great similitude between
us and them For may we not in our times, and in our land, take up the complaint
of the Prophet, that there is no truth? may we not justly say of these times,
as the Prophet Esaias of his, namely, that truth is fallen in the street, and
that it so fails, that he who refraineth from evil makes himself a pray?
Esa. 59. 14. 15. For that we Esaias. 59. 14. 15
may come to particulars: where are those simple hearted Nathaniels, in whom
there is no guile? how small is the number Simplicity of heart esteemed folly.
Psalm. 15. 2.
of those faithful men, who speak the truth from their hearts? where almost
shall a man find, that integrity, simplicity, and uprightness of heart,
which is in so many places of the Scriptures commended unto us, both by precept
and by example? Nay, rather is not this simplicity so much hated, that even
the name it self is had in reproach? for a simple man and a fool are commonly
used in the same signification: and contrariwse he is reputed most wise, who is
most deceitful, double hearted, and void of truth. Is not every where the
serpentine subtilty in great request, and in the mean while the simplicity of
the Dove, not only contemned, but also derided, as if it were sottish folly?
is it not a chief point of policy in our days to pretend one thing, and
intend another? to dissemble hatred with lying lips, and Iudas-like to betray
under color of kissing and embracing? by all which it clearly appears, that
there is no truth, that is, no simplicity nor sincerity in the hearts of men.

But as truth is banished from the heart and reins, so also Truth of speech
much decayed.
from the tongue and speech; for as men are double hearted, so also they are
double tongued; and well may we in our times complain with David. Psalm. 12.
1. 2. The faithful are Psalm. 12. 1. 2
failed from among the children of men. They speak deceitfully every one with
his neighbor, flattering with their lips and speak with a double heart. The
wise man persuades us, that we be ready to buy the truth, and not to sell it
at any rate. Prou. 23. 23 Prou. 23. 23.
But now truth is so basely esteemed, that it is not thought worth the
purchasing: and contrariwise all sorts of men are willing to sell it at the
lowest prises, as though it were nothing worth. Some part with it for nothing,
speaking untruly upon no cause, but merely their own vanity: some sell it
for the least penny of profit, or the lightest dram of vain pleasure. Have
they committed any fault? presently truth is sold, to buy a cover of a false
excuse, wherewith they may hide it from those, whom they are more loath to
displease then God himself. Do they hunt after the favor of great
parsonages? then truth must needs be sold through base flattery to purchase
it. Would they spightfully revenge them selves upon their neighbor, and yet he
shall never know who hurt him? they part with truth through backbiting and
slandering, for which if at any time they are called in question, they make
untruth their best salve to cure that wound which they have made with their
lying tongues. In a word the least cause is thought sufficient, to make men
part with truth through false speaking, and though it ought ^o be unto us most
precious, yet almost every one is willing to forgo it at any rate.

Lastly, as there is no place left for truth in men's hearts No truth to be
found in men's actions.
and tongues, so neither can it easily be found in their actions and
behavior, for as this age is double hearted and double tongued, so also it is
full of double dealing; and as the Prophet speaks, Justice stands a far
off. Esaias. 59. 14. For in this faithless age, there is no respect of keeping
promise, Esaias. 59. 14.
though it has been backed with many protestations, when as it may be broken
with some small advantage; neither is there any cable so strong which can bind
men to observe covenants concluded, when their fidelity is attended with the
least loss or inconvenience. In ancient times when men esteemed their credit
more then wealth, their word was sufficient in any contract; but when truth
began to fail the law provided for better security, that covenants should
be expressed and recorded in writing, and injustice yet prevailing, seals
unto these writings were annexed: But in this truthles age all this is little
worth unless men be bound in a double forfeyture of wealth, from forfeyting of
their honesty and credit, yea so boundless is men's falsehood in these times,
that bonds are not sufficient to bind men to just and honest dealing, unless
they be also chained in statutes and recognisances.

The like want of truth may be observed in all states, and in all dealings
between man and man, wherein truth is not Want of truth observed amongst all
sorts of men.
bought as being precious, according to the wisemans counsel, but sold at
vile prises: It is sold by states men for treacherous policies; of
Magistrates for rewards, friendship, or respect of persons; of Lawyers, for
fees; it is commonly sold of shopkeepers, that by the sale of truth, they may
make their wares more saleable; of Artificers, who supply all defects, either
of their labor or bad stuff, by untruth and falsehood. And as this is the
state of Court and City, so also of the Country, where a man shall find that
the simplest have wit enough to betray the truth; and the poorer that the
people be, the more ready are they to sell truth at the basest rate. And I
would to God, this want of truth, were wanting in the Chruch, and that in the
banishment of truth out of the common wealth, yet the Church might be a
sanctuary and place of refuge, where it might retire it self, and besafe
guarded from violence; but alas in these days, it is far otherwise, for many
in stead of Gods truth, preach their own fantasies and froathy conceits of
wit, raking in the puddle of Popists postils, that they may stuff their
Sermons with such dotages of wit, as better beseem the Stage then the Pulpit:
leaving in the mean time the pure fountain of Gods word, as though these
waters of life were not worth the drawing, and loathing to bring any sound
exposition of their Text, because they imagine such vulgar simplicity to be a
great disparagement to the acutenes of their wit, and therefore they choose
rather to wrest and wring the scriptures unto such senses, as shall serve to be
fit foundations, whereupon they may ground their idle quirkes, and witty
fooleries, then to deliver any sound interpretation, whereout they may gather
any wholesome doctrine, and profitable instructions: vvherin they utterly
forget the presence in which they stand, the end wherefore they are sent, the
majesty and authority of the embassage, and the gravity required in such
ambassadors; and plainly show, that they aim not at the saving of souls, or
the building of men up in Christ, but that they gape after the wind of vulgar
praise; that they envy poets their fantastical wits, and therefore contend
with them for the Laurel, who shall most abound in giddy conceits; that they
labor to rob Players of their popular applause, and to get to themselves their
thronged audience, when as their hearers may receive as much delight, and as
plentifully furnish their treasury of wit* by coming to their exercises, as
by frequenting the theaters. Others there are who with Ahabs Prophets betray
the truth through base flattery; dissembling the truth because it procures
hatred, and teach lies because they think this the best ladder whereby they
may climb unto preferment: and such are those who preach prosp eritie, where
the Lord threatens ruin; who proclaim peace where the Lord denounces war;
who so they please, care not how little they profit; who sow the pillowes of
gods mercies and put them under the elbowes of obstinate and impenitent
sinners, that so they may with more security, and less check of conscience,
continue in their wickedness.

And thus you see how much truth fails in our days, both in the Church and
common wealth; which may be Benignity and mercy barnished
unto us a just cause of fear, that the Lord has a controversy with the
inhabitants of this land: the like also may be said of mercy, whether we
understand thereby, benignity and compassion, or beneficence, consisting in the
actions of charity and christianity. In respect of the first, we may well
acknowledge, that this is the iron age of the world, wherein the most part of
men are cruel, hard hearted destitute of all pity and compassion, and quite
senseless in the feeling of their neighbors miseries, for who almost is
touched with such a fellow-feeling of other men's calamities, as becomes those
who profess themselves members of the same body? who is ready to mourn with
those that mourn, or to be a co-partner in another man's grief, if he be
not also partaker in his misery? who being well clothed feels cold, when
he sees another nakedness? who abounding in wealth, compassionateth
another want? who enjoying liberty, is touched with the sense of that
wretchedness which others feel that are imprisoned? who living in health,
groneth at another sickness, or who living in security, is touched with
fear when he sees his neighbors dangers? and yet we boast our selves to
be members of Christ Jesus, and fellow members one with another, though we be
destitute of all compassion and fellow feeling.

The like want also we have of Christian beneficence, The great want of
Christian beneficence.
and of the works of mercy: for the coldness of Charity in the heart does
cause it also to freese in the tongue and hand, for who almost in our time, is
ready to instruct the ignorant, to exhort the sluggish, to admonish those who
fall through weakness, to reprehend those who sin through negligence or
obstinacy, to counsel the simple or to comfort the distressed? And
contrariwise how many are there amongst us, who are content to be Satan's ready
instruments to discourage others in any good course, both by their word and
example also? How many are ready to seduce the ignorant, to discourage the
forward by reproaching their profession, to corrupt the weak, by their
unsavory profane and filthy communication, to applaud men in wicked courses,
and by insulting over those who are in misery, to add affliction unto
affliction.

And as this beneficence is wanting in communication, so The works of mercy
neglected.
also in charitable actions, and in works of mercy: for is not I pray you good
hospitality almost q^^^e decayed, and almesdeeds utterly neglected? are not
those goods which God has bestowed upon the Land in great abundance, wholly
spent, in gorgious attire, in maintaining of Horses, Coaches, Hounds, Hawks
and Whores, in dicing, carding, masking, and reuelling: or if not thus
prodigally spent, yet (which is as bad) hoorded up in Misers Chests, and
worshipped as Idols? Are not men in these times, more ready to strip the
clothed, then to cloth the naked? to spoil the needy of their provision, then
to feed the poor? to dislodge the harbored, then to lodge the harbourlesse?
to cast into prison, then to relieve the imprisoned? witness our streets,
wherein we see daily many pampered Horses, and neere-starued people: witness
the stately houses in the Country, abandoned by their masters, because they
have no other means to abandon their poor neighbors; as though these Babels
were built for the honor of their majesty, and not for hospitality, for show
and not for use: witness the prisons replenished with prisoners, either for
small or desperate debts, laid in by cruel creditors, rather for merciless
revenge, then any hope of satisfaction: witness the complaints of the needy,
and cries of the distressed, which daily ascend up into heaven, and move the
Lord to take the cause of the poor into his own hand, and to proclaim a
controversy with the inhabitants of this land, because there is no mercy to be
found amongst them.

Neither are we wanting to our neighbors alone, in the The want of piety and
sound Religion.
duties of Justice and Charity; but also unto God, in the duties of piety,
and of his worship and service: for if we make a general search through our
whole people, we shall find that there is little knowledge of God in the land,
in respect of the plentiful means hereof, which the Lord has granted unto
us, above all the nations which are round about us. For how many are there
amongst us, who despise and contemn knowledge, and the means of coming by
it, continuing in the blindness of ignorance, because they wilfully shut their
eyes in the clear light of the Gospel? how many securely neglect it, being
wholly taken up with the world, so as they have not any leisure to seek after
this precious pearl throughout the whole week? how many are there, who in
their outward behavior make show, that they respect knowledge, and seek after
it, that labor in this pursuit so coldly and remissely, that they make it
manifest they seek for that which they do not care to find? for how many of
those who make some profession of Religion, who come to the Church, and hear
the word of God both read and preached, who nevertheless remain children in
knowledge, ignorant of the History of the Scriptures, and of the principles of
Christian Religion, of our state by nature, of the work of our Redemption
wrought by Christ, of the manner and means of our Justification and salvation?
how many are there who are not able to give any account of their faith and
hope, in any reasonable sort after so many years of instruction? yea, how many
are there, who (if we set aside the outward Ceremonies, which are subject to
the senses) can put no difference between the religion of Christ and
Antichrist? and howsoever in words they profess themselves such forward
Protestants, that they could be content to burn for their Religion, yet in
truth are not able to put a difference between the doctrine of our Church, and
refined Popery? and as many amongst us spit at the Devils name, and defy him
in word, and yet in their lives and conversation remain his vassals, being at
his beck to do him service; so many show an outward detestation of the Pope and
popery, but yet their hatred extends no further, then the name; for either
they exclayming against the Beast, retain his mark, being not yet purged from
the dregs of Popery, and Superstition, or else remain ignorant of Gods true
Religion, and so lie open as an easy pray to all Seducers.

And thus you see how small the number of those is, who have the knowledge of
God, in comparison of those innumerable numbers of ignorant persons, which live
amongst us. Now further, if we make a diligent search among those who have some
knowledge, and consider how many of this number have only an historical and
speculatiue knowledge swimming in the brain, whereby they are able to
discourse of Religion: and in the mean time make no use of it, for the
sanctification of their hearts and affections, or for the reformation of their
lives and conversation: all which may truly be said to be without the true
knowledge of God and his religion: for we are truly said to know so much
only in Christianity, as we make a fruitful and profitable use of, for the
purifying of our inward affections, and for the bettring of our outward
actions. And if having set all these aside, we then take a view of those that
remain, who know God and his Truth, and live according to their knowledge in
holiness and newness of Life: we shall find the number so small, that the
Lord may justly also in this respect contend with us, because there is no
knowledge of God in the land.

And thus you see that if the Lord should summon us to appear before him, and
should arraigne us before the tribunal seat of judgment, to answer for our
selves, in respect of these sins here laid to the Israelits charge, we also
must needs plead guilty, and put our selves wholly upon the plea of mercy. All
which our sins are much aggrauated hereby, Our sins are much aggrauated by
gods mercies.
in that they are committed by the inhabitants of this land, upon which the Lord
has bestowed many more and far greater benefits both temporal and
spiritual, then ever he bestowed upon the people of Israel.

Secondly, in that he has by his omnipotent power and watchful providence
preserved us, in this land from the open violence and secret treasons of our
malicious enemies, especially from that more then barbarous conspiracy, whereby
the enemies of gods truth had plotted by one blast of gunpowder, to blow up
the whole state, ruin the Church, and ouerturne the whole commonwealth, which
deliverance, is cause sufficient in it self alone, to move us daily with
incessant praises to magnify gods mercy, and to show our thankfulness by
performing unto him all holy duties.

Thirdly, in that we having bound our selves by covenant to our God; that we
would embrace truth, and mercy, and increase in his saving knowledge, yet
nevertheless have broken our covenant, by utter neglect of these holy duties.

Fourthly, in that the Lord having given unto us, singular means, of attaining
unto these rich ornaments of the soul, namely his word printed, read, and
preached amongst us, and the use of his Sacraments, yet we have made no
fruitful use of them, but still remain in our spiritual nakedness.

Lastly, in that these are not the sins of some few persons, but generally of
the inhabitants of the land, which do not hide themselves in some secret
corners, but walk boldly in the open streets, being privileged from both
shame and punishment, in respect of the multitude of offenders.

Seeing therefore we are guilty of the Israelits sins, yea and have
aggrauated them by many circumstances, what can we say for our selves why we
should not be subject to their punishments? Seeing there is no truth, nor
mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land, what can we expect but that the Lord
will contend with us, and that not in verbal controversies by the mouth of his
ministers, for though we have often heard them yet we have little regarded
them, but have contemned their persons and despised their threatenings; neither
can we hope that he will any longer use his his fatherly corrections and gentle
chasticements, for these he has often used in vain, as for example he has
diverse times summoned us by famine, sickness, plague and pestilence, danger
of enemies, yea and of late laid the head of our whole state, as it were upon
the block, and lifted up The gunpowder treason.
the fearful axe of his feirce judgment, being ready to give the mortal
stroke; and yet are we hereby nothing reclaimed from our sins, nothing moved to
the performance of any holy duties. And therefore seeing neither words nor
chasticements are available for our amendment, and seeing after that the Lord
has repriued us as it were from the block yet we remain unreformed; what can
we further expect but that he should in his feirce wrath sweep us away, in an
universal deluge of his judgments, unless we seek reconciliation, and appease
gods anger, by speedy humiliation, and unfeigned repentance.

ANd so much concerning the sins of omission, whereof the people of Israel
are here accused and convicted: now follow the sins of commission; whereby
they had positiuely and actually broken Gods commandments. verse. 2. By
swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring, they break out,
and blood touches blood. In the original text, these sins are expressed in
the Infinitive mood, to note their The exposition
continued act of sinning. To swear and lie, and kill, and steal, and whore,
is their usual custom, or common fashion, so that they do not only sometimes
fall into these sins through infirmity but wilfully continue in them, and
make them as it were their ordinary exercise, and common practice.

The sins whereof they are here convicted and condemned, either immediately
respect God and the breach of the first table, or their neighbor, and the
breach of the second Table: both which are first propounded, and then intended
and aggrauated.

The sins which respect God and the breach of the first Table, are all
comprised under this one particular of swearing: the word here used may either
signify swearing or cursing, and so is diversely translated by diverse: but
seeing it was the purpose of the Lord in this place to set down a brief
Epitome of the peoples sins, I see no reason why in our exposition, we may
not comprehend them both.

Yea, but this people transgressed the first table in many other respects, as
namely, by their gross Idolatry, false worship, contempt of Gods word, and
profanation of his Sabbaths, why then does he only here accuse them of this
sin of swearing? I answer: he does under this one particular comprehend all
the rest, either because this sin most notoriously reigned amongst them, or
else because this profane and false swearing is usually accompanied with all
impiety, for he that makes no conscience of vain, usual and false swearing,
makes conscience of no impiety.

But let us consider what kind of swearing is here condemned, neither must we
understand this of all manner and kinds of swearing, seeing a lawful Oath is
in Gods word commanded, as a notable part of his worship and service. So Deuteronomy.
6. 13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10. 20.
him, and shall swear by his name. Chap. 10. 20. Yea and sometimes it
signifies the whole service of God, as Psalm. 63. Psalm. 63. 11.
11. All that swear by him, shall rejoice in him.

But here only unlawful swearing is condemned, which sin is diversely
committed: as first in regard of the object, Esaias. 65. 16.
when men swear by any thing besides the Lord alone. Secondly, in respect of
the manner, when as they do not swear in truth, justice and judgment.
Thirdly, in respect Ier. 4. 2.
of the end, when as in their oaths, they do not chiefly aim at Gods glory*
or their own or their neighbors good: which sin they commit who swear
rashly, ordinarily, and in their rage and fury. But of this argument I purpose
to speak more largely else where, and therefore I will here pass it over.

The other sin signified by this word (...), is cursing and direful
imprecations, which is used against our selves, Of Cursing.
or against our neighbors: against our selves, when as rashly, vainly, and
unnecessarily we invoke Gods fearful Judgments against our state, person,
body or soul, for the needless confirmation of some truth, either in our
asseuerations or promises, or for the binding of our selves to the performance
of some unprofitable or evil action. An example whereof we have in Iesabel. 1
King. 19. 2. Against our neighbors, when in malice or rage we desire God to
pour upon them 1 King. 19. 2.
some grievous punishment. The which is an horrible abuse of Gods name, power
and justice, when as we go about to make him our instrument of unjust revenge,
and the executioner of our malicious and wicked outrages: and likewise a
heinous sin against our neighbors, when as our malice exceeding our power,
we wish unto them those evils which we are not able to inflict. And this our
Savior condemns, though it be used against those who curse and persecute
us. Math. 5. 44. So Romans 12. 14. Mat. 5. 44.


The second sin, of which the people of Israel are accused Romans 12. 14.
and convicted, is Lying: for the better understanding Of Lying.
whereof, that knowing it we may avoid it, we will consider the nature and
kinds thereof.

A Lie is, when by any means a man utters an untruth, or the truth untruly,
and with a purpose to deceive. So that What a Lie is.
there are two sorts of Lies: the first, when as a man speaks not as the
thing is: the second, when he speaks the 2. Sorts of lies.
truth, but deceitfully, with a desire to be otherwise understood then the
truth is. The first which is a logical or a real Lie, is of two sorts: first,
when as a man speaks an untruth against his mind and knowledge, and this is
the chief kind of Lying, from whence in the Latin it has his name: for
mentiri, est contra mentemire. Secondly, when a man inconsiderately and through
error utters an untruth, thinking that he speaks true, Which howsoever it
be a lie in the general signification, yet he that utters it cannot be
called a liar, because howsoever his words agree not with the thing, yet they
agree with his mind. Only he offends through inconsiderate rashness, in
that he affirms that as certain truth, of which he has no certain
knowledge, and thereby gives offense to those that hear him, who discern the
untruth but do not know the mind of him that utters it.

Secondly, he lies who speaks the truth with a purpose to deceive; not
knowing that to be true which he avouches, or thinking it to be otherwise,
or knowing it to That he lies, who speaks the truth to deceive.
be truth desires to be understood otherwise then he speaks it: and this is
as great a sin as a plain lie; for as it is a lesser fault in regard it has
more show of truth, so it is greater because it is joined with more deceit. As
therefore a man may pronounce an untruth, and yet be no liar so he may be a
liar in uttering the truth, when as he does not speak it with a simple heart.

And these are the diverse kinds of lying, which are here condemned; the which
howsoever they seem small sins That lying is a great sin in gods sight.
in the sight of men, as appears by their common practice, yet they are great
in Gods sight, and therefore carefully to be avoided by all christians: which
that we may the rather do, let these motives persuade us.

First, because the Lord in the scriptures has straightly forbidden it, Leu.
19. 11. Ye shall not lie one to another Ephesians, Leu. 19. 11.
4. 25. Cast of lying and speak the truth every man to his neighbor, Ephe. 4.
25.
for we are members one of another. Col. 3. 9. Lie not one to another seeing
ye have put off the old man and his works. Col. 3. 1.


Secondly, because it is condemned as a grievous sin, namely as an
abomination to the Lord Pro 12. 22. as a sin which God abhoreth Pro. 6. 17. As
being the cursed offspring Pro. 12. 22.
of that wicked father the devil. Ioh. 8. 44. The which is to be understood
not only of pernicious lies, but also Ioh. 8. 44.
merry lies; for God condemns it as a sin to make Princes merry with lies.
Hos. 7. 3. Yea of officious and profitable lies: For truth must not be sold at
any price; Pro. 23. 23. Hos. 7. 3. Pro. 23. 23.
And it is unlawful to lie for Gods cause. Job. 13. 7. 9. and Job. 13. 7. 9.
therefore much less for any worldly benefit.

Thirdly, as truth makes us to resemble our heavenly father, Lying makes men
resemble the Devil.
who is the author and fountain of truth; so Lying makes men to resemble the
Devil, who is the father of Lies: and as truth is the badge or cognizance of a
Christian in earth, and Heir of heaven; so Lying is a note and Psalm. 15. 2.
token of one who is the son of perdition: for Liars have their childes-part
in the Lake which burns with fire and Apoc. 21. 8.
brimstone.

Fourthly, because by Lying men loose their credit, so as no man will believe
them when they speak the truth.

Fifthly, because it takes away the true use of speech, which Lying
overthrows the use of speech.
is to express the meaning of the heart: and ouerturneth all human society,
contracts, and commercements between man and man, etc.

Lastly, it makes the Lord to proclaim, a controversy with us, and to
contend with us by his heavy Judgments, For a false witness shall not be
unpunished, and he that speaks Lies shall not escape. Prou. 19. 5. But he
shall perish. Verse. 9. Prou. 19. 5. 9. Psalm. 5. 6.
And be destroyed. Psalm. 5. 6. As appears in the example of Ananias and
Saphira. Act. 5. And after this life he shall Act. 5.
be shut out of Gods kingdom. Apoc. 22. 15. And be cast into Apoc. 22. 15. and
21. 8.
hell fire. Apoc. 21. 8.

The third sin whereof they are convicted and condemned, Of Killing.
is killing: whereby we are not only to understand the taking away of the
life of man, which is murder in the highest degree; but also all hurts,
wrongs, and injuries offered against the person of their neighbor: for as in
the former verse, by the want of mercy was understood the want of love,
compassion, and all christian beneficence; so by this sin of commission
opposed thereunto, we are to understand the contrary vices, cruelties, injuries
and oppression committed against the person and life of our brother. Again it
seems that it was the Prophets purpose in setting down this short Epitome of
the peoples sins, to bring them to an examatition of themselves by the Law of
God, that so the obstinate might be convinced of their manifold
transgressions; as though he should say: if you, who upon every occasion are
ready to justify your selves, would examine your hearts and consciences, your
lives and conuersations according to Gods Law, you should find that you have
broken all and every part thereof: as namely, by swearing, lying, killing,
stealing, etc. Seeing then the Prophet in this place, has relation unto the
Law of God violated by them, it follows, that as these sins are condemned
in the Law, so also here. But in the Law is condemned not only the capital
sin, which is specified, but all other of the same kind, with the means and
occasions thereof; and therefore whereas the Prophet does accuse them of
Killing, he does under this one word include all other their sins of this
kind and nature.

As first, the killing and murder of the heart, to which is to be referred all
unjust anger, inueterate malice, repining envy, purpose of taking private
revenge, disdain, rejoicing at other men's harms, cruelty, discord and such
like.

Secondly, the murder of the tongue, to which is referred, chiding, railing,
cursing, scoffing, backbiting and slaundering.

Thirdly, the murder of the hands, under which is comprised all manner of
violence against the person of our neighbor, as quarrelling, fighting,
wounding, and killing either of his body or soul.

The fourth sin is Stealing, whereby (as in the former) Of Stealing.
we are not only to understand Theft in the grosest kind, as that open and
violent Theft, which is called Rapina and Latrocinium, Rapine and Robbery, or
that secret and deceitful Theft, which we call Furtum, that is, pilfering and
stealing; but also all manner of unlawful means, whereby our neighbor is
defrauded and deprived of his goods, whether they be condemned by human
Laws, or allowed and toll rated. And this is a Tree which sends forth many
branches: The diverse kinds of theft.
For either this theft is committed out of contract, or in contract: to the
first we are to refer all violent and forcible courses, taken for the
spoiling our neighbor of his goods. As first oppression, whereby those who
excel others in power Oppression.
authority and riches, are ready to devour and swallow up the poor, to
grind their faces, feed upon their sweat, and even drink their blood; of such
we read. Esaias 3. 14. 15. Micah. 3. Esaias. 3. 14. 15.
2. 3. And in this respect those oppressors are called roaring Micah. 3. 2. 3.
Lions, and devouring Wolves. Zeph. 3. 3. And this oppression Zeph. 3. 3.
is committed either through mere violence, and without color of Law, which
is the usual Theft of Tyrants, and cruel Landlords: or else when some show
of Law is pretended; which is called extortion, and is the sin either of
Magistrates, who make Laws for the oppression of the common wealth, who take
bribes to betray the cause of the innocent, who press the extreamitie of the
Law, and strictly stand upon the outward letter, though in respect of
circumstances it be without all equity.

Or else of officers, who inhaunce their fees, and grate upon the poor,
delaying the dispach of his business, unless for expedition their duties be
doubled and trebled.

Or else of Lawyers, who taking upon them to be the patrons of poor men's
causes, become latrones of their goods: robbing and spoiling whole common
wealths under color of righting the wronged, and maintaining equity and
Justice.

Or else of Ministers, who fleece the sheep, eat the milk, and cloth
themselves with the wool, but do not feed the flock; being either utterly
unfurnished of sufficient gifts, or being sufficient, neglect their duty
through idleness or for ambition.

Or else, this theft is committed by the people, who receiving spiritual
things from their Ministers, will not communicate unto them their carnal
things, but by fraudulent or violent courses withold from them that necessary
and sufficient maintenance, which both by the laws of God and man is allotted
and allowed unto them. The which howsoever it is esteemed a small fault, or
none at all, yet it is not only theft, but Sacrilege in Gods sight, as
appears. Mal. 3. 8. Mal. 3. 8.


The second kind of theft is cloaked and disguised under the habit of lawful
contracts, unto which we may refer all manner of deceit and fraud used in
buying and selling, usury selling time under show of giving credit and such
like.

All which kinds of theft are grievous sins in Gods sight, forbidden and
condemned in gods Law, Exodus 20. 25. Exodus 20. 25.
And punished in this life with gods curse. Zach. 5. 3. 4. and in the life to
come with banishment out of gods kingdom Zach. 5. 3. 4.
1. Cor. 6. 10. 1. Cor. 6. 10.


The last sin, whereof they are accused and convicted, Of whoredom and the
diverse kinds of uncleanness.
is whoring, by which we are to understand all manner of uncleanness, either
internal in the mind, or external in the body: the internal are the
unclean lusts of the flesh, which are either suddenly intertayned, condemned
by Christ, Math. 5. 28. or nourished and retained, which the Apostle, calls
burning. 1. Cor. 7. 9. And our Prophet compares to Mat. 5. 28. 1. Cor. 7. 9.
Hos. 7. 4.
a hot Oven. Hos. 7. 4.

The external uncleanness of the body, is either the uncleanness of the
eyes, an example whereof we have in the old world. Genesis 6. 2. In Sechem. Genesis
34. 2. In Putiphars Genesis 6. 2. and 34. 2. and 39. 7 2. Sam. 11. 2.
wife. Genesis 39. 7. In David, 2. Sam. 11. 2. And in those fleshly men of whom
Peter speaks, whose eyes were full of adultery 1 Pet. 2. 14. 1. Pet. 2. 14.


Or of the ears, when as they commit adultery with the ribauld tongues of
obsceane persons, whilst with pleasing and tickling delight, they listen unto
unchaste and filthy talk.

Or of the tongue, when as men take delight in unchaste speeches, and filthy
ribauldrie, wherewith the hearers are offended or corrupted, and their own
lusts inflamed. From which the Apostle dehorteth, Ephe. 4. 29. and 5. 4. Col.
3. 8. And which who so uses what profession soever he makes Ephe. 4. 29. 5.
4. Col. 3. 8.
yet his religion is in vain. Iam. 1. 26. Iam. 1. 26.


Or lastly this uncleanness is committed in fact, either between unmarried
persons, which is called simple fornication, or between married folks, one or
both which is called adultry. That I may say nothing of those sins of
uncleanness against nature, which a modest tongue cannot without shame speak
of, nor a chaste care hear without glowing and blushing.

All which kinds of adultery and uncleanness, are carefully to be anoyded
of all christians. First because they are grievous sins. Secondly, because
they are punished with a fearful measure of gods heavy judgments. For the
first, Whoredom a grievous sin.
adultery is a grievous sin, because the adulterer in a high degree sins
against God, his neighbor and himself.

Against God, by resisting his will, 1. These. 4. 3. By taking First against
God. 1. These. 4. 3. 1. Cor. 7. 2.
away the use of marriage, which is his own ordinance, 1 Cor. 7 2. By making the
members of Christ the members of an harlot, and by drawing as much as in them
lies our Savior into fellowship of their sin, 1. Cor. 6. 15. By defiling the
temple of the holy ghost and turning it into a stews. 1. Cor. 6. 19. 1. Cor.
6. 15. and 6. 19.


Secondly, against their neighbor, and that both singular persons, and whole
societies. Singular persons, as namely Secondly, against their neighbor.
those whom they draw into the same wickedness and punishment; for as they
sin not alone, so they do not go into hell alone, but have another at least
to bear them company; so they sin against the parents of the virgin whom they
defile; or the husband or wife of the married party; yea they sin against the
fruit of their own body, whom they disgrace and brand with a note of perpetual
infamy. Deuteronomy. 23. 2. Deu. 23. 2.


So they offend against whole societies; as first, the family, by defiling it
and bringing into it an Abimelech, who oftentimes does ouerturne it. Judge. 9.
5. Secondly, against their Judge. 9. 5.
country, by causing the Lord to contend with it, by defiling the land, and by
making it to vomit out the inhabitants. Leu. 18. 25. 27. 28. Thirdly, against
the Church, by Leu. 18. 25. 27 28.
hindering as much as in them lies the propagation thereof, unto which is
required a holy seed. Mat. 2. 15. Mat. 2. 15.


Thirdly, they sin against themselves, and that both Thirdly against
themselves.
body and soul. Against their body, for other sins are without the body, but
this is committed against the body. 1. Cor. 6. 18. And this is done, by abusing
it as the instrument of sin and satan, which was made for the service 1.
Cor. 6.. 18
of God. Secondly by weakening it, and making it subject to loathsome diseases.
Pro. 5. 11. and 31. 3. Pro. 5. 3. 11. and 31. 3.


Against the soul, both in this life, by besotting and infatuating it, in
which respect Venus is called (...), a heart-stealer, and Cupid is said to be
blind, because it blinds the eye of reason, and darkneth the judgment and
understanding; so that he who is thus besotted goes unawares to destruction,
as a bird to the snare, Prou. 7. 22. 23. and 7. 7. Prou. 7. 22. 23. and 7. 7.
But specially they sin against their souls, in respect of the life to come,
for he that commits this sin destroys his own soul. Prou. 6. 32.
Excludes himself from Prou. 6. 32.
Gods presence. 1. Cor. 6. 9. And plungeth both body and 1. Cor. 6. 9.
soul into the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone. Apo. 21. 8. Apoc.
21. 8.


But as these sins of uncleanness are heinous and grievous, The punishments
of the sin of uncleanness
so also they are punished with fearful punishments, both in this life and
the life to come. In this life, both with corporal and spiritual punishments:
with corporal, as first, with poverty, and beggerie, for this sin consumes
the substance, Prou. 29. 3. And brings a man to a piece of Prou. 29. 3. and
6. 26
bread. Prou. 6. 26. As appears, in the prodigal Son. Luke. 15. Luke. 15.


Secondly, with perpetual reproach and infamy; for he that commits
Adultery, shall find a wound and dishonor, and his reproach shall never be
put away. Pro. 6. 33. Prou. 6. 33.


Thirdly, with barrenness and want of Issue, for they that commit Adultery
shall not increase, as it is in this Chapter Verse. 10. Hos. 4. 10.


Fourthly, with noisome and loathsome diseases, as we, have but too good
experience in our own times.

Fifthly, with shortness of life; for the Adulterer spends his strength with
women, and makes himself hoare-headed even in his youth, etc.

But besides these corporal punishments, God also inflicteth upon them
spiritual judgments, as blindness of mind, impenitencie, and hardness of
heart: whereof it comes to pass that they are hardly reclaymed, according to
that Prou. 2. 19. All they that go unto her return not again, Prou. 2. 19.
neither take they hold of the ways of life.

And these are the punishments inflicted upon Adulterers in this life: the
which howsoever they are grievous, yet are they but small and light, in
comparison of those which they shall suffer in the life to come. For the
Harlots house tends to death, and her paths unto the dead. Prou. 2. 18. that
Prou. 2. 18.
is, not only the death of the body, but of the soul likewise, So the Apostle
says, that the wrath of God is upon Adulterers. Col. 3. 5. 6. That they shall
be excluded out of Gods Col. 3. 5. 6.
kingdom. Ephesians. 5. 5. For no unclean thing shall enter in Ephesians. 5. 5.
thither. Apoc. 21. 27. And shall have their portion in the Apo. 21. 27. 8.
Lake which burns with fire and brimstone. Verse. 8.

And these are the sins whereof the Israelites were accused Exposition.
and convicted, the which are further aggrauated by two adjuncts: the first, in
these words, They brake out, the which speech is Metaphorical, borrowed from
the practice of unruly beasts, which will be held in no pasture, but break
through all their fences and hedges, and so wander abroad: and sometimes it is
applied unto rivers running with violent and swelling streams, whose course
being stopped, causes them to break down their banks, and to ouerflow the
whole country. Whereby he implies, that the people were desperately given over
to work wickedness, so as they would not be contained within any bounds, not
restrained with any fence, namely the law of God, his fear, shame, nor
punishment, but violently rushed through all these hedges, into the open
pastures, and broad ways of all sin and wickedness; yea, the more they were
stopped in these ill courses, the more their swelling lusts ouerflowed,
spreading over the whole country, with an universal deluge of impiety and
iniquity.

The second adjunct, whereby their sins are aggrauated, is expressed in these
words: And blood touches blood. For the understanding whereof, we are to
know, that blood in the Scriptures often signifies grievous sins, together
with the guilt and punishment, which does accompany them; because he that
sins, makes himself guilty of his blood, which as a just punishment, he
deserves to shead in lue of his transgression. So Leu. 20. 9. He that curses
Father Leu. 20. 9.
or Mother, shall dye the death, his blood shall be upon him. Iosu. 2. 19.
Whosoever goes out of the doors, his blood shall be Iosu. 2. 19. 2. Sam. 1 16 1.
Kin. 2. 37 Psa. 5. 6. Mat. 17. 25.
upon his head, and we will be guiltless. 2 Samuel 1. 16. 1. Kings 2. 37. Psalm.
5. 6. The Lord will abhor the man of blood. And in this sense the Jews cried
Mat, 27. 25. His blood be upon us and our children. And thus the words are to
be understood in this place, namely that they had committed heinous
transgressions and thereby had made themselves subject to guilt and punishment,
and in this phrase of speech, their sins are further aggrauated, in respect of
their multitude, employed by the plural number here used: bloods touch bloods.
2 in respect of their continual practice of wickedness, signified by this
word touching; whereby he implies that their sins were continual, and as it
were contiguous one with another; so as they had no sooner committed one sin,
but presently they were ready to commit another, and as it were to heap
wickedness upon wickedness.

And this is the meaning of the words: the doctrines which out of them may be
gathered are diverse. First whereas That we must reject the first motions of sin
to enter to shut the doors of our hearts against it, and to turn it back with
a frowning countenance; for if we do not give it a repulse, it will
continually haunt us, till at last with his pleasing allurements it have
persuaded us, to keep open house for the free entertainment of all sin and
wickedness. But if we have already fallen into any sin, then our best
course is quickly to expel it, and to take heed that it do not take
possession of us, and so pleading custom grow to a habit and second nature:
For it is our mortal enemy, and therefore as it is the best course for our
safety, to keep it from entering into our coasts: so it is next the best, to
give it a sharp encounter at the first entrance, and to keep it from
fortifying and intrenching it self against us. It is a poison, and therefore
we hazard the life of our souls, if we drink of it; but if we have already
swallowed it down, our best course is presently to cast it up again, before
it have dispersed it self into the vital parts, for then our case will be
desperate. It is the Ague of the soul, for the curing whereof, the best
method in spiritual Physic, is to prevent it before it come, and to take
away the causes thereof, or if through our ignorance and unwariness we are
fallen into it: we are at the first to apply speedy means for our recovery,
for if it once sease upon us we shall not leave sin till sin leave us.

The use hereof tends to meet with a deceiueble conceit A deceivable
conceit of corrupt nature discovered and refuted.
of our corrupt nature, which being so terrified by gods Law, and fearful
judgments, that it cannot resolve to continue a constant course in sin, will
yet presumptuously borrow leave of God for once or twice, with a purpose then
to give it over. So some think I will neglect the sanctification of the
Sabbath, and the hearing of the word this once, and after I will become very
diligent: I will now swear, being in heat, or standing upon my credit, but my
purpose is hereafter to give it over: I will now for once break my word,
seeing it is greatly for my advantage, but henceforward I will make conscience
of my promise: I will for a while continue my deceiptfull dealing, but when my
state is a little better grounded, I will become just and honest: I will play
the good fellow now I am in this company, but my purpose is to frequent better,
and to become more precise: I will but this once commit adultery, and then
having but a trial of it, I will resolve to live chastely: but let such
consider, in what a fearful case they are, if the Lord should (as he justly
may) take them away in his wrath, whilst they are committing these
presumptuous sins, or before they have repented of them: for as the tree
falls so it shall lie. Eccl. 11. 3 Eccl. 11. 3.
and they shall receive judgment, not according to their unconstant
resolutions, but according to their certain actions. And in the second place
let them know, that the more their dropsy souls, swelling with presumption,
drink of these waters of iniquity, the more they thirst: the more they listen
to these Sirens, the more they are inueigled with them: and if they are unable
to resist the assaults of sin, when they are unconquered, in their full
strength, without maime or wound, and assisted by Gods spirit, how much less
will they be able to stand in the encounter, when they are once spoiled,
weakened, maimed, vvounded, especially Gods spirit, which by their presumptuous
sins they have grieved being departed from them?

The second thing to be observed is, that he comprehends All impiety
comprised under unlawful swearing.
all impiety and the whole breach of the first table, under this one sin of
unlawful swearing: and as in the former Verse, he had comprised all the sins
of omission, under the want of knowledge as being the fountain of all the
rest, and the internal root from which they spring; so here he comprehends
all sins of commission under this one of abusing Gods holy name, which is an
external sin of the tongue. First, because it is an undoubted sign and an
inseparable companion of all manner of wickedness; for he that makes no
conscience of blaspeming Gods holy name, by either false, or vain and idle
oaths, he makes conscience of no sin, but would (if he might with as little
disgrace and danger do it) commit all manner of impiety; he that will not be
restrained by Gods fear, love, mercy, goodness, and the manifold benefits
which he has received of him, from vain swearing, whereby he receives no
profit, but loss, even the loss of Gods favor, the assurance of salvation,
of a good conscience, and of reputation amongst those that fear God; nor any
pleasure, unless he take (like the Devil himself) a hellish pleasure in
acting sin, and despiting God; nor has thereby any credit, but rather is
branded with the black mark of a profane person; he that will contemptuously
trample under feet the precious body and blood of Jesus Christ, which he
spared not to give for our redemption, and so irreligiously scorn the greatest
benefit that ever the Lord bestowed upon us, it is not to be doubted, but that
this man what show soever he makes, is a profane person: who when he is
allured by the baits of the world, riches, honors, and pleasures, will not
stick to commit any manner of wickedness, seeing he is ready to commit this
horrible sin of blaspheming gods name, being induced thereunto without any
respect of the least good.

Secondly, he implies under this one sin of swearing, all the sins
committed against the first table; because all these sins are linked together
and so inseperably joined one with the other, that whosoever is held in bondage
under one of them, he is subject to the rest; according to that, Iam. 2. 10.
Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet fails in Iam. 2. 10. 11.
one point, he is guilty of all. The reason is, because he that wilfully
neglects any part of Gods Law, he does not perform any one duty as he ought
in obedience to gods commandment, and for the advancement of his glory, but
for sinister respects; for if out of a good conscience, and the true fear of
God, he performed any duty, then the same causes would move him to perform
all, seeing God injoyneth one commandment as well as another, as the Apostle
there reasons, Verse 11.

The use hereof is, that we make conscience not only of one, but of all Gods
Commandments, and that we carefully avoid, not only this or that sin as
Herod did, but all kinds and degrees of sin; especially false or vain
swearing, for this alone includes or necessarily infers all manner of
impiety: and therefore let blasphemous swearers make at some times what show
of religion they will, yet we may safely and surely conclude with the Apostle
as in the general, so especially of this sin of blaspheming Gods Name, that
if any amongst you, seems Religious, and refraineth not his James. 1. 26.
Tongne, from customable swearing and vain Oaths, he but deceives his own
heart, and his Religion is in vain. James. 1. 26.

The third thing to be obserned is, that the Lord conuinceth Why God
condemns all sins under the names of those which are greatest in that kind.
and condemns the Israelits of all their transgressions under the names of
the greatest sins of that kind: as cruelty and oppression under the name of
murder: all manner of deceit under the name of theft: all kinds of
uncleanness under the name of whoring and adultery. And this he does: Mat. 5.




I am no extorcioner, murderer, adulterer, etc. and to change the Pharisees
brag, into the poor Publicans humble prayer. God be merciful unto me a
sinner.

Fourthly, whereas he says they break out like unruly beasts Sin if it be
not quickly suppressed grows violent
who would be held in by no sense, and like swelling streams, which break
down their banks, and ouer-flow the whole country; here again we may observe
the nature of sin, which if it be not quickly suppressed will grow so violent
and contagious, that nothing will restrain nor contain it with in any bounds.
The violence thereof if once it has taken full possession of us is such, that
neither Gods love, mercy and manifold benefits, nor yet his law, fearful
curse, feirce wrath nor terrible judgments will restrain us from running
headlong into it; yea rather sin will take occasion by the commandment to
work in us all manner of concupisence; as appears, Romans 7. 8. And such is
the contagious infection thereof, that it will not be contained in the Romans 7.
8.
persons who are already poisoned therewith, (but like a river which has
swelled over his banks) ouerfloweth a whole country. And as the canker, or
gangreene, having taken one member of the body, if it be not presently cured,
or cut off does corrupt the next, until it have rotted the whole body: so if
sin having tainted some few members of a body politic, be not by wholesome
laws and execution of justice killed and suppressed, it will like the
gangreene spread over and corrupt the whole body of the common wealth.

The use hereof is, First that if sin have made an entrance The uses.
into us, we labor to cast it out, before it have taken full possession, and
that we crush in pieces this Babilonish brood, before they grow too strong
for us.

Secondly it serves for the confutation of the foolish conceit The folly of
those who defer repentance.
and practice of worldly men, who nourish their corruptions, and defer their
repentance from year to year, thinking that howsoever it is now somewhat
difficult to master their sins, yet hereafter they may do it at pleasure:
but let such know, that the longer their sins grow upon them, the more hardly
will they be subdued, and if now they seem too strong for them, let them
assure themselves, that in further process of time they will grow altogether
irresistable; neither will any fence restrain them from running and rushing
into the pleasant pastures of sin and wickedness.

Thirdly, seeing sin is of such a contagious, spreading, and ouerflowing
nature; this must make us careful to avoid the company of wicked men, least
we be tainted with their corruptions; and if it have like a general Deluge
ouerflowed the whole country where we dwell, then as Noah was preserved from
drowning, by keeping himself within the Arc, so if we would not be
drenched and drowned in this Sea of corruption, which ouer-spreadeth the whole
earth, we must keep our selves in the Arc of Gods Church, and frequent the
company of Gods faithful people, for if we haunt the fellowship of the wicked,
we shall be surely carried away in the stream both of their sin and also of
their punishments.

Fourthly, more particularly it teaches Magistrates and Superiors must
suppress sin before it be grown too strong and violent.
Masters of Families, to suppress sin in those committed to their charge,
before it be grown over strong and violent, least it make head against all
laws and good orders, challenge freedom and impunitie, in respect of the
multitude of those that offend, and so grow to such audacious impudency, that
it dares to vaunt it self against goodness, and to disdain and scorn all
virtue and godliness. Let them therefore follow the example of Abraham, and
when they see an Ismaelite scoffing at the children of promise, let them, if
there be no other means to reform him, cast him out of the family: If there
be an Abimilech, let him be suppressed, or removed, least he destroy the
whole lineage of the godly, and disturb the Church and common wealth. Judge. 9.
Judge. 9.
If Eli know the wickedness of Hophni and Phinehas, and 1 Samuel 2. and 3.
will not correct them, it will bring the heavy Judgments of God upon the
whole posterity: If David cocker Absalon, 2 Samuel 15. and 16.
and will not keep him under, in the end he will conspire against him, and
draw the whole people into his rebellion. Let therefore all Magistrates and
householders propound David's practice for their pattern. Psalm. 101. that is,
let Psalm. 101.
them resolve not only to suppress the wicked in the family and common
wealth, but let them do it betimes, as he protests verse. 8. least as David
speaks of the sons of Zeruiah, they grow in the end too strong for them.

The last thing to be observed is, that he calls their Sin brings upon
us, the greatest guilt and punishment.
heinous sins by the name of blood; to note both unto them and us, that sin
makes us subject to the greatest guilt and punishment, even to the shedding of
blood, yea, our dearest life blood. So the Lord threatened our first parents.
Genesis 2. 17. In the day that ye eat thereof, ye shall dye the death. Genesis 2.
17.
And Ezech. 18. he reckons up diverse sins, and concludes Exech. 18. 13.
that he who commits any of them, shall dye the death, and that his blood
shall be upon him. Verse. 13. And this was signified by the sacrifices of the
Law, in which for the expiation of sin, was required the shedding of blood:
for the the Apostle says, Heb. 9. 22. almost all things are by the Heb. 9. 22.
law, purged with blood, and without shedding of blood there is no remission.
In the offering whereof the law provided, that Leu. 1. 4. and 3. 8.
the offender should lay his hands upon the head of the beast which was
slain, thereby testifying that by his sin, he had justly deserved that
death which the poor beast suffered. Not that the blood of Bulls and Goats
could take away the guilt and punishment of sin, but only the precious blood
of Christ, which was thereby signified and prefigured. Heb. 9. 12. Heb. 9. 12.


The use of this serves, first, to make us most careful in That we must
carefully avoid sin.
abstayning from all manner of known sins; seeing they make us subject to
the greatest guilt and punishment, and bring our dearest blood upon our own
heads. There is no malefactor so desperate, that would commit a capital crime
if he were assured that he could not escape the hands of his just Judge: but
all our sins are capital, and deserve death both of body and soul; neither
can we fly the presence of the just Judge of heaven and earth, and therefore
no pleasures, riches nor preferments should persuade us to commit sin,
whereby we make our selves liable to such heavy punishments.

Secondly, if we have sinned, this consideration should If we have sinned we
must carefully seek reconciliation with God.
move us most earnestly to labor that Gods wrath may be appeased, his justice
satisfied, and that we may be freed from the heavy burden of sin, which
makes us subject to death and condemnation. And considering that the guilt and
punishment can not otherwise be done away, but by blood, even by the precious
blood of Jesus Christ, which alone purges away all sin. 1 John 1. 7.
Therefore when 1 John. 1. 7.
our consciences are guilty of sin, let us labor above all things in the
world to apply unto our selves the virtue of Christ's blood, death and merits,
and hunger and thirst after his righteousness, that thereby being justified,
we may stand righteous in his sight.

Lastly, it serves to confute the conceit of the secure Their conceit
confuted, who make light account of sin.
men of the world, who make but a May Game of sin, and imagine that they can
appease Gods wrath for all their heinous wickedness, by a broken sigh, or by
saying, Lord have mercy upon us, for we are all sinners; or by making some
counterfaite show of repentance in their sickness, or when they lie upon their
death beds: as also it refuteth the doctrine of the Papists, who so lightly
esteem of sin, that they teach it may be done away, by auricular Confession,
Penance, human Satisfactions, Pilgrimages, saying over of so many
Pater-nosters, Aue-Maryes, and Creedes, by a Bishops blessing, and Popish
Pardons: but we are to know that howsoever they esteem of it, yet it is so
odious in Gods sight, that no satisfaction can be made for it, but by the alone
sufficient sacrifice of Christ's blood, in which if we have not part, our blood
will be upon our own heads, and the guilt and punishment of our sins will
ever remain upon us.

And so much for the doctrines and uses which are to be Application.
observed out of these words: Now in the next place we are to apply them to our
own times, and to examine whether we That unlawful swearing exceedingly
abounds.
be not guilty of those sins of which the Israelites are her convicted and
condemned. The first sin is swearing, in which respect if we take a general
survey of our state, we shall find that we may well take up Ieremies
complaint, that because of oaths this land mourns. Ier. 23. 10. For the Ier.
23. 10.
name of God was never so profaned and blasphemed amongst the people of
Israel, as in this sinful nation, neither can we find that they ever so
lightly, vainly, and impiously abused the dreadful and glorious name of their
Jehovah, as it is abused amongst us: nay contrariwise we find that it was
usual with them to rent their garments, when they hard Gods name blasphemed,
which if we should do in our days, we should never go in whole apparel, and
the whole wealth of the land were scarce sufficient to furnish the people with
clothes: yea such a superstitious respect they had of the name of God, that
numbering by letters they durst not use the letters (...) because one of Gods
names was thereby expressed, but in stead of them used (...) lest the name of
god should be profaned by common use; whereas amongst us the fearful name of
God is used, without all respect in jests and May-games, common swearing, and
impious cursing. But the more full handling of this point I will reserve for a
larger discourse of this argument.

And so much concerning the sin of swearing; the other sin, signified by
the same word is cursing, and direful That wicked cursing is rife in these
times.
imprecations. The which sin also, does exceedingly reign in this our land,
and pulls down gods heavy judgments upon us: for are men sporting
themselves in their pleasures and recreations, if any thing cross them in
their delights what Poxes, Plagues and mischeifes, will their accursed cursing
mouths thunder out? are they about their worldly affairs and business, if
they do not sort according to their desire what direful curses will they utter?
if they be by any accident incensed with anger, they have no readyer way to
ease themselves, then by belching out of their poisonous stomachs, curses and
blasphemies; neither is there any thing privileged from this their impious
fury: for not only their enemies who have injured or abused them, are thought
fit subjects upon whom they may lay their heavy curses, but also their friends
who are near and dear unto them, yea what soever comes next to hand;
sometimes they thus reward their poor servants for their painful service;
sometimes their seely cattle are thus requited, for all the use and benefits
which they have by them; yea sometimes the children of their own bowels have
these hellish blessings bestowed upon them, and that upon small and trifling
occasions; nay such is their senslesnesse in this sin that they are ready to
curse the senstesse creatures, and that oftentimes when there is no fault in
them, which are only their bare instruments, but in themselves who for want of
heed, wit, or providence, could use them no better: but let such cursers know,
that the The punishment of cursing.
curses which they have still in their mouths, shall fall upon their own
heads; and that they are but like stones or balls cast against a hard wall,
which hurt it not but rebound upon the throwers. Let them remember the saying
of the Psalmist. Psalm. 109. 17. As he loved cursing, so shall it come unto
Psalm. 109. 17. 18.
him, and as he loved not blessing so shall it be far from him. 18. As he
clothed himself with cursing like a raiment, so shall it come into his bowels
like water, and like oil into his bones.

And well were it, if he that curses did bear the punishment of his own
sin himself alone; but it is otherwise: Cursing makes the common wealth
liable to Gods judgments.
for where cursing abounds, it causes the Lord to proclaim a controversy
with the whole land, and to inflict upon it his heavy judgments. The which as
it should forcibly restrain men from this horrible sin, because thereby they
make not only themselves, but also their dear country liable to grievous
punishments; so also it should move Christian magistrates to be careful in
the suppressing of this vice, seeing where it abounds, there the whole
country lies open to Gods fearful plagues.

The third sin whereof the Israelits are accused, is Lying, in which respect
if we take a view of our land, we That the sin of lying is exceeding common
in these times.
shall find that neither they, nor the Cretians themselves exceeded our people
in this vice. For look amongst all sorts and conditions of men, and it will
plainly appear, that al sorts of lies abound: vain lies, which have no other
end but to keep their tongues in ure: merry lies, for to that pass are men
come, that they will lie for recreation, and sport themselves in their
wickedness: officious lies for gain and advantage, though it be joined with the
loss of their souls: yea, and pernicious lies, tending to the hurt, reproach
and slander of their neighbors. If we take a view of state policy, we
shall find that their mixta prudentia, which is so much admired and highly
esteemed, is nothing else but a mixture of worldly wisdom with aduantageable
lying and deep dissimulation. Look amongst our Lawyers, who take upon them to
maintain truth and justice: and you shall see a common practice of lying in
their false pleas and allegations, joined with an impudent facing out, and
discountenancing of Truth, tending to the overthrow of justice, innocence and
the advancement of wrong and oppression: the which sin is more dangerous to
the state, because these liars are licensed and countenanced in their sin,
and suffered to say what they will or can for their Clyent, though it be never
so false, without check or controulement. Examine the state of the City, and
you shall find, that among buyers and sellers there is scarce any bargain
made without the help of many Lies; the which they find so beneficial for the
increase of their wealth, that they would not sell their gains which they get
by Lying, for that which they get by their honest labors: yea, so highly is
this sin in favor with them, that they read a Lecture of lying to their
servants, which who so best learneth, he is esteemed the finest chapman, and
fittest to be employed in his masters most weighty businesses. On the contrary
side, he that is not expert in this Lying skill, either being naturally
inclyned to honest dealing, or else because he makes conscience of his ways,
such an one though never so faithful and painful in his calling, is in no
favor with his master, but esteemed a heavy headed and dull witted fellow,
altogether unfit for any employment. Yea so little account or conscience is
made of this sin, that upon every tryfling occasion it is thought fit to be
used: for let a mangoe to another but to speak with him, at his house, and he
shall find all servants generally instructed to return a Lie, that they know
not whether their master be within, but they will go see; and if the master
likes not the party or his business, then at the return of the messenger the
Lie is doubled. Do these men think we believe the Scriptures, that a Lie is
abominable in Gods sight, that Prou. 12. 22. and 6. 17. Apoc. 22. 15. and 21.
8.
he abhors it, that the Liar shall be excluded out of Gods kingdom, and
cast into the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone? without doubt either
they are so invred to Lying, that they measuring God by themselves, do not
believe his truth, or else they never meditate or think upon it; for there is
none so gamesome that would leap into hell fire for sport; there is none so
covetous that would wittingly and willingly sell his soul for every small
trifle, which is of more value then the whole world; there is scarce any so
given over to desperate wickedness, that would have his servant by a Lie to
hazard his salvation, which danger might be prevented by undergoing little or
no inconvenience.

The fourth sin laid to the Israelites charge is Killing; That the land is
defiled with blood.
the which we must needs acknowledge does exceedingly abound in this land, in
all the kinds and degrees thereof: for first, if we examine our state
concerning murder in the highest nature, we must needs acknowledge that our
country is exceedingly defiled with blood: for how many outrageous and more
then barbarous Murders have been committed in every corner of this Land,
within the compass of a few years? how many openly have been slaughtered by
desperate Ruffians in frayes and quarrels? how many murdered by Thieves and
Robbers? how many traitorously poisoned, and privily made away by treacherous
enemies? the which bloody sins being committed by some private men, would not
lie so heavy upon the whole state if they had been severely punished by the
Magistrates, and blood had been punished with blood. But alas, it has been far
otherwise; for diverse horrible murders have had their pardons by the mediation
of their great friends, contrary to the express commandment of almighty God.
Genesis 6. 9. Exo. 21. 12. Number. 35. 30. Genesis 9. 6. Exodus 21. 12. Number 35. 30. 31
31. Whereby it is come to pass, that the whole land is defiled with blood, for
as it is, Verse. 33. Blood defiles the Land, and the Land cannot be cleansed of
the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it.

But if we speak of the other inferior kinds of Murder, we shall find,
that not only some few persons, but even the whole body of the people is
guilty of this sin; for to speak first of the murder of the heart, how does
it abound Of the murder of the Heart.
amongst us in the several kinds thereof? for how common is unjust anger
without a cause? inueterate malice, whereby one bears to another such hatred,
that they will not so much as speak to them for long time together; yea and
rather then they will forgive injuries, deprive themselves of the Sacrament,
the seal of their salvation? spightfull envy, whereby one is vexed at the
prosperity of another, and no less grieved at the sight of their neighbors
good, then in the sense of their own evil. So how does desire of taking private
revenge bear sway in men's hearts, insomuch that men think it a disparagement to
their courage, and a great disgrace to them, if they put up an injury? how do
men disdain and despise one another, if they come near them in place,
apparel or account, whom they esteem their inferiors? what rejoicing is
there in other men's harms, especially if they envy their state or bear them
any secret grudge? when was there in any age the like cruelty in the hearts of
men, whereby they are not only restrained from doing good one to another in
their greatest extremities, but moved also to hurt and oppress one another
when they have opportunity? when were men so eagerly disposed to entertain
discord and contention, when but the least show of an occasion is offered? by
all which it appears; how the murder of the heart abounds.

The like may be said of the murder of the Tongue; for Of the murder of the
Tongue.
railing, chiding and reuiling is to be heard in every corner, for every trifle
one miscalling another by reproachful names; and out of the malice of their
hearts, men are ready to utter for every light cause, such poisoned words, as
tend to their disgrace and ruin? how ready are the most to deride and scoff
one another with bitter frumps, thinking that they have much commended their
wits, when they have taunted one another with biting jests? what backbiting,
and slandering abounds in every house, where the continual subject of men's
talk, both at their table, and in their ordinary communication, is the faults
and imperfections of their neighbors, yea, sometimes of their most familiar
friends? by all which it is manifest that the most men are guilty of the
murder of the tongue.

Neither are the greatest part amongst us to be excused Of the murder of the
Hands.
of the murder of the Hands: for although for fear of the Law, the most be
restrained from actual murder, yet how many have offered violence against the
person of their neighbor, by quarrelling and fighting, hurting and wounding of
their bodies, thinking this to be a small or no sin at all, if they do not
take away their lives?

So that if the Lord should contend with us, and arraigne us before his
judgment seat; we must generally plead guilty, and put our selves wholly upon
the doom of Gods infinite mercy.

The fifth sin whereof the Israelites are indicted and condemned, is Stealing,
of which the whole people of this land is guilty many vvayes. For first, if we
speak of the highest degree of this sin, the natural disposition of this
people is That the people of this land are much addicted to stealing.
so inclinable hereunto, that it does not undeservedly bear the brand and
reproach of this vice amongst other nations. And in truth amongst our selves
we have great experience hereof: for howsoever theft is punished severely in
this land by death it self, yet the most of our able poor, if they be of a
base mind give themselves to begging, and those who are of more spirit and
courage, choose rather to rob and steal then to live by their honest labors.

But howsoever many may plead not guilty in respect of Of the theft of the
Heart.
this highest degree of theft, by reason of their sufficiency of maintenance,
or fear of punishment; yet the other kinds of Theft, which are not punished
by human laws, abound amongst us: as first, the Theft of the Heart,
discontentednesse with men's own estates; and covetousness, whereby they
desire by unlawful means to get unto themselves the wealth of other men, does
as much abound in this nation, as amongst any people of the world. And hereby
the seed of Gods word and all spiritual graces are exceedingly choked, all
holy duetyes of piety and Christianity neglected, the relief of the poor
and all works of mercy omitted, and the contrary vices vnmeasurably increased.

Come from the theft of the heart, to the theft which is in Of oppression.
fact, both through violence and deceit, and we shall find our selves entered
into an Ocean without either bottom or end: for where amongst any civil
people was ever seen the like tyrannical oppression, whereby the rich and
mighty eat up the weak and needy as the greater fishes devour the less?
when was there ever heard of the like exactions, impositions, inhaunsement of
rents to such unreasonable rates, that poor men can not with the sweat of
their brows earne their bread? such delaying, if not perverting of justice for
friendship and respect of persons? In what age of the world was there such
corruption in courts and Offices, such inhaunsing of fees, such extortion and
intolerable pilling, proling and bribing? When did ever the Lawyers so
flourish by the common spoil, by deceit and impostures, protractions of
suites, defending injury and fashood, betraying the cause of the innocent, like
thieves contending one with another in counterfaite strife, who shall have the
true man's purse.

Neither is the state of the ministry to be acquitted of Theft of the
Ministry toward the people.
this crime of Theft; for how many is there in this land, which live upon the
common spoil of the Parish, performing no duty for it? how many unprofitable
Drones, who eat the honey and never labor? some because they cannot by reason
of their insufficiency and ignorance, which are those dumb dogs, of which the
Prophet speaks, which not being able Esa. 56. 10.
to bark, betray the flock into the jaws of the ravenous Wolf: some through
idleness, because they will not take pains, prizing their own sweat at a
higher rate, then the precious souls of all those which are committed to their
charge: some through covetousness, adding living unto living, and so become
negligent Non-residents, who feed themselves but starve the people, etc.

And as the ministers offend by defrauding their flocks of Theft of the people
toward the Ministers.
that spiritual food which should nourish them to everlasting life; so also
do the people generally in the land, and especially in this City, defraud
their Ministers of that sufficient maintenance, which both by the Laws of God
and of the land are due unto them: some by might and force, some by deceiptfull
conueyances, crafty collusions, and other unjust and fradulent courses; which
although men in their carnal security can slightly pass it over, yet let them
be assured that if ever they come unto any sense of sin, it will lie heavy
upon their consciences, that they have thus defrauded their ministers, and in
them God himself. Mal. 3. 8. Mal. 3. 8.


And these with many other kinds of theft are committed Of theft by usury,
buying and selling.
usually in this land in ordinary dealing out of contract, besides which, there
are innumerable kinds of theft committed in contracts; as that legal theft of
Usury, under color of lending, which now (especially in this city) is grown
into such a common trade, that if there were a Corporation made of those who
chiefly live by this profession, it would exceed in number the greatest Company
in the City. The like theft is usually committed in buying and selling; for
what innumerable deceipts are used in our times by men of this profession? what
false lights? what unequal measures, and deceiptfull waights? what corrupt and
bad wares? what deceit in ouer-prizing them above their double value? what
facing, lying, swearing, forswearing and ouer-reaching? in which respects these
professions, may well keep their old names of Crafts and Mysteryes, seeing
almost every shop is now become a School of deceit and falsehood, in which
there are so many hidden subtilties, so many unknown secrecies, and subtle
turnings and windings, that in their dealings there is not only fraud, but
even a Mystery of deceit.

And thus have I briefly poynted at some kinds of theft commonly practiced in
this land; the which if I should relate in all the particulars thereof, the very
names of the diverse sorts of this sin, would be suffficient to fill a volume.
But this which has been said is enough to prove that by this sin of Theft
we have justly deserved, that the Lord should contend with us, and inflict upon
us his fearful judgments and most grievous punishments.

The last sin laid to the Israelits charge is Adultery, with which
filthynesse this land was never so much desiled That the land is exceedingly
polluted with Adultery.
as in these times, so that, if we could plead not guilty in respect of the
former crimes, yet this sin of uncleanness were sufficient in it self
alone, to cause this land in Gods just wrath, to vomit out her inhabitants, who
have thus wickedly Leu. 18. 25. 27
defiled it. For to say nothing of the inward uncleanness of the heart, of which
the Lord alone and men's consciences are the witnesses and judges; How many are
there whose whoredoms are written in their for-heads, and who carry their
adultery, between their breasts? How many are there who commit the adultery
of the tongue, whilst they take their chief delight in ribauld and obsceane
speeches, rotten and filthy communication? How many is there who commit the
adultery of the ear, whilst with pleasing delight they attentively listen to
baudie jests, and are never merrier then when they are in the company of
filthy ribaulds? how many commit the adultery of the eyes, whilst they are so
far from making with Job a covenant with their eyes, that they Job. 31. 1.
will not lasciuiously look upon a woman, that they purposely open them that
they may take full view of obsceane objects, and frequent those places where
they may most glut their adulterous eyes with wanton spectacles? How many
openly profess their inward uncleanness of heart, by their immodest attire,
wanton and esseminate apparel, and by laying open to the common view their
naked breasts, as though it were a bill affixed to the door post, to signify
to the passers by, that within that place dwells an unclean heart, and that
whosoever will may there buy honesty and chastity at an easy rate? Yea how
many are there in this land, who give themselves over to all manner of
uncleanness and adultery in the highest degree, spending both their strength
and whole estates upon filthy harlots, even till they rot with loathsome
diseases, and have brought themselves to utter beggerie? The which adulterous
filthiness the more reigns, because the Magistrates do (if not altogether
wincke at it) yet so slightly punish it, as though they jumped with the Papists
in judgment, that it is but a venial sin, which may be well tolerated; or
as though the multitude of offenders did privilege the sin, and take away
all hope of reformation, the guilty which should be punished, exceeding the
number of the innocent who should see them punished.

And thus have I showed, that the people and inhabitants of this land, are in
most heinous manner guilty of all these sins, whereof the Israelits are here
convicted and condemned; the which we have also fearfully aggrauated by the
same and many other circumstances, for they are not seldom committed and in
few places, but they are come to a common custom and usual fashion, in every
corner of the Realm, and especially in this City; there is no modesty or
moderation in committing of them, but men break out, and like unruly beasts
will be contained by no fence; for neither Gods infinite goodness, his
marvelous mercy, nor his innumerable benefits, so bounteously bestowed upon
this country will restrain them from committing of these sins; no nor yet the
curse of his law, the fearful denunciation of his heavy judgments, so often
sounding in our ears, his fatherly admonitions and gentle chastizements,
wherewith we have diverse times ben exercised. Yea so barbarously bold are men
grown in their sins, that the more diligently the Lord uses all good means
to stop them in their wicked courses, the more their unruly lusts swell, and
violently break down the banks of modesty, piety, justice, and the fear
of God; and so with an irresistable sloud of wickedness ouerflow the whole
country; the more carefully the Lord applies unto them such sovereign salues
as might cure the wounds of sin, the more desperate they are in plucking them
off again, that they may rot in their corruptions; the more means is used to
stay the infection of this contagious plague, the more it spreads it self
over the whole country. And as these sins abound in innumerable numbers, so
they are heinous and bloody in respect of their quality, being committed in
the highest degree of their several kinds: so that Gods Ministers in our
times, may justly complain of the inhabitants of our land, that those sins
of swearing, lying, killing, etc. are usually committed amongst them, that like
beasts, they violently break out, and blood touches blood.

Whereof it necessarily follows, that seeing we abound in these sins, and
will not be reclaymed from them; seeing the Lord has often allured us by his
innumerable benefits, by his sweet promises, by his fatherly admonitions; and
often terrified us by his severe threatenings, and fearful judgments of
famine and dearth, sickness and pestilence, and yet there is no amendment and
reformation; that we can expect no other but that the Lord will bring this land
to utter destruction and desolation; unless we labor to prevent these heavy
punishments by turning unto him by speedy and unfeigned repentance. For the Lord
takes that course with us, which we take with our children and servants, first
he contains us in his fear and obedience, by his gracious benefits; then if
we notwithstanding live in sin he admonishes and threatens us, and if
this will not reclaim us, then he corrects and punishes us; but if these
often inflicted are not available, but that with full resolution we will
desperately runue on in our wicked courses, then he will reject and cast us
off, thrust us out of his family, withdraw from us all signs of his favor,
and give us over to be utterly destroyed with those plagues which duly attend
upon such desperate sins.

AND so much concerning the first bill of indictment, whereby the people of
Israel are accused and convicted; now follows the sentence of condemnation,
whereby they are adjudged to suffer deserved punishments. Verse. 3. Therefore
shall the land mourn, and every one that dwells therein shall be cut off, with
the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of the heaven, and also the fishes
of the sea shall be taken away. Where the Lord more plainly expresses after
what The exposition
manner he would contend with the people, to wit, not by his word alone, but by
his judgments also.

The punishment it self here threatened, is the utter destruction and
desolation of the land, by war and the usual companion thereof dearth and
famine; the which is most lively and emphatically expressed in diverse
metaphorical and hyperbolicall speeches, the which I will expound as they lie
in order.

And first here is expressed the cause of their punishment, then the punishment
it self; the cause of their punishment, in this word, Therefore, that is,
because all manner of sin both of omission and commission does abound in the
land, and the people is desperately resolved to rush into all manner of
wickedness, notwithstanding all those means which I have used to reclaim
them, and even are now grown to a custom and habit of sinning; therefore I
will forbear them no longer, seeing they give no hope of their reformation,
but will presently execute my fearful judgments amongst them, till they be
utterly destroyed.

The punishment it self is first expressed, and then amplified, it is
expressed in two borrowed speeches; the first in these words, the land shall
mourn: As though he should say, because the people will not mourn for their
sins, even the land it self shall mourn, and as it were sigh and groan
under the heavy burden of my punishments. So that hereby he implies their
stubberne rebellion, impenitencie, and hardness of heart, in that the brute and
senseles earth would be sooner affected and touched with the feeling of Gods
judgments, then the more senseless inhabitants; and also the greatness of
the punishment, which should be so sharp that it would give sense to the
senseles creatures.

The judgment it self is destruction and desolation, by war and famine,
whereby the inhabitants of the land should be destroyed and swept away, and all
the goodly ornaments of the earth, as the pleasant Orchards and gardens, the
fruitful fields and vinyards, should be utterly wasted and spoiled: so that
now the good mother earth should like Rachell spend her time in mourning for
her children, because they were not, and like a desolate captive spoiled of all
her riches and percious ornaments lament her passed loss and present misery.
The meaning therefore of these words is this, that the earth shall become
barraine and fruitless, and and shall be stripped and spoiled of all her
inhabitants, and so become a vast and disolate wilderness, neither inhabited
by men, nor adorned with her beautiful fruits, as it were with her prinely
coat of diverse coullours: for as the earth which is inhabited by a
flowrishing people, and decked and adorned with her plenteous fruits, is said
to rejoice laugh and sing, Psalm. 96 12. Let the field be joyful and all that
is Psalm. 96. 12.
in it, let the trees of the wood then rejoice. Unto which the Prophet Esaias
alludeth Chap. 35. 1. 2. The wast ground shall Esaias. 35. 1. 2.
be glad and flourish as a Rose. It shall flourish abundantly and shall
greatly rejoice. So it is said to mourn and weep when it is dis-peopled, and
laid wast and desolate, like a wilderness. So Esaias 33. 9. The earth mourns
and faints, Libanon is ashamed and hewn down, Sharon is like a wilderness
etc. Ier. Esaias 33. 9. Ier. 4. 27. 28.
4. 27. 28. The whole land shall be desolate, therefore shall the earth
mourn. Joel. 1. 10. The field is wasted, the land mourns Joel. 1. 10.
for the corn is destroyed etc.

And thus the land mourned: first when as it was wasted by Tilgath-Pilneeser
King of Assiria, who led away two Tribes and a half captive as appears, 1.
Chron. 5. 26. 1. Chro. 5. 26.
but much more when as it was utterly ouerthowne and destroyed by Salmaneser,
of which we may read, 2. Kings. 17 2. King. 17.


Secondly it is said, that every one that dwells in the land shall be cut
off, the word is shall languish, or faint through weakness; whereby he
signifies that howsoever the people would not mourn for sin, yet the Lord
would make them mourn under his punishments, and that so greatly, that they
should even languish and faint in their sorrow and heaviness, having no
appearance of any comfort.

Now these judgments are further aggrauated and amplyfied, whereas it is said
that the unreasonable creatures, the inhabitants both of the air, earth, and
water shall be pertakers of the peoples misery, and be overwhelmed in their
ruin: and this shows the greatness of their destruction. For as when the
Lord would magnify his blessing upon mankind, he says, that he would keep
his Covenant not only with Noah and his sons, but with all living creatures,
Genesis 9. 9. 10.
Fowls, Cattle and Beasts, because these creatures were given unto man for his
profit and honest delight: so contrariwise when he would amplify his irefull
judgments, he says, that he would not only destroy the people, but also
spoil them of all benefits whereby they might receive any profit and comfort.
And as to amplify the greatness of their punishment, and the grieuousnes of
their sin, he commanded the Israelites to destroy not only the people of
Jericho, but also their houses, beasts and cattle, silver, gold, and all that
belonged to them; so here he threatens that for the same causes he would take
the same course with the Israelites themselves: that is, to show his
detestation of their horrible Treasons and Rebellions, he would not only
destroy them, but also their Land, and all that belonged unto them.

Yea, he says his punishments should extend to the fishes of the sea, and this
does exceedingly amplify the greatness of his wrath; for even in the general
Deluge the fishes were exempted from punishment, as if they had been a nation
of another world, who having no society with mankind were not infected with
the contagion of his sin: but now he showed that his wrath was more inflamed,
in that he threatens to make the fishes pertakers of man's misery and
punishments: not that indeed the Lord was purposed to catch the silly fish in
the nets of his judgments, but only used these Rhetorical and Hyperbolicall
amplyfications, that hereby he might more feelingly affect the secure and hard
hearted israelites, both with the sense of their heinous sins, and grievous
punishments.

And this is the meaning of the words. The Doctrines which arise out of them
are diverse. First, whereas he says, The sins of the inhabitants cause a land
to mourn.
Therefore, that is, because of their grievous sins the Land shall mourn and
become desolate: hence we observe, that the chief cause which makes a land
sit mourning like a desolate widow, or a distressed mother, robbed of her
children, and spoiled of all her comforts, is the sin of the inhabitants. Psa.
107. 34. This brought an universal deluge over Psalm. 107. 34.
the whole world: this brought down fire and brimstone upon Sodom and
Gomorrah: this caused the land of Canaan to spue out her inhabitants. Leu. 18.
25. The like judgment Leu. 18. 25. 26
whereof the Lord threatened to inflict upon the Children of Israel, if they
imitated them in their sins. Verse 28. Deuteronomy. 28. 21. 22. 63. The which
threatenings were accordingly Deuteronomy. 28. 21. 22. and 63.
accomplished in their captivity, and final desolation.

The use of this doctrine is, that thereby we be made The uses.
careful to avoid sin, seeing it brings the judgments of God not only
upon our own heads, but also upon our country.

Secondly, it teaches us, to what cause we are chiefly to impute all manner
of punishments, as war, dearth, the pestilence, namely to our sins, as the
chief and principal cause, whatsoever be the inferior causes, means or
instruments.

Thirdly it confuteth their practice, who endeavor to uphold the flowrishing
state of their Country, by Machiuilian policies, falsehood, treachery, wrongs
and injuries, offered to their neighbors; by tollerating the sins which
should be severely punished, for fear of bringing danger to the State, by
exasperating a multitude or great faction, or by any other wicked and unlawful
means whatsoever: for how approueable so ever these courses may seem in
human Exo. 1. 10. Number. 24. 14. and 25. 2. and 31. 16. 17. 2. Sam. 16. 21. 1.
King. 12. 26. 27.
policy, yet the truth is, they are so far from preserving a land, that they
make it liable to Gods judgments, and bring down upon it his heavy
punishments. Exo. 1. 10 Number. 24. 14. and 25. 2. and 31. 16. 17. 2 Samuel 16. 21.
1 King. 12. 26. 27. 28.

The second observation may be this, if a people having haynously sinned, does
not seriously repent and mourn under They who will not groan under the burden
of sin shall mourn under the burden of punishment.
the burden of their transgressions, they shall faint and languish under the
burden of Gods heavy Judgments; for as it is the only means to preserve us
free from punishment, not to fall into sin, so it is the only way of
removing punishments inflicted for sin, to take away the cause thereof by
unfeigned repentance, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. Ezech. 18. 21. and 2. Chro. 7. 14. Ezech.
18. 21. 33. 14. 16.
33. 14. 16.

The use hereof serves to teach us what course is best to be taken for the
removing those judgments, which lie heavy Repentance the best means to remove
judgments.
upon our land, or at least have displayed their colors, being ready to march
against us; namely the Pestilence, Inundations, Dearth and Famine. Surely we
must not chiefly trust in human policies, and preuentions, or in the help of
our bordering friends, for all this will be to little purpose, if we do not in
the first place seek reconciliation with God, by forsaking our sins, and
turning unto him by unfeigned repentance.

The second use serves, for the comfort of those that God protects those that
mourn.
mourn in Sion, and daily bewail both their own sins, and the sins of
their people: for such are to know, that the Lord will give them a special
privilege and protection, whereby they shall be protected from the common
calamities which he inflicteth upon their nation; or if as members Ier. 39. 16.
17.
of this great body pollitick, by reason of their communion, they necessarily
partake in their miseries and afflictions, yet the Lord will so sanctify these
crosses unto them, and will give unto them such a measure of strength, faith,
patience, and comfort: that when unrepentant sinners, who never sighed nor
groned under the burden of sin, do now groan and languish under the weight of
punishment; they contrariwise, who upon their unfeigned repentance are assured
of the forgiveness of their sins, shall not only be patient, but also
rejoice in their tribulations, and their afflictions shall be unto them, as a
Serpent without a sting.

Lastly, this serves to refute the practice of those, who when they are justly
punished for their sins, in stead of removing the cause by repentance, do
add sin unto sin, by using wicked and unlawful means for the removing
The folly of those who by sin labor to remove punishment.
of their punishments; as for example going unto Witches, Wizards and
Sorcerers, using falshoode and deceit, injury and oppression, that so they
may remove the burden which God has laid upon them, unto the shoulder of
their neighbor: But such are to know, that this is not the way to give them
ease, or to release them of their afflictions, nay rather they are to expect,
that as they add sin unto sin, so God will add punishment unto
punishment; until they which refuse to mourn for their sins, faint and
sink under his heavy judgments.

The third thing to be observed is the senseless hardness The obdurate hardness
of man's heart.
of man's heart, and the secure impenitencie of our corrupt nature; whereby it
comes to pass, that neither Gods mercies nor judgments, will any whit
affect us, if the Lord give us over to our own obdurate stubbernesse; for even
when the senseless and brutish creatures, are in their kind affected, both
with Gods mercies and judgments, only man remains without sense and feeling.
The heavens veil their face and shed forth their tears; the earth groneth and
shakes; the waters roar and swell; the beasts, fowls and fishes mourn and
hang down their heads, showing their inward grief, by that diverse language
which God has given them, when as the Lord is angry and lays his heavy hand
upon them; only man the chief rebel of the world smileth when God frowneth,
and though he be somewhat touched with sense of pain, yet he sorroweth only
because he is punished, and not because by his sins he has deserved
punishment. And hence it is that the Lord sometimes turns his speech from
man, because he has no ears to hear, nor heart to understand, nor sense to
feel and apprehend his mercies or judgments, unto the senseless and brutish
creatures; to note unto us that the senseless creatures are more sensible then
a senseless man. So Esaias 1. 2. 3. Ier. 22. 29. Esaias 1. 2. 3. Ier. 22. 29.


So it is said in this place, that the land it self mourned, and that the
beasts, birds and fishes bore their part in this sorrowful song; but the
Inhabitants of the Land are said only to have languished under the burden of
their miseries, and nothing is said of any sorrow or mourning under the heavy
burden of their sin. The like example we have Genesis 4. 13. Exodus 8. 8. 15 1
Kin. 13. 6. 33 Mat. 11. 16. 17 and 23. 37.
in Cain. Genesis 4. 13. In Pharaoh. Exodus 8. 8. 15. In Saul, Jeroboam. 1 King.
13. 6. 33. And in the people of the Jews. Mat. 11. 16. 17. and 23. 37. But I
shall not need to look far for examples to illustrate this point, seeing our
own experience does too manifestly prove it: for howsoever like Bul-rushes we
have hanged down our heads, whilst the storm of Gods judgments, did make us
bend and stoop, yet we are presently ready to walk under the burden of our
sins, with stiff and stretched out necks, when we see that the storm of
Gods fury is a little ouerblowne.

The use of this doctrine serves: first, to teach us that seeing naturally we
are hard hearted, and so senselesly secure in our sins, that we earnestly
labor for a broken heart and contrite spirit; and continually beg at the hands
of God, that he will take away our stony hearts, and give us hearts of flesh,
which will grieve and mourn when he shows any signs of his displeasure,
and even like the heart of Josias melt at the hearing of the threatenings of his
Law; grounding these our prayers upon his own gracious promises. Iere. Iere.
32. 39. Ezech. 11. 19. and 36. 26.
32. 39. Ezech. 11. 19. and 36. 26.

Secondly, it serves for the reproof of carnal worldlings, who securely go
on in their sins, foolishly imagining that they may repent when they list,
and so receive their pardon from God: but such are to know that as it is a
work of greatest necessity, so also of greatest difficulty, for if the Lord
leave them to their own hardness of heart, as he justly may, seeing they have
abused his grace to wantonness, and his mercy and long suffering to
impenitencie; well may they languish under punishment, yet they shall be
further off from true repentance and unfeigned mourning for their sins, then
the senseless earth or brutish Creatures.

Thirdly, we are to observe, that the sin of man is not only hurtful and
pernicious to himself, but even to the Sin is pernicious to all the Creatures.
whole earth, and all the Creatures therein contained. In the Creation the Lord
blessed the earth and her Inhabitants, but sin turned this blessing into a
curse. Genesis 3. 17. Gods Genesis 3. 17.
blessing made it fruitful, but man's sin made it barren, and in stead of
Corn, Wine and Oil, caused it to bring forth Thorns and Thistles, if it be
not, as it were watered with man's sweat. Verse. 18. 19. It brought a general
Deluge, Verse. 18. 19.
wherein not only man, but all the Creatures perished. It turned Sodom and
Gomorrah, which was like the garden of Eden, into a salt Marsh, and desolate
wilderness. It brought all those plagues of Aegipt not only upon man, but upon
the beasts likewise. In a word, it is the cause of all the miseries which all
the Creatures suffer, under which they groan and travail in pain together
with us, as the Apostle speaks. Romans 8. 22.
Romans 8. 22. from which with fervent desire they wait to be delivered, when
man is freed from his sin, as appears. Verse. 19. 20. 21. Ver. 19. 20. 21


Neither is this unjust with God; that the creatures should be punished for the
sin of man: seeing as man was not made for himself but for God; so they were
not made for themselves but for the use of man: and therefore as they were to
joy in his rejoicing; so to bear their part of grief in his mourning and
misery: like the servants of Noble men, who are quelled in their Lords ruins,
and though they are not guilty of their treasons committed against their
sovereign prince, yet they are overthrown in their estates and pertakers in
their punishments.

The use of this doctrine is: first, to admonish us, that when we see the
miseries of any of the poor Creatures, as the barrenness of the earth, the
toil, sickness and manifold infirmities of the beasts, etc. we be thereby put
in remembrance of our sins, and be moved to bewail them, as being the cause
not only of our own, but also of all the creatures misery.

Secondly, it serves to reprove those, who abuse the poor creatures with
tyrannical cruelty, and are so far from pitying them, in those miseries which
our sins have inflicted upon them, that they make seauen-fould greater the
heavy burden of their evils, through their barbarous usage of them; like
hard-harted and merciless Lords, who seeing their servant adjudged to death
for their treasons, in stead of pitying his punishment play themselves the
executioner, in causing him to dye by exquisite torments, etc.

The last thing to be observed is, that when the Lord exercises his
judgments upon the creatures, when the That we are not lightly to pass over
gods judgments inflicted upon the creatures.
Earth is smitten with barrenness, spoiled of her fruits, and stripped of her
goodly ornaments; when the waters above either drop not at all or in such
abundance that in stead of watring her, they drown and over flow her, and when
the beasts and cattle perish either by murraigne or famishment, we are not
lightly to pass these things over; but to esteem them as signs of Gods
displeasure conceived for our sins, and as so many summons whereby the Lord
warns us to seek reconciliation by true repentance, lest we be overtaken by
his more fearful judgments. Leuit. 26. 14. 15. etc. Leu. 26. 14. 15 Deuteronomy.
28. 15. 16.
Deuteronomy. 28. 15. 16. etc.

The use hereof serves for the reproof of those who are nothing affected with
gods judgments upon the creatures, no further then themselves have a sensible
feeling of their evils, so that if in the time of dearth and famine they feel
no want they are never thereby put in mind either of Gods anger or of their
own sins, nor touched with those miseries under which the brute creatures
mourn, nor with any compassion or fellow-feeling of their neighbors wants.

ANd so much concerning the first bill of Indictment; whereby the Israelits are
arraigned and convicted: the second is contained Verse 4. And the sentence of
condemnation Yet let none rebuke nor reprove another for thy people are as they
that rebuke the Priest. In which words The exposition.
he aggrauateth their former sins, by showing that such was their desperate
resolution of continuing in them, that they would hear of no admonition, or if
they were admonished, would unjustly rebuke those of whom they were justly
rebuked.

The sin whereof they are accused, is their impatiencie of rebuke, for
howsoever they abounded in all manner of sin yet they could not endure, that
either Gods Prophets or other his faithful servants should admonish or
reprove them for their wickedness. And this was a manifest sign, that they
were desperately resolved to continue in their sins, and were now past all hope
of recovery in this sickness of their souls, seeing they would not hear the
Physician, nor regard his counsel, nor follow his directions, nor use any
means for their recovery; but cast the potions against the walls and pull of
the plasters applied for their curing, and throw them in the Physicians face.
The like example we have Esaias. 30. 9. 10. 11. Where the Prophet complains
that the Israelits were a rebellious people, lying children, who Esaias. 30. 9.
10. 11.
would not hear the word of the Lord, which say unto the seers see not, and to
the Prophets prophecy not unto us right things, but speak flattering things
unto us, Prophecy errors etc. So Amos. 2. 12. and 7. 12. Mich. 2. 6. Ier. 44.
15. 16.
Amos. 2. 12. and 7. 12. 13. 14, and. Mich. 2. 6. Ier. 44. 15. 16.

Yea but it is not said here, that the people forbid the Prophet to admonish
and rebuke them, but the Lord himself. I answer, the Lord in his word is so
far from forbidding these duties of admonition and reprehension, that he
necessarily requires them, unless it be when as the sinner is so desperately
resolved to continue in his wickedness that he hates admonition, and is ready
to revenge it (as though it were an injury) upon him who does admonish him. Of
such the Lord speaks Ezech. 3. 26. I will make thy tongue Ezech. 3. 26.
cleave to the roof of thy mouth, that thou shall be dumb, and shall not be
to them as a man that rebukes, for they are a rebellious house. And our
Savior Christ Mat. 7. 6. Give ye not Mat. 7. 6.
that which is holy to dogs, etc. And such were this people of whom the Lord
says; Yet let none rebuke nor reprove another. As though he should have
said; although their sins are so many and heinous, that they deserve
continual reproof and reprehension, yet let no man rebuke them, seeing it is
to no purpose, they being so desperately given over to all wickedness, that
they are become altogether impatient of any reproof.

And this is plainly expressed in the words following. For thy people are as
they that rebuke the Priest. that is, they are such as indeed do rebuke the
Priest, for so this word As, is sometimes taken absolutely. Hos. 5. 10. The
princes of Judah are as they that remove the Landmark. Ioh. 1. 14. And we saw
the glory thereof, as the glory of the only begotten son. Where he
aggrauateth their sin, showing that they were not only impatient of
reproof, but which was more, they contended with their teachers, and rebuked
those by whom they were rebuked. So that they were not only impatient to hear
any reprehension, but also were grown so insolent and impudent in their
sins, that they durst defend them against their reprouers, and were ready to
challenge them, that they more offended in censuring their faults, then
themselves in committing them.

And this is signified by this phrase of rebuking the priest, where by Priest
we are to understand all whosoever have a lawful calling from god, to deliver
his word, whether, Priest, Prophet or other Ministers; but he makes mention of
the Priest, because ordinarily to him was committed the office of teaching,
exhorting, and comforting Gods people, as also of rebuking, accusing, and
condemning the obstinate and rebellious.

Now this did exceedingly aggrauate their sins, in that they durst thus
insolently and presumptuously oppose themselves against Gods Priests, returning
reproof for reproof, and inverting and perverting Gods own order and
ordinance, who appointed the Priests in the Ministry of the Word, to rebuke
their sins, and that freely without check and controulement for their just
reprehensions. The which insolency and presumption was to be punished by the
law of God, even with death it self, as appears. Deuteronomy. 17. 11. 12. And Deuteronomy.
17. 11. 12. Number* 1^.
this the Lord himself inflicted upon Corah and his associates. Numb. 16. The
reason is, because this contempt is not offered only against the Minister, but
against God himself, and his ordinance, as our Savior has taught us. Mat.
10. 14. Mat. 10. 14. 15. Luke. 10. 16.
15. Luke. 10. 16.

Examples of this sin we have not only in this place, but also in many others,
where the people have not only contended with their teachers, but even
persecuted them, for their reprehensions. So Iere. 18. 18. Come let us imagine
some devise Ier. 18. 18.
against Jeremy, etc. Let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give
heed to any of his words. Amos. 7. 10. Amos. 7. 10. 11 12. 13.
11. 12. 13.

And this is the meaning of the words. The doctrines That it is a sign of Gods
wrath when he stops the mouths of his Ministers.
it is a sign of Gods heavy displeasure and approaching vengeance, and that
his purpose is to give over such unto a reprobate sense, to run on in their
sins without hope of amendment to eternal perdition, when as he stops
the mouths of his faithful servants, and will not suffer them to reprove and
reprehend them for their sins; so here when he was determined to punish the
Israelites with Captivity, he restrains his Prophets, from rebuking and
reprehending them, though they abounded in all sin. And Ezech. Ezech. 3. 26.
3. 26. because the people were desperately given over to work wickedness,
he stops the Prophets mouth and forbids him to rebuke them. When the
Scribes and Pharisees showed their malicious spite against Christ and his
truth, our Savior would not instruct them but in Parables, and restrains his
Disciples from reproving them for their malicious forwardness. Mat. 15. 14.
Let them alone, they Mat. 15. 14.
be the blind leaders of the blind, etc. The reason hereof is, first because
he would not have his servants loose their labor in admonishing and reproving
those who are so resolute in their wickedness, that there is no hope of
amendment. And secondly; because he is purposed to let them perish in their
sins, and therefore restrains them of the means, whereby they might escape
his judgments, or else so gives them over to the hardness of their hearts,
that they do not profit by them, as we may see in the example of Pharaoh and
Elies sons. 1 Samuel 2. 25. And Amaziah. 1 Samuel 2. 25.
2 Chronicles. 25. 16. 2 Chro. 25. 16.


The use hereof serves first to persuade all that are themselves Christian
rebukes necessary
religious, that they be ready to reprove and admonish all their brethren of
their sins, if they see any hope of reformation; for hereby they shall
perform a work most charitable in stopping them in their course of sin,
whereby they incur Gods wrath, and run headlong to their own perdition,
and this duty is enjoined. Leu. 19. 17. Leu. 19. 17.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke
him and not suffer him to sin. Iam. 5. 19. 20. Iam. 5. 19. 20.
Which who so performs shall be blessed. Pro. 14. 25. Unto Pro. 24. 25.
him that rebukes the sinner, shall be pleasure, and upon them shall come the
blessing of goodness.

Secondly, it teaches all with patience to hear the word We must patiently
hear the word of reprehension.
of admonion and reprehension, when they offend; and not only patiently, but
also thankfully; seeing it is a means to restrain from us Gods wrath and
heavy judgments. It is a potion, which howsoever it is bitter, yet it helps
to purge away the gross humors of sin, and preserves from eternal death:
It is a corrasiue indeed, but yet profitable, because it draws out the core
of our corruptions: It may be displeasant at first, when we are awaked out of
the sweet sleep of carnal security, but we shall have little cause to be
offended with him that has rouzed us up seeing this sleep ends in death.

Thirdly, it shows the extreme folly of those who rage The folly of such,
who rage against those who reprove them.
against Gods Ministers, when they reprove and reprehend them for their sins,
thinking themselves never worse, then when they are under the censure of the
word, and never better at ease, then when they may sleep securely in their
sins without reproof. Such are sick of the spiritual Lethargy, they delight
in this easy sleep that brings death, and cannot endure to be rouzed up,
though it be the only means to preserve life and recover health. And
howsoever they seem so wise in their own conceits that they need no
admonition, yet let them know that wisdom it self calls them fools Pro.
12. 1. Though they hold their own course to be best, Pro. 12 1.
yet they are wanderers out of the way of life. Prou. 10. 17. Pro. 10. 17.
Though they think them selves secure and safe, yet they are branded to
destruction. Pro. 29. 1. As appears in Pro. 29. 1.
the example of Hophni and Phinehas. 1 Samuel 2. 25. Who 1. Sam. 2. 25.
are said not to have harkened to their fathers admonition because God would
slay them.

The second thing to be observed is, that it is a matter of That it is
extremely dangerous to stop our ears against admonition.
extreme danger to stop our ears against the admonitions and reprehensions of
Gods ministers, seeing for the manifold contempt of his word the Lord will take
it from us, and suffer us to run on in our sins without stop into eternal
perdition. When Gods servants had often reproved the wicked Israelits for their
sins, and they would not be reclaymed, at last he forbids them to rebuke them
any more. After Ezechiell had often inueighed against the sins of his times,
Ezech. 33. 32.
and was no otherwise respected but as a musition to make them sport, at last
God causes his tongue to cleave to the roof of his mouth. Ezech. 3. 26. When
the Prophets had and 3. 26.
many times set before the people, the spiritual food of their souls, and
they loathed and scorned it, at last the Lord sends a famine. Amos. 8. 11.
When the Jews will not Amos. 8. 11.
hear Stephen reproving them, nor Paul calling them to repentance, the Gospel
shall be taken from them and given to the Gentiles. Act 22. 21. When men are often
reproved for Acts. 22. 21.
their ignorance, injustice and filthiness, and will not be reformed, at last
they shall hear that fearful sentence, he that is ignorant let him be
ignorant still, he that is unjust let him be 1. Cor. 14. 38.
unjust still, he that is filthy let him be filthy still. Apoc. 22. 11. Apoc.
22. 11.


The use hereof is, that we do with all reverence and patience hear the
admonitions and reprehensions of Gods Ministers, that we suffer our selves to
be ruled by the scepter of the Word, and in the ministry thereof lay our
hearts open to be battred, bruised and wounded with this hammer and sword of the
spirit, that so we may be converted from our sins, and return unto the
Lord when as he calls us. Psalm. 95. 7. 8. To day if ye will hear his
voice, harden not Psalm. 95. 7. 8.
your hearts. Let us open the door to our beloved when he knocks, least he
depart from us. Can. 5. 2. 6. Let us seek Can. 5. 2. 6.
the Lord whilst he may be found, and call upon him whilst he Esaias. 55. 6.
is near. Otherwise if we have often been instructed and admonished, and will
not be reformed, but hate admonition; and those also that do admonish us, it
will come at last to pass, that the Lord will cause his Ministers tongues to
cleave to the roof of their mouths, prohibit them to reprove the sins of
the people, and so give them over unto a reprobate sense, that they may without
any impediment run on in their sins to their eternal perdition.

The third thing to be observed is, that howsoever we are To whom the duty of
admonition is to be performed.
enjoined in the Scriptures to admonish one another, yet this duty is not to
be performed unto all, neither is this spiritual seed rashly to be cast in
every place, but only in such grounds, where in some probability of reason,
we may expect fruit. For if we know that they have often ben admonished of
their sins, and are nothing bettered, but rather despise and scorn rebukes,
we are to let them alone, and leave them to Gods judgments? for by reproving
such we purchase shame and hatred. Prou 9. 7. 8. If we see that notwithstanding
Pro. 9. 7. 8.
they have had the means of their conversion, they continue wallowing in the
filthy sinck of sin, we are not to cast these precious pearls before such
swine, least they tread them under their beastly feet: If we see that they are
desperate Ruffians, which will snarle against our reproves, and in the pride
and malice of their hearts, be ready to fly in the face of those, who
admonish them of their sins, we are not to give those holy things to such
Ban-dogs, as our Savior has taught us. Mat. 7. 6. For as Christ would not
Math. 7. 6.
have his word profanely scorned, so he would not have his servants
endangered, nor his spiritual Physicians to hazard their lives, in seeking to
cure such frantic Bedlems, whose diseases are desperate; but rather leave
them to be brought to the knowledge of themselves, by the three-stringed whip
of Gods judgments.

But yet we are not thus to take it as though only those Who are to be
reproved.
were to be admonished and reproved, who show some inclinable disposition to
amendment, and they to be let alone, who live in their outrageous sins, and
give at first sight no hope of reformation: for admonition and reproof is a
special means, sanctified by God for their conversion, the hammer to batter
their stony hearts, and the best tamer of these Lions, Bears, Leopards and
Cockatrices, as appears Esa. 11. 4. 6. 7. But only those are exempted who
having Esaias. 11. 4. 6.
had these means often applied, do contemn and despise them, and those who
in respect of their frantic maliciousnes cannot be reproved without great
danger to the party who performs this duty.

Lastly, we may observe, that the Lord does condemn That it is desperate
wickedness to contend with those who justly reprove us.
it as a sign of desperate wickedness in the people, when as being rebuked
for their sins, by Gods Priests, Prophets, and Ministers, in stead of laying
these admonitions to heart, that they may be reformed, they expostulate with
them, cast in their teeth reproaches, and challenge them of the like faults or
greater, then those which they lay to their charge. And thus dealt Dathan and
his associates, with Moses and Aaron. Number. 16. Ahab with Elias. 1 King. 18.
17. The Number. 16. 1 King. 18. 17. Iere. 18. 18. 19. Amos. 7. 10. Mat. 12. 24.
Israelites with Jeremy. Ier. 18. 18. 19. Amaziah with Amos. Amos 7. 10. And
the Scribes and Pharasies with our Savior Christ. Mat. 12. 24. The which sin
is so grievous in Gods sight, that in the Law he did command that it should
be punished with death. Deuteronomy. 17. 11. 12. And in this Deu. 17. 11. 12
place, with a more fearful judgment, by taking away from the people, the
means of their conversion and salvation, and suffering them securely to go on
in their sins to their perdition. The reason is, because it is an utter
subversion of Gods ordinance, when the people being rebuked, do retort
reproves upon their teachers: as if the hand or foot should take upon them to
guide the eye; the child rebuke the father; the patient direct the Physician;
the Scholar check his Scholemaister; or the sheep expostulate with the
shepherd: besides howsoever in respect of their persons, they are of mean
condition, and full of infirmities and imperfections: yet in their office and
ministry, they are gods ambassadors, whose words cannot be despised, without
contempt offered against the Lord himself, as our Savior has taught us. Luke
10. 16. Luke 10. 16.


The use hereof serves to move all men with patience to suffer themselves to
be directed by these spiritual guides; to be admonished by these spiritual
fathers, without expostulations; to be cured of these spiritual Physicians
without murmuring or repining, etc. least by crossing Gods holy ordinance, they
move the Lord to take away from them these means of their conversion and give
them up to a reprobate sense.

Secondly, it serves for the just reproof of the people Those rebuked who
reprove their teachers.
of this land, and especially of this City, who are grown unto that height of
pride and insolency, that they will take upon them to teach their teachers,
and bring all that is spoken to the rule and censure of their shallow conceit:
as also those who when they hear their sins reproved out of gods word, in
stead of amending their wicked ways, are ready to expostulate with their
teachers, to reprove them for their rebukes, and to cast in their teeth, their
faults and imperfections. As if the ungracious Scholar because he is corrected
should lash his Schoolmaister with the same rod; or as if the frantic patient
should pull off his plaster and cast it into the Physicians face.

ANd so much concerning the second bill of indictment: the Therefore shall thou
fall in the day, and the Prophet shall fall with thee in the night, and I will
destroy thy mother. In which words we are Exposition.
to consider, first the punishment denounced; secondly the cause thereof;
thirdly the persons against whom it is threatened; fourthly the time when it is
inflicted. The punishment is expressed in these words, thou shall fall: the
which is a metaphor borrowed from such, as being either blind or walking in the
dark, are ready to fall into the ditches and pits. Whereby is signified that
because they loved darkness better then light, and erring in their own wicked
ways would not endure to be directed and guided by the light of Gods word, but
hated their guides and despised their admonitions, therefore they should fall
into the pit of Gods fearful judgments, and perish therein both people and
Prophets.

Now these judgments into which the Prophet says the people shall fall, are
as I take it properly to be understood of those temporary punishments, into
which soon after they did fall; namely, the sword, captivity and desolation;
howsoever it may well be that under these as types may be understood their
fall into gods spiritual judgments, death and eternal condemnation; when as
the light of the Gospel appearing, and the sun of righteousness clearly
shyning, they would not receive the promised Messiah; but as though they had
been still in the dark or stark blind, they stumbled at him as at a stone of
offense, and so fell into the pit of eternal perdition, according to the
Prophecies. Esaias. 8. Esaias 8. 14. Luke 2. 34. Romans 9. 32. 1 Cor. 1. 23.
14. Luke 2. 34. Which we see accomplished. Romans 9. 32. 1. Cor. 1. 23.

Secondly, the cause why they fell into the pit of Gods judgments is employed
in this word Therefore, as it is fitly here translated: whereby is signified,
that because they refused the light of Gods word and would not harken to his
faithful Prophets, nor suffer themselves to be guided by them, but contemned
their admonitions, yea and insolently rebuked their reprouers, choosing rather
to harken unto false Prophets who seduced them and flattered them in their
sins; therefore running on in the ways of darkness like blind people after
blind guided, they should both fall into the pit of Gods judgments, the deep
pit of temporary punishments, and the bottomless pit of eternal destruction.

Thirdly, the persons against whom these punishments are threatened, are first
more distinctly specified, and after comprised in one general sum. They are
specified whereas he says that both people and Prophets should thus fall. The
people are expressed in this word Thou: where he makes an Apostrophe and
conversion of his speech to the people, and having spoken of them in the former
Verse, in the third person, he now uses the second for the greater emphasis,
that he might point them out who were marked by God unto punishment, and the
singular number as though he would cull them out man by man. And this was just
with God that this people who wilfully shut their eyes against the light of
Gods truth, and despised his faithful servants admonishing them, should be
given up of God to a reprobate sense, to follow the delusions of false
Prophets, and to walk in their own wicked ways, until they fell into the
pit of destruction.

It is further said, that their Prophets should fall with them; by which we
are not to understand their true Prophets, who admonished them of their sins
and so becoming guiltless of their transgressions saved their own souls,
and were not pertakers with them in their punishments; but their false and
flattering Prophets, who soothed them in their sins, and sowed cushions under
their elbowes that they might more securely go on in their wickedness. And
here also he uses the singular number indefinitely, for the greater emphasis,
as though he should say howsoever diverse may think that they shall be exempted
in the common punishment by their wit, learning, policy, authority, or
favor with the people, yet not one of them shall escape. And this was just
with God that the false Prophets who had seduced the people should being
accessarie to their sins be pertakers in their punishments.

Secondly he says, that he will destroy their mother, whereby we are to
understand the whole Commonwealth Sinagogue, and Church of the Jews; which
the Lord threatens so to ouer-turne and ruinate, that there should not remain
so much as an outward face of a kingdom, nor the glorious title of the Church,
wherein they so much boasted: as though he should say, my purpose is to
destroy all and some; particular persons, and the whole state both of church
and commonwealth, so as I will not leave so much as your goodly shows, and
glorious titles, under which you shelter your selves from the storm of Gods
judgments, and so securely live in your sins without repentance. Where the
Lord uses the name of Mother, to comprehend the whole Synagogue of the
Israelites, both to show the grieuousnesse of the judgment, in that the Lord
killed the damme together with her young, and also that he might more sensibly
affect their stony and secure hearts with compassionate grief; seeing by
their sins they had not only destroyed themselves, but also their mother,
who in respect of this near alliance ought above all things in the world to be
most dear unto them.

Now this fearful judgment the Lord accordingly inflicted upon them, when as
first he destroyed innumerable numbers of the Israelits, both by their civil
dissentions, and foreign invasions; and afterward when as the remnant which
remained were carried Captive into Assiria, and the Assirians planted their
Colonies in the Land of Israel, whereby all hope of restitution was utterly
cut off.

The last thing expressed is, the time of these calamities, in these words, in
the day, and in the night. The words are originally, to day and to night,
whereby he signifies first, that their punishments should be very sudden and
speedy: and secondly, that they should be continual, one following in the neck
of another, as the day does immediately follow the night. As though he should
say, I will speedely destroy the people in their sins, and although I do not
presently attach with my judgments the false Prophets, because the people must
bear the first brunt of the war; yet having done with the one, I will
immediately begin with the other, until I have made an end of all, because all
have joined together in this rebellion.

And this is the meaning of the words. The Doctrines They who will not be
admonished shall be destroyed.
those who cannot endure to be admonished of their faults, nor reproved for
their sins by Gods true Prophets: but rather desire to be soothed and
flattered in their wicked ways, by false and lying seducers, shall fall into
the pit of Gods fearful judgments. So it is said. Prou. 29. 1. A man Prou.
29. 1.
that hardens his neck when he is rebuked, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and cannot be cured. Examples hereof we have in 1 King. 22. 26. 2 Chronicles. 25.
15. 16. 23. 27. Esaias. 30. 10. 13 2 These. 2. 11.
Ahab. 1 King. 22. 26. 27. 34. In Amaziah. 2 Chronicles. 25. 15. 16. 23. 27. In the
people of Israel. Esaias. 30. 10. 13. And in the limbs of Antichrist. 2 These.
2. 11. The reason hereof is manifest, for admonition and reprehension are the
means to bring the sinner to repentance, and repentance is the principal
means to prevent Gods judgments: those therefore who refuse the means of
amendment, continue obstinately in their sins, and so remain continually
liable to deserved punishments. Gods Ministers are the spiritual Physicians,
who cure those who are diseased with sin, by ministering unto them the
wholesome preservatives of admonition, and the bitter potions of reprehension
and rebuke: If therefore these medicines be applied, there is hope of
recovery; but if the patient contemn the Physicians counsel, and refuses to
take these wholesome medicines, but rather hearkeneth to some unskillful
Empericke, who promises cure without any trouble to the patient; such a one is
near death and destruction, because he cannot be cured, as the wise man
shows. Prou. 29. 1. Prou. 29. 1.


The use hereof serves, first, to move all men willingly to hearken unto
admonitions, and patiently to bear reproves, seeing it is a notable means
sanctified by God for our amendment, that so we may escape Gods heavy
judgments. An example hereof we have in David. Psalm. 141. 4. 5. Who would not
eat the delicates of the wicked but desires Psalm. 141. 4. 5.
that the righteous should smite and reprove him, because their rebukes were as
a precious Balsamum, to cure his spiritual wounds of sin.

Secondly, it serves to persuade all Christians with cheerfulness to perform
this duty of admonition and reprehension, seeing it preserves their brother
from death and destruction; for if we are bound when we see the beast of our
enemy endaungered to relieve him, by keeping him from running into the ditch,
or by helping him out being fallen; how much more are we bound in conscience to
help the person not of our enemy, but of our neighbor, yea of our brother,
and to preserve him by our Godly admonition from falling in the pit of utter
destruction? This duty God requires. Leu. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy
brother in thine Leu. 19. 17.
heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor and not suffer him to
sin. And is commended as a singular work of charity. Iam. 5. 19. 20. Which
who so performs, howsoever Iam. 5. 19. 20.
for a time he may be suspected as an enemy, or taken for a rigorous and
troublesome friend, yet in the end he shall be preferred before the most
pleasing flatterers, as appears. Prou. 28. 23. He that rebukes a man shall
find more Pro. 28. 23.
favor at the length then he that flattereth with his Tongue.

Lastly, it serves to show the miserable condition of this The impatiencie of
men in these days to hear reproof.
land and state, which abounding in sin, is notwithstanding impatient of
reproof, and is so desperately settled in wickedness, that it is now more
danger for a godly man to reprove sin, then for offenders to commit it.
Neither are private men alone discouraged from performing of this duty, with
the taunts and violence of the wicked ones, but even Gods faithful Ministers
are so hampred if they freely and plainly reprehend the iniquities of the
times, that except the word of God be as fire in their bowels which cannot be
smothered, they take little pleasure in censuring sin, or in being the Lords
heralds to denounce his heavy judgments. Yea, so vnmeasurably are Gods
ambassadors restrained from delivering the word of reproof, that even
Stageplayers may more freely and safely scoff at the vices of great offenders,
then Gods Ministers may sincerely reprehend them out of Gods word. Seeing
therefore we are grown desperate in sin, and impatient of reproof, what
remains but that with the Israelites we fall into the pit of Gods fearful
judgments?

The second thing to be observed is, that not only the The Prophets who seduce
the people shall perish with them.
people who live in wickedness, but also the Prophets who seduce them, or
boulster them up in their sins, shall fall into the pit of Gods judgments in
the day of his visitation. So the Prophet Jeremy threatens Pashur the son
of Imner the Priest, that because he had preached lies, he and Ier. 20. 6. and
23. 31.
all that belonged to him should dye in captivity. Ier. 20. 6. So the Lord
threatens, that in his wrath he will come against the Prophets, which have
sweet tongues seducing the people with pleasing Lies. Chap. 23. 31. So when
the false Prophets bore the people in hand that they should not serve the king
of Babell* for this their sin in seducing the people, and the sin of the
people in giving credit rather to them then to the true Prophets, the Lord
denounces destruction both against the Prophets and people, Chap. 27. Ier. 27.
15. and 14. 14. 15. 16.
15. See Chap. 14. 14. 15. 16. The Prophet Ezechiell likewise threatens the
false Prophets, that because they proclaimed peace, where the Lord denounced
war, and played the dawbers, in covering the faults and sins of the people
with untempered mortar, that they and their work should both perish. Ezech.
10. 14. And in general the Lord delivered Ezech. 13. 10. 14.
this denunciation by the same Prophet, that if the watchman seeing the sword
coming, did not give the people warning, nor admonish them of their wicked
ways, the wicked should dye in their sins, but their blood should be
required of the watchmans hands. The reason hereof is manifest, Ezech. 33. 8.
for if those whom he has appointed to be his ambassadors unto the people
living in their rebellion, that they may tell them of their sins, and
denounce his judgments, do conspire with the people against God, sooth them
in their sins, and become the heralds to proclaim Gods mercies, not caring
to displease God so they may please the people; the Lord in his justice can do
no less but punish the rebellions of the people, and the treacherous treason
of such ambassadors.

The use of this doctrine serves first to stir up Gods Ministers Sincerity
required in the Ministers in Preaching. Col. 1. 10.
with all care and conscience, to deliver that embassage which they have
received from God purely and sincerely; not as men pleasers but as the servants
of Jesus Christ. Least in seeking popular applause by not reproving of sin,
they cause both themselves and the people to fall into the pit of Gods
judgments in the day of his visitation. 1. Kin. 22. 14. 1. Kin. 22. 14.


Secondly, it teaches the people, with all patience and reverence to receive
the word of admonition and rebuke, as Patience and reverence required in the
people in hearing.
being the means sanctified by God, to bring them to a sight of their sins
and unfeigned repentance; that so both they and their ministers may escape Gods
justly deserved wrath and vengeance. If one walking in a pleasant way should be
admonished by a friend, that if he went forward he were in danger to fall into
an hidden pit, or into an ambushment of enemies, though his walk were
delightful, who would not turn back, and show himself thankful to him
from whom he had received such a friendly admonition? but this is our case, we
walk in the pleasant ways of sin, which lead us into the pit of
destruction? and cause us to fall if we go forward in them, into the
ambushment of our spiritual enemies, satan, hell, and condemnation: who
therefore being admonished to desist in this dangerous, though pleasing
course, would not willingly turn back, and render thanks unto him, by whose
admonition he was preserved from such imminent danger.

Lastly this serves for the just terror of all time-seruers, Terror for
time-seruers who sooth men in their sins.
and men pleasers, who will not or dare not deliver Gods embassage, nor
admonish or reprove great personages for their sins, for fear of incurring
their displeasure, or loosing those rewards which they hope to receive by
soothing them in all their wicked ways; in this respect worse then Balaam
himself, who howsoever he loved the reward of iniquity, yet protested that
he would not speak any other thing, then that which God put in his mouth, for
to gain thereby all the wealth of Balaac; whereas they for a far less
matter, speak the clean contrary; commending where God condemns; blessing
where he curses, and cursing where he blesses; proclayming peace, where he
denounces war; and giving a Quietus est, and general acquittance, to those
whom the Lord for their great and grievous debts is ready to arrest and attach:
such although for a time they get the favor of great personages, and flowrish
in the world, yet they are in a most miserable condition, seeing the time will
come, when as the Lord will cause his judgments to apprehend them, as being
traitors to his Majesty, in delivering a quite contrary embassage to that
which they received from him; Traitors unto their Prince and Country, in that
they have not admonished them of imminent dangers, but soothing them in the
pleasing ways of sin, have encouraged them to go forward in them, till they
fall into the pit of punishment; and traitors to their own souls, in that as
they accompany them in their sins, so also they shall accompany them in their
punishments.

Thirdly, we are to observe, that God will inflict punishments God severely
punishes those who contemn admonition.
speedely, continually, and one in the neck of another, upon that people who
despise admonitions, and are impatient to hear rebukes: for when his
sovereign salues of instruction will not heal them, nor his sharp corasiues
of rebuke keep them from putrefaction and rottenness, what remains, but
that with the sword of vengeance he should cut them off? And thus the Lord
punishes contemners of his word; by suffering them to fall into errors and
heresies; and by giving them up to strong delusions, and to believe 2. These. 2.
11.
lies; by giving them over to a reprobate sense, to run on in their wicked
ways, without check or stop; and lastly, by bringing upon them calamity upon
calamity, and punishment upon punishment, till they be utterly destroyed and
cut off. An example whereof we have in the Churches of Israel and Judah, in
Jeroboam, in Ahab, and many others.

The use is, that if we would escape these manifold and A particular Church may
cease to be a true Church.
continual calamities, we submit our selves to be ruled by the scepter of the
word, and be as well contented to hear our selves admonished of our faults,
and reproved for out sins, as to hear of comfort when we do well, and of
the gracious promises of the Gospll, when we have turned from our sins by
unfeigned repentance.

Lastly, we may observe, that howsoever the Catholic and invisible Church of
Christ, cannot fail and cease to be his Church, yet a particular and visible
Church may; as we see in the example of the Church of Israel in this place.
For when Idolatry, Will Worship, and human traditions thrust out Gods pure
and sincere worship, when the ministry of the word cease, and in stead
thereof lies are published and embraced; when the Sacraments are neglected, or
wholly corrupted and depraved, such assemblies whether particular or national,
cease to be the Church of Christ, and begin to be the Synagogue of Satan.

This heavy judgment Christ also threatens against the Church of the Jews.
Mat. 21. 43. The kingdom of God Mat. 21. 43.
shall be taken from you, etc. And against the Church of Ephesus. Apoc. 2. 5. I
will come against thee shortly, and will remove Apoc. 2. 5.
thy Candlestick out of his place, except thou amend, that is, I will translate
my Church from thee to some other nation. The fearful execution of all which
threatenings, we see at this day, for all those famous Churches mentioned in the
Scriptures, are utterly perished, and become both in their souls and bodies
the Vassals of Gog and Magog, the Turk, Mahomet, and the seven headed beast
the Antichrist of Rome.

The use which we are to make hereof is, first, to admonish We must not rest
in outward privileges.
us that we do not flatter our selves in those glorious titles and goodly
privileges, which yet through Gods mercy we enjoy, in that we are the Church
of God, and have his word and Sacraments amongst us. For if we securely rest in
these titles and privileges, and think it sufficient that we have the
kingdom of God amongst us, but bring forth no fruits of it, nor live like his
subjects, but the vassals of Satan; this kingdom shall likewise be taken from
us, and given to a nation which will bring forth the fruits thereof. If we
continue in our sins, loose our first love, and will not repent and amend,
our Candlestick shall be removed; if we remain stubbornely rebellious, and
will not endure admonition and rebuke, the Lord will destroy our mother, as
here he threatens the Israelites, and make us like the Churches of the Jews
and Asia.

Secondly it serves for the confutation of the Papists, The Church of Rome no
true Church of God.
who invest their mother the Church of Rome in the royal ornaments of her
ancesters, grace her with their titles and and privileges, and advance her
above others in the glorious chair of antiquity. But seeing she has fallen
from her first love, and repents not, seeing she has voluntarily excluded
her self out of Christ's kingdom, and will not endure to be governed by the
scepter of his word, but has seruilely submitted her self to Antichrist, and
is content to take his mark and bear his yoke: seeing she has banished out
of her Gods pure worship, the ministry of his word, and has wholly corrupted
and depraved his Sacraments, and now worshippeth Idols, Saints, Angels, their
breadden God of the Altar; and if they worship the true God at all yet not
according to his word, but after their own wills in human inventions and
traditions; and seeing they are so desperately resolved to continue in these
their sins that they will here of no admonition, but rebuke their reprouers,
yea persecute unto the death all that labor to reclaim them, it is hereby
manifest, that long ago they are ceased to be the spouse of Christ, and are
now become an infamous harlot, even the whore of Babylon, they are no more the
Church of God but the Sinagogue of Satan, and slaves of Antichrist. For if the
Church of Israel who had Gods law, covenant, promises, and all royal
prerogatives, ceased to be the Church, when as they did wholly degenerate, and
abandoned Gods pure worship, and if those famous Churches, mentioned in the new
testament, planted by the Apostles themselves, making the like apostasy were
subject to the same punishment, then what can privilege the apostate Church of
Rome (which is wholly degenerate from her ancestors, both in purity of
doctrine and holiness of manners and conversation) from the like fearful
judgment; seeing she has matched them, yea and exceeded them all in desperate
and audatious wickedness?

ANd so much concerning the second bill of indictment, and the sentence thereto
annexed. Now follows the third bill and sentence, which from the 6. verse to
the 11. verse are intermixed one with the other: wherein he inditeth,
accuses, and condemns the whole body of the Church and common wealth, both
priests and people; and this he does first jointly, and after more particularly
he sets down both the sins and punishments of the Priests and people. But
I will speak of them as they lie in order. Verse. 6. My people are destroyed
for want of knowledge. Because thou have refused knowledge, I will also refuse
thee, that thou shall be no Priest to me: and seeing thou have forgotten the
Law of thy God, I will also forget thy children. In which Exposition.
words he does more particularly exaggerate that sin of omission, whereof he
accuses them verse 1. namely that there was no knowledge of God in the land;
by showing that not only the people, but also the priests, who should instruct
them, were utterly destitute of this knowledge: and withal specifieth Gods
real controversy, and particular punishments which he was purposed to inflict
upon them. In handling whereof, we will first consider of their sin, and then
of their punishment. Their sin and punishment are jointly expressed in these
words: My people are destroyed for want of knowledge. Their sin was want of
knowledge or ignorance of God and his true Religion: the which sin did lie
heavy both upon the Priests and people: upon the Priests, not only in that
they were culpable of the same ignorance, of which he speaks afterward, but
also as they were causes of the peoples ignorance, and consequently accessory
to their destruction. For whereas they were bound by Gods law and ordinance, to
instruct the people in the knowlegde of God and his true religion, for which
they had great honor and large maintenance allowed them; they seazing upon the
reward and wages, utterly neglected the duty, either through their own
ignorance, because they could not, or through their idleness or
maliciousness, whereby they would not inform them in the knowledge of Gods
truth, but suffered them to run headlong to their destruction.

So likewise this sin of Ignorance did lie heavy upon the people, for
howsoever the Priests utterly neglected their duty in teaching and instructing
them, yet the people were not hereby excused: First, because they willingly
suffered themselves to be hud-winckt by their Priests, and were contented to
be nuzled in ignorance by these blind guides, choosing rather to go on
securely in their sins without admonition or reproof, then to be troubled by
any means in their evil courses. Secondly, because though the Priests
neglected their duty, yet they had Gods Prophets sent unto them, to inform
them in the knowledge of gods truth, whom they despised and refused to hear as
has been showed. Thirdly, in that they had the word and Law of God written,
delivered unto them, out of which through painful reading and meditation they
might have attained unto some knowledge. So that their case was unlike the case
of the Gentiles, who had only the light of nature, and so remained in
ignorance because they wanted the means of saving knowledge: whereas they had
the law and oracles of God committed unto them, the which were faithfully
expounded unto them by Gods Prophets, but they neglected the reading of the
Law, and contemned the admonitions and instructions of the Prophets, and so
were ignorant because they would be ignorant, and loved the darkness of error
better then the light of Gods truth. And this is Emphatically employed, whereas
the Lord does say (not the people but) my people: that is, this my people, with
whom I have made my Covenant, and unto whom I have given my Law, and sent my
Prophets to instruct them in my truth, even they are destroyed for want of
knowledge.

The punishment inflicted both upon Priests and people is destruction: whereby
we are to understand not only that temporary destruction of their body,
state, and country by their enemies, but also their spiritual and everlasting
destruction both of body and soul, for as it is eternal life to John. 17. 3.
know God, his son, and true Religion, so it brings eternal death to be
ignorant of them.

And thus their sin and punishment has been jointly showed: now more
particularly he expresses both the sin and punishment of the Priests. The
sins of the Priests are four; unto every one of which he annexeth a
proportionable punishment: the two first are expressed in this Verse. Because
thou have refused knowledge I will also refuse thee, etc. In which words he
turns his speech, and makes an Apostrophe to the Priests, accusing them of a
twofold sin, and denouncing against them a twofold punishment. Their first
sin was that they had refused or contemned knowledge, the which as it was a
great sin in the people, so most grievous in the Priests; seeing in regard of
their public Ignorance a great sin in the Priests.
calling and function they were bound by the Law of God, not only to have an
extraordinary measure of knowledge themselves, but also to instruct others. So
Deuteronomy. 33. 8. Deuteronomy. 33. 8. 10.
And of Levy he said, let thy Thummim, and thy Vrim be with thy holy one, etc.
And Verse. 10. They shall teach Iaacob thy Judgments and Israel thy Law, etc.
So Mal. 2. 7. For the Mal. 2. 7.
Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his
mouth, for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hoasts.

The knowledge therefore which was required in the Priests, and which in this
place they refused, was such a knowledge, as was proper to their calling and
function; that is, not only a speculatiue knowledge in the brain, but a
practical knowledge, whereby they communicated that they knew to the people,
not alone in the understanding, but in the lips, that is, in speech, publishing
and preaching Gods truth, that the people may seek it from their mouth: not an
idle knowledge, whereby they know to know, and make no use of it; but an
operative knowledge whereby they teach and inform Gods people in his true
religion.

The sin therefore which is here condemned in the priests is, that they usurped
the office of the Priesthood, and challenged the honor, and seized upon the
profits due unto it, but neglected their duty; for thinking it sufficient, to
wear the habit, and offer the Sacrifices, and administer the other
Ceremonies, they refused the chief duty which God required of them; that is,
to teach the people, for they utterly neglected and despised the knowledge of
God and his truth themselves, or at least such a knowledge as their calling
required; for though they had some knowledge in the brain, yet they had none
in the lips; though they had some in speculation, yet through idleness, or
carelessness, or covetousness, or ambition, they made no use of it, for the
instruction of the people, for they were destroyed for want of knowledge.

And this was their sin. The punishment which the Lord does proportionate
unto it is, that because they had refused knowledge, he would refuse them, that
they should be no Priests unto him: where we are to observe, that he speaks
unto them as unto one man in the singular number for the greater Emphasis;
showing that seeing they had joined together as one man in their sin, so they
should be joined as one in the punishment, and not one of them escape.

The punishment it self is, that God would refuse them, and not suffer them to
be his Priests. They could be content to bear the title, and have the honor,
and receive the benefit of Gods Priests, and serve God with a mess of
ceremonies and sacrifices, because these things required small labor, and
brought great profit, so they might neglect the maine duty of all, namely, the
informing themselves in the knowledge of God and his truth, and the teaching
and instructing of the people But the Lord tells them, that by no means he
would suffer these to be severed; and therefore seeing they had refused the
maine and essential duty of the Priesthood, he would refuse them for being
any longer his Priests; if they would not take the pains, he would restrain
them of the gains; if they would not bear the burden, he would pull from
them the honor and reward. So that no knowledge, no Priests to him.

Where we are further to observe a singular Emphasis in the words, for first
the Verb here used, which is translated, I will refuse thee, is in an unusual
form, having (...) extrordinarily added before the affixe: by which increase
of the word, the Lord would intend the signification: namely, that he would
not after an usual manner refuse them, but with great contempt and reproach.
Secondly, whereas he says, I will refuse thee, and thou shall be no Priest to
me; he implies, that howsoever they were allowed as Priests by men, namely,
by the Prince, state and people, yet wanting knowledge he would disavow them;
howsoever they suffered them to perform outward service in the Church, in the
Ceremonies and Sacrifices, yet they should not execute the office of the
Priesthood unto him; neither would he respect any thing they did, seeing they
were ignorant and neglected the maine duty of teaching the people. Though
therefore they were the princes Priests, yet they should be none of his; though
they served the peoples turn, and were fit Priests for their devotions, yet he
would make no account of their service, which was joined with ignorance, and
consequently not performed in spirit and truth.

The second sin is, that they had forgotten the Law of their God; these words
some understand as spoken of the people; but howsoever these by consequence may
be judged culpable of this sin (for if the Priests who should have
continually put the people in mind of Gods Law and Covenant made with them,
had themselves forgotten it, then much more the ignorant people) yet as I take
it, first and principally this sin is condemned in the Priests, because both
the words going before, and the words following are to be understood of them.
The sin is forgetfulness of Gods Law, which is a fruit of their former
sin, namely, their neglect and contempt of it, for etiam senes quae curant
meminerunt, those things are retained in mind even of those who have sliperie
memories, which they regard and care for. Whereas therefore he says, that they
did not so much as remember Gods Law, hereby he intimates that their neglect
and contempt of it was most notorious.

Now whereas he says further, not simply that they had forgotten the law of
God, but of thy God; this also has his emphasis and aggrauats their sin, in
that every people is principally to remember the laws of their own
sovereign, but God was their King, and they had bound themselves by covenant
that they would hear, remember and obey his law, the which covenant they
shamefully broke, for so far were they from obeying Gods law that they would
not so much as take any notice of it, or vouchsafe it a place in their memory.

The punishment threatened is proportionable to the sin, namely that God
likewise would forget their children; the which is spoken after the manner of
men, that he might the better fit himself to their capacity: for if we
speak properly, God cannot be said to forget or remember, seeing all things
past, present, and to come, are present before him in one perfect view: but
hereby he would signify unto them, that as they had so neglected his law,
that they did not so much as remember it, so he would utterly neglect them, and
withdraw from them all signs of his love and care, as if he had utterly
forgotten them and his covenant made with them. Now whereas he says that he
would forget their children: the meaning is that he would destroy the
Priesthood: for ordinarily the children succeeded the parents in the Priests
office; but now he tells them that he would not only strip them of this
honor, but their posterity also, and so make the priesthood to cease: for
whereas he threatens the children, he much more includes the parents; for if
the heat of Gods wrath extended to the children, for their fathers sins;
much more should it be inflamed against the fathers themselves.

Lastly, whereas he speaking of the Priests sin, says that they had
forgotten his Law; and of his own punishment, that he would forget their
children: hereby is employed Gods merciful justice and man's impiety, in that
God does not forget them, before they have forgotten him; and therefore if God
at any time neglect and forget his people, it is manifest that it is because
they have neglected and forgotten him first.

And thus have I showed the meaning of the words: the doctrines which arise out
of them are diverse. The first thing That ignorance is a great sin in the
people.
to be observed is, that if a people live in ignorance of God and his religion,
for want of teaching and instruction, the Lord condemns it as a great sin,
both in the ministers and people In the ministers, in that they neglect their
duty, and either through their insufficiency or idleness, suffer them to go
on in the ways of darkness to their perdition, whereby they become
accessarie, yea principal causes of their destruction, of which I shall speak
afterward. And in the people, in that they are content to live in their
ignorance, and voluntarily submit themselves to be led by such blind guids, as
cannot inform them in the ways of the Lord. For they should have care of
their own souls, though others neglect it: they should count this one thing
necessary, to be instructed in the knowledge of gods truth, and prefer it
before their worldly affairs; they should wanting this precious pearl of gods
word, rather sell all they have to purchase it, then content themselves to be
without it; they should themselves read, study, and meditate in the
scriptures, which are sufficient to make them wise to salvation, especially
when the ordinary means fail.

But this sin is much more heinous in the people, if they continue in ignorance
when as the Lord gives them liberally the means of knowledge; if they
wilfully shut their eyes when the light of Gods word clearly shines unto them;
if they continue blind because they will not see; if they refuse to hear the
word preached, or neglect and despise it when they hear it, as not worth the
knowing or remembering; if they choose rather to be under blind guides, because
they would not be troubled with hearing and learning, or with admonitions and
reprehensions (whereas they rather desire to live quietly and securely in their
sins) then under faithful and painful Ministers, who would disturb their
ease and awake their consciences out of the sleep of sin, for such living in
ignorance are without excuse, and for want of knowledge shall most certainly
be destroyed.

The second thing to be observed is, that where the people The people shall be
destroyed which want knowledge.
are destitute of knowledge for want of instruction, there the people and
ministers shall be destroyed. The people first, because they content themselves
with such blind guids and willingly remain in their ignorance: secondly,
because wanting knowledge they deprive themselves of all means whereby they may
be saved, for those whom God has elected to salvation as to the end, he has
also ordained that they should use the means, whereby they may attain to
salvation; that is, that they should be effectually called, justified, and
sanctified; but none can attain to any of these means without the knowledge
of God and his religion: for whomsoever God effectually calls, those with his
word and holy spirit he illuminateth with the knowledge of his will, their
own misery, the work of redemption wrought by Christ, and with other
principles and fundamental points of Religion; without then this knowledge
there is no effectual calling. So likewise no justification, for whosoever are
justified they are also endued with a lively faith, whereby they apply unto
themselves the merits and sufferings of Christ; but without knowledge there is
no faith, for we cannot believe and be certainly persuaded of that whereof
we are ignorant, and consequently no justifycation. In a word without
knowledge there is no sanctifycation; for knowledge is the foundation of all
virtue and obedience, without which we can neither choose the good nor refuse
the evil. Now without these means there is no salvation, neither is there any
saved, but those who are effectually called, justified and sanctified; and
therefore it necessarily follows, that they who want knowledge, are
destroyed. This might be proved more particularly, whether we respect the
temporary destruction of the body and state, or the eternal destruction of the
soul, but that I have already handled this point before, entreating of the
first verse of this Chapter.

But if this want of knowledge in the people, proceed from the insufficiency
or idleness of their ministers, then does it bring destruction to them also,
as being the causes of their ruin. This the Lord threatens. Ezech. 3. 18. and
33. 8. Ezech. 3. 18. and 33. 8.
When I shall say to the wicked, O wicked man thou shall dye the the death, if
thou do not speak and admonish the wicked man of his way, that wicked man
shall dye for his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hand. To which
Paul seems to allude Act. 20. 26. Where approving his pains in his
ministry, Act. 20. 26.
he says, he was pure from the blood of all men: From which place Gregory
thus concludes: tot occidimus, quot ad mortem ire tepidi and tacentes videmus.
We murder (says he) so many as we see going the way to destruction, and
carelessly hold our peace.

The use of this doctrine serves to teach us in what a miserable estate such a
people are, who content themselves to live in ignorance, whether they want the
means of knowledge, or having them do neglect and contemn them, seeing they
live in their sins, without any hope to attain unto salvation, or to escape
destruction. Those that want the means cannot be excused, if they do not
labor after them, seeing Christ has taught us, that this one thing is most
necessary, John. 6. 27.
and more to be desired then our bodily food: in the obtaining whereof
whosoever employ themselves, they are preferred before such as give worldly
entertainment to Christ himself, as appears, Luke 10. 39 40. 41. 42. That
Luke 10. 39. 40
it is of greater value then all worldly wealth, and therefore if we want it,
we are rather to sell all we have, to purchase this precious pearl, then to
be without it. Whereas these Mat. 13. 45.
men esteem this invaluable jewel, of all other things least necessary, and
will not part with the least worldly benefit for the obtaining of it. But much
more do those offend, and accordingly shall more fearfully be punished, who
having the means of knowledge, the preaching of the Gospel, do neglect and
contemn it, who walk in the dark ways of ignorance, because they wilfully
shut their eyes when the brightlight of the Gospel shines unto them, and
continue destitute of knowledge, because they stop their ears, not vouchsafing
to hear instruction: and yet in the mean time these men have a strong
conceit, that they shall attain unto salvation: as though the way to heaven
were so direct and straight, that they could easily find it, though they go
blinde-fold, and not so much as desire a guide: quite contrary to the whole
course of Scripture, wherein the Lord has taught us, that his will is, that
those who shall be saved, shall also come to the knowledge of his truth. 1 Timothy
2. 4. 1 Timothy 2. 4.
That it is the only means to attain unto life eternal, to know God and his
son Jesus Christ. John. 17. 3. That those Ioh. 17. 5.
whose feet are to travail in the way of peace, must first be illightened
with the knowledge of Salvation. Luke. 1. 77. 78. Luke 1. 77. 78.
79. And contrariwise that they who sit in darkness, they also sit in the
shadow of death, as it is in the same place, that they are strangers from the
life of God. Ephesians. 4. 18. That the Lord Ephesians. 4. 18.
will render vengeance to those that do not know him. 2 These. 2 These. 1. 8.
1. 8. And that they shall be destroyed, as it is in this place.

The second use concerns the ministers, serving for an The Ministers must
teach the people.
effectual argument to persuade them, that they perform their duty, in
teaching and instructing the people, least wanting instruction, they also want
knowledge, and so be made subject to utter destruction. Whereby it will come to
pass, that those Ministers, who through their negligence are the causes
hereof, shall being guilty of their sins, be also destroyed with them. Now if
the weight of a man's own sin be an intolerable burden, what will become of
those, who shall bear the weight not only of their own sin, but also of
their whole congregation, unto which through their idleness or insufficiency
they have been accessarie?

Thirdly, it serves for the reproof of the Papists, who The papists labor
to keep the people in blindness.
by all means possible, labor to keep the people in blindness and
ignorance, by taking away from them the light of Gods word both read and
preached, that so keeping them blindfold, they may abuse them at pleasure, and
like carrion Crows having picked out their eyes, may make a pray of them. But
let all know, that what fair shows soever they make, and how curiously
soever they paint over this rotten post, with the colors of their devotion,
whereby they underprop the ruinous building of their high raised Hirarchie; yet
in very truth by depriving the people of knowledge, they deprive them also of
salvation, and make them subject to utter destruction, and so consequently they
make themselves guilty both of their sin and ruin; of both which they have
been the principal causes.

The third thing to be observed is, that as the want of knowledge is a sin in
all men, so especially in the Minister, That ignorance is a grievous sin in
the Ministers.
whether we understand it of that sufficiency of knowledge which he ought to
have in himself, whereby he is enabled to teach the people, or the fruitful
use of this knowledge for the instruction of the people; for of him is
required, not only the faculty but also the function; not only that he has
knowledge in the brain, but also in his lips; not only that he has light in
himself, but also that he gives light to others; not only that he know the
way to Gods kingdom, but also that he inform those committed to his charge in
this way. Here therefore is first condemned the ignorance and insufficiency of
the Minister; whereby he is utterly disabled for the performing of his duty
in teaching the people, the which is a heinous sin in Gods sight, as may
appear by these reasons: first, in that they thrust themselves into this great
work of the Ministry being altogether unfurnished of those gifts which should
fit them for this function: for above all other things it is required in a
Minister that he be fit to teach. 1. Tim. 3. 2. and Tim. 2. 2 but these cannot
teach others, being themselves ignorant. 1. Tim. 3. 2. 2. Tim. 2. 2. Mat. 5. 14.
Gods true ministers are the Light of the world. Math. 5. 14. appointed by God
to illuminate those who sit in darkness and in the shadow of death; Luke 1.
77. 78. but these men wanting the light of knowledge in themselves, cannot give
Luke 1. 77. 78
light unto others, and so they sit both together in the shadow of death: if
then they who should be the light are darkness how great is that darkness Mat.
6. 23. The minister in the Church is as the eye in the body, and the knowledge
Mat. 6. 23.
of the Minister, as the sight in the eye, such Ministers then as want
knowledge, they are stark blind, as the Lord himself plainly concludes.
Esaias. 56. 10. Their watchmen are blind, Esaias. 56. 10.
they have no knowledge: and consequently when these are in stead of guides,
then the blind do lead the blind and so they fall both into the pit, as our
Savior speaks. Mat. 15. 14. Mat. 15. 14.


The Ministers are the mouth of God unto the people, and the mouth of the
people unto God: but these men are dumb and cannot speak, they are the
messengers of the Lord of hoasts, Mal. 2. 7. Hag. 1. 13. by whose embassage
there is peace concluded, and reconciliation made between God Mal. 2. 7. Hag.
1. 13.
and man: 2 Cor. 5. 18. 20. but these men are altogether unfit for these
offices, seeing they cannot do their message, 2 Cor. 5. 18. 20
nor deliver their embassage. They are the nurses of Gods children, who nourish
them with the milk of the word, that they may grow up there by: 1 Pet. 2. 2.
but these men having dry breasts, do starve the Lords people, and so are no
better 1 Pet. 2. 2.
then murderers in his sight. They are Gods shepherds to feed his Lambs:
John. 21. 15. but these ignorant shepherds non pascunt, sed depascunt gregem,
they feed not the John. 21. 15.
flock, but feed upon it, they eat the milk, and cloth themselves with the
wool, but lead them not into the green pastures of Gods truth, but let them
perish for want of food; and therefore a fearful woe lies upon them, as
appears. Ezech. 34. 2. 3. Gods faithful Ministers are his Stewards, who have
in their storehouse new and old, and do give to Ezech. 34. 2. 3.
every one of the family their portion in due season: Luke. 12. 42. but these
men have no store of provision, neither Luke 12. 42.
have they any skill to divide this spiritual food of the word aright, and so
famish the family, and disgrace their master. Esaias. 22. 22.
They are the guides and Captains of the Lord of hoasts, to go before the
people toward the heavenly Canaan, and teach them so to handle their weapons,
that they may repel and overcome their enemies, who assault them in the way,
and labor to hinder them from going forward in this spiritual march, but these
men do not know the way themselves and therefore cannot direct others. They are
not used to the spiritual armor, nor know how to handle the sword of the
spirit, and therefore are utterly unfit to train up others, or to make them
fit for this spiritual war-fare. They are the salt of the earth, and knowledge
is the sauoury saltness of this salt: but these men wanting knowledge, are
unsavory salt, which is good for nothing, no not for the dunghill, but
deserves to be cast out and trodden under foot. Luke 14. Luke 14. 34. 35
34. 35. that is, to be condemned and despised of all men, the which
punishment the Lord threatens. Mal. 2. 9. Mal. 2. 9.


Secondly, such ignorant Ministers do grievously sin, in Ignorant Ministers
usurp an office unto which they are not called.
that they presumptuously take upon them, this great office, unto which they
are not called of God; for whomsoever the Lord calls to any function, those
he inableth in some measure to discharge the duty which he requires of them,
for his calling is effectual and ministers efficacy to those whom he calls,
to effect those duties whereunto he calls them. As soon as he called
Aholiab and Bezalcell, to build his Exo. 35. 30. 31.
Tabernacle, he endued them with wisdom and skill fit for the work; and how
much more will he furnish with knowledge, and spiritual wisdom, those whom
he chooses to build up his Church? There is no wise man, will choose him for
his Carpenter, who is ignorant in building; or for his Husbandman, who has no
skill in husbandry; or for his Shepherd, who has no discretion to feed his
Sheep: and shall we think God less wise or provident then mortal man? No
assuredly, those whom he appoynteth to be lights he first illumina^^^, that so
they may give light unto others: those whom he makes eyes in the spiritual
body of the Church, he endueth with the sight of knowledge, whereby they may be
enabled to guide and direct the members of the body: the mouths of his making
for his own use and service, are not dumb nor tongue-tyed: those messengers
and ambassadors which are of his sending, are wise and willing to deliver his
message; for he that condemns this in others, Prou. 26. 6.
will not approve it in his own practice: those whom he appoints nurses to
his children, have the milk of knowledge in their breasts, neither would the
Lord commit his little infants, to such as would starve them for want of milk:
he never made them his shepherds, who have no food for his sheep; nor them
his stewards who have no provision in store, nor wisdom to give fit
nourishment to his family: he never made blind men to be his guides; nor
fresh water soldiers to be his Captains: and the salt of his making is
sauoury in it self, and fit to season that which is unsavory. It follows
therefore, that seeing they are not called of God; that they run before they
are sent, like those false Prophets Ier. 14. 14. 15. and are gross intruders
into those offices in Ier. 14. 14. 15.
which they have no skill; for which intrusion, they shall one day make a
fearful account. For if it be intolerable for any to profess himself an
ambassador, when as he was never sent by his Prince, nor has received any
message from him: how much more horrible is it for a sinful man, by intrusion
to usurp the place and dignity of Gods Ambassador, whom the Lord never
called to this office and function?

Thirdly, this sin of ignorance is heinous in the Minister, Ignorant
Ministers destroy both their own and other men's souls.
in that it destroys not only his own soul, but brings destruction to
the people, because hereby they are deprived of the preaching of the word, the
ordinary means whereby they should be saved. So the wise man teaches us. Prou.
29. 18. Where there is no vision there the people decay. The reason Prou. 29.
18.
is apparent, for whomsoever the Lord in his eternal counsel, has purposed to
preserve from destruction, and to elect unto salvation, he has ordained in the
same eternal counsel that those shall use the subordinate means, whereby they
may be saved: as first, that being elected they should be also effectually
called; being called they should be justified; that being justified they should
be sanctified; and so being sanctified they should also be gloryfied, as
appears. Romans 8. 30 Romans 8. 30.
But all these the Lord ordinarily effects by the Ministry of the Word, as
may appear in the particulars. For first, the ordinary means of our
effectual calling, is the preaching of the Gospel, as appears Ephe. 4. 11.
12. He therefore gave Ephesians. 4. 11. 12
some to be Apostles, and some Evangelists, and some Pastort and Teachers:
for the gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, and
for the edification of the body of Christ. So he says, that by the Gospel we
are called to that salvation, unto which we were elected, and to obtain the
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2 These. 2. 13. 14. And this is signified in
the 2. These. 2. 13. 14.
Parable, where all that come to the wedding supper are called thereunto by the
kings servants. Math. 22. 2. 3. Mat. 22. 2. 3.


So we are justified by faith, whereby we lay hold upon Christ, who is our
justification: but this faith is ordinarily begot in us by the ministry of the
word preached. Romans 10. Romans 10. 14. 15. 17.
14. 15. 17. And hence it is that this word is called the word of Faith. Verse
8. And the dispensers thereof the ministers 8.
by whom we believe. 1 Cor. 3. 5. Therefore without the 1. Cor. 3. 5.
preaching of the word ordinarily there is no Faith, and without Faith no
Justification.

The third means to salvation is our sanctification, which is a necessary
effect of our justification, for they that are in Christ, are new creatures. 2
Cor. 5. 17. But we are sanctified 2. Cor. 5. 17.
and regenerate, not of mortal seed but of immortal, by the word of God. 1
Pet. 1. 23. And hence it is that the Ministers of the 1. Peter. 1. 23.
Gospel, who are the dispensers of this immortal seed, are called the
spiritual fathers of those whom they beget unto God. 1 Cor. 4. 15. Therefore
take away the Ministry 1. Cor. 4. 15.
of the word, and take away regeneration; without which we cannot enter into
the kingdom of heaven. Ioh. 3. 3. John. 3. 3.


Lastly as the means of Salvation, so salvation it self is ascribed to the
Ministry of the word preached; for Paul exhorting Timothy to faithful
diligence in his Ministry, does use this as an effectual reason, because
hereby He should save not only himself but also those that heard him. 1 Timothy
4. 16. 1. Tim. 4. 16.


Seeing therefore the preaching of the word is the ordinary means of
salvation, hence it follows that the neglect of this preaching is the
ordinary means which brings destruction; and consequently such Ministers as
take upon them the charge of souls, and do not feed them with this bread of
life, are principal causes whereby those People are destroyed.

The use of this doctrine serves for the admonition of Sufficiency of gifts
necessarily required in Ministers.
diverse sorts of men, and for their reproof if they neglect this admonition.
First all intending the Ministry, or having taken the charge upon them, are
to be admonished that they seriously examine themselves, whether they are
furnished with knowledge and other gifts necessarily required to this calling;
otherwise they are not to enter into it, if already they have not undertaken
it, or not to continue in this calling if they be already entered: for what
will it profit them to get thereby worldly mainteynance, or an easy and idle
life, if they through their ignorance and insufficiency, neglecting their
duty, destroy not only their own souls, but also the precious souls of the
people committed to their charge.

Secondly, Parents are here admonished, that they do not Parents must not
offer the lame and hault to God.
offer the lame, hault, and sick unto God, that is, that they do not prefer
to the service of the sanctuary, such of their children, as in respect of
their insufficiency of gifts are unfit for any other vocation, and therefore
much more unfit for this, unto which the best gifts are scarce sufficient; for
what are such children behoulding to their Parents for providing them
maintenance by placing them in this calling, seeing by providing for their
bodies for a time, they destroy both body and soul for ever, and make them
also the causes of the destruction of others? in which respect they should
deal better with them if they made them prentises to the basest trades,
wherein they might live in the fear of God with a good conscience.

Thirdly, it admonishes Patrons and Church governors, that the one present
not, the other admit not into pastoral No ignorant men ought to be preferred
to the function of the Miniestrie.
charges, such as through their ignorance must of necessity starve their
flock; for if they either through foolish pity, friendship, or corruption,
commit the souls of men to be nourished by such nurses, as in their own
knowledge they they are assured have dry breasts, and cannot give unto them the
sincere milk of the Word, not only these who are the next and immediate
causes of their destruction shall perish with them, but also they who being
placed as Stewards in Gods family, have showed so little care in providing
food for his children and servants.

Lastly, it serves to admonish the people, that they do The people must not
seat themselves under blind guides.
not rest contented to be still lead by such blind guides, nor to be under the
charge of such ignorant and unskillful shepherds, as have no knowledge to
feed them; for what will it profit them, if by living in such places they may
have plenty for their bodies, if in the mean while their souls, are starued?
what benefit will they have by any worldly conueniencie in their place of
abode; the neighborhood of their friends; the goodness of the air; the
pleasantness of the seat; the fitness of living there for to gain in their
trade or calling: yea, what if in every respect it be like the seat of Sodom,
which was pleasant and fruitful as the Garden of Genesis 13. 10.
God; if for want of instruction, it be a Sodom also in ignorance and sin,
which with the inhabitants thereof must one day be destroyed? There is no man
so foolish that would be allured either by pleasure or profit, to dwell in a
place where there is no bread to preserve the life of his body, but much more
foolish are they who are incited by these baits to live in such a place where
there is no food for the soul. No man would dwell in a town which is
assaulted by enemies, and has no watchman to give warning of their approach,
though the place were both pleasant and profitable, for what would it advantage
him to have wealth and all delights, if he be in a continual fear that he
shall be destroyed? but we in this world have not only our spiritual enemies
to assault us, but also whole armies of Gods judgments ready to invade us, if
we live in sin and ignorance; if therefore we want a watch man to give us
warning of the approach of these enemies and judgments, that by putting on the
spiritual armor, we may be enabled to repel the one, and by returning unto
God our king, whom by our sins we have offended, we may be preserved from the
other, what will the profits and pleasures of this life benefit us, seeing we
are daily in danger to be destroyed? For as our Savior says. Mar. 8. 36.
What will it profit a man if he shall win the whole Mar. 8. 36.
world, if he shall loose his own soul. Rather therefore let us follow Maryes
example, that is, howsoever we think worldly things convenient, yet let us
judge this one thing necessary. Luke. 10. 42. And the practice of the wise
Merchant approved Luke 10. 42.
by our Savior Christ, that is, let us rather sell all we have to purchase
this precious pearl of Gods Word, then content our selves to live without it.
Mat. 13. 45. 46. Mat. 13. 45. 46


And thus have I showed, that it is a great sin in the The greatness of their
sin who having knowledge do not teach the people.
Minister to undertake this calling, when through ignorance he is unable to
teach the people: the like may be said of those, who having knowledge and
learning do not instruct the people; either through idleness, carelesnes,
covetousness, ambition or want of a good conscience. For howsoever they have
never so great a measure of knowledge, yet if we speak of such knowledge, as
is required to the office and function of a Minister, they have only so much as
they make use of in Idle Ministers as bad as ignorant Ministers.
their Ministry; and therefore if they use little or none at all, they have
little or none of that knowledge which is required of them. The Lord requires
not only that the Priests head, but also his lips should preserve knowledge,
and that the people from his mouth should seek instruction. Mal. 2. 7. Mal. 2.
7.
Not only that they have the profound knowledge of the learned, but that they
have the tongue of the learned, to minister Esa. 50. 4.
a word in time to him that is weary, as it is Esaias. 50. 4. Not only that they
have the tallent; but also that they use the tallent. Not only that they have
store of provision, but also that they do distribute it to the relieuing of
Gods people: which duty if they neglect, they are no better then ignorant
Ministers; nay they are worse, if we respect their own minds, and full as
bad if we respect the peoples benefit. They are worse in themselves, for they
are more to be condemned, who can instruct them and will not, then they that
would and cannot, for they are like unto rich but hard-harted cornemorants, who
having their barnes and garners full of corn, let the people famish for want
of food, or at least like Monopolists, having ingrosed these spiritual
commodities, they will not utter them but at excessive rates; either when they
are largely feed, or hope thereby to attain unto great credit or preferment.
Where as the other let the people perish for want of provision, and furnish not
the market because their warehouses are empty. The ignorant Ministers are in
themselves dark and cannot give light; the idle learned Ministers have light
indeed, but whereas they should set it in the Candlestick of the Church, they
hide it in their studyes, as under a bushel, and will not lighten others: they
are like blind eyes, which cannot guide the people in the paths of Gods
truth; these eyes which wilfully winck and will not give direction; and who so
blind as they who will not see? they are dumb and cannot speak; these
sullenly silent and will not speak; they cannot deliver Gods embassage because
they want wit; these will not deliver it, and will not because they will not:
they starve their children which they have taken upon them to nurse, because
they have dry breasts; these have milk enough, but herein more cruel then
the savage Dragons, they will not take pains to draw them out. Lamen. 4. 3.
They are ignorant shepherds, Lamen. 4. 3.
and cannot feed Christ's flock; these are idle shepherds, who will not
endure the labor; or covetous shepherds, who taking upon them the charge of
diverse flocks in diverse places, whilst they are with the one, of necessity
suffer the other to starve, or to be devoured of the wolf; or at the best
commit them to the keeping of hirelings, in whom they cannot expect that care
and conscience which they want themselves: seeing they are the principal,
these but deputies: they bound to painfulnesse with the strong cable of their
charge; these with the weak thread of some small stipend. Or if gain be the
inducement to both, to take the care and pains, then it is not likely that the
hireling will be moved to take this care and pains for ten or twenty pounds,
seeing themselves have a hundred or two hundred pounds, and yet neglect it.
Howsoever it is, it is sure, that these ingrossers of Benefices greatly offend
whatsoever their deputy be; for if insufficient they then betray their flock
by committing them to one who cannot feed them; if sufficient, then they
offend against him in taking from him unjustly the reward of his labors; for
he that feeds the flock is to have the wool to cloth him, and the milk to
feed him, and not he who takes no pains about them.

But as they are worse in themselves, then ignorant Ministers, so as bad to the
people; for it is all one to these hungry souls, whether their Ministers
suffer them to starve, either because they have no provision of food, or
because having store they will not communicate it for their relief; saving
that it is a greater torment to the mind to starve in the sight of meat, or
to perish with thirst in the sight of water; and a greater grief to perish
helpless in the presence of those upon whom we rely for help, when having
power they want will to relieve us, then when having will they want power. It
is all one to the people whether their guides are blind or always wincke;
whether there be no light at all, or it be hid from them under a bushel;
whether they hear not Gods embassage because they cannot, or because they will
not deliver it; whether their nurses want milk themselves or will not suffer
them to suck it; whether they have ignorant shepherds that cannot feed them,
or idle shepherds that will not feed them; whether they perish for want of
knowledge, because their Ministers cannot teach them, or because having
knowledge he will not teach them.

The use of this doctrine serves, first to persuade all who Arguments to
persuade Ministers to painful diligence in their calling
have undertaken the great work of the Ministry, and have received from God
some sufficiency of gifts for the discharge thereof, that they do with all
diligence, care, and conscience, labor to perform the duties which belong to
this high calling; which that they may the rather do, I will propound some
arguments to this purpose: of which some allure and persuade, some force and
constrain, to the faithful and painful preaching of the Word. The arguments
First Gods commandment.
which may persuade here unto are, first the commandment of God. Matthew. 28.
19. Go and teach all nations, etc. Mat. 28. 19.
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. Mark. 16.
15. Go ye into all the world and preach Mar. 16. 15.
the gospel. Act. 20. 28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, Act. 20 28.
and to all the flock whereof the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed
the Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood. 2 Timothy 4. 1. I
charge thee therefore before God 2. Tim. 4. 1. 2.
and before the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall judge the quick and the dead at
his appearing and in his kingdom. 2. Preach the Word, be instant in season and
out of season, improve, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and doctrine. 1
Pet. 5. 2. Feed 1. Peter. 5. 2.
the flock of Christ which depends upon you, caring for it not by constraint
but willingly, not for filthy lucre but of a ready mind.

The second motive may be taken from the love of God; The second motive taken
from the love of God.
for if God the father has so loved us, that he has not spared to give unto
us his son; and God the son, that he has not spared to give himself for
us, that his precious death might be the price of our redemption; and God the
holy Ghost, that he continually labors to apply unto us the virtue of
Christ's death and merits for our justification and salvation, dwelling in us as
in his temples, enriching us with the invaluable treasures of his gifts and
graces, and assisting and protecting us against the malice and fury of our
spiritual enemies; more especially if we who are poor miserable and sinful
men, are called by God to this high function, to be his ambassadors, and to be
as the eye in the body of the Church, as captains and leaders over his armies,
as stewards over his family, as shepherds over his flock, then most
ungrateful are we of all other men. if we do not most dearly love the Lord,
who has thus infinitely loved us. But we cannot better express this our love,
then in feeding his flock, and by faithful performance of his ambassadge
committed unto us, that we may in Christ reconcile men unto him, according to
that speech of our Savior to Peter. John. 21. 15. Ioh. 21. 15.
Simon the son of Iona love thou me more then these? feed my lambs. And
therefore if we would testify our love to Christ, we must be painful in our
Ministry, and not suffer our selves to be with-drawne from the faithful
execution of this function, by trifling occasions, pleasures, idleness,
profit, ambition, or any worldly respect. The third motive the necessity of
preaching for the building of the Church.


The third motive is, that we consider that the Ministry of the word, is the
means ordained by God for the planting, building, enlarging, strengthening and
upholding of the Church: so the Apostle Peter says, that we are borne a new,
not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the word of God who lives and
endures for ever. 1 Pet. 1. 23. And he adds 1 Peter. 1. 23. 25.
Verse 25. This is the word which is preached among you. And in this respect
Paul calls himself a Planter. 1. Cor. 3. 6. 1. Cor. 3. 6.
And the spiritual father of the Corinthians, who by the seed of the Word had
begotten them unto God. 1 Cor. 4. 15. It 1. Cor. 4. 15.
is the means also of the spiritual growth of the Church, nourishing all the
members thereof, till they come to ripe age and full growth: for therein babes
have milk to suck. 1. Cor. 1. Cor. 3. 2.
3. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 2 And there also is strong meat, for those that 1. Peter. 2.
2.
Heb. 5. 12. and 6. 1.
are past their childhood. Heb. 5. 12. 14. and 6. 1. In a word, it is the
means to make the man of God perfect and absolute, as appears, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
The whole Scripture is given 2. Tim. 3. 16.
by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, and
to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute, being made
perfect unto all good works. But most excellently are all these comprised
together. Ephe. 4. 11. He Ephe. 4. 11.
gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers. 12. For the gathering together of the Saints, and for
the work of the Ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ. 13.
Till we all meet together (in the unity of faith and knowledge of the Son
of God) unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the fulness of
Christ. If therefore we desire the birth, growth and perfection of the Church
of God, which ought to be more dear to us then our own salvation; then let us
use all faithful diligence in the preaching of the Word, which is the means
sanctified by God for this purpose; we pray daily that Gods kingdom may come,
that is, may be increased, strengthened, and accomplished in all perfection,
but by the Ministry of the Word all these are effected, and therefore if we
desire that we pray for, (which all do that are not Hypocrites) then must we
use this means, ordained by God for the effecting this our desire.

The fourth motive is taken from the consideration of our The fourth motive
taken from the Ministers calling. Mat. 28. 19.
place and calling in the Church; for the Minister is called not only to be a
Disciple of Christ, but also to make Disciples, as the word (...), signifies.
Mat. 28. 19. He must not only be a soldier of Christ, but a captain, to
conduct others to the heavenly Canaan; he must not only be a seruent, but a
steward, to give every one in the family his portion in due season; he ought to
be not only a sheep of Christ, but a shepherd, to feed the flock and defend
them from the Wolf; he must not only be a living stone in Gods Temple, as
other Christians, 1 Pet. 2. 5. but he must be a 1 Pet. 2. 5.
master builder. 1. Cor. 3. 10. Not only a Plant in Gods 1 Cor. 3. 10.
Garden, Can. 4. 13. but a Gardener to plant and water others. Cant. 4. 13. 1
Cor. 3. 6. 9.
1 Cor. 3. 6. 9. Not only a child of God, but also a spiritual Father,
begetting others unto Christ by the seed of the 1 Cor. 4. 15.
Word. In a word, he must not only be careful of his own salvation, but he
must also show the like care in saving others. 1 Timothy 4. 16. And therefore it
will not excuse those who 1 Timothy 4. 16.
have entered into this calling, that they line peaceably, love their neigbours,
deal justly, be liberal to the poor, keep good hospitality, and abstain
from offering the least wrong and injury, which are duties belonging to all
Christians, if they neglect their public Ministry, and for want of teaching,
suffer the people committed unto them, to be destroyed.

The fifth motive is the promise of reward, unto those who The fifth motive taken
from the promise of reward.
by their faithful diligence in preaching the word, gain souls unto Christ,
and build up the Church of God: For the wise shall shine as the brightness of
the Firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness as the Stars for
ever and ever. Dan. 12. 3. The faithful Steward that gives the servants meat
Dan. 12. 3.
in due season shall be blessed, and be made Heir of all his masters riches.
Mat. 24. 45. 46. Those that with Timothy take Mat. 24. 45. 46.
heed to themselves and unto learning, and continue therein shall save both
themselves and those that hear them. 1 Timothy 4. 16. 1. Tim. 4. 16.
Those the Lords Captains, who with Paul have fought a good sight, finished
their course and have kept the faith, may with him assuredly expect the crown
of righteousness which is laid up for them. 2 Timothy 4. 7. 8. 2. Tim. 4. 6. 8.


But if these reasons will not allure and persuade us, there The sixth motive
taken from the woe denounced against the negligent. Ezech. 34. 2.
are others which may force and constrain us, to be painful in the
Ministry: first, because there is a fearful woe denounced against those who
neglect this duty, and whilst they feed themselves starve the flock. Ezech.
34. 2. The which woe the Apostle acknowledges due to himself, if he did not
preach the gospel. 1 Cor. 9. 16. And indeed 1. Cor. 9. 16.
most woeful is the condition of such idle shepherds seeing the Lord does
threaten to come against them as their enemy, to take vengeance on them.
Ezech. 34. 10. into whose Ezech. 34. 10.
hands it is a fearful thing to fall, Heb. 10. 31* because he Heb. 10. 31.
and 12. 2^.
is a consuming fire, and his enemies as stubble before him. Chap. 12. 29.

Secondly, because negligent Ministers are accursed; for The seventh, from the
curse denounced against idle Ministers.
if a curse belongs to them who withdraw corn from the people, Prou. 11. 26.
what are they to expect who with-hould from them this spiritual Manna, the
food of their souls, which should nourish them to life eternal? surely both
are cursed The difference is, they are cursed by the people, these by God
himself; for if the Lord pronounces them accursed, that do the work of
destruction negligently, when he requires it, as appears, Ier. 48. 10. then
much Ier. 48. 10.
more accursed is he, who negligently performs the work of salvation, which
by a certain kind of eminency is called the work of God, 1. Cor. 16. 10.
for howsoever the 1. Cor. 16. 10.
other be his work yet it is his strange work, Esaias 28. 21. Esaias 28. 18.
whereas this is a work of his nature, even of his mercy in which he much
delights. The eight, because their gifts die for want of use. Mat. 25. 28.


Thirdly, because negligent Ministers, not using the gifts which they have
received from god, are stripped of them, according to that, Mat. 25. 28. take
therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him that has ten Talents. And
this is that judgment denounced against the idle shepherds. Zach. 11. Zach.
11. 17.
17. O Idol shepherd, that leaves the stocks: the sword shall be upon his
arm, and upon his right eye: His arm shall be clean dried up, and his right
eye shall be utterly darkened: that is, they shall be so weakened in Gods gifts,
that they shall be unable to perform the work of the Ministry, and so darkened
in their understanding, that they shall not discorne the mysteries of
salvation, much less be able to teach others. The fearful execution of which
judgment we have seen in many Ministers of our times, whose breasts have
grown dry, because for idleness they would not draw them out to give the
people suck, whereas the painful Ministers are like euerspringing
fountains, which though they are still drawn, yet are never dry.

Fourthly, because through the negligence of the Minister, The fourth, because
he is guilty of the peoples destruction Prou. 29. 18.
the people want knowledge, and so are destroyed, as it is in this place. To
this accords that. Prou. 29. 18. Where there is no vision, the people decay.
Of which destruction idle Ministers are not only accessaries, but also
principal causes; whereof it is, that the Lord plainly says, that the idle
shepherds who did not feed his sheep, did devour them. Ezech. Ezech. 34. 8. 10
34. 8. 10. And therefore affirms, that he will require his sheep at their
hands, as being guilty of their blood. Now if the murdering and destroying of
one body be a fearful sin, and will make an heavy reckoning at the day of
judgment, what shall we think of their sin and account, who have murdered
the bodies and souls of many hundreds committed to their charge, not with a
momentany and temporal, but with a spiritual and everlasting death?

Lastly, this may enforce all to avoid slothful idleness in The last, because
they are guilty of condemnation.
their Ministry, in that they make themselves subject hereby to eternal
condemnation. For the unprofitable servant, who having received a tallent of
his master, and idly hides it, never using it for his masters glory, nor
for the good of his fellow-seruants, must be cast into utter darkness, where
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Mat. 25. 30. O then what will Mat. 25.
10.
it profit such negligent Ministers that they have passed their time in
idleness, pomp and pleasure, when as they shall bear the punishment, not
only of their own sin, but of theirs also, whom by their negligence they
have destroyed? what will it avail them, that they have heaped living upon
living, seeing hereby they have multiplied both their sin and condemnation?
what will that excuse pleasure them, that they have committed over the charge
of the souls undertaken by them, to a substitute or attorney; seeing at this
great Audit their Attorney shall not be suffered to answer for them, but they
shall be constrained to render an account in their own person But most
fearful will their state be, who to save charges and avoid pains, have made
choice of ignorant and insufficient men, to be their substitutes, more fit to
be Neat-heards, or Swine-heards, then the shepherds of the Lords sheep: like
Vzzah, who committed the Arc to be drawn in a Cart, which he should have
carried upon his own shoulder; so they commit the burden of God's Ark, the
Church, to such as are little better then Carters, and think it sufficient, if
once or twice in a year they put to their hand and sustain it, when (as it
were) it tottereth and is ready to fall But such are to expect, if not the like
sudden, yet a more fearful judgment then that which happened to Vzzah, who in
Gods fierce wrath was smitten with 1 Chro. 15. 12. 13. 2 Samuel 6. 7.
death. 2 Samuel 6. 7.

The fourth thing to be observed is that howsoever these ignorant priests were
allowed by the king; and appointed by the governors of the Church of Israel;
and entertained by the people; and so wore the habit and enjoyed the livings;
and offered the Sacrifices; and used the other Ceremonies in the Church; yet the
Lord plainly disavoweth them, disgradeth them of their titles, and deposes
them from the office of Priesthood; and flatly tells them that he would
refuse them, so as they should be no Priests to him, because they had refused
knowledge and neglected the maine duty in teaching the people. From whence
we learn, that though ignorant and idle Ministers, have never so manifold
allowance and approbation from men, yet God rejects them as not being worth
the having: for all who are called of God to this function, are furnished with
sufficiency of gifts, where by they are able, and with willingness of mind
whereby they are ready to instruct his people: as for those who are not thus
fitted, it were a great disparagement both to Gods wisdom love and providence,
either to choose them, or to own them. There is no wise Prince will choose a
dumb ambassador, or one who will not either for fear or idleness do his
message; there is no householder would have in his service a steward, who in
respect of his folly cannot provide for the family; there is no man will
choose such an one for his carpenter, who has no skill in building nor knows
how to handle a tool; there is no people so simple that will retain a
shepherd, if they know that either he is ignorant how to use their sheep, or
idle and careless, and will not take pains either in feeding or defending
them: and shall we think the Lord less wise or provident then man, that he
should send on his message dumb ambassadors; or commit his family to be
governed by foolish or malicious stewards; or choose for the building of his
spiritual temple them that have no knowledge, or will not labor; or set over
his flock such ignorant or idle shepherds, who either want skill or will to
feed his sheep, and to defend them from the Wolf?

The use hereof serves first, to teach us whom we Who are to be approved for
faithful Ministers.
are to approve as the faithful Ministers of God; namely, not all who are
allowed by men, seeing many of these are ignorant and many idle, the one
wanting ability the other will to instruct the people, but only those who are
furnished with sufficiency of gifts whereby they can, and with willingness
and alacrity whereby they will with painful diligence inform the people in
the ways of God.

Secondly, it shows and condemns the grievous sin of many amongst us, who
run and are not sent, and presumptuously rush into the place of Gods
ambassadors, having neither calling nor approbation from him: yea and that
after in his word he has plainly protested, that seeing they have refused
knowledge, he has rejected and deposed them from the Priesthood. It is
counted an heinous fault amongst us, for one who is lawfully suspended and
degraded, to execute the function of the Ministry, but how much more
intolerable is their contempt against Gods sovereign Majesty, who being for
their ignorance deprived by him, and rejected as being none of his Ministers,
dare yet audaciously take upon them this office and function? Much better
therefore were it for such, with those false Prophets of whom Zachary
speaks, to give over the place of a Prophet, as being Zach. 13. 4. 5.
ashamed of their ignorance and insufficiency, and to lay aside their habit,
wherewith they have deceived and abused the people, and plainly to confess I
am no Prophet, I am an Husbandman, or an heard-man, or a tradesman, then by
retayning the place of Gods Ministers, to inflame his wrath and pull down his
fearful vengeance against them, Ezech. 34. 10. Ier. 27. 15. Ezech. 34. 10.
Ier. 27. 15. Knowledge and not succession a true note of a lawful Ministry.


Thirdly, it confuteth the doctrine of the Church of Rome, who approve their
Priesthood (not by their knowledge or painfulness in teaching the people,
both which were utterly neglected in former ages, till of latter years for
policy sake, they have been forced to take more pains, or rather through
necessity being otherwise unable to defend their declinining hirarchie, but)
by the continual succession of their Bishops, the which also they make a note
infallible of the true Church. Notwithstanding in this they go not before the
apostate Church of Israel, who had a continual succession of their Priests
and Levites, even from Aarons time, and yet now they ceased to be the true
Church of God, and are rejected from the Priesthood. It is not therefore the
succession of the Ministry, but their knowledge and painful diligence in
teaching the people, which approves them to be the true Ministers of God, and
where these are, they are an infallible note of Gods true Church; but when the
preaching of the Word is neglected, either through Ignorance or Idleness,
there is no Ministry approved of God, and consequently no true Church.

And so much concerning the sin of the Priests. The second is forgetfulness
of God and his Law, in these words: And seeing thou have forgotten the law of
thy God. Unto which is annexed a grievous punishment in these words: I will
also forget thy children.

Their sin was forgetfulness of Gods Law, for howsoever The exposition
they were the Lords Priests, unto whom Gods Oracles were committed, in which
by Gods Commandment they were to meditate continually, that so not only
knowing but also remembering them, they might be the better fitted both to
observe them themselves, and also to teach and instruct the people in the
knowledge of Gods will, in his Law revealed, yet such was their carelessness,
negligence and contempt of it, that they neither knew nor remembered it, and
much less obeyed it themselves, or informed the people, that they might know
and keep it. From whence we may Our inclinablenesse unto forgetfulness of God.
observe how inclinable we are to this vice of forgetfulness, seeing neither
respect of our place and duty, nor any means that can be used will imprint
Gods Law in the stony tables of our memories, unless it be engraven with the
finger of gods spirit, howsoever they are like wax ready to receive the print
of any worldly impression, and like brass to keep it.

The causes of this our forgetfulness are, first, our natural The causes of
our forgetfulness.
corruption, and the uncleanness of our hearts and minds, being one of the
cursed fruits of original sin; whereof it is, that they are forges of
wicked thoughts, fountains from which nothing spring but carnal meditations,
and like wide siues, which suffer all the flower of goodness to pass through
them, and retain nothing but the gross branne of worldliness and wickedness.
This appears. Genesis 6. 5. and. 8. 21. Genesis 6. 5. and 8. 21. Mat 15. 19.
Mat. 15. 19.

The second cause is our want of love and delight in heavenly and spiritual
things, and our too much love of the world and worldly vanities; for if our
treasure were in the Ark of God, our hearts would be there also; if Gods Law
were to us, as it was unto David, sweeter then the honey and the honey comb; if
with him we loved it better then all worldly riches, then would we also never
forget it, but meditate therein day and night.

The third cause of the forgetfulness of Gods Law is, Gods mercies make us
unmindful of him.
our pride of heart, through the unthankful abuse of our prosperity; for such
is our corruption, that whereas Gods benefits should make us mindful of his
Law, that in lue of thankfulness, we might obey it; contrariwise the abundance
of Gods mercies makes us to forget not only the Law, but even God himself, so
the Lord complains. Hos. 13. 6. Hos. 13. 6.
As in their pastures so were they filled, they were filled, and their heart
was exalted, therefore have they forgotten me. Hence it is that the Lord gives
the Israelites so often warning, that when they abounded in Gods blessings, they
should not suffer their hearts, to be lift up, and so to forget him the author
of all their good. Deuteronomy. 8. 11. 12. A man would think, that as tokens Deuteronomy. 8.
11. 12.
sent, serve to put us in mind of an absent friend, so the innumerable tokens
of Gods love, which as it were, from heaven he sends unto us, should serve as
so many remembrancers, to put us in mind of him who sends them unto us, but
(though against all reason) it falls out otherwise, for the tokens of Gods
love, as riches, pleasures, and honors, make us forget the sender; and
therefore wise Hagur seeing this corruption in himself, does entreat the Lord
to restrain his bounty, and not to bestow too much upon him, least being
full, he should deny him, and say who is the Lord. Prou. 30. 8. 9. Pro. 30. 8.
9.


Seeing therefore our corrupt nature is so inclinable to The greatness of this
sin of forgetfulness.
this vice of forgetfulness, let us labor not only to see it, but also to
subdue and mortify it; which that we may the rather perform with the greater
care and conscience, let us consider the grieuousnesse of the sin, and the
greatness of the punishment which does attend it. The grieuousnesse of the
sin herein appears, in that it is not only in it self heinous, but a
cause also of innumerable other sins. In it self it is a heinous sin as
appears by the Lords often and earnest forbidding of it. So Deuteronomy. 4. 23. Take
heed unto Deuteronomy. 4. 23. and 8. 11.
your selves, least you forget the covenant of the Lord your God. and 8. 11.
Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, not keeping his commandments.
And when the people notwithstanding these admonitions, did forget the Lord, he
grievously complains of this neglect. So Deu. 32. 18. thou have forgotten
Deuteronomy. 32. 18. Esaias. 57. 11. Ier. 2. 32.
the mighty God that begat thee and formed thee. Esa. 57. 11. and Ier. 2. 32.
Can a maid forget her ornament, or a bride her attire? yet my people has
forgotten me days with out number.

Secondly, to forget God and his word is a kind of Athisme, seeing they have
not God nor his law in their principal parts, namely their heart, mind, and
soul; for they who so have them, do also remember them.

Thirdly, this forgetfulness is joined with singular contempt of Gods word,
for they who regard it, do also remember it; they that can say with David,
that they delight in his statutes, may also add that which he adds, that
they will not forget his word. Psalm. 119. 16. Psalm. 119. 16.


Fourthly, as this forgetfulness, is in it self a sin, so it is the cause
of almost all sin. Whereof it is that forgetfulness and the transgression of
the law are often joined together, as the cause and effect. Deuteronomy. 8. 11. Beware
that thou Deuteronomy. 8. 11.
forget not the Lord thy God not keeping his commandments. Ier. 3. 21. They
have perverted their way and have forgotten the Lord their God. Prou. 2. 17.
Which forsakes the guide of Ier. 3. 21.
Pro. 2. 17. Ezech. 22. 12
her youth* and forgets the covenant of her God. Ezech. 22. 12. Iud. 3. 7.
The children of Israel did wickedly in the sight of the Lord, and forgot the
Lord their God. The reason is, because Iud. 3. 7.
they who do not so much as remember the law of God can much less observe it,
and those who never think, neither on gods promises nor threatenings, are
neither encouraged to that which is good, nor discouraged from that which is
evil.

But as this forgetfulness is to be avoided, in that it is a The punishment of
the sin of forgetfulness.
grievous sin, so also because God inflicteth upon it grievous punishments.
As in this place he threatens the Priests, that because they had forgotten his
Law, he would not only forget them but their children; the which was a
fearful judgment, whether we consider it in the general, or in this
particular. In the general, for if in God we live, and move, and have our
being. Act. 17. 28. If when he but hides his face Act. 17. 28.
we are troubled. Psalm. 104. 29. If when he neglects us we are straight
deprived of all good, and exposed unto all evil, Psalm. 104. 29.
then what is Gods forgetfulness, but our destruction? so likewise in this
particular where by Gods forgetting their children, is meant his neglect of
them, the withdrawing of the signs of his love, and the disinheriting of them
of the honor of Priesthood: as if he would call back his commission, and
suffer them no more to bear the name of his ambassadors, turn them out of
their stewardship, and make them more base then common servants; make them of
shepherds worse then the meanest of the flock; and of Captains, common
soldiers, which also with the rest should be casheerd out of his Camp, the
Church militant.

Besides this heavy judgment, there are diverse others threatened against this
sin of forgetfulness in the book of God; and these both temporal and
eternal. Of the first sort is the punishment of barrenness and dearth. Esaias.
17. Esaias. 17. 10. 11
10. 11. Desolation and destruction of their cities. Hos. 8. Hos. 8. 10.
10. Bondage and subjection under tyrannical enemies. 1. Sam. 12. 9. The Lord
scatters those that forget him and 1 Samuel 12. 9.
his word, as stubble before the wind. Ier. 13. 24. 25. He Ier. 13. 24. Ier.
18. 17.
overthrows them in the day of battle. Chap. 18. 17. But the most grievous
punishment of all is, that they shall bear their wickedness, which is a
burden intolerable, and presses all that are under it even down to hell.
Ezec. 23. 35. Ezech. 23. 35.


So likewise it is punished with eternal punishments; for as it is, Psalm. 9.
17. The wicked shall turn into hell, and all the nations that forget God. And
therefore I conclude this point Psalm. 9. 17. and 50. 22.
with the Psalmist. Psalm. 50. 22. O consider this O ye that forget God, least I
tear you in pieces and their be none to deliver you.

And these are those punishments both temporal and eternal, which the Lord
inflicteth upon those who forget his law; which that we may avoid, we are
not only with all reverence to hear and receive the word of God, but also
with all care and conscience to treasure it up in our memories, that so we may
perform obedience thereunto in our lives and conuersations, which if we do
we shall be eternally blessed. Iam. 1. 25. Iam. 1. 25.


To this purpose let us briefly consider of some means, Of the means to help
our memory and avoid forgetfulness.
whereby we may help our memories, and avoid this sin of forgetfulness.
The first is, that we prepare our selves before we hear the word of God, that
our hearts may be fit grounds to receive the seed of Gods word. And this is
done first, by meditating upon our sins, which we desire should be mortified,
and on those virtues and graces, wherein we are weak or wanting; and this
will work in us an earnest desire to hear the word, which is the Physic that
will cure our corruptions, and the food which will nourish and strengthen us in
all grace and goodness. Now those who feed upon this heavenly banquet with a
hungry appetite, and a good stomach, they will well digest it, and retain
this wholesome nourishment; whereas they who hear the word and receive this
food with cloied appetites, they are ready as soon as they have received it,
to cast it up again through forgetfulness.

Secondly, before we come, we must purge our hearts from all maliciousness
and filthiness, and remove out of our minds all our worldly businesses and
distractions, which will choke in us the seed of Gods word, and keep us from
hearing and remembering it. If then we would keep and lock up the treasure of
Gods word in the chest of our hearts, we must first cast out of it the base
rags of worldly vanities, for God and Mammon, spiritual wisdom and worldly
profaneness, will never dwell together.

Thirdly, we must before we come have recourse unto God by hearty prayer,
desiring him that with his holy spirit he will not only open our ears, that
we may reverently hear his word, but also write it in our hearts, so as it may
never be blotted out.

So in the hearing of the word, we are to perform these duties, if we would
retain it in memory: first, we must hear it with delight, for if with David
we delight our selves in Gods statutes, then we will not forget his word. Psalm.
119. 16. Psalm. 116. 16.
If we receive it with joy, as being that precious pearl, which alone makes
rich, then our hearts will be fixed on it, for there as the treasure is, there
will the heart be also.

Secondly, we must hear the word with great reverence and attention, fixing
our eyes on the teacher, as they on Christ, Luke. 4. 20. and our hearts upon
his words: and so Luke. 4. 20.
that which is received with such attentive reverence, will not easily slip out
of memory.

Thirdly, we must observe the method and order of our teacher, how he deuideth
his Text into several branches, and how he passes from point to point: and so
the general points being remembered, will help us to recall the particulars
under them contained; even as the body of a Tree brings us to the maine
boughs; the boughs, to the branches; and the branches to the little
sprigges and leaves.

Lastly, after we have heard the word we are to help our memories by prayer,
meditation, and conference: for otherwise the food of the word will be as
meat undigested, which cannot abide in the stomach, or as the seed
uncovered, which is devoured of the fowls as soon as it falls on the ground.

ANd so much concernig the second sin, laid to the charge of the Priests:
the third follows together with the punishment denounced against it. Verse.
7. As they were increased so they sinned against me; therefore will I change
their glory into shame. The which words contain two parts: Exposition.
first, the Priests sin: secondly, their punishment. Their sin was the
ungrateful abuse of Gods abundant blessings and rich mercies, multiplied upon
them; in these words: As they were increased the more they sinned against me.
Where he expresses both the blessings multiplied upon the Priests, and their
abuse of them; the blessings in these words, as they were increased. Whereby is
signified, not only that the Lord had multiplied the Priests in number, but
also (and that as I take it more principally) that he had increased them in
riches, power, and dignity above the rest of the people; the which
extraordinary benefits, should have wrought in them an extraordinary measure
of thankfulness and care to glorify God, seeing he was the sole author of
all their preferment; as he also implies, whereas he says, not that they had
thus increased themselves, but that they were increased, namely by the Lord
their God.

Their sin was their ungrateful abuse of these benefits, in these words: So
they sinned against me, that is, the more I multiplied my blessings upon them,
the more they multiplied their sins against me: for thus this word (So) is
sometimes taken: as Exodus 1. 12. But as they vexed them so they Exodus 1. 12.
multiplied, that is, the more they vexed them, the more they multiplied, as
our translation also has it. So in this Prophecy. Chap. 11. 2. They called
them, so they went from them, that Hos. 11. 2.
is, the more they called them, the more they went from them. This then was
their sin, that whereas Gods liberal bounty toward them, should have made
them thankful to God, and zealous of his glory: contrariwise, his benefits
made them wanton proud, and forgetful of God; and not only negligent of all
good duetyes; but ready to commit any iniquity and impiety against God. The
which sin* as it is odious in all, so especially in the Priests, as some also
think it is employed in the words, against me, which they translate, Sic
peccauerunt mihi, they have sinned to me, whereby is intimated that the Priests
sins, who draw near unto God, and not only profess his law themselves, but
also teach others, do more nearly touch the Lord, dishonor his name, and
provoke his wrath, then the sins of the ordinary people; even as the crimes of
a Steward whom his Lord puts in trust with the rest of the family, do more
discredit his master, and incense his anger, then the faults of the common
servants.

The punishment denounced against this sin is contained in these words:
therefore I will change their glory into shame; where by glory, we are to
understand al those benefits of riches, power and honor in which the Lord had
increased them; all which he comprehends under the name glory, because they
were their glory, or the things wherein they chiefly gloryed. So, whereas he
says, that he would turn their glory into shame, the meaning is, that he
would deprive them of all these benefits belonging to the Priesthood, and so
expose them to shame and reproach. As though he should have said, because you
have ungratefully abused all those benefits and prerogatives which I have
endowed you with, above all the rest of my people, and in stead of the fruits
of love, thankfulness and obedience, have taken occasion by my benefits the
more to dishonor me, and to provoke my displeasure, by multiplying your sins
against me; therefore I will strip you utterly of all my blessings, in which
your chief glory consists, and so expose you to be scorned and despised of
all who have seen your passed glory, and now behold your present misery.

And this punishment was accordingly inflicted. First, when as the Lord exposed
these ignorant Priests to the contempt of the people; but principally when as
they were led into captivity, at what time not only the glory of the
Priesthood, but the Priesthood it self ceased: and so they who were
Captains and leaders, became as common soldiers, yea, as miserable captives
under their enemies, who had no respect of their place and calling.

And so much for the meaning of the words: the The privileges of the
Ministry.
doctrines are these. First, we may observe that the Lord aduanceth his
Priesthood and Ministry, and endoweth them with many singular prerogatives
and privileges, above the rest of the people, as he notes in this place: the
which may further appear if we consider their function and calling; for they
are chosen of God to stand in his stead, to represent his own person, and to
perform his own work which himself performed unto his Church in the days of
the Patriarks, until Moses time. For then the Lord taught them with his own
mouth, until the Israelites being terrified with his fearful voice, earnestly
desired that they might be informed in Gods will by the Ministry of men.
Deuteronomy. 18. 18. So Deuteronomy. 18. 18.
our Savior performed this office and function, whilst he remained on the
earth; but when he ascended into heaven he appointed his Ministers to supply
his place, and to instruct his Church. Mat. 28. 19. So that now they are in his
stead, Mat. 28. 19.
and as his ambassadors do deliver the word of reconciliation unto the
people. 2 Cor. 5. 20. Whose voice if the people 2. Cor. 5. 20.
here and obey, the Lord acknowledges that obedience as done to himself; whom
if they despise, he accounts the contempt offered against his own person.
Luke 10. 16. Luke 10. 16.


But their dignity and the greatness of their privileges God Ministers are
his mouth to the people.
will better appear, if we consider their office and Ministry, and the
titles wherewith in the Scriptures the holy ghost has honored them. For
First, in the Ministry of the word, they are the mouth of God to the people,
and his ambassadors; who perform his own work; as it is, 1. 1. Cor. 16. 10.
Cor. 16. 10. even the work of reconciliation, justification, sanctification
and salvation. And therefore the Lord vouchsafes them this dignity to be
called (...), Fellow 1. Cor. 3. 9.
laborers with God, unto whose most glorious and infinite Majesty, it is an
advancement above the worthynesse of the most excellent creature, to be
acknowledged his meanest servant.

So in prayer, they are the mouth of the people unto God, The mouth of the
people to God.
and as it were the ambassadors general of the earth, by whom they make their
suits known unto God, entreat a supply of their wants, and return
thanksgiving unto the Lord for all his benefits.

In like manner the Lord has committed unto them the administration of the
Sacraments, which are the seals of his They are the keepers of Gods seals the
Sacarments
covenant; whereby all his gracious promises, are ratified and confirmed unto
us; so that as in respect of the rich treasure of Gods word, committed to their
disposing, they are the Lords treasurers; so in respect of the Sacraments, they
are the keepers of his great seals. Now if these offices be great under
mortal Princes, in corruptible things: how are these officers advanced who
are under in these places the King of Kings? who dispense not transitory
trifles, but heavenly treasures; nor seal assurances of earthly patrimonies,
but of an eternal inheritance and a most glorious kingdom.

But come we from their office to their titles, and we shall The titles given
to the Ministry.
find that they are much advanced above others: For the rest of Gods people are
called his servants, these his stewards, Luke 12 42. who have the custody of
his keys committed Luke 12. 42.
unto them, that they may relieve those of the family who are obedient out of
their store, and shut the stubborn and rebellious out of the doors. Mat. 16.
19. They are called the Mat. 16. 19.
Lords sheep, these the shepherds. Ezech. 34. 2. They the Ezech. 34. 2.
Lords corn and harvest, these his husbandmen, Mat. 9. 37. Mat. 9. 37.
They the Lords Plants in his garden, Cant. 4. 13. these his Cant. 4. 13.
gardeners who plant and water them, 1 Cor. 3. 6. They living stones in the
temple of God, these master builders, 1 Cor. 3. 1. Cor. 3. 6. and 3. 9.
9. who finish this work and bring it to perfection, Ephe. 4. 12. 13. They
children in Gods family, these spiritual fathers, Ephe. 4. 12. 13.
who by the seed of the word beget them unto God* 1 Cor. 4. 15. 1. Cor. 4. 15.


And these were the spiritual prerogatives, with which The temporal
privileges of the Ministry
the Lord has endowed his Priesthood and Ministry; besides which he
allotted unto them many temporal privileges; as for example, the double
honor of reverence and maintenance: for in respect of the first, none were in
greater honor and account among the people, next under the King, then the
Lords Priests: and for the other none more plentifully maintained then they,
who had not only the tithes, but the first fruits, oblations, and daily
sacrifices; all which they had not at the peoples devotions, but challenged them
in Gods right as being his portion, which when he gave unto them the land he
reserved for himself. Neither is the Lords liberality shortened toward his
Ministers in the time of the Gospel, for he has commanded the people to give
unto them double honor: the honor of reverence, and the honor of
maintenance, as appears, 1 Timothy 5. 17. 18. For if 1. Tim. 5. 17. 18.
the Lords care were such both for the honor and maintenance of the legal
Ministry and Priesthood, which was the Ministry of the letter which kills,
the Ministry of death and condemnation; how much more that the Miinsterie of
the new covenant, which is the Ministry of the spirit that gives life, and
the Ministry of righteousness, (that is, whereby we of sinners are made
righteous) should excel in glory, as the Apostle reasons. 2 Cor. 3. 6. 7.
8. 9. 2. Cor. 3. 6 7.


The use of this doctrine respects both Ministers and people: the Ministers,
first, for instruction; that seeing the Lord has advanced them to such Honor
and Dignity, they walk worthy this high calling, thinking no pains too much
which they shall take for the advancement of Gods glory, who has so
exceedingly honored them.

Secondly, for their consolation and encouragement against all Consolation for
Gods Ministers against contempt.
the misery, poverty, reproach and contempt which they suffer in this life.
For though outwardly they are poor and destitute of all worldly pomp, yet
they are like the Kings daughter, all glorious within; though they are despised
of men, yet they are highly esteemed before God; though the world esteems
them as the very ofscouring of all things, yet the Lord has chosen them to be
his chief Officers, his Ambassadors, his Stewards, his Keepers of the
inestimable Treasure of his Word, and of his great seals, the Sacraments of
Baptism and the Lords Supper.

The use which concerns the people is, that they honor The people ought to
reverence Gods Ministers.
them whom God thus honors, and that they behave themselves toward their
Ministers, as it becomes the rest of the family to behave themselves toward
the steward or Treasurer; the people toward the Ambassador; yea the children
toward their fathers. For look what honor is done unto them, as being Gods
Ambassadors, that the Lord accounterh as done unto himself, whose person they
sustain; look what disgrace and reproach is offered against them as being his
Ministers, the Lord esteems it as offered against himself, and therefore will
never let it go unpunished, either in this life or in the life to come: for if
David could not endure those insolent abuses which were by Hanun offered 2.
Sam. 10.
against his Ambassadors, whom in love and kindness he sent unto him, but
revenged them with the death and destruction of a great part of the people of
Ammon: how much less can the Lord endure that reproach, injuries and outrages,
should be offered against his Ambassadors, and not revenge these indignities,
which are not so much offered against men, as in them against himself?
Fearful examples hereof we have in the Scriptures, as in the conspiracy of
Corah and his associates, whom the earth swallowed quick. Numb. 16. In Numb. 6.
16.
Jeroboam, whose hand was withered up for the contempt and violence which he
offered against the Lords Prophet. 1 Kin. 1. King. 13.
13. In the two Captains and their fifties, who were destroyed with fire from
heaven, because they came not to the Lords Prophet, with that submissiue
reverence which beseemed them. 2 King. 1. 9. 10. 11. 12. In the fifty two
children 2. King. 1. 9. 10
who were destroyed by Bears, for scoffing at Elisha. 2 Kin. 2 2. King. 2.
And the in people of Israel, who because they mocked the messengers of God,
and despised their words, and misvsed the Prophets, therefore they were
subjected to Gods heavy 2. Chro. 36. 16. 17.
wrath, and in the end utterly destroyed. 2 Chro. 36. 16. 17.

The second thing to be observed is the gorse ingratitude Our ungrateful abuse
of Gods benefits.
of our corrupt natures: whereby it comes to pass that the more God
multiplyeth his mercies, the more ready we are to rebel against him, and to
provoke his wrath by our sins; for whereas Gods manifould benefits multiplied
upon us should make us to humble our selves before him, in that he has made us
so deeply indebted to his infinite goodness; we contrariwise abusing them,
make them serve as so many steps whereby we may ascend into the seat of pride;
whereas they should serve as so many common places to put us in mind of Gods
gracious goodness toward us; we abusing them are made hereby more forgetful of
God, as though now being thoroughly furnished, we had no further need of his
help; whereas they should serve as so many motives to stir us up to holy
obedience, that thereby we may glorify God, the author of all our good; we
hereby grow more undutiful, like cockred children toward their Parents, or
pampred horses toward their masters, and are more ready to fall into the
sins of pride, voluptuousness, love of the world, profaneness, and utter
neglect of religion and all religious duties; whereas the abundance of Gods
blessings which we enjoy, should make us to pity, and take compassion on
those who want them, they abused through our corruption, do make us to
disdain and contemn them; furious and cruel in revenge, and insolent in
offering wrongs and injuries. And hence it is that the Lord does so carefully
vvarne the Israelites, that when they did enjoy all the blessings of Canaan,
they should not forget and rebel against him. Deuteronomy. 6. 10. 11. 12. Into which
sin they shamefully Deuteronomy. 6. 10. 11. Psalm. 62. 10. 1. Tim. 6. 17.
fell, notwithstanding they were thus admonished. So Psalm. 62. 10. 1 Timothy 6.
17. Examples of this ungrateful abuse of Gods blessing, we have in Saul,
Jeroboam, Naball, Nebuchadnezzar, Hos. 10. 1. and 13. 6.
the people of Israel: but never was age more fruitful of these examples,
never land more plentiful in these ungrateful presidents, then this of ours;
wherein the more the blessings of God abound, the more pride, forgetfulness of
God, contempt of Religion, and the utter neglect of all holy duties abound
likewise; so that hard it is to find a man bettered by Gods benefits; or more
zealous of Gods glory, the more blessings they receive from him; but
contrariwise the more they abound in honors, riches, peace, health, and all
kind of prosperity, the more they show their profanenes, irreligion, worldlines
and utter neglect of all holy duties.

The use of this doctrine is, first, that seeing through our corruption we are
so apt to abuse Gods blessings, we be made hereby more watchful over our own
hearts, when we are in prosperity, that we be not overtaken with this
unthankfulness, and that we be no more earnest in begging these temporary
benefits, then in praying also for an holy use of them, that they may serve as
helps and furtherances unto us in all holy and Christian duties: for if the
more we abound in them, the more we abound in sin against God, then do they
cease to be blessings and benefits, and become snares to entangle us, and
thorns to choke in us all virtue and godliness.

Secondly, that we arm our selves with patience, when as we are not so much
increased in these temporal benefits, seeing the Lord herein respects the
good of his children, and withholds worldly blessings from them, because he
knows they would abuse them unto sin.

Thirdly, that we be not vexed out of measure with impatiencie, when as those
of whom we have best deserved, do show themselves ungrateful to us,
considering that we continually show our selves much more unthankful against
God, unto whom we are infinitely more indebted.

The third thing to be observed is, that the Lord condemns Ungratefulness
condemned as a great sin.
this ungrateful abuse of his blessings and benefits, as a great sin, not
only in this, but also in many other places, So Esaias. 1. 2. 3. he condemns
it as a vice worse then brutish, Esaias. 1. 2. 3. and 5. 5.
Esaias. 5. 5. he complains that when he had done what he could for his
vineyard, yet still it brought forth wild grapes: so Ezech. 16. 16. 17. that
the people abused his blessings Ezech. 16. 16.
as means to further them in Idolatry. So Hos. 10. 1. Hos. 10. 1. and 13. 6.
and 13. 6. But as this sin is in all men grievous, so it is in Gods
Ministers most heinous, both because the blessings which they enjoy being
extraordinary, do require extraordinary thankfulness, and also in that they
are daily informed out of Gods word, both whence they have these benefits,
and that the Lord for all, only requires a thankful heart, we having
nothing else to return unto him.

Now this unthankful abuse of Gods benefits unto sin, Ingratitude diverse
ways committed.
is committed diverse ways. First, when as we do not acknowledge God the
author of the benefits which we enjoy, but ascribe them unto some other
things; as unto Idols, an example whereof we have in the Israelites, Ierem.
44. 17. Ier. 44. 17. Hos. 2. 5. 8.
Hos. 2. 5. 8. or unto a man's own wit, power, industry, and labor, an
example whereof we have in the King of Ashur, Esaias. 10. 13. and in
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan 4. 27. Esaias. 10. 13. Dan. 4. 27. Hab. 1. 16.
and this is to sacrifice to our own nets, as is is. Hab. 1. 16.

Secondly, when as knowing God to be the author of the blessings which we
enjoy, we do not praise him with thankful hearts, nor employ his gifts to the
advancement of his glory, which are the chief ends for which he has bestowed
them. Psalm. 105. 45. Psalm. 105. 45.


Lastly, when as we abuse Gods blessings as means and motives to withdraw
us from performing the duties which God requires of us, and to incite us to
the committing of the contrary vices. As when by Gods blessings we are made
more slack and negligent in the duties of his worship and service, as those
are who to maintain state, come not to the assemblies of Gods Saints, to hear
the Word, and call upon his name, when as enjoying prosperity we be moved
thereby to withdraw our hearts from God, and to set them upon the world; when
as honors make us neglect him who has advanced us; when as riches like thorns
choke in us the seed of the word, so as Gods spiritual graces cannot spring
in us; when as enjoying pleasures, we wallow in these worldly delights, and
spend that precious time wholly in them, which should be bestowed in Gods
service; when as by worldly prosperity we are made more proud, insolent,
disdainefull, impatient, reuengefull, cruel, unmerciful, voluptuous, spending
we care not what upon back, belly, and upon the filthy lusts of the flesh. And
this is the chief and most ungrateful abuse of Gods benefits, when as we do
not only not glorify him, but dishonor and injure him in his own gifts, as
if the poor Subject being enriched by his Prince, should employ his riches in
furnishing himself for the service of the Princes enemy: or as if the wife
having from her husband abundance of all things, should abuse his gifts for the
hiring and rewarding of filthy adulterers, as Ezech. 16. 16 17. 33. The
ingratitude of this land.
it is. Ezech. 16. 16. 17. 33.

The use of this doctrine serves to convince the greatest part of our land, of
this sin of unthankfulness, seeing the more the Lord multiplyeth his
benefits of peace, prosperity, and abundance of all good things, the more we
multiply our sins, abusing his grace unto wantonness, and his manifold
blessings, as arguments to continue us in our impenitencie, security and
hardness of heart. For are not those most cold in all duties of religion, who
most abound with these benefits? do they not choke the seed of the Word in
the most, and make it unfruitful? and in stead of loving and praising God the
more for his blessings, do not men hereby grow lovers of the world, and
forgetful of God? do not those who abound most in wealth, honors, and
pleasures, employ all to the dishonor of God and the service of sin and
satan, spending Gods gifts in pride, excessive bravery, surfeiting,
drunkenness and filthy lusts of the flesh, so that the Lord may in our time
justly take up this complaint of England, that the more he has increased it in
his benefits the more it has sinned against him.

The last thing to be observed is, the punishment of this ungrateful abuse of
Gods blessings, and that is wheresoever The punishment of ingratitude.
Gods gifts are thus abused by any, there he will strip them of them; and not
only so, but will also bring upon them the contrary evils: as in this place,
because they abused their honor and advancement, he does not only threaten
to take it from them, but to turn it into shame and reproach. So he threatens
his vineyard, that because in stead of the sweet grapes of righteousness, it
brought forth nothing but the sower grapes of sin, after he had bestowed all
his cost and labor about it, he would not only abandon and let it alone, but
pull down the hedge, and lay it waste to be devoured of the beasts of the
field. So when as the children Esaias. 5.
of Israel, were not moved by Gods benefits to love and obedience, but sinned
and provoked him with their rebellions; he does not only withdraw his
blessings, but his wrath being inflamed against them he brings upon them his
fearful judgments: Whereupon one makes this conclusion, Quanto maiora
beneficia sunt hominibus constituta, tanto grauiora peccantibus iudicia: the
greater benefits that Chryso. super Math.
we receive from God, the greater shall be our punishments, if we abuse them
unto sin. Mat. 11. 21. Mat. 11. 21.


The use hereof is, that seeing the Lord with a liberal hand That we must
return thankfulness to God for his benefits
has sown the seed of his benefits amongst us, we return unto him the
harvest of love, obedience, and thankfulness; otherwise if we unthankfully
abuse Gods blessings unto sin, the Lord will not only strip us of them, but
also bring upon us the contrary evils: he will turn our peace into war, our
liberty into tharldome, our health into sickness, our plenty into penury
and want, our glory into shame, and that which we most fear shall come upon
us: or else which is worst of all, if he continue these his gifts, yet he
will make them of blessings curses, of benefits punishments, by giving us over
to our own ways, and suffering us to go on as in all other our sins, so
namely in this horrible abuse of his benefits, in the security and hardness
of our own hearts, until he attach us by death, and call us to a reckoning
before his seat of judgment, how we have spent, and what use we have made
of his talents, when as not being able to answer one word, we shall be
bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness, where shall be weeping
and gnashing Mat. 25. 30.
of teeth.

ANd so much concerning the third sin, whereof the Priests are convicted and
condemned, and the punishment denounced against it. The last sin which
particularly is laid to their charge is, their greedy luxuriousness, whereby
they were wholy addicted to pleasures, and pampered themselves with ease and
belly-cheare; in the mean time neglecting the maine duties of the Priesthood,
whereby they should have glorified God, and preserved from destruction both
themselves and those also which were committed to their charge. And because
they could not maintain this profuse luxury without great commings in and
extraordinary gains, therefore they used all wicked and unlawful means to
enrich themselves, both by neglecting the duties of their callings which God
required, and committing grievous sins which in his word he had forbidden.
And this is contained Verse. 8. They eat up the sins of my people: and they
lift up their minds unto their iniquity. In which words is set down a
master sin, and his attendant. The master sin is luxuriousness, in these
words: they eat up the sins of my people. The attendant is unlawful
avarice, in these words following, and they lift up their minds unto their
iniquity. In the handling whereof we are first to Exposition.
show the meaning of the words, and then the doctrines which arise out of them.

And first we are to enquire what is meant by eating the sins of the
people; for the understanding whereof we are to know that in many places of
the Scripture, sin is put for the sacrifices, which were offered for sin:
So Exodus 29. 14 Exodus 29. 14.
But the flesh of the Calfe, and his skin, and his dung, shall thou burn
with sire without the boast, it is sin, that is, a sin Offering. So Leu.
10. 17. Wherefore have ye not eaten the Leu. 10. 17
sin, (that is, the sin offerings) in the holy place. And in this sense
Christ is said to be made sin for us. 2 Cor. 5. 21. that 2. Cor. 5. 21.
is, an oblation, for our sins, for the satisfying of his fathers justice,
and the appeasing of his wrath. In which signification we are here to take it,
so that by eating the sins of the people, is meant, the eating of their
sacrifices which were offered for their sins.

But it may be demanded, how this is imputed unto them as a sin, to eat
these sacrifices, seeing it was the portion of the Priests which was allotted
unto them by gods own commandment, as appears Leu. 6. 25. 26. 29. Unto
which Leu. 6. 25. 26. 29.
I answer, that they sinned in that these sacrifices did not belong unto them;
seeing they were appropriated unto Gods true Priests and Levites, which
instructed the people, and worshipped God in the Temple at Jerusalem,
according to his commandment: But these were Ieroboams Priests, chosen out of
the basest of people of other Tribes, who being ignorant themselves, utterly
neglected the duty of teaching the people; neither did they offer the
sacrifices in the place appointed for Gods worship, but in the high places of
Dan and Bethell. Secondly, in that in these sacrifices they aimed not at the
glory of God* nor the good of the people: not at Gods glory, for they did not
so much offer these sacrifices, that God thereby might be worshipped and
served, as that they might hereby serve their own turns, and make large
provision for their own bellies; neither did they respect the peoples good,
for so they would bring store of Sacrifices, and oblations, whereby they might
have abundance of provision, to mainetaine them in idleness and voluptuousness,
they were content to vvinck at their corruptions, to flatter them in their
sins, to be altogether silent in admonitions and reproves, and to persuade
them, that though they lived in their sins, yet God would be well pleased and
fully satisfied, if they brought their sacrifices to make their atonement.
Whereby the people were moved to go on in their sins without repentance, and
to rest in the deed done, as though that were sufficient for their salvation.
By which their doctrine and practice they utterly perverted the right end and
use of the Sacrifices, which were instituted of God to bring the people to
repentance and faith. For first when the beast was to be slain, they were
enjoined to lay their hands on the head thereof, that hereby they might
acknowledge and profess, that themselves had by their sins justly deserved
that death which the poor beast suffered, yea, everlasting death of body and
soul; to the end that hereby their hearts might be pricked, and their
consciences wounded with the consideration of their sins, and the
apprehension of Gods justice and severe wrath against them; and so be brought
to mourn and bewail their sins past, and to a settled purpose and resolution
not to fall into them again for the time to come. For which end also God
appointed these sacrifices as a certain mulct and penalty for sin, that by
this cost and charge they might be restrained from committing these sins,
which must be thus dearly expiated. Again, whereas it was impossible that
the blood of Bulls and Goats should purge away sin, hereby they were brought
as by certain types unto Jesus Christ, who was the Lamb slain from the
beginning of the world, by whose blood alone they were to have redemption and
remission of sin.

But this doctrine they either knew not, or knowing it, they concealed it, as
making much against their profit, and taught the people to rest in the outward
Sacrifices as in the deed done, whereby they were not restrained but rather
encouraged to live in sin, seeing such easy remedies were provided for
them. And hence it is that the Lord uses this metaphor of eating the sins of
the people, to signify their eating of the sacrifices offered for sin;
because whilst they received their offerings they wincked at their sins,
never giving them any admonition or reproof, but rather encouraging them in
their wickedness, by putting them in hope of pardon for the oblations sake;
they hereby turned their sacrifices into sin, and might fitly be said to feed
upon the sins of the people, which they swallowed in silence for their own
profit.

And thus have I showed their luxurious pampering of themselves in ease and
bellie-cheare, signified in the first words. Their greedy avarice, whereby
they maintained themselves in these luxurious courses, may partly appear by
that which has been said, but is more plainly expressed in the words
following: And they lift up their minds unto their iniquity, that is, they
not only curiously observe what sins are committed by the people, but also
earnestly desire that they may offend, that out of their falls they may raise
their own gain and advantage. So that in this place to lift up their minds
unto their iniquity, is to expect, and as it were to gape after their sins
as after a pray, which they earnestly covet to seize upon. And thus this phrase
is used in other places, as Deuteronomy. 24. 15. Where it is said, that Deuteronomy. 24. 15.
they should not delay to pay the workmans hire, because he is poor, and
lifts up his mind unto it (for so the words are) that is, earnestly
expects, and wholly depends upon it, because by it his life is sustained. So
Ier. 22. 27. But unto Ier. 22. 27.
the land where unto they lift up their minds that they may return, they
shall not return.

The sin therefore of the Priests which is here condemned is, that they
desired the people should commit many sins, that so they might receive the
benefit of many sacrifices, and being thus enriched, might spend their time in
idleness and luxuriousness; the which was an abominable wickedness against
God; for their allowance was granted unto them, that they should restrain
the people from sin by their instructions, admonitions and reproves; and
therefore they were to receive their carnal things, that they might
communicate unto them spiritual things, and howsoever they gained by the
sacrifices offered for sin, yet they should not have delighted in their
sins, nay they should have mourned for them, and even have groned under their
burden, to which end the sin offering was allowed them, as appears, Leu.
10. 17. for so he says, that Leu. 10. 17.
the sin Offering was given the Priests, that they should bear the iniquity
of the Congregation, and make an atonement for them before the Lord.

But these wicked Priests were so far from restrayning the people from sin,
that they encouraged them unto wickedness, by extenuating their offenses, and
offering unto them a speedy and easier remedy; namely, that if having sinned,
they would come and offer their sacrifices for sin, God would rest satisfied,
and receive them into former favor; and so far were they from grieuing for
their transgressions, that they desired earnestly that they might trangresse,
and expected their falls, as wholly depending upon them for their gain and
advantage.

To conclude all in a short sum, the sins whereof the Priests are here
accused are, that they gave themselves to idleness and belly-cheare, and
turned the Sacrifices into a pray, wherewith they pampred themselves; and to
the end that they might receive these oblations in more abundance, they wincked
at the peoples sins, never admonishing nor rebuking them for them, but rather
desired they should sin that they might offer the more Sacrifices: possessing
them with this conceit, that God required no more, but that having sinned,
they should by their oblations make satisfaction. Whereby they encouraged them
unto wickedness, seeing having satisfied their lusts by committing sin, there
was no more to be done for expiation, but to bring new sacrifices, and so they
might again renew their sins, as often as they pleased, so they would also renew
their sacrifices and oblations.

And this is the meaning of the words: the doctrines to That it is a great
sin to receive the profits of our calling, and neglect the duties.
the Lord condemns it as a great sin, when a man seazeth upon the profits
which belong unto his calling, and spends them in luxuriousness and
belly-cheare, in the mean time utterly neglecting the duties of his calling,
for this was the sin of the Priests in this place. The reason hereof is.
First, because where the reward and profit of the calling is given upon
condition of the performance of the duties of the calling, there if the
duties be neglected, and the profits received, it is esteemed no better then
theft in Gods sight, because they are usurped without any right, seeing they
are not granted absolutely, but upon condition of the duty which is neglected:
as if the soldier receiving pay from his prince, do spend it upon his lusts,
and is never ready to fight against his enemies; and the servant wages from his
master and never perform any service unto him.

Secondly, because the end of our callings and the profits of them, is not that
we should pamper our selves in ease, and satisfy our lusts, but that we should
by the performance of our duties glorify God, and further the good of the
Church and common wealth, which who so neglects, they are like unprofitable
Drones, who gather no honey, but live at ease and feed themselves with others
labors.

Examples of this sin we have in Esau, who spent all his time in hunting,
which should have been employed in the duties of his calling. In the Sodomits,
who spent their wealth in pride and pleasures, eating and drinking, idleness and
luxvriousnesse, and wholly neglected the relief of the poor. Ezech. 16. 49. In
the Idol shepherds, who sleeced their Ezech. 19. 49. and 34. 2.
sheep, and fed upon the milk, but did not feed the flock, Ezech. 34. 2. And
in the evil servant, who seized upon the reward due to the steward, and spent
it in eating and drinking, but neglected the duties which he owed, both to his
master and the family. Mat. 24. 49. 50. Mat. 24. 49.


The use of this doctrine serves to condemn the practice of the Popish
Monks, who being abundantly provided for out of the Churches stock, do
cloister up themselves in their Monasteries, and spend their time in idleness
and luxuriousness, performing no duty neither to Church nor common wealth; so
also it serves for the just reproof of many amongst our selves; as of
Magistrates, who being liberally maintained at the charge of the common wealth,
do neglect the duties of government and executing justice, and spend their time
in pleasures and idleness. So also of Ministers, who seize upon the
preferments of the Church but do not labor in the work of the Ministry:
And lastly, of unprofitable gentlemen, who enjoying the fat of the land, do
spend it in pride, excess, and voluptuous living, but perform no good duty
either to Church or common wealth. All which have a fearful account to make
at the day of judgment, seeing they take the Lords liberal wages, performing
no service for it, but wastfully mispend it about the satisfying of their own
sinful lusts; let not therefore such men flatter themselves with a conceit,
that what they enjoy is their own, and that they may do with their own what
they list, for it is not their own absolutely, but only on this condition
that they perform the duties of their callings of which it is the reward, and
it is then only lawful for us to eat our bread, when as we have earned it
with the sweat of our brows, Genesis 3. 19. Neither ought we to spend Genesis 3. 19.
these gifts of God, for the satisfying of our own sinful lusts, seeing they
are his Talents which he has given us to employ, for the advancing of his own
glory, and the good of our fellow servants.

The second thing to be observed is, that howsoever these Men respect their
own cause more then Gods.
Priests did easily remit Gods right, so far forth as it did not concern
their own worldly profit, and were so meal mouthed that they durst not speak
against the peoples sins, whereby his holy name was dishonored, yet they
would loose none of their own right in their sacrifices and oblations: whence
we may discern a notable corruption that is in us, which is our singular
partiality in respecting our own cause more then the cause of God: for when the
matter concerns him, we are very remiss, cold, and easy to be entreated,
but when it concerns our selves, very earnest hot and inexorable: For
example, the Magistrate makes laws for the maintenance of his own right,
state, and dignity, and being made does most straightly execute them, but
either he makes no laws at all to repress those sins which immediately
impeach Gods glory, or if their be any made yet he is very remiss in the
execution: many Ministers are very slack and timorous in rebuking of sin,
for fear of displeasing their parishioners, but if any part of their own
right or duties, be withheld from them, they show themselves bold and
resolute for the recovery of it, though it be with the displeasure of the
greatest; many masters suffer their servants to use swearing and blasphemy,
pretending they are so unruly that they can bear no sway with them, neither
with their persuasions nor rebukes, but if they offer unto them any wrong or
damage, then they show themselves men of absolute authority in inflicting upon
the offender sharp punishment; so they can easily dispense with their servants
for the breaking of the Sabbath, and pass over the matter from themselves, by
pretending that they would willingly bring them to the Church, and have them to
observe a holy rest, but they are so stubborn and wilful, that they cannot
restrain them from their vain and unlawful sports; and yet these men who can
bear no rule with their servants on the Lord day, have authority and also use
it all the six days of the week, to keep them from these unlawful
pastimes, and to make them to follow their worldly business; and where is the
cause of this great difference, surely not in the servant, who might as easily
be brought, to sit in the Church on the Lords day, as to work painefully in his
trade all the week, but the fault lies upon the master, who is so earnestly
resolute for the dispatch of his own business, that he will admit of no
denial or excuse; whereas contrariwise either he carelessly permits his
servants when the Lords day comes to do what they lift, or deals so coldly
and remisly on Gods behalf, as if though he do speak, he did not greatly
care whether his speech be regarded or no: so when men see Gods name
dishonored by any sin, they are so bashful and timorous, that they are hardly
moved to speak in Gods cause, but if their own name be traduced, and their
credit impeached in any company, they show themselves furiously violent in
removing the imputation. The cause hereof is, our coldness in the love of God,
and our too much self love, which makes men think all too much which they
do for Gods sake, and all too little which they can do for themselves; for if
there were not this exceeding partiality in our affections, we would never
show our selves so partial in our actions.

The use hereof is, that seeing our corruption, we labor to reform it; and to
this end, we must continually endeavor to abate the inordinate love of our
selves, and to increase in our hearts that heavenly love of God; and so shall we
grow more mild and moderate in our own cause, and more fervently zealous in
the cause of God, according to the example of Moses, who in matters which
concerned himself, was Number. 12. 1.
the meekest man upon the earth, and was easily inclined to put up wrongs, and
to depart from his right; but when he was to deal for God, he took upon him
an holy obstinacy, so as he would not consent unto Pharaoh, that so much as a
hoof should remain behind them, Exo. 10. 26. and showed Exodus 10. 26.
himself religiously cruel, in slaying some of the Idolaters, and causing
others to drink the ashes of the Idol. Exodus Exo. 32. 20. 27
32. 20. 27. The like mildness and patience showed Samuel, when his just
government was rejected by the inconstant people; and the like fervent zeal
and holy anger, when he was to deal in Gods cause against Agag the enemy of
the Church, and in reproving Saul (notwithstanding that he loved him) for
transgressing Gods commandment. 1 Samuel 15 1 Samuel 15. 23. 33.
23. 26. 28. 33.

The third thing to be observed is, that the Prophet having Luxurious
prodig^^ity and greedy covetousness often go together.
first accused them of living idly in luxurious excess, under the phrase of
eating the sins of the people, does in the next place condemn them of greedy
covetousness and unlawful avarice, whereby they desired to enrich themselves,
even by the sins of the people, that so they might maintain their wastfull
and profuse expenses, about their pleasures and belly-cheare. And indeed fitly
are these joined together in the reproof, seeing they are seldom severed in
the offender; for idleness and luxurious excess, is the mother which breeds
and brings forth unlawful covetousness, and this wicked avarice is the
nurse of this excess and idleness. When as men addict themselves unto
idleness, neglecting the duties of their callings, and yet will maintain their
port above their pitch, and wastfully spend in pride, pleasure, and
belly-cheare, above their means, then must they of necessity fall to plotting
and devising, how they may have extraordinary supply by wicked and unlawful
means, when as those which are honest and approuable fail them; then they
begin to covet other men's goods, and to plot means how they may compass them;
then they fall to stealing, purloyning, bribing, oppressing, cousening,
deceiving and what not, that they may enrich themselves and maintain their
excess and pleasure. Thus Magistrates consume their people with tributes and
taxations, that hereby they may maintain their excess and wastfull expenses.
Thus Ministers heap living upon living, because they cannot be content to live
frugally within their compass, but must mainetaine a port and state above
their lawful means, that by their profuse hospitality, they may advance their
credit, and so rush into forbidden pastures, being not content to feed in the
circuit of their own tether. So Gentlemen, that they may maintain themselves,
their wives, and children, in excessive and almost princely bravery, are driven
to increase their fines, and inhaunse their rents to excessive rates, and when
all this is not sufficient to defray their charges, they are feign to give over
hospitality, and to hide themselves in corners to save expenses. And thus also
Citizens vying with one another, who shall exceed in pride and excess, and
not being able to maintain themselves in this course by their lawful gains
and honest labors, are driven to use all manner of fraud and deceit in buying
and selling, subtle slights, and indirect ways; and when all this will not
serve the turn, they are at the last constrained to break and become
bankrupts, either utterly ruined in their estates, or that which is worst of
all they keep in their hands the goods of those who have credited them; and so
seek to rise again by their fall, and to enrich themselves by bringing others
into poverty: or if not so, then they seek to buy or farm some office,
wherein they may live by bribing, proling, extortion and exaction, or procure a
patent for some Monopoly, that so they may advance and raise their own
gains, out of the loss and hinderance of the whole land and common wealth.

The use hereof is, to move men to live within their compass, and to embrace
temperance and frugalitie as being Frugalitie is a good virtue.
excellent virtues in themselves, and also singular means to preserve us from
many vices, and to restrain us from rushing into grievous tentations: For so
long as a man living by his honest labors, does keep his expenses with in the
compass of his gains so long he has much peace of conscience and
contentation of mind, neither is he easily drawn by hazarding his credit and
much less his soul, to gain that wealth which he can well want; whereas
those who spend their time in idleness pleasure and luxurious excess have
always their minds stretched upon the rack of want, tormenting themselves
with carking care, how they may salve their credit, and maintain their idle
bravery, and luxurious wast; and not being able to compass their desires by
honest and lawful means, they lie open to all tentations of the devil, and
are ready to entertain any wicked and dishonest course which seems to
proffer unto them the least gain.

Fourthly, we may here observe, that the Lord condemns That it is an heinous
offense to endeavor to enrich our selves by the sins of others.
it as a heinous offense, when as men desire to enrich themselves by the sins
of others; I say when as men desire the falls of their neighbors for their
own advantage: otherwise it is lawful for Magistrates to take penal fines,
when as they do not desire that their subjects should offend for their own
gain, but rather by these punishments endeavor to restrain them from
committing of the like faults. But to delight in the sins of our brethen,
because thereby we have gain and advantage, is outrageous wickedness in the
sight of God; for seeing the plagues of God, death and condemnation is the due
wages belonging unto sin, what do these men but greedely desire gain, though
it cost the price of men's bodies and souls, and cast the offenders down into
hell? Now if it be an outrageous sin to desire gains, though it be purchased
with the bodily life of our neighbor, what shall we thinck of the
horriblenesse of their sin, who seek their own profit by hazarding both their
bodies and souls to eternal destruction? Thus does the Pope of Rome offend,
who inricheth himself by selling dispensations for sin, and is content to
tolerate filthy stews, that thereby he may increase his yearly revenew: And
thus do Magistrates offend, when they rejoice in the peoples faults and
transgressions, because by inflicting upon them a penal mulct they enrich their
own coffers. Thus do Lawyers offend, who delight in the malice, discord, and
contentions of the people, because hereby they have fit opportunity to enrich
themselves with fees. Thus do Judges and Officers of such Courts offend, as
make a pray of the sins of the people, watching after and hopefully expecting
the neglect of duties, as after a booty or prize, and rejoicing in their
hearts, when as they hear of adulteries, slanders, and other enormious crimes,
because they may out of them, raise their own profit, which wickedness they
manifestly commit, who change the course of the Law, and turn open punishments
into privy mulcts, and punishments which should be personal and exemplary,
into punishments of the purse. Thus also do they sin, who that they may
prevail in their suites, give hire unto the sons of Beliall to confirm their
false evidence by wicked perjury. And thus do shopkeepers grievously offend,
when as they can be content, that their servants should in selling their wares,
use lying, swearing, and deceit, that thereby they may put them off at the
higher rate. But in this respect Ministers do most grievously sin, when as
either they mislead the people, in errors and heresies, that they may have the
fitter opportunity of enriching themselves; or when as they flatter them in
their sins, and sow pillowes under their elbowes, that they may more securely
go on in wickedness, that so by pleasing them in their lewd courses, they
may have the greater interest in them, and in their purses. And this was the
sin of the Priests in this place, who by their false doctrine hartned the
people in their sins, teaching them that when they had sinned, there was no
more to be done, for the appeasing of Gods anger, but to offer their
sacrifices: and thus the Scribes and Pharisees countenanced children in their
vndutifullnesse and rebellion against their parents, if they would bring unto
them oblations. Mat. 15. Mat. 15. 4. 5.
4. 5. 6. And this is the sin of those false teachers which the Apostle Peter
fore-telleth should be in these latter days, which through covetousness
should with fained words make merchandise of men's souls. 2 Pet. 2. 3. The
which prophecy 2 Pet. 2. 3.
we may see most evidently accomplished in the Clergy of the Church of Rome,
who for money sell dispensations for sins, and encourage the people in all
manner of wickedness, by offering unto them easy remedies to free them from
this burden; namely, by doing or buying out of penance, by going on
pilgimages, by offering to Saints, by purchasing of pardons, indulgences, and
absolutions, by auricular confession, by giving of money to have masses,
trentals, and dirges said for their souls: for what worldly man would not be
encouraged to live in his sins, which are more dear unto him then his
wealth, yea, then the fruit of his own body, as the Prophet shows; if he
may be acquitted of the guilt Micah. 6. 7.
and punishments thereof by confessing them to the Priest, and by giving of
money for the procuring of a pardon or dispensation?

The use of this doctrine serves to make us abhor the sin Covetousness the
root of all evil.
of covetousness, which if we once intertaine into our hearts, it will lay them
open unto al wickedness; for as the Apostle says, they who resolve upon this,
that they will be rich, they fall into tentations and snares, and into many
foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction; for
the desire of money is the root of all evil, etc. 1 Timothy 6. 9. 10. Yea it
makes Tim. 6. 9. 10.
men not only themselves to run into all manner of sin, not caring what wicked
means they use for the increasing of their wealth, but also to take delight in
the sins of other men, if they be aduantageable unto them, not caring for a
little gain to sell and betray the souls of those to utter destruction, for
the redeeming whereof Christ did shed his most precious blood.

ANd thus much for their sin: in the next place he sets down their
punishment, the which is first generally expressed, and then partticularly
specified: It is generally expressed. Verse 9. And there shall be like people,
like Priest: for I will visit their ways upon them, and reward them their
deeds: or thus, therefore like as the people be, so shall the Priest be also,
etc. In which words their punishment is described The exposition.
in a twofold proportion of quantity: first, that the people and Priests
should without any difference bear the like punishments. Secondly, that this
retribution of punishment, should be proportionated to their ways and works.

Concerning the first, the Lord threatens that because there was no difference
to be found between the people and the Priests, but that both had vttterly
neglected their duty: the Priests by living in ignorance, idleness and
luxuriousnes, neglecting the preaching of the word, whereby they should have
instructed the people, and misleading them by their false doctrine, into errors
for their own game and advantage: the people in that they willingly desired to
live in ignorance, and rather chose to be under the leading of those blind
guides, because they would securely go on in their sins, then under Gods
true Prophets, who would gaul their consciences by their reproves: therefore
without difference or respect of persons, he would inflict upon them like
punishments, that is, he would deprive both of all signs of his love and
favor, cause both to be led into captivity, subject both to many miseries and
calamities, and make both alike contemptible and inglorious.

The which punishment as it did lie heavy upon all the people in that they
should be stripped of all the benefits which they enjoyed, and subjected unto
want and misery, be made of freemen, bond-slaues, and of the children of God,
the servants of their enemies, so most heavily did it lie upon the Priests, in
that they fell as it were from the highest staire of honor, riches, and
dignity, unto as low a bottom of penury, comtempt, and ignominy, as the
meanest of the people. Where as there is any respect of persons, in punishing
of them, though the offense be one and the same, yet are the punishments diverse
and different, for those who are noble and in high place, more fair and easy
punishments; for those of mean and base estate, those which are more cruel
and ignominious: but the Lord tells the Priests here, that he would have no
regard of their place, but without all respect of person or calling, would
cause their punishment to be as sharp and shameful as the basest of the
people. The like place unto this we have. Esaias. 24. 2. And there shall be
Esaias. 24. 2.
like people like Priest, and like Servant like Master, like maid like
Mistress, etc. 3. Tbe earth shall be clean emptied and utterly spoiled, etc.

The reason why the Lord thus deals with them is, because they were not Gods
true Priests, but shadows only; which were in the place, but performed no
substantial duty of that calling, and bore the title, but utterly neglected
the maine part of their office, the teaching of the people. Now their function,
honors, and titles, did not lessen but rather aggrauated their sins, in that
they unthankfully abused Gods extraordinary benefits, and made their sins
more exemplarie and scandalous, in which respects it is truly said.

Omne animi vitium tanto conspectius in se
Crimen habet, quanto mayor qui peccat habetur.
Every vice is aggrauated by the dignity of the person who does commit it.

And this was the first proportion of punishment, the other is that he would
proportionate their punishments according to the haynousnes of their offenses.
For I will visit their ways upon them, and reward them their deeds. In which
words is set down both the administration of Gods judgments, and the
execution; the administration in these words; I will visit their ways upon
them. For the understanding whereof we are to know, that the word visit is
metaphorical, borrowed from the practice of just Magistrates who going about
to punish offenders, do first visit and examine the faults, and then proceed
to punishment: so the Lord to approve his righteous judgments, does show that
he will not inflict his punishments rashly, but upon mature deliberation and
examination of the delinquents: the which the Lord is able to do in an
instant, both in respect of his own infinite knowledge and wisdom, and also
in regard that he can always readily produce our witnesses against us, even
our own consciences.

The things which the Lord threatens to visit and examine are their ways; the
which also is metaphorical, and signifies a man's course of life and
conversation, in the which he walks as in his constant way; and if at any
time he chance to digress out of it, yet he returns into it again: And
thus it is taken Genesis 6, 12. For all flesh had corrupted his Genesis 6. 12.
way upon the earth, and Psalm. 1. 1. Nor stood in the way of sinners. Psalm. 1.
2.
So that he will not examine and punish them according to their extraordinary
actions, which are as it were slips out of the way, by-pathes and digerssions,
but according to their usual ways, that is, the constant and continued course
of their life and conversation.

The execution of Gods just judgments, after due trial and examination, is
expressed in these words: and reward them their deeds. Where the Lord
threatens that he will deal with them as a just judge, neither rigorously
intending the punishment above the fault, nor partially sparing them for favor
or friendship, but that he will equally proportionate the punishments according
to their demerits. Where we may note that he does not say, he will reward them
according to their thoughts and intentions, nor according to their words and
speeches, because the one of these is hidden from men, and the other may be
hipocritically colored and dissembled, but that he may approve his righteous
judgments both to the offender and to all others, he says he will reward
them according to their deeds, which are open and manifest.

And this is the meaning of the words: the doctrines The doctrines, Gods
vnpertiall proceeding in the administration of his judgments.
which arise out of them are these. First, we may observe Gods upright and
impartial proceeding in the administation and execution of his judgments and
punishments, whereby without any respect or acceptance of persons, callings,
or degree, he renders unto every one according to their deserts, as in this
place, howsoever the Priests far excelled the common people, in place,
dignity, and authority, yet because they were a like sinful, he puts no
difference between them in their punishments. When the whole world rebelled
against him, without any respect of persons, state, or condition, he
ouer*whelmed them all with a general deluge. When Pharaoh resisted his
commandment, he found no more favor then the basest of his people. When
Nebuchadnezzar would needs be his rival in his glory, it was not his
Monarchy could keep him from feeding and lodging amongst the brute beasts.
All Ahabs royalty power and authority, could not privilege neither him nor
Iesabell from having their blood licked by the dogs. In a word there was
never any so great and mighty who had any favor at Gods hand for their power
and mightiness, but if they as grievously sinned, they also were as grievously
punished, as the poorest and most abject. The curse of the law is denounced
indifferently against all who transgress it, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Tophet is prepared
of old, not only for poor Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Esaias 30. 33. Ezech. 18. 20.
wicked men but also for the wicked King, Esaias. 30. 33. And without all respect
of persons the soul that sins must dye. Ezech. 18. 20. The reason is
because they are all alike the workmanship of his hands; and therefore as the
potter is no more beholding to his pots which are more curiously wrought, then
to those which are made for the basest use; so the Lord is no more bound to men
of greatest dignity, then to those of meanest condition, seeing all are his
creatures, alike, and what they have, they have received from him. This reason
Elihu renders, he accepts not (says he) the person of Princes, and
regards not the rich more then the poor, for they be all the work of his
hands. Job. 34. 19. Again, in respect Job. 34. 19.
of Gods infinte Majesty all are alike, and in respect of his sovereign
authority, all are equally his poor vassals, unto whom he has given his Law,
from the obedience whereof none are exempted more then other, nor yet from the
punishment therein denounced if they transgress it. Yea, so far is God from
sparing the great, rich, and mighty, that these of all other shall receive the
greatest measure of punishment. First, because they have more unthankfully
abused his rich mercies as means to further them in their sins, which should
have served as so many arguments to move them to obedience, and then because
being advanced above others in place, dignity and authority, their sins
tend more to the dishonor of God, and hurt of their neighbors, then the
sins of those who are in mean estate, because they are examplary and
scandalous, enticing and drawing inferiors to imitate their wicked practices;
so that seldom do these high Cedars fall, but they beat down many of the
lower shrubs that stand about them.

The uses of this doctrine either concern all men in general, Gods
uprightness should move us to mortify our sins.
or more especially respect those who are of higher place and condition: the
use which concerns all men is, first, that seeing the Lord who is to be their
judge, judges uprightly without respect of persons, they be hereby moved to
labor in the mortifying of their corruptions, in the and cleansing of their
souls from sin, that so they may appear righteous before him, and thereby
escape the severity of his justice. And this use Moses makes, Deuteronomy. 10. 16.
Circumcise Deu. 10. 16.
therefore the foreskinne of your hearts, and harden your necks no more. 17.
For the Lord your God, is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God, mighty
and terrible, which accepts no persons, nor takes reward.

The second use is, that we shake off security, whereby Gods justice should
make us to shake off security.
men carelessly go forward in their sins, as though God would never call them
to reckoning, or though he did, yet were so merciful that no place will be
left for his justice; such are to know, that as God is infinite in mercy, so
also he is infinite in justice, and therefore will execute his righteous
judgments, according to their works good or evil, without respect of any
man's person: so that it behooves every one carefully to watch over their own
ways, and to tremble with fear before Gods majesty, when as they find that
they live in any known sin without repentance. And this use is made by the
Apostle. 1 Pet. 1. 17. And if ye call him 1 Pet. 1. 17.
father, which without respect of persons judges according to every man's
work, pass the time of your dwelling here in fear.

The third general use is, that we do not offer wrongs God a just revenger of
wrongs.
and injuries against our neighbors, for though we can carry the matter so
cunningly that they can get no advantage against us before the judgment seat
of men, yet when God the upright Judge shall come in his visitation, he will
without respect of person revenge the wrongs of the injured, and pay every one
by that measure wherewith they have measured unto others. And this use also the
Apostle makes, diswading men from behauing themselves injuriously to others,
because he that does wrong shall receive for the wrong which he has done,
there being no respect of persons with GOD. Col. 3. 25.
Col. 3. 25.

The use which concerns Superiors: first, respects God punishes the
mighty as well as the weak.
those who excel others in power and riches, that they be not hereby
enbouldened to be insolent in offering injuryes, or cruel in oppressing the
poor and weak, knowing that there is a superior power unto theirs, who
naught respects their wealth and might, for he regards not bribes, nor
fears the face of the Prince, more then the basest subject, who one day will
go his circuit and visitation, and summon all to appear at his Assizes, and
will have the causes of the weak and needy, without partiality tried before
him: For he accepts not the persons of Princes, and regards not the rich
more then the poor, because they be all alike the work of his hands, as it is
Job. 34. 19. Job. 34. 19.


Secondly, it respects superiors in authority, as Magistrates, Magistrates
must execute righteous judgment.
and masters of families, that they be hereby moved not to abuse their
authority which God has put into their hands, to his dishonor and the hurt
of their neighbor. As first, that the Magistrates in the fear of the Lord
execute righteous judgment, without having respect of any man's person, place,
or state, not perverting justice for fear, favor, or reward; knowing that
there is a supreme Magistate above them, before whom they must be also judged,
who cannot be corrupted or perverted, from judging righteously, because there
is no iniquity with him, nor respect of persons, nor receiving of rewards, as
Iehosaphat speaks to his Judges. 2 Chronicles. 1 Chronicles. 19. 6. 7.
19. 6. 7. So likewise Masters of families, are so to behave themselves
toward their family and servants, in love, peaceablenesse and justice, as
knowing that they also have a master in heaven, and a judge of all their
actions, who will judge without all partiality, the person of the Master and
servant, being unto him both alike; and this use the Apostle makes of this
doctrine. Ephesians. 6. 9. Ephe. 6. 9.


The second thing to be considered is, that howsoever God does not continually
punish our sins, but deferreth his punishments to certain days of visitation.
wicked men do daily by their sins provoke Gods wrath, yet the Lord does not
continually inflict his punishments, but as a just and merciful Judge,
deferreth them unto certain times of visitation, and as it were unto certain
days of Assizes, as appears in this place; for howsoever the Priests were so
wholly corrupted in their ways, that they deserved present punishment, yet he
does not presently inflict it, but deferreth it to the day of his visitation:
so when the whole world was wholly corrupted with sin, yet he deferred their
punishment for the space of an hundred years. Though Sodom and Gomorrah
abounded in all wickedness, yet he put off the day of his visitation till the
measure of their sins was full: and though the Cananites were outragiously
sinful, yet the Lord deferred to punish them for many years, till their
sins were come to full ripeness. The causes of which delays are diverse: the
first and principal is Gods own nature, even his patience and long-suffering,
which makes him long in resolving to punish, and when he has resolved, slow
in execution: and this the Lord himself professes in that description whereby
he makes himself known. Exodus 34. 6. The Lord, the Lord, strong, Exodus 34.
6.
merciful and gracious, slow to anger. So David, Psalm. 103. 8. Psalm. 103. 8.
The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger and of great
kindness. 9. He will not always chide, etc. And this made Jonah loathe to
denounce destruction against Nineueh because he knew that he was a gracious God
and merciful, slow to anger, repenting him of evil. As it is Ion. 4. 2. The
second cause is, Ion. 4. 2.
that men may have time to turn from their sins by repentance, and so escape
his punishments. For God takes no delight in their destruction, but in their
conversion and salvation, as he protests. Ezech. 33. 11. And this end Ezech.
33. 11.
the Lord plainly notes, Esa. 30. 18. Yet therefore will the Esa. 30. 18.
Lord wait that he may have mercy upon you, etc. And the Apostle plainly
expresses it. Romans 2. 4. where he says, that Romans 2. 4.
Gods patience and long-suffering leads us to repentance. The Apostle Peter
likewise, whereas he says, that the Lord is patient toward us, because he
would have no man to perish, but would have all men to come to repentance. 2
Pet. 3. 9. Lastly, that he 2 Pet. 3. 9.
may leave the wicked and impenitent without excuse; for when as he has showed
himself loathe to punish both by his delays, and by using all means to
reclaim them, and yet they stubbornly persist in their wickedness, then are
the judgments of God inflicted upon them approved by all men, and even by
their own guilty consciences.

Notwithstanding howsoever the Lord for these and diverse Gods delaying
judgment makes men secure.
other causes deferreth the execution of his just vengeance, yet men abuse this
his long-suffering unto sin, either imagining with the Atheist, that he has
not thunderbolts enough to dart against every sinner for every fault, or that
there is no providence, no justice, no God that regards the sins of men: or
with the secure Worldling, that they may go on in their sins without
repentance, because these punishments which are so long delayed, will never be
inflicted; according to that, Eccle. 8. 11. because sentence against an evil
work is Eccl. 8. 11.
not executed speedely, therefore the heart of the children of men is fully set
in them to do evil. An example whereof we have in the evil servant. Mat. 24.
48. who because his master Mat. 24. 48.
deferred his coming, so behaved himself as though he would never come: and
in those mockers who because the day of judgment is deferred, therefore walk
after their own 2 Pet. 4. 3.
lusts; like herein unto foolish thieves, who imagine that because the Judge
does not every day sit upon the judgment seat, therefore they may securely
steal, because the Assizes will never come.

But such are to know, that as Gods mercy and patience will not suffer him to
make have in the punishing of sin, so his justice will not suffer him for
ever to let it go unpunished; and howsoever he does not use martial law in
executing justice as soon as the offense is committed, yet let them assure
themselves, that unless by repentance they plead their pardon, he will surely
visit them, either at his quarter Sessions in this life, or at his general
Assizes in the life to come. Though Saul were long repriued, after he was
condemned, yet at last came the fearful day of his execution. Though Naboths
blood was long unrevenged, yet at last God visited this sin, both upon Ahab,
Iesabell and all their posterity. Though for a time Jeroboam flourished in his
Idolatry, yet at length it brought a fearful destruction upon his whole
family. And though the Lord for a long while suffered the people of the Jews
with great patience and long-suffering, yet at last he paid them home, so that
now they are a spectacle of his heavy wrath unto all nations, and a reproach
and hissing to the whole world.

The use of this doctrine is, first, for our instruction, that we imitate the
Lord in his patience and long long-suffering, not letting the raines loose to
fury and revenge, upon every occasion, but rather striving to overcome evil
with goodness.

Secondly, for our admonition, that we do not abuse Gods patience to
impenitencie and hardness of heart, least whilst we thus heap up the measure
of our sins, we do also treasure up for our selves wrath against the day of
wrath, and of the declaration of the just judgment of God, who will reward
every man according to his works, as it is, Romans 2. 5. 6. Romans 2. 5. 6.


The third thing to be observed is, that he says he will visit their ways
upon them; thereby giving them to understand, God judges us according to our
usual conversation, and not our extraordinary actions.
that he would not in examining and judging of them stand upon their errors,
by-pathes, and extraordinary actions, but upon their usual behavior, and upon
their ordinary course in their life and conversation. From whence we learn
that the Lord in the day of his visitation will not regard nor examine our
sins to punish them, nor our good actions to reward them, if they be
extraordinary and extrauagant, but will deal with us according to our
customable carriage of our selves, and usual demeanure: so that if our way and
course of life wherein we walk, be the way of holiness and righteousness he
justifies and approves of us, notwithstanding our many slips and falls in this
way, and errors, by-pathes, and digressions out of this way: for not only
they are to be accounted blessed of God, who sin not, seeing thus the blessing
should belong to none of the sons of Adam Christ excepted, but they also are
blessed Who have not stood in the way of sinners, nor sat in the seat of the
scorners, as it is, Psalm. 1. 1. that is, who have not made Psalm. 1. 1.
a custom and usual practice of sin and wickedness; and the reason is,
because the Lord does not judge us as he finds us in some by-way, where into
we have been thrust with some violent or sudden passion, but according to
that way wherein we walk with a constant purpose and settled resolution. So it
is said that they are blessed, who are upright in their way, and walk in the
Law of the Lord, Psalm. 119 1. Psalm. 119. 1.
that is, they are blessed notwithstanding all their infirmities and
imperfections, who in the uprightness of their hearts desire to keep a
constant course in godliness; and howsoever they often go astray through
error and corruption, yet make choice of Gods Law as the way wherein they
desire to walk. For if the Lord should mark what is done amiss, who were
able to abide it? Psalm. 130. 3. If he should Enter into judgment with us, and
examine our particular Psalm. 130. 3.
faults, none that lives should be justified in his sight. Ps. 143. 2. Psalm.
143. 2.
But the Lord knows our weakness, and accepts of our desire and
endeavors, he does not deal with us after our sins, nor rewards us after our
iniquities: but as a father has compassion on his children, so has the Lord
compassion on them that fear him: for he knows whereof we be made, he
remembreh that we are but dust, as it is Psalm. 103. 10. 13. 14. Psalm. 103. 10.
13.


As therefore a loving father bears with the infirmities of his child, when
he sees that he takes good courses, and indeauoureth with an earnest desire
to please him: so the God pardons our infirmities when we have good
endeavors.
Lord much more accepts of the imperfect obedience of his children, when as
he sees that with upright hearts, they desire to serve and please him, covering
their imperfections with Christ's perfect righteousness, and washing away their
corruptions in his most precious blood, so as in the day of judgment they
shall not arise against them to their condemnation. Although David did make a
fearful digression out of the way of righteousness when as he committed
murder and adultery, and numbered the people, yet God did not judge him
according to these particular slips, because in the whole course of his life he
kept the ways of the Lord, and hated all by-ways of falsehood and iniquity,
as himself professes, Psalm. 18. 21. and 119. 104. He did not condemn Peter
for digressing into the way of iniquity Psalm. 18. 2. and 119. 104.
when as he denied his master, because he did not voluntarily make choice of
this way, but was suddenly thrust into it by violent fear; nor Paul because
he sometimes did the evil Mat. 26.
which he would not, being taken captive with the violence of sin, seeing he
was in his general course delighted in the Romans 7.
law of God, and did earnestly strive against his corruptions.

So in like manner, he judges the wicked according to their ways, and not
according to their particular actions, God respects not ague fits in religion.
neither does he respect their ague fits of Religion, and justice, when as
generally in the course of their life, they cast his laws behind their back,
and willingly walk in the ways of wickedness, but judges them according to
their ways, and the constant course of their conversation. So it is said that
the wicked should eat the fruit of their own ways. Prou. 1. 31. And the
Lord threatens to visit Jacob Pro. 1. 31.
according to his ways, Hos. 12. 2. Though Pharaoh sometimes Hos. 12. 2.
confessed his sin and justified God; though Saul uttered many good speeches,
and performed many actions which might well have beseemed a better man; though
Iehu in a fit showed great zeal in suppressing idolatry, and in erecting Gods
true worship; though Ahab once humbled himself before God, and by outward
signs testified his repentance; and though Herod hard John the Baptist
willingly, and in many things yielded obedience to his admonitions, yet none of
all these were approved by God, because whatsoever their particular actions
were, yet they were wicked in their ways, that is, in their life and
conversation.

The use of this doctrine is, that we labor for upright We must labor for
upright hearts.
hearts, and constantly resolve to forsake all sin, and to embrace all
righteousness in our lives and conuersations; and then if besides our purpose
and desire we digress out of the right way by falling into some sin through
infirmity and the violence of our corruptions, the Lord will spare us as a
father spares his child, who desires to please him, as he professes, Mal.
3. 17. Neither shall our imperfections and Mal. 3. 17.
slips, withdraw Gods love or hinder our salvation, because he does not visit
nor punish men, according to their errors and slips, but according to their
ways, and ordinary course of life.

Secondly, it serves for the terror of hipocrites, who securely God regards
not the extrauagant good deeds of hipocrits.
go on in the course of sin, thinking that God will be well pleased if at
sometimes they make a show of religion by going to the Church, or giving an
alms to a poor man, or by performing some other works of justice, mercy, or
liberality. But such are to know, that unless they keep a constant course in
godliness, and make the path of righteousness and holiness their ordinary way,
all their particular good works, which are but as it were so many steppings
aside out of their constant course of sinning, will little profit them in the
day of Gods visitation, because they shall be judged, not according to their
extrauagant good deeds, but according to their ways and ordinary conversation.

The last thing to be observed is, that he says he will reward God judges us
according to our outward actions.
them according to their deeds Whence we learn that in the execution of Gods
punishments and judgments, he does not proceed according to men's thoughts and
intentions, nor yet according to their speeches and words, but according to
their works and actions; so that it will not avail us, when God comes to
visit and judge us, to say that we have had many godly resolutions, religious
intentions, and a good meaning; nor yet that we have said, Lord, Lord, and made
a goodly profession of religion and godliness, if we have been profane and
unjust in life and conversation, and have not done the will of our father which
is in heaven. Mat. Mat. 7. 21.
7. 21. Seeing the Lord will reward us, not according to our thoughts and
words, but according to our deeds and works. Not that the Lord will in
judgment neglect the thoughts and words of the godly to reward them, and of
the wicked to punish them; for the Lord sees all things. Job. 42. 2. He Job.
42. 2.
searches the heart and reins. Ier. 17. 10. And he judges Ier. 17. 10.
even the very secrets of men. Romans 2. 16. And it is also said Romans 2. 16.
that men shall give an account of every idle word at the day of judgment.
Mat. 12. 36. But this is understood, that the Mat. 12. 36.
Lord will principally in giving sentence, in dispensing of his punishments and
rewards, respect our works and actions. So it is said. Romans 2. 6. That God will
regard every man according Romans 2. 6.
to their works. So Mat. 16. 27. it is said, that the Son of man Mat. 16. 27.
shall come in the glory of his father, with his Angels, and shall give to
every man according to his deeds. And the Apostle tells us, that we must all
appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may receive the
things which he has done in his body, whether good or evil. 2. Cor. 5. 10. So
likewise 2. Cor. 5. 10.
our Savior Christ setting down the form of the last judgment, shows that
the sentence shall be pronounced according to their works. Mat. 25. 35. 42. From
whence we are not Mat. 25. 35. 42
to gather with the Papists, that as wicked men are condemned for the demerit
of their evil works, so the godly are saved for the merit of their good
works; seeing there is not the like reason in that they are absolutely evil,
but these not absolutely good and perfect, and therefore cannot justify nor
save us before Gods judgment seat, they being imperfect; but only a lively
faith, which does apply unto us Christ's perfect righteousness. But for as much
as this faith is a spiritual grace, and not outwardly seen, therefore the
Lord to take away the brags of hypocrites, who would boast of that faith which
indeed they have not, and to approve unto all his righteous judgments in
dispensing of his rewards and punishments, does not judge according to the
root of faith which is hidden, but according to the fruits of good works which
are open and manifest.

The use of this doctrine is, that we do not with ignorant We must not content
our selves with our good meanings
people content our selves with our good meanings, nor with hypocrites rest in
glorious speeches and in a goodly profession of Religion, but that we labor
to approve both our good intentions and outward profession to be indeed sincere
and upright, by our holy practice and actual obedience. For not every one who
says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the
will of the father which is in heaven. Mat. 7. 21. Not the hearers of the Law,
but the doers Mat. 7. 21.
thereof shall be justified. Romans 2. 14. Not they that are bare Romans 2. 14.
Luke. 11. 28.
hearers of the Word, but they which hear it and keep it are blessed; as for
those who are professors of piety, and workers of iniquity, they shall be
separated from Christ and from his glory. Mat. 7. 23. Mat. 7. 23.


Secondly, it serves to show the miserable estate of the The miserable estate
of the wicked.
wicked in the day of Gods visitation, who shall have a proportion of
punishment according to their sins, for if every sin deserve everlasting
death, seeing Gods infinite justice being offended, cannot be satisfied but by
an infinite punishment, what a fearful measure of condemnation is prepared
for those, who shall bear the punishment of their sins which are innumerable,
and of which they have made an usual and common practice!

ANd so much concerning their punishment generally expressed. In the next place
it is particularly specified, Verse 10. For they shall eat and not have enough,
they shall commit Adultery and shall not increase, because they have left off
to take heed to the Lord. In which words he does proportionate The exposition.
a punishment to their sin, and withal adjoyneth another cause of all the
evil which he brought upon them. The punishment proportionable to their sin
is, that whereas they bent their whole endeavor to pamper the belly, and to
pass their days in all voluptuous excess, the Lord threatens that they
should spend all their labor in vain, for either they should not attain to
that plenty which they so earnestly desired, or though they had abundance, yet
he would withdraw his blessing and make all unprofitable, so as they should
find no contentment in any thing which they enjoyed: and whereas they
exceedingly desired to have store of children, unto whom they might leave that
abundant wealth which they had couetously scraped by the wicked abuse of their
office and Priesthood, that so they might perpetuate their names and continue
an everlasting memory of themselves in their posterity; and because they could
not have so many children as they desired in lawful marriage, therefore gave
themselves to unlawful lusts, and multiplied their adulteries, that so at
least they might increase a bastardly brood, who might succeed them; the Lord
threatens that he would cross them in this their wicked purpose also; for
howsoever they multipled their whoredoms for increase, yet their posterity
should not hereby be multiplied, but their name should perish notwithstanding
all their wicked devices to continue it, and their wealth which they desired
should be enjoyed by their children, should all come into the hands of
strangers.

The meaning then of these words is this, that because these Priests cared not
what wicked means they used so they might accomplish their desires, therefore
the Lord threatens to cross and curse them in all their impious designs, so
as they should by no means attain unto their evil purposes. More
particularly, because they were addicted unto all manner of wicked avarice,
that being enriched they might spend their time in voluptuous pleasures, he
therefore threatens, that though they had store of food, yet it should not
satisfy them; though they exceeded in all manner of voluptuous pleasures, yet
they should bring unto them no manner of contentment, but the more they fed
upon them, the more they should hunger after them; and howsoever they seemed
filled, yea and cloyed with them, yet they should not satisfy them, but rather
increase their appetite. And because for the increasing of their posterity,
they rather trusted to their adulteries, then to Gods blessing on their lawful
marriage, therefore he threatens that they should spend their strength in
vain, and notwithstanding all their wicked endeavors to the contrary, should
dye childelesse.

The cause and as it is were the root of all these evils, is discovered in
these words: Because they have left off to take heed to the Lord: or, to
observe and wait upon the Lord. Which words may admit of a general or more
special interpretation: generally they may be understood thus, that therefore
these evils came upon them, because they had given over to observe the Lord,
his will, and his commandments, that they might perform obedience unto them;
for servants are said to observe their masters when as they diligently wait
upon them, and are ready at their beck, marking and observing both out of
their words and countenances, what is their will and pleasure, that they may
obey it. And thus this phrase is used Zach. 11. 11. The poor of the sheep
which do Zach. 11. 11.
observe me, or wait upon me, that is, who endeavor to serve and please me.
So that in this sense the sin which is here laid to their charge was, that
they had given over to serve the Lord, and had forsaken his pure worship
prescribed in his word, and not marking what Gods will was, had given over
themselves to will worship, and the inventions of their own brain.

The more special interpretation, which I take to be most fit and agreeable to
the text is this; that because they had used all wicked and ungodly means, to
maintain themselves in voluptuous pleasures, to attain unto riches, and to
propagate their posterity, and had left off to observe the Lord, that is, to
wait upon him, in the use of lawful means, for the attaining unto their
desires, not regarding what was his will, so they might have their own will,
nor relying upon his providence, but upon their own unlawful shifts;
therefore he would cross them in their wicked courses, and would so curse
their ungodly means unto them, because they would not rely themselves upon
his blessing, in the use of those which were good, that they should perish in
their frustrated hopes, and altogether fail in their desires.

And this is the meaning of the words; the doctrines which God crosses the
purposes and plots of wicked worldlings.
that howsoever the wicked and ungodly do make sure account by their subtle
plots and mischievous practices to accomplish their desires, and to compass
what they will, yet the Lord so crosses them in their evil courses, that they
fail in their hopes, and are altogether disappointed in their designs; for
either the Lord does merely frustrate all their labor, in not suffering them
to attain unto such worldly benefits, which they pursue, or if they obtain
them, yet does not suffer them to enjoy them, because he withholds his
blessing, and all comfort and contentment in the use of them. For the first:
how many are there who have set their hearts wholly upon the world, and with far
more fervent desire have sought for temporal benefits, then the salvation of
their own souls, not caring what wicked means they used, so they might
accomplish their designs, and yet have been so crossed by God, that they
could never atchiue their wills? How many ambitious men have spent their whole
lives in climing the hill of honor, sometimes laboring to advance themselves
by Machiuilian policies; sometimes indeauouring to clime up by treading upon
other men's shoulders, not caring who fall so they may rise, and yet could never
make any ascent at all, or if they did, have tumbled down again before they
have come to the mid way, into the lowest bottom of shame and disgrace? Whilst
Adam sought to be in honor equal to God himself, he got a shameful
downfall and if Gods mercy had not stayed him by the way, he had fallen as
deep into hell as the Devil. The old world labored to get fame by raising a
Tower up to heaven; but the end was Babel, that is, confusion. Absolon desired
to seat himself upon the royal throne, but the advancement which he got, was
to be hanged on a Tree. Nebuchadnezzar would be honored as a God, but he was
abased under the condition of the meanest man, and became a companion of the
beasts. So how many covetous men have spent their time in greedy scraping of
riches, who in scraping have scattered them, and whilst (like Esops Dog) they
greedely grasped after that which they had not, lost that they had? How many is
there who in seeking wealth, have found poverty, proving that true in their
own experience (which the wise Prou. 23. 5.
man speaks) that riches takes her to her wings as an Eagle, and flees away
the faster, the more eagerly she is pursued? so how many have fixed their
minds wholly upon voluptuous pleasures, who by surfeiting, drunkenness, and
unlawful lusts, have drawn upon themselves grievous sicknesses and diseases,
and have ended their days in grief and misery?

The use hereof serves to show, the wretched estate of The wretched estate of
wicked worldlings
wicked worldlings, who miserably toil themselves in pursuing these
transitory trifles, and yet in the end do miss of their purpose and loose
all their labor; yea and that which is worst of all, after they have made sale
of their souls, by using all wicked means for the purchasing of these worldly
vanities, they are mocked in their hopes, and whilst they put out their hand
to receive their miserable bargain, and open the bag to see what they have
gained, they find in stead of honor shame, for riches poverty, and for
pleasures grief and misery. Herein not unlike to unhappy unthrifts, who
having sold their goodly patrimonies for a meals meat, after they have
passed from them all their title and intrest, be sent away empty without any
relief.

And this is the state of such wretched men, who using all wicked means for
the compassing of their desires, do after Wicked men have no comfort in
worldly benefits.
much hunting catch nothing: neither is the case of those much better who by
unlawful courses have gotten the possession of that which so eagerly they
pursued; for though they have it, yet they enjoy it not, though they abound in
all worldly things, yet they have no benefit by them, the Lord not giving them
hearts to use them to their comforts and contentation. For how many are there
who whilst they are pursuing these transitory trifles do highly esteem of
them, imagining that they should attain unto a high degree of happiness, if
they might attain them, but after that they have once possession of them, can
find in their use no comfort or contentation, either because they find them
far short of their expectation, or because they have in them as much trouble
and vexation, as pleasure and benefit, or finally in that they have wounded
their consciences by using wicked means in coming by them.

Others there are, whom the Lord gives over to be tormented The desires of
worldlings are in satiable.
with the hungry fury of insatiableness, whereby it comes to pass that
all which they get of these worldly vanities, serves but as fuel to increase
the flames of their lusts, as drink to their dropsy desires which nourish the
disease but do not quench their thirst, as sawces which rather sharpen the
appetite then allay their hunger, and as wind in the stomach which filling
satisfies not but rather tormenteth: the ambitious man can never be satisfied
with honor, but is more tormented when he sees but one above him, then
delighted when he sees thousands under him, and is more vexed with one
supposed disgrace, then contented with innumerable honors which are done unto
him, as appears in the example of Haman who was even sick with Ester. 5. 12.
13.
grief and despite when only Mordecay neglected him, though all the rest of
the emperors court did him obeisance.

So the covetous man is never satisfied with riches; according to that Eccle.
5. 9. He that loves silver shall never be Eccles. 5. 9.
satisfied with silver, and he that loves riches shall be without the fruit
thereof. Where he sets down a two-fould quality of a covetous man; the
first is that he is insatiable; whereby is comes to pass that the more he
has the more he desires, et cum habet quod voluit, non habet quod vult, when
he has what he desired he rests not satisfied, but still desires more;
and though he has too much yet he has never enough, though unto others he
seems to abound, yet in his own judgment he is still in want. In which
respect Pro. 27. 20. and 30 15.
Covetousness is compared to a bottomless gulf, or the grave, which are never
filled, and to horse-leaches, which are still sucking but are never satisfied.
The other is his misery, in that he depriueth himself of the fruition of that
which he possesses; for so wholly intentive is he in hunting after a new
pray, that he pineth with hunger, forgetting to feed upon that which he has
already caught* and so eager in pursuing that wealth which he has not, that he
quite forgets to use that he has, and therefore it is truly said, that
auarus eget tam quae habet, quam quae non habet, he has no more use of that
which he has* then of that which he has not; in regard of which his miserable
condition, the wise man prefers untimely birth before such a life. Eccle. 6.
3. Eccl. 6. 3.


So likewise the voluptuous man feeds continually upon pleasures but is never
satisfied with them, for when he has inioyed one, he hungreth after another,
and when he has enjoyed thousands, he is as far from contentment as at the
beginning; so that pleasures to the voluptuous are like unto sweet drinks; they
are delightful in the going down but never quench the thirst. Pro. 23. 35.
Pro. 23. 35.


The use of this doctrine is, that we do affect these worldly Worldly things
must be affected moderately,
things with great moderation, and that we use only those means which are
lawful for the accomplishing of our desires, for if we suffer our hearts to be
as it were nailed to the things of this life, then will they become so many
baits to draw us into tentations, and into the snares of the devil. And when
to obtain them we have taken a certain course to disinherite our selves of
heaven, and to enter into sure possession of hell, this heavy but just
judgment shall be added unto all the rest, that we shall be given over to be
tormented with the Canina appetentia, the greedy worm, so as we shall still
be feeding upon these earthly vanities but shall never be satisfied, and they
shall be unto us as painted meats, which may for a time please the eye, but
will rather increase our appetite, then allay our hunger.

The use is, that we set our hearts upon the Lord, and in the first place
seek heavenly things; for if we love the Lord, We must set our hearts upon the
Lord only.
we shall enjoy him, and he alone will thoroughly satisfy us with all joy and
contentment. If we fear the Lord, he will not only tickle and allure the
desire, but also fulfill and satisfy it. Psalm. 145. 19. If we delight in the
Lord, he will give us Psalm. 145. 19.
the desire of our heart. Psalm. 37. 5. And in a word, if we seek Psalm. 37. 4.
the Lord above all worldly things, then shall we want nothing which is good.
Psalm. 34. 10. Neither shall we need to fear, Psalm. 34. 10.
that by too earnest affecting heavenly things, we shall deprive our selves of
all earthly benefits, for we have a promise from God who cannot deceive us,
that if we will in the first place seek his kingdom and righteousness, all
earthly benefits necessary for us, shall be cast unto us as vantages to the
bargain. Mat. 6. 33. Mat. 6. 33.


The second thing to be observed is, that though we have Our meat nourishes us
not when Gods curse is upon it.
never so great abundance of meat, and all manner of provision, yet it will
never nourish and satisfy us, when God lays his curse upon it. So the Lord
threatens that if the people sinned, he would break the staff of bread, and
bring a twofold famine into the land; the one kind through the scarcity of
bread, which may be called the famine of the poor; the other through
insufficiency of it to nourish, whereby it should come to pass that eating they
should not be satisfied; with which famine the rich should be pinched as well
as the poor. Leu. 26. 26. The which judgment was Leu. 26. 26.
inflicted upon the Jews, as appears. Hag. 1. 6. Ye have sown Hag. 1. 6.
much and bring in little, ye eat but ye have not enough, ye drink but ye are
not filled, ye clothe you, but ye be not warm, and he that earneth wages,
puts the wages into a broken bag.

The reason hereof is, because the Lord is the God of nature, who has not
given to his creatures any absolute virtue and power, to attain unto the ends
for which they were created in their own strength, without his further
blessing; but has reserved unto himself a superior and ouer-ruling power,
whereby he can restrain their virtue and make them weak and impotent for any
use. Yea, so can he overrule them, that when he pleases he can accomplish by
them contrary effects to their own nature: as for example, if he withdraw his
blessing, and lay his curse upon them, bread and meat have no more power to
nourish us, then the earth or stones; nay contrariwise they serve as the
instruments of death to bring us to our end, and have the same operation with
deadly poison, causing us to fall into desperate diseases. Riches without Gods
blessing do not bring comfort and contentment, but torment the possessour with
care, and work in him a greedy insatiablenesse. Physic when God curses it,
kills in stead of curing; and the very air it self, which in it own
nature, refreshes the vital spirits, and preserves life, when Gods curse
lies on it, in stead of refreshing poysoneth us, and by the infection thereof,
brings the plague and pestilence.

The use hereof is, that when the Lord has given unto We must rest on God in
abundance as well as in want.
us plenty of meat, drink, apparel, riches, and all manner of provision,
that we do not rest upon, and trust in our store, as though being thus
furnished we had no further need of Gods help, which was the sin of the
rich fool, Luke 12. 19 who said to his soul, Soul thou have much goods laid
up for many years, live at ease, eat, drinck and take thy pastime. For if we
thus make an Idol of our own provision, by trusting and relying on it more
then on God himself, the Lord in his just judgment will break the staff of
bread, and so we trusting to a broken staff are sure to be most deceived, when
we most rest on it. Let us therefore learn, not only in the the time of
want, but also when we abound in all plenty, to beg at Gods hands our daily
bread, and to be as earnest in craving his continual blessing upon that which
he has already given us, as in imploring the supply of our wants, before we
have received it.

The second use serves to comfort Gods poor servants; God makes small
provision sufficient.
for seeing it is not in the virtue, and much less the quantity of the food
which we receive principally, that we are nourished, but in Gods blessing;
therefore though their store be small, they may safely rest upon Gods
providence, who as he can leave little virtue in great store, where he means
to curse, so he can add double virtue to single provision, and make their
small pittance as sufficient for the preserving of their health and strength,
as the great abundance of the rich. For as our Savior has taught us, We live
not by bread Mat. 4. 4.
only, but by every word which proceeds out of the mouth of God Mat. 4. 4.
If Elias have but one meals meat, yet God can add such virtue to it, that in
the strength thereof he shall be able to travail forty days; if the poor
widow will depend upon gods providence, though she have no more but a handful
of meal, and a cruse of Oil, yet it shall by Gods blessing be made sufficient
to preserve her the whole time of dearth. Though Daniell and his fellows have
only Dan. 1. 12. 15.
water and pulse to feed upon, because they would not transgress Gods
commandment to have better cheer, they shall thereby be fairer and in better
liking, then they who eat the portion of the kings meat. And who does not see
by daily experience, that our poor country people, who feed for the most part
upon hard cheese, milk, and roots, through the blessing of God, have greater
strength and better health, and longer life, then the richer sort who pamper
themselves with all dainties?

The last use is, that seeing we are for our nourishment to We must make our
provision by lawful means.
depend more upon Gods blessing then upon our own provision, hence we learn
to eat our bread in the sweat of our brows, and to furnish our store by
honest and lawful means, that so we may with comfort expect Gods blessing
upon our food: otherwise if we make our provision by wicked and unlawful
means, though we have abundance in possession, yet we shall have little
comfort in the use, seeing we can have no assurance of Gods blessing. For
example, if any get their goods by fraud and deceit, how can they hope that
the Lord will bless them in their theft, seeing he has plainly told them,
that they who eat the bread of deceit their mouth shall be filled with
gravel? Prou. 20. 17. How can they expect the Pro. 20. 17.
blessing of God upon that food which is gotten by oppression and cruelty,
whereby they eat the flesh and drink the blood of the poor, as the Prophet
speaks, Mich. 3. 3. Mich. 3. 3.
Seeing their meats swimming in blood call for vengeance, and even the stones
in their walls, and the timber of their houses cry unto the Lord against them
as it is Habac. 2. 11. Habac. 2. 11.


The third thing to be observed is the disposition of wicked men, who care not
what unlawful means they use, so they Wicked men use all unlawful means for
the compassing their desires.
may accomplish their desires. So the wicked priests coveting to have children,
who might inherit their wealth, and by continuing their name might keep them
in perpetual memory, and not having their desire satisfied by the ordinary
means of lawful marriage, in stead of fleeing unto God, who is the sole
author of generation, they take unto them harlots, and so imagined that by
multiplying their adulteries they should also have multiplied their posterity.
Thus when men desire to be rich, in stead of craving Gods blessing on their
honest labors, in whose hands the earth is and all that therein is, Psalm. 24.
1. they fall to using ungodly and Psalm. 24. 1.
dishonest means, fraud and deceit, oppression, extorsion, and all manner of
cruelty; when they affect advancement they do not seek Gods honor, that he
may honor them, but rather use Machiuilian policies to advance themselves, 1.
Sam. 2. 31.
not caring so they may rise though it be with the ruin of many others. And
the reason hereof is, because men trust in themselves more then in God, and
depend more upon their own providence then on Gods promises; imagining that
they are able to find out a readier way, and a far more speedy course, for the
atchieuing of their desires, then any is which God has prescribed. But
oftentimes it comes to pass, that they make more have then good speed, the
Lord frustrating their purposes, and bringing their counsels to naught.
Whilst Achan sought to be presently rich, and Ios. 7.
would not stay Gods appointed time, till he might enjoy his portion in the
Land of promise, he brought Gods fearful judgment upon himself and all his
family. When Gehezie 2 King. 5.
labored to enrich himself by unlawful means, he got gods curse with his
gains, even the leprosy upon himself and all his posterity. When Absolon
would needs sit on the throne Ezekiel. 7. 10.
before his time, though he purchased the crown with his fathers head, he was
hanged in a tree. When Haman would raise himself, though it were with the
ruin of all Gods Ester. 7. 10.
people, he was raised indeed, but it was upon the Gallows.

The use hereof is, that as we are to desire nothing but We must wait on Gods
blessing in the use of lawful means.
that which is good, so we are for the compassing of it to use only lawful
and good means, waiting upon Gods leisure, and watching for his blessing upon
our honest endeavors; and then we may undoubtedly hope, that if that which we
desire be good for us to receive, the Lord will grant it unto us, according to
his promises. Psalm. 27. 14. Hope in the Lord, be Psalm. 27. 14.
strong and he shall comfort thine heart. So Psalm. 37. 34. Wait on the Lord,
and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee that thou shall Psalm. 37. 34.
inherit the land. Prou. 20. 22. Wait upon the Lord and he Pro. 20. 22.
will save thee. But if we will prevent the Lord by our own subtle means,
and take a speedier course for the compassing of our desires, then he has
prescribed us, namely, by our crafty fetches, and unfaithful and dishonest
dealing, let us rest assured that either the Lord will cross all our devises,
and frustrate all our wicked endeavors, or if we obtain by these means the
things which we desire, they are given unto us in Gods wrath and not in his
love, and accordingly we shall find in the use of them a curse and not a
blessing.

ANd thus much concerning the sins and punishments, both of the Priests and
people. Now whereas it might be well wondered at, that the people who professed
themselves the people of God, a chosen nation, and more holy and religious then
al others, and that these priests who boasted that they were the Priests of the
Lord, and had the Law and testimonies, which they were daily to read, study
and publish unto the people, should be besotted with ignorance, and corrupted
with so many enormious crimes: in the next words he renders the reason,
namely, that they were become brutish in their sins, because by wallowing
themselves in brutish pleasures, they were wholly infatuated and deprived of
their understandings. This reason is expressed Verse 11. Whoredom, and wine
and new wine take away their heart. As though he should have said, it is no
marvel, that these The exposition.
Priests and people, howsoever they make profession of religion, are sottish in
their sins, and more like beasts then men; seeing by addicting themselves
wholly to brutish pleasures, they have lost the use of common reason, and have
no understanding in any good thing.

But let us more particularly set down the meaning of the words: By Whoredom
and wine some understand their Idolatry and delight in superstition; but I
rather take them in their literal sense. First, because they better so agree
with the verse going before, whereupon they seem to depend, in the which they
were condemned of voluptuousnes. Secondly, because howsoever Idolatry is
usually signified by whoredom, yet delight in Superstition, is not so fitly
signified by wine. Thirdly, because I hold it always best and safest to rest
in the plain and natural meaning, and not to run to Allegories, when such a
sense agrees with the Analogy of faith, and with the circumstances of the
place.

By Whoredom and Wine therefore, we are to understand generally all
voluptuous pleasures, and more especially the sin of uncleanness and
drunkenness, which above all other brutish pleasures rob men of their hearts,
and unto which they were principally addicted, as before has been showed.
Neither are we so to take it, as though Wine in it self were a stealer of
hearts, seeing if it be moderately used, it cheareth and refreshes the heart of
man, and makes him more sit for Gods service, to which end it was created; but
by Wine we are here to understand the excessive abuse of Wine unto
drunkenness, which takes away the heart, and quite extinguisheth the light of
reason. Esaias. 28. 7. Esaias. 28. 7.


It is further added unto Wine, New wine or sweet wine, Pro. 23. 30.
that by this repetion or rather addition he might amplyfie, and more fully set
forth their voluptuous excess in drinking, in that they mingled the new with
the old, or when they were glutted with the one, used the other that so they
might set an edge on their dulled appetites, and where their cloyed
intemperance, that thus they might gull it down in greater abundance. So that
by this addition he charge them, that not only they were addicted to
drunkenness, being overtaken through the infirmity of their nature, but that
they did voluntarily wallow in this sin with delight, and because they would
use it with greater pleasure, they tried new and wanton conclusions, and did as
it were set up a school of riot, and intemperance.

Where by the way, he also tasketh their great ingratitude, in that the better
the Lord fed them, the more they kicked against him; the more liberally he
multiplied his benefits, the more they abused them to wantonness,
voluptuousness, and all beastly Epicurisme.

It is further said that Whoredom, Wine, and new Wine did take away their
heart. Where by heart we are to understand all the chief faculties of the
soul, as the understanding and reason, the will and affections; so that
through their voluptuousness their minds were infatuated with blind
ignorance, their wills with-drawne from all goodness, and their affections
become so brutish that they delighted in nothing but in beastly sensuality.
And in this sense the heart is usually taken in the scriptures: for whereas man
consists of two principal parts, the body and the soul, the body is usually
called the flesh; the soul the heart. So Psalm. 84. 2. My Psalm. 84. 2.
heart and my flesh rejoice in the living God. 1 Pet. 3. 4. Let the 1. Pet. 3. 4.
hid man of the heart be vncorrupt. Psalm. 16. 9. Wherefore my heart Psalm. 16. 9.
is glad, my tongue rejoices, my flesh also does rest in hope. Genesis 6. 5. and
8. 12.
Genesis 6. 5. and 8. 21.

And this is the meaning of the words: the doctrines are The abuse of
prosperity through our corruption.
are the causes why men wallow themselves in voluptuous pleasures; not in their
own nature, for being so considered they are Gods good blessings and benefits,
but as through our corruption, they are abused unto sin. And this shows the
poisonous contagion of our natures, which so infecteth Gods creatures, that of
wholesome drinks they become deadly potions, of good evil, and of blessings
curses. The more God inlargeth our prosperity, and multiplyeth his benefits,
the better we should remember and love him, the more thankful we should be
unto him, the more zealous of his glory, the more dutiful, obedient, and
diligent in his service, seeing like a bountiful master he does so richly
reward our labors. And the more we abound in gods blessings, the more sobriety
and temperance we should show in the use of them; for we need not to be
rauenously greedy at a full table, and the greatness of the cheer should
rather abate then whet our appetites. But such is the hateful corruption of
our natures, that we make a quite contrary use of Gods benefits; for when men
are enriched with them, they forget God, they set their hearts on the world,
they never return praise to the author of all their good, they wax key cold in
their devotions, undutiful, negligent, idle and wholly addict themselves to
voluptuous pleasures, wastfully misspending Gods blessings in excess, riot,
wantonness, and belly-cheare, whereby they are made altogether unfit to
perform any service unto God, and most fit to serve satan, sin, the world,
and the lusts of their own flesh. An example whereof we have in this place;
for when the Priests and people flourished in prosperity, and abounded in
wealth, they gave themselves to all voluptuousnes, to Whoredom and drunkenness,
whereby they were wholly infatuated, and became ignorant and forgetful of Gods
Law, negligent in their callings, and unfit for any good duties. Many other
examples might be brought to illustrate this point. The Sodomites inhabiting a
Genesis 13. 8.
place which was so enriched with Gods benefits that it was like another
Paradize in pleasant store, abused these gifts of God to pride, gluttony,
drunkenness and all manner of unlawful Ezech. 16. 49.
lusts. The Israelites for a little while abounding in a place of want, in
stead of praising God for his benefits, sat Exodus 32.
down to eat and drink and rose up to play. The rich glutton, Luke. 16.
having store of wealth, spent it all in purple, fine linen, and delicate
fair, but had not of all his provision one meals meat to give unto Lazarus.
And the other rich man surnamed the fool, when he had filled his barnes, and
furnished himself with store, in stead of resolving to praise God for Luke 12.
19.
his benefits, and to employ them so as he might be glorified in the use of
his own gifts, resolves to live at ease, to eat, drinck and take his pastime.

The use of this doctrine is: first, to admonish those who flourish in
prosperity, and abound in Gods blessings that they be careful in employing
them to Gods glory, and so to use them, that they may serve as helps to further
them, in all holy and religious duties; for such is our natural corruption,
that if we do not prevent it with watchful diligence, we shall abuse Gods
bounty, and employ our abundance for the pampering of the flesh in all
voluptuousness.

The second use serves for the reproof of many in these days, who being
enriched with all abundant store, think upon no better use of Gods blessings,
but to consume them in pride, excess, gormandize, and drunkenness, never
remembering that where the Lord gives greatest wages, there he requires most
diligent service, nor that he bestows upon them abundance, that they may
supply others wants, and out of their superfluity relieve the poores
necessity. If it be to maintain Hawks and Hounds, and Harlots, excessive
bravery, gluttony, drinking and good fellowship, they care not to spend many
hundreds, but they can scarce afford a penny to the relief of Christ's poor
members, when as they are ready to pine with hunger.

The second thing to be observed is, that as voluptuous Voluptuous pleasures
transform men into beasts, especially whordome and drunkenness.
pleasures do take away the understanding and transform men into beasts, so
especially whoredom and drunkenness: for first, for Whoredom, it makes wise
men fools, and so infatuateth and besotteth the understanding, that there is
no place left, not only for spiritual wisdom, but not so much as for reason
and common sense. For they who are addicted to this vice, care not so they may
satisfy their carnal lusts, though they run headlong and blinde-fold into
all mischiefs; they expose their name to infamy and reproach; they wast their
substance in maintaining Harlots, and bring themselves to extreme poverty;
they are so blinded that they cannot see the odious behavior, the shameless
impudence, and ugly filthiness of their Harlots, but are ready to judge their
vices virtues, and to esteem them of greater excellence then any other; they
cast off all care of wife and children, as though they were mere strangers;
they lay aside all shame, and think nothing so filthy which they may not
speak, nothing so uncivil which they may not do in any presence; they
consume their strength, infect their bodies with loathsome diseases, shorten
their lives, and damn their own souls. And all these mischiefs they run
into to satisfy their filthy lusts, and to enjoy a short and brutish pleasure.
Hence it is that the Heathen called Venus (...), a stealer of hearts, and made
Cupid blind, because they who are possessed with lust, loose the light of
their understanding, and the use of reason. And hereof it is that the sin of
uncleanness by a certain kind of eminence is in the Sciptures called folly,
and the Adulterers fools. So Sichem when he deflowred Dina, is said to have
committed folly in Israel. Genesis 34. 7. So Thamar diswading Ammon from Genesis 34.
7. 2 Samuel 13. 12.
uncleanness, wills him not to commit that folly. So the wise man teaches
us, that he who commits Adultery with a woman, is destitute of
understanding, and destroys Prou. 6. 32. and 7. 7.
his own soul. Prou. 6. 32. and Chap. 7. ver. 7. he marshals him in the rank
of fools, I saw (says he) among the fools a young man destitute of
understanding. And least the similitude of folly should be too good to
express his madness, he compares him Verse. 22. To an ox led to the
slaughter, Pro. 7. 22.
to show that he was not only a fool, but also brutish in his folly. The
like may also be said of the sin of drunkenness, as I purpose else where to
show at large.

The use hereof is, that every one abstain from fornication, and possess his
vessel in holiness and honor, as the Apostle exhorts. 1 These. 4. 3. And
that like pilgrims we abstain 1. These. 4. 3.
from these fleshly lusts, because they fight against our souls, as it is, 1
Pet. 2. 11. For if we wallow in this sinck of 1. Pet. 2. 11.
filthy pleasures they will take away the heart, infatuate our understanding,
and deprive us of the use of reason; and so we shall be left, not only
destitute of piety religion and honesty, but also of common civility and
humanity, and become like unto brute beast, the formal difference of reason
being taken away.

The last thing to be observed is, that they who addict There is no mean or
moderation in unlawful pleasures
themselves to pleasures, are so wholly ouer-ruled by their lusts that they can
observe no mean or moderation, but grow from delight to curious wantonness,
and when they have satisfied their natural lusts and even dulled and cloyed
their sensual appetites, they fall to device how by art they may renew and
sharpen them. In which respect these voluptuous men are far worse then many
other sinners, whose state nevertheless is most damnable; namely such as
persevere in their sins without repentance, and will not leave sin till
sin leave them; but these after their sins have forsaken them, there being
wanting natural strength and means for Pro. 23. 30
the acting of them, will not forsake their sins, but use all alluring means
to intertaine them still, and earnestly endeavor to renew their strength that
they may renew their wickedness. Thus these drunkards when they were glutted
with wine, they added new wine, the one having strength to inflame them, the
other delightful sweetness to allure them, that so by this variety they
might set an edge on their dulled appetite, and make them as it were
long-winded and unwearied in this drunken exercise. So the glutton when he has
cloyed his stomach, with surfeiting and gormandize, and satisfied, yea
oppressed nature with loathing sacietie, he labors by art to repair nature,
and to thrust it forward by invention, when as it is quite tired; not only by
variety of dishes, the more dainty and delicate following the grosser and
more common fair, but by innumerable sorts of sauces, the usual harbingers of
gluttony and excess. So that now cookery is become an ingenious profession,
and requires as much time to make an exquisite proficient, as some one of the
liberal Sciences. The like also may be said of Fornicatours and Adulterers,
who when they have tired nature, and consumed their strength, labor to
re-enable their disabled concupiscence by exquisite wantonness, and when they
are satisfied as being beasts, they remain insatiable as being men, their
reasonable or rather unreasonable lust far exceeding their sensual
concupiscence. Hence it is, that when their lust has outrun their strength,
they labor to refresh it by obscoene speeches, wanton Pictures, dishonest
daliance, inflaming drincks, pampring meats, Italian roots, and when all this
will not suffice, they hire the noble art of Physic it self, to become a
baude to their uncleanness, as though they could not run fast enough unto
hell, unless they hastened their speed by laying all these Posthorses in the
way.

The use hereof is, that we give voluptuousnes her answer We must resist
voluptuousnes at the first.
when she makes her first motion, and turn it away with a frowning
countenance when it first knocks at the door of our hearts. For howsoever at
the entrance it looks bashfully (for sin knowing it own ugliness cannot
but be ashamed of it self) yet when it has once got intertainement it will
grow bold and impudent, not admitting any repulse. First, it will allure
nature, then delight it, then satisfy it, then glut it with loathsome
satietie, and when it is quite spent and tired, it will find means to refresh
it by curiosity and wantonness for a new conflict, but so as it is sure to
receive the greater foil.

AND so much concerning the third bill of indictment; wherein the people of
Israel, especially the Priests are accused and convicted of diverse heinous
crimes. Now least the people should think their faults extenuated, and
themselves acquitted either from the guilt or punishment of their sins,
because they were mislead by their blind and wicked guides, he teturneth
again unto them, and frames against them a new bill of indictment, wherein he
accuses them, that they wilfully joined with their false teachers in their
Idolatry, and were well contented to be guided by them, rather then by Gods
true Prophets; and therefore it was just with God, that both the blind leaders
and blind followers should fall together into the pit of destruction, seeing
they both wilfully did shut their eyes, and loved the darkness of ignorance
far better then the shining light of Gods truth.

This indictment contains two things: First, an accusation of sin:
Secondly, a denunciation of punishment. Their sin whereof he accuses them,
was their Idolatry, the which is of two kinds: first, their consulting with
their Idols: secondly, their worshipping of them by oblations and sacrifices.
Their consulting with their Idols is set down in these words, Verse 12. My
people ask counsel of their stocks, and their staff teaches them: for the
spirit of fornications has caused them to err, and they have gone a whoring
from under their God.

In which words is contained two things: first, their sin: The exposition.
secondly, the cause thereof. Their sin in these words: My people ask
counsel of their stocks, and their staff teaches them. Where first is set
down the persons who committed this wickedness, and then the quality of
their sin is also expressed. The persons are said to be not Heathens and
Pagans, but the people of God. My people ask counsel, etc. by which high
title it is not his purpose to grace them with any privilege of honor, or to
prefer them before the nations and infidels, but rather he raises them up
that he may give them the greater fall, and shows their honorable condition
whereunto they were advanced by Gods free and undeserved grace, that hereby he
may aggrauate the haynousnesse of their sin. As though he should have said,
if these outrageous sins be not to be excused in the gentiles and infidells,
who have only the dim light of Nature to be their guide, and whom I have
vouchsafed but common favors; then how intolerable is this wickedness being
committed by this people of Israel, unto whom above all the nations of the
earth, I have vouchsafed this royal privilege and prerogative, to be called
my chosen and peculiar people? unto whom I have given my laws, statutes, and
ordinances for their direction, and my Sacraments as assured seals of my love
and favor; upon whom I have multiplied innumerable benefits to encourage them
in my service: who have abounded with Oracles of infallible truth, as the event
has proved, and have continually had my Prophets to satisfy them in their
doubts, and to guide them in all truth: even this ungrateful people, after all
these benefits received, have causlesly forsaken me and no necessity urging
them have consulted with their Idols. Neither is this heinous fault committed
by some few persons, but as though they had made a common conspiracy, the
whole body of the people have associated and combined themselves together as
one man, in this apostacy and Idolatry.

The like place unto this we have Ier. 2. 10. 11. etc. Where the Lord sends
his people to the gentiles, to see if they Ier. 2. 10. 11.
could find the like wickedness committed by them against their Idols, which
they had committed against him the true and everliving God.

The sin committed by this people is, that they did ask council at their
stocks, and their staff did teach them, In which words their sins are both
expressed, and also their folly in committing of them exceedingly aggrauated.
But let us come to the meaning of the words. Some expositers not to be
neglected, do understand them allegorically, as though by wood and staff were
meant, their ignorant and false Prophets, upon whom they did rest and rely for
their direction in the right way, as the blind asks counsel, and relyeth
for his direction in his way upon his staff. But Allegories are needless
where the literal sense is more probable, and agreeable with the Text; and
besides it seems to me a far fetched and vnvsual Allegory, to signify
false Prophets by wood and staves, and therefore I rather think that as
ingenerall he accuses them of their Idolatry, in that they did go unto Idols,
call upon and worship them; so more especially that they did consult with them
and ask their counsel and direction about future events.

The particular sin therefore whereof he accuses them was their Idolatrous
and superstitious diuinations, whereof as there were many kinds, according to
the diverse instruments which they used, as divining by Oracles, by Lots, by
fire and water, by flying of Birds, and looking into the intrailes of Beasts,
by their tripodes, dead bodies, and the like; so were there amongst them these
two special kinds here mentioned, namely, when in their diuinations they used
wodden Author libri. 613. mandatorum.
Images, the which was called (...), and also when as for the same purpose they
used certain crooked wands or sticks, which were fitted for their use, with
certain Ceremonies, Pictures, and Characters written on them. The which kind
of Divination was called (...), of which Liuie in his Roman History and M.
Cicero in his books of Divination makes mention. So that their sin here
condemned was, that they forsook the Lord, and his true Prophets, and refusing
their direction, did consult with their Idols and Images, for the knowledge of
future events; using many heathenish superstitions, and devilish Ceremonies
for this purpose. An example of this sin we Ezech. 21. 21.
have in the king of Babell, Ezech. 21. 21. And the King of Babell stood in the
parting of the way, at the head of two ways, consulting by Divination, and
made his knives bright (namely, which he used in killing and cutting up his
sacrifices) he consulted with Idols and looked into the Liver. All which kinds
of abhominatio^s were in the Israelits much more abominable, seeing they had
the law of God, wherein they were expressly condemned, as appears Leu. 20. 27.
Deuteronomy. 8. 10. 11. 12. Leu 20. 27. Deuteronomy 18. 10. 11


Now this their sin is further aggrauated by diverse arguments; first, by
their shameless impudency, in that notwithstanding they consulted with these
Idols, and used all these devilish ceremonies, yet they still boasted that
they did not worship nor consult with the Images themselves, but God in the
Image. And therefore it is not said that they did ask counsel of their
Images, but in their Images, for so the Text has it; that is, used them as
their instruments, wherein they boasted that they consulted with the true God.
Secondly, he does not simply say that they consulted with an Image or staff,
but they ask counsel in their wood, and their staff teaches them,
signifying hereby that they had learned no such thing out of Gods word, where
all such practices are condemned as most odious abominations, but that they
were their own will-worships, human inventions, and devilish superstitions.

Lastly, he aggrauateth their sin, by their sottish folly, in that they had
not only refused the counsel and direction of the most wise and all-seeing
God, but also had made choice of base and blind Idols made of wood and stone
to be their guides and counsailours; which were in other things (though not in
this) far more senseless then themselves, and suffered themselves to be
advised and directed by their staves, which were not only destitute of
understanding, but also of sense and motion. but as it pleased themselves to
carry, move, turn and rule them, herein like unto blind men, who refer
themselves over to be guided by their staff in their way which themselves
carry. Yea, in truth herein far more blind and extremely sottish, in that
the blind man's staff, howsoever it does sometimes deceive, yet most commonly
it helps him to avoid dangers, whereas these men suffering themselves to be
guided by these staves of devilish superstition, are thereby misled into the
deep pit of eternal destruction.

This sottish folly of idolaters is most excellently deciphered by the Prophet
Esaias, Chap. 44. 14. 15. 16. where he says, Esa. 40. 20. 21. and 44. 14. 15.
that the blind Idolater takes a tree out of the forest, and burns the
half thereof even in the fire, and upon the half thereof he eats flesh, he
rosteth the roast, and is satisfied, also he warmeth himself and says, Aha, I
am warm, I have been at the fire, Verse 17. And the residue thereof he makes
a God, even his Idol, he boweth unto it, and worshippeth and prays unto it,
and says, deliver me for thou art my God, etc.

And this was the sin of the people of Israel: the cause whereby they became
so deeply besotted in this wickedness, is rendered in the next words: For the
spirit of Fornications has caused them to err, and they have gone a whoring
from under their God. Where the Prophet shows that it was no marvel they so
foully erred out of the way of truth, seeing they were wholly mislead by a spirit
of Fornications, which made them to go a whoring from under their God.

Now by this spirit of Fornications we are to understand not only the unclean
spirit Satan, who leads men into all manner of spiritual and corporal
filthiness, but more especially that vehement proannesse and fervent
inclination unto this spiritual whoredom and Idolatry, which was deeply
rooted in the hearts of the people: for vehement affections and earnest
inclinations, are with the Hebrews called the spirit of such things as are so
earnestly affected: as the spirit of Jealousy: Number. 5. 14. The spirit of Lying:
1 King. Number. 5. 14. 1. King. 22. 13. Esaias. 19. 14. and 29. 10. Zach. 13. 2. 1
John. 4. 6.
22. 13. The spirit of Giddiness: Esaias. 19. 14. The spirit of Drowsiness:
Esaias. 29. 10. The spirit of Uncleanness: Zach 13. 2. The spirit of error. 1
Ioh. 4. 6. In all which places is signified the exceeding proannes of man's
corrupt nature unto these evils, as though the very soul it self were wholly
set upon them, or as if the soul were not so much the subject of the vices,
and they the adjuncts, as the vices the subject of the Soul. And further this
proannesse is called a spirit Metonimically, to point out unto us the chief
author and fountain from whence it is diriued, even Satan the spirit of all
wickedness.

Moreover it is called the spirit of fornications, rather then the spirit of
idolatry, not only because he would persist in the former allegory of
marriage, but also that hereby he might point out as it were in lively colors
the disposition of idolaters. As though he would say, it fares with these
filthy idolaters, as with unclean adulterers; who are so blinded and inflamed
with their lust, and so besotted and hardened by their vice, that without either
shame or wit, like brute beasts they run headlong into their sin, and into
all those mischeifes which do accompany it, as though they were utterly
deprived of all judgment and understanding. And for this cause also he uses
the plural number fornications, rather then the singular, to note both their
furious earnestness and their accustomed practice in committing this sin.

Whereby he plainly shows that howsoever their Priests utterly neglected
their duty, yet were not the people hereby excused of their sins; both
because they gave themselves to voluptuous pleasures and thereby were deprived
of their understandings, and became proane unto all wickedness, and also because
they were not only outwardly mislead by their false teachers, but also had
inwardly in themselves a spirit of fornications, that is, a vehement pronesse
unto idolatry, wherewith they were wholly besotted.

Finally he adds, And they have gone a Whoring from under their God, that is,
they have quite shaken off the marriage yoke, and withdrawing themselves from
under the government and subjection of God their lawful husband, have wholly
given themselves over to spiritual uncleanness, and to commit whordome with
their impure Idols. The which words may be understood as a cause of the former,
that they therefore forsook the Lord, and gave themselves over to be ruled by
their Idols, because they were possessed with a spirit of fornications which
caused them to fall into these gross and absurd errors, or as an effect,
that therefore they were mislead by the spirit of fornications, because having
forsaken the Lord and his truth, he had given them over to a reprobate sense,
and suffered them to be deluded by a spirit of error, and with strong
delusions, because they would not embrace nor love the truth. For these are
mutual and reciprocal causes, to embrace false worship and idolatry, and to
forsake God; for when the idolater begins to worship his idols, he
renounceth the worship of God, and when he will not love nor delight himself
in Gods true worship and service, then the Lord gives up him to a reprobate
sense, and to be deluded with strong delusions, as the Apostle shows, Romans 1.
23. 24. 2 These. 2. 11. Romans 1. 23. 24. 2. These. 2. 11.


And so much concerning the meaning of the words: the The title of Gods people
does not grace or profit us vnlesie we live like the people of God.
benefit to profit and comfort us, that we bear the title of Gods people, and
abound in his temporal gifts and blessings, if our life be not conformable to
our titles and privileges; and if we do not thankfully employ Gods benefits
bestowed upon us, to the advancement of his glory, the good of his Church, and
the furthering of our own salvation: yea contrariwise if we use them as
encouragements to harten us in our sins, and ungratefully abuse them to Gods
dishonor and the disgrace of our profession, making them serve as vayles under
which we may more cunningly hide our leprous sores of sin and close acted
wickedness; then are they so far from gracing us that they wholly tend to our
discredit, and so far from being truly profitable, that they serve as so
many arguments to aggrauate our sins, and to approve the justice of Gods
righteous judgments when as he takes the most rigourous course in inflicting
punishments. It was an high privilege of honor to the people of Israel to be
entitled the people of God, but when they contemned his true worship, forsook
the Lord, and consulted with Idols, all this tended to their utter disgrace,
and to make their idolatry much more abominable then the idolatry of the
Gentiles. So it was a great dignity to the wicked Angels, that they were
created the most excellent of the creatures, and were made the immediate
Ministers of God, and as it were courtiars to the great King of heaven and
earth; but when as they most vngratfully sinned against such as gracious
creator, their excellency did not benefit them, but aggrauated their sin and
plunged them into the deepest bottom of just condemnation. It was a great
mercy of God vouchsafed to the Sodomites, that they were placed in Genesis 13. 8.
the garden of the world, where they abounded in all Gods temporal blessings,
but when they abused Gods goodness and by his benefits became more rebellious,
they were not hereby privileged from punishment, but inflamed Gods Genesis 19.
more fearful wrath against themselves, which caused fire and brimstone to
rain down from heaven and consume them. It was a great privilege to the
Israelites, to be the vineyard of the Lord, which he had hedged in from the
rest of the world for his own use and delight, but when they answered not to
Gods mercy in their obedience, but in stead of the sweet grapes of
righteousness, brought forth the sour Esaias. 5.
grapes of sin, the Lord did not only forsake it, but also pull down the
hedge, and laid it open to the common spoil. It was a singular prerogative
unto them, that they had amongst them the profession of Religion, and the
Temple of God, the place of Gods worship; but when they abused it as a visard
of hypocrisy, to countenance their sin, and as a shield to fence off all
Gods threatenings of punishment, God sends them to Shilo to see a pattern of
his fearful Ier. 7. 4. 12.
vengeance, which should also ouer-take them unless they repented. Finally, it
was a great dignity, and royal privilege to the people of the Jews, that
they enjoyed all earthly benefits in the land of Canaan, that they were Gods
peculiar people, with whom he had made his covenant; his chosen nation; his
royal Priesthood; the treasurers of his word; the keepers of his seals; and
that they had the first offer of eternal salvation by Christ, and of the
joyful tidings of the Gospel: but when they abused this rich mercy by
continuing in their rebellion, by stopping their ears to Christ's heavenly
Sermons; by crucifying the Lord of Life; and by continuing in final
impenitencie, after they were long called there unto by the preaching of the
Apostles; all Gods patience, long-suffering, and innumerable benefits, served
but as so many arguments to aggrauate their sins, to bring upon them more
fearful punishments, and to make their condemnation more horrible and
grievous, as may plainly appear by these places. Math. 11. 21. Luke. 13. 34.
35. Mat. 11. 21. Luke 13. 34. Romans 2. 4. 5.
Romans 2. 4. 5.

By all which it appears that Gods benefits are not blessings Gods blessings
abused do aggrauate our sins.
unto us if we do abuse them as motives unto sin, but rather they make our
sins out of measure sinful, and our punishments more intolerable. And of
this the reason is most apparent; for as it excuses the neglect of duty, when
the party to whom it is to be performed is but a mere stranger, and
extenuateth the fault, when as it is committed against an enemy, so it does
much aggrauate it, if he be a familiar acquaintance, or near friend, unto whom
we are deeply indebted for many benefits: if the wife do misdemeane her self
toward a crabbed and perverse husband, though it does not altogether excuse
her, yet it extenuateth her fault; but if she thus behave her self toward a
husband who is most kind and loving, and omitteth no good duty which can be
required of him, the world is ready to cry shame against such misbehauior. If
the servant neglects his duty to such a master as performs no duty unto
him, but defraudeth him of his wages, and daily oppresses him with new
injuries, although it will not justify his doings, yet it will lessen his
faults; but if this neglect be toward such a one as is loving and liberal, it
deserves justly a sharper censure and more severe punishment. So if the Lord
were unto us as a stranger or enemy, a bitter husband, or cruel master, we
might have som-what to say for the neglect of our duty; but seeing he is most
bountiful and benign, requiting every dram of love with a pound of
kindness, and rewarding every pennyworth of service, with a talent of wages,
yea, seeing he preuenteth us with his free grace, and begins, and
continues, and multiplyeth his benefits without any manner of our deserts, if
after all this we neglect our duties to such a God, so gracious, and infinite
in mercy, yea, and contrariwise abuse his own gifts to his dishonor, and take
occasion by his benefits the more to provoke his wrath by our sins, what
judgments are too heavy, what punishments too grievous for such unthankful
wretches?

The use hereof serves to teach us, not to content ous selves We must not
content our selves with the privileges of Christians unless we live their
lives.
with the privileges of Christians, unless we live the lives of Christians;
not to rest in Gods temporal benefits as being sufficient arguments of his
love, or undoubted pledges of our salvation, unless we have also the grace
given us to employ them to the advancement of Gods glory, and to use them to
those good and holy ends for which God has bestowed them. For it will nothing
avayle us that we are chosen out of the rest of the world to be Gods peculiar
people, unless as it becomes the inheritance of God we be purged from our
iniquities and be zealous of good works; it will Tit. 2. 14.
not profit us to be intertayned into Gods own family, if we do not behave
our selves as it becomes his children and servants; nor to have the covenant
and the seals thereof, the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, and the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords supper, unless this covenant be as well
written in our hearts as in our books, and be as fruitfully practiced, as it is
faithfully delivered. In a word we shall be never the better for the abundance
of temporal benefits as peace, plenty, health, liberty, and the rest, unless
as we surpass others in these privileges and pledges of Gods love, so also
we do excel them in love toward God, zeal, thankfulness, and holy
obedience: yea contrariwise if God have sown amongst us the seeds of his
mercies with a liberal hand, expecting a fruitful harvest of holiness and
righteousness, and we in stead hereof return unto him the ta^es and cockle of
sin and wickedness, we shall be but the nearer unto a curse, and his great
bounty and innumerable benefits shall serve as so many arguments to aggrauate
our sins, and multiply our punishments. That the Papists in vain boast of
the privileges, of their Church.


Secondly, it serves to beat down the glorious braggs of the Papists and
sinagogue of Rome, who boast themselves as being the peculiar people and Church
of God, upon whom the Lord has multiplied manifold benefits spiritual and
temporal, and in whose custody still remain the treasure of Gods word, and his
seals the Sacraments: but though it should be granted unto them that their
Church in former times has had these privileges, and that yet there remain
some steps and prints of them, this does not any whit commend them or make
their state the better, yea rather it serves to aggrauate their fearful
Apostasy, their heinous rebellion, and abominable idolatry, in which they
live and persevere, notwithstanding the Lord has formerly dealt so graciously
with them, and presently does not take that just vengeance of their sins,
which they long ago deserved. For howsoever the Lord has caused the light of
the Gospel to shine unto them, whereby he has discovered the sottish grosenes
of their idolatry and superstitions, yet they will not forsake their idols and
turn to the living God, Acts. 14. 15.
who has made heaven and earth, but like unto the Israelites here spoken of,
they worship their images of wood and stone, and daily commit more then
heathenish idolatry; they consult with their idols in all their difficulties
and dangers, going on pilgrimage unto them for their counsel and direction;
they make vows unto them, and offer them oblations in every high place, that
is, in the innumerable temples which they have erected for this purpose; and
they are so wholly seduced by the spirit of fornications, that if any man gain
say them in these their wicked courses, they are ready to pursue and persecute
him with sword, fire, and faggot. In a word they have wholly corrupted Gods
worship and service, and are become more sottish in their superstitions and
idolatry, then either the Turks or Pagans. So that if they will needs vaunt
themselves of their titles, that they are Gods people and Church, and in their
privileges which they have above others, they do but glory in their shame,
seeing they are so many arguments to aggrauate their sins and ungrateful
wickedness, in that they are worse then the Turks and infidels in her
idolatry and superstition, especially in this resspect, that they have had
many singular means granted them by God for their conversion and reformation,
which the other have wanted, and yet notwithstanding all Gods mercies, persist
in their apostacy and rebellion.

The second thing to be observed is, that the Lord condemns That it is an
heinous sin to worship Images.
it as a heinous sin, to worship Images, and to ask counsel of stocks and
stones. And in truth what groser Idolatry can be imagined then to give that
honor and worship which is proper the unto Lord, to the works of men's hands,
as to fall down before a base Idol, to creep unto it, to invocate it, and to
offer unto it vows and oblations? nevertheless how sottishly absurd soever
this Idolatry be, yet has it many patrones amongst those who make profession
of Christianity, namely, the whole Church of Rome, who allow by their doctrine
and practice, both the making and worshipping of Images, not only of God
himself and the three persons in Trinity, but also of Angels and Saints. But
we are to abhor this gross Idolatry, as being in the word of God condemned as
impious, and derided as sottish and ridiculous. It is expressly condemned in the
second commandment, Thou shall not make unto thy self any graven Image, etc.
So Deuteronomy. 4. 15. Take therefore good heed unto your selves, Deuteronomy. 4. 15.
for ye saw no Image in the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out of
the midst of the fire. 16. That you corrupt not your selves, and make you a
graven Image, or representation of any figure, whether it be male or female,
etc. So Leu. 19. 4. Leuit. 19. 4. and 26. 1. Esaias. 40. 18.
and 26. 1. Esa. 40. 18. And least we should think that this was only a
legal ordinance, which is abrogated by the Gospel, as one of the Papists does
impudently affirm, it is no Catharinus.
less strictly urged in the new Testament, and the neglect thereof condemned,
as appears. Romans 1. 23. 1 Cor. 10. 20 Romans 1. 23. 1 Cor. 10. 20. 1 John. 5.
21.
1 John. 5. 21.

And as the Lord has strictly forbidden and condemned this sin, so also has
he severely punished it, as we may see in the example of the Israelits, Exodus
32. In the time of the Exodus. 32.
Judges, and of the Kings, of Jeroboam, Ahab, and the rest, Deuteronomy. 27. 15. Psalm.
97. 7.
according to his word. Deuteronomy. 27. 15. Psalm. 97. 7.

But as the Lord has condemned the making and worshipping of Images as wicked,
so also as sottish and ridiculous, as may appear. Psalm. 115. 4. 5. etc. And
135. 16. Psalm. 115. 4. 5.
17. etc. Esaias. 40. 20. 21. etc. And 44. Ver. 9. to 21.

But it is objected by the Papists that Images are Lay The Papists confuted who
say that images are Lay men's books.
men's books. I answer that if Lay men have no better books, the greater is the
Cleargies sin, for the Lord has given the books of holy Scriptures, not
only unto them, but to the Laytie also, that by studying therein they may be
led into all truth; but they use them like little children or fools, for
taking away from them the rich treasure of Gods word, in stead thereof they
give unto them babies and pictures to play withal, to keep them as it were
from crying and complaining. They take away from them the profitable
schoolmaister which would thoroughly instruct them in the will of God, because
hereby all their juggling and deceit would be discovered; and give them Images
to be their play-fellowes. Yea, in truth they deal far worse with Gods
people, for childish babies, and play-fellowes, are unto children harmless
delights, whereas these Images are pernicious unto their souls, by seducing
them out of the way of truth into the way of error and falsehood, as the
Scriptures plainly teach us. Ier. 10. 15. They are called vanity and the work
of error, Ier. 10. 15.
not only because they grossly err that make, but they also that serve them.
They teach men indeed, but what is their doctrine? even the doctrine of
vanity, as it is Verse 8. They use a kind of dumb eloquence to persuade
simple men, but what is it they speak? The Prophet Zachary tells us, Zach.
10. 2. Surely the Idols have spoken vanity. They Zach. 10. 2.
teach Idiots, but what is their lesson? the Prophet Habakkuk Hab. 2. 18.
tells us, Chap. 2. ver. 18. They are teachers of Lies.

But they reply that in these places the Images of the heathens Not only Images
of the heathen Gods forbidden.
are condemned, but they make and worship only jmages of the true God and
saints. I answer that as in the commandment all manner of similitudes are
forbidden, so principally Images of the true Jehovah, as the Lawgiver does
Deuteronomy. 4. 12. Esaias. 40. 18. Act. 17. 29. Romans 1. 23.
expound himself in many places. Deuteronomy. 4. 12. 15. Esaias. 40 18 to 26. Act. 17.
29. Romans 1. 23. For what greater dishonor can be offered unto God, then to
represent him who is an invisible Majesty, by a base visible Creature, and to
circumscribe him in a little Image, who is infinite and incomprehensible?

Secondly, they object the Cherubins which covered the The Cherubins brazen and
serpent no excuse for Popish Images.
Mercy seat, and the brazen Serpent. To which I answer, that both the one and
the other make against them, for they were both made by Gods express
Commandment, but they make Images, which in his Law are expressly forbidden
and condemned. The Cherubins were made not to be worshipped, but to cover the
mercy seat, that when the glory of God appeared, men might be kept from
curious prying into his secrets, and that seeing no manner of similitude they
might make no resemblance of him. And the brazen Serpent was not erected that
the people should worship it, but that it should be a figure and type of
Christ, and a Sacrament of their curing and healing, not only in respect of
the wounds which the fiery Serpents made in their bodies, but of those
spiritual wounds which the old Serpent Satan had made both in body and soul
by the sting of sin. And when the people did alter the end and use thereof, and
abused it unto Idolatry, Ezekias in zeal to Gods glory did break it in
pieces. 1 King. 18. 4. King. 18. 4.


And thus they object for their making of Images: now The popish excuse for
worshipping images answered.
for their worshipping of them, which is the grosest kind of Idolatry, and so
extremely repugnant to the word of God; they allege in their excuse that they
do not worship the Images themselves, but only so far forth as they have
relation with the things whereof they are Images. To which I answer, that this
excuse is both false and vain: the falsehood of their doctrine appears by
their practice, for if they did not worship the images themselves, to what
purpose did they by their devices give unto them a seeming life and motion, as
the turning of the eyes, the moving of the hands, and the bending of the head
and body, and why was one Image had in great esteem, and another image of the
same Saint negiected and disregarded?

Secondly, their excuse is vain, seeing this is that Idolatry which is so much
condemned in the Scriptures: for the Israelites when they worshipped Images,
did profess that they did not worship the Idols of wood and stone, but God in
them; so when they made a golden Calfe in the wilderness, they had therein a
respect to God, who brought them out of the land of Egypt, and professed that
in it they worshipped the true Jehovah, as appears. Exodus 32. 4. 5. So Exodus
32. 4.
Micah his mother says, that she had dedicated the silver unto the Lord, to
make a graven and moulten Image. Iud. 17. 3. Judge. 17. 3.
So Jeroboam having made the golden Calves, says: behold O Israel thy Gods
which brought thee out of the land of Aegipt: 1 King. 12. 28. that is, the
Image and similitude which represents 1 King. 12. 28.
the true God: neither would any have been so sottish as to believe that the
Calves which themselves had lately made, had freed their forefathers out of
their captivity. And as we have heard the people worshipped not the Image of
Baal, but God in the Image: and therefore the Lord says, they should no more
call him Baali. Chap. 2. ver. Hos. 2. 16.
16. Yea even the heathens themselves thus excused their Idolatry, as Austine
witnesses: Non ego illum lapidem colo In Psalm. 96.
and adoro quem video, sed seruio ei quem non video. Quis est ille? Numen
quoddam invisibile quod praesidet illi simulachro: that is, I do not serve and
worship that stone which I see, but I serve him whom I do not see. And who is
he? a certain invisible and Divine power which has the charge of that Image.

The use of this Doctrine is, first that we laud and magnify We must laud
Gods name for freeing us from popish idolatry
the name of our gracious God, who has freed us from this more then Egyptian
darkness of Idolatry and superstition, and has placed us in his Goshen and
true Church, where by the clear shining light of his Gospel he has dispelled
these foggy mists of sottish ignorance, and has plainly discovered even to the
eyes of little children those doltish follies, with which the wisest of their
forefathers were blinded and misllead.

Secondly, it serves to admonish us, that we do not with the unthankful
Israelits desire to return again into this We must not desire to return into
this Romish servitude.
Egyptian servitude, because we would enjoy those pompous pleasures which the
advocates of Rome do offer unto us, but that we rather make choice of the
afflicted way of gods truth, which will in the end bring us to the heavenly
Canaan. And to this purpose we must avoid not only the grosest kinds of
Idolatry and superstition, but also all the pettite sorts thereof, yea we must
carefully fly the means of idolatry, as will worship, society with
Idolaters, especially in that near bond of marriage, ignorance of Gods true
religion, whereby we make our selves like blind men, which may easily be led
any way, and as it were an easy pray to be devoured of those locusts, the
Priests, and Jesuits, which are come out of the bottomless pit.

Lastly, we are hereby admonished to embrace and love We must love Gods truth
if we would not be seduced with Papists delusions.
the truth, which the Lord by the Ministers of his word has in such plentiful
manner and measure delivered unto us, least for the contempt of his Gospel, he
give us over to strong delusions, and to believe lies; which seduction is a
certain forerunner of eternal condemnation, as the Apostle shows 2 These. 2.
11. 12. And whilst we make profession of the 2. These. 2. 11. 12.
Gospel let us labor to bring forth the fruits thereof in holiness and
righteousness, least the Lord do cause his kingdom to be taken from us, and
bestow it upon some other nations, who will be more fruitful, for what should
they do Mat. 21. 43.
with the light who wilfully shut their eyes against it? and to what purpose
should they enjoy the Gospel of righteousness, who in their lives bring forth
nothing but the fruits of iniquity?

The third thing to be observed is, that the Lord condemns That it is an
heinous sin to use divination.
it as an heinous sin, to consult with idols, and to use divination for
direction in time of danger, or for knowledge of future things, which are
contingent. And this may further appear both by Gods earnest prohibitions of
the use of these unlawful arts, and by the punishments threatened and inflicted
upon the offenders. The Lord has straightly forbidden them, Deuteronomy. 18. 10. 11.
Let none be found amongst you Deuteronomy. 18. 10. 11.
that makes his son or daughter to go through the fire, or that uses
Witchcraft, or a regarder of times, or a marker of the flying of Fowls, or a
Sorcerer, or a Charmer, or that counsaileth with spirits, or a Southsayer, or
that asks counsel of the dead; for all that do such things are an
abomination unto the Lord, etc. The punishment denounced is death, Exodus. 22.
18. Exodus 22. 18.
Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live. So Leu. 20. 27. If a man Leu. 20. 27.
or woman, have a spirit of Divination in them, they shall dye the death, etc.
The which punishment was accordingly inflicted by Saul. 1 Samuel 28. 3. 9. And by
Josias. 2 King. 23 24. The 1 Samuel 28. 3. 9. 2 King. 23. 24
execution of which punishments the Lord takes upon himself if the
Magistrates neglect it, as it is, Mich. 5. 12. I will Mich. 5. 12.
cut off thine Inchanters out of thy Land. Besides which temporal death, the
Lord denounces death eternal, consisting both in the separation from the
joys of heaven, as appears, Apoc. 22. 15. and also in the torments of hell
fire, as Apoc. 22. 15. and 21. 8.
it is, Chap. 21. 8.

The like may be said of them who consult with diuiners, That it is a great
sin to consult with Witches. Leu. 19. 31.
and ask counsel of them; for as they join together in their horrible
sin, so they shall not be disioyned in their punishments. Their sin is
forbidden as heinous. Leu. 19. 13. Ye shall not regard them that work with
spirits, neither Southsayers, ye shall not seek to them, to be defiled with
them, I am the Lord your God. Their punishment denounced by God, is death, and
separation from the Church of God, as appears. Leu. 20. 6. The which
punishment was inflicted upon Leu. 20. 6.
Saul, for consulting with the witch of Endor. 1 Chr. 10. 13. 1 Chro. 10. 13
And upon Ahaziah for asking counsel of Baal-zebub the God of Ekron. 2 King.
1. 3. 4, 2 King. 1. 3. 4.


The use hereof serves to reprove many amongst us, who when either themselves
or their friends be sick, or when they have lost their goods by thieves or
other casualties, or when they curiously desire to know what shall befall them
in the time to come, are ready to use these wicked and Diabolical means for
the satisfying of their desires; wherein they bewray notable diffidence,
impiety, and folly: diffidence, in that if the Lord defer his help a little
while, they will not wait his leisure, nor trust in his promises, but rather
rely upon the devil, and upon the direction of his wicked instruments. Their
impiety is hereby manifested, in that they seek to free themselves from those
afflictions which God has laid upon them by Satan's help, (as it were)
whether God will or no, for if it were his will they should be released, he
would grant them lawful means. Lastly, they show their folly, not only in
that they inquire of them who have a spirit of divination, and of the
Southsayers who murmr and whisper, and leave the Lord most wise and most
mighty, and go from the living to the dead; contrary to, the admonition of the
Prophet, Esaias. 8. 19. but also in that they imagine they Esa. 8. 19.
can prevail against God by Satan's assistance, who is but his slave, and so
fast tied in chains, that he is not able to stir without his permission.

Fourthly, we here learn what is the cause why Idolaters, The cause why the
wisest Idolaters live in sottish superstitions.
who otherwise are exceeding wise, do live in most sottish superstition, and
are blinded with such childish follies as may move in any just cause of
admiration; namely, because they are seduced with a spirit of fornications,
that is, not only abandoned of Gods spirit, who leads us into all truth, but
also wholly lead with the unclean spirit Satan, the chief author of
spiritual whoredom, who begets in these children of disobedience a spirit
of Idolatry, that is, a vehement and earnest desire to live in this sin; with
which they are so wholly transported, that they go forward in their gross and
absurd courses, not only against religion, and the revealed will of God, but
against reason, nature, and common sense. An example hereof we have in the
Israelites, who howsoever they had so manifold experience of Gods mercy and
power, in multiplying his benefits upon them, and in their miraculous
deliverances, and preservation from their enemies, and of his severe justice in
punishing their Idolatries, yet were so seduced with this spirit of
fornications, that neither Gods mercyes nor judgments could restrain them
from forsaking his true worship, and serving the Idols of the Heathens, in as
gross manner as those who never heard of God and his word. The like experience
we have in the Papists at this day, who howsoever they are worldly wise, in the
things of this life, yet being bewitched and carried headlong with this spirit
of fornications, they suffer themselves wittingly and willingly to be abused by
their false teachers, as if they were the most ignorant idiots in the world;
they believe the carnal presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the altar,
contrary not only to religion but also to reason, nature, and their own
sense, and adore their breaden God with divine worship; they are content with
great sums of money to purchase pardon of their sins of the Pope, who is a
sinful man like themselves, yea the man of sin; they whip and torment
themselves before their idols like Baalls Priests; they creep to the Cross;
and go on pilgrimage to images of wood and stone, and by praying, vowing, and
offering unto them, they acknowledge them as their Gods, seeing they give unto
them all parts of divine worship, whereas they are creatures more base and
impotent then themselves; and whence proceeds all this but that they are
given over of God to strong delusions, and to believe lies, bewitched of the
evil spirit satan, and wholly transported and mislead with the spirit of
fornications.

The use hereof is, that howsoever we are sometime led We must take heed we be
not transported with the spirit of sin.
captive of sin, and through infirmity be overtaken with the corruption of
the flesh, yet that we carefully take heed we be not transported wholly with
the spirit of sin, desiring to break Gods commandments, and delighting in
our transgression. Let us watch over our hearts, that they may do faithful
service unto God though the other members be sometime inthralled in the
bondage of sin, and though in the spiritual conflict we receive some wounds of
satan, the world, and the flesh, yet let us be sure to keep fast buckled unto
us the breast plate of righteousness, sincerity, and integrity, so as we may
truly say with the Apostle Paul, that we delight in Romans 7. 22.
the law of God concerning the inner man, howsoever we find another law in our
members, rebelling against the law of our minds, leading us captive unto the
law of sin. Let us wholly resign our selves over to be guided by the spirit
of God, that so we may be assured that we are his sons and children; for if
Gods spirit be not our guide to lead us into all truth, Romans ^. 14.
we shall be seduced by the spirit of sin, and carried headlong into all manner
of sottish and outrageous wickedness.

Fifthly, we here learn that as soon as men addict themselves They that addict
themselves to idolatry shake of Gods yoke.
to will worship, superstition, and idolatry, they shake off Gods yoke, and
withdraw themselves from under his government; as the Israelits in this place,
who when they went a whoring after their idols, are said to have departed from
under their God. So Deu. 31. 16. They will go a whoring Deuteronomy. 31. 16.
after Gods of a strange land, and will forsake me and break my covenant. And
so themselves confess that they did forsake the Lord when they served Baalim,
Judge. 10. 10. though Judge. 10. 10.
they professed that in Baal they served the true God, as appears, Hos. 2.
16. Thus the Lord says that as soon as the people burnt incense unto their
Gods, and worshipped the Hos. 2. 16.
work of their own hands, they forsook him. Ier. 1. 16. Ier. 1. 16.


The reason is manifest, for they who refuse to be governed by the kings law,
and either make their own will a law, or submit themselves to be ruled by the
law of a strange Prince, they do not only reject the law but also refuse to
have that Prince for their governor; but the word of God, is his law and the
scepter of his kingdom, whereby he rules all his subjects, and therefore they
who will not be ruled by this law, but by their own will, and human
inventions and traditions, in refusing Gods law they refuse and forsake God
himself, and will not admit him for their governor. And hence it is that the
Lord joined these together, where he says, that Saul had forsaken him and had
not performed his commandments, 1 Samuel 15. 11. and 1 King. 11. 33, Because 1.
Sam. 15. 11. 1. King. 11. 33.
they have forsaken me, etc. and have not walked in my ways. Again the Lord
is our true husband; and the covenant of marriage on our part is, that we will
observe marriage fidelity, and keep our faith which we have plighted unto him
inviolable, which we perform when as we worship him alone in spirit and
truth, according to his revealed will: when as therefore we either go a
whoring after Idols, or in stead of Gods true worship, offer unto him our own
will worship, and humane inventions, we violate our faith, break the bond of
marriage between us, and so renounce the Lord from being our husband.

The use hereof is, that we most carefully avoid all manner of Idolatry,
Superstition, and will worship, and not flatter our selves with a conceit that
the Lord will be content with our devotion and good meaning, though it dissent
from his word, that we may prostrate our body unto an image, and reserve our
hearts for God, and that his will and our own wills, his Law and humane
inventions may well stand together, in his worship and service; for God and
Idols, the Ark and Dagon, light and darkness, righteousness and
unrighteousness, true religion and sottish superstition, will never agree
together, but as soon as we receive the one, we do ipso facto, exclude and
forsake the other, and therefore we are put to our choice, whether we will
forsake the true Jehovah, or the Idol Baal, Gods true religion, or our own
Superstions.

Hitherto we have spoken of their first kind of Idolatry, that is to say, their
consulting with Idols: The second follows, which is their worshipping of
them, by offering unto them sacrifices and oblations: Unto which is annexed the
punishment which is inflicted upon them, for both the one and the other. Verse
13. They sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains, and burn incense upon the
hills under the Oak, and the Poplar tree, and the Elm, because the shadow
thereof is good; therefore your daughters shall be harlots, and your spouses
shall be Whores, etc. The which words contain two parts: The exposition.
the first is an accusation of sin: the second is a denunciation of
punishment. Their sin was their Idolatrous worship, which also was performed
in places prohibited by Gods express commandment. They sacrifice upon the
tops of the mountains: Where he more plainly shows what he meant by the
spirit of fornications in the former Verse, namely, that they had forsaken the
Lord and his true worship, together with the place unto which it was
appropriated, and committed spiritual whoredom with their idols, which they
erected to themselves upon every hill and mountain.

So that here he accuses and condemns them of a double sin; the first was
their Idolatry, whereby they worshipped God in Idols and Images of wood and
stone, contrary to the express Word of God, both in the second commandment
and else where: the second was that they worshipped in prohibited places; for
the Lord had expressly charged them that they should offer their sacrifices in
no place, but in his Tabernacle and Temple, and that they should erect no other
Alters, but the Alter for the burnt offerings and for the incense, which
himself had caused to be made, and placed first in the Tabernacle, and then in
the Temple, as appears. Deuteronomy. 12. 11. 13. 14. 2 Chro. 7. 12. Exodus 20. 24.
Deuteronomy. 12. 11. 2 Chro. 7. 12. Exodus 20. 24. Deuteronomy. 27. 5. 6. Ios. 22. 10. 16.
Deuteronomy. 27. 5. 6. 7. Ios. 22. 10. 16. 19. Both that he might hereby restrain
them from will worship, and also that he might typically teach them, that as
they had but one Temple to serve in, so they had but one God to serve; as they
had but one Alter for their sacrifices, and one for their incense, so there was
but one Mediator which sanctified all their oblations, and perfumed all their
prayers, whereby they became like sweet odours in Gods nosthrils.

But they neglected the commandments of God, and erected altars, and offered
sacrifices upon the hills and mountains; imitating therein the heathenish
Gentiles, who erected their Temples in woods and groves upon the tops of hills,
according to that:

Lucus in vrbe fuit media, laetissimus vmbra, etc. Vir. Aeneid. lib. 1.

Hic Templum Iunoni ingens Sidonia Dido
Condebat.
Whereof also their Temples were called Phana, because in respect of their high
situation they were eminent and conspicuous; to which they were moved by these
considerations, because being more stately and majesticall, they thought them
more fit for divine worship, and also because they thought these places in
regard of their eminency nearer unto heaven, which is the place of Gods chief
residence, wherein they preferred heathenish will worship and their own natural
reason before the express word of God.

And this was that idolatrous superstition, which is so often condemned in the
books of the Kings and Chronicles; namely, that they did worship in the groves
and high places, yea and kings otherwise godly and religious, are blemished
with this note of disgrace, that they suffered such kind of worship, and did
not cut down the groves, and utterly demolish these idolatrous places. Thus
Solomon sinned in erecting an high place for Chemosh the abomination of Moab,
in the mountain, etc. as appears 1 King. 11. 7. And thus the Israelites 1.
King. 11. 7. Esaias. 57. 7. Ier. 2. 20. Ezech. 6. 13.
daily provoked Gods anger against them, as we see both in this place and in
diverse others. Esa. 57. 7. Ier. 2. 20. Ezec. 6. 13.

It is further added by way of more particular description that they burned
incense upon the hills, under the Oaks, and the Poplar tree, and the Elm; and
the reason moving them thereunto is adjoined, because the shadow thereof was
good, the meaning is that they sacrificed and burnt incense in their groves,
and made choice for this purpose of such trees, as were most pleasant, and by
reason of their broad and thick leaves, most fit to cast a delightful shadow,
which would not only shelter them from the schorching heat of the Sun, but
also stir up in them a kind of superstitious devotion. The which also was
increased by a conceit which they had of the trees themselves; for as they put
more holiness in the hills then in the valleys, so also in one tree more then
in another, in respect of the diverse idols, unto which they were consecrated,
according to that:

Populus Alcidae, gratissima vitis Iaccho,
formosae myrtus veneri, sua laurea Phoebo. Virg. eglog. 7.

That is, the Poplar tree is most acceptable to Hercules, the Vine to Bacchus,
the Myrrh tree to Venus, and the Bay tree to Apollo.

Whereby the Prophet shows, that they were utterly fallen away from the true
religion to Paganism and Heathenish superstition and idolatry; for which
sins they were much more inexcusable, both because for them principally the
Lord had cast out the nations before them, and also had given them express and
straight commandment, that they should utterly demolish and deface all these
idolatrous monuments, destroy the places wherein the nations served their Gods,
upon the high Mountains, and upon the hills, and under every green tree, and
overthrow their aulters, and break down their pillars, and burn their
groves, hew down the graven images of their Gods, and abolish their names out
of the place, Deuteronomy. 12. 2. 3. and 7. 4. 5. Deuteronomy. 12. 2. 3. and 7. 4. 5.


So that they could not pretend ignorance for their excuse, being sufficiently
instructed both by Gods works and also by his word, and therefore it is
manifest, that being wholly carried away with a spirit of fornications they
committed these sins proudly and presumptuously against Gods Majesty,
preferring humane inventions and their own superstitions before Gods revealed
will.

Nevertheless some color of excuse they had to blind their own judgments,
gagge their consciences, and to stop the mouths of all reprouers, namely,
because the shadow of these groves and trees was good, that is, both pleasant
and profitable; pleasant both in respect of the delightful shade, and the
sweetness of the air, which usually accompanyeth such places, and profitable
not only for the enlarging their devotions, but because they were thereby also
preserved from the scorching heat of the sun, with which the people of those
countries were sometimes molested, and so fitted as they thought with more
alacritrie to perform their religious services.

So that the cause why they transgressed Gods commandment was as it seems
their good meaning, whereby they imagined that by taking their own courses,
they should be much better fitted for his service, then by following his
direction in his word; which in truth was nothing else but carnal and
abominable pride in them, whereby they thought themselves wiser then God
himself, and preferred their own will worship and human inventions, before
Gods revealed will.

And thus have we seen what their sin was, as it is here plainly expressed;
the which also in the same words is much aggrauated: first, in that they did
not only seldom fall into this sin, but made it an usual and common
practice, and this is signified by the Verb here used in the original, which
being in the second Conjugation of Actiues, does imply the frequency of the
action, as Tremelius observes; as also where he says, that they sacrificed on
the mountains and hills, in the plural number, and under the Oak, Popler, and
Elm, whereby he intimates that the Israelites were not contented to commit
this Idolatry in one or two places, or upon some few Altars, but they had many
hills, many groves, many Alters, and many Chapels and Temples, which they had
erected in every part of the Land. Wherein it seems they gloryed as though
they were in better case, and much to be preferred before the Jews, seeing
they had but one Temple, and one Altar for sacrifices, and another for sweet
incense, where as they had great variety and choice of Temples and Alters for
their devotions.

Secondly, their sin was aggrauated by their shameless impudency, for they
did not commit their spiritual whoredoms in secret corners, but in the eye of
the world in most eminent places.

Lastly, in that they were not abashed at their wickedness, but rather justified
it by pretending their good meaning, advancing themselves before all who had
not aspired to the same degree of sin, and that through affected and wilful
ignorance, for their practice was repugnant and opposite to the express word
of God, which was not only committed unto them in writing, but also faithfully
expounded and zealously enforced by Gods true Prophets.

And this was the peoples sin: their punishment follows, whereof there is
two degrees: the first, that he would punish them in their family with shame
and reproach: the second, that he would withold the means, with which such
abuses should be reformed, whereby they were discredited and disgraced. The
first is contained in these words, therefore your Daughters shall be harlots,
and your Spouses shall be Whores. The which words some understand as the fruit
and effect of their Idolatry, both because spiritual whoredom is usually
finished and perfected with corporal adultery, as appears in the example of
the children of Israel, seduced by the daughters of Moab: Number. 25. 1. 2. 6.
and also because Number. 25. 1. 2. 6
husbands and fathers gave their wives and daughters fit occasion and
opportunity to play the harlots, whilst they absented themselves in the hills
and groves about their Superstitious devotions, yea, and provoked them also by
their bad example, when under color of Religion they gave themselves to all
uncleanness, as it is the usual practice of Idolaters.

But I rather expound these words, as the punishment the Lord threatens to
inflict upon them for their Idolatry; namely, that he would punish their
spiritual whoredom with carnal whoredom, and because by their frequent
Idolatries, they had grievously dishonored his name, therefore he would
disgrace and dishonor them, by causing their houses to become stews, and
their daughters and spouses, or daughters in Law (as the word may indifferently
signify) to become strumpets and common harlots. The which punishment the Lord
inflicted upon the Gentiles, who because they turned the glory of the
incorruptible God, into the similitude of the image of a corruptible man, and
of birds, etc. therefore God gave them up to their own hearts lusts, unto
uncleanness Romans 1. 23. 24.
and to defile their own bodies amongst themselves, etc. as it is, Romans 1. 23.
24. Where we are to observe that the Lord punishes one sin with another, not
by infusing corruption, or by provoking unto wickedness, but only by with
drawing his grace, and by giving men over to their own vile affection.

Now this punishment by the Law of requital, is proportionated unto their sin,
for as the Idolaters did rob God of his honor to give it unto Idols, so the
Lord threatens to spoil them of their honors, and to expose their names to
infamy 1 Samuel 2. 13.
and reproach, by suffering their wives and daughters to play the Harlots; and
because being his spouse and children they prostituted themselves to idols, and
exceedingly grieved him by their Adulteries, therefore he would vex them
also, by suffering their wives and children to defile themselves with
Adulterers, that so by their own grief, they might learn how much they had
grieved the Lord with their spiritual fornications.

Whereby the Lord shows, that in the day of his visitation he needs not to
seek far for means of revenge, seeing he could make them their own
executioners, and their nearest and dearest friends the instruments of his
wrath, to inflict on them deserved punishents.

And this is the meaning of the words. The doctrines God as well condemns
Idolatrous ceremonies as Idolatrous worship.
the Lord condemns it as a great sin, not only when men serve him with a
false and Idolatrous worship, but also when the manner, Ceremonies, and
circumstances are repugnant unto his word So the Israelites are here accused
and condemned, not only for their will worship and superstition in the service
of God it self, but also because they failed in respect of the place; for
whereas God had straightly charged them, that they should publicly worship
him, by sacrifices and oblations in his Tabernacle and Temple only, they
contrariwise erected Alters and offered sacrifices upon the hills and mountains.
So Nadab and Abihu were presently Leu. 10.
consumed with fire which came out from God, because they offered strange fire,
though they worshipped the true God, and that in other respects, with such
service as he required. Thus Saul was rejected, and Vzziah was smitten with 2
Chro. 26. 18. 19.
the Leprosy, because they usurped the Priests office.

The reason whereof is this, because the Lord is author of that commandment
which concerns the circumstance, as well as of that which concerns the
substance, and is no less disobeyed in the one then in the other. Neither does
the Lord so much respect the matter, or object of the transgression where about
it is made, as the mind of the transgressour, and the neglect, or contempt of
his commandment. For example in the sin of our first parents, he did not
respect the eating of the Apple, but their disobedience to his precept, their
pride, infidelity and rebellion. He did not regard the gathering of sticks on
the Sabbath day, but the contemptuous breach of his commandment, which he had
published immediately before. In a word, all the ceremonies of the law were in
themselves matters of no such necessity, but forasmuch as the Lord had
commanded ceremonial duties, as well as moral, and exercised the Churches
obedience in them both, therefore it was a great sin to contemn the ceremonies
and cerimoniall worship, because the commandment of God was transgressed
herein, as well as in the neglect of moral duties. And this is that which
Samuel told Saul, when he labored to extenuate his sin, that disobedience
was as the sin of witchcraft, and to transgress Gods express commandment
wilfully though in a small matter, was as Idolatry in his sight. 1 Samuel 15. 23.
1. Sam. 15. 23


The use hereof serves to teach us, that we submit our selves to be ruled by
the prescript rule of Gods word, as in all our actions, so especially in
performing the duties of his worship and service, neither declining unto the
right hand nor to the left; for to do more then he requires is superstition,
and to do less, profaneness. As therefore it was a sin in the old Law, to
offer sacrifice in any other place but in the temple, because God had restayned
his public service to that place alone; so it is a sin of superstition in the
time of the Gospel, to put more holiness in one Chruch then in another,
seeing now Christ has abrogated the ceremonies of the Law, and made all places
alike, requiring this alone of us, that in every place we lift up pure hands,
and worship God in spirit and truth, as it is, John. 4. 23. 24. John 4. 23. 24.


And as they superstitiously sin, which put difference in places dedicated to
Gods public worship and service, seeing in his word he has taken such
differences away, so they likewise offend, who confound public and private
worship, together with the places allotted to either of them, because god in
the scriptures has distinguished them. For example, when God requires public
worship on his sabbaths in the assemblies and congregation, it is a sin for
any man to neglect this, though he offer unto God his private service at home
by reading and praying. So whereas God in his public service requires
unanimity and uniformity, it is a sin for any in the assembly to distract
himself from the rest, and to make a rent in these holy exercises; as to read
privately when the Minister with the congregation prays publicly, or to pray
when he preaches. For if it be an absurd kind of vnmanerlinesse, to speak to
our better whilst he speaks unto us, because such confusion hinders both our
hearing and understanding, or whilst he conferreth with us about important
affairs, to turn from him and talk with another; then is it no less
absurdity to speak unto God in prayer, whilst he speaks unto us in the
Ministry of the Word, or when he deals with us about businesses of no
less moment then the salvation of our souls, to turn from him and give our
selves to private reading.

Secondly, we are taught hereby not to extenuate our sins, The maine evil in
sin is the transgression of Gods commandment.
by alleging that the things wherein we offend are but trifles, and matters
of small moment; for the maine evil in sin is the transgression of Gods
commandment, and the evil disposition of the sinner. Now Gods commandment is
broken in small matters, as well as in great, and a man may show more malice
and wickedness in committing a sin but light in it own nature, when as it is
committed upon knowledge, against the conscience, presumptuously, and
contemptuously against Gods majesty, then another who falls into a grievous
sin which is not aggrauated by these circumstances. What smaller matter in it
self then to eat an apple? yet here in our first parents did grievously
sin, because they transgressed Gods express commandment, and showed gross
infidelity and pride in this action. What less matter then to gather a few
sticks upon the sabbath day? yet Number. 15. 32.
because it was an action of contempt against Gods majesty, who in his law had
newly forbidden it, it was a more heinous sin in Gods sight, then David's
murder and adultery, because the one proceeded from malice of heart and profane
despite of God, the other from the frailty and infirmity of the flesh.

The second thing to be observed, is the spreading leprosy The spreading
leprosy of idolatry.
of idolatry, which if it once have infected us, though it seem but a small
specke or spot at the first, it will in short time over spread the whole body.
At the first through Ieroboams instigation the Israelits erected Idols but in
two places of the land, namely Dan and Bethell, but as we see, it so increased
in a small time that idols were erected and worshipped almost in every hill and
mountain, and under every green tree, as appears in this place. The like
example we have in the papists at this day; in former times they only erected
images in Churches, to put them in mind of Christ, and of the Saints, but when
they had thus far transgressed Gods commandment by their will worship, they
did not stay here, but have also given unto them divine worship, and have
multiplied their idols and images in number far above any heathens and
pagans; the cause hereof is, the corruption of man's nature, which is
exceedingly addicted to this idolatry and superstition, partly through
grosenesse of understanding, affecting a palpable deity and divine worship,
which is subject to the senses, and partly through pride, preferring his own
inventions and will worship, before the will of God revealed in his word.

The use hereof is, that we do not only flee from idolatry We must fly the
first beginnings of idolatry.
in the grosest kind, but also that we shun the first beginnings thereof,
for if in the least degree we give way unto it, we shall from one degree ascend
unto another, till we come to the highest; partly because we are naturally
possessed with a spirit of fornications, which carries us headlong into this
sin, and partly because the Lord will give us up to a reprobate sense, and to
be deluded with strong delusions, if we do not embrace and love his truth,
but incline to will worship and Idolatry.

The third thing to be observed is, that our good intentions Good intentions
having no sound ground no better then will worship
in Gods service, which have no ground in his word, are nothing else but
will worship and superstition. The Israelites made choice to worship in the
groves and under the green trees, because the shadow thereof was good, that
is, because they thought these pleasant places and delightful shade in the
sweet and open air, were most fit and convenient for religious worship: but
because this their good intention was contrary to Gods word, which restrained
public service and sacrifices unto the Temple at Jerusalem, their good meaning
could not privilege them from the just censure of Idolatry and Superstition.
So Aaron in a good intention made Exodus 32. 1. 5.
a golden calfe. Exodus 32. 1. 5. But it was condemned and punished as gross
Idolatry. Gedeon in a good intention made Judge. 8. 27.
an Ephod of the Midianitish pray, but it was an occasion of Idolatry, and the
ruin of his house; and Micahs mother in a good intention made a moulten Image,
Judge. 17. 3. and Judge. 17. 3.
Micah himself consecrated one of his sons to be a priest unto it, Verse. 5.
and entertained a Leuite for the same purpose, with the like good meaning, and
yet nevertheless all this was but gross superstition and Idolatry in Gods
sight.

The use hereof is, that we be not deluded with this conceit, that the Lord
will accept of any manner of service, so it proceed from a good meaning and
intention, for if it have no warrant out of Gods Word, but be repugnant
thereunto, whatsoever our meaning and intention be, it is but vvil-worship,
superstition and Idolatry in Gods sight. And therefore we must not examine what
we intend, but what God requires; not what we like as most fit and couenient,
but what is pleasing unto God. And this examination is to be made not according
to our own fantasies and carnal wisdom which as the Apostle says, is
emnitie against God, but Romans 8. 7.
according to the canon and rule of Gods word, which that we may the rather
do, let these reasons persuade us: first, because the Lord has straightly
forbidden and condemned all manner of vvil-worship, and in his service has
precisely restrained us to his word for our direction. Deu. 5. 32. Take Deuteronomy.
5. 32. and 12. 8. 32.
heed that you do as the Lord your God has commanded, turn not aside to the
right hand nor to the left, And 12. 8. Ye shall not do after all these
things, that we do here this day, that is, every man what seems him good in
his own eyes. And Verse. 32. Whatsoever I command you, take heed you do it,
thou shall Number. 15. 39. Prou. 39. 5. 6. Ezech. 20. 18. Col. 2. 20. The causes
why the Lord forbids all will worship.
put nothing thereto nor take ought there from. So Numb. 15. 39 Pro. 30. 5. 6.
Ezech. 20. 18. Col. 2. 20.

Now the causes why the Lord does so earnestly forbid all manner of
vvil-worship, are principally two: first, it does exceedingly derogate from his
wisdom, when as men do not think his laws sufficient for their government
and direction, but labor to perfect them by their own inventions, as though
they were wiser then God himself. Now if it be an odious thing to an earthly
prince that his subjects should take upon them to alter, or add, or detract
from his Laws, or in stead of submitting themselves to be governed thereby,
should make their own will a law, though they should make never so fair a
show of their good meaning and intentions; then how odious and abhorninable a
thing is it for us, thus to demean our selves toward God who is infinite in
wisdom, and the supreme king of heaven and earth.

Secondly, because where will worship and humane inventions Will Worship
banisheth the true service of God.
are intertayned, there soon after the true worship of God is expelled and
banished, for such is the averseness of man's corrupt nature toward the true
worship of God, and proannesse unto humane inventions and superstitions, that
when they are both together, he nourishes and makes high esteem of
will worship, as being the birth of his own brain, and utterly neglects Gods
pure and sincere service, which in his word he has prescribed, as though it
were the child of a stranger. And this is a notable fruit of pride and self
love, when as men prefer the wisdom of the flesh before the wisdom of
God, and their own inventious before his commandments. The which was the
sin of the Scribes and Pharisees, who as our Savior charged them, made the
commandments of God of no authority, whilst they established their own
traditions. Mat. 15. 16. And vvhilest they were Mat. 15. 16. and 23. 23.
over busy in tithing Mint, Annis, and Commin, they were wholy negligent in
the weight matters of Gods Law, as Judgment, Mercy and Fidelity, as it is,
Mat. 23. 23.

Secondly, it behooves us to embrace Gods pure and sincere Will Worship is vain
and unprofitable.
worship prescribed in his word, and to avoid vvil-vvorship and our own
superstitious devotions, because when we have spent our time and even tired
our selves in these things all our labor will be spent in vain. So the Lord
himself says, Mat. 15. 9. In vain they worship me, teaching Mat 15. 9.
for doctrines men's precepts. And the Apostle says that humain inventions and
traditions, as touch not, taste not, handle not, do perish in the using. Col.
2. 22. For if we would have Col. 2. 22.
any wages for our labor, we must do the Lords work which himself has
commanded, otherwise he will demand of us, as he did of the Israelits,
Esaias 1 12. Who has Esaias. 1. 12.
required these things at your hands. And will say unto us, as he did to the
Priests and people of Israel, Zach. 7. 5. When ye Zach. 7. 5.
fasted and mourned did ye fast unto me? did I approve it? and when ye did
eat and drink, did ye not eat and drink for your selves? should ye not
hear the words which the Lord has cried by the ministry of the former
Prophets? etc. The reason hereof is plain, for as the Lord has appointed us
to travail, so also he has appointed our way, out of which whosoever turns
aside, the faster he goes the further he is from the end of his journey, and
so spends his labor not only in vain but to loss. This is the way walk
in it. If we would offer our bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable
unto God, which is our reasonable serving of God, we must not follovv our
own inventions nor humane traditions, but labor to find out what is the
good will of God, acceptable, and perfect, as it is, Romans 12. 1. 2. And if we
would do good Romans 12. 1. 2.
works indeed, we must not follovv our own fantasy, but Gods
commandments: for we are created unto good works in Christ Jesus, which God
has ordained that we should walk in them, as it is, Ephesians. 2. 10.

Lastly, this may restrain us from Will Worship and Ephe. 2. 10.
superstition, in that whatsoever our good meaning and devotion Will Worship is
the service of satan, not of God.
is, yet in truth whilst we offer unto God superstitious and idolatrous
service, we do not worship the Lord but satan, the unclean spirit, and
chief author of this spiritual whoredom. So when the Israelites worshipped
idols, and offered sacrifices unto then, howsoever they pretended that they
worshipped the true Jehovah in them, yet the Lord plainly says, that they
did not offer unto God, but unto devils. Deuteronomy. 32. 17. So Psalm. 106. 37, They
offered their sons and daughters unto Devils. And the Lord plainly says,
that Deuteronomy. 32. 17. Psalm. 106. 37.
whilst they worshipped their images in the wilderness, they did not offer
unto him, whatsoever they pretended, as it is, Amos. 5. 25. The reason hereof
is plain, for whose will Amos. 5. 25.
we observe, them we obey; and their servants we are, to whom we yield
obedience, as the Apostle shows, To. 6. 16 Romans 6. 16.
But the will of God is, that we should worship him in spirit and truth,
according to the prescript rule of his Word, turning aside neither to the right
hand nor to the left; the will of Satan is, that either we do not worship
God at all, or that we worship him with our own wil-vvorship and
superstitious devotions; and therefore they who leave the sincere and pure
worship of God, and will not obey his revealed will, but serve him with
their own inventions and human traditions, they may be truly said
notwithstanding their good intentions to worship the devil, rather then the
true God.

The fourth thing to be observed is, that the Lord does God punishes one sin
with another.
not only punish sin with punishments properly so called, but also does
punish one sin with another, not by infusing wickedness, or by tempting,
that is, alluring or provoking men unto sin, for God thus tempts no man, as
it is, Iam. 1. 13. James 1. 13.
But by withdrawing his grace, and giving them over to be misled by their own
corruption. Thus he punished Pharaoh with hardness of heart, not by making it
hard but by denying the oil of his grace, whereby it should have been
softened. Thus he tempted David to number the people, 2 Samuel 24. 1. because
his wrath was kindled against Israel 2. Sam. 24. 1.
for their sins. Thus he punished the Gentiles Idolatry, by giving them up to
their own vile affections and to a reprobate sense. Romans 1. And thus in these
latter days, because men Romans 1.
will not love and embrace his truth, he sends amongst them strong
delusions, that they should believe lies. 2 These. 2. 11. And 2. These. 2. 11.
this is the most grievous punishment which can be inflicted in this life; for
other punishments through the blessing of God, are usual means to bring us
unto him, by true repentance, but when we are punished by adding sin unto
sin, we do more and more fly from him. Other punishments are sharp eye
salues, to make us see our misery, that we may be moved to sue for Gods
mercy, and do make us loath sin, when as we feel the smart, and see the cursed
fruit which it brings forth; but by this punishment men's understandings are
darkened, and their hearts hardened, and their consciences seared, and so
multiply their sins, and increase in fearful manner the measure of their
condemnation.

More particularly we here learn, that the Lord punishes God punishes
spiritual whordome with corporal uncleanness. Number. 25. 1. 2.
spiritual whoredom with corporal uncleanness, even as contrariwise he
punishes carnal adultery with spiritual fornication. Of the former we have
an Example in this place, and in the Israelites, who joined with the Moabites,
first in their Idolatry, and then in filthy whoredom. Yea, and in our own
times the Lord punishes the spiritual fornication of the Whore of Babylon,
the Church of Rome, by giving them up to vile affections, and to all kinds of
abominable filthiness, which makes them infamous throughout the world. Of
the latter we have an example in Solomon, who being vnmeasurably addicted to
the sin of uncleanness, and therefore given over of God to his own lusts, was
seduced by his strange wives to commit also with them spiritual whoredom with
their Idols.

The use of the general doctrine is, that we carefully take That it is a most
dangerous punishment when God punishes one sin with another.
heed least we securely lie under that heavy punishment, whereby God
punishes one sin with another; otherwise we may easily deceive our selves
and think our state happy when it is most miserable. When the Lord lays upon
us corporal punishments, our very sense and feeling puts us in mind of our
sins, and with a kind of urgent necessity forces us to sue for Gods favor
by unfeigned repentance: but for the most part we are insensible of this heavy
punishment, through the pleasing sweetness of sin, and the blindness of our
understanding in spiritual things. But the more difficulty there is in the
matter, the more circumspection let us use in watching over our selves; and
when Gods word teaches us, that God is just in punishing of sin, and our own
consciences tell us, that we have grievously offended; if we have no sensible
punishments laid upon us for our sins, in which we lie without repentance,
let us observe, if the Lord do not punish us by this other way, namely, by
giving us over to security and hardness of heart, and to commit sin upon sin
without any remorse or touch of conscience.

Now the best means to prevent this judgment is, to make a holy use of Gods
more gentle chastisements, to be moved thereby unto true repentance, for
usually the Lord does not inflict upon his Church this fearful punishment,
till they have often neglected and despised his fatherly corrections, whereby
they should have been reclaymed. So long as there is any hope of amendment,
the Lord uses his rod of chastisement, but when they will not be reformed,
but desperately sin against God, the Lord casts his rod aside, thrusts
them from under his discipline and government, and suffers them to run on
in their own wicked courses.

The use of the particular doctrine is, that we embrace Gods pure worship and
service, and do not defile our selves with Idolatry, superstition, and our own
vvil-worship, for if we dishonor the Lord by our spiritual whoredom he will
dishonor us by suffering those of our family to disgrace and discredit us by
their corporal whoredom. If we vex and grieve our gracious husbands, by
prostituting our souls and bodies to commit spiritual uncleanness with Idols,
he will vex and grieve us by suffering our wives and daughters to become
harlots, and by turning our houses into common stews.

Lastly, we may here observe, that the Lord never wants The Lord never
wants means to execute his judgments.
means to execute his judgments; for to say nothing of his own absolute
power, whereby he is able to destroy the sinner with a word of his mouth, he
has whole armies of his creatures ready to be the instruments of his wrath.
So that when men provoke his anger, he cannot only raise their enemies
against them to bring them to destruction, but even their familiar
acquaintance; yea even the children of their own body, and their wives who lie
in their bosom are ready to be the executioners of Gods vengeance when he
appoints them. When he meant to bring a judgment upon the house of Ahab, he
could make the tutors and gouerners 2. Kings. 10.
of his children, to become their executioners. When he purposed to cut off
proud Senacharib, he could use his own sons Adramelech and Sharezer, to take
away his 2. King. 19. 37.
life; and though David had had no other enemy which might have been Gods
scourge to correct his sin, his own son Absalon will not be wanting to
chastise him, so far forth as God permits; yea if the sinner had neither
friend nor enemy to execute Gods vengeance, he can make them to become their
own executioners, as we may see in the example of Saul, Achitophel, Judas,
Nero, and many others.

The use hereof is, that we do not by our sins, provoke God unto anger,
seeing we are not stronger then he, as the Apostle speaks; for besides his
own strength whereby he 1. Cor. 10. 22.
is able to destroy us every minute, he has the help of all his creatures,
yea he can use our own strength for our utter overthrow, and make our best
patrons and protecters to become our murderers.

Secondly, it serves to show the extreme folly of those who labor to please
men more then God, and to hazard the The folly of those who labor to please
men more then God.
loss of his love, by committing of sin against their knowledge and
conscience, rather then they will hazard the loss of the love of some carnal
friends, seeing if they had done that which is upright in Gods sight, they
should hereby have some assurance of Gods love, who has the hearts of men in
his hand, and can make their enemies to become their friends; whereas on the
other side when they provoke Gods wrath by their sins, he can easily make
those whom by evil means and wicked policies they have made their friends to
become their mortal foes, and the instruments of his anger, to take just
vengeance on them for their sins.

AND thus much concerning the first degree of their punishment: the second
follows, Verse 14. I will not visit your daughters when they are harlots,
nor your spouses when they are whores: for they themselves are separated (or
do separate themselves) with harlots, and sacrifice with whores, therefore the
people that does not understand shall fall. In which words are contained their
punishment, and the cause thereof: their punishment is particularly expressed
in the first words, I will not visit your daughters, etc. and then upon the
inferring of the cause, it is in more general sort repeated and ratified in
the last words, therefore the people that does not understand shall fall. The
cause of this punishment is expressed in these words, for they separate
themselves with harlots, and sacrifice with whores.

And these are the parts: the exposition follows. Some The Exposition Iunius
and Polanus.
of great learning and judgment, do read these words by way of
interrogation thus, should not I punish your daughters because they play the
harlots? etc. as though he should say, I will most certainly punish them, and
I appeal to your own consciences whether it be not just that they should be
punished for their uncleanness. The which interpretation they embrace because
they think that it could Heb. 13. 4.
not stand with Gods justice to suffer their adulteries to go unpunished.

But howsoever this exposition be agreeable with the analogy of faith, and is
not contrary to the circumstances of the place, yet I prefer before it our
own translation; first, because it better agrees with all antiquity:
secondly, because it more fitly accords with that which went before, and
that which follows. For before he said that he would punish the spiritual
whoredom of the Husbands and Fathers, with the corporal Adulteries of the
Wives and Daughters; and now he further shows the means whereby he would
inflict this punishment; not by infusing this wickedness into them, or by
inclining or urging them to commit these sins, but by not only withholding
his grace which should stay them, and so leaving them to their own natural
corruption, which in it self was most prone to this uncleanness, but also by
denying to chastise and correct them for their sins, whereby they might have
been restrained or reclaimed from them, the which impunitie would be an
occasion through their corruption, to make them more securely to go forward in
their wickedness. And because it might seem hard that the God of justice
should, when sin abounded, make a non-sizes, and tolerate such wickedness:
he shows in the next words the cause hereof, namely, that he suffered their
Wives and Daughters to live in whoredom and uncleanness, that hereby he might
punish with reproachful infamy and shameful disgrace their Husbands and
Fathers, because they committed both carnal and spiritual whoredom against
him.

Yea, but howsoever it was just with God to punish the sins of the husband
and fathers, with the sins of the wives and daughters, yet how can this stand
with his justice not to punish their sins also? I answer that we are not to
understand these words generally and absolutely, as though he would inflict
upon them no kind of punishment, or at no time visit them for their sins.
For it is said, that whoremongers and adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13. 14.
but more specially, that he would not lay upon them that kind of punishment
which is called chastisement and correction, whereby God restrains his
children from sin, or reclaymeth them by repentance when as they are fallen
into it; and that he would not punish them as yet, but would suffer them to
go on in their sins, until thereby he had punished the sins of their
husbands and fathers, and then when the measure of both their wickedness
was full, he would ouerwhelme them all in an universal deluge of his
judgments, both in this life and the life to come.

And this was their punishment: now the cause is annexed; for they separate
with Harlots, and sacrifice with Whores: which words some read also with an
interogation, and do expound them thus: should not I punish your daughters
because they are harlots? etc. Because they, that is, their fathers do
separate, that is, make choice with their harlots at home of their best and
fattest things, which they may offer with their Whores publicly under show of
religion. But this exposition seems forced and far fetched, that the Lord
should punish the daughters and wives vvhoredomes, because the fathers and
husbands joined with harlots in their Idolatry, besides that addition of
separating the fattest things for Idotrous sacrifices, stands but upon bare
conjecture; to say nothing of the interrogation and changing of the natural
signification of the particles, where no necessity urges and constrains. And
therefore I rather choose another exposition, which better agrees with the
words of the Text, and with the drift of the Prophet in this place. For
whereas before he had said he would not by his punishments restrain their
daughters and wives from their adulteries, whereby they were utterly disgraced,
and their houses made infamous; in these words he justifies this his heavy
punishment, by showing that he had just cause to inflict it. For there was no
reason why their name and reputation should be in any account with him, seeing
they themselves had no regard of his glory, but had shamefully dishonored his
holy name by making an apostasy from him and his true Religion, and committing
both carnal and spiritual whoredom with their lovers.

And this is the general meaning and maine drift of the Prophet, the which
will more evidently appear in the more particular examining of the words.
Where first we are to note that in this speech there is a change of the
person, for in the beginning he said, your daughters, etc. In which tenor if
he had proceeded he should have added, for you separate your selves, etc. but
he turns his speech from them and uses the third person, for they separate,
etc. the which howsoever it is usual in the writings of the Prophets, yet it
seems this conversion of speech is purposely in this place affected; for by
turning from them he shows his indignation and detestation of their sin,
as though they were so defiled with their corporal and spiritual whoredoms,
that they were not worthy to be spoken unto from the Lord.

It is further added: for they separate with harlots, etc. the original word
Paradh, which is here translated Separate, is as some think derived from
Peredh, which signifies a Mule, which is so named because amongst all the
beasts they are most adultrous and lustful, howsoever they do not generate.
And therefore Drusius thinks the latin word diuidunt most fit to express
the meaning of it, which sometimes signifies the act of uncleanness. So Plautus
in Aulular.

Me tu quidem hercle (dicam palam) non diuides. By this phrase then is
signified both their spiritual and corporal whoredom; their spiritual
whoredom which is here principally understood by way of Allegory consisted
herein, that they separated and divided themselves from the Lord their true
husband, by breaking the bond of marriage, forsaking his true religion, and
prostituting themselves to commit spiritual whoredom with their idols. Which
spiritual fornication well deserved to be punished with corporal adultery,
that as they dishonored God by the one, so the Lord should cause them to be
dishonored by the other. Their carnal adultery by themselves committed may
here also be employed, as an effect of the spiritual, in which respect also
they made diverse kinds of separation with their harlots. For they separated
themselves from their lawful wives, to join with harlots, and separated their
harlots from their Husbands, to join with them, and both together separated
themselves from the company of men, because this vice of whoredom lurketh in
corners, and loves the veil of night and darkness which hides from the eyes
of men her foul deformity and ugly filthiness.

And I do the rather expound these words in this general sense, both because
they may well bear it, and also because this spiritual and carnal whoredom
are seldom severed, it being an usual paradoxe with idolaters to judge the
sins of uncleanness to be venial, as we may see in the example of the
Israelites in former times, and in the Papists at this day, whose devotions and
superstitions are so polluted with carnal filthiness, that all Christendom
does take knowledge thereof. Now in this respect also it was just with God to
punish them with the adulteries of their wives and daughters, for seeing they
had defiled and deflowred other men's wives and daughters* it was a just and
proportionable punishment, that theirs also should grind unto other men, as
Job speaks. Job. 31. 9. 10.


Now this their sin is more plainly signified in the next words, where he
says, that they did sacrifice with whores: Where he shows that as their
hearts were divided from God, and joined both with their spiritual and carnal
lovers, so they made profession of their apostasy and adultery in their open
practice; for as they secretly committed carnal whoredom with their strumpets
under color of religion and devotion, so they openly joined with them in their
spiritual adultery and idolatry, by sacrificing unto their idols. And here
again I expound the words both of corporal and spiritual filthiness,
because as their sacrificing is expressed plainly, and not by Allegory, so
we are to understand the other word (their whores) not by Metaphor, but in it
own signification. And therefore as by their sacrificing is signified their
spiritual whoredom, so by their sacrificing with harlots is employed also
their carnal uncleanness.

And thus I have showed both their punishment and the cause thereof: now in the
last words is contained a further reason, why they should be thus severely
punished, and then their punishment is in some general terms repeated and
ratified. The reason is, because they were a people that did not understand,
that is, a people not only destitute of the knowledge of God and his true
Religion, but also so besotted in their superstitions, and so wholy possessed
with affected ignorance, and vvilfull indociblenesse, that neither Gods Word,
nor his works, his mercies nor his judgments, would make them to see their
sins or bring them to repentance.

Where he takes away an objection, which might be made by the hipocrites,
namely, that it would not stand with the justice of God to deal so severely
with the people; for they had a good meaning in all their devotions, and if
they failed in the manner of worshipping God, it was through ignorance, and
therefore to be excused. To which objection, the Prophet seems to answer,
that they were ignorant indeed, and by reason hereof they fell into all manner
of sin, but their ignorance did not excuse their faults, neither was it self
to be excused, seeing they contemned the means of knowledge and remained
ignorant, because they would be ignorant, and affected the darkness of
superstition, more then the light of Gods truth.

The punishment denounced is, that they shall fall; that is, because they are
indocible and will not by any means be informed in the right course,
therefore the Lord will give them over to their own blindness of mind, that
so they may go on in their superstition and Idolatryes, and remain perplexed
in their reprobate errors, until at length they stumble, and fall into the
pit of utter ruin and destruction.

And this is the meaning of the words: The Doctrines wealth or family, when as
he suffers sin and wickedness It is a fearful judgment when God does
not restrain us from sin by his chastisements.
to abound, and does not restrain men by his punishments, nor reclaim them by
his corrections: And contrariwise that it is a sign of Gods love and fatherly
care over those whom he does chastise with manifold afflictions for their
sins, that so he may reclaim them from their evil ways; whereas if they
should flourish in their wickedness, it would be a notable means to hearten
them in their sin, and to make them securely to go forward in their evil
courses, without ever calling themselves to a reckoning.

And this may appear both by testimonies of Scripture, by Examples, and by
Reason. For the first, the Apostle Paul says, that the Lord does suffer with
long patience Romans 9. 22.
the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction, to show his wrath, and to make
his power known, that is, he suffers them to go on in their sins without
punishment, that when they abuse his patience and long suffering as
encouragements in their wickedness, he may have just occasion to manifest his
power and wrath in taking due vengeance on them. So when the Israelites did go
on in their sins, and would neither be reformed by his mercyes, nor his
judgments, he threatens that he will correct them no more. Esaias. 1. 5.
Whereupon it would follow, Esaias. 1. 5.
that being left unto themselves, they would desperately and securely live in
sin, for when as God does not visit men for their sins, they go forward
in them, as though they should never be called to a reckoning, as it
appears. Ecclesiast. 8. 11. Because sentence against an evil work is
Eccles. 8. 11.
not executed speedely, therefore the heart of the Children of men is fully set
in them to do evil. So the Lord renders this reason why the people did not
reverence, nor fear him, nor remember him, nor his word, Esaias. 57. 11. Is it
not (says Esaias. 57 11.
he) because I hold my peace, and that of long time, therefore thou fear
not me?

But on the other side it is a notable sign of Gods mercy It is an notable
sign of mercy when God corrects us for sin.
and love, when as he crosses us in our wicked courses, and will not suffer
us to prosper in our sins, that being by these afflictions discouraged in our
evil ways, we may return back, and prevent his heavy judgments by true
repentance. To this purpose the Apostle says, that when we are judged, we
are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world, 1 Corinthians. 11. 32. And 1. Cor. 11. 32.
therefore he makes it a sign of Gods love, and an argument of our adoption,
when as we are chastened of the Apoc. 3. 21. Heb. 12. 6. 10. 11.
Lord. Hebrew. 12. 6. Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every
son whom he receives; And on the other side concludes, that those who live
in sin and are not chastised they are bastards, and no sons. For as
impunitie causes these to go on in wickedness to their destruction, so
affliction howsoever for the present it is not joyous but grievous, yet it is
profitable, because it helps to mortify our sins, and brings forth the
quiet fruit of righteousness unto them which are thereby exercised, as it is,
Hebrews 12. verse 10. 11.

This also appears by examples. When the Sodomites The former doctrine
confirmed by examples.
lived in their sins, he suffered them still to enjoy their pleasures and
abundance, and never reclaymed them from their wickedness by his
chastisements, but suffered them to continue in their sins till the cry of
them ascended into heaven, and called for that last and fearful vengeance,
whereby they were utterly destroyed. So he suffered the Cananites to possess
that pleasant land, which flowed with Milk and Honey, in great peace and
security, till the measure of their sins being full, he powered out upon
them the full Viols of his Wrath. So Dives lived in all pompous pleasures, till
Death brought him into hell torments. And thus Job does at large describe the
great prosperity of the wicked, even to the time of their funerals. Job. 21.
7. to the 13. And David often observes Job. 21. 7. 8.
how exceedingly the wicked flowrished in their wickedness, even to their
utter destruction. Psalm. 37. 35 and Psalm. 37. 35. and 73. 3. 4. 5. 12.
73. 3. 4. 5. 12. etc.

But the case of Gods Children and Servant is far otherwise, for when they
sin the Lord does chastise them for their amendment, and will not suffer them
to go on in their sins to their destruction. We read but of one sin which
Noah committed, that is to say, his sin of drunkenness, and yet the Lord
punished it by exposing him to the derision of his own wicked son; so we
read but of three crimes which holy David fell into, though he were a King
exposed to manifould tentations, his adultery, murder, and pride in numbering
the people, and yet the Lord suffered none of the three to go uncorrected, for
he punished his adultery committed in secret with another man's wife, by
letting his son defile his concubines in the sight of all the people; his
murdering of his servant, with the death of his child, and by not suffering the
sword to depart from his house, his numbering of the people, by an exceeding
plague and pestilence; so that if David a man according to Gods own heart, do
but step a side out of the way of righteousness, the Lord is ready to whip
him into it again, by the scourge of afflictions; and that not for want, but
in the abundance of his love, because he should have no encouragement to go
on in sin, which would bring him to destruction. And this David himself well
knew, and therefore says, that before he was afflicted he went astray, but
being afflicted he kept Gods word. Psalm. 119. 67. And therefore he says,
that it was good for him that he had been afflicted, seeing hereby he had
Psalm. 119. 67. and 94. 12.
learned Gods statutes, verse 71. And Psalm 94. 12. He pronounces them
blessed whom God does chastise and teach in his Law. So the Lord tells David
that if his son Solomon sinned he would chasten him with the rod of men, but
his mercy should not depart from him, 2 Samuel 7. 14. giving us to understand
that he will not let his children escape 2. Sam. 7. 14.
in their sins without correction, and yet nevertheless remains merciful
unto them. Finally, howsoever the gentiles were suffered to go on in their
idolatry, and to flowrish in their sins; yet as soon as his own people
Israel did leave his pure worship and follow Idols, he did severely punish
them as appears, Exodus 32. and in the History of the Judges and Kings. Exodus
32.


Lastly, this appears by clear evidence of reason: for The former doctrine
proved by reasons.
as impunitie is a manifest sign that God gives men over to go on in their
sins to their destruction, because he denies them the means, whereby they
might come to the sight of their sin, and unto true sorrow for it; so it is a
good sign that God loves us, as his Children, when he uses us like his
Children, that is, corrects us for our faults, and affords unto us the
means whereby we may be reclaymed. We are so blinded with carnal security
and self love, that we cannot see our transgressions and iniquities, and
afflictions are that sharp, but yet sovereign water, which helps to the
recovery of our sight; when as therefore the Lord denies to afflict us living
in sin, what does he else but leaves us to our own natural blindness, to
go on in our sins, till we fall into the pit of destruction? They are those
precious salues, which serve to draw out the core of our corruptions, and those
wholesome, though unpleasant potions, whereby we are purged from our sins;
when as therefore the Lord afflicts us, he intends to cure and purge us,
but when he withholds these means, his purpose is, to let us fester and rot
in our sin, and to let us abound in these gross humors, which will bring the
sickness and death of the soul unto us; they are those purging fires, which
purify us from the dross of our corruptions, and therefore when the Lord
casts us into them, his purpose is to make us pure gold, fit for his
treasury of eternal happiness, but when he lets us alone in the dross of
our sins, his meaning is to let us rust and canker, and to cast us away as
refuse silver.

The use hereof serves to confute the vain bragges of The Papists confuted
who glory in the outward pomp of their church
the Papists, who boast of the glory, pomp, riches, and the flourishing estate
of their Church; using it as an argument of Gods love toward them, and of the
trueness of their Church and Religion, that they are blessed with great
prosperity, and on the other side objecting the cross and manifold
persecutions which the professors of the Gospel are subject unto, as a
reproach to their Religion. But seeing so many sins are not only committed,
but also tolerated, yea, defended and countenanced in that Church, their
immunitie from afflictions and punishments can be no sign of Gods Love, but
rather that in his heavy displeasure, he has given them over as a desperate
cure, and because by no means they will be reclaymed from their
Superstitions, Idolatryes, Adulteries, and other enormious crimes, that
therefore they are given up to a reprobate sense, and to their own filthy
lusts, that so committing sin with greediness, they may treasure up against
themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just
judgment of God.

And the like use also may secure Worldlings make of this Doctrine, who bless
themselves in their sins, because they are not crossed in their evil
courses; seeing nothing ought to be a greater terror unto them then this,
that the Lord leaves them to themselves, and withholds from them this
wholesome means of their amendment.

Lastly, it serves for the comfort of Gods Children, when as they are sharply
afflicted for their sins, seeing this is no sign of Gods hatred and of their
rejection, but rather of his Love and Fatherly care over them, which causes
him to lay upon them these chastisements, that hereby they may be reclaymed
from their sins, and not suffered to run on in their evil courses to their
destruction.

The second doctrine which we here learn is, that if If we dishonor God he
will dishonor us.
we do neglect our duty to GOD, he will make those who owe us duty, to
neglect this duty when we most expect it; and if we dishonor him by our
sins, he will cause us to be dishonored and disgraced, not only by our
enemies and strangers, but also by our nearest and most familiar friends. So
because the people of Israel, who professed themselves the spouse and children
of God, did by forsaking the Lord their husband and father, and adhae^ing unto
Idols, grievously dishonor his holy name, the Lord lays upon them a
proportionable punishment, that their wives and daughters should neglect to
them all love, conjugall duties, and filial obedience, whereby they should not
only inwardly be vexed and grieved in their minds, but also outwardly in
their names be exposed to infamy and reproach.

The like example we have else where in the book of God; when Noah neglected
the duty of temperance and sobriety toward God, his wicked son Cham
neglected the duty of reverence toward him. When Elie was so indulgent
toward his sons, that he would rather displease God, by suffering them to
dishonor his name, then he would displease his sons by giving them due
correction, whereby they might have been reclaymed from their sins, they
neglected all duty to their father, contemned his holy admonitions, and so
brought shame and reproach upon the whole family. For the Lord caused in one
day not only the glory to depart from Israel, when the Arc was taken, which
chiefly redounded to the dishonor of Elie, who then was the Judge of Israel,
but also took away his sons, which were to be the glory of his house, and
together with them the office of the Priesthood, and so made him inglorious
both in the Commonwealth, Church, and in his own private family. The like
may be said of David, who because he dishonored GOD, and caused his holy name
to be blasphemed amongst the Gentiles, by his sins of adultery and murder,
as also by his indulgency toward his Children, whom he not only corrected
not, but not so much as reproved; the Lord punished him not only as he was a
King, but also as he was a Father, by suffering both Children and Subjects to
neglect their duty: and as both by the sword of the Children of Ammon and his
own uncleanness he had dishonored God; so the Lord used both the sword and
filthiness of his own Children to his dishonor and disgrace. For Ammon his
Son defiled Thamar his Daughter, and then Absalon murdered Ammon, because
his Father had not as he ought duly punished his abominable filthiness. And
then again when as justice was not executed against Absalon for his murder,
according to Gods Law, he lived to the dishonor of his Father, who had not
given glory to God by inflicting deserved punishments for sin, defiling his
Concubines in the sight of the people, and thrusting him for a time out of his
kingdom, with extreme peril of his life.

The use of this Doctrine serves, first, to teach us, that above all things
we labor in the performance of all holy Duties, to advance the glory of Gods
holy Name, whereby it will come to pass, that the Lord will be careful of
our honor and reputation, and so guide and direct by his holy Spirit all those
who belong unto us, that they shall perform all good Duties which may both
credit and comfort us. Whereas on the other side if we dishonor God by
neglecting such duties as he requires, he will withdraw his spirit, and give
over our inferiors to their own unnatural stubbornness and perverseness, and
then they by neglecting all good duties will dishonor and disgrace us. 1 Samuel
2. 30. 1 Samuel 2. 30.


Secondly, from hence we learn, whence originally Whence chiefly proceed
all disorders in families.
proceed all disorders and enormious Crimes in families, namely, because the
chief heads neglect their duty toward God, and so dishonor his holy Name.
It is an usual complaint which sounds in every man's ears in these our
days, that children are undutiful to parents, stubborn and disobedient, and
that Servants were never so negligent in performance of all duties toward
their superiors; and men wonders to see such a great difference between these
times and those which went before.

But if we would go to the fountain of these evils, and find out the core
of all these corruptions, we shall find that howsoever inferiors cannot be
excused, yet the fault is principally in the Superiors and governors. Either
because they neglect their duty toward them, from whom they expect duty, as
by being like Elie indulgent, not correcting the vices of their Children, and
so honoring them more then God, or by being loose in their government, or
lewd and scandalous in their example; or finally because they do not like
Abraham instruct their family in the ways of the Lord themselves, nor take
care that they may be instructed by others; and so living in ignorance, and
neglecting all duties which they owe to God, it is no marvel that they are
undutiful and disobedient to parents and governors, seeing the love and fear
of God is the fountain of all love and duty toward men. Or if so be men can
plead not guilty in all these inditements, yet if they be arraigned at the
bar of Gods judgment, and have their own consciences produced as witnesses
against them, they will be forced to confess, that they have been exceeding
negligent in performing all good duties toward God himself, and through their
coldness, backwardness, want of zeal, and disobedience, they have been
wanting to God in the advancement of his glory, and contrariwise have
dishonored his name and scandalized their profession; and therefore it is most
just with God that he exposes them to shame and reproach, by suffering their
children and servants to live in such infamous sins and rebellious
wickedness, as disgrace and discredit the whole family, without any inward
restraint of his spirit, or any outward stop by afflictions and punishments.

Thirdly, whereas he says that this people who did Ignorance does not free us
from the punishment of sin.
not understand, that is, who continued ignorant of God and his will should
fall, and be overwhelmed with Gods judgments, hence we observe that
ignorance will not free us from punishment, but rather will make us to be
swallowed up of vengeance in the day of wrath. For the better understanding
whereof we are to consider what ignorance is lawful and good, and what is
sinful and wicked, what ignorance excuses and extenuateth sin, and
mittigateth punishment, and what does aggrauate them. Of diverse kinds of
ignorance. 1 Commendable ignorance.
And first, we are to know that there is a lawful and commendable kind of
ignorance, when as we do not presume to understand above that which is meet
to understand, but that we do understand according to sobriety, as God has
dealt to every man the measure of Faith, as the Apostle speaks. Romans 12. 3.
And when as we leave the secret things Romans 12. 3.
not revealed in Gods word to the Lord, and earnestly labor to inform our
selves in those things which are revealed as it is Deuteronomy. 29. 29. not curiously
prying into Gods hidden Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
Mysteryes, but rather drawing before them the curtain of reverent ignorance.
For example it is no sin to be ignorant of Gods secret will and counsel,
and of his works before the Creation, of the orders and degrees of the Angels;
or not to comprehend by a clear and distinct knowledge the Mystery of the
Trinity, the hypostaticall Union of Christ two natures; nor the Union between
Christ and his Church; seeing some of these are not manifestly revealed, but as
it were, in a dark Myrrour; and some being infinite and incomprehensible, can
no more be comprehended by our shallow understanding, then the whole world can
be grasped in a man's hand, or the maine Ocean can be contained in a nut-shell.

The sinful ignorance is of two kinds: The first, necessary: Of sinful and
necessary ignorance.
the other voluntary and affected. Necessary ignorance is either that darkness
of understanding, and blindness of mind derived from our first Parents, which
is one of the branches of original sin; or that actual ignorance which
continues in us after we come to years, when as we are deprived of the
means of knowledge, both which cannot be excused, much less defended, in
that we are ignorant of those things which we ought to know, and that through
our own default, as being guilty of the sin of our first Parents: for God in
them endued us with a clear light of knowledge, but we in them did fall into
sin, and thereby put out the light, and defaced the image of God in our
understanding.

But howsoever this ignorance is the evil of sin, and Necessary ignorance
extenuateth faults.
not the evil of punishment alone, as some have imagined, yet it does excuse
other faults and sins, and also lesseneth the punishment. It does excuse
wholly a fault before men, when as it is committed through necessary
ignorance, all means of knowledge being wanting; but before God it does not
wholly excuse and acquit us for the reasons above alleged, but only in part,
and as the schoolmen speak, it freeth us a tanto non a toto, that is, it
lesseneth our sin and punishment but does not wholly take them away: so our
Savior says, that the servant that knew not his masters will, and did commit
things worthy of stripes, should not altogether escape unpunished, but should
be beaten with fewer stripes, Luke 12. 48. And that Ti^e Luke 12. 48.
and Sidon who wanted those means of knowledge which Corazin and Bethsaida
neglected, should not altogether be acquitted in the day of judgment, but more
easily punished. Math. 11. 21. Mat. 11. 21.


But yet this also is to be held with this caution and reservation, Ignorance
as it is the punishment of sin excuses not.
that we understand it only of primarie and simple ignorance, and not of
that necessary ignorance which is a just punishment of sin; namely, when as
men being enlightened with the knowledge of God and his truth, are for
with-houlding of this truth in unrighteousness, and not loving nor embracing
it, given up of God to a reprobate sense, to blindness of mind, and to be
seduced and besotted with errors and strong delusions. Which was the case of
many of the Israelites in this place, of the Gentiles, Romans 1. 18. 28. and is
the state of many Romans 1. 18. 28. 2. These. 2. 10. 11.
in these days, as it was foretold, 2 These. 2. 10. 11. For this ignorance is
so far from excusing other sins, that in it self it is damnably desperate;
for howsoever in regard of the absence of means it is for the present
necesarie, yet if we respect the first causes thereof it is wilful and
obstinate.

Now whereas it may be objected, that the Apostle says The meaning of Acts.
17. 30.
unto the Gentiles, that the Lord did not regard the times of their ignorance.
Act. 17. 30. we are to know, first, that it is not taken simply but
comparatively, that he did not regard so much their sins committed in the
time of ignorance, as those which they should commit after the manifestation of
his truth: and secondly, that the speech is not legal, showing what God would
exact in the rigor of his justice, but Evangelical, namely, that he would
not impute those sins of ignorance unto them, but bury them in Christ's death
and obedience, so that now they would embrace him as their Savior by a lively
faith, and bring forth the fruits hereof in unfeigned repentance, forsaking
their former ignorance, and the sinful fruits thereof, and laboring after
knowledge and holy obedience.

The other kind of ignorance which is affected and voluntary, when as men
continue ignorant, because they neglect and contemn the means of knowledge
offered unto them, is so far from excusing other sins, that it does much
aggrauate them, as being it self in a desperate degree of sin, and also the
cause of much other wickedness; for therefore they refuse to know their
masters will, because Psalm. 36. 3.
they are desperately resolved not to obey it, and will not understand, because
they will not be hindered in their course of wickedness. Of such the Psalmist
speaks. Psalm. 36. 3. He has left off to understand, and to do good, or
least he should do good. And as this does aggrauate men's sins, so also it
does increase their punishment, and augment the fearful measure of their
condemnation. But of Verse 1. and 6. of this Chapter.
this I have already spoken, and therefore I will here pass it over.

The use hereof is that we do not labor to hide our sins under this broken
veil of Ignorance, or extenuate our faults by pretending that if we do
offend, it is because we are ignorant, and know no better, for our ignorance
after that we have so long enjoyed the light of the Gospel, cannot be
necessary, but voluntary and wilful, because we neglect or despise the
means of knowledge; and therefore this ignorance will not excuse us, but
rather aggrauate both our sin and punishment.

Lastly, we here learn, that when the Lord has used God gives over those
who despise the means of their conversion.
all means both by his word and works, his benefits, chastisements, and more
gentle punishments, to bring a people to Knowledge, Faith, and Repentance; and
they nevertheless neglecting and contemning these means, do continue in
wilful Ignorance, gross Infidelity, and secure Impenitencie; then the Lord
will give them over to their own wicked courses, and suffer them to fall
headlong both into the evils of sin, and the evils of punishment. For
Example, he will give them over to the blindness of their minds, to run
on in Errors, Heresies, Superstition, and Idolatry; to the perverseness of
their wills, to refuse the good, and choose the evil, to their own vile
affections, to commit such abominable wickedness, as nature it self, though
much corrupted abhors and detesteth, and even to a reprobate sense, that
they may heap sin upon sin, and treasure up against themselves wrath
against the day of wrath. And when he has often assayed fatherly corrections,
and light afflictions, to amend them, and they will not be reformed, he will
cause them to be overtaken by his fearful plagues and heavy judgments, and
in the end plunge them into the gulf of destruction and eternal condemnation.
An Example hereof we have in this place, for when the Israelits would not
understand, nor be reformed, neither by Gods Word nor works, his mercies nor
judgments, the Lord caused them to fall and to be ouer-whelmed with most
fearful punishments. When the Gentiles would not serve God according to that
light of nature, which he had given unto them, he gave them up to their own
vile affections, and to a reprobate mind. Romans 1. When the Lord gives unto
men Romans 1.
means of knowledge, and they refuse instruction, then he will pronounce that
fearful sentence. 1 Cor. 14. 38. If any 1 Cor. 14. 38.
man be ignorant, let him be ignorant. If he long affords the means of
regeneration, and yet men continue in their unrighteousness, and natural
corruptions, he will leave them to themselves, and pass upon them that
difinitiue sentence. Apoc. 22. 11. He that is unjust, let him be unjust Apoc.
22. 11.
still; and he that is filthy, let him be filthy still. If he in his
patience and long-suffering, do give unto sinners long time of repentance, and
also graciously affords unto them the means of their conversion, then is
there nothing to be expected but utter destruction and desolation, if by all
these means they will not be reclaymed. So when the people of Judah grievously
sinned, the Lord having compassion on his people sends his Prophets to call
them to repentance: But when as they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised
his words, and mis-vsed his Prophets, then there being no remedy, the wrath of
the Lord was kindled against his people, and he delivered them into
Captivity, and made their Land desolate, as appears. 2 Chronicles. 36. 15. 16.
17. And in the time of our Savior 2 Chro. 36. 15. 16.
Christ, when as they stopped their ears against his gracious call, and would
not understand the great work of Redemption wrought by him, which was so
evidently declared, both by his Word and works, he pronounces against them
the fearful sentence of desolation and destruction. Luke 13. 34. 35. Luke 13.
34. 35


The reason hereof is, because the Lord the most wise Physician of our souls,
will not loose his labor, by ministering his Physic to such Patients whose
diseases are desperate, and therefore when they wilfully refuse to be cured,
rend in pieces his prescripts, pull off his plasters, and reject those
wholesome Potions which he ministers to purge them from their corruptions,
and to restore them to their spiritual health, he gives them over to
themselves to dye and perish in the sickness of their souls.

Secondly, as the Lord hates all other sin, so his soul abhors the
contempt of his Word, which he has appointed to be the means of the
conversion and salvation of all sinners. And therefore if his sword of the
spirit will not make a separation between us and our sins, he will make it
a sword of vengeance and destruction, to cut us off in his fierce wrath. For it
is never drawn out but it accomplisheth either the work of his mercy, or of
his judgment. So the Lord says, Esaias. 45. 23. I have sworn by my Esaias. 45.
23. and 55. 11.
self, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, it shall not
return, etc. And 55. 11. So shall my word be that goes out of my mouth, it
shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I will, and
it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it. So the Apostle says, that
Gods word is the savor of life to them that are saved, and the savor of death
to those that perish. 2 Cor. 2. 15. 26. 2. Cor. 2. 15. 16.


The use hereof serves to teach us, that with all careful diligence we make
profitable use of the means which the Lord has given us, both for the
inlightening of our understandings, and the reforming of our lives. For if
having the word of God purely and sincerely preached, we continue in wilful
ignorance, and will not understand, if being allured by God mercies, and
enforced by his judgments, wherewith diversely at diverse times he has
exercised us, we notwithstanding continue in our impenitency and security,
what remains but that the Lord should give us over as a desperate cure, and
suffer us to run on in the course of sin, until at length we fall into
the pit of destruction in this life, and into the bottomless gulf of
condemnation in the life to come?

AND thus much concerning the former part of this The second part of the
Chapter.
Chapter, in which I have showed are contained diverse bills of Inditements
against the rebellious and apostate Church of Israel: now because they were
desperately suncke in their wickedness, and past all hope of recovery; In the
second part of the Chapter he labors to persuade with the house of Judah,
that they should not join with them in their sins, nor be seduced by their
evil example to make the like Apostasy, least accompanying them in their
defection and rebellion, they were also made pertakers of their punishments.

And this is the Prophets maine drift and scope in the second part of this
Chapter. The parts thereof are two: The first is an admonition to the house of
Judah, to avoid the sins of the Israelits. The second contains certain
reasons to enforce it, taken both from the haynousnesse of their sins, and
the greatness of their punishments. The admonition is expressed, verse 15.
Though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah sin: Come not ye into
Gilgall, neither go ye up to Beth-auen, nor swear, The Lord lives. In which
admonition he does first ingenerall dissuade them The exposition.
from imitating the Israelites in their sin, and especially from their
Idolatry and Apostasy; and then he dehorteth them from certain special
means, whereby they might easily be brought to communicate with them in their
impiety, namely, joining with them in irreligious society, and intermingling
Gods pure worship with their superstition and Idolatry.

The general disswasion is contained in these words: Though thou Israel play
the harlot, yet let not Judah sin, as if he had said, although thou Israel
being wholly possessed with a spirit of fornication, art so desperately addicted
to idolatry and spiritual whoredom, that there is no hope remaining that
ever thou will be reclaymed, yet let not the Lord be as it were robbed of both
his sons in the same day, O let not Judah who is not as yet come to that
desperate degree of sin, be seduced by your bad neighborhood and evil
example, and derive the same guilt of iniquity upon himself; for so the word
Assam usually signifies such a fault or guilt as is derived from one to
another, the one being the motive and impulsive cause of the other sin.

The ground of this disswasion was the dangerous estate of the people of Judah,
first in regard of their near neighbour-hoode with these idolatrous
Israelites, who were ready to seduce them both by their example and
allurements; the which is employed in the first words, Though thou Israel, etc.
As though he should have said, seeing thou Israel which art so near a
neighbor and kinsman to Judah, art so defiled with idolatry, that there is
great danger least thou should poison them with thy contagion, yet let Judah
carefully take heed to avoid thy leprous infection. Secondly this amplyfieth
their danger, that they were already tainted with their superstition and
idolatry, which through their natural corruption and proanes unto this sin
was apt to spread further and further, and therefore like a good Physician he
labors to cure their ague in the first fits, and to stay them from falling
any deeper into this sickness of sin. And to this purpose he admonishes
them that they should not imitate the Israelites in their Idolatry, but purge
away their dreggs of superstition, wherewith they were already corrupted, and
restore Gods pure worship in his Temple amongst them, by the office and
Ministry of his true Priests and Levites.

Now howsoever this admonition did principally concern the people of Judah, yet
the Prophet does here publish it to the Israelites, speaking of Judah in the
third person, as being absent: And this he does because he was a Prophet
purposely sent to the house of Israel, to call them to repentance, and
therefore he admonishes the people of Judah in their hearing to take heed of
their sins, and to retain amongst them Gods pure worship, partly that he
might hereby make them ashamed of their sinful state, which was a just cause
why their brethren should shun their company, and partly that by a certain
kind of emulation he might draw them likewise to repentance.

And this is the meaning of the general disswasion, whereby he dehorteth them
from imitating their sins: In the next words he disswadeth them from the
means, by the use whereof they might be entangled in their sins; and these
are two: the first was their frequenting of places dedicated to Idolatry: the
other joining with them in their superstitions and idolatrous service, in which
they intermingled the worship of God with the worship of idols, and the
commandments of God with their own inventions. The first means is contained
in these words, Come not ye into Gilgal, neither go ye up to Beth-auen.

For the understanding whereof we are to know, that this Gilgall was a town
situate near Ierricho, on the east part thereof beyond Iordaine, which was
exceeding famous amongst the people of Israel and Judah, for there the Ark of God first rested after they were entered into the land of promise; there Joshua
erected an Alter in perpetual remembrance of that famous miracle, whereby
Jordan was divided, so that the Israelites passed through on dry ground; there
the Israelites were first circumcised after they came into the land of promise,
and the shame of uncircumcision was taken from them; from whence also it had it
name Gilgal or Galgal, which signifies to take away, as appears, Joshua 5. 9.
There also they first kept Ios. 5. 9. 15.
the feast of the Passover; there the Manna ceasing the people did first eat
the bread and fruits of the land; there the Angel appeared to Joshua,
commanding him to put off his shoes, because the place was holy, Iosu. 5. 15.
And here also Saul the first King of Israel was anointed. By all which
memorable accidents in this place it was much enobled amongst the people.

By the other place Beth-auen, we are here to understand Bethel, of which name
there were two towns, the one belonged to the tribe of Benjamin, as appears,
Ios. 18. Ios. 18. 22.
22. the other to the tribe of Ephraim, as is manifest, Iud. 1. Judge. 1. 22.
22. The which in former times was called Luz, which name it had from the
abundaunce of Almonds which there grew. But when Jacob rested there and saw the
vision of Angels ascending and discending upon the Ladder, he changed the
name, and called it Beth-el, that is, the house of God, as appears, Gene. 28.
19. This Beth-el is Genesis 28. 19.
here understood, and is called Beth-auen, not that they were both one City,
for besides this Beth-el, there was another town near adjoining unto it,
which was called Beth-auen, Iosu. 7. 2. and 18. 12. 13. But the Prophet does
here call Ios. 7. 2. and 18 12. 13.
Beth-el Beth-auen by way of reproach; because of the idolatry which was there
committed, for as it was first called Luz, and then because of Jacobs vision
Beth-el, although there was another City of that name. So contrariwise, when
it was abused to idolatry, the name was changed and called Beth-auen, that is,
a house of vanity and idolatry, for an idol, and vanity, or nothing, are
used the one for the other. So Hos. 6. 8. Gilead is a city of them that work,
So Hos. 6. 8.
Auen, that is, iniquity, vanity, or idolatry. So 1 Corint. 8. An idol is
nothing, or a vain thing. So that the meaning 1 Cor. 8.
is, as if he had said, it is unworthy now the name of Beth-el, the house of
God, because it is consecrated to idolatry, and therefore let it be called
Beth-auen rather, that is, a house of vanity, impiety, and idolatry.

Now the reason why Judah is forbidden to ascend into these places was, because
they were consecrated to idolatrous worship. For when Iereboam took upon him
the government, as on the one side he saw that it was necessary to have a
place for the public service of God, because religion is the surest bond of
all good society and government, so on the other side consulting with no
better a counsailour then humane wisdom, he thought it dangerous to his
state, that the people should go up to Jerusalem, least having too much
familiarity and intercourse of friendship with the men of Judah, his people
should be drawn to make a defection from him to the kingdom of the house of
David. And therefore he resolved upon this 1 King. 12. 27.
course, as the safest, to appoint in his own country some places for the
public exercises of Religion. Now because there seemed to be some difficulty
to withdraw the people from the Temple which was expressly appointed by God for
this purpose, unto other places which were as expressly prohibited, therefore in
wicked policy he made choice of such places as were most famous, and unto
which the people were most devoted, for some special privileges which they
had had in former time, that hereby he might blind their judgment and allure
their affection. Now none seemed fitter for his purpose then these two: seeing
Gilgal was in special account with the people, because of all those memorable
things there done, of which I have already spoken, and especially in respect of
the appearing of the Angel, who also said that it was holy ground, though in
truth this was spoken not in regard of the place it self, but in regard of
Gods glorious presence at that time. And Bethell was esteemed not only in
respect of the name, but also in that formerly Jacob had there erected an
Altar, and Genesis 28.
offered Sacrifices, as appears. Genesis 28. The which also was a strong motive
to persuade the people, who are in themselves inclinable to imitate the example
of their forefathers, seeing they had such an holy Patriarch for their
President. Although in truth this was no good reason, though it were plausible
enough, to move them to this practice, seeing that was but an extraordinary act
of Jacob, not to be imitated, especially seeing by the express Law of God,
his public worship was restrained to Jerusalem, and therefore they were not to
look what Jacob did, but what the Lord commanded in his Law.

Nevertheless, these colors served to bleere the eyes of the people, and to
bring them unto a superstitious conceit of these places above other, and
therefore he made choice of these places and erected groves, and Temples, and
Aulters for the worship of God in Idols. Concerning Beth-ell there is no
question, for it is plainly said that Jeroboam erected his Idols in Beth-ell
and Dan. 1 King. 12. 29. As 1 King. 12. 29.
also else where: for Gilgall though there be no such direct Testimony, yet it
may clearly be proved, that it was a place famous, or rather infamous for the
impious Idolatry there committed, as appears. Hos. 9. 15. and 12. 11. Hos. 9.
15. and 12 11. Amos. 4. 4.
Amos. 4. 4.

The reason then why the Prophet does so earnestly forbid the people of Judah to
come at Gilgall and Beth-auen was, not only because they were consecrated unto
idolatry, and therefore in this respect dangerous, in that by frequenting
these Idolatrous places, they might easily be seduced to join with them in
their false worship, but also because there was more peril of these places
then of others, in regard of that reverend estimation the people had of them,
for the reasons abouesaid. And this also was the cause, why he specially
makes mention of these two places, under which he comprehends all the rest
of like quality, because as they were more famous then either Dan or any other
of the high places, so also in respect of their credit with the people, much
more dangerous.

Now in the form of the prohibition, we are further to observe, that he does
not only prohibit them to sacrifice in these places, but not so much as to
ascend or go unto them, not that it was not lawful for them to come into
these places for their civil affairs, and worldly businesses, but by this
strait prohibition, he implies that he would as little as might be, have
them to frequent the company of Idolaters; but especially, that it was
altogether unlawful for them who professed Gods true Religion, to be present
at their idolatrous sacrifices and other solemnities, whereby in time they
would be seduced to immitate them in their superstitions.

And thus we have seen what was the first means of idolatry, the other is
that they should not join with them in their religion, which consisted of true
and false worship mingled together; In these words, nor swear the Lord
liueeth. In which words he does not forbid the lawful use of an oath, which
being made in truth, righteousness, and judgment, is a part of Gods worship;
which is expressly commanded in his word, as appears, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and Deuteronomy.
6. 13.
10. 20. Ier. 4. 2. But only restrayneth them from imitating the practice of
the Idolatrous Israelites; who joined the worship of God prescribed in his word
with their own inventions, and superstitions, and though they served idols yet
swore not only by them; but also by the true Jehovah, as appears plainly,
Amos. 8. 14. They swear by the Amos. 8. 14.
sin of Samaria, and say thy God O Dan lives, etc. So Zeph. 1. 5.
Zeph. 1. 5. the Lord threatens his judgments against those in Judah, who did
worship and swear by the Lord, and swear by Malcham, The sin therefore
which is here forbidden is, their joining a true oath with false worship, and
the service of God with the service of idols. So that these words have
reference to the former, after this manner; if ye go to Gilgall and Beth-auen
to communicate with idols in their idolatry, do not presume to swear by the
Lord, nor to make profession of his religion; for he cannot abide that there
should be any mixture of his true worship with idolatry, nor that the same
mouth should swear by his name, and call upon idols. Neither does he here
simply forbid them to swear at all, but that they should not use this form,
the Lord lives. As though he should say, if ye worship Idols swear by them
also, if ye will, but have nothing to do with my name in your oaths, unless
you turn from your idolatry. And according to this sense the words may fitly
be read (as a learned Hebritian Drusius.
has observed) by a disjunction after this manner, Come not at Gilgall, or
swear not the Lord lives.

Now under this one particular part of Gods service by an Psalm. 63. 11.
oath, is comprehended his whole worship, as also it is taken, Psalm. 63. 11.
And so generally they are here forbidden to make any manner of mixture and
composition between idolatry, and any part of Gods true worship. So that the
1 King. 18.
Lord requires of them the same thing which Elias required before times of the
Israelits, 1 King. 18. If Baal be God serve him, but if Jehovah be God serve
him, that is, you are Psalm. 50. 16. Math. 6. 4. Eze. 20. 39. 40.
at your choice whether ye will serve, but the Lord will no longer endure that
you should halt between both. So Psalm. 50. 16. Math. 6. 4. Ezech. 20. 39. 40.

And thus much concerning the meaning of the words. The Lord uses the means
of our conversion until our estate is desperate.
The doctrines which do hence arise are diverse: First we may here observe
that as the Lord gives over those whose estate is desperate and incurable to
run on in the headlong course of sin, to their destruction. So contrariwise
where there remains the least show of hope he never forsakes his people,
but uses all means to bring them to Repentance, that they may be saved. An
example hereof we have in this place, for when the people of Israel were past
cure, he causes his Prophet to labor with the men of Judah for their
reformation, who were not so deeply sunk in rebellion. So when neither the
heavenly Sermons, nor wonderful Miracles of Jesus Christ, would draw the Jews
to repentance, he causes the Apostles to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles,
that they at least might be gathered to his Church, and that hereby in an holy
emulation the Jews also might be converted to the Faith. So although the Land
of Judah was exceedingly defiled with sin, so as from the crown of the head
unto the sole of the foot there was nothing sound in this polliticke body, yet
does he when they professed open emnitie, call them to a parley, offering unto
them reasonable conditions of Peace, namely, that if they would turn unto him,
by unfeigned repentance, he would make their scarlet sins as white as snow.
Esaias. 1. 18. Esaias. 1. 18.


Now the cause hereof is not in any desert of sinners, who having already by
their sins provoked Gods fierce wrath, rather merit his heavy punishments;
but in the Lord himself, who is of such infinite mercy, that he desires not
the destruction but the conversion of sinners, and would have all men to be
saved, and come to true knowledge and unfeigned repentance, as appears. Ezech.
33. 11. 1 Timothy 2. 4. Ezech. 33. 11. 1 Timothy 2. 4.
And to this purpose he sends his Prophets to call them, and multiplyeth his
benefits to allure them, and also visits their sins with gentle
chastisements that he may reclayme them, yea, and after they have long had
these means of conversion, the Lord in infinite patience is content to wait
their leisure, as it is. Esaias. 30. 18. and never Esaias. 30. 18.
brings utter destruction, till there be no remedy, as it is said, Chro.
36. 14. 2. Chro. 36. 14


The use hereof serves, first to confute the practice of the Brownists, who
leave and forsake the Church of Christ for some small spots and little
wrinkles, their Ministers refusing to preach, and the people to hear in our
congregations. But herein they nothing resemble the Lord, whose children they
would seem to be, who when the Church of Israel had made a fearful apostasy
from Gods true religion, and was wholly defiled with superstition, idolatry,
and all wickedness, and obstinately continued in these sins, notwithstanding
the manifold and continual means which the Lord used to call them to
repentance; yet still he sends his Prophets unto them, to teach, admonish,
and reprove them, that they might be brought to amendment; and when as they
desperately perseuered in sin, and were now past all hope of recovery, he
causes his Prophet to admonish the Jews, to avoid their sins and
punishments, when as their state also was exceedingly corrupted.

Secondly, it serves for our comfort and encouragement, The Lord has mercy in
store for those who forsake their evil ways.
if that now at the length we will forsake our evil ways, and take hold of
the means of our conversion, whilst God offers them unto us. For howsoever
we are sunk deep in our rebellion, and have many ways provoked Gods wrath,
continuing in our sins, notwithstanding the Lord has afforded us such
plentiful means to bring us to amendment; yet if now we will begin a new
course, and consecrate our selves to the service of God, there is assured hope
of pardon. For yet the Lord waits that he may have mercy upon us, Esa. 30.
68.
yet he patiently grants unto us the means of our conversion; and we may
assure our selves that if he be so gracious when as we obstinately persevere
in sin, he will be much more merciful, if we turn unto him by true
repentance. But on the other side, if we contemn so great a mercy of God, we
shall have a more fearful judgment laid upon us: for laesa patientia furor,
the greater Gods patience is which we despise, the more furious revenge he
will take on us in the day of his visitation: Romans 2. 4. 5.

The second thing to be observed is, that Gods Ministers Romans 2. 4. 5.
ought not to surcease their pains in their Ministry, though The Ministers
must not surcease their pains in the Ministry.
they plainly discern that the estate of the people committed to their charge
is altogether desperate, and past hope of recovery. For though there were no
appearance of hope at home, yet he is painfully to persist in the work of the
Ministry, that he may convert those who are abroad, and want the preaching
of the word, that so he may help to gather those into the Church which are
elected, and increase the number of the faithful, as much as in him lies. So
when the Israelites, to whom our Prophet was sent, were past cure, he labors
to convert the Jews unto God. And so when the Jews desperately refused the
means of their conversion and salvation, the Apostles ceased not their
labors, but turned to the Gentiles, and by their painful preaching endeavored
to convert them unto the faith. For howsoever our hearers profit not, there is
a necessity that lies upon us, and a fearful woe denounced against us if we
preach not the Gospel, 1. Cor. 9. 16. Whatsoever be the success of our
labors, we 1. Cor. 9. 16.
are charged as we will answer it before God, and before the Lord Jesus
Christ, which shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing; that we
preach the word, and be instant in season, and out of season, and that we
improve, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and doctrine: 2. Tim. 4. 1. 2.
Whether the people 2. Tim. 4. 1. 2.
will hear us or no, we must tell them of their sins, and give them warning
of Gods approaching judgments; and then though they die in their sins, yet
we have discharged our duty, and shall save our own souls: Ezech. 33. 7. 8.
9. Ezech. 33 7, 8, 9. Those reproved, who surcease their pains in the
Ministry.


The use hereof serves to reprove those, who surcease their pains in the
work of the Ministry, because they cannot see the fruit of their labors,
but contrariwise find, that the more diligently they preach unto their people,
the more obstinately they contemn the means of their salvation, loathe the
food of their souls, and persist in their impenitencie. For the neglect of
other men's duties must not be an argument to make us neglect ours, but rather
should make us more earnest in the work of the Ministry. Neither do we know
whom, nor when the Lord will call; the Spirit blows where it lists, and
when it lists, and the Lord who has the hearts of all in his hand, can make
those who were lions Esa. 11.
and bears and wolves yesterday, to become this day gentle as lambs, and
innocent as doves, and of mockers of his word he can make zealous conuerts; of
persecuting Saul, a preaching Act. 2. 13. 37. Act. 9.
Paul. Besides, though they had certain assurance that they should never
convert a soul of those people which are committed to them, nor build up any
one in the faith of Christ, yet are they not discharged of their work, nor
hereby have received a privilege of idleness; seeing when these who have
often heard them, do obstinately stop their ears, there are perhaps others
who would willingly have the benefit of their Ministry. And though there were
not, yet must we preach the word, even when we are assured that it is the
savor of death unto death, because the Lord who has set us on work, and will
surely pay us our wages, is as well glorified by executing justice against
obstinate sinners, as by showing mercy to those who are by his word moved to
repentance and amendment of life.

The third thing to be observed is, that as al men had need The danger of evil
neighborhood.
to be admonished of their ways in ye ministry of the word, so especially
those which live near unto wicked and ungodly neighbors, who by their
manifold inducements, allurements, and evil examples, are always ready to
seduce them out of the way of righteousness into the way of sin. For this
was the case of the people of the Jews in this place, who being themselves
corrupted, had the wicked Israelites for their neighbors, who by all means
were ready to draw them more and more from God, into the bywaies of sin and
wickedness; and therefore the Lord thought it good and necessary to stop them
in these evil courses, not only by the admonitions of their own Prophets, who
were purposely sent unto them, but also causes our Prophet, who was sent to
the Israelites, to admonish them to beware of being corrupted by their evil
example. So when the people of Israel were to enter into the land of Canaan,
where they should be compassed about with idolatrous Gentiles; how often and
earnestly does the Lord admonish them, to beware of being seduced from his
worship and service, by their wicked example, and alluring inticements.

And not without good cause are all good means carefully used in this case,
seeing on the one side sin in it own nature is no less infectious then the
plague or leprosy, apt to spread from man to man, family to family, city to
city, and country to country; and seeing on the other side we are full of
the gross humors of corruption, whereby we are exceeding apt to receive the
infection; and therefore if the wholesome preservatives of admonition,
instruction, and reprehension, be not often and carefully applied, we are daily
exposed to certain danger of approaching destruction.

The use hereof serves to teach us, that as at all times we We must patiently
hear our selves admonished and reproved.
be ready with all meekness and patience, to hear our selves admonished, and
our sins reproved, so especially when we are exposed to these tentations, and
are in danger to be infected through the neighborhood of wicked men; seeing
they are stiff in evil, we weak in good; they earnest in drawing us into
sin, and we weak in making resistance; they apt to infect us, and we as apt
to receive infection. And for as much as we live in dangerous times, wherein
faith, piety and justice exceedingly fail amongst men, and contrariwise all
manner of sin and wickedness abounds upon the face of the earth; let us
not only carefully watch over our own hearts and ways, that we may escape
these dangers, but also let us be content to suffer the Lords watchmen to
ouersee us; and when they observing out declining from good things, coldness
in holy duties, and pronenesse unto the sins of these sinful times, do out
of Gods word admonish us either publicly or privately of our defection and
corruption, and exhort us to amendment, let us patiently hearken to their
admonitions and exhortations, seeing we shall find all little enough to keep
us from being carried away with the stream of common corruptions, and to
preserve us from being infected with the contagion of these sinful times. Yea
and not only let us hearken to the admonitions of Gods Ministers in the
ministry of the word; but also let private men in the fear of God both
perform the duty of admonition, when they see their neighbor ready to fall
into sin, or already fallen, and also when themselves need, be as ready to
be admonished of their faults, as being an excellent means sanctified by God,
both for the restraining of men from sin, before it is committed, and to
restore them by true repentance when they have committed it. And this mutual
duty of admonition is commended unto us, Leuit. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate
thy brother in thine heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke Leuit. 19. 17.
thy neighbor, and not suffer him to sin. Hebr. 3. 13. Exhort one another
daily, whilst it is called to day, lest any of you be Heb. 3. 13. Matthew. 18.
15. Prou. 27. 5. 6. and 10. 17. and 15 32.
hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin. So Mat. 18. 15. Pro. 27. 5. 6. And so
for hearkening unto admonition, it is likewise commended unto us, Pro. 10. 17.
He that regards instruction is in the way of life, etc. And contrariwise, He
that refuses instruction, despises his own soul; but he that obeys
correction, gets understanding, Pro. 15. 32.

Fourthly, whereas the Lord by his Prophet does first admonish They who would
avoid sin must also avoid the wicked company of sinners.
the people of Judah, to avoid the sins of the Israelites, and then in the
next place does dehort them from going to Gilgal, that is, from having any
near familiarity or society with the superstitious Israelites, especially in
their idolatrous service; hence we learn first in general, that whosoever
will avoid sin, must also avoid the means whereby he might be induced to fall
into it, and then more especially that he avoid the society and near
familiarity of sinners, as being a singular inducement to draw men into
communion of wickedness. This David knew well, and therefore being resolved to
observe Gods law, and seeing some kind of impossibility, that he should so do,
if the wicked did frequent his company; in the first place he banisheth them,
and then resolves to go forward in his course, Psalm. 119. 115. Away from me
ye wicked, for I will keep the Commandments Psalm. 119. 115.
of my God. Sin is the canker of the soul; and therefore as the canker
having infected one part of the body, goes unto the next, till all be wholly
corrupted; so sin having infected one person of a family, or one family of a
city, stays not here, but infecteth the next, and so spreads by degrees
till it have corrupted the whole body: this the Apostle shows, 1. Cor. 5. 6.
where exhorting them to excommunicate 1. Cor. 5. 6.
the iucestuous person, he uses this as his argument, that A little leaven
leaueneth the whole lump; noting thereby the infectious nature of sin, which
through the corruption of one member tainteth the whole body: as therefore men
carefully avoid the company of such as are infected with contagious diseases,
to preserve their bodies in health; so should we much more carefully flee the
society of those who are grievously infected with the diseases of sin, both
because our souls are more apt to receive this spiritual contagion, then our
bodies the other, and also because this infection is much more dangerous and
pernicious.

Yet more especially, we here learn, carefully to avoid the company of
idolaters, because such is our inclinablenes We must carefully avoid the
company of idolaters.
thereunto, that by their example and persuasions, we may easily be corrupted.
And this moved the Prophet here to persuade the people of Judah not to go to
Gilgal and Bethauen, lest intertaining near familiarity and friendship with
the superstitious Israelites, they should be infected with their idolatry. So
that here we learn, that the company of idolaters is to be avoided in two
respects, 1. yt we are not to have any near familiarity and friendship with
them, in civil society. Secondly, that we must not join with them in their
idolatrous service. In the former respect we are to observe this general rule,
not to have any intercourse of dealing with them, further then humane
necessity requires; as for example, when we sell our, or buy their
commodities, which only then is lawful, or at least expedient, when we cannot
conveniently use the like merchandise in such places where Gods truth is
professed and maintained. More especially, here is condemned the near contract
of marriage between professors of true religion, and idolaters; the which was
the sin of the faithful before the flood, which brought that universal
deluge, first of sin, and then of water upon the whole earth, Genesis 6. 2. this
was Salomons sin whereby he was Genes. 6. 2. 1. King. 11. 4.
drawn unto idolatry, 1. King. 11. 4. and the chief cause of Ahabs
wickedness, because he had lincked himself in marriage with idolatrous Iesabel,
as appears, 1. King. 16. 31. So 1. King. 16. 31.
this is rendered as a reason, why Iehoram the son of good Iehosaphat,
forsook his fathers steps, and committed gross idolatry, because he married
Ahabs daughter, 2. King. 8. 18. 2. King. 8. 18.
and this was the cause of Iudahs transgression, and Isreal's abomination,
because they married the daughters of a strange god, Malac. 2. 11. Hence it was,
that when the people repented Malach. 2. 11.
of this sin, they did not only leave off to marry wives of the Gentiles,
but also divorced those whom they had already married, because they were
notable instruments to incline them to idolatry, Ezra. 10. 1. 2. 3.

The second thing which we here learn, is, that we must Ezra 10. 1. 2. 3. We
must not communicate with idolaters, in their idolatrous service.
not by any means keep company or communicate with idolaters in their
idolatrous service: for whereas he does dissuade the men of Judah from going
unto Gilgal and Bethauen, he principally intends that they should not come
into their temples, which were consecrated to idolatry, nor be present with
them at their idol service. This argument the Apostle does purposely entreat
of, 1. Cor. 8. where he disswadeth 1. Cor. 8.
the Corinthians from communicating with idolaters in their temples, at their
idol feasts; because hereby they gave a grievous scandal to their weak
brethren: and in the tenth chapter he tells them, that they could not drink
1. Cor. 10. 21.
of the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils, nor be partakers of the Lords
table, and the table of devils, verse. 21. intimating thereby, that as those who
worthily communicate at the Lords table, are united unto Christ and made one
with him: so they that communicate with idols in their idolatrous sacrifices
and Sacraments, are thereby united unto idols, and made one with them, and
consequently cease to be the members of Christ, for we cannot have communion
with both, there being no more agreement between them, then between light and
darkness.

But here some object, that they may lawfully present their bodies at
idolatrous service, so that they reserve their An objection of temporizers
answered
hearts for Gods pure worship. To which I answer, that if this assertion were
true, then were al Gods holy Martyrs but simple men, who rather were content to
endure exquisite torments, then give any outward approbation to idolatry; then
were the three children far out of the way, who rather chose to be cast into
the fiery furnace, then they would bow to Nebuchadnezers Idol. But indeed it
is far otherwise, for the Lord who has created and redeemed as well the body
as the soul, has wholly appropriated, as well the one as the other, for his
worship and service. So 1. Cor. 6. 20. Ye are 1. Cor. 6. 20.
bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body, and in your
spirits, for they are Gods. Romans 12. 1. the Apostle exhorts Romans 12. 1.
us to offer our body a lively sacrifice unto God. And 2. Cor. 6. 17. Come out
from amongst them, and separate your 2. Cor. 6. 17.
selves, says the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you.
So Esaias 52. 11. And the Apostle John does exhort Esaias 52. 11.
us, to keep not our souls alone, but our selves, that is, our whole person
from idols, 1. Ioh. 5. 21. So in the second Commandment, 1. Ioh. 5. 21.
the outward bowing to images is precisely forbidden. And of this there is
great reason: for what husband having a wife, would endure that she should
prostitute her body to commit whoredom, though she should never so deeply
protest that she reserved her heart for him? how much less will the Lord
admit such an excuse, when those who profess themselves his spouse commit
spiritual whoredom with idols in their bodies? Again, they who go thus far,
will not stay here, but in the end will worship idols, as well with their
souls as with their bodies. This progress of idolaters the Psalmist
excellently expresses, Psalm. 106. 35. Psalm. 106. 35.
where he says, that first they mingled themselves with idolaters, and then
they learned their works, and fell to worshipping their idols, and in
conclusion became so superstitiously devout in their idolatry, that they did
not stick to offer their own sons and daughters unto devils, which turned
to their utter ruin. As therefore Joseph when heresolued, not to commit
adultery with his mistress, did flee out of her company, so if we would not
commit spiritual whoredom with idols, we must have no society with them.

Against this is objected, that the Prophet permitted Naamans example, no
president for temporizers.
Naaman to bow himself in the house of Rimmon. I answer, that this bowing was
in Naamans intention a civil worship performed not to the idol, but to his
master who did lean on him; which notwithstanding his own conscience
condemned as a sin, in that being a convert, he vouchsafed the idol his
presence, and bowed before him, though not unto him; and therefore he prays
the Lord to be merciful unto him in pardoning this sin: nether does the
Prophet in saying, Go in peace, approve this action, but only dismisseth him
with this civil salutation, as not being willing to discourage him at his
first entrance into the profession of Gods true religion, by imposing upon him
this heavy task, to incur his masters utter displeasure, for denying unto
him his service.

The use hereof serves: First, to reprove such as intertaine near
familiarity with idolaters; as for example, those who 2. King. 5. Those
reproved who entertain near familiarity with idolaters.
make choice of Papists, to be their intimate and inward friends, who exceed
in all kinds of gross idolatry.

Secondly, such as travel into Popish and idolatrous countries, being moved
hereunto, either through mere curiosity to see fashions, or for some
needless commodity, which can in no sort counteruaile the manifold dangers
whereunto they expose themselves, by consorting with such as are still ready
to allure them to commit idolatry.

Thirdly, such amongst us, who either for wealth or friends, or some other
worldly respects, lincke themselves in marriage with Popish idolaters, taking
into their bosoms a serpent, which is still ready to tempt and entice them to
break Gods Commandments, concerning his pure worship, and to embrace idolatry
and superstition, 2. Cor. 6. 14. 2. Cor. 6. 14.


Lastly, their practice is here reproved, who either upon fantastical
curiosity, or for commodity, or for fear of punishment, are ready to
present their bodies before the idol of the Mass, and to bow before an image,
imagining that they are to be excused, if they reserve their hearts for God.
But let such know, that herein they rob God of his glory, in denying to make
public profession of his true religion; they give a grievous offense to their
weak brethren, who see their outward practice, and do not see their inward
intention; they spoil the Lord of his right, in that they do not worship him
in the whole man, but with a part only; they cast themselves into desperate
danger, of making a further apostasy from God and his true religion, and of
embracing idolatry both in body and mind; they deprive themselves of a good
testimony of their own salvation; in a word, they Romans 10. 10.
deny Jesus Christ and his truth before men, and therefore unless they repent
of this sin, he will also deny them before his Father in heaven, as it is
Matthew. 10. 33. Matthew. 10. 33.


Fifthly, we here learn, that all places lose their dignity, and become
infamous, when as they are defiled with sin, All places lose their dignity
when they are defiled with sin, and consecrated to idolatry.
and consecrated to idolatry; so famous Gilgal, which was ennobled by many
memorable accidents which there happened, became through the idolatry there
committed so infamous, and of such bad note, that the people of Judah are
forbidden to resort unto it. And Beth-el, which in former times was the house
of God, by the like abuse became Beth-auen, a house of vanity. So Shilo which
was greatly renowned, because God had set his name there, and placed therein
his Tabernacle and Arc, the visible signs of his presence, became afterward
as remarkable for Gods heavy judgments, as before it had been for his great
mercies, through the grievous sins therein committed; so as the Prophet
Jeremy does propound it, as a pattern and example of Gods fearful wrath, to
keep the people of Judah from glorying in the Temple, Ier. 7. 12. Psalm. 78. 60.
The like may be said of the Jerem. 7. 12. Psalm. 78. 60.
Temple it self, which in the first institution was the house of prayer,
consecrated to Gods public worship and service, but through the wicked abuse
thereof, it became by Christ's own testimony a den of thieves, Matthew. 21. 13.
So Jerusalem Matthew. 21. 13.
the holy city, is become an harlot; and whereas heretofore it was the place
of Gods presence, it is now the prey of Gog and Magog. And Rome also, which was
the spouse of Christ, is become the whore of Babylon; and whereas heretofore it
was a famous Church, professing and practicing Gods true religion, now it is
become the habitation of devils, the hold of all foul spirits, and a cage of
every unclean and hateful bird, as it was prophesied of her, Apoc. 18. 2.
Apoc. 18. 2.


The use hereof serves first to admonish us, yt we read our lesson out of all
these examples, which were written for our learning; namely, that we do not
vaunt of our land and country, as being a place wherein the Church is seated,
Gods true religion planted, and his pure and sincere worship established and
exercised: for if we securely go on in sin, sheltering our selves from the
heat of Gods anger under the shade of these privileges; we shall in the end
find that our country was never so famous in the fruition of Gods manifold
mercies, as it shall be infamous and reproched through the filthiness of our
sins, and the fearfulness of Gods vengeance, which he will execute amongst us.

Secondly, it confuteth popish pilgrimages unto Rome Popish pilgrimages
confuted.
and the Holy land: for though these places retained still their ancient
diguity, and maintained still Gods pure religion, yet have we no reason to go
unto them to worship God; seeing in the time of the Gospel all difference of
places is taken away. Neither are we now restrained to mount Gerazim, or
Jerusalem, or Rome, or any other place, but this only is required, that as God
is a spirit, infinite, and omnipresent, so we worship him in spirit and truth,
as it is Ioh. 4. 23. To this purpose Ioh. 4. 23. Hierome.
one says: Non Hierosolymam vidisse, sed Hierosolymis been vixisse laudandum
est: It is no commendation to have seen Jerusalem, but to have lived well at
Jerusalem, that is praise worthy. Another says: Non terrena sed coelestis
Hierosolyma Bernard. epist. 319. ad Lelbert. Abbat.
require^da est, non pedibus proficiscendo, sed affectibus proficiendo: that
is, We must not seek after the earthly but the heavenly Jerusalem, not by
pilgrimage on foot, but by bettering our affections. How much less then are
we now to travail unto these places, seeing these Beth-els are become
Beth-auens? and howsoever they were heretofore the places of Gods worship, yet
are they now utterly degenerate, being wholly devoted to Turcisme,
Antichristianisme, superstition and idolatry: and therefore having lost their
ancient dignity, and now become infamous, we are not to esteem them as they
were, but as they are, nor to go unto them, lest they taint us also with their
superstitions and idolatry.

The Last thing which is here to be observed, is, that the All mixture
between true and false religion condemned.
Lord condemns all manner of mixture between true religion and false
religion, between his pure worship prescribed in his word, and will worship,
superstition and idolatry. For he could not endure that those who went up to
Gilgal and Beth-auen, and communicated with idolaters, should swear by his
name, and thereby make a kind of outward profession of his religion: he could
not abide the halting of the Israelites between him and Baal, but puts them
to their choice, either to worship him alone, or Baal alone, 1. King. 18. The
like place we have, Ezech. 20. 39. As 1. King 18. Ezech. 20. 39, Jer. 44. 26.
for you, O house of Israel, thus says the Lord God, go you and serve every
one his idol, seeing that you will not obey me; and pollute my holy name no
more, with your gifts and with your idols. So Zeph. 1. 4. 5. he threatens to
cut off all those who worshipped Zeph. 1. 4. 5.
the host of heaven, and them that worship and swear by the Lord, and sweared
also by Malchan. And this was the sin of the Samaritanes, who worshipped the
true Jehovah, because they would avoid his punishments, but withal worshipped
together with him the gods of their own countries, as appears, 2. King. 17.
29. 30. 2. King. 17. 29. 30. The reason why will worship is condemned. 2. Cor.
6. 14. 15.


The reason why this sin is so straightly forbidden and condemned, is, because,
first, there can be no communion between God and idols, between his true
religion and wilworship, idolatry and superstition, according to that, 2. Cor.
6. 14. 15. What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what
communion has light with darkness? and what concord has Christ with Belial?
or what part has the beleener with the infidel? and what agreement has the
Temple of God with idols?

Secondly, because the Lord is not capable of any copartnership; for whereas
there are three sorts of men, who can abide no sharing nor partnership, a King
in his kingdom, a master in his family, a husband in his marriage bed; the
Lord is both our King, master and husband. He is a King, yea a glorious King,
Psalm. 24. and last verse, and he will not give his Psalm. 24. 10. Esaias 42. 8.
glory to another, Esaias 42. 8. and therefore he will rule us alone by the
scepter of his word, or he will thrust us from under his government, and give
us over to be ruled by the tyranny of Satan, and our own corrupt wills. He is
our master, Malac. 1. 6. who requires all our service, or else will have
Malac. 1. 6.
none of it at all; because we cannot perform faithful service to two
masters, especially being of a contratie disposition, Matthew. 6. 24. He is the
husband of the Church, Esa. 54. 5. Matthew. 6. 24. Esaias 54. 5.
yea a jealous husband, who can endure no cotriuals in his love; and therefore
if she will needs play the harlot with others, the Lord will divorce her from
him, as being altogether unworthy to enjoy his love.

The use of this doctrine serves to admonish us, that we We must make no
mixture between Christ's true religion and Popish superstition.
carefully beware of making a mixture, between that true religion which we
profess, and Popish superstition, that is, the religion of Christ, and the
religion of Antichrist: for seeing they match, yea and far exceed even the
Gentiles themselves in their multitude of idols, they having for every day in
the year, and for every little village in a whole kingdom, and for every
occasion and employment, a several Saint, to whom they give divine honor, by
praying unto them, by erecting statues, images and temples for their honor, by
dedicating and setting apart holy days for their service, by making vows, and
offering oblations unto them, seeing they worship the Idol of the Mass, and
creep to the cross, and to magnify their own merits, extenuate the
all-sufficient merits of Jesus Christ; therefore it is as possible to reconcile
truth and falsehood, light and darkness, God and Belial, as Christian religion
with Popish superstition. And therefore let those whom God has in mercy
severed from this Romish synagogue, hearken to the Prophets admonition, Come
ye not at Gilgal, nor go up to Beth-auen: and let those who are already
amongst them, hearken to that voice which came down from heaven, Go out of her
my people, and be not pantakers in her sins, that ye receive not of her
plagues: Apocal. Apoc. 18. 4.
18. 4.

ANd thus much concerning the admonition. Now follow the reasons whereby it is
enforced, the which are of two sorts; the first are taken from their sins,
the other from their punishments. Their sins are first generally propounded,
namely, that they were undutiful, stubborn and rebellious, verse. 16. And then
they are more specially expounded, to wit, that they had grievously
transgressed the first table, by their gross idolatry, verse. 17. and the
second also, both by intemperancie against themselves, and by their adultery
and extorsion against their neighbors, verse. 18. Their punishments, which
should discourage Judah from imitating their sins, were two, the first was
captivity, verse. 16. the other ignominy and confusion, verse. 19.

And these are the particular branches, of this last part of the Chapter. Now
we will entreat of them as they lie in order. Verse. 16. For Israel is
rebellious as an unruly heyfer: now the Lord will feed the^ as a lamb in a
large place. In which words are The exposition.
contained two reasons, to dissuade Judah from associating themselves in too
near familiarity and friendship with the Israelites, and especially from
joining with them in their idolatrous worship. The first whereof is taken from
their sin, the other from their punishment. Their sin is contained in these
words: For Israel is rebellious as an unruly heyfer. The meaning is, that the
Israelites were exceedingly contumacious and stubborn, and even wanton in
their rebellion, and that they were become like out-lawes, who had shaked off
the yoke of Gods government; for so the word Sorerah, which is here translated
rebellious, is taken elsewhere, as Deuteronomy. 21. 18. If any man have a son, that
is (Sorer) stubborn and rebellious, (...) Deuteronomy. 21. 18.
that is to say, who will not submit himself to his fathers government, etc.

Now this their rebellious stubbornness, is in lively manner expressed by a
similitude taken from an unruly heifer, the which is here contracted, but may
be thus explicated; as the heifer which is well fatted, by running in a
fruitful pasture, grows in time so wanton, that she contemns her master,
shakes off the yoke, gaddeth abroad and skippeth over hedge and ditch into
other pastures, rather for wantonness then for hunger; so the Israelites being
fatted by Gods manifold benefits grew thereby so wanton and rebellious, that
they despised the Lord who sed them, shook off the yoke of his government,
denying to submit themselves to be ruled by his holy word, forsook the Temple
which was appointed by the Lord to be their pasture, wherein he would feed
them with his word and Sacraments, and broke into forbidden places, even the
hills, groves, and idolatrous Temples, where for wantonness, and not for
hunger, they fed themselves with the poisonous hemlocke of idolatry and
Heathenish superstition, refusing in the mean time the wholesome food of their
souls, Gods pure and sincere worship, whereby they should have been fed to
eternal life.

In which similitude diverse things are implied: first, that the Israelites were
contumatious and rebellious against the Lord, and that beyond all bounds and
limits of humanity; and therefore they are compared in their rebellion not
with reasonable men, but with unreasonable beasts, to show their stupiditie and
brutishnes in this their sin.

Secondly, he intimates their audacious stubbornness, whereby they were
ready to resist God to his face, in that he compares them not to such beasts
as show their contempt of their master by their flight and running away, but to
a stubborn and unruly heifer, which will not only shake off the yoke, but also
put at her master with her horns.

Thirdly, here is implied their unruly wantonness, which would not suffer them
to continue in one and the same Church with the Jews, as it were in one heard
and one pasture, but caused them after a wild fashion to sever themselves from
the rest, and to leap as it were over Gods fence, to associate themselves with
the Gentiles, in their more then brutish idolatry and damnable superstitions.

Lastly, he here intimates their wicked abuse of Gods blessings, wherewith
being as it were fatted and pampered to the full, they did not only
ungratefully forget and forsake the Lord, but also rebelliously cast off the
yoke of his government, and stubbornely opposed his will, and as it were in
savage and brutish manner made head against him.

Now what could be a more forcible disswasion to restrain all amongst the
people of Judah, in who^ there was any spark of grace, or dram of goodness,
from consorting with the Israelites in near familiarity, and much more in
their Heathenish idolatry, then this, that they were barbarous, yea brutish
rebels against the sovereign Majesty and most mighty King of heaven and
earth, who after an audacious manner resisted and opposed against God, as it
were to his face, and who had separated themselves from Gods true Church, and
from the communion of Saints to join with the Heathen people in their
idolatry, and that not being urged through any necessity, but of a waiward
will and unruly wantonness, unto which they were come through the wicked and
ungrateful abuse of Gods blessings and plentiful benefits, wherewith they
were fed and pampered, according to that, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. But he that should have
bin upright, when he waxed fat, spurned with his heel. Thou art fat, thou art
Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
gross, thou art laden with fatness: therefore he forsook God that made
him, and regarded not the strong God of his salvation: Amos 4. 1.

And this was the first reason, to dissuade the men of Judah Amos 4. 1.
from consorting with the idolatrous Israelites. The second argument is taken
from their punishment, in these words; Now the Lord will feed them as a lamb
in a large place. Whereby is signified, that the Lord would bring upon the
people of Israel all kind of miserable calamities, in the land of their
captivity, wherewith he would tame their stubborn unruliness, and humble
their haughty pride.

But let us descend unto more particulars. In this punishment here threatened
two things are to be considered: first, the time when it should be inflicted:
secondly, the punishment it self. The time is expressed in the present tense:
Now the Lord will feed them. Whereby is signified, that seeing they were
grown to such haughty stubbornness, in their rebellion, God would no longer
endure it, but would take a speedy course to abate their pride, master their
unruly stubbornness, and to tame their wantonness, by loading them as it were
with calamities.

The punishment it self is expressed by way of allegory: for as before he had
signified their unruliness and rebellion, by a similitude of an unruly heifer,
so now he sets down their abject and miserable condition, under the
similitude of a silly wandering lamb in a desert place. As though he should
say, Because whilst I fed them plentifully with my benefits, they behaved
themselves like wanton, stubborn and unruly beasts; I will out of hand strip
them of my gifts, wherewith they are too much pampered, and so load them with
miseries and calamities, that they shall become as mild and tame as silly
lambs, wandering in the wilderness, and forsaken both of damme and shepherd.

By which similitude the Prophet does in most lively manner decipher the
miserable condition of the people of Israel; for first, whereas sheep being
sociable creatures, delight in company, and love to be in the flock; it is
unto them irksome and tedious, when being straied from the rest, they wander
alone in desert places: but such tediousness of life the Lord threatens
against the Israelites; for seeing they would not associate themselves with the
rest of his flock, the people of Judah, nor would be content to be infolded in
his Temple, as it were in their safe sheepfould; but behaved themselves rather
like wanton heifers, then like the Lords sheep, taking delight in gadding from
the rest of their company and leaping into forbidden pastures; therefore the
Lord threatens, that seeing through wantonness they delighted in separation,
he would so scatter them amongst the Heathen, that they should not have any
flock to join themselves unto, nor no fellowship or communion one with an
other, but should become like single sheep, scattered here and there in vast
and desert places. And this is implied whereas he uses the singular number,
saying that they should be feed, not as lambs flocking together, but as a
lamb severed from the rest of his company.

Again, the good and saferie of the silly lamb herein consists, when as
he is under the government and protection of his careful shepherd, and may
satisfy his hunger, either by sucking his damme, or by nibling the sweet
grass in a pleasant pasture: on the other side, no greater misery can befall
the silly lamb, then to be forsaken of the shepherd, abandoned of the damme,
and to go wandering in the wilderness, amongst wolves and other savage beasts,
especially being silly and simple in wit, unable to make any shift by policy
to escape danger, feeble and weak, not able to make resistance against the
least violence; and slow of pace, having no hope to save himself by flight.
For what can the poor lamb do in this case, but wander up and down, fearing
every shadow, and trembling at every noise, till he have spent his strength
with bleating and crying for hopeless help, or is pined with hunger, or is
made a pray of some ravenous beast? But this the Lord threatens should be the
condition of the rebellious Israelites; for because they would not be ruled by
him their loving and careful shepherd, he excluded them out of his fould,
and thrust them from under his government and protection; because they despised
their mother the true Church, he seuers and scatters them from her, so as they
could not any longer suck her breasts, nor receive the milk of the word and
Sacraments, for the relieuing their spiritual hunger; because they could not
be content to live in that fruitful pasture the land of Canaan, but like
unruly heifers took their chief pleasure in ranging abroad, he threatens
that he would provide a place for them large enough, for they should have the
whole world to wander in, after they were led into captivity, where their
commons should be no less hard then full of danger; for it should not be unto
them like the land of Israel and Judah, which was like a pleasant pasture,
hedged about on every side, with the strong fence of Gods mighty power, and
ever watching providence; but like a vast and desert wilderness, which being
dry and barren, should afford unto the^ but bare and slender provision to
sustain their lives; and being full of cruel and wicked men, as it were with
so many wolves, bears, tigres, and lions, should give unto them continual
cause of fear, of being devoured and destroyed, both in respect of their
ravenous rage, and powerful malice; and also their own feeble weakness in
making any resistance.

And this also was an effectual argument to dissuade the men of Judah, from
associating themselves with the wicked Israelites, seeing if they were
copartners with them in their defection and rebellion, forsaking Gods true
Church, Temple, and religion, to join with them in their apostasy,
superstition, and idolatry, they should also participate with them in all
these calamities and grievous miseries.

And thus much for the meaning of the words. The doctrines That we are hardly
drawn from bad company when we are entangled with it.
bad company, so when we are once entangled with it, we are hardly drawn
from it, with the best arguments and most effectual disswasions. An example
hereof we have in this place; for when the people of Judah had found a wicked
sweetness in the society of the idolatrous Israelites, they were hardly
drawn from frequenting their company, and therefore the Lord thought it
necessary by his Prophet, to use so many forcible reasons, some whereof are
taken from the hainousnes of their sins, and some from the grieuousnes of
their punishments, to dissuade the men of Judah from haunting the impions
fellowship of the Israelites. So how often and earnestly did the Lord charge
the people of Israel, when they entered into the land of promise, not to make
any covenant, not to have any society with the inhabitants of the land? as we
may see, Exodus 23. 32. Deuteronomy. 7. 1, 2, 3, 4. Exodus 23. 32. Deuteronomy. 7. 1. 2. 3.
Notwithstanding all which warnings, they kept them still amongst them, and
would not quite expel them out of their country; as appears, Judge. 1. 28. 2.
1, 2, 3. The like may be Iud. 1. 28. 2. 1. 2
said of Lot and his wife, who were so bewitched with ye pleasures of Sodom,
that they would not leave that wicked company, though they had strong
inducements so to do, both in respect that their sins were most outrageous, as
also in that Genesis 14.
they had already tasted of their punishments, being together with them
spoiled of their goods and led captive, had not God stirred up Abraham to
rescue them. Yea and when God had absolutely told them, that he would destroy
Sodom, and was now purposely come to execute his fierce wrath upon them, yet
they made such slow haste to depart, that the Angel of the Lord was feign to
use a kind of forcible Genesis 19. 16. 26
violence, and by strong hand to draw them out of the city. And after they
were escaped the danger, though they had a direct prohibition from God, yet
Lots wise looked back, as being loath to depart, and longing to return into
this sincke of sin. So how miserably was good Iehosaphat ensnared in that
evil fellowship with Ahab and his family, in as much as neither their
horrible idolatries, and heinous wickedness, nor Gods fearful judgments
threatened and inflicted upon them, could weane him from their company, 1.
King. 22. 4. and 2. King. 8. 18 2. Chron. 20. 35 36.
nor restrain him from entering into the nearest contracts and alliances with
them, to the utter corrupting and perverting of his house?

Now the cause hereof is partly the corruption of our own The flesh and wicked
worldlings are in near allia^ce.
flesh, the greatest and worst part of our selves, which, whilst we continue
here, holds great correspondence and near familiarity with the world and
wicked worldlings; and partly because wicked men have many worldly baits of
pleasure, and profit, which like Circe her poisonous potions, do so bewitch
us, yt we have no power at all to flee from this wicked fellowship. But as
Sampson being spoiled of his strength, was made an easy pray to the
Philistims, who put out his eyes, and made him like a slave to grind in their
prison house; so these cursed Dalilaes use all their bewitching charms to rob
us of our spiritual strength, and then we are easily surprised of our
spiritual enemies, and have the eyes of our understanding so blinded, that we
cannot see either the hellishnesse of their behavior, or the fearful plagues
which hang over their heads; nor have any power or desire to make any evasion
out of their pleasing thraldom, until the Lord repair our strength by his
holy Spirit, and work in our hearts a true hatred of their wicked tyranny.

The use hereof is, that we learn hereby to hate the company We must shun the
company of wicked me^.
of wicked men, as well when they smile, as when they frown, when they flatter
and allure, as when they threaten and offer violence: seeing when they most
fawn upon us, they most defile us; they mortally stab us, whilst they kindly
embrace us; and whilst they are entered into most friendly parlies of peace and
love, they are undermining our State, and plotting treacherous treasons against
both our souls and bodies: especially let us be careful to withstand their
first allurements, and turn away our eyes from their enticing baits, and even
stop our ears against these Sirens songs, before we hear their charming
notes: for if this worldly birdiime of wicked company, have once taken hold of
us, like silly birds the more we strive, the more we shall be inuegled and
made unfit to fly from them; and if we do but give them audience, they will so
allure us with their bewitching tunes, that we shall have no power to withhold
us from their company, though Syren-like they entice us to come amongst them,
that they may devour and prey upon us.

The second thing to be here observed, is, that both the The sins and
punishments of wicked me^, should weane us from their company.
sins and punishments of wicked men, should be effectual reasons to dissuade
the faithful from frequenting their company; for these are the arguments which
the holy Ghost here uses, to dissuade the men of Judah from resorting unto the
Israelites, because they were rebelliously stubborn in their sins, and like
unruly heifers had shaken off the yoke of government, and because by these
sins they had made themselves liable to Gods fearful punishments of
captivity, and manifold calamities, which in short time should be inflicted
on them. Concerning the former, we are not to understand it of all sins, for
then we should avoid all company in the world, for as much as all men are
sinners; but only of such sins as being wilfully committed, are also
obstinately defended. For when men are come to this pass, that they commit
their sins against their knowledge and conscience, presumptuously and with an
high hand against God, and that after they have been often instructed,
admonished and rebuked, both in private conference, and in the public
ministry of the Word; when they become like unruly heifers, stubbornely
casting off the yoke of Gods government, and do in rebellious manner oppose
against God himself, defending their sins, and glorying in their wickedness,
as the Israelites did in this place; then are we carefully to flee and avoid
all manner of familiar friendship, and fellowship with them. For first, whereas
the maine end, why we should resort into the company of wicked men, is, to
instruct, admonish and rebuke them, that so we may reclaim them from their
wicked ways, and convert them unto God; for which purpose our Savior kept
company with publicans and sinners; this end is taken away through their
contemptuous stubbornensse, and obstinate contempt of all these holy means of
their conversion: for here our Savior Christ's rule takes place, that we must
not cast holy things unto dogs, nor pearls before swine, lest they tread
these precious jewels under their filthy feet, and turning again all to rent
us, as it is, Matthew. 7. 6. And his example also Matthew. 7. 6.
serves for our direction, for when the Scribes and Pharisees, obstinately
opposed against the means of their conversion, and rebelliously set themselves
against Gods revealed will, he gives over their company, and consorteth
himself with publicans and sinners. And secondly when there is no hope of
converting them from their sins, in regard of their obstinacy and stiffenes
in rebellion, there is great fear lest they will pervert us in respect of our
frailty and faint weakness in good courses. And therefore as all wise men being
in health, do avoid the company of those who being infected with the plague,
have the marks and tokens appearing upon them, because there is great danger
of their infection, but no hope of the others recovery; so if we be endued
with any spark of spiritual wisdom, we will carefully avoid those, who are
deeply infected with the contagious diseases of sin, especially when as by
their stubborn contemning of all holy admonitions and wholesome reprehensions,
they evidently show that they are marked to destruction, and have the plain
tokens of reprobation appearing upon them, seeing there is more danger that we
shall be infected by their contagion, then there is hope that they should be
cured by our admonitio^s. And this was holy David's practice, as appears,
Psalm. 26. 4. I have not haunted with vain persons, neither kept company with
the dissemblers. 5. I have hated the assembly of the evil, and have not
companied with the wicked. And Psalm. 119. 115. Away from me you wicked, for
Psalm. 26. 4 5. and 119. 115.
I will keep the commandments of my God.

Again, the imminent danger of Gods fearful punishments, which hang over the
heads of wicked men, should be an effectual reason to persuade the faithful
to avoid their company, seeing that as the Lord does often spare the wicked for
the godlies sake, as appears, Genesis 18. 32. so he does sometimes inflict
temporal punishments upon the faithful, because they are in the company of
ungodly men, as appears in the example of Lot, consorting himself with the
Act. 27. 24. Genesis 18. 32. and 14 and 19. 1. King. 22.
Sodomites, Genesis 14. and 19. and of Iehosaphat entertaining near familiarity
and friendship with wicked Ahab, 1. King. 22. Those therefore who would not be
destroyed with Corah and his accomplices, must separate themselves from them,
Numb. 16. 26. and they must come out of Babylon, who will not Numb. 16. 26.
Apoc. 18. 4.
be partakers of her plagues, Apoc. 18. 4.

The use hereof serves to reprove such, as consort themselves Those reproved
who comfort with wicked men.
in near familiarity and fellowship with those, who by their daily practice
show their unrecoverable and desperate rebellion against God, and their
profane contempt of all goodness; seeing hereby they notably bewray their
impiety toward God, and their extreme folly in regard of themselves. For if
they had any true love of God, or zeal of his glory, they would not be
familiar with those that hate him, nor yet grace such graceless impes with
their company, who spend their whole lives to his dishonor; and if they had
any dram of true wisdom, to provide for their own safety, they would not
range themselves in the forlorn hope, nor venture their lives in that ship
which is ready to sinck; nor join themselves with such wicked companions, who
having committed high treason against the great King of heaven and earth, are
daily in danger to be attached, condemned, and led to execution.

Thirdly, we may here observe, that customable living in Customable sinning
makes men brutish in their wickedness.
sin, does make men to become, not only inhumane and barbarous, but brutish
in wickedness; and therefore it is usual with the holy Ghost to decipher the
disposition of sinners, by comparing them unto brute beasts; as in this place
he sets forth the stubborn rebellion of the Israelites by likening them to
an unruly heifer, who casting off the yoke, is ready with violence to run
against her master. So ye sottish folly of the adulterer is deciphered, when
as he is compared to an ox led to ye slaughter, Pro. 7. 22. and his beastly
filthiness, Prou. 7. 22.
when as he is likened to an horse, neighing after his neighbors wife, Ier.
5. 8. The Prophet Esaias compares sinners Jerem. 5. 8.
before their conversion, unto savage beasts, as Lions, Leopards, Wolves,
Bears, Aspes, and Cockatrices, Esa. 11. 6. 7. 8. Esaias 11. 6. 7. 8.
And our Savior Christ likeneth incorrigible sinners to filthy swine, and
fierce bandogs, Matthew. 7. 6. So the Apostle Matthew. 7. 6.
Peter compares those who after some show and profession of religion, do make
a relapse into their old sins, unto a dog returning to his vomit, and to a sow
which being washed, walloweth again in the mire, 2. Pet. 2. 22. Yea the
Prophet 2. Pet. 2. 22.
Esaias goes further, and affirms, that ungrateful and rebellious sinners are
worse then the brute beasts, Esaias 1. 3. The Esaias 1. 3.
ox (says he) knows his owner, and the ass his masters crib, but Israel
has not known, my people has not understood.

The use hereof serves to show the wretched and base estate of rebellious and
unrepentant sinners, seeing howsoever The wretched estate of impenitent sinners.
they may ruffle it in their bravery, be honorable in their titles, and have
the first place and chief seat wheresoever they come, yet are they no better
then brute beasts; yea in truth they are far worse, as being in their
disposition whilst they live more malicious, ungrateful and rebellious, and
after death far more miserable; for well were it with them, if after they have
led a brutish life, they might in their death be like unto the beasts which
perish; but it shall be far otherwise, their death being unto them but an
entrance into death eternal, and a passage into the torments of hell fire.

Secondly, this shows the malignant quality of sin, The malignant quality
of sinners.
which like Circe her poisonous potions, transformeth men into beasts, and
makes those who were created according to the most beautiful image of God, to
be more ugly and deformed in Gods sight, then the most brutish* and basest
creature. The consideration whereof as it should make us most careful in
avoiding sin, with all the baits, allurements and prouocations which incite
us thereunto; so when we are defiled and deformed with the foul and filthy
spots of our transgressions, we should be as careful to apply unto us the
precious blood of Christ by a lively faith, that thereby being cleansed and
purged, we may be restored to our former beauty and perfection.

Fourthly, we may here observe, that when a people professing Those who will
not serve God, shall be made slaves to their enemies.
religion, do cast off the yoke of Gods government, and in the pride and
stubbornness of their hearts contemn all means of their conversion, then the
judgments of God lie waiting at the door, and are ready to enter upon them;
and because they will not submit themselves to be ruled by the scepter of Gods
kingdom, he will thrust them from under his protection, cause them to be led
into captivity, and suffer their enemies to tyrrannize and insult over them.
So in this place, because the Israelites were become like unruly Heifers, and
would not bear the yoke of Gods government, he threatens that they should
become the captives and slaves of their enemies, and under their tyrannical
thraldom endure manifold miseries and calamities. Many examples might be
brought to clear this point. In the time of the Judges, when the people
rebelled against the Lord, contemned his word, and denied him their service and
allegiance, he gave them over into the hands of their enemies, as the
Canaanites, Midianites, Philistines, and diverse others. When the Jews would
not serve the Lord their sovereign King, he made them serve tyrannical Lords
in a strange country, both before and since the coming of Christ. When
Manasses and Zedechias would not regard the word of the Lord, but persecuted
his Prophets, and made war as it were against Heaven, the Lord pulled down
their pride, and broke their stubborn and rebellious hearts with the manifold
calamities of a miserable captivity. And this is that which the Lord
threatens against the rebellious potentates of the earth, who in furious rage
combined themselves against the kingdom of Jesus Christ; namely, that he would
vex them in his sore displeasure: and because they would not be ruled by the
scepter of his word, he would crash them with his scepter of iron, and break
them in pieces like a potters vessel, Psalm. 2. 2. 5. 9. So our Psalm. 2. 2. 5.
9.
Savior Christ has taught us, that those his enemies who had shaken off the
yoke of his government, and would not let him reign over them, should be
haled into his presence and slain before his face, Luke 19. 27. Luke 19. 27.


And surely this is just with God, that those who deny unto him their obedience
and allegiance, which is the Lords lawful right, both in respect of their
creation, continual preservation, and of those manifold benefits which they
have received under his government, should be used as rebellious traitors, and
feel the extremest rigor of his righteous laws; that those who will not be
ruled by the scepter of his word, should be cut off with the sword of justice;
and that they who will not serve their gracious Lord, who richly rewards
their imperfect service, with the vnderserued wages of both temporal benefits
in this life, and eternal glory in the life to come, should in their bodies
be yielded up to the tyrannical government of their insolent enemies, who
will reward their service with injuries, indignities, and manifold calamities,
and both in body and soul, become the vassals and slaves of sin, Satan, the
world, and their own unruly lusts, whose wages is eternal death, after a
wretched and miserable life.

The use hereof is, that we labor to conform our selves in holy obedience
unto the will of our heavenly King, and submit our selves to be ruled by the
scepter of his word; and then he will keep us under his protection, defend us
from the malice and fury of all our enemies, and greatly enrich us with his
blessings and benefits. Whereas on the other side, if we deny unto him our
allegiance, he will take no further charge of us, but will lay us open to the
common spoil; if we be proud he will find means to humble us, if stubborn
and unruly, he will take a speedy course to tame and rule us; and if like
untamed heifers, we shake off the yoke of his government which is light and
easy, he can hamper us well enough, by laying upon our necks the iron yoke
of our tyrannical enemies, which will gall us not only to the quick, but even
to the heart.

Lastly, we may here observe, how wretched and miserable The miserable estate
of those who are thrust from under Gods protection.
their estate is, who for their rebellious stubburnnesse, are thrust from under
Gods government and protection. For they shall be as a lamb in a large place:
that is; as the poor lamb is in a most desperate condition, which wandreth
alone in some vast wilderness, without any shepherd to tend and defend him,
or damme to feed him, in danger either of pining, or of devouring; so alike
wretched is their estate, who for their stubburnnesse and unruliness, are
thrust out of Christ's sheepfold, from under his government and protection. For
whereas whilst they were at his guiding, he led them into his green
pastures, feeding them with his sweet milk, and pleasant grass of his word
and Sacraments; now they are deprived of this food of their souls, and so
spiritually pined and starued: whereas he fenced them in, and kept them from
wandering, with the strong hedges of his benefits, and gentle chastisements; now
the fence being taken away, they stray abroad, and wander up and down in the
desert of this world, both pinched with want of all spiritual food, and
exposed to all manner of desperate danger: whereas whilst they were under his
direction, they were under his protection also; who by his providence and power
defended them from worldly wolves, and bears, and from that ramping and
roaring Lion, and fierce red Dragon Satan, who daily assailed and earnestly
labored to devour them: now being disarmed of his assistance, they lie open
to the common spoil, being altogether unable either to sly away, or make
resistance. And this was the state of the first rebellious sheep, our great
grandfather Adam, when as by his Genesis 3. 7.
sin he had made himself naked: this was the case of the Lords flock, the
people of Israel, when as they also had Exodus 32. 25.
made themselves naked by their idolatry, whilst they were in the wilderness;
and into this condition they often brought themselves in the time of the
Judges. For howsoever whilst they served the Lord, they had prosperity,
peace, plenty of all things, and were so hedged in on all sides, that all
their enemies could not hurt them; yet when as they made a desection from under
his government, and for their grievous sins were disarmed of his protection,
how speedily did their enemies invade them? how sharply did they assault them?
and how easily did they pray upon them? And finally when they made no end of
provoking the Lord to anger by their sins, how miserably were they scattered
like sheep without a shepherd, and made a pray to the savage beasts, the
cruel Heathens; as the Lord threatens in this place?

The use hereof is, yt we carefully keep our selves in Gods safe sheepfold and
pleasant pasture, the true Church, and attentively hearken, and diligently obey
the voice of our great shepherd, and so we shall not only be safe under his
protection, but also be plentifully fed with his abundant blessings.
Otherwise, if we leave our sheepish nature, and become unruly like untamed
heifers, the Lord will let us range at large, pinch us with penury, and expose
us to all the former dangers.

ANd thus much in general concerning the sins of the Israelites, namely,
their stubborn rebellion; which the Prophet uses as an argument, to dissuade
the men of Judah, from associating themselves with them. In the next place he
does more specially express the particular sins, which most reigned amongst
them, the which are of two sorts: first, their sins against the first table, in
this verse: and secondly, their sins against the second table, in the verse
following. Their sin against the first table was their idolatry, in these
words, Verse. 17. Ephraim is joined to idols: let him alone. Which words
contain two things: first, a reason The exposition.
to dissuade the men of Judah from accompanying the Israelites, in these words,
Ephraim is joined to idols: and secondly a repetition of the general
dehortation, whereby it is reenforced, in the words following, let him alone.

Concerning the former: here by Ephraim we are Synecdochically to understand
the ten Tribes of Israel, which made a defection from the house of David, and
joined with Jeroboam. But Ephraim one of the ten, is here and elsewhere
principally named: first, because it was at this time chief of all the rest,
both in honor and wealth. Secondly, he names Ephraim only, to vpbraide his
unthankfulness, in that he had abused Gods extraordinary mercy toward him;
for whereas he had of the mere mercy and love of God, received the
pre-eminence before his elder brother Manasses, in his great grandfather Jacobs
blessing, and the privilege of the birthright, the which also the Lord
verified by the event, this should have moved him to extraordinary thankfulness
and obedience; he contrariwise did not only himself make a fearful
defection from God, and his pure religion, but polluted also the whole kingdom
with his superstition and idolatry, and became the head, and first mouer of
this horrible Apostasy. Lastly, he here names Ephraim, rather then any other
Tribe, because Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and other idolatrous Kings, which
were the setters up, and maintainers of idolatry, were herehence descended; so
that as hereby he taxes the whole Tribe, as being principal ringleaders to
idolatry, so especially the Kings and Nobles of this Tribe, which by their
authority, example, and practice, drew not only them, but the other Tribes
also, to idolatry and superstition.

It is further added, that this Ephraim is joined to idols: the word signifies
a continued act of time, namely, as they had in former times, so they continued
to join themselves to their idols: where he understands such a joining and
conjunction, as is between the fornicatour and the harlot, who by their
whoredom so join together, as that they become one flesh: implying hereby
that they and their idols were united together, in such a near and inseparable
knot, that there was scarce any possibility, that they would ever admit of any
disunion and separation.

And this was the manner of their conjunction. The things (...)
to which they were joined, were their idols. The word here used, is derived
from an Hebrew root, which signifies sorrow, grief, and terror, and
therefore Iunius translateth it, Coniunctus est terriculis Ephraim, whereby is
implied that the worshipping and serving of idols, never brings any sound
comfort, peace of conscience, or cheerful devotion, but grief and servile
fear, anxietie and trouble of mind.

And this is the meaning of the first part of this verse. Now upon this reason
alleged, the former dehortation is urged and enforced, in these words, Let
them alone. The which many learned Expositors understand, as the speech of God
to the Prophet; as though the Lord seeing the stubborn perverseness of the
people, who by no means would be reclaimed, should enjoin his Prophet to
surcease his labors, and to give them over as being a desperate cure. But I
rather take it, to be the speech of the Prophet himself to the people of
Judah, dissuading them from intermedling with the Israelites, because they were
such gross idolaters, as were now become past hope of amendment. And I thus
expound it: first, because the maine drift of this second part of the chapter,
is to dissuade the men of Judah from associating themselves with the idolatrous
Israelites; and therefore as in the 15. verse, he dehorted them from coming
into their company, so now he admonishes them not to intermeddle, or have any
dealings with them. And secondly we see, that after this restraint, the Prophet
still continues his labors in the work of his ministry, which he would
not have done, had the Lord by his prohibition enjoined him to desist; for it
is a fault to fight, when the Lord sounds the retraite, as well as to stand
still, or flee back when he sounds the alarm to battle. And Hosea should
have offended, if he had preached, when the Lord had enjoined him silence, as
well as Jonas in detracting his labors, and in not speaking that which God had
put into his mouth, when he sent him on his message: although I deny not, but
that the Lord does sometimes use rhetorical and semblable prohibitions in this
kind, not that he would have the event accord with the outward letter, but to
put the secure people in mind of the desperateness of their condition, and to
awake them out of their spiritual lethargy; but I see no reason why we should
run to figures, when the plain sense better accords with the scope of the
place.

The meaning then is, that Judah should let the Israelites alone, and have no
manner of familiarity, or intercourse of dealing with them. For whereas they
might pretend, that they therefore conuersed with them, that by their
admonitions, they might reclaim them from their idolatry: he takes away
this objection, by showing that they were so desperately addicted to their
idols, and so as it were glewed unto, and incorporated with them, that there
was no hope of any separation; and therefore seeing there was no likelihood of
their reclaiming, it was the best course not to meddle with them; for well
might they make them worse, but it was not like they could make the other
better; well might they allure them to communicate with them in their
superstitions, but it was scarce possible to dissuade them from their
idolatrous and false worship. Again, as our Savior says in another case,
they had Moses and the Prophets, the Luke 16.
book of Gods law, and faithful Expositors to make it clear to their
understandings, and to admonish them of their evil ways, and therefore it was
likely, if they would not give them the hearing, then much less would they
regard their private admonitions.

And this is the meaning of the words. The doctrines The greatness of the sinner
does aggrauate the sin.
power, riches or other Gods blessings, does not take away or extenuate the
fault, guilt or punishment of sin, but rather does increase and aggrauate
them. Because Ephraim was the principal Tribe amongst the ten, and most
abounded with all manner of Gods blessings; therefore in the first place he is
accused, as being more sinful, then all the other Tribes, and in the general
indictment, he bears the name of all his confederates, as being in respect
of his greatness, more guilty of sin then any of his brethren. So because
the Lord had advanced the people of Israel, above all the nations round about
them, and had privileged them with extraordinary blessings, both temporal
and spiritual above al their neighbor countries, therefore their sins and
rebellions were much more heinous and abominable in Gods sight, and their
punishments much more grievous, as appears, Ezech. 5. 5. 6. 9. 10. In these
respects also the Prophet matcheth Ezech. 5. 5. 6. 9. 10. and cap 6.
them, yea and gives them the pre-eminence in wickedness, above Sodom it
self; especially in that they had abused Gods more rich mercy, and wilfully
withstood the means of their conversion and salvation, which the other wanted,
as he shows at large, Ezech. 16.

And surely not without reason, are those to be condemned as the most grievous
malefactors, who being most highly advanced by God in the fruition of all his
gifts and blessings, do notwithstanding dishonor him by their sins, and with
an high hand rebel against him. First, because to their other sins, they
add horrible ingratitude, a vice odious to God and man: for whereas Gods
bounty should oblige them to duty and obedience, they forgetting or
neglecting the author of their preferment, abuse his own gifts to his
dishonor: and like unthankful rebels being advanced and enriched by their
Sovereign, use all their credit, power and wealth to strengthen them in their
rebellion. Secondly, because those who are advanced above others, in honor,
power, and riches, are seated as it were upon a hill, and in the eye of all
men, whereby it comes to pass that their sins are exemplarie, and so they
do not only offend God themselves, but also draw others to imitate their
wickedness; and hereby their single sins are doubled and redoubled upon their
sinful souls, according to the number of those who are corrupted by their
evil example.

The use hereof serves to stir up all whom the Lord has The more we are
advanced, the more should be our thankfulness.
advanced above others in his blessings, that they earnestly labor to exceed
others in thankfulness and obedience. Otherwise if they being unmindful of Gods
benefits rebel against him, and dishonor his name by their sins; they shall
be condemned and punished not only as ordinary sinners, but also as
ungrateful rebels, and as chief captains and ringleaders, who by their
example have drawn others into the like transgressions.

Secondly, those who are of a mean estate may here learn The smalnes of our
receipts causes short accounts.
contentation, seeing by the smalnesse of their receipts, they have the benefit
of short accounts; and the lower their condition is, the more they are
privileged from the guilt of other men's sins. For whereas those who are in
eminent places, are exposed much more to the boisterous storms of manifold
tentations, and when they fall like high buildings beat down inferiors, as
it were under cottages, with their ruins; those who are but of mean quality,
do not lie so open to these blasts of trial; or though they be ouerthrown in
the day of tentation, yet commonly they are only guilty of their own fall,
there being few or none that by their example are drawn into their sin.

Secondly, we here observe, that such is the near conjunction between
idolaters and their idols, that they most The near conjunction between
idolaters and their idols.
hardly admit of any separation: for as in corporal fornication, the adulterer
is so joined with the adulteress, that they become one flesh; whereby it
comes to pass, that they so desperately dote one upon another, that neither
the loss of their credit, nor the impouerishing of their estate, nor the
manifold mischiefs which accompanied their sins in this life, nor the
eternal torments of hell fire, which are threatened against adulterers in the
life to come, can weane them one from another; so in this spiritual whoredom,
the idolater does in his heart and affections so cleave unto his idols, that he
neglects his fame and reputation with the godly, consumes his wealth and
substance, contemns Gods heavy judgments denounced against idolaters, both
in this life and the life to come. And this was the estate of Ephraim in this
place, who so firmly cleaued unto their idols, that they could by no means be
severed, neither by Gods alluring promises, nor terrifying threats, neither by
his mercies, nor by his judgments, neither by the public preaching of Gods
Prophets, nor by the private admonitions of their brethren; and therefore the
Lord commands the men of Judah, not to intermeddle with them, as being now
become a desperate cure, of whom there was no hope of amendment and
reformation. Many such examples we have in the book of God. Although Laban long
enjoyed the company of holy Jacob, and plainly saw the manifold blessings
which the true Jehovah multiplied upon him, yea and upon himself also for
Jacobs sake; yet all this could not withdraw him from worshipping his idols. So
although the Lord made choice of the Israelites for his peculiar people, and
gave unto them his law, wherein he prescribed his true worship, and restrained
them from idolatry, and confirmed this law by powerful miracles, and by
continual experience gave them to understand, that he blessed them with all
his benefits when they worshipped him according to his revealed will, and
contrariwise multiplied his plagues upon them, when they worshipped idols; yet
so wholly were they possessed with a spirit of fornications, that all this
would not restrain them from this sin, nor reclaim them from their idolatry,
when they had addicted themselves unto it. So although the Lord had punished
the land of Judah with captivity and desolation, and had sent his Prophets unto
them that remained, to ascertaine them that their idolatry was the chief
cause of all their miseries, yet they rebelliously contemn the word of the
Lord, and desperately resolve to continue in their idolatry, Iere. 44. 16. 17.
21. 22. The like may be said of Jeroboam, Iere. 44. 16. 17. 21 22.
Ahab, and the rest of the idolatrous Kings, who after they had joined
themselves with idols, could by no means be ever parted from them, neither by
Gods word, nor by his miracles, by his benefits nor by his punishments. And
even in our own days do we not see that the idolatrous Papists having
wedded themselves to their superstitions, will by no means admit of any
divorce and separation, but shutting their eyes against the light of Gods
truth, and hardening their hearts against all those holy precepts whereby
idolatry and superstition is forbidden and condemned, impudently persist in
their evil courses, choosing rather to raze out that which was written by Gods
own finger, and to mangle and maime the commandments of almighty God, which
prohibit the making and worshipping of images, then to suffer their idolatrous
superstitions to be rooted out of their hearts, or to admit of any division or
separation between them and their idols?

The use of this doctrine is, that when any are suitors unto We must prevent
the beginnings of idolatry.
us in the behalf of idols for our love, we give them a speedy answer, and
forbid the banes when they are first published, alleging for our selves, that
we are already married to our husband Christ, and therefore cannot entertain
their love, unless we would become notorious strumpets; that we have already
received Christ into our hearts, and therefore there is no place there for
idols, seeing there can be no communion between them; that we are the temples
of the holy Ghost, which has no agreement with idols, as the Apostle speaks,
2. Cor. 6. 16. Yea let us, not only abhor 2 Cor. 6. 16.
this spiritual whoredom in the grossest kinds, but also withstand all means
and occasions thereof, making with Job in another kind a covenant with our
eyes, that we will not look upon these alluring harlots; and stopping our
ears against all those bewitching pandors, who solicit for them, and woo our
hearts from God and his pure worship. Otherwise such is the inclinablenesse of
our hearts to idolatry and superstition, and in so near a bond of love is
corrupted nature and our fleshly part united with idols, that if we give way
to the first motions, and suffer our hearts and affections to be joined with
them, the knot between us will prove inseparable, and no persuasions will
withdraw us from them.

Thirdly, we here learn from the name which the holy Idolatry and
superstition. brings no true comfort, but horror and anxietie.
Ghost gives unto idols, that they do not give unto those who are devoted to
their service any true comfort, or sound joy, or peace of conscience, but
contrariwise, horror and scare, disquietnes of mind, and just cause of grief
and sorrow, in respect of the manifold miseries and calamities which they bring
to both soul, body, and state in this life and the life to come. For whereas
those who serve the Lord the Prince of peace and God of all consolation, may
certainly expect from him peace of conscience, in the midst of all wordly
garboyles, and true comfort when they are compassed about with all calamities;
contrariwise they who worship idols, serve Satan the prince of terror and
fear, who continually tormenteth his vassals with perplexed minds, and
troubled consciences, and draws them to their devotions by dreadful
apparitions, and affrighting terrors, having no ground to give unto them
whereupon they may build any sound comfort. Whereas those who truly serve God
according to his revealed will, may securely expect help in the time of
trouble, and protection and deliverance in the time of danger, because he is
omniscient and knows our estates, omnipotent, and can relieve us, and most
kind and gracious, and will not withdraw his helping hand when we stand in
need: contrariwise these idols are blind and cannot see us, impotent and cannot
help us, without any love, yea without reason, sense, and life, and therefore
regard us not when we most implore their aid. Of the former we have an example
in Elias, who worshipping the true God in a true manner, was heard of God,
magnified in the sight of the people, by an admirable miracle, and protected
and delivered in the midst of all dangers; of the others in Baals Priests, 1.
King. 18.
who by worshipping their idol, got nothing but wounds to their bodies,
anguish and perplexity to their minds and souls, and utter destruction to
them both. The like reward had Jeroboam, Ahab, and the rest of the idolatrous
Kings, for their zealous devotions, and painful service which they performed
to their idols.

The use of this doctrine is that, which the Apostle John teaches us, 1. Ioh.
5. 21. that we keep our selves from idols, 1. John 5. 21.
and preserve our bodies and souls pure and undefiled from the filthy spots
of this spiritual uncleanness. And this we shall do, if we resist and
withstand the first beginnings and degrees of idolatry, and in Gods worship
and service submit our selves to be guided by the straight line of his holy
word, neither declining on the right hand, nor on the left; or if we have been
already seduced, and joined with idols, I mean in the worshipping of Saints,
Angels, and Images, unto which kind of idolatry the Papists allure us, both by
their doctrine and example; then let us betimes break off this fellowship,
whilst yet there remains some hope of separation. For if when in our heart
and affections, we are first joined and glewed unto them, we pull our selves
asunder with an holy violence, we shall find the separation almost as easily
achieved, as attempted, the union being green and weak: but if we be
hardened and strengthened in this conjunction, by long time and custom, we
shall find that the whole wood will as easily break in sunder, as the joint,
and as soon will the body part with his members, and the soul admit of a
willing divorce from the body, as we being thus joined, may be severed from
idols, unless we be plentifully watered with the dew of Gods word, and be
thoroughly warmed with the fire of his holy Spirit, and so being suppled, be
made pliable to Gods will.

Lastly, we here learn, that when men have long withstood We must give over
those who are past cure, and not intermeddle with them.
the means of their salvation, and are hardened in their sins, so as there is
no hope of doing them good, by our holy admonitions, instructions,
exhortations, and reprehensions, then are we to let them alone, and not to
intermeddle with them: first, because we shall expose Gods holy ordinances to
pollution, and subject them to the proud contempt of rebellious and malicious
men, contrary to the admonition of our Savior, Matthew. 7. 6. Give ye not that
which Matthew. 7. 6.
is holy to dogs, nor cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they tread them
under their feet, and turning again all to rent you. And secondly, because
there is much more danger that they will make us worse, then hope that we shall
make them better. For sooner will these incurable leapers, taint us with their
leprosy of sin, then we shall cleanse them by our best approved medicines;
and being so deeply infected with the plague of wickedness, that the marks and
tokens of death and destruction appear upon them, there is no show of hope,
that we should restore them to their spiritual health, but there is great
cause of fear lest they infect us with their contagion. It is true indeed,
that though their pestilent vices were apt to taint us, yet if we were not as
apt to be tainted, there were no such great danger; but here it is far
otherwise; for as their poisonous contagion is fit to infect us, so in respect
of the gross and corrupt humors of sin, which remain even in all those who
are regenerate, we are as apt to receive the infection; and therefore we have
small reason to thrust our selves into their company, when it evidently
appears that their diseases are desperate and past our cure.

Again, if we haunt the company of wicked men, and entertain The evils that
redound to those who frequent evil company.
near familiarity and friendship with them, either we must be silent when we
see their faults, or else admonish and reprove them; if we smother them in
silence, and can be content to hear and see God dishonored, then do we show
our want of the love of God, and zeal of his glory, and have a manifest
argument against our own souls, that we are none of his children: for what
son having any natural affection in him, can hear his father slandered and
abused, and hold his peace? yea and we show our hatred also against the party,
what show of love soever we pretend, if we neglect seasonable admonitions and
reproves, and become accessaries to his sins, as the Lord plainly implies,
Leuit. 19. 17. Leuit. 19. 17.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke thy
neighbor, and suffer him not to sin. On the other side, if we reprove
desperate sinners, we shall not only cast these holy things unto dogs, and
pearls before swine, who will tread them under their unclean feet, but we
shall our selves be endangered, lest like furious bandogs they turn again,
and all to rent us, either by railing speeches and uncivil taunts, or by open
violence and desperate fury. If we like of their wicked courses, we are not
much better then they: if they be irksome and grievous unto us, why do we by
haunting their company, seek our own sorrow?

The use of this doctrine serves to teach us, that under no color of excuse
we frequent the company of such, who are so far spent in the sickness of
sin, that there is no probable hope of their recovery; for seeing they are
strong in evil, we weak in good; they wholly corrupt, we but in part
regenerate; they striving with all the powers of their heart, mind and soul,
to draw us unto their sins, and we faintly opposing, either to persuade them
from their wickedness, or to stand in our own uprightness: in a word, seeing
we labor against the stream in our course of righteousness, and they have
both wind and tide in their course of sin, let not us grapple with the^,
foolishly imagining that we can force them upward, seeing upon so much
advantage as they have against us, they are much more likely, not only to
hinder our progress in godliness, but to carry us with them down the
stream of vice and wickedness.

ANd thus much concerning their sins of idolatry, against the first table.
In respect of the second, they sinned two ways. First, against themselves by
intemperance. Secondly, against their neighbors. And these sins were either
common to all the people, to wit, their whoredoms and uncleanness, or
peculiar to their Magistrates, namely, their bribing and extortion. Al which
are comprised in these words, Verse. 18. Their drunkenness stincketh, they have
committed whoredom, their Rulers love to say with shame, Bring ye. Or thus,
Their drink putrifieth and stincketh: or as others read, Their drink is
refractarious and rebellious, they continually commit whoredom, their Princes
love to say with shame, Bring ye. Which words are not in number so many, as
are The exposition.
the interpretations diverse, which are by diverse Expositors given of them: but
I will propound only those which seem most probable, and insist in that which
best agrees with the drift of the Prophet, and circumstances of the place.
Some expound these words allegorically, understanding by drink, or
drunkenness, that they were made spiritually drunken, with their unbridled
love of superstition, and being thus besotted, they committed spiritual
whoredom, that is, idolatry without shame. But as I take it, allegories in
expounding the Scriptures, are like oaths in speech, never good, but when they
are necessary. Besides, he had spoken of their desperate love toward their
idols in the former verse, comprehending under it the sins of the first
table; and therefore it is not likely, that in this brevity of speech, he does
inculcate and reiterate the same thing, but rather uses a new argument to
dissuade the men of Judah from frequenting their company, namely, because they
were guilty of the breaches of the second table also; of which he gives three
instances, to wit, their drunkenness, adultery, and briberie, under which he
compriseth all the rest.

But let us come to more particulars. Their drunkenness stincketh, or, their
drink putrifieth and stincketh, as the word here used signifies. Which words
amongst many others, have these three interpretations. Some read the^ thus,
Their Drusius in Hosea.
drink is gone back; namely, from his first quality and condition, and so
sowreth and corrupts: for in the proper and Sur.
primary signification, the word (...) signifies to go back. Whereby they
understand by a metonymie of the cause, that they were gone back and
degenerate from their first state of integrity, and had made a defection from
God: according to that, Esaias 1. 22. Thy silver is become dross, thy wine is
Esa. 1. 22.
mixed with water. But as I take it, this does not so well agree with the scope
of the Prophet, nor fitly cohereth with the words following, as after shall
appear.

Others read them thus; Their wine is refractarious or Iunius.
rebellious: that is, (understanding them by the same metonymie) their
excessive drinking of wine and strong drink, makes them refractarious and
rebellious: according to that, Prou. 20. 1. Wine is a mocker, and strong drink
is raging: that Pro. 20. 1.
is, it makes men to mock and rage. And this translation is very probable:
first, because the word may well bear it; for strong drink makes men
refractary, and to run back, as an unruly heifer, when her master puts
on the yoke, runs backward, and will not suffer the yoke to come upon her
neck. And thus the same word is used, Hosea 7. 14. Hos 7. 14.
And they rebel against me. Again, this well agrees with the drift of the
place; for before he had said that Israel was rebellious, as an unruly heifer:
and here he shows what was the cause of their vntulinesse; namely, their
excessive drinking of wine or strong drink.

Lastly, others read them according to our translation; R. D. Kimhi. Comment.
in Hos. and in lib. radic. and Mercer. in Hos.
their drunkenness, or their drink corrupts and stinketh. In which sense,
the Prophet alludeth, to the quality and condition of drunken men, who gull
down such excessive store of wine and strong drink, that their stomachs
being not able to digest it, it there putrifieth, corrupts, and stinketh; and
so they annoy the standers by with their unsavory breath, filthy belchings and
vomitings; as the Prophet Esaias also speaks, Esaias 28. 8. And this
interpretation I embrace Esa. 28. 8.
above the rest: first, because the word may well bear it; for then drink is
said to go back, when it loses it natural virtue, degenerateth, sowreth,
and corrupts. Secondly, because, as I take it, it best fitteth with the scope
of the Prophet; which is not so much to show the effects of these sins, as
that drink or drunkenness makes men unruly and rebellious, as to set forth
these odious sins themselves; namely, that they were addicted to beastly
drunkenness, whoredom, and bribing; and therefore not to be conuersed withal
with any that made conscience of their ways. And thus the two other sins are
to be understood in themselves, and not in their effects. Lastly, this
interpretation is most familiar, simple, and plain, without either trope or
allegory; and therefore offreth less force to the words then the other.

The meaning then is, that they were addicted to this sin of drunkenness, and
that in such brutish manner, that even their very breath was noisome, and all
their whole carriage so beastly and shamelesly loathsome, as that it might be
an effectual argument to weane from their company, not only those amongst the
men of Judah, who were religious, but even all such as had in them any civility
or humanity.

The next sin which here he lays to their charge is, that they committed
whoredom; which some also understand of spiritual fornication and idolatry:
but I rather understand it of their carnal whoredom and adultery, of which
they were also guilty; as before appears, verse 11. And so these sins of
drunkenness and whoredom are fitly joined together, as the cause and the
effect: for sine Cerere and Libero friget venus, drunkenness is a preparatiue
to uncleanness, and as it were the wood or oil wherewith this fire of lust is
kindled and nourished. Now further he implies, that they were not in any
moderate sort given to this sin; for he redoubleth the word in the original
text; whoring, they whored: that is, they continually lived in this sin,
without measure or shame.

And this also was an effectual reason to withdraw the men of Judah from their
company, seeing they lived in an infamous and odious sin, and also were
likely to infect and corrupt them by their wicked example; the sin of
uncleanness being in it own nature an infectious and spreading sin, apt to
poison all who come near them that are tainted and infected with it.

The third and last sin is bribing and extortion, in these words; Their rulers
love to say with shame, or shamefully; Bring ye. In which words we are to
consider the persons who committed this sin, and the sin it self. The persons
were their rulers and magistrates. The word signifies their shields: whereby
is implied; first the office and duty of good magistrates; namely, to shield
and defend their subjects from outward violence, injuries, and oppressions: and
secondly, the sin of these rulers, and the miserable condition of the people
is hereby showed and aggrauated; both in that the magistrates, whose chief
care and study should have been to defend the people, to right their wrongs,
to execute judgment, and repel outward injuries, did greedily bend their
minds to covetousness, and both forgetting their place, and neglecting their
duty, gaped after bribes: and also in that hereby, nothing could follow but
horrible disorder in the state, when as those who should have been the
correctors and punishers of vice, and the rewarders of virtue, sought only
their own private gain, and spent all their time and whole endeavors in
hunting after bribes and rewards, as after a pray; whereby all manner of
licentious liberty was given unto the people of running headlong into all
manner of sin, seeing their governors regarded them not; or though they
should call them into question, yet they could easily blind their eyes, and
stop their mouths, and tie their hands with rewards and bribes.

And these were the persons. The sin is both expressed, and also exceedingly
aggrauated. Their sin laid to their charge, is their bribing and extortion;
which as it is in it self evil, so it is of worse consequence; for it utterly
peruerteth all justice and righteous judgment, and makes those who should be
impartial Judges, respecters of persons; as appears, Deuteronomy. 16. 19. The
reward blinds the eyes of the wise, Deuteronomy. 16. 19.
and peruerteth the words of the just.

Now this their sin is aggrauated by their manner of committing of it, and
that both in respect of their inward affection, and also their outward carriage
and demeanure. For the former it is said, not only that they were content to
receive gifts, when they were offered, but also that they embraced this sin
in their heart and affection, and were far in love with their vice; for they
loved to say, Bring ye.

For their outward carriage of it, it is said, not only that they loved to
receive gifts when they were offered, and thrust upon them, but that they were
grown to such an height of impudency and injustice, that they did not stick
openly to profess their bribing, and by word of mouth to require rewards,
wringing and extorting from them gifts by direct speeches, when either they
would have them wink at their faults, or administer judgment, or dispatch
their business.

Yea, and this they did not in any modest or shamefast manner, but shamefully.
The word here used may be referred either to the manner of their requiring
rewards, that shamelesly and with a brazen forehead, they called for bribes,
and couenanted before hand to have rewards for any business which they
dispatched; or it may be referred to the rewards which they required, namely,
that they called for shameful rewards, either in respect of their quantity,
that they required great rewards, for small businesses; or in respect of their
quality, that they were the rewards of unrighteousness, given and received
for the betraying of justice and truth, for the upholding of the wicked, and
discountenancing of the just; for the clearing or acquitting of the faulty,
and for the condemning of the innocent.

And this is the meaning of the words. The doctrines which we learn out of
them are these: first, that drunkenness That drunkenness is an odious sin.
nostrels of God and men. It is abominable to God, as in many other respects,
so especially because the drunkard makes his belly his god, vnfitteth
himself for all duties of Gods worship and service, and most grossly and
ungratefully abuses his good creatures, to the furthering of him in
wickedness, as I have elsewhere more largely proved. So likewise it is
loathsomely stinking before men; for not only do they offend men's eyes, in
beholding their filthy carriage and behavior, and their ears by their foolish
railing or ribald speeches, but also their smell, for their noisome sluttishnes
even infecteth the air, and their very breath is a strong argument to make
this sin odious, so that though there were no impiety in it, yet we were to
abhor it because it is so loathsome.

The use hereof is, the same which the holy Ghost makes in this place, namely,
that it serve for a strong disswasion to restrain us from such company as are
addicted to this sin of drunkenness; for not only are they to be avoided as
wicked 1. Cor. 5. 11.
men* both in regard of this sin it self, and all other abominable
wickedness which is the usual fruit thereof, lest accompanying them we be
allured to join with them in their sin; but we are to avoid these living
carrions, because they infect the air with their breath, and annoy their
company with their loathsome slutrishnes.

The second thing which we here learn is, that we are We must carefully
avoid the company of adulterers.
with like care to avoid the company of such as are addicted to the sin of
whoredom, though we had no other reason to restrain us. For this the Lord
himself uses as an effectual reason in this place, to dissuade the men of
Judah from accompanying the Israelites, because they continued in the sin of
whoredom, wherewith they were likely to taint and infect those who entertained
near familiarity with them. The force of which reason will more clearly
appear, if we consider not only that the evil example of unclean persons
both by their ribald words, and unchaste behavior, is apt to corrupt, and that
in regard of our pronenesse and natural inclination to this vice, we are as
apt to be corrupted; but also that adulterers have many wiles to beguile us,
many baits to allure us, and impudent foreheads in venturing to give the
assault to our chastity: as appears in the example of Joseph's Mistress, who
having gotten the advantage of his company, solicites him to this sin in a
plain and shameless manner; in Lots daughters, who came to that height of
impudency, that they shamed not to entice their own father; in the people of
Israel, inueigled with the Numb. 25. 1.
alluring charms of the cursed nations; in Ammon defiling his own sister; and
in the shameless harlot, described in the 2. Sam. 13.
Proverbs, who having enticed a young man to come into her company, used such
an art of lust to abuse him, and so many bewitching inticements to allure him,
that at last he yields unto her, and follows her as an ox to the slaughter,
and as a fool to the stocks: as it is, Prou. 7. 10. 11. 13. 21. 22. Prou. 7.
10. 11.


The use hereof is, that if we desire to preserve our chastity, we avoid the
company of adulterers and unclean persons, seeing in it self it is sufficient
to corrupt us, and to make us copartners with them in this sin. For as there
needs no bellows to blow the fire, when it touches gunpowder, because the
one is no more fit to fire, then the other to be inflamed; so there needs no
other help to inflame the heart with lust, then the touch and familiar
acquaintance of unchaste persons; because as they are fit with the fire of their
lust to inflame us, so we carry in our selves such combustible matter, as is
no less ready to take the fire and to be inflamed.

Thirdly, we here learn that it is one of the highest degrees That it is an
high degree of wickedness to be in love with sin.
of sin, when as we do not only fall into wickedness, but also grow into
love and liking with it: for this is the sin of the Princes of Israel in this
place, who did not only bribe, but also took delight in bribing, and not only
said, but loved to say, Bring ye. Which as it argued that they had brazen
faces, so also that their hearts were rotten, and wholly corrupted with sin.
So long as the sickness is seated in the outward parts only, there is great
hope of recovery, because whilst the heart is whole and sound, it ministers
and conueigheth life, spirits and strength to the exterior members, whereby
they are enabled to encounter the disease, and in the end to expel it and get
victory; but if it have once seized upon the heart, and taken thorough
possession of it, there is no hope of any recovery; so whilst our spiritual
diseases of sin enter no further then the imaginations, thoughts, words or
outward actions, our hearts continuing sound in their integrity and
vprightnes, there is assured hope, that they ministering continually spiritual
life, and strength, to all the rest of the regenerate parts, they will in time
expel the corrupt humors of sin, and obtain a full conquest over these
spiritual diseases; but if sin have taken possession of the heart, so that
having committed it, we like, and love, and highly value it in our affections,
then remains no hope of recovering spiritual health, or of escaping death
and utter destruction, unless the Lord cure us by miracle, and taking away the
corrupted heart out of our bodies, do give unto us new hearts which are sound
and upright. It is the top of our perfection, and the farthest progress which
we can make in Christianity, when we cleave unto the Lord with all our hearts,
loving him entirely, and our neighbor for his sake, and when being inflamed
with the fire of this holy love, we labor to perform all good duties unto
them both, and take our chief delight in this performance; and so contrariwise
it is one of the deepest degrees of sin, when we set our hearts upon it, and
love it as our dearest darling, and not only willingly transgress Gods
commandments, but also delight in our transgression. The first is an evident
sign of the child of God, though he have never so many infirmities and
imperfections; the latter an apparent token of the child of the devil, though
he be graced with never so good a nature, never so many counterfeit moral
virtues, never so glorious a show of honesty and civility. It is common to
those that are regenerate to slip into the puddle of sin; but being
defiled, they are never at rest till they be washed and cleansed from their
pollution with the blood of Christ, applied unto them by a true and renewed
faith; but it is proper to the unregenerate, after they are fallen into this
filthy sinck to wallow in it, and to take their chief delight in their
pollution. It is incident to the faithful to be lead Romans 7. 24.
captive of sin, howbeit being in captivity they are never quiet till they
come out of this thraldom, and obtain desired liberty; but it is peculiar to
the wicked being made slaves to love their bondage, and being imprisoned as
Satan's vassals, to delight in their prison, and to be in love with their
greues, setters and chains of sin, wherewith they are held in his
captivity. The godly may do the evil they would not, and neglect the good
which they would do; nevertheless, they take no pleasure in their
transgressions, but they are delighted in the law of God, in the inner man, and
it is as sweet unto them, as the honey or honey comb; but to commit wickedness
with the full swinge and consent of will, to loath virtue, and to be in love
with vice, to offend God, and to be well pleased when he is offended, is the
devils badge, whereby his servants are known and distinguished from the
servants of God.

Lastly, we here observe, that the Lord condemns it as a great sin in the
Rulers of Israel, to take bribes and rewards, in that not only thereby
themselves were corrupted, but also the whole state of government disioynted,
and disordered; because their bribing perverted justice, and brought in
impunitie, and together with it, all manner of sin and wickedness. But of this
sin my purpose is to speak more largely elsewhere, and therefore I will
here pass it over.

ANd thus much concerning their sins. Their punishment follows: Verse. 19. The
wind has bound the^ up in her wings; And they shall be ashamed of their
sacrifices. In which The exposition.
words he denounces against them a double punishment, the latter whereof is
the effect of the former; the first is captivity, in these words, The wind
has bound them up in her wings: the other is shame and confusion, in the words
following, and they shall be ashamed of their sacrifices. The former is
expressed in a lofty allegory, wherein he resembles the wrath of God
pursuing the wicked Israelites, to a swift wind, or an irresistable tempest;
and the people to dust or chafe, which thereby is caught up and scattered over
the face of the earth. This similitude is here contracted, but may be thus
explicated; As the wind catches up the chafe, and carries it aloft with
irresistable swiftnes, as though it were fast bound unto his wings; and having
tossed it to and fro, does at last scatter it abroad upon the earth: so the
anger of God stirred up with the sins of the Israelites, should seize upon
them like a furious tempest, and scatter them here and there in a miserable
captivity, amongst the Gentiles and nations, who should be Lords over them.

The persons then thus to be scattered, were the people of Israel, signified by
this word (them) which in the original is expressed in the feminine gender,
and singular number, ligauit eam, has bound her, towit, the nation of the
Israelites, or the tribe of Ephraim, of which the former words are to be
understood. The means whereby they should be thus scattered, was the wind of
Gods fury and fierce displeasure, provoked by their sins.

The like allegory is used, Job 21. 18. Psalm. 1. 4. where it is Job 21. 18.
Psalm. 1. 4. Ezech. 5. 3.
said, that the wicked are as chafe, which the wind drives away, Ezech. 5.
3. Now the cause why he uses this similitude, was not only because these dark
speeches were fit for a prophecy, which is as a book sealed up, until it be
opened and expounded by the event; but also because in these few words, being
rightly understood, those heavy judgments which were inflicted upon the
Israelites, were most fully and fitly signified. For first, hereby is implied
the suddenness of this judgment which should befall them, when they least
expected it: for as a foul storm suddenly follows a fair calm; and the
wind which comes we know not from whence, rusheth upon us with unexpected
speed: so the Lord surprizeth the Israelites at unawares, with his heavy
punishment of a miserable captivity, and whilst they pampered themselves with
the fleshly pleasures of drunkenness and uncleanness, and hoarded up the
riches of iniquity by bribing and extortion, as though they were assured that
they should never be dispossessed of them; even then suddenly the wrath of God
attached them, and brought upon them the Assyrians, who spoiled the land, and
led them into cruel bondage.

Secondly, hereby is implied the swiftness of this judgment, which is here
compared to the swiftnes of the wind, and that when it goes on Gods message
with posting speed; for as though the swiftnes of the wind were not quick
enough, to express the speedines of Gods vengeance, he gives wings unto it,
to double (as it were) his have. And thus this similitude is commonly used to
signify the hasty speediness of an action. So when David would in lively
manner express the speedy swiftnes, which the Lord uses in assisting his
servants, and destroying his enemies, he says, that He rode upon the Cherub
and did fly, and he came flying upon the wings of the wind, Psalm. 18. 10. 2.
Sam. 22. 11. and Psalm. Psalm. 18. 10. and 104 3. 2. Sam. 22. 11.
104. 3. He makes the clouds his chariot, and goes upon the wings of the
wind. And in the same sense this similitude is used with profane writers. So
Virgil, Et ventis and fulmi^^s ocyor alis, swifter then the wind or lightning.

Thirdly, hereby is implied, that this judgment should come upon them with
such irresistable fury, that they should not be able by any means to
withstand it; and this is signified, whereas it is said, that the wind should
bind them in his wings, that is, as they who are bound hand and foot are
utterly unable to make resistance; so they should be so ouermatched and
hampered by the Assyrians, that it should be but folly to strive against their
strength, seeing they should be debarred of all means, whereby they might
either defend themselves, or offend the enemy. And thus the irresistable power
of the Chaldeans is at large described, Joel. 1. 6. 7. and 2. 2. 3. etc. Joel.
1. 6. and 2. 2. 3.


Fourthly, hereby is signified the nature of their captivity, namely, that
being led away by their enemies, they should not have any set place, wherein
they might rest and assemble themselves together, for the performance of civil
and divine duties; but that they should be tossed to and fro, from post to
pillar, and be scattered and dispersed one from another, in the land of their
captivity, amongst the Gentiles and nations, as the wind scatters the
chafe upon the face of the earth.

Lastly, the certainty of this judgment is here expressed, in that he does
not use the future tense, as speaking of a thing to be done in time to come,
but the perfect tense, as though it were to come upon them with such undoubted
certainty, that it seemed to be as it were done already. So Ioh. 3. 36. He
Joh. 3. 36.
that believes the Son has everlasting life; that is, shall most surely have
it, and he that believes not is condemned already. And this is the judgment
which is here threatened: the which accordingly was inflicted, under the reign
of Hosea King of Israel, in the two hundred forty and third year of the
Israelitish monarchy, when as they were carried away captive, by Salmanasser,
and dispersed amongst the Heathen nations, as appears, 2. King. 17. 2. King.
17.


And so much concerning the first punishment. The second is shame and
confusion, in these words, And they shall be ashamed of their sacrifices. The
which punishment is an effect of the former: for when as they were brought into
great straites and grievous calamities, and could have no help or relief from
the idols which they had served, then they were ashamed, when they considered
that they had spent all their labor and cost in vain. Whilst idolaters
flourish in prosperity, they flatter themselves in their sins, and become
hereby more obstinate in their superstition; imagining that they are
privileged from Gods judgments, and have the fruition of all his blessings,
for their false worship sake: but when the hand of God lies heavy upon them,
and when he seems (as it were) to fight with them from heaven, by inflicting
upon them grievous afflictions; then they double their devotions and
superstitions unto their idols, that by their help they may be delivered: but
when they find their hope frustrate, and that they are forsaken of their idols
when they most need their help, then at length they acknowledge their
impotencie and insufficiency, and are confounded with shame, when they see
that their gods, in whom they gloried, fail them, and that they have spent
upon them so much unrewarded cost, and bootlesse labor. The punishment then
here denounced is shame and confusion; the cause of this shame, is their
sacrifices, not such as they offered unto the true God, in such manner and
form as he had prescribed in his word, which always bring boldness,
confidence, and assured hope of help and deliverance; according to that Psalm
25. 3. All that hope in thee shall not be ashamed: Psalm. 25. 3.
but here he understands such sacrifices as were offered unto idols,
according unto their own wills and inventions; and therefore he calls them
their sacrifices: that is, sacrifices of their own devising and inuenting;
whereby also he does synecdochically understand all their false worship and
idolatry, whereby they served false gods.

And this is the meaning of the words. The doctrines Voluptuousness and
covetousness, are the causes and forerunners of confusion and destruction.
of confusion and destruction: for when a people go on securely in the
fruition of sinful pleasures, and greedily give themselves to all manner of
covetous courses, which seem to promise them any gain, as though they
imagined that they should for ever live upon the earth; then Gods judgments
with winged speed shall attach them, and bring them to shame and utter ruin.
So when the people of Israel polluted themselves with those filthy pleasures of
drunkenness and whoredom, and when their rulers greedily gaped after gain,
defiling their hearts with covetousness, and their hands with bribes; the Lord
threatens that he will surprise them and carry them away, as it were, in the
whirlewind of his wrath, when they least of all suspected any danger. Thus the
old world spent their time wholly in voluptuous pleasures, in eating, and
drinking, in marrying wives, and giving in marriage, unto the day that Noah
entered into the Joel 1. 6. and 2. 2. 3.
Arc; and the flood came and destroyed them all: Matthew. 17. 27. And the
Sodomites also wholly addicted themselves to belly cheer, surfeiting, and
drunkenness, to buying and selling, planting and building, until in the day
that Lot went out of Sodom; it reined sire and brimstone from heaven and
destroyed them all: verse. 28, 29. So when Balthaser and his Princes securely
inioying Nebuchadnezzers conquests, gave themselves to eating, drinking, and
voluptuous pleasures, the handwriting of vengeance appeared unto them,
perplexing them with unexpected fear and sudden confusion; and speedy
vengeance seizing upon them, their Monarchy was overthrown, and themselves
overcome and slaughtered by their enemies. And latter experience has taught
us, that as the Roman Empire increased and flourished, whilst they used
seuerer discipline, sobriety, temperance, bounty, and homely gravity, every
one neglecting their own particular, to benefit their Country, and advance the
good of the Commonwealth; so, when they effeminately did spend their times in
voluptuous pleasures, wanton luxuriousness, excessive pride and bravery; and
to maintain themselves in these prodigal courses, greedily scraped from the
Commonwealth to enrich their private houses, and advance their own estate;
they having first made themselves slaves to their wanton lusts, afterward
became slaves to their cruel enemies; and losing that through intemperancy and
covetousness, which their ancestors had wone by sobriety, continency, and
frugality, of the conquerours of the world, they became the underlings and
vassals of the barbarous Goths and Vandals.

And this must needs come to pass, both in respect of Gods righteous
judgments, with whom it is just to punish abused prosperity with wretched
adversity, wastefull prodigality with extreme beggary, haughtiness and
pride with an abject and base condition, oppression with oppression, and
tyranny with slavery: and also in reason and civil policy; for as on the
one side pleasures make men proud, wanton, impatient, discontent, and insolent
in offering wrongs and injuries, by all which they exasperate others, and
procure against themselves many implacable enemies; so also they effeminate the
mind, and so disable the body, that they are not able to uphold themselves in
their unjust courses against the least violence, but become an easy pray to
their incensed enemies, when they go about to right their own wrongs, and to
repay their injuries with ^ust revenge.

The use hereof is, that it serve as a warning to the people That our land is
much corrupted with voluptuous pleasures and covetousness.
of this our land, which is exceedingly corrupted with these sins; that they
turn from these wicked courses by true repentance, that so they may be
reconciled unto God, and prevent the like fearful judgments, unto which they
are liable, being defiled with the like wickedness. For has not our long
peace and prosperity brought an universal sleep of security upon the land?
Have not our people grievously abused their great plenty, and the manifold
blessings wherewith God has enriched them, by mis-spending them in voluptuous
pleasures, and in all manner of luxurious wantonness and intemperance? Was
ever the land so defiled with surfeiting and drunkenness, whordome, and all
manner of uncleanness? Was there ever the like greedy covetousness,
oppression, bribing, extortion, and all manner deceitful and cruel dealing?
Were ever the hearts and hands of our Nation so effeminated, as in these times,
wherein there is scarce any difference between men and women in niceness,
wantonness, and soft luxuriousness, both in respect of diet and attire? Is
not the manly courage, and able valor of this our Nation much decayed, and
does not foxe-like wiliness take the place of true fortitude? Finally, were
ever men more insolent in offering injuries, or more impotent in repelling
deserved revenge? What therefore can remain but a miserable conclusion of all
these premises? what can we expect, but that as we have matched, and surpassed
those who have gone before us, in voluptuousnes, intemperance, and
covetousness; we should also be like unto them in punishment, confusion, and
destruction, unless we speedily prevent Gods judgments by unfeigned
repentance, and auert these punishments by turning from our sins?

Secondly, we may here observe, that howsoever the Lord The Lords patience
ends in wrath toward the impenitent.
in his infinite patience and long suffering, deferreth the just punishment of
wicked men and sinful nations, to the end that hereby they may be drawn to
repentance, and so escape his plagues; yet when notwithstanding all this mercy
and patience of God, they continue in their heinous transgressions, the Lord
brings his judgments like a whirle-winde, and takes them away in a tempest
of his wrath; as appears in the example of the Israelites in this place. More
paticularly Punishment comes upon the wicked suddenly.
the punishments of the wicked, which have been long deferred, shall at length
come upon them suddenly, and when they least expect any danger; even as the
storm does suddenly follow the calm. To this purpose it is said; that Though
the excellency of the wicked mount up to heaven, and his head reach unto the
clouds; yet shall he perish for ever, like his dung, and they which have seen
him shall say, Where is he? He shall flee away as a dream, and they shall not
find him, and shall pass away as a vision in the night: Job 20. 6, 7, 8. And
Job 20. 6, 7, 8. and 21. 13. Psalm. 73. 19.
Chap. 21. 13. They spend their days in wealth, and suddenly they go down to
the grave. So Psalm. 73. 19. How suddenly are they destroyed, perished, and
horribly consumed, as a dream when one awaketh! And the Prophet Esaias compares
the destruction of the wicked to the ruins of a wall, which though it stands
a long time, yet it suddenly falls and in a moment: Esa. 30. 13. Therefore
this iniquity shall be unto you as a breach Esa. 30. 13.
that falls, or as a swelling in an high wall, whose breaking comes
suddenly and in a moment. Examples whereof we have in the old world, and in
Sodom and Gomorrah, who whilst they securely inioyed their voluptuous
pleasures without fear of any danger, were suddenly surprised with Gods
judgments, even with the general deluge, and with fire and brimstone
descending down from heaven. So when Nebuchadnezzer gloried in his power and
majesty, it is said, that whilst the word was yet in his mouth, the message
of Gods anger was delivered unto him.

Secondly, as the wind is so swift that it is impossible to Gods judgments
are swift and unavoidable.
flee away from it, though we run upon our greatest speed; so the judgments
of God pursue the wicked with such posting have, that it is impossible for them
to escape, though they be as swift as the Hind in the forest, or the Swallow
in the air. To this purpose it is said, Matthew. 3. 5. I will come Mal. 3. 5.
near to you to judgment, and I will be a swift witness against the
soothsaiers, etc. And 2. Pet. 2. 1. the Apostle says, that 2. Pet. 2. 1.
the lying Prophets by their false teaching brought upon themselves swift
damnation. So when the Lord would bring upon the men of Judah destruction and
desolation, he says, that their enemies should come up against them as the
clouds, his chariots as tempests, and that his Horses should be lighter than
the Eagles: Iere. 4. 13. And therefore though Ier. 4. 13. and 46. 6.
they were never so swift, yet they should not be able to flee away: as he also
speaks Chap. 46. 6. for either the flight should perish from the swift, as it
is Amos 2. 14. or if they Amos 2. 14.
continued in their swiftness, their persecuters should be swifter, as the
Lord threatens, Esa. 30. 16. Esa. 30. 16.


Thirdly, as the wind or tempest carries away the dust Wicked men cannot
resist when God punishes.
and chafe with such irresistable fury, that it is altogether impossible for
it by any weight or strength it has to remain together vndispersed; so the
judgments of God do surprise the wicked with such force and violence, that it
is not possible for them with their greatest power to make any resistance, but
their destruction shall be unto them altogether unrecoverable. In which respect
the Prophet compares Esa. 30. 13, 14.
the judgments of God falling upon wicked men, to the ruins of a wall; for as
before it falls, it may easily be underpropped and repaired, but when it is
in falling, it cannot be stayed by any force of man; so howsoever it is no hard
thing to prevent the judgments of God from lighting upon us before they attach
us, if we forsake our sins by true repentance; yt if the sentence be past,
and the punishments have already begun to seize upon us, then is our case
desperate and unrecoverable, seeing we are not able to make any resistance, hor
to withstand them with our greatest power. And hence also it is that in the
same place he compares the wicked to a Potters pot, which is so brittle that
it is broken with the least violence, and being broken, cannot be amended nor
serve for any use, Esa. 30. 13, 14. to the same purpose it is said, Prou. 6.
15. That the wicked man Prou. 6. 15.
shall be destroyed suddenly, and without recovery: and that as the swift
should not escape by flight, so neither the strong man by his strength, Ierem.
46. 6. So Amos 2. 14. Iere. 46. 6. Amos 2. 14.
The flight shall perish from the swift, and the strong shall not strengthen
his force neither shall the mighty save his life. And in this respect the
wrath of God in this place, is compared to a strong wind, and the wicked to
chafe which is scattered by it. So Job. 21. 18. They shall be as stubble
before the Job 21. 18. Psalm. 1. 4.
wind, and as chafe that the storm carries away: Psalm. 1. 4.

The use hereof is, that when being guilty of sin, we hear the judgments
of God denounced against us, we do earnestly repent of our wickedness, flee
unto the throne of grace, submit our selves under Gods hands, and humbly sue
for pardon and forgiveness, seeing it is the only course we can take to
secure us, from being overwhelmed with Gods plagues. For if we flee from the
Lord, his judgments shall pursue us with unexpected speed, and shall overtake
us like the swift wind in our greatest have; and if we struggle and strive
against them, they will overthrow us with irresistable violence, and like a
furious tempest they will carry us away as dust or chafe.

The last thing to be observed is the punishment of idolatry Idolatry is
punished with shame and confusion.
and superstition; for howsoever idolaters whilst they prosper in their
superstition and false worship, glory in their idols, and ascribe all the
benefits which they have received unto them, and their own idolatrous
devotions, yet when the Lord thundereth against them from heaven with his
judgments, and brings upon them afflictions and inextricable calamities, and
when for the removing of these evils, they have long sued unto their idols for
help in vain, then are they covered and overwhelmed with shame and confusion,
then do they with desperate sorrow bewail their former follies, and their
bootelesse devotions, and cast away from them their images as unprofitable,
wherein formerly they placed their chiefest confidence. And this confusion as
it is here poynted at by our Prophet, so is it in large and most lively manner
deciphered, Esa. 2. 19. Then Esaias 2. 19. ^0. 21.
shall they go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth,
from before the fear of the Lord, and from the glory of his majesty, when he
shall arise to destroy the earth. 20. At that day shall a man cast away his
silver idols, and his golden idols (which they had made themselves to worship
them) to the mowles and to the backs. 21. To go into the holes of the rocks,
and into the tops of the ragged rocks; from before the fear of the Lord, and
from the glory of his majesty, when he shall rise to destroy the earth. So
our Prophet says, that when the Lord in his wrath should destroy Auen, that
is, the places consecrated to idolatry, then the idolaters being confounded
with shame, should say to the mountains, cover us, and to the hills, fall upon
us. Chap. 10. 8. And this is that punishment which the Prophet desires should
be inflicted Hosea 10. 8.
upon idolaters, Psalm. 97. 7. Confounded be all, they which Psalm. 97. 7.
serve graven images, and that glory in idols. And which the Prophet Esaias
denounces against the idolatrous Jews, Esa. 1. 29. For they shall be
confounded for the oaks which ye Esaias 1. 29.
have desired, and ye shall be ashamed of the gardens that ye have chosen. An
example hereof we have in Baals priests, who were confounded with shame, when
as they were in the sight of the people abandoned of his help, when they most
1. King. 18.
needed and implored it.

The use hereof is, that abhorring and renouncing idols, True obedience
brings hope and help.
and all manner of idolatrous superstition, which will leave us hopeless and
helpless in our greatest extremities, we do cleave unto the true Jehovah,
performing unto him such faithful and sincere scruice as he requires in his
word, without the mixture of humane inventions; and then the Lord will preserve
us in the day of affliction from all evil. Or if for his glory and our trial
he bring us to the touchstone of adversity, and suffer us to taste of some
calamity and misery, yet will he give us such a comfortable feeling of his
favor, and arm us with power and patience to bear our troubles, that we
shall never go away ashamed and confounded. To this purpose is that, Psalm.
34. 5. They shall Psalm. 34. 5.
look unto him and run to him, and their faces shall not be ashamed: And
Psalm. 25. 3. All that hope in thee shall not be ashamed. Psalm. 25. 3.
So the Lord promises that none of them who consecrate themselves unto him to
be his people, shall ever be ashamed, Joel 2. 26. And this David found by
experience Joel. 2. 26.
both of his ancestors, as appears Psalm. 22. 4, 5. Our fathers trusted in
thee, they trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them. 5. Called upon thee
and were delivered, they trusted in thee, and were not confounded. And also of
himself, Psalm. 34. 4. I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me
out of all my fear. Whereas if we leave the Lord, and trust in idols, and in
our own inventions and idolatrous superstitions, we shall be abandoned in
our greatest need, and be confounded with shame, when we expect help and
deliverance.

FINIS.

