A RECORD OF SOME WORTHY PROCEEDINGS: IN THE HONORABLE, WISE, AND FAITHFVLL
HOUSE OF COMMONS IN THE LATE Parliament.

Iustitiae est suum cuique tribuere.

1611.

Contents.
1. A Preface to true English men. 2. A memorable speech in Parliament. 3. A
Petition for the Parliaments liberty. 4. Particulars of the great contract. 5.
Petitions for grace in ecclesiastical causes. 6. Grievances in temporal
matters.
To all true hearted English men dwelling in their native soil.
HOwsoever (my dear countrymen) it is mine hap to abide on this side the
seas; yet I cannot but hearken after the prosperity of my gracious Sovereign,
and natural country, especially in the Parliament time. I am not (indeed) in
any such eminent place* as where I may be sure to have a perfect relation of
all remarkable affairs: yet by my diligent endeavor, I obtain (in time) more
probable intelligence, than many of you do. Of which the love of my country
compels to make some present use, occasioned by a Publication (for not one
word thereof is in the Kings name) dated 31. December last. Wherein the
worthiest house of Commons that ever was, is covertly traduced for spending
long time, and great charges, and yet failing an earnest expectation of a good
conclusion for the Ease, and Freedom of his Majesty's subjects. I could not
therefore but endeavor to prevent (as I may) the heart-burning which (I fear)
that publication may occasion between the King and his Commons, and 2. to make
it appear that no house of Commons had ever a greater zeal for the ease and
freedom of the subjects than the late house had. The former, by demonstrating
that the said covert imputation is not the Kings, but the pen-mans. For whereas
Proclamations (in deed) speak in the first person, as thus, Our subjects; and,
We are resolved, that publication speaks in the third person thus, His
Majesty's subjects; and, His Majesty is resolved. Therefore it was not penned
by his Majesty. Again, How can close suggesting the said imputation to be
cause of dissolving the Parliament agree with that which is expresley said,
That his Majesty, for many good considerations known to himself determined to
dissolve, etc? Does not this show, that the over large preamble of that
publication is the penmans, and only the body thereof was by the Kings
direction? Moreover, In a Proclamation dated 24. September last, his Majesty
finds fault with former proclamations, in regard of their penning. Which
shows, that, when his Majesty has signified his mind touching the substance
of a proclamation; he does not always review the penning thereof. Therefore it
may be supposed, that he did not peruse the penning of the publication. So that
I think it may be well concluded, that the said imputation is not the Kings,
but the pen-mans.

As for the Zeal of the commons in parliament for the ease, and freedom of
the subjects, let that appear by that which is here published. Only I suppose
it not amiss to remember, that in the second session of the late parliament,
there passed these bills in the house of commons. 1. An act for the better
observing and keeping holy the Sabbath day, or Sunday. 2. An act against such,
as coming to church, do refuse to receive the sacrament of the Lords supper.
3. An act for the providing of a learned, and godly Ministry. and 4. An act to
enable suspended, and deprived Ministers to sue, and prosecute their appeals.
I remember these, because that worthy Knight, or burgisse (whose speech is here
recorded) does not speak of them; Intending (belike) to mention no other
bills, but such as passed in the house of commons, in the fourth, that is, the
last session of parliament. I say, The last, because the fifth cannot be
accounted a session, seeing nothing was concluded therein, the Speaker, sundry
mornings before the house met together adjourning the same from day to day, til
the parliament was prorogued, and there dissolved. Well, I pray God; that,
whenever we shall have an other parliament, Counties, cities and burroughes
may not be moved by letters from such common-wealth-men, as the penman of the
said publication is feared to be, to choose such Knights and burgisses, as will
have less Zeal for the ease and freedom of the subjects, than had the
Knights, and burgisses of the late parliament.

A memorable speech in the house of Commons.
MR. Speaker, I perceive we are all much troubled by the evil success which
we have had in the great contract concerning tenures and purveiance, after our
long travel and much time spent therein, and in other causes of good
importance: so as many have taken occasion thereby to say of us, that although
there was never a more honorable assembly, in the Commons house of Parliament,
of godly, wise, and learned men, then at this time, that yet there did never
less fruit appear of their labor to the world, at any time before, then now:
which fruitless labor if it might be truly imputed unto us, it might worthily
grieve us all. but I hope that in seeking out means of redress, or relief in
this case, I shall make it appear to all, that will rightly weigh of the
things, that if furtherance had been given by others, whom it concerns, to our
labors and good indevours, many abuses had been reformed, and much good done
to the common wealth of England.

But as it is true, which that great wise Lord, who has the chief charge of
the treasure of the Realm; said unto us at our last meeting with the
honorable Lords of the upper house of Parliament, in the painted chamber at
Westin: touching the great contract, viz. that he did well perceive, that we
had a great desire to have effected that great contract, that the Kings maiesly
had willingly given his assent to the same, and that yet neverrhelesse it
proceeded not, wherein he could not find the impediment, but that God did not
bless it: so is it likewise true of the rest of our proceeding in Parliament,
that God has nor blessed the same with good success, which troubled me at the
first, until I did further consider of many other parties of the Realm, and
many other callings, and societies of the Realm, to whom God has given as
little blessing, as to the Parliament house. For it did appear plainly to us
in this house, upon the treaty and examinations of the grievances of the
Church and common wealth, that the Merchants of England who were a calling of
very great use in this Realm, for the wealth, strength, and credit thereof,
and as it were the legs of the common wealth, whereon it goes, had not
received such blessing of late, yea in their merchandising, as in former times,
although they labor as much, and adventure as much, as in former times they did.
And that likewise the clothiers being a trade whereby many thowsands subjects
are mainteyned, although they labor in their calling as much at this time, as
ever before they did; do of late find so little fruit of their labor, as that
many of them are decayed, and many of them have given over that trade to the
hinderance of the Realm.

And also the like is fallen to the Mariners, and Shipwrights of this Realm,
which number is greatly decayed, and with them the serviceable shipp: and
shipping very much weakened, which threatens a decay of the walls, and
strength of the Realm, which by good shipping, and good Mariners, is well
defended.

And I find also, that God has not blessed the treasure of the Realm, for it
is gone from us, as if God had blown upon it, to turn it out of the land, so
as Prince and people want.

And I find also in the calling of lawyers that there is not the like increase
of their labors, as in times past, except it be some few favorites; and I
think that diverse Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses now here present about me,
could say the like of diverse sorts of men in their cou^tryes, cities, and
Burroughes, if they list to speak: whereupon I do assuredly think, that for
some public sins of the land, God has a quarrel to the land, whereby he
does withdraw his ordinary blessings; which public sins this great
Council of the Realm ought first to seek out, and as much as in our power to
redress the same, that God being thereby reconciled unto the land, an happy
blessing might ensue to all the estates thereof: which to effect you shall see
what we for our parts have done to obtain Gods loving countenance to the land,
as a shield, by removing the public sins thereof, which as a thick cloud
does keep from us Gods sun-shining grace.

First we did see, and consider, that the precious name of God, which we ought
to regard more then our lives, is not by the laws of England, so tenderly
regarded, and preserved, as the name of all sorts of people in the land: For
if some evil words be used against the King it is high treason, for which the
offender shall dye. And if some evil words be used against noble men, it is
publishable by the statute de Scandalu^ magnatum. And that for some evil words
used by any private person against another, an actio^ of the case does lie, at
the common law, to punish the offender, and to recompense the party wronged*
But for abusing the holy name of God, and tearing him in pieces by wicked
oaths, there is no punishment by the laws of the Realm, whereby both men,
women, and children increase in that sin greevously, every day, without
punishment or check: wherefore to prevent that sin, we did, at two several
sessions of Parliament, make two several bills, which did pass our house of
Commons, to be made laws for punishment of such Offenders.

And to take away that crying sin which does most provoke God, and most
greeve the subjects, viz, the depriving, priving, disgracing, silencing,
disgrading, and imprisoning, such of Gods Messengers (being learned and godly
preachers) as he has furnished with most heavenly graces to call us to true
repentance, for no other cause, but for not conforming themselves otherwise
than by subscription limited in the statutes made in the 14. year of the late
Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, thereby making the laws of the Church, and
common wealth to jar: which to reform we made a law for subscription
agreeing to the intent of the foresaid statute, which every wise man will
approve, and willingly subscribe unto, whereby much peace, and unity would
grow in the chnrch and common wealth, and be an occasion that many subjects
might be well taught the means of their salvation, who now want sufficient
knowledge of the word of God to ground their faith upon.

And to take away another gross sin, which is made lawful by act of
Parliament, whereby the land is made guilty thereof, viz. concerning non
residents, and plurality of benefices, we did pass a bill in the last
Sessions of Parliament, and have another bill concerning that offense ready to
pass being twice read, and agreed upon at the Co^mittees, whereby we abrogate
so much of the statute of the 21 year of K. He^. the 8. as did enable non
reside^ts, or the taking of more benefices then one with cure of souls, for by
the provisoes in that Statute, the Kings Chapleines may have as many benefices,
as they can get, without stint, and some others may have 4. benefices with cure
at one time, in several counties, and some two benefices, and yet be resident
upon none of them, so long as he attends upon his Lord, or Mr. which is a
thing intolerable in a Christian common wealth.

And for that some scandalous Ministers of evil life do bring a great slander
to all the rest, being many godly and learned preachers, we did make a good law
to remove such scandalous Ministers from their place.

And where by the laws of God, and the laws of this Realm the
ecclesiastical persons should, in their government, use only the spiritual
sword by exhortation, admonition, and excommunication, which are the keys of
the Church to exclude impenitent sinners, and to receive into the Church, the
penitent and faithful persons, and to leave the temporal sword, to the
temporal Magistrate, which was always so used in England until the second
year of King Hen. 4. at which time the popish Prelates, following the example
of the man of sin at Rome, obtained a statute without the free consent of the
subjects (as is set forth by Mr. Fox, and in some sort, appears by the
record of the Tower) by which statute they got the temporal sword into their
hands, which statute was since, by several acts of Parliament, made void
with great disgrace, and yet by color of that temporal authority once, by a
short space by them used, some ecclesiastical persons do use both swords, to
the great grief, and trouble of the subjects, and with those two swords, they
do also use the oath ex officio, which began first in England, by that statute
of the 2. year of K. Henry the 4. being contrary to the laws of England, and
(as I verily think) contrary to the laws of God.

Wherefore we to reform those great abuses, made 2. good laws, the one to
abridge the force of the ecclesiastical commission in many points: the other to
abrogate, and take away the power of ecclesiastical persons to minister the
oath ex officio being a very hateful thing, and unlawful.

Andi for that among the Canons, late made by the clergy of England in their
Convocation, it was thought, that some of their canons did extend to charge the
bodies, lands, and goods of the subjects of the Realm, further then was
lawful, and meet, we therefore made a good law to make void such Canons, as
do charge the bodies, lands and goods of the subjects, unless that the same
Canons were confirmed by Parliament.

And as we had care of the Church, so had we care of the common wealth,
touching impositions laid upon the subjects goods, and merchandise, and other
things, and therefore, after long travel taken by us in searching ancient
Records in the Tower of London, and in other places, and after great dispute
made hereupon, in open house, by many learned Lawyers, we found it clear in
our opinion, that impositions laid upon merchandise, or other goods of the
subjects of this Realm, by the Kings Majesty, with out the free consent of the
subjects in Parliament was not lawful, and therefore we did make and pass a
bill, by the general consent of the house of Commons, intended by us all to be
a law, thereby to declare, that by the laws of England, no imposition could
be lawfully laid upon goods, or merchandise of the subjects of England, without
consent of the subjects in Parliament.

And because that many subjects were greatly troubled by purueyance, and
cartaking, notwithstanding the good laws in that behalf made to restrain the
same, a bill was preferred by some member of the house, for reformation of that
abuse, at the beginning of the last Sessions of Parliament; which bill, by all
likelihood, had long since passed this house of commons, if the matter of
purveyance had not been comprehended in the great contract, which matter of
great contract being now ended, a new bill concerning purveyance, and
cartaking is in my hands, now presently to be delivered into the house to
receive such proceeding therein, as shall be thought meet.

And touching wardship and tenures, because it is thought a heavy law, and
grievous to the subjects, after the death of the father to have the son, and
heir within age; taken from the mother and kindred, to be bought and sold, and
with the heir also to take all the lands and tenements of the father, that
should many times mainteyne both the heir, and the rest of the children, for
the only benefit of the guardian: therefore we made a very large offer to free
the land thereof, which we labored earnestly to effect, but God has not
blessed it, nor brought to good effect any of those good intended laws above
by me mentioned, although we much desired the same, and had done therein as
much as perteyned to us to do, which if they had been well effected, and
passed as laws and statutes, and that all such grievances, concerning the
Church and common wealth, as we carefully commended unto his Ma: in writing
(whereof the copies do remain in this house) had procured such amendeme^t of
things, as we expected, it had made England so honorable and happy in the
government thereof, as ever was kingdom in this world (as I think). And which
when the same shall be well effected, will (as I think) make both King, and
subjects more happy, then ever they were. For if all these things had so
concurred together, as we wished, and labored for, what would we not give to
supply the Kings wants, and to support him in a most Royal, and princely
estate. But rebus sic stantibus, as is before declared, without reformation of
those things, which were by us so earnestly sought, we cannot give much to
supply the Kings wants, because we know no certainty of that which should
remain to us after our gift, so as, in mine opinion, the good proceeding of
this Parliament has not been hindered by us, which is all I meant to say at
this time.

The particulars to be contracted for, in consideration of two hundred thousand
pounds, per annum to be paid unto his Majesty.

1. Wardshippes, and tenures, with their particular dependances, shall be utterly
taken away. 2. The maxim, Nullum tempus occurrit regi, shall be no longer of any
effect. 3. All the Kings patents shall be expounded for the good of the patentee,
and according to the true meaning. 4. No forfeiture shall be taken by the King,
or his patentee, for non payment of rent. 5. Any subject shall plead the
general issue (Not guilty) upon information of intrusion. 6. All penal laws,
and informations shall be ordered for the best ease of the subject. 7. All manner
purveyance taken by prerogative, cart taking, compositio^s, and co^missions
therefore, and Praeemption (except of time) shall be utterly taken away, and no
clerk of the market shall set price on any victual, nor any other shall do
the same. 8. All prefines, and post fines to be due upon alienation by fine and
recovery, shall be taken away. 9. Debts shall be paid to the subjects before any
advantage be taken, by the King, of forfeitures upon outlaries, or attainders
of felons, or traitors. 10. That clause in the statutes of 34. and 35. of Hen.
8. touching alteration of laws in Wales shall be repealed. 11. Every subject
that has possessed land by the space of 60. years, where the King, in that
time, has not had the possession, or profit thereof, by the space of one
year, shall be free from the Kings claim. And, if the King, within that space,
has been seized of any rent, out of the same lands, then that rent only
shall remain to the King. 12. Old debtes due to the King before ten years
last past shall be forgiven. 13. The King shall express the cause of demurrer in
pleading against any of his subjects. 14. Fees of all courts to be paid by the
subjects shall be expressed in a book in print. 15. All laws absolute, that are
penal, shall be repeaied, and all penal laws of one nature shall be reduced to
one law. 16. No protection against law shall be granted by the King. 17. Any
thing doubtful in any of these articles shall be explaned by our selves. 18. Any
other matter, which at our next meeting, we shall conceive to be for ease of
the subjects, and shall not detract from the King, in point of sovereignty, or
profit shall be essential in this contract.
To the Kings most excellent Majesty.
MOst gracious sovereign, whereas we your Majesty's most humble subjects the
commons assembled in Parliament, have received first by message, and since by
speech, from your Majesty a commandment of restraint from debating, in
Parliament, your Majesty's right of imposing upon your subjectes goods
exported, or imported out of, or into this Realm, yet allowing us to examine
the grievances of these impositio^s in regard of the quantity, time, and other
circumstances of disproportion thereto incident: we your said humble subjectes
nothing doubting, but that your Majesty had no intent, by that commandment, to
infringe the ancient, and fundamental right of the liberty of Parliament, in
point of exact discussing of all matters concerning them, and their
possessions, goods, and rights whatsoever: which yet we cannot but conceive to
be done, in effect, by this commandment, do with all humble duty make this
remonstrance to your Majesty.

First we hold it an ancient, general, and undoubted right of Parliament to
debate freely all matters, which do properly concern the subject, and his
right, or state: which freedom of debate being once foreclosed, the essence of
the liberty of Parliamet is with all dissolved.

And whereas, in this case, the subjects right on the one side, and your
Majesty's prerogative on the other cannot possibly be severed in debate of
either, we allege, that your Majesty's prerogatives of that kind concerning
directly the subjects right, and interest, we daily handled and discussed in
all courts at Westminster, and have been ever freely debated, upon all fit
occasions, but in this, and all former Parliaments without restraint. Which
being forbidden, it is impossible for the subject either to know, or maintain
his right, and property to his own lands, and goods though never so just,
and manifest.

It may further please your Most excellent Majesty to understand that we have
no mind to impugn, but a desire to inform ourselves of your highness
prerogative in that point: which if ever, is now most necessary to be known.
And though it were to no other purpose, yet to satisfy the generality of your
Majesty's subjects, who finding themselves much grieved by these new
Imdositions, do languish in much sorrow, and discomfort.

These reasons (dread sovereign) being the proper reasons of Parliament) do
plead for the upholding of this our ancient right and liberty. Howbeit, seeing
it has pleased your Majesty to insist upon that judgment in the Exchequer,
as being direction sufficient for us, without further examination, upon great
desire of leaving your Ma, unsatisfied in no one point of our intents, and
proceedings, w^ profess touching that judgment, That we neither do nor will
take upon us to reverse it: but our desire is to know the reasons whereupon the
same was grounded. And the rather, for that a general co^ceipt is had, that
the reasons of that judgment may be exte^ded much further, even to the utter
ruin of the ancient liberty of this kingdom, and of the subjects right of
property to have lands, and goods. Therefore the judgment it self, being the
first and the last that ever was given in that kind, for ought appearing unto
us, and being only in one case, and against one man; it can bind in law no
other then that person, and is also reversable by writ of error granted
heretofore by act of Parliament. And neither he, nor any other subject is
debarred, by it, from trying his right in the same, or like case, in any of
your Majesty's Courts of record at Westminster.

Lastly we nothing doubt, but your intended proceeding, in a full examination
of the right, nature, and measure of these new impositions (if this restraint
had not come between) should have been so orderly, and moderately carried, and
so applied to the manifold necessity of these times, and given your Majesty so
true a view of the state, and right of your subjects, that it would have been
much to your Majesty's content, and satisfaction (which we most desire) and
removed all cause of fears, and jealousies from the loyal hearts of your
subjects, which is (as it ought to be) our careful endeavor. Whereas
contrariwise, in that other way directed by your Majesty, we cannot safely
proceed, without concluding, for ever, the right of the subject: which, without
due examination thereof, we may not do.

We therefore, your highness loyal and dutiful commons, not swerving from the
approved steps of our ancestors, most humbly and instantly beseech your
gracious Majesty, that without offense to the same we may (according to the
undoubted right, and liberty of Parliament) proceed in our intended course of
a full examination of these new impositions, that so we may cheerfully pass on
to your Majesty's business, from which this st^p has, by diversion, so long
with held us. And we your Majesty's most humble, faithful, and loyal
subjects, shall ever, according to our bounden duty, pray for your Majesty's
long and happy reign over us.

Delivered by 20. of the lower house of Parliament the 24. of May 1610,
Petitions.
MOst gracious and dread sovereign, Since it has pleased Almighty God, of his
unspeakable goodness and mercy toward us, to call your Majesty to the
government of this kingdom, and has crowned you with supreme power, as well in
the Church, as in the common wealth, for the advancement of his glory, and the
general benefit of all the subjects of this land, Weo do with all humility
present, at the feet of your excellent Ma: our selves, and our desires full of
confidence in the assurance, of your religious mind, and princely disposition,
That you will be graciously pleased to give life, and effect to these our
petitions greatly tending (as undoubtedly we conceive) to the glory of God,
the good of his Church, and safety of your most royal person, wherein we
acknowledge our greatest happiness to consist.

1. Whereas good and provident laws have been made for the maintenance of
Gods true religion and safety of your Majesty's most royal person, issue, and
estate, against Jesuits, seminary Priests, and popish recusants. And although
your Majesty by your godly learned, and judicious writings have declared your
princely, and christian zeal in the defense of the religion established, and
have very lately (to the comfort of your best affected subjects) published to
both howses of Parliament your princely will and pleasure, that recusants
should not be concealed, but derected and convicted: yet for that the laws are
not executed against the Priests, who are the corrupters of the people in
religion, and loyalty, and many Recusants have already compounded, and (as it
is to be feared) more and more (except your Ma: in your great wisdom, preve^t
the same) will co^pound with those beg their penalties, which makes the laws
altogether fruitless, or of little or none effect, and the offenders to become
bold, obdurate, and unconformable: Your Majesty therefore would be pleased, at
the humble suit of your commons in this present Parliament assembled, in the
causes so highly concerning the glory of God, the preservation of true
religion, of your Majesty and state, to suffer your highness natural clemency
to retire it self and to give place unto justice, and to lay your royal
command upon al your ministers of justice both ecclesiastical, and civil, to
see the laws made against Jesuits seminary Priests and Recusants (of what
kind and sect soever) to be duly, and exactly executed, without dread, or
delay. And that your Majesty would be pleased likewise to take into your own
hands, the penalties due for recusancie, and that the same be not converted to
the private gain of some, to your infinite loss, the imboldning of the
Papists, and decay of true religion.

2. Whereas also diverse painful, and learned Pastors, that have long traveiled
in the work of the Ministry, with good fruit and blessing of their labors,
who were ever ready to perform the legal Subscription appointed by the Statute
of 13. Elizab: which only concerns the confession of the true Christian
faith and doctrine of the Sacraments, yet for not conforming in some points of
ceremonies, and refusing the subscription directed by the late Canons, have
been removed from their ecclesiastical livings, being their freehold, and
debarred from all means of maintenance, to the great grief of sundry your
Majesty's well affected subjects; seeing the whole people, that want instruction,
are by this means punished, and through ignorance, lie open to the seducements
of popish, and ill affected persons; We therefore most humbly beseech, your
Majesty would be graciously pleased, that such deprived, and silenced ministers
may by license, or permissio^ of the reverend fathers, in their several
diocesses, instruct, and preach unto their people in such parishes, and places,
where they may be employed: so as they apply themselves, in their Ministry, to
wholesome doctrine, and exhortation, and live quietly, and peaceably in their
callings, and shall not by writing, or preaching, impugn things established
by public authority.

3. Whereas likewise through plurality of benifices, and toleration of non
recidencie in many, who possess not the meanest livinges with cure of souls,
the people in diverse places want instruction, and are ignorant, and easy to be
seduced, whereby the adversaries of out religion gain great advantage, and
although the pluralists, and non-residents do frame excuse of the smalnesse of
some livinges, and pretend the maintenance of learning, yet we find by
experience that they, coupling many of the greatest livings, do leave the
least helpless, and the best as ill served, and supplied with preachers, as the
meanest. And where pluralists heaping up many livings into one hand, do by
that means keep diverse learned men from maintenance to the discouragement of
Students, and the hinderance of learning and the non-residents (for seeking, or
absenting themselves from their pastoral charges) do leave the people, as a
prey, unto the popish Seducers. It might therefore please your most excellent
Majesty for remedy of these evils in the Church to provide, that dispensatio^s
for plurality of benefices with cure of souls may be prohibited, and that
toleration of non-residencie may be restrained. So shall true religion be
better vpheld, and the people more instructed in divine, and civil duties:

4. And for as much as excommunication is the heaviest censure for the most
grievous offenses which the Church does retain, yet exercised and inflicted
upon an incredible number of the common people by the subordinate officers of
the jurisdiction ecclesiastical, most commonly for very small causes grounded
upon the sole information of a base apparitour, in which case the parties,
before they can be discharged, are driven to excessive expense for matters of
very small moment, so that the richer break thorough more heinous offenses, and
escape that censure, by commutation of penance to the great scandal of the
Church government, in the abuse of so high a censure, the contempt of the
censure it self; and grievance of your Majesty's poor subjects.

Wherefore your Majesty's dutiful commons most humbly beseech your highness
that some due, and fit reformation may be had in the premises.
Grievances.
To the Kings most excellent Majesty.
Most gracious Sovereign, your Majesty's most humble commons assembled in
Parliament being moved, as well out of their duty and zeal to your Majesty; as
out of the sense of just grief wherewith your loving subjects are generally
through the whole Realm at this time possessed, because they perceive their
common and ancient right and liberty to be much declined, and infringed in
these late years, Do with all duty and humility present these our just
complaints thereof to your gracious view, most instantly craving justice
therein and due redress. And although it be true, that many of the
particulars, whereof we now complain, were in some use in the late Queens
time, and then not much impugned, because the usage of them, being then more
moderate, gave not so great occasion of offense, and consequently not so much
cause to inquire into the right and validity of them. Yet the right being now
more thoroughly scanned, by reason of the great mischiefs, and inconvenien^es
which the subjects have thereby sustained, we are very confident, that your
Majesty will be so far from thinking it a point of honor, or greatness to
continue any grievance upon your people, because you found them begun in some
of your Predecessors times, as you will rather hold it a work of great glory
to reform them, since your Majesty knows well, that neither continuance of
time, nor errors of men, can or ought to prejudice truth of justice; and that
nothing can be more worthy of so worthy a King, nor more answerable to the
great wisdom, and goodness which abound in you, then to understand the griefs,
and redress the wrongs of so loyal, and well deserving a people. In this
confidence (dread sovereign) we offer these grievances (the particulars
whereof are hereunder set down) to your gracious consideration, and we offer
them out of the greatest loyalty, and duty that subjects can bear to their
Prince. Most humbly and instantly beseeching your Majesty, as well for justice
sake (more then which (as we conceive) in these Petitions we do not seek) as
also for the better assurance of the state, and general repose of your
faithful and loving subjects, and for testimony of your gracious acceptance
of their full affections, declared as well by their joyful receiving of your
Majesty, at your happy entrance into this kingdom, which you have been often
pleased, with favor, to remember; as also by their extraordinary
contributions granted since unto you, such as have been never yielded to any
former Prince, upon the like terms, and occasions, that we may receive to
these our complaints your most gracious answer: which we cannot doubt but will be
such, as may be worthy of your princely self, and will give satisfaction, and
great comfort to all your loyal, and most dutiful loving subjects; who do,
and will ever pray for the happy preservation of your most royal Majesty.

New Impositions.
THe policy and constitution of this your kingdom appropriates unto the Kings
of this Realm, with the assent of the Parliament, as well the sovereign power
of making laws, as that of taxing, or imposing upon the subjects goods, or
merchandises. Wherein they have justly such a propriety, as may not, without
their consent, be altered, or changed. This is the cause, that the people of
this Kingdom, as they ever showed themselves faithful, and loving to their
Kings, and ready to aid them in all their just occasions, with voluntary
contributions, so have they been ever careful to preserve their own liberties
and rights, when any thing has been done to prejudice or impeach the same. And
therefore when their Princes occasioned either by their wars or their over
great bounty, or by any other necessity, have, without consent of Parliament,
set impositions, either within the land, or upon commodities either exported,
or imported by the Merchants, they have, in open Parliament, complained of it,
in that it was done without their consents. And thereupon never failed to
obtain a speedy, and full redress without any claim, made by the Kings of
any power, or prerogative in that point. And though the law of propriety be
original, and carefully preserved by the common laws of this Realm, which
are as ancient as the kingdom it self; yet these famous Kings? for the better
contentment, and assurance of their loving subjects, agreed, that this old
fundamental right should be further declared, and established by act of
Parliament. Wherein it is provided, that no such charges should ever be laid
upon the people, without their common consent, as may appear by sundry records
of former times. We therefore your Majesty's most humble commons assembled in
Parliament following the example of this worthy care of our ancestors, and out
of a duty of those for whom we serve, finding that your Majesty without
advise or consent of Parliament, has lately, in time of peace, set both
greater impositions, and far more in number, then any your noble ancestors
did ever, in time of war, have with all humility presumed to present this
most just, and necessary Petition unto your Ma: That all impositions set
without the assent of Parliament may be quite abolished, and taken away, and
that your Majesty in imitatio^ likewise of your noble Progenetors, will be
pleased, that a law may be made during this session of Parliament, to declare
that all Impositions set, or to be set upon your people their goods or
merchandises, save only by common consent in Parliament, are, and shall be void.
Wherein your Ma: shall not only give your subjects good satisfaction in point
of their right, but also bring exceeding joy, and comfort to them which now
suffer, partly through the abating of the price of native commodities, and
partly through the raising of all foreign, to the overthrow of Merchants and
shipping, the causing of a general dearth, and decay of wealth among your
people, who will be thereby no less discouraged, then disabled to supply your
Ma: when occasion shall require it.

Commission ecclesiastical.
WHereas by the statute 1. Eliz cap. 1. entitled an Act restoring to the crown
the ancient jurisdiction over the state ecclesiastical, etc. power was given
to the Queen, and her successors to constitute, and make a Commission in cause
ecclesiastical, the said Act is found to be inconvenient, of dangerous extent
in d^vers respects. First, for that it inableth the making of such a commission
as well to any one subject borne, as to more. Secondly, for that whereas by the
intention, and words of the said statute, ecclesiastical jurisdiction is
restored to the crown, and highness, by that statute enabled to give only such
power ecclesiastical to the said commisioners, yet under color of some words
in that statute, whereby the Commisioners are authorized to execute their
Commission according to the tenor, and effect of your highness letters patents.
And by letters patents grounded thereupon, the said Commissioners do fine, and
imprison, and exercise other authority not belonging to the ecclesiastical
jurisdiction restored by that statute, which we conceive to be a great wrong to
the subject; And that those Commissioners might as well by color of those
words, if they were so authorized by your highness letters pate^ts, fine without
stint, and imprison without limitation of time, as also according to will, and
discretion, without any rules of law, spiritual or temporal, adiudge and
impose utter confiscation of goods, forfeiture of lands, yea, and the taking
away of limme and of life it self; and this for any matter whatsoever
perteyning to spiritual jurisdiction. Which never was, nor could be meant by
the makers of that law. Thirdly for that by the said statute the King, and his
successors may (howsoever your Majesty has been pleased out of your gracious
disposition otherwise to order) make, and direct such Commission into all the
Counties, and Dioceses, yea into every parish of England, and thereby all
causes may be taken from ordinary jurisdiction of Bishops, Chancellors, and
Arch deacons, and lay men solely be enabled to excommunicate, and exercise all
other censures spiritual. Fourthly for that every petty offense perteyning to
spiritual jurisdiction, is, by color of the said words, and letters Patents
grounded thereupon, made subject to excommunication and punishment by that
strange and exorbitant power, and commission, whereby the least offenders, not
committing any thing of any enormous, or high nature may be drawn from the
most remote places of the kingdom to London; or York, which, is very grievous,
and inconvenient. Fifthly for that limit, touching causes subject to this
commission, being only with these words, viz. Such as perteine to spiritual
or ecclesiastical jurisdiction; it is very hard to know, what matters, or
offenses are included in that number. And the rather because it is unknown,
what ancient canons, or laws spiritual are in force, and what not: from
whence arises great incertaintie, and occasion of contention.

And whereas upon the same statute a commission ecclesiastical is made;
Therein is grievance apprehended thus. First for that thereby the same men have
both spiritual and temporal jurisdiction, and may both force the party by
oath to accuse himself of an offense, and also inquire thereof by a jurie, and
lastly may inflict for the same offense, at the same time, and by one and the
same sentence, both a spiritual and temporal punishment. Secondly whereas,
upon sentences of deprivation, or other spiritual censures given by force of
ordinary jurisdiction, an appeal lies for the party grieved; that is here
excluded by express words of the commission. Also here is to be a trial by
jury, yet no remedy by traverse, nor attaint. Neither can a man have any writ
of error, though a Judgment or sentence be given against him, amounting to
the taking away of all his goods, and imprisoning him during life, yea to the
adiudging him in the case of Praemunire, whereby his lands are forseyted, and
he out of the protection of the law. Thirdly, that whereas penal laws, and
offenses against the same cannot be determined in other courts, or by other
persons, then by those trusted by Parliament with the execution thereof, yet
the execution of many such statutes (diverse whereof were made since 1. Eliz.)
are commended and committed to these Commisioners ecclesiastical, who are
either to inflict the punishment contained in the statutes being praemunire, and
of other high nature, and so to enforce a man upon his own oath to accuse, and
expose himself to these punishments, or else to inflict other temporal
punishment at their pleasure. And yet besides, and after that done, the party
shall be subject in the Courts mentioned in the Acts, to punishments by the same
acts appointed and inflicted: which we think very unreasonable. Fourthly, that
the commission gives authority to enforce men called into question to enter
into recognisance not only for appearance from time, to time, but also for
performance of whatsoever shall be, by the commisioners ordered. And also that
it gives power to enjoin parties defendant, or accused, to pay such fees to
ministers of the court, as by the commisioners shall be thought fit.

And touching the execution of the commission, it is found grievous these ways
among other. First for that laymen are by the Commisioners punished for
speaking (otherwise then in judicial places, and courses) of the symonie and
other misdemeanors of spiritual men, though the thing spoken be true, and the
speech tending to the inducing of some condign punishment. Secondly in that
these commisioners usually appoint and allot to weomen discontented at, and
unwilling to live with their husbands such portions, and allowances for present
maintenance, as to them shall seem fit: to the great encouragement of wives to
be disobedient, and contemptuous against their husbands. Thirdly, in that their
pursuivantes, or other ministers employed in the apprehension of suspected
offenders in any things spiritual, and in the searching for any supposed
scandalous books* use to break open men's houses, closets, and deskes,
rifeling all corners, and secret custodies, as in cases of high treason, or
suspicion thereof. All which premises among other things considered, your
Majesty's most loyal, and dutiful commons, in all humblenes, beseech you,
that for the easing of them, as well from the present grievance, as from the
fear, and possibility of greater in times future; your highness would vouchsafe
your royal assent, and allowance to, and for the ratifying of the said
Statute and the reducing thereof, and consequently of the said commission to
reasonable, and co^venient limits, by some act to be passed in this present
session of Parliament.

Proclamations.
Amongst many other points of happiness, and freedom which your Majesty's
subjects of this kingdom have inioyed under your royal Progenitors, Kings and
Queens of this Realm, there is none which they have accounted more dear, and
precious then this, to be guided, and governed by the certain rule of the law
(which gives both to the head, and members, that which of right belongs unto
them) and not by any uncertain or arbitrary form of government. Which, as it
has proceeded from the original good constitution, and temperature of this
estate: so has it been the principal means of upholding the same in such
sort, as that their Kings have been just, beloved, happy and glorious, and the
kingdom it self peaceable, flourishing and durable so many ages. And the
effect, as well of the contentment that the subjects of this kingdom have taken
in this form of government, as also of the love, respect, and duty which they
have, by reason of the same, rendered unto their Princes, may appear in this,
That they have, as occasion has required, yielded more extraordinary and
voluntary contributions to assist their Kings, than the subjects of any other
known kingdom whatsoever. Out of this root has grown the indubitable right
of the people of this kingdom: not to be made subject to any punishment, that
shall extend to their lives, lands, bodies, or goods, other then such, as are
ordained by the common laws of this land, or the statutes made by their common
consent in Parliament. Nevertheless it is apparent both that proclamations
have been, of late years, much more frequent, then heretofore, and that they
are extended, not only to the liberty, but also to the goods, inheritances,
and livelihood of men, some of them tending to alter some points of the law,
and make anewe. Other some made, shortly after a session of Parliament, for
matter directly rejected in the same session; other appointing punishments to
be inflicted before lawful trial, and conviction; Some co^teyning penalties
in form of penal statutes: Some referring the punishment of offenders to the
courts of arbitrary discretion, which have laid heavy and grievous censures
upon the delinquents: Some, as the Proclamation for starch, accompanied with
Letters commanding inquiry to be made against the transgressors, at the
quarter sessions: and some vouching former proclamations to countenance, and
warrant the later, as by a catalogue here under written more particularly
appears. By reason whereof there is a general fear conceived, and spread
amongst your Majesty's people, that proclamations will, by degrees, grow up,
and increase to the strength, and nature of laws. Whereby, not only that
ancient happynes, freedom will be much blemished (if not quite taken away) which
their ancestors have so long inioyed: but the same may also (in process of time)
bring a new form of arbytrary government upon the Realm. And this their fear
is the more increased by occasion as well of certain books lately published,
which ascribe a greater power to Proclamatio^s then heretofore has been
conceived to belong unto them; as also of the care taken to reduce all the
proclamations, made since your Majesty's reign, into one volume; and to print
them in such form as Acts of Parliament formerly have been, and still are used
to be: which seems to imply a purpose to give them more reputation and more
establishment, the^ heretofore they have had. We therefore your Majesty's
humble subjects the commons in this Parliamen^ assembled, taking these matters
into our considerations, and weighing how much it does concern your Maistie,
both in honor and safety, that such impressions should not be suffered to
settle in your subjects minds, have thought it to apperteyne to our duties, as
well toward your Majesty; and to those that have trusted, and sent us to this
service, to present unto your Majesty's view these fears, and griefs of your
people and to become humble suitors unto your Majesty, that hence forth no
fine, or forfeyture of goods, or other pecuniary, or corporal punishment may
be inflicted upon your subjects (other tha^ restraint of liberty, which we
also humbly beseech may be, but upon urgent necessity, and to continue but till
other order may be taken by course of law) unless they shall offend against
some law or statute of this realm in force, at the time of their offense
committed. And for the greater assurance, and comfort of your people, That it
will please your Majesty to declare your royal pleasure to that purpose,
either by some law to be made in this sessio^ of Parliament: or by some such
other course (whereof your people may take knowledge) as to your Princely
wisdom shall seem most convenient.

Proclamations importing alterations of some points of the law, and making new.

11. Ian. 1. Iac f. 17. forbids choosing of Knights, and burgesses
bankerupt, or outlawed: and commands choice of such, as are not only taxed to
subsidies, but also have ordinarily paid, and satisfied the same. f. 59. If
returns be made contrary to the proclamation, they are to be rejected, as
unlawful, and insufficient. f: 60.

25. Aug. 5. Ia. f. 151. That the proclamation shall be a warrant to any officer,
or subject to seize starch, and to dispose, or destroy any stuff etc. and
restreineth all men not licenced to make starch. f. 154.

2. A Proclamation made shortly after Parliament for matter directly rejected
the precedent session.

1. Mar. 2. I. f. 102. A proclamation for building with brick after a bill to
that and rejected*

3. Proclamations touching the freehold, and livelihood of men. 16. September. 1.
Ia. f. 41. Raising and pulling down howses authorized, and prohibition to
build them again at any time. f. 42. 12. Oct. 5. Ia. f. 160. forbidding
building and taking away the materials; and appointing the owners land to be
let by other men, at what price they please. f. 161.

4. Proclamations referring punishment to be done by Justices of peace, Majors,
Bailives, Constables, and other Officers; or seizure by persons who have no
authority to require, hear, and determine of those offenses. So it is to be
inflicted before lawful trial and co^viction.

8. Ian. 2. Ia f. 72. A Proclamation for folding wooles. 23. Aug. 5. Ia. f.
151. seizure of starch, etc. f. 154.

5. Proclamations penned with penalties in form of penal Statutes.

4. No. 1. Ia. f. Pain of confiscation of goods, f. 56. 18. Ian. 2. Ia. f. 72.
Ten days imprisonment and standing in the pillory, f. 72. Justices of peace to
forfeyt 20. pounds if they see not the Proclamation of folding wooles executed,
f. 75.

23. Aug. 5. Ia. f 151. forfeyture of one moitie of starch etc. seized etc. 154.

6 Punishment of offenders in courts of arbitrary discretion, as star chamber.

1. Mar. 2. Ia. f. 102. Proclamation for building. f. 103. 12. Oct. 5. In. 159.
Proclam. for building, f. 160. 5. Iul. 6. Ia. f. 177. Procl. for starch. f.
180. 25. Iul. 6. Ia. f. 180. Procl for building, f. 181.

7. Proclam former become Presidents, and vouched in later Proclam.

18. Iun. 2. Ia. f. 75. avoucheth 5. E. 6. and 4. Eliz. f. 73. 25. Iul. 6. Ia.
f. 180. mentions former Proclam. against buildings, and explaineth, and
qualifieth them. f. 180.

Stay of writes of prohibition, etc.
Your Majesty's commons in this session of Parliament assembled, do cheerfully
acknowledge the spring and fountain of the public justice of this state, to
be originally in your Ma: from the benefit thereof is conveyed, and derived
into every member of this politic body by your Highness writs. Amongst which
none are more honorable for the support of the common justice of the realm,
then the writes of prohibition, habe as corpus, and de homine replegia^do:
writs have been ever held, and found to be a chief means of relief unto the
poor distressed, and oppressed subjects of this kingdom, and can be no
inconvenience at all. Seeing they are no way conclusive against any man, and do
draw no benefit to the procurers, but rather a fruitless charge, if they be
obtained upon any unjust ground, or pretense. In the free granting of, and
proceccing upon some of which writes, especially that of prohibition; there
has of late, been observed to be some obstruction: by reason, that upon the
complaints and the importunity of some, who desire the support of inferior
courts, against the principal courts of the common law (wherewith your Majesty
has been greatly troubled) you have taken into your royal consideration the
several extents of the jurisdiction of the said several courts. Since which
time the said writes have been more sparingly, graunced, and with stricter
cautio^s then anciently has been accustomed. It is therefore most humbly
desired, that it may please your Majesty (whose glory is never more
co^spicuous, then when the poorest of the commonalty are blessed with the
influence of the ancient beams of justice) to require your judges, in the
courts of Westminster, to grant the said writes, in cases wherein such writes
do lie, and by law are grantable: And in such sort, as that such persons,
whose bodies being either committed to prison, or their causes like to receive
great prejudice by procedings against them, in times of vacation, may not be
debarred nor deferred from having the speedy relief and benefit of those
writes, more then in former times. 4. Shires.


For as much as the exercise of authority over the counties of Gloucester
Hereford Wigorne and Salope. by the president, and council of Wales by way of
instructions, upon pretext of a statute made in the 34. year of the reign of
King Henry the 8. is conceived not to be warranted by that or any other law of
this Realm of England. And for that in the 2. session of this present
parliament, there did a bill pass the house of the Commons, whereb^ it was
declared that the true intent, and meaning of that before mentioned statute,
was not thereby to subject these countries to that kind of government by
instructions. And yet notwithstanding the inahbitants of those Counties are
since utterly discouraged, and in effect, debarred from trial of the right of
that kind of jurisdiction over those countries, by the ordinary course of the
common laws of this land; by reason of Prohibitions, which were heretofore
frequently granted (upon suggestion, that those countries are not part of Wales
or of the marches of the same (which is the very point in question) are now
become very hard to be obtained, except in cases, where those of that council
do exceed the instructions set down to them by your Majesty. As also for
that, in cases, where actions have been brought at the common law, whereby that
question might have come to dicision, the plaintifes have been stopped,
sometimes by injunctions out of your Majesty's court of Chancery, from their
proceedings sometime before, sometime after judgeme^ts, and some time also by
imprisonment. The precedent of which proceedings does concern all your
Majesty's loyal and dutiful subjects of this kingdom, as well in respect of
the stopping of the free course of Justice: as also, by reason that if that
kind of jurisdiction were at first extended over those 4. counties, and be now
still continued without warrant of law: then consequence of this example may,
in future times, give countenance to the erecting of like jurisdictions in
other places of this Realm. And for as much as your Majesty was pleased to
command all the Judges to consider of this question, and that they thereupon
bestowed very many days in hearing the cause argued by learned counsel on
both sides. And in viewing and considering of great numbers of records
produced before them, concerning that cause: whereby, they have (no doubt)
thoroughly informed themselves of the right. It is therefore the most humble
petition of the commons in this present Parliament assembled, that your most
excellent Majesty will also be pleased to command, that the Judges may
deliver their opinion upon that so exact, and deliberate hearing, which was had
before them, concerning the right of the foresaid jurisdiction over those 4.
Counties by force of that statute. And that the opinion which they shall
deliver therein, may be in such sort published, as that all your Majesty's
subjects whom it may concern may have means to take knowledge thereof. And
that your Ma: will vouchsafe to declare it by your most princely pleasure, that
any of your Majesty's subjects who may have occasion thereof may try his, or
their right in that point by due, and ordinary course of the common law,
either by suing out of prohibitions, or any other your Majesty's writs without
restraint. And that if the said jurisdiction over those 4. Counties shall
appear to your Majesty, by the opinion of the Judges, or otherwise, not to be
warranted by law, that then your Majesty be pleased out of your most princely
and gracious favor toward all your loyal, and dutiful subjects, to order
the ceasing of the said jurisdiction over those counties, to the great comfort
of the inhabitants of those counties, and the rest of your Majesty's subjects
of all the kingdom.

New drapery.
Complaint was made, in all humble manner, the second session of this present
Parliament, of many disorders, outrages, and oppressions committed upon
occasion of letters patents granted to the Duke of Lenox, for the searching,
and sealing of stufs, and manufactures, called by the name of new draperie:
which patent we held in all, or the most parts of it, to be questionable, and
in many apparently unlawful: and the execution thereof we found stretched by
the farmers, and deputies beyond the extent of the said letters patents, as
appears in the particulars set down in the said greivance. To which it
pleased your Majesty to give this gracious answer, that the validity of the
said patent should be left to be judged by the law. And whenever any abuse
arising in the execution thereof should appear, it should be severely
punished. Which was, for that time, to our good satisfaction yet finding, by
diverse complaints made now in Parliament, that not only the said letters
patents are still in force, and the validity of them undecided by judgment:
but disorders in the execution of them are so far off from being reformed,
that they multiply every day to the grievance of your Majesty's subjects. And
those of the poorer sort, who exercising these manufactures are subject to much
oppression, to the great hindra^ce of some, and utter undoing of many as has
appeared in the particularities of the complaints presented unto us. Our humble
desire is, that your Ma: will be pleased, according to your former resolution, to
give order, that this cause, which has thus long hung in suspense, be speedily
brought to judgment: and that before all the Judges, because it concerns all
the subjects of the land. And, in the mean time, that the execution of the
said letters patents, so far forth as they concern the said new draperies,
may be suspended till judgment be given: whereby your subjects, who do in
all humility present this grievance unto your Majesty may be relieved, and
have no occasion to reiterate their complaints.

License of Wines.
Whereas by ancient, and late statutes it has been enacted, that wines should
be retayled at such low rates, and prices, as for these 50 years last past
they could not be affoarded. And for redress thereof it was ordained by a
statute, in the 5. year of the late Queen Elizabeth, that (those former laws
notwithstanding) wines might be sold at such prices, as by Proclamation from
time to time to be made by consent of diverse great officers, should be
published, and set down: which proclamation nevertheless, the late Queen, and
your most excellent Ma: have been drawn to forbear, upon the earnest suit of
certain persons, therein only intended their private gain* By reason whereof,
both great sums of money in fines, rentes, and annual payments have been
gotten, and raised unto the said persons, and their assigns, and great damage
and prejudice has likewise fallen, and light upon your people, not only by
inhancing the prices of wines, licencing over many Tavernes, and appointing of
unmeet persons, in unfit places, to keep the same: But also by reason that
corrupt, mingled, evil, and unwholesome wines have been uttered, and sold to
the great hurt of the health of your Highness people, One man sometimes
engrossing all the Licenses designed for that place: Whereupon complaint being
made to your Majesty, amongst other grievances of your people, in the second
session of this present Parliament, your Highness was pleased to answer, that
your grants in that behalf were no other, then such as were warrantable by the
law. Whereas the greivance was the greater, for that all laws, concerning the
sale of wines, being intended, and conceived to stand, and be reptaled, there
were nevertheless, by the overfight of them which were trusted in that
busienes, casually omitted, and left unrepealed certain absolute laws
impossible to be observed: as namely one made in the time of K. Edward the
first, commanding wines to be sold at 12. pence the sexterne, and one other
made in the 28. of K. Henry the eight prohibiting all persons, under penalty,
to sell any french wines above 8. pence the gallon, and other wines, as secks,
and sweet wines above 12. pence the gallon: and one branch of a statute made in
the 7. year of K. Edward the 6. prohibiting men to sell any wines by retaile
in their howses. Whereupon your Majesty has been induced and drawn to ground
new patents of dispensation, and to grant the benefit thereof unto the Lord
Admiral: whereby the like discommodities and inconveniences have sithence
insued unto the commonwealth as formerly did arise and grow upon the other
repealed laws, whereof, in the former petitions of your subjects exhibited
unto your Majesty in the said second session, your highness never had any
direct, and clear information. May it therefore please your most excellent
Majesty at the humble request of your commons (who have taken into
consideration the great charges, and expenses, which the said L. Admiral has
been at, in your Majesty's service, and have considered likewise the present
licenses, and grants for valuable consideration unto many hundredth of your
Highness subjects, which without great loss to the said grantees, cannot be so
suddenly made void) out of your Princely wisdom, and goodness, wherein you
have professed not to extend, and strain your prerogative royal against the
public good of your people, for the particular gain of any private persons,
To vouchsafe, that from hench forwards, there may no mo grante* of that nature,
be made unto any of your subjects whomsoever. But that the said statute of 5.
Elizabeth, for the apprising of wines, to be published by proclamation, a^
time, and occasion shall require, may be put in execution. And that your
Majesty will likewise vouchsafe to grant your royal assent to a bill of
repeal of the said obsolete statutes, and all other, whereupon any such, Non
obstantes, and dispensations might be grounded upon. In which statute of
repeal proviso shall be made for the indempnitie of all such, as under your
Majesty's great seal have already procured license for such sale of wines.

Alehouses
Whereas, by the laws of this your Majesty's realm of England no taxes, aides,
or impositio^s of any kind whatsoever, ought or can be laid, and imposed upon
your people, or upon any of their goods, or commodities, but only by authority
and consent of Parliament. Which being undoubtedly the ancient, and
fundamental law of th^^ land, is yet, for more abundant clearnes expressly
declared in sundry acts of Parliament made and inacted in the time of sundry
your Majesty's Progenitors, the noblest, and most prudent Kings of this Realm.
Y^^r como^s with just grief do complain unto your Majesty of the late tax,
and imposition laid, and imposed yearly upon such, as are allowed to keep
victualing houses, or sell ale, and beer be retaile. Which imposition not
being taxed by assent of parliament, but commanded, and directed only by
letters, and instructions, your commons are persuaded that the same proceeded
rather upon misinformation, then by the direction, and judgment of your own
most noble and royal heart. Wherefore your said commons knowing the grief of
your people in this behalf, do (according to their duties) in all humility
inform, and signify unto your Majesty: first, that the said taxation being
singular, and without example, is in it self a President of dangerous
consequence, and (as your people fear) may easily (in time) be extended
further, as to badgers of corn, makers of mal^, drovers of cattle, and such
like, who, in such sort, are to be licenced by Justices of peace, as those
persons are, upon whom, at this time, this present charg^ and tax is laid.
Secondly such howses, being often times at (the best) the harbors of idleness,
drunkenness, whoredom, and all manner of felonies, the licenses are now (the
honester sort, in most places, refusing to undergo the new charge) rented, and
taken by the looser, and baser sort of people, who have no conscience how they
gain, By reason whereof all manner of vice, and evil behavior is likely
every day to increase: neither can the Justices of peace conveniently prevent
the same: for that the persons licenced under the late contribution, affirm,
with clamor, that they have a toleration for a year, and that such persons
are not friends unto the crown, that seek to suppress them, and thereby to
diminish your highness revenewes. Thirdly many Justices of peace, (being sworn
to execute their office) which for this particular they conceive to be, that
alehouse keepers formerly licensed, are not to be suppressed without just, and
reasonable cause, cannot be satisfied touching their said oath, but are much
distracted, and perplexed what to do (the late instructions notwithstanding)
against such persons, a^ otherwise being not known to be of evi^ behavior,
only refuse to pay this late taxed and imposed some of money. In consideration
whereof, your humble commons most instantly beseech your most excellent
Majesty that the former letters, and instructions may be countermaunded, or
stayed, and all further directions, and proceedings in that kind forborne.

Seacole.
Among many resemblances, which are observed to be between natural and
politic bodies, there is none more apt, and natural then this, That the
diseases of both do not, at one instant, commonly seize upon all parts: but
beginning in some one part, do, by tract of time, and by degrees, get
possession of the whole, unless by applying of wholesome and proper remedies,
in due time, they be prevented. Which as it is in many things very visible* so
it is in nothing more apparent, then in this matter of impositions: which
beginning at the first either with foreign commodities brought in, or such
of our own, as were transported, is now extended to those commodities, which
growing in this kingdom, are not transported, but uttered to the subjects of
the same: for proof whereof, we do, with all humility present unto your Ma:
view the late imposition of 12. pence the chalder of seacole rising in Blithe
and Sunderland, not by virtue of any contract, or grant (as in the coals of
New castle) but under a mere pretext of your Majesty's most royal prerogative:
which imposition is not only grievous for the present (especially to those of
the poorer sort, the price of whose only, and most necessary fuel is
thereby, to their great grief, inhaunced) but dangerous also for the future;
considering that the reason of this president may be extended to all the
commodities of this kingdom. May it therefore please your most excellent
Majesty, who is the great, and sovereign physician of this estate, to apply
such a remedy as this disease may be presently cured, and all diseases for
time to come, of like nature, prevented.

These grievances were Presented to his Majesty with a speech of Sir Fr. Bacon,
by 12. of the lower house. 7. July 1610. in the 4. session of Parliament;
Because the King commanded 12. and no more, etc.

