THE CASTLE OF HEALTH GATHERED AND MADE BY SIR THOmas Elyot knight, out of the
chief Authors of Physyke, whereby every manne may know the state of his own
body, the preservation of health, and how to instruct well his physytion in
syckenes that he be not deceived.

1534

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS LORD CRVMVVELL LORD PRIVY SEAL Thomas Elyot
knight wysheth long life in honor.
HE GIVES twice that gives quyckly (says Senek.) Bis dat qui cito dat.
The grief, which I had for your lordshyps disease, with the desire that ye
might live long with out syckenes, caused such speed in building the
Castle of health, that therein lacked some part of perfection, but yet the
promptnes in gyuyng that thing, which I thought necessary, to declare mine
affection, I doubt not, was no less esteemed of your good lordshyp, tha^ before
is rehearsed. Not withstanding, when I had eftesones perused that little
fortress, and found here and there some thing that lacked, I took my pen
in the stead of a truelle, and amended the faults, and added somewhat more,
where I thought it conuenyent: And yet perchance some things might happen to
escape, which were as nedeful to be corrected: mine attendence on the
parlyament, I being a member of the lower house, withdrawyng from me leisure
conuenyente, to find in this warke all the faults, whithe moughte be amended.
May (...) now like your good lordshyppe to take in good part, not eftesones
the cas^^lle, which I all re^ye have given you, but my good will and dylygente
in amendynge or repayrynge the same, which is also prynted in a much better
letter, considering that I no less do behold you co^tynually with mine eye
of remembrance, than they, which at dinner and supper do daily look on you, the
cause I will not repete for suspicion of flattery. Frendeshyp (as men say)
should be requyted, but yet crave I none other thing, but only equal
benevolence, and faith without any suspicion: whereunto actual demonstration
is so much requisite, that without if they both, seem to be drowned, sens
among us that be mortal, things are most judged by outward tokens. And yet
also in them men be sometime deceived, Hypocr^^y having in this world so
great a preemynence: but in amity is one rule, which seldom fails. He that
lives moderatly, does love always faithfully: for over him affections and
passions have left authority: and he that stands just in the myddell,
stands most surely. Also in the world there is no more folly, than to these
friends of them, which do follow Fortune, like as swyne do follow the maiden,
which bears on her heed a payle full of milk. And if the payle fall, or
happen to be emptye, they will follow no longer. The moderate person, where
both authority and virtue be in his friend equell, because that virtue was
the only cause of his love, that remaynyng, his mind is in such wise thereunto
joined, that although authorytie happen to slyppe, yet that love and virtue
may never be severed. I have spoken of frendeshyppe perchance more than
needs, but who will not wysshe, (if it moughte happen) to have such a
treasour, as neither the mountains of Ethiope, nor the ryuers of Inde do
conteyne in them, to be thereto compared. Callimachus an ancient poet says,
Puissance is dredefull: Richesse is honorable: but love for surety is most
incomparable, who perceyueth herein more than your good lordshyppe, which
besides the aboundaunte knowledge of hystoryes and natural wit, also
concerning this matter in your own sundry experiences, I dare say without
flatterye, are equalle to any noble man living. Yet this my long tale is not
superfluous, which is told not to teach you, but only to renew your
lordeshyppes remembrance, which is not always present, specially where the
brain is choked with worldely matters of weyghtye importance. In such as I
am, having little and little to do, remembrance stands more at liberty,
and therefore we may more often think on that, which we have both herd and
seen, and in chesyng friends, be the more circumspecte. But lest I shall make
the name of frendshyppe ^edyouse, by often rehersalle, I now conclude, that I
leave this lyttelle warke a monumente of the long contynewed affection by me
borne toward your lordeshyppe, and a perpetual witness, that I have deserved
so much of your favor, as in mutual frendshyppe is of rayson required;
which may be as easylye paid, as it is granted, if in place, where it
ought to be showed, ye do not forgette it. In the mean time I shall pray to
God to add to your good fortune and health, contynuance with his grace and
favor wherein only is most perfect suertye.

THE TABLE
IT MVST BE remembered, that the noumber in the Table, does sygnifye the leaf,
and the letter A, does sygnifie the first page or side, the letter B, the
second page or side.

A
ANexed to things natural. fol. 1. a. Ages. fo. 10. b. (...). 40. b Air.
fol. 12 a Appuls. fol. 21. a Almondes. fo. 22. b Anyse sede. fo. 25. b Ale.
fol. 36. b Abstinence. fo. 55. b Affectes of the mind. folio. 64. a
B
BLoudde. fol. 8. a Beetes. fo. 24. b Birds. 30. a Brain exceedynge in heat.
fol. 3. b Brayn^ exceedynge in cold. ibidem. Brain moist. ibid. Brain dry.
4. a Brayn hot and moist. ibi. Brayn hot and dry. ibid. Brain cold and moist. 4
b Brayn cold and dry. ibid. Beans. 25. b Breakefast. 43. a Blood suckers. 63.
a Bourage. 27. a Breadde. 28. b Black bird. 30. b Bustarde. 31. a Byttour.
ibid. Brayn of bestis. 32. a Butter. fo. 33. a Bie^e. fo. 36. b
C
COnsyderations of things belonging to health. 1. a Complexion of man. 2. a
Colerike body. 2. b Coler. fo. 8. b Coler natural. fol. 9. a Coler unnatural.
ibid. Color. fo. 11. a Color of hear. 11. b Custom. 17. b Cucumbers. 19. b
Cherics. 21. a Chastnartes. 22. b Capers. 23. a Colewortes and cabages. fol.
23. b Cyhorye. 24. a Cheruyle. 25. a Considerations in abstynence. 55. b
Cloves. 28. b C^nyc. 29. b Capons, hens, and chyckens. 30. a Crane. 31. a
Chese. 33. a Cider. 36. b Confortaryues of the heart. 69. a Cruditit. 75. b
D
DAtes. fol. 20. a Dueke. 31. a Dyuersytie of meats. 44. a Dygestiues of
choler. folio. 59. b Dygestiues of fleume. folio. 60. a Domynyon of condry
complexions. 70. a Diete of sanguine persons. 72. b Dtete of cholerike per
sons. ibid. Dyete of fleuinatycks persons. 73. b Dyete of melancolyke
persons. 74. a Dyete of them, which be redye to fall into syckenes. 78. b
Diete in time of pestilence. 89. a Drink between meals. 43. b Drink at
meals. 46. b Dygested. 55. a
E
Elements, fol. 1. b Endyue. 24. b Eggs. 33. a Exercise. 48. a. (...). 50. a
Euacuation. 54. b Exetementes. ibidm.
F
FLematih body. 2. b Fleume. 8. a Fleme natural. ib. Fleme unnatural. 8. b
Fruits. 19. a Fygges. 20. a Fenell. 25. b Fylberdes. 22. a Flesh. 29. a
Fesaunt. 30. b Fete of beasts. 32. b Fylhe. ibidem. Frytasyes or rubbynges.
folio, 49. a
G
GEnytours hot. folio 7. a Genytors cold. ibidem. Genitours moist. ibid.
Genytours dry. ibide^. Genytours hot and moist. 7. b Genytours hot and
dry. ibide^. Genytours cold and moist. ibidem. Genytoures cold and dry.
ibidem. Gourdes. 19. a Grapes. 20. b Garlyke. 26. b Gynger. 28. a Goose. 31. a
Gysar of birds. 31. b Gestation. 51. b
H
Heart hot distempered. 4. b Heart cold dystempered. 5. a Heart moist
dystempered. ibidem Heart dry dystempered. ibidem. Heart hot and moist. ibid.
Heart hot and dry. 5. b Heart cold and moist. ibid. Heart cold and dry. ibi.
Humors. 8. a Herbs used in potage or to eat. 23. b Hate. 29. b Hearon. 31. a
Heart of beastis. 32. a Heed of beastis. ibid. Honye. 37. b Hemorroides or
pyles. folio. 63. b Heatnes or sorrow. 66. a
I
Icope. 27. a Joye. 69. b
K
kydde. 29. b
L
LJuer in heat distempred. 6. a Liver cold dystempered. ibidem. Liver moist
dystempered. ibidem. Liver dry dystempered. ibidem. Letyse. 23. b. Lekes. 27.
a Lamb. 29. a Lark. 30. b Lyuers of birds and beasts 31. b Lunges of
beasts. ibi. Letting of blood. 61. a Leaches or bloods suckers. 63. a
Lassitude. fo. 77. a and 78. a
M
MElancolike body. fol 3. a Mela^coly. 9. a Members isntrumental. fol. 9 b
Meat and drink. 12. b Meats making good juice. ibidem. Meats making ylle
juice. 13. a Meats making choler. fol 13. b Meats making fleme ibidem. Meats
ingendrynge melancoly. 14 a Meats making thick juice. ibid. Meats hurtynge
the teethe. 14. b Meats hurtynge the eyes. ibidem. Meats making oppilations.
15. a Meats wyndy. ibid. Melons. 19. b Medlars. 22. a Malowes. 24. b Mutton.
29. b Moderacyon in Dyete. 42. a Meals. 42 b Maces. 28. b Members of birds.
folio. 31. b Melt or spleen. 32. a Marowe. ibid. Milk. 35. b
N
Nutmygges. 28. b.
O
OFfycyall members. 9 b Operatio^s. 10. b Olyues. 22. a Orenges. ibid. Onyons.
26. b Order in eating and drinking. 45. b Opilations what they are. fol. 41.
a Old men. 41. b Ordure. 55. a
P
PRyncypall members. fo. 9. b Parts similares. ibid. Powers natural. 10. a
Powers spiritual. ibi. Powers animal. ibid. Peaches. 21. a Pears. 22. a
Pourselan. 25. a Persely. ibide^. Purgers of coler. 59. b Pourgers of flewme.
folio. 60. a Purgers of melancolye. fol. 60. b Precepts of Diocles folio. 75.
b Pomegranates. 21. b Prunes. 22. b Peason. fo. 25. b Parsnepes. 26. a
Penyryall. 27. b Pepper. 28. a Partryche. 30. b Plouer. ibidem. Pygeons. 31. a
Purgations by siege. 57. b. and. 58. a Precyse dyete. 47. a
Q
QVantytie of meat. 16. a Qualytie of meat. fo. 17. a and. 18. b Quynce. 21.
b Quayle. 30. b
R
RAysons. 20. b Rapes. 26. b Radysshe. 26. a Rokat. 27. b Rosemary. ibid.
Repletion. 53. b
S
SAnguine body. 2. a Stomak hot. 6. b Stomach cold. ib. Stomak moist. ibide^.
Stomach dry. 7. a Spirit natural. 10. b Spirit ^ttali. ibidem. Spirit
animal. ibide^. Sorell. 25. a Sauge. 27. a Stomach in the which mete is
corrupted. 88. a Sleep and watch. 47. a Sauerye. 26 b Saffron. 28. b Swynes
flesh. 29. a Sparowes. 30. b Shoueler. 30. a Supper. 43. a Sugar. 38. b
Scarifieng. 62. b Sycknesses appropryed to sondrye seasons and ages. 79 a
Significations of sickenesses. 80. b
T
Things Natural. fo. 1. a Things not natural. ibidem. Things against
nature. ibide^. Things good for the heed. 15. b Things good for the heart.
ibidem. Things good for the iyuer. ibidem. Things good for the lunges. ibid.
Things good for the ties. 16. a Things good for the stomach. ibid.
Temperature of meats. 17. b Turnippes. 26. a Time. 27. b Townesresses. ibid.
Trypes. 31. b Tung of beastis. 32. a Time. 39. a. (...). 40. a Times appropryed
to ^uery humor. 71. a
V
VV^ildes. 12. a walnuttes. 22. a Veale. 29. b Venyson. ibid. woodcockes. 31. a
Vdder. 32. a water. 33. b wine. fo 34. b wuaye. 36. b Vociferation. 52. b
Vomyte. 56. b Vrines. 84. a Virtue of meats. 88. a
Thus ends the Table.


THE FIRST BOOK.
TO THE CONSERVAtion of the body of mankind, within the limitation of health,
which (as Galene says) is the Detuenda sanitate lib. 1.
state of the body, wherein we be neither grieved with pain, nor let from
doing our necessary business, does belong the dylygent consyderation of three
sorts of things, that is to say,

Things Natural, Things not natural, and Things against nature.
Things Natural be.vii. in number.

Elements Complexions. Humors. Members. Powers. Operations and Spirits.
These be necessary to the being of health, according to the order of their
kind: and be always in the natural body.

Things not natural be six in number.

Air Meat and drink. Sleep and watch. Meuyng and rest. Emptynesse and
repletion and Affections of the mind.
Things against Nature be three.

Syckenesse. Cause of syckenesse. Iccident, which follows syckenes.
Annered to things natural.

Age. Color. Figure, and Diversity of kinds.
The elements be those original things un myrt and vncompounde, of whose
temperance and myxture all other things, having corporal substance, be
compacte: Of them be four, that is to say,

Earth. Water. Air and Fire.
Earth is the most gross and pondercuse element, and of her proper nature is
cold and dry.

Water, is more subtle and light thanne earth, but in respect of Air and
Fire, it is gross and heavy, and of hit proper nature is cold and moist.

Air, is more light and subtylle thanne the other two, and being not altered
with any exterior cause, is properly hot and moist.

Fire, is absolutely light and clear, and is the clarifier of other elements,
if they be vyci^te o^ out of their natural temperaunce, and is properly hot
and dry.

This to be remembered, that none of the said elements be commonly ^ene or
felt of mortal men, as they are in their original being: but they, which
by our senses be perceived, be corrupted with mutual mixture, and be rather
erthy, watery, ayry, and fyry, than absolutely earth, water, air, and fire.

Of the complexion of Man. Cap. 2.
COmplexion is a combynation of two diverse qualities of the four elements in
one body, as hot and dry of the Fire: hot and moist of the Air, cold and
moist of the Water, cold and dry of the Earth. But although all these
complexions be assembled in every body of man and woman, yet the body takes
his denomination of those qualities, which abound in him, more thanne in the
other, as hereafter inseweth,

The body, where heat and moisture have soueraintie, is called Sanguine,
wherein the air has preeminence, and it is perceived and known by these
signs, which do follow,

Sanguine Carnosite or fleshynesse. The veins and arteries large. Hear
plenty and read The visage white and ruddy. Sleep much. Dreams of blouddy
things or things pleasant. Pulse great and full. Digestyon perfect. Angry
shortly. Siege, vryne, and sweat abundant. Falling shortly into bledynge. The
urine read and gross.

Where cold with moisture preuayleth, that body is called Fleumatike, wherein
water has preeminence, and is perceived by these signs.

Fleumatike. Fatnes, quauyng and soft. Veins narow. Hear much and plain.
Color white. Sleep superfluous. Dremes of things watery or of fysshe.
Slownes. Dulnes in learning. Cowardyse. Busle slow and little. Dygestyon
weak. Spyttell white, abundaunt, and thycke. Urine gross, white and pale.

Colerike is hot and dry, in whom the fire has preeminence, and is discerned
by these signs following.

Cholerike Leanes of body. Costyfenesse. Hear black or dark aburn curlyd.
Visage and skyn red as fire, or salowe. Hot things noyfull to him. Little
sleep. Dremes of fire, fighting or anger. Wit sharp and quycke. Hardy and
fighting. Pulse swyfte and strong. Urine high colored and clear. Voice
sharp.

Melancolyke is cold and dry, over whom the earth has dominion, and is
perceived by these signs.

Melancolyke. Leanness with hardness of skin. Hear plain and thynne. Color
duskyshe, or white with (...)nnesse. (...)e watch (...)es fearful. (...) in
opinyons. Digestion slow and ill. Tymerous and fearful. Anger long and
frettynge. Pulse little. Seldom laughing. Urine watery and thynne.

BEsides the said complexions of all the hole body, there be in the
particular members, complexions, wherein if there be any distemperaunce, it
brings syckenesse or grief into the member. Wherefore to know the
distemperature, these signs following would be considered. Foresene, that it be
remembered, that some distemperatures be simple and sum be compounde. They
which be simple, be in simple qualities, as in heat, cold, moist, or dry.
They which be compounde, are in compound or myxt qualyties: as heat and
moisture, heat and drythe: cold and moist, cold and dry. But now first
we will speak of the simple complexions, of every principal member, beginning
at the brain.

The brain exceeding in heat has, The hedde and vysage very read and hot.
The hear growing fast black and courlyd. The veins in the eyes apparent.
Superfluous matter in the nosethryls, eien, and ears. The heed annoyed with
hot meats, drynkes, and savors. Sleep short and not sound.

The brain exceeding in cold has, Much superfluite runnynge out of the
nose, mouth, ears and eyes. Hear straight and fine growing slowly, and
flaxen. The headde disposyd by small occasyon to poses and murres. It is soon
annoyed with cold. It is cold in touching. Veins of the eyes not seen.
Sleapy somewhat.

Moist in excess has, Hears plain. Seldom or never balde. Wit dulle.
Much superfluities. Sleep much and deep.

The brayn dry has No superfluites runnyng. Wits good and ready. Watchefull.
Hears black hard and fast growing. Balde shortly.

Complexions compouned.
Brain hot and moist dystempered has, The heed akyng and heavy. Full of
superfluines in the nose. The southen wind greuouse. The Northern wind
wholesome. Sleep deep but unquiet with often wakinges and strange dreams. The
senses and wit imperfect.

Brain hot and dry dystempered has, None abundaunce of superfluities, which
may be expelled. Senses perfect. Much watch. Sooner balde than other. Much
hear in childhod and black or brown, and courlyd. The heed hot and ruddy

Brain cold and moist Dystempered has, The senses and wit dull Much sleep.
The head soon replenisshed with superfluous moisture. Distyllations and poses
or m(...). Not (...) ^alde. Sone (...) with cold.

Brayn cold and dry dyssempered has, The heed cold in feling and without
color. The veins not apering. Soon hurt with cold. Often diserased. wit
perfect in chyldehode, but in age dull. Aged shortly and balde.

Of the heart.
The heart hot distempered has Much blowyng and puffing. Pulse swyfte and
busy. Hardines and ma^hode much. Promptnes actiuitie and quyckenesse in doing
of things. Fury and boldness. The breaste heary toward the left side. The
breast broad with the heed little. The body hot, except the liver do let it.

The heart cold distempered has, The pulse very little. The breath little and
slow. The breast narow. The body all cold, except the liver does inflame it.
Fearfulnes, Scrupulosite, and much care Curiosity. Slownesse in acts. The
breaste clean without hears.

The heart moist distempered has. The pulse soft. Sone a^gry and sone pacified
The body al moist, except the liver disposith contrary.

The heart dry distempered has The pulse hard. Not lightly angry, but being
angry, not soon pacyfied. The body dry, except the li uer does dispose
contrary.

The heart hot and ^oyst The breast and stomach heary Promptnes in acts.
Soon a^gry. Fiersnes but not so much as in hot and dry. Pulse soft, swift,
and busy. Breath or wind according. Shortly falls into diseases caused of
putryfaction.

The heart hot and dry. The heart poulse greatte and swyfte. The breath or
wind according. The breast and stomach all heary. Quick in his doings.
Boldness and hardynesse. Swift and hasty in moving Soon styr^ed to anger and
ryrannous in manners. The breast broad and all the body hot and dry.

The heart cold and moist The pulse soft. Fearful and tymerous. Slow. The
breast clean without hear. Not hastily anger nor refaynynge anger. The breast
narowe. All the body cold and moist

The heart cold and dry has, The pulse hard and little. The wind moderate.
Seldom angry, but wha^ it happens, it dureth long The breast clean without
hear and little. All the body cold and dry.

Of the liver.
The liver in heat distempered has. The veins great. The blood more hot
than temperate. The bealy heary. All the body hot exceeding temperaunce.

The liver cold distempered has The veins small. Abundance of fleum^ The
blood cold. All the body cold in feelynge. The bealy without hear.

The liver moist distempered has The veins soft. Much blood and thynne. All
the body moist in feeling, except the heart disposes it contrary.

The liver dry distempered has The veins hard. The bloudde little and
thycke. All the body dry.

The complexions compounde, may be decer Galenus in art parua. lib. 2.
ned by the said simple qualities. And here is to be noted, that the heat of
the heart may vanquyshe the cold in the liver. For heat is in the heart, as
in the fountain or spring, and in the Liver, as in the River.

Of the stomach.
The stomach hot distempered. He digesteth well, specially hard meats, and
that will not be shortly altered. Light mentes and soon altered, be therein
corrupted. The appetite little and slow. He delyteth in Meats and drinks,
which be hot for every natural complexio^ delyteth in his semblable.

The stomach cold dystempered. He has good appetite. He digesteth ylle and
slowely, specially gross meats and hard. Cold meats do wax sour, being
in him vndygested. He delytethe in meats and drynkes, which be Cold, and yet
of them he is indamaged.

The stomach moist dystempered He thyrsteth but seldom, yet he desires to
drink. with superfluous drink^ he is hurt. He delyteth in moist meats.

The stomach dry dystempered He is soon thyrsty. Content with a lyttelle
drink. Diseased with much drink. He deliteth in dry meats

It is to be noted, that the dyspositions of Galenus in art parua.
the stomach natural, do desire that which is of like qualities. The
dispositions unnatural, do desire things of contrary qualities.

Also not the stomach only causes a man to thyrste or not thyrste, but also
the liver, the lunges, and the heart.

Of the genitories or stones of generation.
The genytories hot distempred Great appetite to the act of generation.
Ingendrynge men children. Hear soon grown about the members.

The genytories cold distempred Small appetite to the act of generation.
Ingendryng women children. Slow growthe of hear about the members.

The genitories moist distempred Sede abundant but thynne and watrye.
The genitoryes dry distempred Sede lyttel but metely thick in substance.
Genytories hot and moist Less appetite to lechery than in them, which be
hot and dry. More puissaunce to do it, and without less damage. Hurt by
absteynyng from it. Less herines tha^ in hot and dry.

The genytories hot and dry The sede thycke. Much fruitefulnesse of
Generation. Great appetite and redynesse to the act. Hear about the members
soon grown. Swyftenesse in spedynge o^ the act. Soon therewith satisfied.
Damage by vsyng thereof.

The genytories cold and moist The sede watery and thynne. Little desire to
the act, but more puissance than in them which be cold and dry. Little
hears or none about the members.

The genytories cold and dry Hears none or few. Little apetit or none to
lecher^ Little puissance to do it. Ingendrynge more females than men chyldern.
That little sede that is, is thikker than in cold and moist.

Of humors.
IN the body of Man be four pryncipal humors, which continuynge in the
proporcion, that nature has lymitted, the body is free from all syckenesse.
Contrary wise by the increase or diminution of any of them in quantity or
quality, over or under their natural assignement, inequall temperature
comes into the body, which sickness follows more or less, according to
the lapse or decay of the temperatures of the said humors, which (...) these
following.

Bloudde, Fleume, Choler, Melancholy
Bloudde has preeminence over all other humors in susteynynge of all living
creatures, for it has more conformity with the originalle cause of living,
by reason of temperatenes i^ heat and moisture, also nouryssheth more the
body, and restores that which is decayed, being the very treasure of life, by
loss whereof, death immedyately follows. The distemperature of blood happens
by one of the other three humors, by the inordinate or superfluous mixture of
them.

Of fleume.
Fleume is of two sorts,

Natural and Unnatural.
Natural fleume is a humor cold and moist, white and sweet, or without taste
engendered by insufficient decoction in the second digestion of the watery or
raw parts of the matter decocte called Chilus, by the last digestyon made apt
to be converted into blood. In this humor, water has dominion most princypall.

Fleume unnatural is that, which is myxte with other humors, or is altered
in his quality. And thereof is.viii. sundry kinds

Fleume. watery, which is founden in spettil of great drinkers, or of them,
which dygeste ylle. Slymy or raw. Glasy, like to white glass, thick,
viscouse like byrd lyme and heuye. Plastry, which is very gross, and as it
were chalky, such is found in the joints of theyin, which have the gowte.
Salt, which is mingled with coler. Sower, myxt with melancoly, which comes of
corrupt dygestion. Harshe, thycke and gross, which is seldom founden, which
tastes like grene crabbes or sloes. ^o^ticum.
Stiptik or binding, is not so gross nor cold, as harshe, and has the taste
like to green red wine, or other like, straynynge the tu^ge.

Choler does participate with natural heat as long as it is in good
temperance. And thereof is also two kinds,

Natural and Unnatural.
Choler natural. Natural choler is the foam of bloudde, the color whereof is
read and clear, or more like to an orange color, and is hot and dry, wherein
the fire has dominion, and is light and sharp, and is engendered of the most
subtle part of matter decocte, or boiled in the stomach, whose be gynnynge is
in the liver.
Unnatural choler is that which is myxte o^ corrupted with other humors,
whereof be four kinds,

Citrine or yelowe choler, which is of the myxture of natural choler, and
watery fleume, and therefore has less heat then pure choler. Yelky, like to
yelkes of eggs, which is of the myxture of fleume congeled, and choler
natural, and is yet less hot than the other. Grene like to lekes, whose
beginning is rather of the stomak, tha^ of the liver Grene like to grene canker
of metal, and bourneth like venym, and is of exceeding adustion of choler or
fleume, and by these two kinds nature is mortifyed.
Melancoly or black coler is divided into two kinds.

Natural, which is the dregs of pure blood, and is known by the blaknes,
when it issues either downewarde or upward, and is verily cold and dry.
Vnnaturalle, which proceeds of the adustion of cholerike myxture, and is
ho^ter and lyg^ter, having in it vyolence to kill, with a dangerous
disposytion.
(...) the members.
There be diversities of members, that is to say.

Principal members. The brain. Th heart. The liver. The stones of generation

Official members. Syn^wes which do serve to the brain. Arteries or pulses,
which do serve to the heart. Vayn^s which do serve to the lyuc^. Vessels
spermatik, where in man's sede lies, which do serve to the s^on^^

Parts called Similares, for being divided they remain in them self like as
they were. Bones. Gristell. Calls betwirte the vttermooste skin and the
flesh. Muskles or fylettes. Fat Fles she.

Members isntrumental. The stomach. The raynes. The bowelles. All the great
synewes.

Those of their virtue do apetite meat and alter it.

O^ powers
Animal. Spiri^uall, Natural.
Natural power which do minister. To whom is ministered.

Which does mynyster. Appetiteth, Retayneth, Digesteth. Expels.

To whom is mynystred, Ingendreth, Nourysheth, Fedeth,

Power spiritual Warkyng, which delateth the heart and art(...)es, and
^ftesones strayneth them. Wrought, which is sty^red by an exterior cause to
wark whereof comes anger, indygnation, subtilitie, and care.

Power animal. That which ordeyneth, discerns, and composet^. That moves
by voluntarye motion. That which is called sensyble, whereof do proceed the
five wits.

Of that which ordeineth do proceed Imagination in the forhed. Reason in the
brain. Remembrance in the nodel.

Operations. Apetite by heat and drythe. Digestio^ by hete and moisture.
Retayning by cold and drythe. Expulsio^ by cold and moysre.

Spirit is an ayry substance subtle, styryng the powers of the body to
perform their opera^ions, which is dyuyded into

Naturalle, which takes his beginning of the liver, and by the veins which
have no pulse, spredeth into all the hole body. ^^^all which proceeds from the
heart, and by the arteries or pulses is sent into all the body. Animalle, which
is engendered in the brain, and is sent by the senewes throughout the body,
and makes sense or feelyng^.
Annexed to things natural.
(...) be. ^ii^. Adolescencye to.xxv. years, hot and moist, in the which
time the body grows. Juuentute unto.xl. years, hot and dry, wherein the body
is in perfyte growth. Senectute, unto.lx. years cold and dry, wherein the body
begins to decreace, Age decrepite, until the last time of life, accidently
moist, but naturally cold and dry, wherein the pdwers and strength of the
body be more and more mynished.

Color.
Of inward causes. Of outward causes.
Color of inward causes Of equality of humors, as he that is read and
white. Of inequality of humors, whereof do proceed, black, salowe, paale,
or white only. Read, Black, do betoben dominion of heat.
Salowe, White, cold of fl(...). Pale, cold of melancholy. Read abundaunce
of blood. Salow, chole^ citrine. Blarke, melancholye or choler aduste.

Color of outward causes. Of cold or heat, as english men be white,
Moriens (...) black. Of things accidentalle, as of fear, of anger, of
sorrow, or other like mocion^.

Color of hear Black, either of abundance of choler inflamed, or of much
intending or abus^yon of bloudde. Read hear of much heat not a^ust^. Gray
hears of abundaunce of melanch(...). (...)te hears of the lack of natural
hear, and by occasyon of fleume pu(...)fyed.

All the resydue concerning things natural (...) in the Introduction of
Joan^icius, and in the little craft of Galene, I purposely (...) over for
this time, forasmoche as it does requy^^ a r^der having some knowledge in
philo^ophye natural, or ^^s is (...) to hard and t^dious to be vnd^^stande.
Moreover this, which I (...) in this first tables, shall be sufficient, to
the conservation of he^the, I mean, with that which now follows in the
other Tables.

The second Table.
Things not natural be so called, because they be no por^yon of a natural
body, as they be, w^iche be called natural things, but yet by the temperance
of them the body being in health, so consysteth by the dis^emp^tance of them,
syckenesse is induced, and the body dessolued.

The first of things not natural is air, which is proprely of it self, or
of some material cause or occasion good or ill.

That which is of it self good, has pure va ^ours, and is o^oriferous.

Also it is of it self, swyft in alteration from hot to cold, wherein the
body is not much provoked to sweat for heat, ne to chylle for vehemence of
cold.

Air among al things not natural is chiefly to be observed, forasmoch as it
does both enclose us, and also enter into our bodies, specially the most noble
member, which is the heart, and we can not be separate one hour from it, for
the necessity of breathyng and fetchyng of wind,

The causes whereby the air is corrupted be specially four.

Influe^ces of sundry sterres. Great standing waters never r^freshed. ^arayne
lyenge long above ground. Much people in small ^ome living uncleanly and
slutty shely.
wyndes brynging holsom air. North, which prolongeth life by expoulsynge
ylle vapors. East is temperate and lusty.

wyndes brynging ylle air. South corrupts, and makes ylle vapors. Weste,
is very mutable, which nature does hate.

Meat and dryn(...)e.
(...) and drink we must consider syxt things,

Substance. Quantity. Quality. Custom. Time. Order.
(...) Substance, some is good, which makes good (...), and good blood, some
is ylle, and ^^gendi^th ylle juice and ylle bloudde.

Meats and drynkes making good (...)ce.
Bread of pure flower, of good whete somewhat leuened, well baked, not to old
nor to stale. Eggs of fesauntes, hens, or patryches new laid, poched, mean
between rere and hard. Milk new mylked, drunk fasting, Wherein is sugar, or
the leaves of mintes. Fesauntes. Pairiches or chykens. Capons or hens. Birds
of the feldes. Fyshe of stony ryuers. Veale suckynge. Porke young. Biefe not
passing.iii. years. Pygeons. Venyson of read dear. Pease potage with myntes.
Fate of swyne or calves. Fygges ripe, before meals.
Raysons, Borage. Languedebiefe. Persely. Myntes. Ryce with almonde myshe.
Letyse. Cykorye. Grapes ripe. Wynes good moderatly taken, well fined. Ale and
biere six days old, clean brewed, and not strong. Myrthe and gladness.
The liver and brains of hens and chykens, and young geese.
Meats and drynkes making ylle juice.
Old biefe. Old mutton. Geese old. Swanne old. Duekes of the kanell.
Inward of beasts. Black puddynges. The heart liver and kydneys of all bestes.
The brains and mary of the backbone. Wodde cul^ers. Shell fyshe, except
creuyse deaudoulce Chese hard. Apples and pears much used. Fygges and grapes
not ripe. All raw herbs, except letyse, borage, and cykorie. Onyons,
Garlyke, immoderatelye used, specially in Choleric stomachs.
Leekes. Wine in must or sour. Fear, sorrow, and pensyfenesst.
Meats ingendrynge choler.
Garlyke. Onyons. Rokat, Kersis, Lekes, Mustarde, Pepper, Houye, Wine much
Dronken. Sweet meats.
Meats ingendrynge fleume.
All slymy and deauynge meats. Chese new. All fysh, specially in a flematike
stoma(...) Inwardes of beasts. Lambs flesh. The synewe parts of flesh.
Skynnes. Brains. Lunges. Rapes. Cucumbers. Replecion, Lack of exercis(...)
Meats ingendrynge melancholy.
Biefe, Gotes flesh, Hares flesh, Bores flesh, Salt flesh, Salt fysshe,
Cole wortes, All pulse except white peason. Brown breadde course. Thycke
wine, Black wine, Old chese, Old flesh. Great fyshes of the sea.
Meats making thick juice.
Rye breadde, Must. Bread without leven. Cake breadde. See fyshe great.
Shelle fyshe. Biefe. The kydneys, The liver of a swyne, The stones of beasts.
Milk much soden. Rapes. All round roots, Cukumbers. Sweet wine. Deep red wine. Garlyke, Mustarde. Origanum. Hysope. Basylle. Fenell. Chese. Eggs fried
or hard. Cheste^ nuttes. Nau^wes. Fygges grene. Appulles not ripe. Pepper.
Rokat, much used. Leekes. much used. Oynyons much used.
Meats which do hurt the teeth.
Very hot meats. Nuttes. Sweet meats and dryntkes. Rodysshe roots. Hard
meats. Milk. Bitter meats. Much vomyte. Leekes. Fyshe fat. Lymons.
Colewortes.
Meats Which do hurt the eyes.
(...). Lechery. Must. All poulse. Sweet wynes and thycke wynes. Hemp sede.
Very salt meats. Garlyke. Oynyons. Colewortes. Radyshe. Reading after supper
immediately.
Making great oppilations.
Thycke milk. All sweet things. Rye breadde. Sweet wynes.
Meats inflatynge or Wyndy.
Beans. Lupynes. Cicer. Mill. Cucumbers. All juice of h(...) Fygges dry.
Rapes. Nauews raw. Milk. Honye not well clarified. Sweet wine. Must.
Things good for the heed
Cububes. Galyngale. Lignum alnes. Maioram. Baulme myntes. Gladen. Nutmygges.
M(...)e. Rosemarye. Roses. Pionye. Hissope. Spyke. Camomyll, Mellylote. ^ewe.
(...)a^kyn(...)se.
Things good for the heart
Cyramome. Saffron. Coral. Cl^ues. Lignum aloes. Perles. Macis. Baulme myntes.
Myrabolanes. Musk, Nutmigges. Rosemarye. The bone of the heart of a red
dear. Maioram. Buglosse. Borage. Setuall.
Things good for the liver
worm wode. With wind. Agrymonye. Saffron. Clones. Endyue. Liver worte.
Cyhorie. Plantayne. Dragons. Raysons great. Saunders. Fen^lle. Violetres. Rose
water. Letyse.
Things good for the lunges
Elycampane. Hysope. Scabiose. Lyko(...). Raysons. Maydenheare. Penidies.
Almondes. Dates. Pistacis.
Things good for the eyes
Eyebryght. Fenyll. Veruyn. Roses. Celandyne. Agrymonye. Cloves. Cold water.
Things good for the stomach
Myrabolanes Nutmygges. Organum. Pystaces. Ouynces. Olybanum. Wormewode.
Saffron. Coral. Agrymonye. Funitorye. Galyngale. Cloves. Lignum aloes. Mastix.
Mynt. Spodium. The innermooste skyn of a hens gysar. Coriander prepared.
THE SECOND BOOK,
Of quantity. Cap. 1.
THE QVANTITIE of meat must be proporcioned after the substance and quality
thereof, and according to the complexion of him that eats First it ought to
be remembered, that meats hot and moist, which are qualities of the
bloudde, are soon turned into bloudde, and therefore much nourysheth the
body. Some meats do nourish but little, having little conformity with
blood in their qualities. Of them, which do neryshe, some are more gross,
some lyghter in digession. The gross meat ingendreth gross blood, but where
it is well concoct in the slomake, and well digested, it makes the flesh more
firm, and the official members more strong, thanne fine metes. wherefore of
men, which use much labor or exercise, also of them, which have very cholerike
stomakes, hoar in England, gross meats may be eaten in a great quantity: and
in a cholerike stomach biefe is better digested than a chykens leg,
forasmoche as in a ho^fe stomach fine meats be shortly aduste and corrupted.
Contrarywyse in a cold or fleumatike stomach gross meat abides long
undigested, and makes putrifyed matter, light meats therefore be to such a
stomach more apt and convenient. The temperate body is best nourysshed with
a little quantity of gross meats: but of tempecate meats in substance and
quality, they may safely eat a good quantity. Foresene always, that they
eat without gourmandyse, or leave with some appetite. And here it would be
remembered, that the cholerike stomach, does not desire so much as he may
digeste, the melancholye stomach may not digeste so much as he desires: for
cold makes appetyte, but natural heat concocteth or boyleth. Not
withstanding unnatural or supernatural heat distroyeth appetyte, and
corrupts digestion, as it appears in fevers. Moreover fruytes and herbs,
specially raw, would be eaten in a small quantity, all though the person be
very cholerike, forasmoch as they do engender thynne watery bloudde, apt to
receive putrefaction, which although it be not shortly perceived of him that
uses it, at length they feel it by sundry diseases, which are long in
coming, and shortly sleeth, or be hardly escaped. Fynallye excess of meats,
is to be abhorred. For as it is said in the book called Ecclesiasticus, In
much meat shall be sycknes, Ecclesiasti co. 37.
and inordinate appetite shall approach unto choler. Semblably the quantity of
drynk would be moderated, that it excede not, nor be equalle unto the quantity
of meat, specially wine, which moderately taken, aydeth nature, and
comfort her, and as the said author of Ecclesiasticus Eccl. 31.
says, wine is a reioycynge to the soul and body. And Theognes says in
Galenes Galen. de tuenda sa.
warke, A large draught of wine is ylle. A moderate draught is not only not
ylle, but also commodious or profitable.

Of quality of meats. Cap. 2.
QValitie is in the complexion, that is to say, it is the state thereof, as
Hot or cold, moist or dry. Also some meats be in winter cold in act, and
in virtue hot. And it would be considered, that every complexion temperate
and intemperate, is co^serued in his state, by that which is like thereto in
form and degree. But that which excedeth much in dystemperaunce, must be
reduced to his temperaunce, by that which is contrary to him in form or
quality, but like in degree moderatly used. By form is understand grossenes,
fynenesse, thyckenesse, or thyckenesse, by degree, as the first, the second,
the third, the fourth, in heat c^^de, moisture, or drythe.

Of Custom. Cap. 3.
Custom in feeding is not to be contemned, or little regarded: for those
meats, to the which a ma^^e has been of long time accustomed, though they be
not of substance commendable, yet do they sometime less harm ^
than better metes, whereunto a man is not used. Also the meats and drynkes,
which do much del^te him that eats, or to be preferred before that, which
is better, but more unsavory. But if the custom be so perniciouse, that it
needs ^
must be left, than would it be withdrawn by little and little in time of
health, and not of lyckenesse. For if it should be withdrawn in time of
syckenesse, Nature should sustain treble de^runent, first by the grefe induced
by sycknesse, second by receyuynge of medicines, thirdly by forbearyng the
thing, wherein she delyteth.

Of the temperature of meats to be received. Cap 4.
TO kere the body in good temper: to them whose natural complexion is moist,
ought to be given meats that be most in virtue or power. Contrariwise to
them, whose naturalle complexion is dry? ought to be given meats dry in
virtue or power. To bodies intemperate, such meats or drinks are to be
given, which be in power contrary to the distemperance, but the degrees are
always to be considered, as well of the temperance of the body, as of the
meats. For where the meats do much excede in degree the temperature of the
body, they anoye the body in causyng distemperance, As hot wynes, pepper,
garlyke, onyons, and salt, be noyfull to them, which be cholerike, because they
be in the highest degree of heat and dries, above the just temperance of
man's body in that complexion. And yet be they oftentimes wholesome to them,
which be fleumatike. Contrary wise, cold water, cold herbs, and cold
fruits moderately used, be holsom to choleryke bodies, by puttyng away the
heat, excedyng the natural temperature: and to them, which be fleumatyke,
they be unwholesome, and do bring into them distemperance of cold and moist.

What distemperance happens by the excess of sundry qualities in meats and
drynkes. Cap. 5.
Meats. Cold, do congele and mortifye. Moist, do putrify and hasten age.
Dry, sucketh up natural moisture. Cla^my, stops the issue of vapors and
urine, and ingendreth toughe fleume and gravel. Fat and oily, swymmeth long
in the stomach, and brings in lothsomnesse. Bitter, does not nouryshe. Salt,
do frette much the stomach. Harrys she, like the taste of wild fruytes, do
constipa^e, and restrayn. Sweet, chauffeth the bloudde, and causes opilations
or stoppynges of the pores and cundytes of the body. Sower cools nature, and
hasteneth age.

What commodity happens by the moderate use of the said qualities of meats
and drynkes. Cap. 6.
Meats Cold asswageth the bournynge of choler. Moist, humecteth that which
is dried. Dry, consumes superfluouse moisture Clammye, thycketh that, which
is subtle and percynge. Bitter cleanses and wypeth of, also mollifieth and
expels fleume. Salt, relenteth fleume clammy, and dries it. Fat and
vnctuouse, nourysheth, and makes soluble. Stiptike or roughe on the toungue
vyndeth and comfort appetite. Sweet does cleanse, dissolve, and nouryshe.

Of fruits. Cap. 7.
FOrasmoche as before that tyllage of corn was invented, and that deuouryng of
flesh and fyshe was of mankind used, men undoubtedly lived by fruits, and
Nature was therewith contented and satisfied: but by change of the diete of our
progenitors, there is caused to be in our bodies such alteration from the
nature, which was in men at the beginning, that now all fruits generally are
noyfulle to man, and do engender ylle humors, and be oftetymes the cause of
putrified fevers, if they be much and contynually eaten. Not withstanding
unto them, which have abundance of choler, they be sometime convenient, to
repress the flame which proceeds of choler. And sum fruytes which be
styptike, or byndynge in taste, eaten before meals, do bind the bealy, but
eaten after meals, they be rather laxatiue. Now shall it not be inexpedient,
to write of some fruits particularly, declarynge their noyefull qualities in
appayrynge of Nature, and how they may be used with lest detriment.

Of Gourdes.
GOurdes raw be unpleasant in eating, Galen. de aliment. 2.
ill for the stomach, and almost never digested, therefore he that will needs
eat them must boil them, toste them, or fry them, every way they be without
savor or taste, and of their proper nature, they give to the body cold and
moist nouryshement, and that very little, but by reason of the slyppernesse
of their substance, and because all meats, which be moist of their nature,
be not byndynge, they lightly pass forth by the bealy. And being well ordered,
they will be metely concocte, if corruption in the stomach do not preuente
them: they be cold and moist in the second degree.

Of Melones and Pepones.
MElones and Pepones be almost of one kind but that the melone is round like
an apple, and the innermoste part thereof, where the seeds are contained, is
used to be eaten. The pepon is much greatter, and somewhat long, and the
inner part thereof is not to (...) eaten: They both are very cold and moist,
and do make ill ^yce in the body, if they be not well digested, but the pepon
much more thanne the melon. they do leest hurre, if they be eaten before
meals. All be it if they do find in the stomach fleume, they be turned into
fleume, if they find choler, they be turned into choler. Not withstandyng
there is in them the virtue to cleanse and to provoke urine, they be cold and
moysie in the second degree.

Cucumbers.
CVcumbers do not excede so much in moisture as melons: and therefore they be
not Galen. de alimor. 2.
so soon corrupted in the stomach: but in some stomachs, being moderatelye
used, they do digeste well: but if they be aboundauntly eaten, or much used,
they engender a cold and thycke humor in the veins, which never or seldom
is turned into good blood, and sometime brings in fevers. Also they abate
carnal lust. The seeds as well thereof, as of melones and gourdes, being
dried, and made clean from the husks, are very medicinable against sycknesses
procedynge of heat, also the difficulty or let in pyssynge, they be cold
and moist in the second degree.

Dates.
Be hard to dygeste, therefore being much eaten, and not well dygested, they
anoy the head, and cause gnawynge in the stomach, and make gross juice, and
sometime cause obstructions or stoppinges in the liver and spleen. And where
there is inflammation or hardness in the body, they are unwholesome, but being
well digested and temperately used, they nourysshe and make the flesh firm,
and also binds the bealy: old days be hot and dry in the first degree:
new gathered are hot and moist in the first degree.

Of fygges.
Figs eaten, do shortly pass out of the stomach, and are sone distrybuted
into all the Actius. 1.
parts of the body, and have the power to cleanse, specially gravel, being
in the raynes of the back, but they make no substancial nourishment, but
rather somewhat lowse and wyndye, but by their quycke passage, the wind is
soon dissolved. Therefore if they be ripe, they do leest harm of any fruytes,
or almost none. Dry figs and old, are more hot and moist thanne new
gathered, but being much eaten they make ill bloudde and juice, and as some do
suppose, do engender lyce, and also anoyeth the liver and the splent, if they
be inflamed, but having the power to attenuate or make humors current, they
make the body soluble, and do cleanse the raynes. Also being eaten before
dinner with ginger or pepper, or powder of time, or penyroyall, they profit
much to them, which have oppilations or hard congeled matter in the inner
parts of the body, or have distillations or reumes falling into the breast
and stomach. New fygges are hot and moist, old fygges are hot in the
first degree, and dry in the second.

Of grapes and raysons.
GRapes do not nouryshe so much as fygges, but being type, they make not much
Galen. de aliment. 2.
ill juice in the body: all be it newely gathered, they trouble the belly, and
fylleth the stomach with wynd, therefore if they be hanged up a while, er they
be eaten, they are the less noyfull. Sweet grapes, are hottest, and do lowse
somewhat, and make a man thyrstye, Sour grapes are cold, and do also lowse,
but Diosco. 5.
they are hard of digestyon, and yet they do not nouryshe. They which are in
taste bitter or harryshe, be like to them that are sour. Raysons do make the
stomach firm and strong, and do provoke appetite, and do comfort weak
bodies, being eaten before meals, they be hot in the first degree, and moist in
second.

Of Cheries.
CHeries, if they be sweet, they do soon slyp down into the stomach, but if
they be sour or sharp, they be more holsom, and do louse, if they be eaten
fresh, and newly gathered, they be cold and moist in the first degree.

Of peaches.
PEaches do less harm, and do make better juice in the body, for they are
not so soon corrupted being eaten. Of the juice of them may be made a
syrope, very wholesome against the distemperau^ce of choler, whereof proceeds a
stynkynge breathe, they be cold in the first degree, and moist in the second.

Of appulles.
AL appulles eaten soon after that they be gathered, are cold, hard to
digest, and do make ill and corrupted bloudde, but being well kept until the
next winter, or the year following, eaten after meals, they are right holsom,
and do confyrme the stomach, and make good digestion, specially if they be
roasted or baken, most properly in a cholerike stomach, they are best p^serued
in honey, so that one touch not an other. The rough tasted apples are wholesome,
where the stomach is weak by dystemperaunce of heat or much moisture. The
bitter apples, where that grief is increaced. The sour appuls, where the
matter in congeled or made thycke with heat. In distemperature of heat and
dries by drynkyng much wine, they have been found commodiouse: being eaten at
night, goinge to bed, without drinking to them, they be cold and moist
in the first degree.

Of Quynces.
QVynces be cold and dry, eaten before meal, they bynd and restrain the
stomak, that it may not digeste well the meat, except that they be roasted or
sodden, the core taken out and mixte with honye claryfyed, or sugar, than they
cause good appetyte, and preserves the heed from drunkenness: taken after
meat, it closes and draws the stomach to gyther, and helps it to dygeste,
and mollifieth the bealy, if it be aboundantely taken: they be cold in the
first degree, and dry in the beginning of the second.

Of Pomegranates.
POmegranates be of good juice, and profitable to the stomach, specially they,
which are sweet, but in a hot fever, they that are sour be more expedient
and wholesome. for than the sweet do intend heat, and puff up the stomach.

Of Pears.
Pears are much of the nature of apples, but they are heuyer, but taken after
meat roasted or baken, they are not unwholesome, and do restrain and knytte the
stomach, being rype^ they be cold and moist in the first degree.

Medlars.
MEdlars are cold and dry, and constrictiue or straynynge the stomach, and
therefore they may be eaten after meals, as a medicine, but not used as meat,
for they engender melancholye, they be cold and dry in the second degree.

Walnuttes
VAlnuttes, if they be blaunched, are supposed to be good for the stomach, and
somewhat lowsynge the bealy, myxte with sugar, they do nourysshe temperately. Of
two dry nuttes, as many fygges, and.xx. leaves of Rewe with a grain of salt,
is wade a medycine, whereof if one do eat fasting, nothing which is venomous
may that day hurt him, and it also preserves against the pestilence, and this
is the very right Mithridate. they be hot and dry in the second degree,
after some oppinions hot in the third degree, dry in the second.

Fylberdes and hasylnuttes.
They are more strong in substance than wall nuttes, wherefore they are not so
easily or soon digested. Also they do inflate the stomach, and cause heed
ache, but they engender fat. And if they be roasted, they are good to
restrain rewmes. Also eaten with pepper, they are good against tourmentes of
the bealye, and the stoppynge of vryne. They be hot and dry in the first
degree.

Of Almondes
THey do extenuate and cleanse without any byndynge, wherefore they purge the
breast and lunges, specially bitter almondes. Also they do mollifye the bealy,
provoke sleep, and causes to pysse well, five or syx of them eaten before
meat, keep a man from being drunk, they be hot and moist in the first
degree.

Of Chestyns
They being roasted under the ymbers or hot ashes, do nourysshe the body
strongely, and eaten with honey fasting, do help a man of the cowghe.

Prunes
OF the gardeyne and type, do dispose a man to the stool, but they do bring
no manner of nouryshement. To this fruit like as to fygges this property
romayneth, that being dried they do profit. The damas^e prune rather byndeth
than lowseth, and is more commodiouse unto the stomach they be cold and moist
in the second degree.

Olyues
COndyte in salt lycoure, taken at the beginning of a meal does corroborate
the stomach, stireth appetite, and louseth the bealy, being eaten with
vyneger. They which be ripe, are temperatly hot, they which be grene, are
cold and dry.

Of Capers
THey nouryshe nothing after that they be salted, but yet they make the belly
louse and purges fleume, which is therein contained. Galen. de alime. 2.
Also styrreth appetite to meat and opens the obstructions or stoppynge of
the liver and spleen, being eaten with oximell, before any other meat: they
be hot and dry in the second degree.

Orenges
The ryndes taken in a little quantity, do comfort the stomach, where it
digesteth, specially condite with sugar, and taken fasting in a small
quantity. The juice of orenges, having a toste of bredde put unto it, with a
little powder of myntes, sugar, and a little cynamome, makes a very good
sauce to provoke appetite. The juice eaten with sugar in a hot fever, is not
to be discommended. The rynde is hot in the first degree, and dry in the
second: the juice of them is cold in the second degree, and dry in the
first.

Herbs used in potage or to eat. Capitulo. 8.
GEnerally al herbs raw, and not sodden, do engender cold and watery juice, if
they be eaten customably, or in abundance: all be it some herbs are more
comestyble, and do less harm unto nature, and moderatelye used, makes
inetely good bloudde.

Lettyse.
Among all herbs, none has so good juice as letise: for somemen do suppose,
that it makes abundance of blood, al be it not very pure or perfyte. It does
set a hot stomach in a very good temper, and makes good appetite, and eaten
in the euennynge, it provoke sleep, albe it, it neither does lowse nor bynd
the bealye of his own property. It increases milk in a woman's breasts, but
it abateth carnal appetite, and much using thereof, hurts the eye syghte.
It is cold and moist temperatly

Colewortes and Cabages.
BEfore that avarice caused marchantes to fetch out of the east and south
parts of the world, the traffyke of spyce and sundry droughes, to content
the vnsaciablenesse of wanton appetites, Colewortes for the virtues supposed to
be in them, were of such estimation, that they were judged to be a sufficient
medycyne against all diseases, as it may appear in the book of wise Cato,
wherein he writes of husbandrye. But now I will no more remember, than shall
be required, in that which shall be used as meat and not pure medicyne. The
juice thereof has virtue to pourge: the holle leaves being half sodden, and
the water poured out, and they being put eftsoon into hot water, and sodden
until they be tender, so eaten they do bind the bealy. Some do suppose, if
they be eaten raw with vinegar, before meat, it shall preserve the stomach
from surfettynge, and the heed from drunkenness: all be it much using of
them dulleth the sight, except the eyes be very moist. Finally the juice that
it makes in the body is not so commendable, as that which is engendered of
lettyse. It is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second.

Of Cikorie or suckorie.
IT is like in operation to lettyse, and tempereth choler wonderfully, and
therefore in all cholerike fevers, the decoction of this herb or the water
thereof stylled, is right expedient. semblably the herb and rote boiled with
flesh, that is fresh being eaten, keeps the stomach and head in very good
temper. I suppose that Southystell and Dentdelyon, be of like qualities, but
not so convenient to be used of them, which are hole, because they are wild
of nature and more bitter, and therefore causes fastidiousnesse or lothsomnesse
of the stomach. It is cold and dry in the second degree.

Endyue and Scariole
BE much like in their operation to Cykorie, but they are more convenient to
medicine than to meat. All be if Scariole called white Endyue, having the
tops of the leaves turned in, and laid in the earth, at the latter end of
summer, and covered, becomes white and crispe, like to the great stalks of
ca bage lettyse, which are in winter taken up and eaten. And to them that
have hot stomakes and dry, they be right wholesome, but being to much used,
or in very great quantity they engender the humor, which makes the cholike*
they be cold and moist in the first degree.

Malowes
Are not cold in operacion, but rather somewhat warm, and have in them a
slyppernesse: Gale. 2. de alimentis.
wherefore being boiled and moderatelye eaten with oil and vyneger, they make
metely good concoction in the stomach, and causes the superfluous matter
therein easily to pass, and clen seth the bealye. It is hot and moist in the
first degree.

White betis
Are also abstersive and lowseth the bealy, but much eaten, annoveth the
stomach: but they are right good against obstructions or stoppynge of the
liver, if they be eaten with vyneger or mustarde, likewise it helps the
spleen. It is cold in the first degree, and moist in the second.

Pourselan.
Does mitigate the great heat in all the inward parts of the body, semblably
of the head and eyes: also it represseth the rage of Venus, but if it be
preserved in salt or bryne, it heateth and pourgeth the stomach. It is cold
in the third degree, and moist in the second.

Cheruyle.
Is very profitable unto the stomach, but it may not sustain very much
boylynge, eaten with vinegar, it provoke appetyte, and also urine. The
decoction thereof drunk with wine, cleanses the bladder.

Sorell.
Being sodden, it louseth the bealy. In a time of pestilence, if one being
fasting, do chewe some of the leaves, and suck down the juice, it
meruaylousely preserves from infections, as a new practiser called
Guainerius, does write. And I my self have proved it in my household. The
seeds thereof brayed and drunk with wine and water, is very wholesome against
the cholike Dioscorides li. 2. ca pit. 106.
and frettynge of the guts: it stops fluxes, and helps the stomach
anoyed with replecion. It is cold in the third degree, and dry in the
second.

Persely.
Is very convenient to the stomach, and comfort appetite, and makes the
breath sweet, the seeds and root causes urine to pass well, and breaks
the stoone, dissolueth wyndes: the roots boiled in water, and thereof oxymel
being made, it dissolueth fleume, and makes good digestion. It is hot and
dry in the third degree.

Fenell,
Being eaten the sede or rote makes abundance of milk, likewise drunk with
ptysane or ale. The sede sommewhat restrayneth flux, provoke to pysse, and
mytigateth frettynges of the stomach and guts, specially the decoction of
the rote, if the matter, causynge fretting be colds, but if it be of a horte
cause, the use ^
thereof is daungerouse, for inflammation or exulce^ation of the raynes or
bladder. It is hot in the third degree, and dry in the first.

Anyse sede.
Makes sweet breathe, provoke urine, and dryueth down things, cleauyng to
the raynes, or bladder, styrreth up courage, and causes abundance of milk. It
is hot and dry in the third degree.

Beans.
They make wind, how so ever they be ordered: the substance, which they do
make, is spungye, and not firm, all be it they be abstersyue, or clensynge the
body, they tarry long, or they be digested, and make gross juice in the
body, but if onyons be sodden with them, they be less noyfull.

Peasyn.
Are much of the nature of beans, but they be less wyndy, and passes faster
out of the body: they be also abstersyue, or clensyng, specially white peason,
and they also cause merely good nouryshynge, the husks taken away. And the
brothe wherein they be sodden, cleuseth right well the raynes and bladder.

Rape rotes and Nauews. Cap. 9.
THe juice made by them, is very gross: and therefore being much eaten, if they
be not perfytely concocte in the stomach, they do make crude or raw juice in
the veins. Also if they be not well boiled, they cause wyndes, and annoye the
stomach, and make sometime frettynges: If they be well boiled first in clean
water, and that being cast away, the second time with fat flesh, they
nourys she much, and do neither lowse nor bind the belly. But Nauews do not
nouryshe so much as rapes, but they be even as wyndy.

Turnepes,
Being well boiled in water, and after with fat flesh, nourysheth much,
augmenteth the sede of man, provoke carnal lust. Eaten raw, they styre up
appetite to eat* being temperatly used, and be convenient unto them, which
have putrifyed matter in their breasts or lunges, causynge them to spytte
eas^ly, but being much and often eaten, they make raw juice and wyndynesse.

Parsneps and carettes.
They do nouryshe with better juice than the other roots, specially carettes,
which are hot and dry, and erpelleth wind. Not withstandyng Gal. simp.
med^. li. 7.
much used they engender ill juice: but carettes less than parsnepes, the
done and the other expels urine.

Radysshe rotes.
Have the virtue to extenuate, or make thyn, and also to warm. Also they cause
to break Paulus Ae ginera. Dioscorides. Li. 7. de aliment.
wind, and to pysse: being eaten before meals, they let the meat, that it
may not descend, but being eaten last, they make good digestion, and louseth
the bealy, though Galenus write contrary. For I, among diverse other, by
experience have proved it: Notwithstanding they be unwholesome for them, that
have contynually the gout, or pain in the joints.

Garlyke.
It does extenuate and cut gross humors and slymy, dissolueth gross
wyndes, and heateth all the body: also opens the places, which are stopped,
generally where it is well digested in the s^omake: it is holsom to diverse
purposes, specially in the body, wherein is gross matter, or much cold
enclosed: if it be sodden until it tos^th his ^artenesse, it somewhat
nouryssheth, and yet loses not his property, to extenuate gross humors:
being sodden in milk, it profyteth much against distillations from the heed
into the stomach.

Onyons.
Do also extenuate, but the long onions more than the round, the red more
than the white, the dry more than they which be green: also raw more than
sodden: they styre appetite to meat, and put away lothsomnesse, and lowse the
bealy, they quycken sight: and being eaten in great abundance with meat, they
cause one to sleep soundely.

Leekes.
Be of ill juice, and do make troublous dreams, but they do extenuate and
cleanse the body. Galen 7. cap. 138.
and also make it soluble, and provoke urine. Moreover it causes one to
spette out easily the fleume, which is in the breaste.

Sauge
It heateth, and somewhat byndeth, and therewith provoke urine, the decoction
of the leaves and branches being druncke. Also it stops bleedynge of
wounds, being laid unto them. Moreover it has been proved, that women,
which have been long time without childerne, and have drunk. r. ounces of the
juice of sauge, with a grain of salt, a quarter of an hour before, that they
have companyed with their husbands, have conceived at that time. It is hot
and dry in the third degree, the using thereof is good against palseyes.

Isope.
Does heat and extenuate, whereby it dygesteth slymye fleume: being prepared
with fygges, it pourged fleume downewarde, with honye and water upward, boiled
in vyneger, it helps the toth ache, if the te the be washed there with: it is
hot and dry in the third degree.

Bourage.
Comfort the heart, and makes one merry, eaten raw before meals, or laid
in wine that is drunk: Also mollyfieth the bealye, and prepares to the
stool. It is hot and moist in the myddell of the first degree.

Sauery.
Purges fleume, helps dygestyon, makes quycke syghte, provoke vryne, and
styreth carnal apetite: It is hot and dry in the third degree.

Rokat.
Heateth much, and increases seed of man, ^ouoketh courage, helps
dig^stion, and somewhat louseth. It is hot and moist in the second degree.

Time.
Dissolueth wyndes, breaks the stone, expels urine, and ceasseth
freattynges. It is hot and dry in the third degree.

Penyryall.
Does ertenuate, heat, and decocte, it reformeth the stomach, oppressed with
fleume, it does recomforte the faynte spirire, it expels melancholy by
siege, and is medicinable against many diseases, it is hot and dry in the
third degree.

Townecresses.
Paulus dyscommendeth, saying, that it resists Lib. (...).
concoction, and hurts the stomach, and makes ill juice in the body, taken
as medicine, it helps many diseases. It is hot and dry in the third
degree.

Rosemary.
Has the veriue to heat, and therefore it dissolueth humor congeled with
cold: It helps against palseys, falling syckenes, old diseases of the
breaste* tourmentes or frettyng, it provoke urine and sweat: it helps the
cough taken with pepper and honey, it puts away to the ache. the root being
chewed, or the juice thereof put into the to the: being bourned, the fume
thereof resysteth the pestplence: the rynde thereof sodden or burned, and the
fume receives at the mouth, stop peth the reume, which falls out of the heed
into the chekes or throote: which I my self have proved, the grene leaves
bruysed, do stop the hemorroides, if they be laid unto them: this herb is
hot and dry in the third degree.

Spices growyng out of this realm used in meat or drink. Cap. 10,
Pepper.
Black pepper is hottest, and most dry, white pepper is next, long pepper
is most temperate. The general propertye of all kinds of pepper is to heat
the body, but as Galene says, it perceth downward, and does not spread
into the veins, if it be gross beaten. It dissolueth fleume and wind, it
helpethe digestion, expulseth urine, and it helps against the diseases of the
breaste, procedynge of cold. It is hot in the first degree, and dry in the
second

Gynger.
Heateth the stomach, and helps dygestyon, but it heateth not so soon as
pepper: but afterward the heat remains longer, and causes the mouth to be
moysre: Being grene, or well confectioned in syrope, it comfort much the
stomach and heed, and quyckneth remembrance. if it be taken in the morrow
fasting. It is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.

Saffron.
Somewhat byndeth, heateth, and comfort the stomach, and the heart specially,
and makes good digestion, being eaten or drunken in a small quantity. It is
hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.

Cloves.
Has virtue to comfort the synewes, also to consume and dissolve superfluouse
humors, They be hot and dry in the third degree: sodde^ with mylk, it
comforts the debilite of nature.

Mases.
Dioscorides commends to be drunk against spyttynge of bloudde, and blouddy
fluxes, and excessive laxes. Paulus Jegineta, adds to it that it helps the
cholyke: they be hot in the second degree and dry in the third degree. It
is to the stomach very commodiouse, taken in a little quantity.

Nutmigges
With their sweet odor comfote and dissolve, and sometime comfort the power
of the sight and also the brayn in cold discrasies, and is hot and dry in the
second degree.

Of bread. Cap. 11.
Bread of fine flower of wheat, having no ^^uyn, is slew of digestion, and
makes (...) (...)nours, but it nouryssheth much: if it be l^^yned, it
dygesteth sooner: bread (...)ynge much branne, fylleth the bealye with
excrementes, and nouryssheth little or nothing, but shortly descends from
the stomach: The mean between both, suffyciently leuyned, well molded, and
moderately baken, is the most hol some to every age. The greatest loves do
norishe most fast, for as much as the fire has not exhausted the moisture of
them. Hot breadde, much eaten, makes fullness and thyrste, and slowely
passes. Barley bread cleanses the body, and does not nouryshe so much as
wheat, and makes cold juice in the body.

Of flesh. Capi. 12.
BEfe of England to Englyshemen, which are in health, brings strong
nourysshynge, but it makes gross bloudde, and ingendreth melancoly: but being
of young oxen, not exceeding the age of four years, to them, which have
cholerike stomakes, it is more convenient, thanne chykens, and other like fine
meats.

Swynes flesh.
Above all kinds of flesh in nouryshyng the body, Galene most commends
porke, not being of an old swyne, and that it be well digested of him, that
eats it. For it makes best juice, it is most convenient for young persons,
and them, which have sustained much labor, and therewith are fatigate, and
become weak. Young pig ges are not commended before that they be one month
old, for they do bread much superfluous humors.

Lamb.
Is very moist and fleumatyke, wherefore it is not conueniente for aged men,
except that it be very dry roasted, nor yet for them which have in their
stomach much fleume.

Mutton.
Galene does not commend it, not withstanding De alime^. (...). ^.
experience proves here in this realm, that if it be young, it is a right
temperate meat, and makes good juice: and therefore it is used more than any
other meat, in all diseases. And yet it is not like good in all places, nor
the sheep, which bears fynest wolle, is not the swetest in eating, nor the
most tender. But I have found in some countrays mutton, which in whitenes,
tenderness, and sweetness of the flesh, might be well nygh compared to
kydde, and in digestion have proved as wholesome.

Kydde and veale.
Of Galene is commended next unto porke, but some men do suppose, that in health
and sickness they be much better thanne porke, the juice of them both being
more pure. And here it is to be noted, that of all beasts, which be dry of
their nature the youngest be most holsom: of them that are moist, the eldest
are lest hurtful.

Hare, Conye.
Makes gross blood, it dries and stops, but yet it provoke a man to
pysse. Conye makes Hippo. de ^atione vi ^us lib. ^. capit. 19. Plin. ^3.
better and more pure nouryshement, and is sooner digested than hare. It is well
proved, that there is n^o meat more wholesome, or that more clean, firmly, and
temperatelye nourysshethe than rabettes.

Dear read and falowe.
Hippocrates affyrmeth the flesh of hearts and hyndes, to be of ill juice,
hard of digestion, and dry, but yet it moves urine. Of falowe dear, he nor
any other old writer does speak of, as I remember. I suppose, because there
be not in all the world so men, as be in England, where they consume a good
part of the best pasture in the realm, and are in nothing profitable, saving
that of the skynnes of them is made better lether, than is of calves: the
huntyng of them being not so pleasant, as the hunting of other venerye or
vermyne, the flesh much more unwholesome and unpleasant, than of a red dear,
ingendrynge melancholy, and making many fearefulle dreams, and disposes the
body to a fever, if it be much eaten: not withstanding the fat thereof (as
some learned men have supposed) is better to be dygested, than the lean.

Of birds.
The flesh of all birds, is much lyghter, tha^ the flesh of beasts in
comparison, most specially of those fowls, which trust most to their
wings, and do bread in high countries.

Capons, hens, and chyckens.
The Capon is above al other fowls praised, for as much as it is easily
digested, and makes little ordure, and much good nouryshement. It is
commodiouse to the breast and stomach. Hens in winter are almost equal unto
the capon: but they do not make so strong nouryshement. Auycen says, if they
be roasted in the bealy of a kydde or lamb, they will be the better. Chikens in
summer, specially if they be ^o^k^elles, are very conuenyent for a weak
stomach, and nourysheth a little. The flesh of a rock is hard of
dy^^^^ion, but the broth, wherein it is boiled, louseth the bealy, and having
sodden in it colewortes, Polypodium, or Cartamus, it pourgeth ill huinours, and
is medicmable against goutes, joint aches, and fevers, which come by courses.

Fesannt.
Excedeth all fowls in sweetness and holsomnesse, and is equal to a capon in
nourishing, but he is somewhat dryer, and is of some men put in comparyson,
mean between a hen and a patryche.

Partriche.
Of all fowls is most soonest digested: and has in him much nutriment,
comfort the brain, and makes sede of generation, and re(...)eth lust,
which is abated.

Quayles.
All though they be of some men commended, yet experience proves them to
increace melancholy, and are of a small nouryshynge.

Larkes.
Be as well the flesh as the brothe, very wholesome: eaten roasted, they do much
help against the cholyke, as Dioscorides says.

A plouer.
Is slow of digestion, nouryssheth little, and increases melancolye.

Black birds or ousyls.
Among wild foul has the chief praise, for lyghtnes of digestion, and that
they make good nouryshement, and little ordure.

Sparowes.
Be hard to digeste, and are very hot, and styreth up Venus, and specially
the brains of them.

Woodcoc^es.
Are of a good temperaunce, and metely light in dygestyon.

Pygeons.
Be easily dygested, and are very wholesome to them, which are fleumatike, or
pure melancoly.

Goose,
Is hard of digestion, but being young and fat, the wings be easy to
digest in a hole stomach, and nourysheth competently.

Ducke,
Is hotter than goose, and hard to digest, and makes warse juice, saving the
branues on the breaste boon, and the neck is better thanne the remnaunt.

Crane and bustarde.
Crane is hard of digestyon, and makes ill juice, but being hanged up long
in the air, he is the less unwholesome. Bustarde being fat, and kept without
meat a day or two before that he be killed, to expulse his ordure, and than
drawn, and hanged as the crane is, being roosted or baken, is a good meat,
and nourysheth well, if he be well dygested.

Hearon, Byttour, Shou^lar,
Being young and fat, be lyghtlyer digested than crane: and the byttour
sooner than the heron. And the shoular sooner than any of them, but all these
fowls must be eaten with much gynger or pepper, and have good old wine
drunk after them, and so shall they be more easyly digested, and the juice
coming of them be the less noyfull.

The parts and members of birds and beasts, Cap. 13.
THe wings braunes and neck of geese, capons, hens, fesaunt, partryche, and
small birds being fa^te, are better than the legs in dygestyon, and lyghter
in nouryshyng, of wyldfoule and pygeons being fat the legs are better than
the wings: the braunes of ducke, teale, and wygeon except, which is better
to dygeste than the tesydewe.

The gysar or stomach.
Of a goose or hen being fat with branne and milk, being well sodden or
made in pou^der, is good for the stomach, in making it strong to digeste, and
nourysheth competently.

The lyuar.
Of a capon, hen, fesaunt, or goose, being ^ade fat with milk myxte with
their meat, is not only easy to digest, but also makes good juice, and
nourysheth excellently. But the lyuers of beasts be ill to dygeste, passes
slowely, and makes gross blod, but it is strong in norishyng

The inward of beasts, as trypes and chitterlynges.
The flesh of them is more hard to dygeste. And therefore although they be
well digested, yet make they not juice naturally sanguine, or clean, but raw
juice and cold: and requires a long time, to be converted into blood.

The lunges or lyghtes.
Are more easy to dygeste than the liver, and less nourysheth, but the
nouryshement, that it makes, is fleumatyke: All be it the lunges of a Fox, is
medicinable for them, which have syknesse of the lunges.

The spleen or (...)ylte.
Is of ill juice, for it is the ^^aber of melancoly.

The heart.
Is of hard flesh, and therefore is not soon dygested, nor passes shortly,
but where he is well dygesteth, the juice that it makes, is not to be
dyspraysed.

The brain.
Is fleumatike, of gross juice, slow in digestynge, noyouse to the stomach,
but where it is well dygesteth, it nourysheth much.

Marowe.
Is more delectable than the brain, it is ill for the stomach, but where it
is well dygesteth, it nourysheth much.

The stones and vdders,
Being well digested, do nouryshe much, but the stones are hotter with their
moystnesse, the vdders cold and fleumatike, they both do increase sede of
generation: but the bloudde made of the vdder is better than that, which
comes of the stones, except it be of calves and lambs. Also the stoones of
cocks, makes commendable nouryshement.

The heed.
The flesh thereof nourishes much, and augmenteth sede: but it is slow of
dygestyon, and noyeth the stomach, but to them, which use much exercise, it
is not discommendable.

The tongue.
Is of a spoungy and sanguine substance, but the kernelles and gristell, which
are in the roots, if they be well dygested, they make good nouryshement, if
they be not well dygested, they make fleume.

The feet.
Being well boiled and tender, in a holle stomach, dygesteth well, and makes
good juice, and passes forth easily. Galene commends the fete of swyne. But
I have proved, that the feet of a young bullock tenderly sodden, and laid in
souse two days or three, and eaten cold in the evening, have brought a
cholerike stomach into a good digestion and sleep, and therewith has also
expulsed salt fleume and choler, and this have I found in my self by often
experience: always foresene, that it be eaten before any other meat, without
drinking immediately after it.

Of fysshe generally. Cap. 14.
THe best fyshe after the opinion of Galen, is that, which swymmeth in the
pure see, and is tossed and lift up with winds and sourges. The more calm
that the water is, the warse is the fyshe, they which are in muddy waters, do
make much fleume and ordure, taken in fennes and dyches be warste, being in
fresh ryuers and swyfte, be sometime commendable: albeit generally, all kinds
of fyshe makes more thynner bloudde, than flesh, so that it does not much
nouryshe, and it does sooner pass out by vapors: to a hot cholerike
stomach, or in fevers, sometime they be wholesome, being new, fresh, and not
very hard in substance or slimy, hard fyshe is hard of digestion, but the
nourishement thereof is more fyrme, than that, which is soft: those which
have much gross humors in them, are best powdered.

Of butter. Cap. 15.
BVtter is also nourysshynge, and profits to them, which have humors
superfluous, in the breast or lunge, and lacks rypyng and clensynge of them:
specially if it be eaten with sugar or honey. If it be well salted, it heateth
and elenseth the more.

Of Chese. Cap. 16.
CHese by the hole sentence of all ancient writers, lets digestion, and is
enemy unto the stomach. Also it ingendreth ill humors, and bredeth the
stone. The chese which does lest harm, is soft chese, reasonably salted,
which sum men do suppose, nourysheth much.

Of Eggs. Cap. 17
Eggs of fesantes, hens, and partriches, be of all other meats most
agreeable unto nature, specially if they be new laid: if they be reere, they
do cleanse the throat and the breaste. If they be hard, they be slow in
digestion: but being ones digested, they do nouryshe much. Mean between rere
and hard, they dygeste conveniently, and nouryshe quyckely. Eggs well poched,
ar better tha^ roasted. If they be fried hard, they be of ill nouryshement, and
do make stynkyng fuines in the stomach, and do corrupt other meats with whom
they be mingled. They be most wholesome, when they be poched, and most
unwholesome, when they be fried. Dioscorides says, If they be souped warm,
before any other meat, they do heal the griefs of the bladder, and raynes,
made with grauelle: alsoo forenesse of the chekes, and throat, and spytting of
bloudde: and they be good against eatarres, or styllynge out of the heed, into
the stomach.

Of drinks, and first of Water Capit. 18.
Undoubtedly water has preemynence above all other lycours, not only because
it is an element, that is to say, a pure matter, whereof all other lycours have
their original substance: but also forasmoch, as it was the very natural and
first drink, to all manner of creatures. wherefore the fayeng of Pindarus the
poet, was ever well allowed, which says, water is best. And one thing is to
be well considered that from the creation of the world, until the vniuersalle
deluge or floudde, during which time, men lived eight or nine hundred years,
there was none other drink used nor known, but water. Also the true folowers
of Pythagoras doctrine, drank only water, and yet lived long: as Apollonius,
and other: and in the searching out of secret and mystical things, their
wits excelled. More over, we have seen men and women of great age, and
strong of body, which never, or very seldom, drank other drink, than pure
water: As by example, in Cornwall, although that the countray be in a very
cold quarter, which prouethe, that if men from their infancye, were
accustomed to none other drink but to water only, moderately used it should
be sufficient to keep natural moisture, and to cause the meat that is eaten
to perce and descend unto the places of digestion, which are the purposes that
drink serves fore. But now to the qualities of water, after the sentence of
ancient philosophers and physicians, The rain water, after the opinion of the
most men, if it be received pure and clean, is most subtle and penetratyue,
of any other waters: the next is that, which yssueth out of a spring in the
east, and passes swyftely, among great stones or rocks: the third is of a
clean river, which rennethe on great hard stones or pebles. There be diverse
means to try out, which is the best water, for that which is lyghtest in
poyse or weight is best. Alsoo that, whereof comes lest skymme or frothe,
when it does boil. Also that, which will soonest be hot. More over deape
lynnen clothes into sundry waters, and after lay them to dry, and that
which is soonest dry, the water wherein it was depid is most subtylle. After
a great surfette, cold water drunken is a general remedy. Hippocrates
affyrmeth, that in sharp and fervent diseases, none other remedy is to be
required, than water. And Galene will not, that chylderne should be let from
drinking of water: De ratio^e uictus in mor. acutis li. 3.
but that when they feel them selves very hot, after meals, and do desire to
drink water, specially of a clean fountayn, they should be suffered. Also
Hippocrates says, In such syknes where as thou fear, lest the heed should
be vehemently grieved, or the mind peryshed there must thou give either water,
or white wine alayed with much water. Not withstanding there be in water
causes of diverse diseases, as of swellynge of the spleen, and the liver, it
also flytteth and swymmeth, and it is long or it perceth, in as much, as it is
cold and slow in decortion, it loses not the bealy, nor provoke urine.
Also in this it is vicyous, that of his proper nature, it makes none ordure.
Finally, always respect must be had to the person, that drynketh it, for to
young men, and them, that be hot of complexion, it does less harm, and
sometime it profyteth: but to them that are feeble, old, fleu matyke, or
melancoly, is not convenient.

Of Wine. Cap. 19.
PLato, the wysest of all philosophers, does affirm, that wine moderatly
drunk, norysheth and comforts, as well all the body, as the spirits of man.
And therefore, god did ordeyne it for mankind, as a remedy against the
incommodities of aege: that thereby they should seem to return unto youth,
and forgette heaviness. Undoubtedly wine heateth and moysteth the body, which
qualities chiefly conserueth nature. And Galene of all wynes, commends that,
which is yelowe and clear, saing, That it is the hotest, and white wine lest
hot. And the color mean between both, of semblable temperature. The yelowe
wine, which is the proper color of very hot wynes, to old men does bring
these co^modites First it heateth al their members, also it purges by vryne,
the watery substance of the bloudde. Moreover the wynes, which be pale or
yelowe, and full of substance, they do increase bloudde, and nouryshe the body,
but for the more part old men have need of such wynes, which do provoke
urine: for as much as in them do abound watrye excrementes, or superfluities.
And they which do tarry long in the bealy, be not apt for aged men. Black or
deep red wines and thick, do bind and congele that which they do find in
the body, and although some of them do not long abide in the bealy, yet they
move not urine, but rather withdraws: but yet they do harm to old men, for
as much as they do stop the eu^dites of the spleen, the liver, and the
raynes. Alsoo gross wynes be best for them, which desire to be fat, but it
makes oppilations: old wine and clear is better for them, that be fleumatike.
Galene also prohibiteth chyldern to drink any Lib. 1. de tuenda sanitate.
wine, forasmoch as they be of an hot and moist temperature, and so is wine:
and therefore it heateth and moysteth to much their bodies, and fylleth their
heedes with vapors. More over, he would, that young men should drink little
wine, for it shall make them prone to fury, and to lechery: and that part of
the soul, which is called rationable, it shall make troublous and dull^: not
withstanding, yet it is sommetyme profitable to mitigate or expel ordure,
made of coler or melancolye. Also it profyteth against drythe, which happens
in the substance of the body, either by to much labor, or by the propre
temperature of age: for wine moysteth and nourysheth that, which is to dry,
also mytigateth and dissolueth the sharpenes of cholet, and purges it also by
urine and sweat: Finally (as Theognes says Much drinking of wine is ill, but
moderate drynkyng of wine is not only not ill, but also commodious and
profitable, which sentence is confyrmed by Jesus Syrac, in the book named
Ecclesiasticus, saying, wine moderatly drunk, reioyseth both the body and
Eccle. 3^.
soul. wherefore to conclude this chapyter, There is neither meat nor drink,
in the use whereof ought to be a more discrete moderation, than in wine,
considering that being good and drunk in due time and mesure, it not only
conserueth natural and radical moisture, whereby life in^ureth, but also it
helps the pryneypall members, which belong to digestyon, to do they^
office: On the other part, being ill or corrupt or taken out of order and
measure, it does contrary to all the premysses, besides that it transformeth a
man or woman, making them beastly. More of the qualities of wine, shall be
touched hereafter in the order of dyete.

Of Milk. Cap. 20.
Milk is comparte of three substaunces, cream, whey, and cruddes. The most
excellent milk is of a woman The milk of a cow is thyekest, the milk of a
cantlle is most subtle, the milk of a goote is between cow milk, and
camelle milk. Ewes milk is between cow milk and asses milk. Alsoo the
milk of beasts, fedyng in large pastures, and out of fennes and marsshes, is
better than of them, which be fed in little closes, or in watery grounds.
In spring time milk is most subtle, and milk of young beasts, is
holsomer, than of old. To chylderne, old men, and to them, which be
oppressed with melancolye, or have the flesh consumed with a fever ethike,
milk is convenient. And generally to all them, which do not feel the milk
rise in their stomokes, after that they have eaten it: and in those persons,
it does easyly pourge that, which is in the bealy superfluous. And afterward
it enters into the veins, and brings good nouryshement. Who so ever has an
appetit to eat or drink milk, to the entente that it shall not arise or
abrayde in the stomach, let him put in to a vessel, out of the which he will
receive it, a few leaves of myntes, sugar, or pure honye. And in to that
vessel cause the best to be milked, and so drink it warm from the vdder: or
else let him do as Paulus Aegineta teaches, that is to say, boil first the
milk with an easy fire, and sethe it after with a hotter fire, and skimme it
clean, and with a sponge deaped in cold water, take that clean away, which
would be burned to the vessel, than put to the milk salt and Oribasius de
confectione ciborum. li. 3.
sugar, and stere it often. More over milk taken to po^urge melancolye, would
be drunk in the morning abundantly new mylked, as is before written. And he
that drynketh, should absteyne from meat, and exercise, until the milk be
digested, and have somewhat pourged the bealy. For with labor it becomes
sour: and therefore it requires rest and watch, or to walk very softely.
Finally, where men and women be used from their chyldhode, for the more part,
to milk, and do eat none or little other meat, but milk and butter, they
appear to be of good complexion and facion of body, and not so much vexed with
sickness, as they which drink wine or ale: not withstanding much use of
milk in men sanguyne or choleryke, does engender the stone.

Of ale, biere, cider, and whay.
I Can neither here nor read, that ale is made and used for a commen drink in
any other cou^tray than England, Scotland, Ireland and Poyle. The latin word
Cereuitia, is indifferent as well to ale as biere, and the only difference
between them is, that biere has hoppes sodden in it, ale ought to have none.
If the corn be good, the water holsom and clean, and the ale or biere well
and perfytely brewed and cleansed, and by the space of.vi. days or more,
settled and defecate, it must needs be a necessary and convenient drink, as
well in syckenesse as in health: consyderyng that barley corn, where of it is
made, is commended, and used in medicine, in all parts of the world: and
accounted to be of a syngular efficacy, in reducyng the body into good temper,
specially which is in a distemperature of heat. For what ancient physician is
there, that in his works commends not ptysane, which is none other than pure
barley, brayed in a mortar, and sodden in water, the same thing is small and
clean ale or biere, saving that perchance, the drienge of the malte is cause
of more drythe to be in the ale, than in ptysane. And the hoppes in biere
makes it colder in operation. But to say as I think, I suppose, that neither
ale nor biere is to be compared to wine, considering, that in them do lack
the heat and moisture, which is in wine. For that being moderately used, is
most like to the natural heat and moisture of man's body. And also the
lykour of ale and biere, being more gross, do engender more gross vapors,
and corrupt humors, thanne wine does, being drunk in like excess of
quantity.

And one thing is to be noted, which was lately well marked, of a man of
excellent lerning, being vexed with the syknes of the stone. That in them,
which do always use to drink ale or bear the stone and grauel engendered in them,
is white of color: And in them, which do use to drink wine for the most
part, the stones and gravel, which be ingendreth in them, be read of
color. Not withstandyng commonly the color of the stone follows the humor,
which does most abound in the pacyent. As coler makes the gravel more
read, fleume makes it more white. Also some men do suppose, that red gravel
is engendered in the raynes: white gravel in the bladder. More over, who so
ever uses ingurgitation of ale or bicre, his breathe shall be more lothesome,
than the breathes of them, which do take the excess of wine: for the wine, by
the reason of his heat, is sooner digesteth, and does leave behind him, fewer
dregs. As for Cider, may not be good in any condition, considering (as I
say) that all fruytes do ingenderyll humors, and do cool to much natural
heat: but to them, which have abundaunce of reddecholer, moderately used, it
somewhat profits in mytigation of excessive heat. But who that will dyly
gently mark in the countrays, where syder is used for a common drink, the men
and women have the color of their vysage palled, and the skin of their
vysage ryueled, although that they be young. Whay if it be left of the butter,
bring well ordered, and not drunk, until it have a thycke curde of milk
over it like to a hatte, is a right temperate drink: forasmoch as by the
vn^tuositie of the butter, whereof the whay retayneth some portion, it is both
may and nouryshynge, and cleanses the breast: and by the subtylnesse of it
self, it desce^deth sone from the stomach, and is shortly digested. Also by
reason of the affinity, which it has with milk, it is conuertible into
bloudde and flesh, specially in those persons, which do inhabit the north
parts, in whom natural heat is conglutinate, and therefore is of more
puissaunce and virtue in the office of concoction. Also custom from chylhoode
does eleuate the power of meats and drynkes in their disposition, not
withstanding that the four humors, sangume, choler, fleume, and melancoly,
must also be considered as it shall apper^ in diverse places hereafter,

Of Honey. Cap. 22.
HOnye as well in meat as in drink (...) of incomparable efficacy, for it not
only cleanses, alters, and nourysheth, but also it long time preserves that
uncorrupted, which is put into it. In so much as Plini^ says, Such is the
nature of honey, that it suffered not the bodies to putrify. And he affirms,
that he did Pli. li. 22.
see an Hippocentaure (which is a beast half man, half horse) brought in
honye to Claudius the emperor out of Egypt, to Rome. And he tells also of
one Pollio Romulus, who was above a hundred years old, of whom Augustus the
emperor demanded, by what means he lived so long, and retained still the
vygoure or lyuelynesse of body and mind, Pollio answered, that he did it inward
with meade (which is drink made with honey and water) outward with oil. Which
saying agrees with the sentence of Democritus, the greatte philosopher: who
being demanded, how a man moughte live long in health, he answered, If he
wette him within with honey, without with oil The same philosopher, when he was
a hundred years old and nine, prolonged his life certain days with the
euaporation of honey, as Aristoxenus writes. Of this excellent matter, most
wonderfully wrought and gathered by the little be, as well of the pure dew of
heaven, as of the most subtyl humor of sweet and virtuous herbs and flowers,
be made likors commodious to mankind, as meade, metheglyn, and oxymel. Meade
which is made with one part of honey, and four times so much of pure water,
and boiled until no skymme do remain, is much commended of Galene, drunk in
summer, for preserving of Galen. de tuend. san. lib. 4.
^elthe. The same author always commends the using of honey, either raw
eaten with fine bread somewhat leuened, or sodden, and received as drink. Also
meade perfectly made, cleanses the breast and lunges, causes a man to spyt
easily, and to pysse abundantly, and purges the bealy moderately. Metheglyn,
which is most used in wales, by reason of hot herbs boiled with honey, is
hotter than meade, and more comfort a cold stomach, if it be perfectely
made, and not new or very stale. Oximell is, where to one part of vinegar is
put double so much of honey, four times as much of water, and that being
boiled unto the third part, and clean skymmed with a fether, is used to be
taken, where in the stomach is much fleume or matter vndygested, so that it
be not read choler, Look the use thereof in Alexandro Tralliano. Many other
good qualities of honye, I omytte to write of, until some other occasyon shall
happen, to remember them particularly, where they shall some to be profitable.

Sugar. Cap. 23.
OF sugar, I do find none ancient author of greeks or latynes, to write by
name, but only Paulus Aegineta, who says in this wise, after that he has
treated of honey, Moreover sugar, which they call honey, that is brought to us
from Arabia, callid felix, is not so sweet as our honey, but is equalle in
virtue, and does not anoy the stomach, nor causes thyrste. These be the words
of Paulus. It is now in daily experience, that sugar is a thing very
temperate and nouryshynge, and where there is choler in the stomach, or that
the stomach abhors honey, it may be used for honey in all things, wherein honey
is required to be.

Of time. Cap. 24.
IN the consyderation of time, for taking of meats and drynkes, it is to be
remembered, that in winter meats ought to be taken in great abundance, and of a
more gross substance than in summer, forasmoch as the exterior air, which
compasses the body being cold, causes the heat to withdraw into the inner
parts, where being enclosed, and contracte together in the stomach and
entrayles, it is of more force to boil and digest that, which is received into
it. Also meats roasted, ar tha^ better than sodden, and flesh and fish
powdered, is tha^ better than in summer. Herbs be not than commendable,
specially raw, neither fruits, except quynces roasted or baked, drynk should be
than taken in lyttel quantity. Moreover wines shall need no water, or very
litell, and that to coleryke persons: red wines, and they, which be thick
and sweet, may be than most surely taken of them, which have none
oppilations, or the stone. Always remember, that in winter fleume increases by
reason of rain and moystnesse of that season, also the length of nyghtes and
much rest. And therefore in that time cholerike persons, are best at ease,
semblably Gal. in comment. in apho. 2. li. 3.
are young men, but to old men winter is enemy. It begins the.viii. day
of November, and endures until the.viii. day of February.

The spryng time does participate the first part with winter, the latter
part, with summer. Wherefore if the first part be cold, than Hipocrat. (...)
humana.
shall the diete be according to winter. If the end be hot, than shall the
diete be of summer. If ^ot^e parts be temperate, than should there be also a
temperannce in diete: always consyderyng, that fleume yet remains, and blood
than (...)r^aseth meat would be less in quantity than (...)ynter, and drink
somewhat more. Spring time begins the.viii. day of February, (...)
continues until the.viii. day of May.

In semmer the inward heat is but little, and the stomach does not digest so
strongely nor quykly Gal. (...) in (...). (...). lib (...).
as in winter, wherefore in that season, eating often, and a little at ones, is
most convenient. And Damascenus says, that fasting in summer dries the
body, makes the color salowe, ingendreth melancoly, and hurts the sight.
also boiled meat, bread steped in white brothe, Hipocrates de (...)moribus.
with s^dden lettyse, or cykorie, are than good to be used also variety in
meats, but not at oone meal, potages made with cold herbs, drink in more
abundance, wine alayde with water, to hot complexions much, to cold natures
less. In this season bloudde increases, and toward the end thereof, choler.
And therefore they, which Galen in comment. in aphor.
be cold of nature and moist, are than best at case, hot natures and dry
wa^ste. More over, children, and very young men in the beginning of summer, are
holest, old folk in the latter end and in haruest^ somer begins the.viii.
day of May, and continues until the.viii. day of August.

Autumn begins the.viii. day of August, and ends the.viii. day of
November, that seson of the year is variable, and the air changeable, by
occasyo^ whereof, happen sundry siknessis, and blod decreaseth, and melancoly
abundeth: wherefore al su^mer fruits would tha^ be eschewed, forasmoch as they
make ill juice and winds in the body. In this time meat would be more
abundant than in somer, but somewhat drier: drink must be less in quantity,
but less myxte with water. This time is dangerous to all ages, al natures,
and all countrays, but the natures hot and moist, be lest indamaged.

Diete concerning sundry times of the year written by the old physician
D^ocles to king Antigonus.
FRom the.xii. day of December, at the which time the day is at the shortest,
until the nynthe day of March, which do conteyne lxxxx. days, reumes and
moystures do increase, than meats and drynkes naturally very hot, would be
moderately used, also to drink abundantly wine without alaye or with little
water, and to use lyberally the company of a woman, is not unwholesome to the
body.

FRom the nynth day of March, at which time is eaquinoctium vernu^, unto
the. xxv day of April, sweet fleume and bloudde do increase, therefore use than
things having much juice and sharp, exercise the body dilygently, than may
ye use safely the company of a woman.

From the xxv. day of Apryll. to the.xiiii. day of June, Choler increases,
than use all things, that are sweet, and do make the bealy soluble, forbear
carnal company with women.

From the.xiiii. day of June, at which time the day is at the le^gest, unto
the.xii. day of September, does melancoly reign, forbear lechery, or use it
moderately.

From the.xii. day of September, unto the xvii. day of October, do abound
fleume and thynne humors, than would all flures and distillations be
prohibited, than all sharp meats and drynkes and of good juice, are to be
used, and lechery eschewed.

From the.xvii. day of October, to the.xii. day of December, increases
gross fleume, use therefore all bitter meats, sweet wynes, fat meat, and
much exercise.

Of ages. Cap. 25.
Children would be nourysheth with meats Gal. de tu. san. li. 1. Chyldern.
and drynkes, which are moderately hot and moist, not withstanding Galene
does prohibit them the use of wine, because it moysteth and heateth to much
the body, and fylleth the heedes of them, which are hot and moist, with
vapors. Also he permits them in hot wether to drink clear water of the
fountain.

A child growing fast in his members toward a man, so that he seems well
fed in the body, is than to be feared of fulness of humors, Oribasins de
virtute simpli. li. 1.
and if it be perceived, that he is replete, than must be withdrawn and
minished some part of that nutriment, and according unto his age, some
euacuation would be devised, other while by exercise, walking up and down
fasting, and before that they eat any meat, let them exercise them selfs
with their own labors and do their own accustomed busynes, and eat the meats
whereunto they be most used, so that it be such, that may not hurt them. And
this need they not to know of physicians, but by experience and diligent
search by their stool, their norices shall perceive what dygesteth well, and
what does not.

But if it appear, that by excessive feeding the bealy of the child is fuller
and greater than it was wont to be, and that which passes by the bealy, is
corrupted, or his sweat stynketh, these things known, if they eat strong
meats, give them not one kind of meat, but diverse, that the novelty of the
meat may help, that they may go more easily to the stole. For if any have an
unreasonable appetite, he is sooner recovered, if he be pourged by a boil or
impostume comen forth and broken, before that the meat be corrupted: and
after that let him eat fine meats, and being ones hole, return by little
and little to his old custom.

Young men, excedyng the age of.xiiii. years, Young men
shall eat meats more gross of substance, colder and moyster: also salades of
cold herbs, and to drink seldom wine, except it be alayd with water. All be
it all these things must be tempred, according to their complexions, and
exercise and quietness in living, whereof ye shall reed in their proper
places hereafter.

Did men, in whom natural heat and strength Old men
seems to decay, should use always meats, which are of quality hot and
moist, and there with all easy to be digested, and absteyne utterly from al
meats and drinks, which will engender thick juice and slymy, semblably from
wine, which is thick, sweet, and dark red wines, and rather use them,
which will make thyn humors, and will purge well the bloudde by vryne:
therefore white or yelowe wynes, and perchance french clarette wynes, are for
them very com, Paulus Eg^^eta. li. 1. cap. 23.
mendable. Also wine prepared with pure honey clarified, wherein roots of
persely or fenelle be steped, specially if they suspecte any thing of the
stoone, or gout* And if they more desire to cleanse their raynes and bladder:
than is it good to use small white wine, as racked renishe wine, or other like
to it. and sommetyme to stepe over night therein a persely root slyt, and
somewhat bruysed, and a little lykorice. Finally, let them beware of all
meats, that will stop the poores, and make obstructions or oppilations, that
Opilatio^s what they are.
is to say, with clammy matter stop the places, where the natural humors
are wroughte and digested, the which meats I have before set in a table.
But if it chance them, to eat any such meat in abundance, let them take
shortly such things, as do resyste opilations, or resolve them. As white
pepper, bruised and myxte with their meats or drink: garlyke also or onyons,
if they abhor them not. Always remember, that aged men should eat often, and
but little at every time, for it fares by them, as it does by a lamp,
which is almooste extincte, which by powrynge in of oil little and little,
is long kept bournynge: and with much oil poured in at ones, it is clean
put out. Also they must forbear all things, which do engender melancolye,
whereof ye shall read in the table before: and breadde clean without leven, is
to them unwholesome.

Moderation in diet, having respect to the strength or weakness of the person.
Cap. 26.
Now here it must be considered, that all though I have written a general diet
for every age, yet netheles it must be remembered, that some children and young
men, either by debilite of nature, or by some accydentall cause, as syckenes,
or much study, happen to gather humors fleumatike or melancoly in the places
of digestio^, so that co^coction or digestion is as weak in them as in those,
which are aged Semblably some old men find nature so beneficyall unto them,
that their stomakes and lyuers are more strong to digeste, than the said
young men, some perchance have much choler remaining in them. In these
cases the said young men must use the diete of old men, or nygh unto it,
until the discrasy be removed, having always respect to their universal
complexions, as they, which are naturally cholerike, to use hot things in a
more temperance than they, which be fleumaticke, or melancolye by nature. The
same observation shall be to Hipocrat. aphor. Galen. in comment.
old men, saving that age, of his own propertye is cold and dry,
therefore the old man, that is cholerycke, shall have more regard to moisture
in meats, than the young man being of the same complexion. Foresene always,
that where nature is offended or grieved, she is curyd by that, which is
contrary to that, which offends or greueth, as cold by heat, heat by
cold, drythe by moisture, moisture by drythe. In that whereby nature should be
nourished in a hole and temperate body, things must be taken, which are
like to the man's nature in quality and degree. As where one has his body in a
good temper, things of the same temperance does nourysshe him. But where he
is out of temper, in heat, cold, moisture, or dryth, temperate meats or
drynkes, nothing do profyt him, for being out of the mean and perfyte
temperature, nature requires to be thereto reduced by contraries, remembrynge
not only, that contraries are remedy unto their contraries, but also in every
contrary, consideration be had of the proporcion in quantity.

Times in day concerning meals. Cap. 27.
Besides the times of the year, and ages, there be also other times of eating
and drinking to be remembered, as the sundry times in the day, which we call
meals, which are in noumber and dystaunce, according to the temperature of
the country and person: As where the country is cold, and the person lusty,
and of a strong nature, there may ^^o meals be used, or the less distance of
time between them. Contrariwise in contrary countrays and personages, the cause
is before rehearsed, where I have spoken of the diet of the times of the year,
not withsta^dyng here must be also consideration of exercise and rest, which
do augmente or apeireth the natural disposition of bodies, as shall be more
declared herafter in the chapter of exercise. But concerning the general usage
of countries, and admittyng the bodies to be in perfect state of health. I
suppose that in England young men, until they come to the age of.xl. years, may
well eat three meals in one day, as at breakefaste, dinner, and supper, so that
between breakefast and dinner, be the space of four hours at the least,
between dinner and supper.vi. hours, and the breakefast less tha^ the dinner,
and the dinner moderate, that is to say, less than saciete or fulness of bealy,
and the drink thereunto measurable, according to the dryenesse or moystnesse
of the meat. For much abundance of drynk at meal, drowned the meat eaten,
and not only lets convenient concoction in the stomach, but also causes it
to pass faster than nature requires, and therefore ingendreth much fleume,
and consequently reumes, and crudenes in the veins, debilitie and slyppernesse
of the stomach, contynuall flux, and many other inconveniences to the body and
members. But to return to meals, I think breakefastes necessary in this
realm, as well for the causes before rehearsed, as Brekefast.
also forasmoche as choler, being fervent in the stomach, sends up fumosities
unto the brayn, and causes heed ache, and sometime becomes aduste, and
smouldreth in the stomach, whereby happens peryllous sycknes, and sommetyme
sodayn death, if the heat enclosed in the stomach have not other convenient
matter to work on: this daily experience proves, and natural reason
confirms. Therefore men and women not aged, having their stomakes clean
without putrified matter, slepyng moderately and sondely in the night, and
feeling them self light in the morning, and sweet breathed, let them on
gods name break their fast: Coleryke men with gross meat, men of other
complexions with lyghter meat, fore seen, that they labor somewhat before:
semblably their dinner and supper, as I have before written, so that they sleep
not incontinent after their meals. And here I will not recite the sentences of
authors, which had never experience of english men's natures, or of the just
temperature of this realm of England, only this counsel of Hipocrates shall
Hipocrat. aphor. 13. lib. 1. Galen. de tuend. san.
be sufficient. We ought to grant somewhat to time, to age, and to custom:
not withstanding where great werynesse or drythe, grieved the body, there
ought the dinner to be the less, and the longer distance between dinner and
supper. alsoo much rest, except a little soft walkyng, that by an vpryght
mouyng, the meat being styred, may descend. This is always to be remembered,
that where one feleth him self full, and grieved with his dinner, or the sauoure
of his meat by erurtation asce^deth or that his stomach is weke by late
syckenesse or much study, than is it most convenient, to absteyne from supper,
and rather provoke him self to sleep much, than to eat or drink any
thing. Also to drink between meals, is not laudable, except very great
thirst constrayneth, for it interrupteth the office of the stomach in
concoction, and causes the meat to pass faster than it should do, and the
drink being cold, it rebukes natural hete, that is workyng, and the meat
remaynyng raw, it corrupts dygestyon, and makyth crudenesse in the veins,
wherefore he that is thyrsty, let him consider the occasyo^. If it be of salt
fleume, let him walk fair and softely, and only wasshe his mouth, and his
throote with barley water, or small ale, or lie down and sleep a little, and
so the thyrste will pass away, or at the least be well assuaged. If it happen
by extreme heat of the air, or by pure choler, or eating of hot spices,
let him drink a little iulep made with clean water and sugar, or a little
small biere or ale, so that he drink not a great glutte, but in a little
quantity, let it still down softly into his stomach, as he sytteth, and than
let him not move suddenly. If the thyrste be in the euenyng, by eating to
much, and drinking of wine, than after the opinion of the best learned
physicians, and as I my self have often experienced, the best remedy is, if
there be no fever, to drink a good draught of cold water, immediately, or else
if it be not peynefull for him to vomyte, to provoke him thereto with a lyttel
warm water, and after to wash his mouth with vinegar and water, and so to
sleep long and soundly, if he can. And if in the morning he feel any
fumosities rysyng, than to drink iulep of violettes, or for lack thereof, a
good draught of very small ale or biere somewhat warmed, without eating any
thing after it.

Of dyuersitie of meats eaten whereby health is appaired. Cap. 28.
NOw let this be a general rule, that sundry meats, being diverse in
substance and quality, eaten at one meal, is the greatest ennemy to health,
that may be, and that which ingendreth most siknesses, for some meats being
gross, and hard to dygeste, some fine and easy to dygest, do require diverse
operations of nature, and diverse temperatures of the stomach, that is to say,
much heat and temperate heat, which may not be together at one time.
Therefore when the fine meat is suffycientlye boiled in the stomach, the gross
meat is raw, so both iuyces, the one good and petfite, the other gross and
crude, at one time dygested, and sent into the veins and body, needs must
health decay, and sycknesses be engendered. Likewise in diverse meats being
diverse qualities, as where some are hot and moist, some cold and moist, some
hot and dry, some cold and dry, according there unto shall the juice be
diverse, which they make in the body. And like as between the said qualities is
contrariety, so thereby shall be in the body an unequal temperature, forasmoch
as it is not possible for man to esteem so just a proporcyon of the qualities
of that, which he receives, that the one shall not excede the other in
quantity. wherefore of the said unequal mixture, needs must ensue corruption,
and consequently syknesse. And theofore to a hole man, it were better, to feed
at one meal competently on very gross meat only, so that it be sweet, and
his nature do not abhor it, than on diverse fine meats, of sundry substance
and qualities. I have known and seen old men, and old women, which eating
only befe, baken, chese, or curdes, have continued in good health, whom I have
prouyd, that when they have eaten sundry fine meats at one meal, have sone
after felt them self grieved with frettinges and head ache, and after that they
have been hole again, there has been given to them one kind of light meat,
they have done as well therewith, as they were wont to do with gross meats,
when they eat it alone, which proves to be true that which I have rehearsed.
And it is good reason, for after the general opinion of philosophers and
physicians, the nature of mankind is best content with things most simple
and vnmixte, all things tendynge to unity, wherein is the only perfection.
Also it is a general rule of phisyke, that where a syckenes may be cured with
symples, that is to say, with one only thing, that is medieinable, there
should the physician give no co^pounde medicyne myxte with many things.

These things considered, it may seem to all men, that have reason, what abuse
is here in this realm in the contynuall gourmandyse and daily fedynge on
sundry meats, at one meal, the spirit of gluttony, triumphynge among us is
his gloryouse charyot, called welfare, dryuynge us before him, as his prisoners,
into his du^gcon of Glutony.
surfeit, where we are tur^edted with catarres, fevers, goutes, pleuresies,
freitynge of the guts, and many other sycknesses, and finally cruelly put to
death by them, oftentimes in youth, or in the most pleasant time of our life,
when we would most gladly live. For the remedy whereof, how many times have
there ben dyuised ordynaunces and acts of counsel, although perchance
bodyly health was not the chyefe occasyon thereof, but rather provision against
vain and sumptuous expenses of the mean people. For the nobility was
exempted and had liberty to abide still in the dongeon, if they would, and to
live less while than other men: But when, where, and how long were the said
good denyses put in due execution, for all that thereof should succeed double
profit, that is to say, health of body, and increse of substance, by eschewyng
of superfluous expenses in sundry dyshes? Alas how long will men fantasye
laws and good ordynaunces, and never determyne them. Fantasy proceeds of
wit, dete, mination of wisdom, wit is in the deuysyng and speaking, but
wisdom is in the performance, which rests ouely in execution. Here I had
almost forgotten, that my purpose was to write of the order of diete, and not
of laws, but the feruente love that I have to the publyque weal of my
countray, constrained me to digress somewhat from my matter: but now will I
proceed forth to write of order, which in taking of meats and drynkes, is
not the least part of diete.

Of order in receiuynge of meat and drink. Cap. 29.
Herbs as well sodden, as vnsodden, also fruytes, which do mollyfye and
louse the bealy, ought to be eaten before any other meat, except that
sommetyme for the repressynge of fumosities, rysynge in the heed by much
drynkyng of wine, raw lettyse, or a cold appull, or the juice of orenges or
lymons may be taken after meals in a lyttel quantity. More over all brothes,
milk, rere eggs, and meats, which are purposely taken to make the bealye
soluble, would be first eaten. All fruits and other meats, that are styptike
or byndyng, would be eaten last after all other. Fruits confectionate
specially with honey, are not to be eaten with other meats. But here is it to be
dylygentelye noted, that where the stomach is coleryke and strong, gross
meats would be first eaten; where the stomach is cold or weak, there would
fine meats be first eaten: for in a hot stomach, fine meats are bourned,
while the gross meat is digesting. Contrary wise in a cold stomach, the
lyttel heat is suffocate with gross meat, and the fine meat left raw, for
lack of concoction, where if the fine meat be first taken moderatly, it
stereth up and comfort natural heat, and makes it more able to concoct
gross meats, if they be eaten afterward: so that it be but in small
quantity. not withstandyng, as I late affirmed, one manner of meat is most
sure to every complerion. foresene that it be always most commonly in conformity
of qualities, with the person that eats. Moreover take heed, that slipper
meats be not first eaten, lest it draw with it to hastily other meats, or
they be digested, nor that stiptik or restraining meatis, be taken at the
beginning as quynces, pears, and medlars, lest they may let other meats,
that they descend not into the bottom of the stomach, where they should be
digested, not withstanding the co^fection made with the juice of quynces,
callid Dacitonites, taken two hours before dinner, or supper, is commended of
Galene, and other, for restoryng appetite, and making good concoction. Also
concerning drink at meals, it would not be before, that somewhat were eten. And
at the beginning the drink would be strongest, and so toward the end more small,
if it be ale or bear, and if it be wine more and more alaide with water. And
after the better opinion of phisicions, the drink would rather be mixte with the
meat by sundry little draughtes, than with one great draught at thend of the
meal, for the mixture tempreth well the meat without anoyance, a great draught
with much drink, drowneth the meat, rebukes natural hete, that than works
in concoction, and with his weight drives down the meat to hastily. Hot
wines and sweet, or co^fectioned with spices, or very strong ale or bear, are not convenient at meals, for the meat is by them rather corrupted, tha^
digested, and they make hot and stinking vapors ascend up to the brains. All
be it if the stomach be very wyndy, or so cold and feeble, that it can not
concoct such a quantity of meat, as is required to the suffycyent
nourishement of the body of him that eats, or has eaten raw herbs or
fruits, where by he feleth some anoyance, than may he drink last incontinent
after his meal, a little quantity of secke, or good aqua vite in small ale:
but if he have much choler in his stomach or a heed full of vapors, it were
much better, that he did neither drink the one, nor the other, but rather eat
a little colyander sede prepared, or a piece of a quince roasted, or in
marmelade, and after rest, to amend the lack of nature with sleep, moderate
exercise, and playsters provided for comfortynge of the stomach. And here will
I leave to write any more of the diete in eating and drinkyng, saving that I
would, that the reders should have in remembrance these two counsayles. First,
that to an hole man, to precise a rule is not convenient in diete: and that the
diseases, which do happen by to much abstinence, are wars to be cured, than
they which come by replecion. Cor. Ccl. li. l. cap. 1.
And as Cornelius Celsus says, A man that is hole and well at ease, and is at
his liberte, ought not to bind him self to rules, or need a physician: but
yet where the stomach is feeble, as is of Ide^, ca. 2.
the more part of citesyns, and well nigh al they that be studious in lernyng
or weighty affairs, there ought to be more circumspection, that the meat may
be such, as that either in quality or quantity, nature being but feeble, but
not rebuked, or to much oppressed.

Of sleep and watch. Cap 30.
THe commodity of moderate sleep, appears by this, that natural heat,
which is occupied about the matter, whereof proceeds nouryshement, is
comforted in the places of dygestion, and so digestion is made better, or more
perfect by sleep, the body fatter, the mind more quiet and clear. the humors
temperate: and by much watch all things happen contrary. The moderacyon of
sleep must be measured by health and syckenesse, by age, by time, by
emptynesse or fullness of the body, and by natural complexions. First to a
hole man, having no devilitie of nature, and digestynge perfytely the meat
that eats, a little sleep is sufficient: but to them, which have weak
stomakes, and do digeste slowely, it requires, that sleep be much lengar.
semblable temperance is required in youth and age, winter and summer. The body
being full of ill humors, very little sleep is sufficient, except the humors
be crude or raw, for than is sleep necessary, which digesteth them better, than
labor. Semblably, where the body is long empty, by long sycknesse or
abstinence, sleep comfort nature, as well in the principal members, as in
all the other. Also regard must be had to the complexion, for they that are
hot and do eat little, and digeste quickly, a little sleep serves,
specially to choleryke persons, for in them much sleep augmenteth heat, more
than is necessary, whereby hot fumes and inflammations are often engendered, and
sometime the natural choler is aduste or putryfied, as experience teaches.
Fleumatike persons at naturallly inclyned to sleep: and because they engender
much humors, they require more sleep than sanguine or cholerike. Persons
having natural melancoly, not procedynge of choler aduste, do require very
much sleep, which in them comfort the powers animal, vital, and
natural, which ye may find written in the tables preceding Sleep would be
taken not immediatelye after meals, and before that the meat is dyscended
from the mouth of the stomach. For thereby is engendered pains and noise in
the belly, and digestion corrupted, and the sleep by ill vapors, ascendyng,
made unquiet and troublous. More over immoderate sleep makes the body apt
unto palseys, apoplexis, falling sycknes, reumes, and impostumes. Also it
makes the wits dull, and the body slow and unapt to honest exercise.
Scmblably immoderate watch dries to much the body, and does debilytate the
powers animal, lets digestion, and makes the body apt to consumptions.
Wherefore in these two things, as well as all other, a diligent temperance is
to be used the moderation is best coniected for it is hard perfytely to know
it) by the sensible lyghtnes of all the body, specially of the brain, the
brows, and the eyes, the passage down of the meat from the stomach, the will
to make urine, and to go to the stool. Contrary wise, heuines in the body and
eyes, and savor of the mete before eaten, signifies that the sleep was not
sufficient. They that are hole must sleep first on the right side, because the
meat may approach to the liver, which is to the stomach, as fire under the
pot, and by him is digested. To them, which have feeble digestion, it is good
to sleep prostrate on their bealyes, or to have their bare hand on their
stomakes. Lyeng upright on the back, is to be utterly abhorred.

The commodity of exercise, and the time when it should be used. Cap. 31.
EVery menynge is not an exercise, but only that which is vehement, the end
whereof, is alteration of the breath or wynd of a man Of exercise do proceed two
commodities, euacuation of excreme^tes, and also good habit of the body. for
exercise being a vehement motion, there of needs must ensue hardness of the
members, whereby labor shall the less grieve, and the body be the more strong
to labor. also thereof comes augmentation of heat, whereby happens the more
attraction of things to be dygested, also more quycke alteration, and better
nourysshynge More over, that al and syngular parts of the body, be therewith
somewhat humected. whereby it happens, that things hard be mollifyed moist
things are extenuate, and the pores of the body ar more opened. And by the
violence of the breath or wynd, the pores are cleansed, and the fylthe in the
body naturally expelled. This thing is so necessary to the preservation of
health, that without it, no man may be long without sycknesse, which is
affyrmed by Lornelius Lelsus, Cor. Cel. lib. 1.
saying, that sluggyshnes dulleth the body, labor does strength it, the first
brings the in commodities of age shortly, the last makes a man long time
lusty. Not withstanding in exercise ought to be four things diligently
considered, that is to say, the time, the things precedyng, the quality and
the quantity of exercise.

First as concerning the time convenient for exercise, that it be not when
there is in the stomach or bowels, great quantity of meat not suffycyently
dygested, or of humors crude or raw, less thereby peril might ensue by
conueyance of them into all the members, before those metes Galen. de tuend.
san. lib. 1.
or humors be concocte or boiled suffyeyently. Galen says, that the time
most convenient for exercise is, when both the first and second digestyon is
complete, as well in the stomach, as in the veins, and that the time
approaches to eat (...). For if ye do exercise sooner or later, ye shall
either fill the body with crude humors, or else augment yelowe choler. The
knowledge of this time is perceived by the color of the urine, for that which
rese^bleth unto clear water betokens, that the juice, which comes from the
stomach, is crude in the veins: that which is well colouryd; not to high or
base, betokens that the second digestion is now perfyte: where the color is
very high or read, it sygh^^fyet(...) that the concoction is more thanne
suffycyent. Wherefore when the vryne appears in a temperate color, not read
nor pale, but as it were gylt, than should exercise have his beginning.

Of fricasies or rubbynges precedynge exercise. Cap. 32.
AS touching things procedynge exercise, for asmoch as it is to be feared,
lest by vehement exercise any of the excreme^ Galenus. Paulus. Oribasius,
Actius.
tes of the bealy or bladder, should hastily be received into the habyte of the
body, by the vyolence of heat, kendled by exercise: also lest (...) thing,
which is hole, be by heuyness^ (...) (...)tes, or vyolent motion, broken or
(...) out of his place, or that the excrementes, by violence of the breathe,
should stop the po^^res or (...)dytes of the body, it shall be necessary
little and little, by chafynge the body, first to mollifye the parts
consolydate, and to ex(...)te or make thynne the humors, and to lowse and open
the poores, and than shall ensue to him that exercises, no peril of
obstruction or rupture. And to bring that to pass, it shall be expedient,
after that the body is cleansed, to rub the body with a course lynnen clothe,
first softely and easilye, and after to increase more and more, to a hard and
swyfte rubbing, until the flesh do swelle, and be somewhat ruddy, and that
not only down right, but also overthwart and round Some do use fricasies in
this form, in the morning, after that they have been at the stole, with their
shirte sleues or bare hand, if their flesh be tended, they do first softely,
and afterward faster, rub their breast, and sides downewarde, and
ouerthwarte, not touching their stomach or bealy, and after cause their
servant semblably to rub overthwart their shoulders, and back, beginning at
their neckbone, and not touching the raynes of their back, except they do
feel there much cold and wind, and afterward their legs from the knees to
the ancle: last their arms from the elbowe to the hand wreste. And in this
form of fricasy I my self have founded an excellent commodity. Old men, or
they, which be very dry in their bodies, if they put to some sweet oils, as
Yrinum, Nardiu^, Chamemelinum, or other like, myxte with a little sweet oil of
rooses, I suppose they do well. I will not here speak of oyntementes used in ode
time among the Romans and Greeks, in fry(...) or rubbynges. For I suppose,
that they were never here used. and in the said places, they be also left,
onelesse it be in palsies, or apoplexies, or against the rigor, which happens
in fevers, only. I will remember the saying of Hipocrates, Fricasye has
power to lowse, to bind, to increase flesh, and to mynysshe hit. For hard
fryeasies do bind or consolidate, soft rubbing does lowse or mollyfye,
much does mynyshe flesh, mean rubbing does augment or increase it. He
that will know more abundantly hereof, let him read the book of Galene of
the preservation of health, called in latyne Detuenda sanitate, translated most
truly and eloquentely, out of Greek into latin, by doctor Linacre, late
physician of most worthy memory to our soueraygne lord king Henry the eight.
The same mattier is written more briefly of Paulus Aegineta, Oribasius, Aetius
and some other late writers, but unto Galene not to be compared.

The diversities of exercises. Cap. 33.
THe quality of exercise, is the dyuersytie thereof, forasmoche as therein be
many differences in mouynge, and also some exercise moves more one part of
the body, some another. In difference of mouynge, some is slow or soft, some
is swyfte or fast: some is strong or violent, some be myxte with strength and
swiftness. Strong or violent exercyses be these, deluyng (specially in tough
clay and heavy) bearyng or susteynynge of heavy burdeynes, clymmyng or walking
against a stiepe upright hill: holding a rope, and clymmyng up thereby, hangyng
by the hands on any thing, above a man's reach, that his fete touch not
the ground: standing and holding up, or spreadynge the arms, with the
hands fast closed, and abiding so a long time. Also to hold the arms
steadfast, causynge an other man, to assay, to pulle them out, and not
withstanding he keeps his arm steadfast, inforcynge thereunto the synewes and
muscles. wrastlynge also with the arms and legs, if the persons be equal
in strength, it does exercise the one and the other: if the one be stronger,
than is it to the weaker a more vyolent exercise. All these kinds of
exercises, and other like them, do augmente strength, and therefore they serve
only for young men, which be inclyned, or be apt to the wars. Swyfte
exercise without violence is, runnynge, playenge with weapons, tenyse, or
throwynge of the balle, trottyng a space of ground forward and backewarde,
going on the toes, and holding up the hands. Also styrrynge up and down
his arms, without plummettes. Vehement exercise is compounde of vyolent
exercise, and swyfte, when they are joined together at oone time, as daunsynge
of galyardes, throwynge of the balle, and rounnynge after it: footeballe play
may be in the number thereof, throwynge of the long darte, and contynuynge it
many times, ronnynge in harneys, and other like.

The moderate exercise is long walking or going a iourneye. The parts of the
body have sundry exercises appropryed unto them, as runnynge and going is the
most proper for the legs. Mouynge of the arms up and down, of stretchynge
them out, and playenge with weapons, serves most for the arms and shulders,
stoupynge and rysynge oftentyme, or lyftynge great weightes, taking up
plummettes or other like poyses on the ends of staves, and in like wise,
lyftyng up in every hand a spear or mortspyke by the ends, specyallye
crossynge the hands, and to lay them down again in their places, these do
exercise the back and loins. Of the bulk and lunges the proper exercise is
meuynge of the breathe in singing or cryenge. The entrayles, which be
underneath the myddreffe, be exercysed by blowynge, either by constraynte, or
playenge on Shaulmes, or Sackbottes, or other like instruments, which do
require much wind. The Musc^les are best exercysed with holding the breath
in, a long time, so that he which does exercise, has well dygested his
meat, and is not troubled with much wind in his body. Finally loud
redynge, counterfayte battle, tenyse, or throwynge the balle, runnynge,
walking, Celsus. 1.
add to shotyng, which in mine opinion excede all the other, do exercise the
body commodiousely. Always remember, that the end of violent exercise, is
difficultye in fetching of the brethe. Of moderate exercise, alteration of
breath only, or the beginning of sweat. More over in winter, runnynge, and
wrastlynge, is convenient. In summer wrastlynge a little, but not runnynge. In
very cold wether, much walking, in hot wether, rest is more expedyent. They
which seem to have moist bodies, and live in ydelnesse, they have need of
vyolent exercise(...) They which at lean and choleryke, must walk softly, and
exercise them selfs very temperatly. The plummettes, called of Galen Alteres,
which are now much used with great men, being of equal weight, and
according to the strength of him, that exercises, are very good to be used
fasting, a little before brekefaste or dinner, holding in every hand one
plummet, and lyftynge them on high, and bringing them down with much
vyolence, and so he may make the exercise vyolent, or moderate, after the
poyse of the plummettes, heuyer or lyghter, and with much or little
labourynge with them.

Of Gestation, that is to say, where one is carried, and is of an other thing
meued, and not of him self. Cap. 34.
THere is also an other kind of exercise, which is called Gestation, and is
myxte with mouynge and rest. For as much as Paul. (...). Actius.
the body, syttyng or lyeng, seems to rest, and not withstandyng it is meued
by that, which bears it, as lyenge in a bed, having by cords or chains,
or in a cradell, syttinge in a chair, which is carried on men's shulders with
staves, as was the use of the ancient Romans or sitting in a boot or barge,
which is rowed, riding on a horse, which aumbleth very easilye, or goth a
very soft pace. The bed, cradel, and chair carried, serves for them, that
are in long and continual syckenesse, or be lately recovered of a fever Also
them, which have the frenesye or letarge, or have a light terciane fever, or
a cotidiane. This exercise swetely asswageth troubles of the mind, and
provoke sleep, as it appears in chylderne, which are rocked. Also it is
convenient for them, which have the palsy, the stoone, or the gout.
Gestation in a charyotte or wagon has in it a shaking of the body, but some
vehement, and some more soft, the soft serves in dyseases of the head, and
where any matter runs down into the stomach and entrayles. But the vehement
shaking is to be used in the griefs of the breast and stomach. Also in
swellyng of the body and legs in dropsies, palseys, mygrimes, and scotomies,
which is an imagination of darkness, being reto^utned, at the end of his
iourneye, he must sytte up, and be easily moved. I have known, says Aetius,
many persons in such wise cured without any other help. Navigations or rowing
nigh to the land, in a clame water, is expedient for them that have dropsies,
lepries, palsepes, called of the vulgar people, takynges, and fransies. To be
carried on a rough water, it is a vyolent exercise, and induces sundry
affections of the mind, sometime fear, sometime hope, now coward heart, now
hardiness, one while pleasure, an another while dyspleasure. These exercises,
if they be well tempered, they may put out of the body, all long during
syckenesses. For that which is myxte with rest and menynge, if any thing
else may, it most excellently causes the body to be well nourysshed.
Celsus, Celsus. 2.
does prohybite gestation, where the body feleth pain, and in the beginning of
fevers, but when they cease, he aloweth it.

Riding moderately, and without gryefe, it does corroborate the spyrite and
body above other exercyses, specially the stomach, it cleanses the senses, and
makes them more quycke: all be it to the breast it is very noyfull. It ought
to be remembered, that as well this, as all other kinds of exercise, would be
used in a hole countreye, and where the air is pure and uncorrupted. Foresene,
that he that woll exercise, do go first to the stool, for the causes rehearsed
in the last chapter.

Of vociferation. Cap. 35.
THe chief exercise of the breast and instruments of the voice, is
vociferacion, which is synging, redyng, or crienge, whereof is the property,
that it purges natural heat, and makes it also subtle and stable, and
makes the members of the body substancyall and strong, resystynge diseases.
This exercise would be used, of persons short wynded, and them, which can
not fetch their brethe, but holdyng their neck straight upright. Also of
them, whose flesh is consumed, specially about the breaste and shoulders.
also which have had apostume^ broken in their breasts: moreover of them that
are hoorse by the much moisture. and to them, which have quartene fevers, it
is convenient, it louseth the humor, that stycketh in the breast, and dries up
the moystenesse of the stomach, which properly the course of the quartayne is
wont to bring with him, it also profits them which have feeble stomakes, or
do vomyte contynually, or do break up sowrenesse out of the stomach. It is
good also for grefes of the heed. He that intends to attempt this exercise,
after that he has been at the stool, and softly rubbed the lower parts, and
washed his hands. Let him speak with as base a voice as he can, and
walking, begin to sing louder and louder, but still in a base voice, and to
take no head of sweet tunes or armonye. For that nothing does profit unto
health of the body, but to enforce him self to sing greatte, for thereby much
air drawn in by fetchyng of breath, thrustyth forth the breast and stomach,
and opens and inlargeth the poores. By high crienge and loud reading, are
expellyd superfluouse humors. Therefore me^^e and women, having their bodies
feeble, and their flesh lowse, and not fyrme, must read oftentimes loud,
and in a baase voice, extendynde out the wind pype, and other passages of the
breathe.

But notwithstanding, this exercise is not used always, and of all persons. For
they in whom is abundance of humors corrupted, or be much diseased with
crudite in the stomak and veins, those do I counsel, to abstain from the
exercise of the voice, lest much corrupts juice or vapors, may thereby be
into all the body dystrybuted. And here I conclude to speak of exercise,
which of them, that desire, to remain long in health, is most diligently, and
as I might say, most scrupulousely to be observed.

THE THIRD BOOK.
Of replecion. Cap. 1.
REPLECION IS A superfluous abundance of humors in the body: and that is in
two manner of wise, that is to say in quantity, and in quality. In quantity,
as where all the four humors are more in abu^daunce, that be equalle in
proporcion to the body, that conteyneth them, or where one humor much
excedeth the remnaunt in quantity. In qualytie, as where the bloudde or other
humor, is hotter, or colder, thycker or thynner, that is convenient unto the
body. First where all the humors, being superfluousely increased, fylleth
and extends the receptories of the body, as the stomach, the veins, and
bowels, and is most properly callid fullness, in greek Plethora, in latin
Plenitudo.

The other is where the body is infarced, either with choler, yelowe or black,
or with fleume, or with watery humors, and is properly called in greek,
Cacochymia, in latin Viciosus succus, in englysh it may be callid corrupt
juice. I will not here write, the subtyl and abundant definitions and
descriptions of Galen in his books de Plenitudine, and in his commentaries
upon the aphorssmes of hipocrates. For it shall here suffyse, to show the
operations of replecion good or ill, rymyttynge them, which be curious, and
desire a more ample declaration, to the most excellent warkes of Galene, where
he may be satisfied, Li. (...). aph.
if he be not determined to repougne against reason. Hipocrates says, where
meat Apho. 15. Vbi cibus praeter na tura^ plus igestus est hic morbu^ facit.
Galen. in co^me^. lopraedicto.
is received much above nature, that makethe syckenesse. Galene declarynge
that place says, More meat than accords with natures measure, is named
replecion. And afterward he expounds that word above nature, to signify to
much and superfluously as who says, where the meat is superfluously taken, it
makes sickness. For meat but a little exceeding temperance, may not forthwith
make syckenesse, but may yet keep the body within the latitude or bounds of
health, for the meat that shall make syckenes, must not a little excede the
exquisite measure. The incommoditie, which happens thereby is, that moystnesse
is to much extended. and natural heat is debilitate. Also naturalle heat
resolves somewhat of the superfluouse meat and drink. And of that, which is
resolved of meat undigested, proceeds fumosytie gross and vndygested, which
ascendynge up into the heed, and touching the ryme, wherein the brain is
wrapped, causes heed ache, tremblyng of the members, duskyshnes of the sight,
and many other sycknesses: also by the sharpnes thereof, it prycketh and
annoyeth the synewes, which make sensibilitie, the roots of whom, ar in the
brayn, and from thense passes through all the body. Finally, the said
fumositie, engendered of repletion, percynge the innermost part of the said
synewes, called sensible, it grievously annoyeth the power animal, there
consystynge, by the occasion whereof, understanding and reason, as to the use of
them, are let and troubled. And also the tongue, which is reasons exposytour,
is depryued of his office, as it appears in them, which are drunk, and them,
which have grievous pains in their heed, procedyng of replecion. Signs of
replecion be these, loss of appetyte, delight in nothing, slothfulness,
dullness of the wit, and senses, more sleep, than Oribasius Euporisto^ lib.
(...).
was accustomed to be, crampes in the body, ster tynge or saltion of the
members, fullness of the veins, and thyckenes of the pulsis, horror or
shrouelynge of the body myxte with heat. The remedies are abstynence, and all
euacuations, whereof I will make mencyon in the next Chapyter.

Of euacuacion. Cap. 2.
THe meats and drynkes received into the body, if the stomach and liver do
their natural office, be altered by concoction and digestion, in such wise
that the best part thereof goth to the nouryshment of the body: the warste,
being separate by the members official, from the residue, are made
excrementes in sundry fourmes, and substaunces, which ar^ like in quality to
the natural humor, which than raygneth most in the body. These excrementes
Excrementes.
be none other, but matter superfluous, and unsavory, which by natural powers
may not be converted into flesh, but remaining in the body corrupt the
members, and therefore nature abhorrynge them, desires to have them
expels. These excrementes be three in number, ordure, urine, humor
superfluouse. More over Ordure.
there be two sorts of ordure, that is to say, one digested, which passes by
siege, the other vndygested, Dygestyd.
which is expelled by vomyte. where I say dygested, I mean, that it is
passed the stomach, and turned into an another figure. Like wise I call that
undigested, which still retayneth the figure of meat. Urine is the watrye
Urine
substance of the bloudde, like as whaye is of milk, which out of the meat
that is altered and concocte or boiled in the stomach, is strayned in the
veins called Mesaraice, which proceeds from the holowe part of the liver,
and sent by the raynes into the bladder, passethe by the Instrumente, the
which is ordained as well to that purpose, as for Generation.

Humor superfluouse is in three sorts, either Humor superfluous.
myxte with any of the four humors, called natural, or else it is gathered
into the brain, or it is between the skin and the flesh, or lies among
the synewes, Muscules or joints. Of humors some are more gross and cold,
some are subtle and hot, and are called vapour^. Now for to expelle the said
excrementes, are.ix. sundry kinds of euacuation, that is to say, abstynence,
vomyte, purgation by siege, lettynge of bloudde, scarifienge called cuppynge,
sweating, provocation of urine, spyttynge, bledyng at the nose, or by
hemorrodes: And in women, their natural purgations. Of these euacuations I
wy^^ briefly declare, with the commodities, which by the discrets use of
them do happen unto the body.

Of abstinence. Cap. 3.
ABstinence is a forbearynge to receive any meat or drink. For if it be but
in part, it is than called rather temperance than abstinence. It ought to be
used only after replecion, as the proper remedy therefore. And than if it be
moderate, it consumes superfluities, Cel. lib. (...). Hipocrat. apho. li. 7.
and in consumynge them, it clarifieth the humors, makes the body fair
colored, and not only keeps out syckenesse, but also where sychenesse is
entered, nothing more helps, if it be used in season. To them, which have
very moist bodies, hunger is right expediente, for Considerations in
abstinence.
it makes theyin more dry, not withstanding there ought to be
consyderations, in the meat before eaten, in the age of the person, in the
time of the year, and in custom. First in the meat before eaten, if it be
much in excess or very gross, or not much exceeding, or light of
digestyon, and according thereto, would abstynence more or less be
proporcioned. Concerning age, Hipocrates says, old men may sustain Apho.
li. 1.
fasting easilye: next unto them, men of myddell age, young men may wars
bear it, chylderne warst of all, specially they that be lustye, not
withandynge, here Galene corrects Hipocrates, saying, that he should have
excepted men Galen. in comment.
very old, who, as experience declares, must eat often and little. As
touching time, it must be remembered, that in winter and spring time, the
stomakes be naturally veeye hot, and sleep is long, and therefore in that
time meats would be more abundaunt, and all though much be eaten, it will be
sooner digested. wherefore abstinence woide not be than so much as in summer,
all be it to absteyne much in summer, except it be after replecion. Damascene
says, it dries the body, it makes the color Damaseenus apho.
salowe, it ingendreth melancoly, and hurts the syghte. More over, custom
may not be forgotten, for they, which are used from chyldhode, to eat sundry
meals in the day, would rather be reduced to fewer meals, and lyttelle
meat, than to be compelled to abstaynevtterly, to the intent, that nature,
which is made by custom, be not rebuked, and the power digestyue thereby
debilitate. And note well, that by to much abstinence, the moisture of the
body is withdrawe^ and consequentely the body dries, and waxes lean:
natural heat, by withdrawynge of moisture, is to much intended, and not
findyng humor to warke in, tourneth his vyolence to the radical or
substantial moisture of the body. and exhaustyng that humor, brings the
body into a consumption. wherefore Hipocrates says, Apho. li. (...)
that to scarce and exquisite an order in meat and drink, is for the more
part more daungerouse than that, which is more abundant. Contrarywyse
moderation in abstinence, according to the said consyderatyons, is to health a
sure bulwark.

Of Vomit. Cap. 4.
THe meat or drink superfluous, or corrupted in the stomach, is best expellyd
by vomyte, if it be not very grievous to him which is diseased. Also the
moderate Aetius. li. 1
use of it, pourgeth fleume, lights the heed, causes that the excess of
meats or drynkes, shall not anoy or bring syckenesse. Moreover it ame^deth
the affectis of the raynes, bladder, and the fundement. It also helps against
lepries, cankers, goutes, dropsies, and also diverse sicknesses procedyng of the
stomach. For-yf any grefs happens of the head, vomyte is than vncommodyous. It
is better in winter, than in summer. Also good for them, which are replete, or
very choleryke, if tkey have not well dygested. but it is ill for them, that
be lean, or have weak stomakes. And therefore where one feleth bitter vapors
rysynge out of his stomach, with grief and weyghtynesse, in the over parts
of his body, let him room forthwith to this remedy. It is also good for
him that is heart burned, and harh much spyttell, or his stomach wambleth, and
for him that remeueth into sondrye places. Yet I coumsaye says Celsus, him
that will be Cells. lib. 1.
in health, and would not be to soon aged, that he use not this daily. And I my
self have (...) men, which daily using it have brought thereby their stomakes
into such custom, that what so ever they did eete, they could not long
retain it, whereby they shorten their lives. wherefore it would not be used, but
only where great surfeit, or abundaunce of fleume do require it. He that will
vomyte after meat, let him drink sundry drynkes myxte together, and last of
all, warm water: or if that be to easy, let him myxt therewith salt or honey.
If he will vomyte fasting, let him drink water and honey sodden together, or
ysope with it, or eat of a radyshe root, and drink warm water upon it.
also water wherein radyshe is boiled, and afterward provoke him self to it,
Them that will have more vyolent pourgations, I remytte to physicians learned.
But yet I do eftsoon warn them, that therein they be circumspecte, and do not
much use it. More over in vomites, the matter brought forth, would be
considered, according to the rules of Hipocrates, in his second Hipocrat.
praesag. 2. cap. 7.
book of pronostications, that is to say, if it be myxt with fleume and
choler, it is most profitable if it be not in very great quantity, nor thycke,
the less myxture it has, the warse is it. If it be green, like to leeke
blaades, thynne or black, it is to be judged ylle. If it have all colors, it
is extreme peryllous. If it be leady colored, and sauoureth horribly, it
signifies a short abolicion, or dissolution of nature. For as Galene affirms
there in his comment, such manner of vomit declares corruption with
extinctinge of nature. Also every putrifyed and stynckynge savor in vomyte is
ill. These things be right Galen. de locis. affectis. lib. 1.
necessary, to be looked for, where one does vomyte without any difficulty:
but to enforce one to vomit, which can not, is very odious, and to be
abhorred.

wels, grief in the raynes of the back or huckle bone, ventosities in the
bealy, inflammation or exulceration in the guts or bladder. It is a convenient
and sure medicine, and left hurt does ensue of it. The making and ordrynge
thereof, I will omytte to write in this place, partly that I would not, that
physicians should to much note in me presumption, partly that another place may
be more apt to that purpose.

The particular commodities of every purgacion. Cap. 6.
IN potions, electuaries, and pylles ought to be much more observation, than
in clysters or suppositories, forasmoch as these do enter no further than into
the gutte, where the ordure lies, and by that place only, brings forth the
matter, which causes disease. But the other entering in that way, that meats
and drynkes do, comes into the stomach, and there is boiled, and sent into
the places of digestyon, and afterward is myxte with the juice, whereof the
substance of the body is made, and expellynge the aduersarye humors, sommewhat
thereof doubtelesse remains in the body. Wherefore men have need to
beware, what medicynes they receive, that in them be no venenosytie, malice or
corruption, lest for the expellynge of a superfluous humor, which perchance
good diet, or some brothes made of good herbs, or the said euacuation, with
suppositorie or clister, might bring forth at leisure. by desiring of to
hastye remedy, they receive in medicine that which shall engender a venomous
humor, and inevitable destruction unto all the body. And therefore happy is
he, which in syckenesse fyndeth a dyscrete and well learned physician, and so
true a potycarye, that has always drowges uncorrupted, and whom the
physician may surely trust, to dispense his things trewely. But now to
return to the said form of pourgation, I will now set forth sum
counsayles, concerning that mattier, which I have collected out of the chief
authors of phisycke. Bodies hot and moist, may easyly sustain pourgation
by the stool. They which be lean or thynne, having the members tender, may
take harm by purgations. To men that are cholerike, and them that eat
lyttelle, pourgations are greuouse. In young chylderne and old men, it is
daungerouse to lowse much the bealye. To them that are not wont to it,
pourgation is noyfulle. He that lives in a good order of diete needs neither
pourgation nor vomyte. After that the pourgation has wroughte, thyrstnes and
sound sleep be signs that the body is sufficiently pourged. By daily taking
of medicynes, nature is corrupted. when ye will purge any thing make first
the matter flowynge and soluble. Medicyne to pourge Hipocrat aphor.
oughe not to be myngled with meat, but to be taken four hours at the least
before meals, or three hours after meals, except certain easy pylles made
to cleanse and comfort the stomach, which would be taken at the beginning of
supper, or after supper a little before that one goes to bed, making a
light supper or none. After purgation taken, the pacyent should rest, and not
walk, until the medicyne has wrought, nor eat or drink in the mean
space. These things have I remembered, because I have known right good
physicians, to have forgotten, to instruct thereof their pacie^tes. Now will I
set forth the table of such things, which of their property do digest or
pourge superfluous humors particularly, which I have gathered out of the
books of Dioscorides, Galene, Paulus Egineta, Oribasius, and Aetius, and other
late writers, not withstanding, I have not written all, for as much as there
be diverse things, whereunto we have not yet founden any names in english.

Digestiues of choler.
Endyue. Lettyse. Cykorye. Scabiose. Maydenheare. Malowes. Mercury. The juice
of pome^ garnades. Pourselane. Popy. Berberies. Roses. Violettes the lefe and
flower. Sorell. Lyuerworte. Sorell de boyse. Whay clarifyed. The great four
cold seeds, that is to say, of gourdes, cucumbers, melones, and citruls.
Psilium, Vyneger. Saunders. Barley water. Prunes. Tamaryndes.
Purges of choler.
Wild hoppes. Wormewode Centorie. Fumytorie. Whay of butter. Violettes.
Mercury. Juycs of Roses Prunes. Eupatorye. Tamarindes, half an ounce in a
decoction. Manna.vi. drammes at the least, and so to xxv. in the brothe of a
hen or capon. Rebarbaru^ by it self from two drammes, unto four, infused
or stiped in lycour, from iiii. dra^mes unto.viii.
Digestyues of fleume.
Fenell, Persely, the roots Smallage. Capers. Laurel. Synuy. Puly. Maioram.
Penyroyall. Wild parsnyp sede. Mynt. Pympepnell. Horemynt. Gladen. Agrymonye.
Calamynt. Nep. Betayne. Sauge. Radyshe. Mugworte. Junyper. Hysope. Pyony.
Baulme. Honye. Gynger. Squilla. Aristolochia. Cynamome. Pepper. Cumyne.
Pourges of fleume.
Centorie. Nettyll. Agrimonye. Alder. Polypodiu^ of the oak. Myrabolani kebuli,
infused from half an ounce to an ounce, and two drammes. In substance, from
two drammes to half an ounce. Agaricus, from a dra^me to two drammes, infused
from.ii. dra^mes to five. Yreos. Maydenheare. Sticados.
Pourges of melancoly.
The brothe of colewortes, light boiled. Baulme mynte. Sticados. Time. Seen,
boiled in white wine, or in the broth of a hen. Lased sauery. Exthimus.
Unwrought sylke. Organum. Calamynt. Borage. Hartis tunge. Quyckbeme.
Maydenheare. Wythwynde. Pulyall mountain. Honey. Sugar.
Melancoly for the thynnesse and subtylnesse of the humor, needs no digestive.

They which will take sharper purgations, or compounde with diverse things,
let them take the counsel of an honest and perfyte phisytion, and not
adventure to myxte things together, without knowing the temperaunce of them
in degrees, and that he can proporcion them to the body, that shall receive
them in symples, as they be written. And so he may use them without peril,
against the humors, whereunto they serve.

Lettynge of bloudde. Cap. 6.
THe part of Euacuation by lettynge of bloudde, is incisyon or cuttynge of the
vain, whereby the blood, which is cause of syckenesse or grief to the hole
body, or any partycular part thereof, does most aptly pass. The commodities
whereof, being in a moderate Arnold (...) de uillano^ ua.
quantity, and in a due time taken, be these that follow, it clarifieth the
wit, and makes good memory, it cleanses the bladder, it dries the brain, it
warmeth the marowe, being in the bones, it opens the hearing, it stops
tears or droppynges of the eyes, it takes away lothsomnesse, and confirms
the stomach, it nourishes that, which is proper to nature, and the contrary
expels. It is thought, that thereby life is prolonged, and the matter making
sycknesse shortly consumed. Wherefore lettynge of Oribasi(...) in medicine
comp^ dio.
bloudde is not only expedient for them, which are fulle of bloudde, or have
abundance of strength, but also for them, in whom, without plenitude,
called fullness, inflammations begin to be in their bodies, or by some
outewarde struck, the bloudde being gathered within, by collection thereof,
do feel grief or disease. Also where there is much pain felt, or
debylitie of some member, whereof is supposed to be engendered some grievous
disease. More over they, which use excess of meats and drynkes, may be cured
by lettynge of bloudde. But those, which be temperate, keeping good diete, be
helped without lettynge of blood: as by fricasies, using of bathes, exercise,
walking, and riding moderately. Alsoo unctions with oils and oyntementes,
called Diaphoretice, which by euaporation, do shortly euacuate the fullness.
All be it, if the fullness be of melancoly bloudde, than always needs must be
lettynge of bloudde. Abundaunce of melancoly bloudde is known by these signs.
There is felt in the entrayles, or within the boulke of a man or woman, a
weyghtynes with tension or thrustynge outward and all that part, which is
above the nauel, is more heavy, than it was wont to be. Also much urine and
fatty, the residence or bo^ome, thycke, troublous, and fat, sommetyme black
poushes or boyles, with inflammation and much pain. These must be shortly let
blood, and the melancoly humor also purged by siege They, which have crude
or raw humors, must be warely let bloudde, before that sycknesse
engender, but having the fever, in no wise. Concerning lettynge of blonde,
these things Aetius. li. 3
following, would be had in continual remembrance, and be before thought on. In
abundance of the bloudde, the quality and quantity, the greatness of the
sycknes, and if it be present, or looked for. also the diet precedyng, the age
and strength of the person, the natural form of his body, the time of the
year, the region or country, the present state of the air, the disvse of
accustomed exercise, the ceassynge of euacuations used before. In quality
consider, of what humor the fulness proceeds. In quantity the abundance of
that, which is to be pourged. In syckenesse, if it be dangerous or tolerable:
if the sycknesse be present, it requires the more dilygence: if it be looked
for, it may be the better proporcioned. Cor. Celsus. lib. 2.
In diete, the custom in earynge and drinkyng, must be specially noted. In
young men and women, lettynge of bloudde would be more lyberall. In old men
and young chylderne, it would be scarser: strong men may sustain bledynge,
they which are feeble, may not endure it: Large bodies have greatter vessels,
than they, which be little. lean me^ have more blod, corporat men have more
flesh. The time of the year must be specially marked. For in the beginning of
Oriba. s^Arnold. deuilla noua de flobothomia. Io. Damascenus in art medi.
spring time, it is best lettynge of bloudde, as Oribasius says, and so
does continue, after the opinion of Arnolde, unto the eight calendes of June.
Aetius affirms, that in winter, or in a cold country, or where the person
is of a very cold nature, the veins should not be opened. And Damascene says,
They which in youth have use to be much let bloudde, after they be three
score years old, their nature waxes cold, and natural heat is in them
suffocate, specially if they were of a cold complexion. but that is to be
understand, where they that are in health, are often let blood. For in the
lapse from health, and in diverse diseases, wherein, the bloudde is corrupted, or
where it ingendreth impostumes, or resorteth to any place, where it ought not
to be, or passes by any other cundyte, than nature has ordained, or where it
is furyouse or inflamed, or by any other means bredethe greuouse diseases, in
all these cases it ought to be practysed, ye sometime in aged persons, women
with child, and young infantes. For in extreme necessity, it were better
experience some remedy, than to do nothing. All other things concerning this
matter, pertayne to the part curatyue, which treats of healynge of
sycknesse, whereof I will not now speak, but remytte the reders to the
counsel of discrete physicians.

Of scarifienge called boxinge or cuppynge. Cap. 7.
FOr as much as it is not convenient, to be let blood often times in the
year, because much of the vital spirit passes forth with ^alenus
the bloudde, which being exhauste, the body waxes cold, and natural
operations become (...). li. 3
the more feeble, I therefore do counsel (says Galene) that the base parts
of the body, as the legs, be scarified, which is the most sure remedy, as
well in conceruynge heithe as in repairynge thereof, being decayed. For it
cures the eyes being anoyed with long distillations. It profyteth also to
the heed, and over part of the body, against sundry diseases. In what member
the bloudde is gathered, the body being first purged by scarification, the
grefe may be cured. Also Oribasius affirms the same, and also adds
Oribasius sin medici(...) co^pen.
thereto, that it helps squynances, or quinces in the throat, and dissolueth
the constipations or stoppynges made of all places, if the places be scarified:
not withstanding applicacion of boxes about the stomach, in hot fevers, where
reason is troubled, are to be eschued, for fear of suffocatio^. Likewise put
to the heed indiscreetly, Aetius.
it hurts both the heed and the eyes. The late authors do affirm, that
scarifieng is in the stead of lettynge bloudde, where for age, debilitie, or
time of the year, or other like consyderation, a man may not sustain bloudde
lettinge, and it brings forth the thynne blood, which is next to the skyn.

Of blood suckers or leaches. Cap. 8.
THere is also an other form of euacuation by worms, found in waters called
blood suckers or leaches, which being put unto the body or member, do draw
out blood. And their drawing is more convenient for fullness of bloudde than
scarifyenge is, forasmoche as they fetch blood more deper, and is more of the
substance of blood, yet the opinion of some men is, that they do draw no
blood but that, which is corrupted, and not proporcionable unto our body. And
therefore in griefs, which happen between the skin and the flesh of blood
corrupted, these are more convenient than scarifienge. But before that they be
put unto any Oribasius in medicinae co^pen.
part of the body, they must be first kept all one day before, gyuyng unto
them a lyttel blood in fresh flesh. And than put them in clean water,
somewhat warm, and with a spounge wype away the slyme, which is about them,
and than lay a little bloudde on the place grieved, and put them thanne to
it, and lay on them a spounge, than when they be fulle, they may fall away.
or if pe will sooner have them of, put a horse hear between their mouths,
and the place, and draw them away, or put to their mouths salt or ashes,
or vyneger, and (...)

heat them, and disturbeth reason, where the bodies be hot before, where
natural heat is feeble, the heat may not be dispersed unto the extreme parts,
and than does the extreme members, that is to say, which are far from the
heart, remain cold and trembling. Of this affection comes sometime fevers,
sometime apoplexies, or privation of sencis, trembling, palseys, madness,
fransies, deformity of vysage: and that warse is, outrageous swearynge,
blasphemye, desire of vengeance, loss of charity, ainitie, credence, also
forgetfulness of benefytte precedynge, and of obedience, duytie, and
reverence. There also do succeed contencion, chargeable suite, unquietness of
mind, lack of appetite, lack of sleep, feeble digestion, scorn, dysdayne,
and hatred of other, with peril of losing of all good reputation. These
inco^modities of Ire, perfitely had in remembrance, and at the first motion
thereof one of them thoughts on, may happen to bring in his fellows, and thereby
the flame may be quenched. or let him that is angry, even at the first
consider one of these things, that like as he is a man, so is also the other,
with whom he is angry, and therefore it is as lefulle for the other to be
angrye, as unto him, and if he so be, than shall that anger be to him
displesant, and stere him more to be angry whereby it appears, that Ire is to
him loathsome. If the other be pactent, than let him abhor that thing in him
self, the lack whereof, in the other contenteth him, and asswageth his malice.
More over, let him before, that occasion of Ire does happen, accustom him
self to behold, and mark well them that be angry, with the success of that
anger, and ruminate is in his mind, a good space after. And in that time, let
him remember, how Christ, the some of god and God, who (as he him self said)
might have had of god his father, if he would have asked them, legions of
angels, to have defended him, ye with less tha^ a wink moughs have slain
all his adversaries, yet he not withstandyng, rebuked, scorned, falsely
accused, plucked hither and thither, stryped, bounden with halters, whipped,
spytte on, buffettes, crowned with sharp thorn, laded with a heuye piece of
timber, his own proper tourmente, halyd, and vryuen forth like a calfe to the
slaughter house, eftesoones beaten and overthrown, retched, forthewith ropes,
arms and legs laid on the Cross, and there unto with long iron nails
through the hands and feet nailed, with many strookes of hammers, with many
pryckynges, or ever the nails moughte perce by his tender and most blessed
flesh and synewes, quyte through the hard timber, up to the heedes of the
nails, and all this being done for the offense of mankind, and not his: yet
with the men, which did it, his most unkind countrymen, his most unnatural
kynnesmenne whom he first made of nothing, preserved by miracles, delivered
from perils, and cured of dyscases, in all his vexation and trouble, he was
never seen or perceived angry. If one will say, that anger is natural, let
hyn: also consider that in Christ's manhood, were all naturalle pomers. If he
will say, that Ire is token of courage, and in Christ it lacked not, whom
both angels and deuyls trembled and feared. The premysses often reuolued, and
borne in the mind, I will not say, shall utterly extincte all motions of
wrath, which is not possible, but it shall, when it kyndleth lightly, repress
it, and let that it shall not grow into flame. And in speaking here of wrath,
I do not mean that, which good men have against vices: or wise and discrete
governors and masters, against the defautes or negligences of their
subjects of servants, used in rebukyng them, or moderately punysshyng them.
For that is not properly ire, but rather to be called displeasure, and is that
whereof god speaks, by his prophet Dauyd saying. Be you angry and do not
sin. And that Psalm. 4. Genes. 35. Exodus 32. Leuit. 10 Marc. 11.
manner of anger, has been in diverse holy men, prophets, and other. And it
appeared in Christ when he drove out them, which made their markette in the
holy temple of god, where there ought to be nothing but prayer. And in like
wise wha^ he rebuked the hypocrites But if none of these things may come so
shortly to his remembrance, that is meued with anger, at the lest let him
think on the lesson, that Apollodorus the philosopher taught to the Emperor
Octauian, that before he speak or do any thing in anger he do recite in
order, all the letters of the A, B, C, and remove somewhat out of the place, that
he is in, and seek occasyon to be otherwise occupied. This shall for this time
suffyse, for the remedies of Ire. And he that will know more of this matter, let
him read in my warke, called the Governor, where I thereof do write more
abu^dantly.

Of dolor or heuinesse of mind. Capitulo. 12.
THere is no thing more ennemy to life, then sorrow, called also heuenesse,
for it exhausteth both natural heat and moisture of the body, and does
extenuate or make the body lean, dulleth the wit, and darkneth the spirits,
lets the use and judgment of reason, and oppressed memory. And Solomon
says, Pro. 17. 25. Ecclesiast(...) 25. 33.
that sorrow dries up the bones. And also like as the mothe in the garmente,
and the wourme in the tree, so does heaviness annoye the heart of a man. Also
in the book called Ecclesiasticus, Sorrow has killed many, and in it self
is found no commodity. Also by heaviness death is hastened, it hydeth virtue
or strength, and heaviness of heart boweth down the neck.

This is so puissaunt an enemy to nature and bodyly health, that to resyste
the malice and violence thereof, are required remedies, as well of the wholesome
counsayles found in holy scripture and in the books of moral doctrine. As
also of certain herbs, fruytes, and spyces, having the propertye to expelle
melancalyke humors, and to comfort and keep lively the spirits, which have
their proper habitation in the heart of man, and moderate nouryshyng of the
natural heat and humor, called radical, which is the base or foundation,
whervppon the life of man stands, and that faylyng, life falls in ruin,
and the body is dissolved. Now first I will declare some remedies against
sorowfulnesse of heart, concerning necessary counsel.

Sometime this affecte happens of Ingratitude, either wherefore benefyte, or
specialle love employed, one receives damage, or is abandoned in his
necessite, or is deceived of him, whom he trusted, or fyndeth him, of whom he
has great expectation, forgetful or neglygent in his commodity, or
perceyueth the person, whom of long time he has loved, to be estraunged
from him, or to have one of later acquayntance in more estimation. This
affection nyppeth the heart, ye of most wise men, for they love most heartily,
not provoked by carnalle affection, but rather by good opinion, engendered by
similitude of honest studies, and virtuous manners of long time mutually
experienced. And it is not only unto man grievous, but also unto god most
displeasant and odiouse, as it is abundantly declared in scripture. wherefore
the person, which feleth him self touched with this affecte, before that it
grow into a passion, and waxes a sycknesse, let him call to remembrance
these artycles following, or at the least ways sum of them, For eueryche of
them may case him, though perchance they can not forthwith perfitely cure
him.

Consider, that the corruption of man's nature is not so much declared in any
thing, as Counsels against ingratitude.
in Ingratytude, whereby a man is made warse, than diverse brute beasts. The
little ante or emote helps up his fellow, whom he sees overthrown with
burdeyn, or by other occasyon. Also when olyphantes do pass over any great
Appianus in uaria hi storia.
water, the greattest and most puissant of them deuyde them selves, and
setting the weakest in the myddell, part go before, tryeng the depnesse and
perils, part come after, succourynge the weakest or least, with their long
noses, when they see them in danger. The same beasts have been seen not only
bring men out of deserts, which have lost their ways, but also revenge the
dyspleasures done to them, the which gave them meat, as one that slew him,
which had committed aduoutrye with his masters wife. The terrible Lions and
Panthers, have been seen in their manner, to render thanks to their
benefactours, ye and to obiecte their own bodies and lives for their defense.
The same we may daily behold in our own dogs.

Than in whom thou fyndest the detestable vice of Ingratytude, reputing him
among the warste sort of creatures, think not that thou haste lost a
friend, but think that thou art^ delivered from a monster of nature, that
devoured thy love, and that thou art now at lybertye, and haste won
experyence to chese the a better. But if this may not suffyse, than Seneca de
benefi. 7.
eftesoones consider, that if thou look well on thy self, perchance thou
may find the fault whereof thou complaynest, within thine own bosomme. Call
to thy remembrance, if thou haste always rendered unto every man condygne
thanks or benefytte, of whom thou have kyndnesse received, or if thou have
always remembered every one of them, that have done to the any commodity or
pleasure. Thou shall well perceive, that what thing thou receyuedst in
chyldehode, thou forgattest, or dyddest little esteem, when thou came to
the state of a man, And what thou dyddest remember in youth, in age, thou
dydded little think on: thy nouryces pappe, her rockynges, her watchynges,
thou have not al way remembered, or equally recompensed. Thy scoole masters
study, his labor, his dilygence in a like degree, thou haste not requyted.
what greatter friends haste thou had, of whom thou could receive any
greatter benefits, than thy nourysshyng and preserving of thy life, in thy
most feblenesse, or thine erudicion, whereby thy nature was made more
excellent. Remembrynge this leave to be angry or sorrowful, for so common a
vice: yet if it cesse not to grieve the, comferre the ingratitude that does vere
the, with that ingratitude, which was showed by the Israelytes whom god chase
for his own people, delivered from seruage, showed for them wonders,
preserved them forty years in desert, destroyed for them kings, gave to them
the country, which flowed milk and honey, defended them against all outward
hostylitie, sent unto them such abundance of riches, that silver was in
Jerusalem, as stones in the street, had his tabernacle, and afterward his
most holy temple among them, which he did daily vysite with his dyuyne
majesty, made their kings to reign gloriousely, and spoke with their
prephetes familyarly, and corrected their errors most gentilly: and yet for
all this, they, imbracyng the paynyms ydolatrie, they left so gracyous and
loving a lord, and living god, and to his great despite, gave divine
honors, to calfes of brass, and other monstruouse images, and at the last
put to most cruel death, the only son of god, that had done so much for
them.

And if we christen men, do look well on our selves, reuoluynge the
incomparable benefit, which we have received by Christ's passion, and
consider the circumstance of his most excellent patience, and most fervent
love toward us, with our forgetfulness, and they daily breche of our promise,
which we made at our baptysme, conferryng our mutual unkindness thereunto,
there shall appear no ingratitude, that should offend us. Finally for a
conclusyon, behold well about the, and thou shalt all day find the
chylderne ingrate to their parents, and wives to their husbands. And will
thou look that thy benefyte, or vain expectation, should make the more fre
from ingratitude of thy friend, whom chance has sent the, than nature may
the parents toward their chyldern, or the conjunction of bodies by lefull
marriage, take unkindness from the wives toward their husbands. This vice
therefore of Ingratitude, being so common a chance, make no worldly
frendeshyp so preciouse, that life or health therefore should be spent or
consumed. I have been the longer in this place, because I have had in this
grief sufficient experience.

If death of chylderne be cause of thy heaviness, Death of children.
call to thy remembrance some chyldern (of whom there is no little number)
whose lives either for vncorrigyble vices, or unfortunate chances, have been
more greuouse unto their parents, thanne the death of thy chylderne ought to
be unto the (...) considering that death is the discharger of all gryefes, and
myseries, and to them that dye well, the first entry into life everlasting.

The loss of goods or authority do green none but fools, which do not
mark dyligently, Loss of goods.
that like as neither the one nor the other does always happen to them that
are worthy, so we have in daily experience, that they fall from him
sodeynely, who in increasynge or keeping them seems most busy.

Oftentimes the repulse from promotion is Lack of promotion.
cause of discomforte, but than consider, whyther in the opinion of good men,
thou art demed worthy to have such aduan^cement, or in thine own expectation
and fantasy. If good men so inge the, thank thou god of that felicity, and
laugh at the blyndnesse of them, that so have refused the. If it proceed of
thine own folly, abhor all arrogance, and enforce thy self to be ad uanced
in men's estimation, before thou can find thy self worthy in thy proper
opinion.

All other chances of fortune esteem as no Chances of fortune.
thing, and that long before they do happen. The often recordynge of myserye,
prepares the mind to feel less adversity. And the contempt of fortune is
sure quietness and most perfyte felycitie.

This now shall suffyse concerning remedies of moral phylosophie. Now will
I write somewhat touching the counsel of physyke, as in relieuynge the
body, which either by the said occasyons, or by the humor of melancolye is
brought out of temper.

The first counsel is, that during the time of that passion, eschew to be
angrye, studyouse, or solitarye, and rejoice the with mei^dye, or else be always
in such company, as best may content the.

Avoid all things that be noyouse in sight, smelling and herynge, and
embrace all thing that is delectable.

Flee darkness, much watch, and business of mind, much companieng with
women, the use of things very hot and dry: often purgations, immoderate
exercise, thyrst, much abstinence, dry wyndes and cold.

Absteyn from daily eating of much old blefe or old mutton, hard chese, hare
flesh, bores flesh, venyson, saltefyshe, coolewortes, beans, and peason, very
course breadde, great fysshes of the sea, as thurlepole, porpyse, and
sturgeon, and other of like natures, wine read and thycke, meats being very
salt or sour, old, burned, or fried, garlyke, onyons, and lekes.

Use meats which are temperatelye hot, and therewith somewhat moist, boiled
rather than roasted, light of dygestyon, and ingendryng bloudde clear and fine.
As milk hot from the vdder, or at the least new mylked, ruen chese, sweet
almondes, the yelkes of rere eggs, little birds of the bushes, chyckens, and
hens. wine white or clarette, clear and feagraunte. Sweet savors in winter
hot, in summer cold, in the mean time temperate.

Confortatiues of the heart hot.
Bourage the flower or leaf. Buglosse. Baulmynte. Elycampane. Cloves.
Cardamomu(...). Rosemary. Lignum aloes. Musk. Ambergryse. Saffron. The bone of
the heart of a red diere. Myntes. The rynde of Citron. Been. Cububes. Basyle.
Cenfortatyues of the heart cold.
Violettes. Perles. Coral. The unicorns horn. Old appulles which be good.
Roses. Saunders. The olyphantes tothe. Water lylies. Coriander prepared.
Comfortatyues temperate.
Jacinet. Sapphire. Emerauldes. Myrabolanes, called kebuly. Buglosse. Gold,
silver.
Of Joy.
I(...) or gladness of heart does prolonge the life, it fatteth the body that
is lean with troubles, bytynge the humors to an equal temperance, and
drawing natural heat outward. But if it be sudden and fervent, it
oftentimes sleeth, for as much as it draws to suddenly and excessyuely
natural heat outward. And therefore diverse men and women have been seen to
fall in a sound, wha^ they have sodaynlye beholden the persons, whom they
fervently loved. A a woman in Rome, herynge first, that her son was slain
in battle. After when he Ti. Liuius.
came to her, she seeing him alive, imbracynge each other, she dyed in his
arms. This well considered, against such inordinate gladness, the best
prescruatiue is to remember, that the extreme parts of mundayne joy is sorrow
and heaviness: And that nothing of this world, may so much rejoice us: but
occasyon may cause it to be displeasaunt unto us.

The dominion of sundry complexions. Cap. 13.
IT seems to me not inconvenient, that I do declare as well the counsayles of
ancient and approved authors, as also mine own opinion gathered by dilygent
markynge in daily experience, concerning as well the necessary diet of every
complexion, aege and declinatio^ of health, as also the mean to resyste
discrasies of the body, before syckenesse be therein confyrmed, leaving the
resydue unto the substancyall learning and circumspecte practyse of good
physicians, which shall the more easilye cure their pacientes, if their
pacientes do not dysdayne to bear away and follow my counsel. And first it
ought to be considered, that none of the four complexions, have sooly such
dominion in one man or woman's body, that no part of any other complexion is
therewith myxte. For when we call a man sanguine, choleryke, fleumatyke, or
melancoly, we do not mean, that he has blood only without any of the
other humors, or choler without bloudde, or fleume without bloudde or
melancolye, or melancolye without bloudde or coler. And therefore the man,
which is sanguine, the more that he draws into age, whereby natural moisture
decayed, the more is he coleryke, by reason, that heat, surmountynge moisture,
needs must remain heat and drythe. semblably, the colerycke man, the more
that he waxes into age, the more natural heat in him is abated, and drythe
surmountynge natural moisture, he becomes melancolyke: but some sanguine man
has in the proporcion of temperatures, a greatter myxture with choler, than
an other has. Likewise the cholerycke or fleumatyke man with the humor of
sanguyne or melancolye. And therefore late practysers of physyke are wont to
call men, according to the myxture of their complexions, as sanguyne colerike,
fleumatike sanguine. etc. Moreover, beside the naturalle complexions, which
man receives in his generation, the humors, whereof the same complexions do
consyste, being augme^ted superfluously in the body or members by any of the
said things called not natural, every of them do semblably augment the
complexion, which is proper unto him, and brings unequal temperature unto
the body. And for these causes, the sanguine or fleumatike man or woman,
feeling and discrasye by choler happened to them by the said things, called not
natural, they shall use the diete described hereafter to him, which is
naturally coleryke. Semblablye the coleryke or melancolyke manne or woman,
having any dyscreasye by fleume, to use the diete of him, which is naturallye
fleumatyke, always remembrynge, that sanguyne and fleumatyke men have more
respect unto dryth, choleryke and melancalyke unto moisture, and that always as
the accedentall complexion decay eth, to resort by little and little to the
dyete, pertaining to his natural complexion.

The times appropried to every natural humor. Cap. 14.
But first it must be considered, that where the four humors, be always in
man, and in some man commonly one humor is more abundant than an other
naturallye, that is to say, from his generation. The said humors have also
peculyar times assygned to every one of them, wherein each of them is in his
most power and force, as after ensues, after the description of Soranus.
Soranus Ephesius


Fleume has most puissance in winter, from the.viii. Idus of November, unto
the.viii. Jdus of February, whereby are engendered Catarres or reumes, the
vuula, the cough, and the stytche. This humor is part in the heed, part in
the stomach. It has dominion from the third hour of night vutyll the
nyneth hour of the same night.

Bloudde increases in spryng time from the viii. Idus of Februarye, unto
the.viii. Idus of May, whereof are engendered fevers, and sweet humors,
which do shortly putrifye, the power of this humor is about the heart, and
has dominion from the.ix. hour of night until the.iii. hour of the morning.

Read choler has power in summer from the.viii. Idus of May, until
the.viii. Idus of Auguste / whereby are engendered hot and sharp fevers / this
humor is specially in the liver / and has dominion from the third hour of
day until the.ix. hour of the same day.

Yelow choler, whereof is ingendreth the fleume of the stomach / is nouryshed in
Autumn, which begins the.viii. Idus of Auguste / and dureth unto the.viii.
Idus of November / and makes shaking fevers and sharp, the black choler than
increases / and than follows thycknes of the blood in the veins. Black
choler or melancoly most rayneth in the spleen / and it rayneth from the.ix.
hour of day until the third hour of night.

Peculyar remedies against the distem perance of every humor.
IF the diste^perance be of blood / help it with Soranus (...)art medendi.
things cold, sharp, and dry: for blood is moist, hot and sweet. If it
be of read choler give things cold / moist / and sweet / for read coler is
bitter and fyry. If it be of black coler / give things hot moist and sweet /
for black coler is sharp and cold. If the disease be of salt fleume give
things sweet hot and dry, thus says Soranus. Notwithstanding where there is
abundance of cold fleume not myxt with coler / there things very sharp and
hot be most convenient / as tarte vyneger with hot rotes and seeds or
wynes strong and rough / honey being sodden in the one and the other / or where
choler is myxt with fleume / syrope acetouse made with vinegar and sugar boiled
/ sometime with herbs / roots or seeds / which may dissoule fleume and digest
it.

Diete of them, which are of sanguine complexion. Cap. 15.
FOr asmoche as in sanguine men bloudde most raygneth / which is soon
corrupted, it shall be necessary for them which are of that complexion / to be
circumspecte in eating meat / that shortly will receive putrefaction / as
the more part of fruits / specially not being perfitely ripe. also meats
that be of ill juice / as flesh of beasts to old / or to young / vdders of
beasts / brains except of capons and chykens marowe of the backebone / much
use of onyons lekes / garlyke / much use of old fygges / much use of raw
herbs / and all thing wherein is excess of hete / cold / or moisture / meats
that be stale / fyshes of the fennes or muddy waters / and to much sleep / as
experyence shows.

Dyete of choleryke persons. Ca. 16.
TO them which be cholerike / being in these naturalle temperature / and
having not from their youth used the contrary / gross meats moderately taken
/ be more convenient / than the meats that be fine, and better shall they
dygeste a piece of good biefe / than a chyckens leg. Choler of his propertye
rather burning than well dygestynge meats of light substance / not
withstanding some gentylmen which be nycely brought up in their infancy / may
not so well sustain that diet as poor men being the more part used to gross
meats. wherefore their diet must be in a temperance / as young biefe / old
veale / mutton / and venyson powdered, young geese, and such like, co^seruyng
their complexion with meats like there unto in quality and degree, according
to the counsel of Hipocrates. And as he perceyueth choler to abound, so to
interlace meats, which be cold in a moderate quantity, and to alay their
wine more or less with water, eschewynge hot spices, hot wynes, and
excessyue labor, whereby the body may be much chaufed. Also he may eat
oftener in the day, than any other: foresene, that there be such distance
between his meals as the meat before eaten be fully dygested, which in some
person is more, in some less, according to the heat and strength of his
stomach, notynge always, that the colerike person digesteth more meat than
his appetite desires, the melancolyke person desires by false appetite more
than his stomach may dygeste. And to a cholerike person, it is right
dangerous, to use long abstynence: for choler, finding nothing in the
stomach to concocte, it fares than, as where a little potage or milk,
being in a vessel over a great fire, it is burned to the vesselle, and
unsavory fumes and vapors do issue out thereof. Likewise in a cholerike
stomach, by abstinence, these inconveniences do happen, humors adust,
consumynge of natural moisture, fumosities and stynkynge vapors, ascendynge
up to the heed, whereof is engendered, duskynge of the eyes, heed aches, hot and
thynne reumes, after every little surfette, and many other inconveniences.
wherefore beside the oppinion of best learned men, mine own peynefull
experyence, also moves me, to exhort them, whche be of this complexion, to
eschew much abstine^ce. And although they be studyous, and use little
exercise, yet in the morning to eat somewhat in little quantity, and not to
study immediately, but first to sytte a while, and after to stand or walk
softely, which using these two years, I and also other, that have long
known me, have perceived in my body a great alteration, that is to say, from
ylle astate to better. Always remember, that if any other humor do abou^de in
the choleryke person, as fleume, or melancolye, than until that humor be
expelled, the diete must be correctiue of that humor, and therefore more hot
and fine, than the natural dyete before rehearsed: but yet there would be always
respect had to the natural complexion, some time sufferyng the person to
eat or drink that, which nature workynge, he fervently desires.

Diete of fleumatike persons Capitulo. 17.
IT is to be remembered, that pure fleume is properly cold and moist, and
lacks taste. Salt fleume is myxt with choler, and therefore has not in him
so much cold nor humiditie, as pure fleume has: and therefore it requires a
temperance in things hot and dry, whereby fleume is digested or expulsed To
fleumatike persons all meats are noyfull, which are very cold, vyscous or
slymy, fat or sone putrifyed, eating much and often, specially meats
ingendrynge fleume, which be remembered in the table precedynge. All things be
ggod, which are hot and dry, also meats and drinks which be sour: onyons
also, and garlyke, moderately used, be very commendable, in pure fleme not
myxte with choler, much vsyng of salt, specially dried. Pepper gross beaten,
and eaten with meat, ought to be with all fleumatycke persons familyar, also
gynger is right convenient, but not to be so frequently used as pepper, for as
much as the nature of pepper is, that being eaten, it passes through the
body, heatyng and comfortynge the stomach, not entering into the veins, or
anoyeng the liver, which virtue is not in gynger. Gynger condite, the which
we do call grene gynger, specyallye candyd with sugar, if it may be gotten, and
also Mirabolanes, called kebuli condyte in India, be most excellent remedies
against fleume, also the herbs which are remembered before in the table of
digestyues of fleume, and the roots of persely, fenel, yreos, Elycampane, and
carettes be very commendable. Exercise twyse in a day, the stomach being
almost empty, so that sweat begin to appear, is very expedient, clensynge of
the body from all fylthynes, with rubbing and wypynge, oftentimes with
washing, specially the heed and partis there about moderate sweating in hot
bathes or stufes be to this complexion necessary specially when they have
eaten and drunken excessyuely. The heed and fete to be kept from cold and to
dwell high and far from mores and marshes, is a rule right necessary, also
to abstain from eating herbs and roots not boiled, and generally from all
meats, which will not be easyly dygested.

The dyuysion of melancoly, and the diete of persons melancolyke. Cap. 18.
MElancoly is of two sorts, the one is called natural, which is only cold
and dry, the other is called adust or bourned. Natural melancoly is (as Galene
says) the residence or dregs of the bloudde: and therefore is colder and
thicker than the blood. Melancoly aduste is in four kinds, either it is of
natural melancolye aduste, or of the more pure part of the blood aduste, or
of choler aduste, or of salt fleume aduste. But of all other that melancoly is
warst, which is engendered of choler: finally all aduste melancolye annoyeth
the wit and judgment of man. for when that humor is hette, it makes men
mad, and when it is extincte, it makes men fools, forgetfulle, and dull.
The natural melancolye kept in his Ex Marcilio ficino, de uita sana.
temperance, profyteth much to true judgment of the wit, but yet if it be
to thycke, it darkeneth the spirits, makes one timorous, and the wit dulle.
If it be myxte with fleume, it mortifieth the bloudde with to much cold,
wherefore it may not be so little, that the blood and spirits in their
feruentnesse, but as it were vnbrydelyd, whereof do happen unstableness of
wit and slypper remembrance: nor yet so much, that by the weight thereof
(for it is heavy, approchynge nygh to the earth) that we seem to be always in
sleep, and need a spur to prycke us forward. Wherefore it is right
expedient, to keep that humor as thynne as nature will suffer it, and not to
have to much of it.

But now to the diete perteynynge to them, whom this humor annoyeth. The
knowledge that melancoly reygneth, is oftentimes heaviness of mind, or fear
without cause, slepinesse in the members, many crampes without replecyon or
emptynesse, sudden furye, sudden incontynencye of the tongue, much
solycytude of light things, with palynesse of the vysage, and fearful
dreams of terryble visyons, dreaming of darkness, deep pyttes, or death of
friends or acquayntaunce, and of all thing that is black. The meats
convenient are they, which be temperatly in heat, but specially they that be
moist meats sone dygested, and they rather boiled thanne roasted, temperately
myxte with spyces, milk hot from the vdder, or late mylked, is very convenient
for that complexion, sweet almondes blaunched, and almond milk, the yelkes of
rere eggs, and fynallye all things, which engender pure bloudde, and all
that is written in the chapyter of age. All these be ill for them, wine thycke
or troublous, specially red wine, meats hard, dry, very salt, or sour,
bourned meat, fried meat, much biefe, hares flesh, beans, roket,
colewortes, mustard, radyshe, garlyke, except there be much wind in the body,
for than is it very wholesome, onyons leekes, finally all things which heateth
to much, keleth to much, or dries to much, also wrath, fear, compassyon,
sorrow, much study or care, much ydelnesse or rest: all thing that is
grievous to see, to smelle or to hear, but most specially darkness. Moreover
much dryenge of the body, either with long watch, or with much care and
tossynge of the mind, or with much lecherye, or much eating and drynkyng of
things that be hot and dry, or immoderate euacation, labor, abstinence,
thyrst, going in the air vntemperately hot, cold or dry, all these things
do anoy them that be grieved with any melancoly. It is to be dylygentely
considered, that where melancolye happens of choler adduste, there meats
which be hot in warkyng, would be wisely tempred, and drinking of hot
wynes would be eschewed: semblable cautele would be in savors. Not
withstanding moderate use of small wynes, clear and well verdured, is herein
very commendable, the humor thereby being clarifyed, and the spyrytes
cleansed, but the abuse or excess thereof does as much damage. Also it is
right expedyente, to put into wine or ale, a gadde of silver or gold, glowing
hot out of the fire, to tempre hot meats with roses, vyolettes, saunders,
rose water, bourage, buglosse, baulme called in latyne Melyssa, or the water of
all three drunken with good wine, white or clarette, or made in a Julep with
sugar, is wonderful wholesome, chewyng of lykoryse, or raysons of coraunce is
right expedyent, but most of all other things, myrthe, good compauye,
gladness, moderate exercise, with moderate feeding. And thus I leave to
speak of dyetes, aptely belongyng to the four complexions.

Galene and all other, do agree in this case, Pepper bruysed and eaten with
meat, is very expedient: And where there is much wind in the stomach, than to
eat all times of the day of the medicyne made of the three kinds of pepper,
time, anyse sede, and honye clarified, which is called Diatrion piperion, or
that which is called Diaspolitico^, or Diapiganon, which is made Galen. de
^enda sa. ^b. 5.
of cumyne stieped one day and a night, or longer in tarte vyneger, and after
fried or laid on a bournyng hot stone, and made in powlder. Also pepper and
rewe dried somewhat, and made into powder, all in equal porcyons, and myxte
with claryfied honey. Galene adds thereto salt peter, called in latin Nitrum.
The confection made with the juice of quynces, and is called Diacyconiten, is
very excellent. but it is to be dylygently noted, that where crudytie is in a
choleryke person, there would the said medicynes be temperatly used, and the
said Diacytonite^, to have little or no spices in it. And for my part, being
the space of four years contynually in this crudytie, I never found any
thing to be compared to fine R^ubarbe, chewed with raysons of corens, which I
took by the counsel of the worshypfull and well learned physitio^, master
doctor Augustyne, who in his manners declarethe the auneyent gentylnesse of his
blood: which medycyne I do not leave to use daily fasting, when I feel such
crudytie to begin. Also syrope acetose, that is to say, sugar sodden in pure
vyneger, and little water, until it be thycke as a syrope, is sometime
convenient, and that as well to choleryke persons, as unto fleumatyke, and if
fleume be abundant, than with roots and seeds of fenell and persely sodden
with it. Also in that case Oxymel, that is to say, honye and water sodden
together, with the said rotes and seeds, and a quantity of vyneger put thereto
in the boiling is very commendable: if the pacient be very costyue, than the
medycyne of Galene, called Hierapicra, from half an ounce to an ounce, taken
in water of honye or ale, or taken in pylles the weight of a grote and a half,
or two grotes, if the stuff be good, will pourge the body suffycyently,
without making the body weaker. Also that medycine by clensyng the stomach and
body, delyuereth a man and woman, from many peryllous sycknesses. If the
humors in the stomach be not putryfyed, but that it is grieved with abundance
of salt fleume, I have found that milk new mylked, wherein is put a
quantity of good honye or sugar, and three leaves of good spear myntes, and a
little boiled, so being drunk warm fasting, the quantity of a pynte, and
resting on it, without eating or drinking any other thing the space of
three hours after, have abundantly pourged and comforted the stomak: but where
there is no fleume but only choler, it is not so wholesome, but rather hurts,
making fumosyties in the heed, whereof comes heed ache.

Of lassitude. Cap. 2.
LAssitude is a disposition toward sycknes, wherein a man feleth a soorenesse, a
swellynge, or an inflammation. Soreness happens of humors sharp and gnawyng,
as after great exercise and labors which lassitude happens to them, whose
bodies are fulle of ylle juice, and excrementes. Also after cruditie in them
which are not exercised, or do abide long in the A(...)
heat of the son. It may also be in the body, wherein is good wyce, if he be
fatigate with immoderate exercise. In them, which do feel this lassitude, the
skyn appears thycke and rough, and there is felt a grief sometime in the skyn
only, ^.
(...)time also in the flesh, as it were of a soore. The cure thereof, is by
much and pleasant rubbing, with sweet oils, which have not the virtue to
restrain or close, and that with many hands, and afterward to exercise
moderately, and to be bayned in water sweet and temperate in heat. also tha^
must be given meats of good juice, potage but seld, wine is not to be
forbodden: for unto wine, uneath any thing may be compared, that so ^ell
dygesteth crude humors: It also provoke sweat and urine, and makes one to
sleep sundly. But if this lassitude do abide the night and day following, or
waxes more and more, than if the pacyent be of good strength and young, and
has abundau^ce of blood, let him be let blood, or provoke the hemoroides
or piles to blede, if they do appear. But if it proceed of the malice of any
humor, without abundance of blood, than resort to purgations apt for the
humor that greueth. The tokens whereof, shall appear as well by the color of
the skyn and diete precedyng, as by urine, ordure, sweat, thyrste, and
appetyte, as it is rehearsed before in the complexions. If the ill bloudde be
little in quantity, and the crude humors abundant, than shall he not be
let blood, nor vehemently pourged, neither, shall exercise or move himself
nor be bayned, for all exercise caryeth humors throughout all the body, and
stops the powers. Wherefore these manner of persons should be kept in rest,
and such meats drynkes and medicyns should be given to them, which should
attenuate or dissolve the grossenes of the humors, without notable heat, as
oximell, barley water, and mulse, if the pacyent abhor not honey. And for as,
much as in the said persons, commonly there is abundance of wind about their
stomakes, therefore pepper specially long pepper or white is very convenient to
be used, and the medicine before written, called Diaspoliticum, when the
humors are dissolved, than it is good to drink white wine, or small clarette
wine moderately.

Lassitude extensiue. Ca. 3.
Won one thinks, that he does feel a swellyng or bollynge of the body,
where in deed there does not appear in sight or touching any swellynge, that
is called Lassitude extensiue, if it happens without exercise or vehement
mouyng. This does happen of excessive multitude of humors, which do extend the
muscules or fyllettes. In this no soreness is felt but only an heaviness with
extension or thrustyng out of the body. And because that there is abundance of
blood in the body, best remedy is to be letten blood about the elbowe or
ancle, after to be pourged, than to use soft frycasyes with oils before
rehearsed, afterward much rest and temperate bathes, and meats lacking
sharpenes, and being abstersyue.

Lassytude with the feelynge of infamation. Cap. 4.
IF without any mouynge, the muscles and flesh rise up in the body, as it
swelled with great pains and exceeding heat, than sone after follows most
hotest fevers, except it be prevented by lettynge of blood, and that in
abundance, and almost to sownynge, but it were Actius.
more sure to be let blood twyse in one day, the first time without sownynge,
at the next time sownynge is not to be feared. If the grefe be in t^^ neck or
heed, the blood must be let of the bayne called Cephalea, or the shulder
vain. If it be in the bulk or uppermost part of the body than must the vain
be cut, which is called Basilica, or the innermost vain. If all the body be
grieved tha^ cut the veyn, which is named Mediana, or the myddel veyn. If a
fever remain after blood lettyng, than order him, with the dicte of them that
have fevers, which ye shall find written hereafter. If no fever remain,
thanne use moderate fricasies, and little eating, and that of meats having
good iuce, increasynge by little and little to the natural diet.

Dyete of them that are ready to fall into syckenesse. Cap. 5.
Now return eftesones to speak of diete, it is to be remembered, that they,
which are ready to fall into diseases, they are prepared thereunto, either by
replecyon of superfluous humors, or else by eruditie or malice of humors,
which are in them. As touching the first, the general dyete must be such, as
thereby the humors may be attenuate, and by convenient euacuatio^, brought to
a moderate quantity. As for the second must be corrected with meats and
drynkes of contrary qualities, having always respect to the age of the person,
time of the year, place of habitation, and most specially the universal
complexion, for choler offendyng in an old man, in winter time, in a cold
country, or the person being of his natural complexion fleumatike or
melancoly, would not be so habundantly expulsed or subdued, as if it be in one
young and lusty, in the hot summer, in the cou^trais, where the son
fervently burns or the person of his proper nature is very coleryke. And in
like wise contrary. wherefore every man, knowing his own natural complexion,
with the quality of the humor that offends, let him make temperan^ce his
chief coke, and remembrynge that which I have before declared, ordeyne to him
self such diete, as may reform the offense with none or little annoyance, to
his universal complexion. And if he can so do, he shall happily escape, not
only diverse syckenesses but also the most pernicious danger, procedyng of
corrupted drowges or spices, whereof some covetous poticaries do make medicines,
maugre the heedes of good and well learned physicyons.

Syckenes most commune to particular times of the year and ages. Ca. 6.
ALthough I do not inte^de to write of the cure of egritudes or syckenesses
confyrmed, as well because it moughte be reputed in me a great presumption, as
also forasmoche as it were very peryllous to dinulgate that noble science, to
common people, not learned in lyberall sciences and philosophy, which be
required to be suffyciently in a physician. And more over, many books of
Hipocrates and Galene ought to be radde, before that one do take upon him the
general cure of men's bodies: yet not withstandyng, I trust I may without any
note of arrogance write, what diseases do most commonly happen in sundry times
of the year and ages of men and women, with some signifycations, whereby the
discrasie or distemperature of the body is perceived, to the intent that the
physician being far of, may be truly informed / considering that vrines
far carried, do often deceive them / and like wise lack of the syghte of the
pacyent / and inquisition of things which do precede or follow the syckenesse.
And with this I trust none honest and charytable physician will be offended /
but rather give to me thanks for my dyligence / in the aduaunrynge of their
estimation, which by lack of perfect instruction has been appayred.

Syckenesses of spring time.
Diseases procedynge of melancoly / as madness / falling syckenesse /
bleedynges / auynses / poses / hoorsenesse / coughes / lepries / scabbes / ache
in the joints.

Syckenesses of summer.
Many of the said diseases / also fevers concynuall / hot fevers / fevers
tertiane / quartaynes / vomites / flyres / watryng of eyes / peynes of the
ears / blysters and soores of the mouth / and sweattynges.

Syckenesses of Autumn.
Diverse of summer syckenesses / also oppilations of the spleen / dropsies /
consumptio^s / stra^gulyons / costyuenesse / ache in the huckle boones /
shortness of wind / frettynge of the bowelles / falling syckenesse / and
melancoly dyseases.

Syckenesse of winter.
Stitches and griefs in the sides / inflamatio^ of the lunges / reumes /
coughes / pains in the bresle / sides / and loins / heed ache / and palseyes.

Sycknesses happenyng to chyldern.
When they be new borne / there do happen to them soores of the mouth called
Aphte / vomitynge / coughes / watchyng / fearfulness / inflammations of the
nauyll / moystures of the ears.

Wwhan they breed tethe / ytchynge of the gummes / fevers / crampes / and
laskes.

When they ware elder / than be they grieved with kernelles / oppennesse of the
moulde of the heed / shortness of wind / the stone of the bladder / wourmes
of the bealy / wartes / swellynges under the chynne / and in England commonly
purpyls / measels / and small pockes.

Syckenesse happenyng to young men from.xiiii. years of age.
Fevers cotydiane / tereyane / quarteyne / hot fevers / spyttynge or
vomitynge of blood / pleuresies / diseases of the sides / inflammation of the
lunges / lethargies / fransye / hot syckenesses / cholerik passions /
costiuenes or vehement laskes.

Syckenesse of age.
Difficulty of breathe / reumes with coughes / strangulyon / and dyfficultie
in pyssynge / ache in the joints, diseases of the raynes, ^wymmynges in the
heed, palseyes, ytchynge of all the body, lack of sleep, moisture in the eyes
and ears dullness of sight, hardness of herynge, tisiknesse or shortness of
breath.

Although many of the said syckenesses do happen in every time and age, yet
because they be most frequent in the said times and ages, I have written them,
to the intent, that in the ages and times most inclyned unto them, such
things might be than eschewed, which are apt to ingendre the said diseases.

The general sygnifications and tokens of syckenes. Cap. 7.
IF the body be hotter, colder, moyster, drier, leaner, fuller, the color
more pale, or swarte, the eyes more holowe, than is accustomed to be it
sygnifieth that the body is disposed to syknes, or already sick.

The brain sick. Rauynge. Forgetfulness. Fantasye. Humors coming from the
roufe of the mouth, the eyes, the nose, or the ears. Watch. Sleep.

The heart sick. Difficulty of breathe. Trembling of the heart. Beatynge of
the pulse. Fevers. Cold. Diutrsite of colors. Grief about the heart.

The liver sick. Lack or abu^dau^ce of humors. The form of the body
alteted. Palenes. Concoction. Digestion. Alteration of excrementes accustomed.
Pain in the place of the liver. Swellynge. Difficulty of breath.

The stomach sick. Concoction, slow or quycke. Appetite of moist or dry,
dull or quycke. Separation of excreme^tes moist or hard with their colors.
Yexynge. Belkynge. Vometynge with pain and difficulty of brethe. Vryne much
or lyttel with the color and substance to read or to pale, to thick or to
thynne

The breaste. Difficulty of breathe. Cowgh. Spyttynge. Pain in the breaste.

This have I written, not to give iudgemen^ thereby, but only for the pacyent
to have in a redynesse, to the intent, that what so ever he feleth or
perceyueth in every of the said things thereof to instruct his physician,
whereunto he may adapt his counsel and remedies.

Of vrynes. Cap. viii.
FOrasmoch as now a days the most commune judgment in syckenesse is by
vrines, which being far carried or much meued, or standing long after that
it is made, the form thereof is so altered, that the phisytion shall not
perfytely perceive the natural color, nor contents, although it be never so
well chaufed at the fire, as Actuarius and other greatte learned men do affirm.
I will therefore somewhat speak of vrines, not so much as a physician knows,
but as much as is necessarieto every man for to perceive the place and cause
of his grief, whereby he may the better instruct the Physician.

First in urine, four things are to be considered, that is to say, the
substance, the color, the regions or parts of the urine, and the contents or
things therein contained.

Also forasmoch as in the body of man be four qualities, heat, cold,
moisture, and dryth, two of them heat and cold, are causes of the color, dryth
and moisture are causes of the substance.

Moreover in vryne, being in a vessel apt there unto be seen, are three
regio^s. The lowest region in the bottom of the vrynall, containing the space
of two fyngers or little more. The myddel region, from whens the lowest ended
unto the cerkele. The highest region is the cerkle.

The highness of the color sygnifyeth heat, the place, black, or grene,
sygnifyeth could.

Also the grossenes or thyckenesse of the vryne sygnifieth moisture, the
clerenes or thynnes, sygnifieth drithe.

The colors of vrynes.
Color of bright goulde. Color of gylte.
Perfyte dygestyon.
Red as a red apple or chery. Base read, like to bole ar^enake, or saffron dry
Read glowynge like fire.
Excess of dygestion.
Color of a beasts liver. Color of dark red wine. Grene like to colewortes.
Adustion of humors.
Leaddy color. Black as ynke. Black as horn.
Feebleness or mortifycation of nature, except it be in purginge of melancoly.
White clear as water. Gray as a horn. White as whay. Color of a camels
hear.
Lack of dygestyon.
Pale like to brothe of flesh sodden. The beginnynge of digestyon.
Citrine Color or yelowe. Subcitrine or paler.
The myddell of dygestyon.
White and thin betokens melancolye to have domynyon. White and thycke,
sygnifieth fleume. Read and thycke betokens sangnuine. Read and thin
betokenethe choler to have the souerayntie.
The substance of the urine. Cap. ix.
AT the first pissyng, all vrines well nigh do appear thyn, as long as they
abide warm, for natural heat, during the time that it prevails, suffers
not that the lycour, which is the substance of the urine, to con^^le or be
thycke for any occasion: but after that heat is gone, some vrines shortly,
some a longer time after, wax thyck, like wise sometime, some a(...)pissed
thicker, and after wax clear, some remain stylle as they were made, some be
metely thycke, as they were troubled, some very thick and gross. Thoi that
wax clear, sone do gather that, which is thick into the bottom of the vrinal,
some remayn troubled, the grossenes not withstanding gathered in the bottom.
Se^blably the diversity of thyn or subtyl vrines, must be perceived, that is
to say, that some are very subtle, as water, some less subtle, some in a
mean between thycke and thynne.

Of things contained in the urine, some do discende down to the bottom, and
be called in a greek word Hypostasis, in english some call it the grou^des,
some the resyde^ce, which if it be white, light, risynge up from the bottom of
the vrinall, like a pear, it signifies health, if it be of any other figure or
color, it betokens some a noyance. If like things be seen in the myddell of
the vrynall, they be called sublations, if they approach unto the highest
region of the urine, they be named clouds, in latin Nebule. The grou^des or
reside^ces not perfect, some is like lit ^e^le read vetches, and is called in
latin Orobea, some is like to bra^ne of wheat gron^de, and severed from the
meal, and is called branny reside^ce, in latin Furfurea, some be like unto
plates, having breadth and length without thycknes, and may be named platy
reside^ce, in latin Laminea, some is like to meal, wheat, or barley, and may
be named mealy residence, in latin Sunilacea.

There is also seen in the urine like to white hears, some lengar, some
shorter, so^tune like to rags somewhat red, there is also seen in the up
permoste part of the urine, sometime a foam or froth sometime belles or bobles.
sometime there swymmeth in the urine a thing like a copwebbe otherwhile there is
about the cerkle, as it were the re^tyng of clothe, sometime there is in the
urine like motes of the son, sometime like the matter of a sore, otherwhyle
like the sede of a man also grauelle or sand. And in these things may be
diverse colors, some white, some red, some between both, some yelow, some
graye, and some black. All this must be diligently marked, and thereof
separatly to advertise the Phisitio^, unto whom I refer the judgment of the
syckenes, for the cause before rehearsed, and for as much as the judgment of
them is very subtle.

Se^blably of ordure, whyther it be very thyn or very thick: what other matter
yssueth out with it, what color it is of the savor very great, litell or
none, if it were easyly expulsed, or peynefully, how often or how seldom.
Moreover of sweat, what color it is of, and of what savor if in tasting it be
salt, sour, bitter, or unsavory.

Also the vomit, if it be of one color or many, if it do smell horrybly, of
what humor it had most habundaunce, if it were fasting, or after meals, if
it were peynefull or easy.

Likewise spettil, whether it be thick or thin or mixed with blood or matter
corrupt, accordingly of the humor issuinge out at the nose, and if that be
blood, than whyther it be red, watrye or black.

Moreover, it may not be forgotten, to aduertyse the Physician of the diet used
by the pacient, as well before the syckenesse, as in the time of the sychenesse,
his age, the strength of his body, his exercise, and place, where he lengest
abode in his youth, whether it were hye or low, watery or dry, hot or cold.

This I trust shall be suffycient, to instruct a physician, he that desires to
know more particularly hereof, let him read the books of Hypocrates, Galene,
Cornelyus Celsus, Actuarius, Paulus, and diverse other late wrytters, for this
little treatise may not receive it.

The preceptis of the ancient physician Dyocles unto king Antigonus. Cap. 10.
We will now divide the body of man into four parts, the heed, boulke,
called in latin thorax, which conteyneth the breast, the sides, the stomach, and
entrayles. The belly, called in latin venture, conteyneth the panche and the
bowels. Also the bladder, called in latin vesica, in the which name is also
contained the cundites, by the which vryne passes. When any disease approaches
to the heed, these tokens do commonly precede, swimming in the hced, heed ache,
heuines of the brows, sounding in the ears, pryckynges in the temple, the
eyes in the morning do water, or wax dymme, the smelling is dulle, the
gummes do smelle. Wha^ thou felest such tokens forthwith pourge the heed with
somwath, not with vehement medecines, but taking I soap or Organum, and the
croppes of them boil with white or claret wine half a pynte, and therewith
gargarise your mouth fasting, until the fleume be purged out of your heed,
this is the easyest medicine in discrasies of the heed. It is also very wholesome
to gargaryse the mouth and breast with honey water, wherinto mustarde is put and
myngled, but first the heed must be rubbed with a warm clothe, that the fleum
may easyly come out of the heed. And if these tokens be neglected, these manner
of syckenesses do follow sone after, blared eyes, and humor lettinge the
sight, cleftes in the ears, swel lynges in the neck full of matter, called
the kings evil, corruption of the brain, poses, or reumes, heaviness of the
heed, and tooth ache.

Wha^ the boulke is like to suffer any sickness it is perceived by these
tokens, all the body is in a sweatte, the bulk most specially, the tongue wa
xeth thick, the spettyll is either salt or bitter, or cholerycke, the sides
and shoulders do ache without any occasyon, the pacient gapeth often, also there
does happen much waking, suffocations or lack of breath, thirst after sleep,
the mind is vexed with heuinesse, also the breast and arms are very could,
and the hands do trembele.

Against these thyges this remedy may be provided. After a moderate soupper,
assaye to vomit without any medycine, vomyte is also profitable, which meat
does follow: He that in such wise will vomit, let him eat hastyly small
radysshe roots, townkersis, rokat, synuy, or purslane, and drink after it a
great quantity of warm water, and provoke him sesfe to vomyte. He that
sets little by the said tokens, let him fear these sycknesses following,
the pleuresie, the syckenes of the lunges, melancolye or madness, sharp fevers,
the fransye, the letargie, inflammation with yexinge.

If any syckenesse be toward the bealy, they may be espied by these tokens,
the bealye is first wrapped together, and in it self is troubled, all meats
and drinks do seem bitter in taste, he feleth heaviness in his knees, a
styffenes in his loins, a weariness in all his body without any occasion, a
slepynesse in his legs, with a little fever, when thou feleste these tokens,
mollyfie the bealy, not with medicyne, but with good order of diete, for it is
best and most sure, to use those things, whereof lightly may ensue none
annoya^ce, in the number of them are betes boiled in water of honey garlike
sodden, malowes, sorel, mercury, and all things condite in honey. Al these do
erpel the ordure of the belly: but if any of the said signs does more and more
increase, the lyquour, wherein the sede of Carthamus, callid also Cnicus, is
boiled, is a plesa^t and sure medicine, small colewortes boiled in a good
quantity of water, the licour thereof in measure* ii pintes, saving the third
part of a pint, with hon^ and salt being drunken, shall profit much. Cicer,
and the pulse called in la^^o ernum, in english I suppose chittes* in water
drunk fasting, has the same essect. To them, which set littel by the said
tokens, these diseases do suddenly happen, Flux of the bealy, bluddy flux,
slyppernes of the bowels, peynes in the guts, ach in huckle bones the fever
terciane, the gowte, the apoplexy or palsy in the lymmes, hemoroides, aching
of joints.

When the bladder is toward any sickness, it is perceived by these tokens,
fullness felt after little meat, brekyng wind downwarde and upward, palenesse
of color in all the body, heavy or troublous sleapes, the urine pale, and
passing forth peynefully, swellynges about the coddes and privy members. Wha^
these tokens appear, tha^ is it expedient to hauy remedy of odoriferous
things, which do expel urine, which shall be done without any peril with
the rotes of fenell and persely stieped one or two days in good white wine and
to drink thereof fasting every morning three ounces and two dra^mes, with the
water of wild carettes, or clycampane, which of these is next at hand, every
of the^ have like effect. Also water, wherein the peasyn called in latyne
Ciceres, are stieped, being drunk with wine, is like co^modiouse: he that
neglects the said tokens, let him look for these syckenesses fo lowynge, the
dropsy, the greatness of the spleen, grief in the liver, the stone, ache of the
back, or peynes in the raynes, the difficulty of urine, fulness of the belly.
In all these things that we have spoken of, we shall give to child^e^ most easy
medi cines, to me^ those, which be stronger in workyng.

This diete of Diocles, althought at this time it seems not most pleasant,
nor according to the practice now used, yet being tempred with that, which I
have before remembered, some thing may be found in it, which being
experienced, may be as commodious for the health of man's body, as that diete,
which is more curyous or pleasant.

Of them in wose stomakes meat is corrupted. Cap. 11.
THey in whom customably meat is corrupted, let them before that they eat any
meat assaye to vomit, drinking sweet wine, abstain from meat, that engender
botches infla^mations, fumous ructuations or vapors, and take such as noryshe
good juice, and chose them out, which do molyfy the belly, and at sundry times
take them. It is also good to take temperatly that which lowseth the belly, as
the medicyne called picra, and to absteyne from such things, whereby ill iuyre
is gathered, and do engender syckenesses, hard to be cured or never, as
goutes, boneache, peynes of the raynes etc.

Of the virtue of meats. Cap. 12.
HE that is studious about the co^seruation of health, he needs to know the
virtue ribasius (...) medici (...) fimp. 1.
of meats. The meat which has virtue to extenuate, or make humors subtylle,
it opens the poores, and brings forth that which is fast in the flesh,
it makes that which is clammye, subtylle, and does extenuate, or relent that
which is fat, it brings forth that which abides long in the bealy, but
that which is eaten, is a superfluity watery and coleryke, and at length makes
melancolike blood. Wherefore much vsinge of them is prohibited, specially to
them, that are colerike, and only serves for them that are replete with fleume,
crude or undigested humors, clammi or fat. The diete of fattinge things,
does nourish abundantly, so that the stomach and liver do digest well: meat
of good juice, makes good blood, but yet it stops the liver and spleen.
These do they, which make fat humors only, as the poulse callid Lenticula,
and they that are slimy like malowes, some do make fat humors, and be also
slimy, as fishes with hard shelles. Finally the diete, which does extenuate
and make lean, is more sure for keeping of health, than that, which fatteth
much. Norishing meats would be therefore moderateli used, when a man perceyueth
him self to have need thereof, it may be most sureli used of them that be
exercised temporately, and can sleep when they lust. They that can not sleep by
reason of exercise, let them eschew fattinge meats, let none ydelle
person attempt to use them. In the preservation of health, sluggardy is the
greattest mischief. Like as the temperate moving is good, so is the meat which
between thycke and thynne, is to man's health most convenient, which ingendreth
blood, according to the competent co^stitution of man's body, and therefore is
it to be chifly used. Meat of ill juice is always noiful, wherefore it ought to
be eschewed. Likewise the variety of meats is to be observed diligently, for
it is a great thing to couple well together things of contrary virtues. for
if they be not well digested, that which is received, may bring displeasure.

A diete preservative in the time of pestilenee. Capitulo. xiii.
THe bodies most apt to be infected, are specially sanguine, next colerike
than fleumatike last melancolyke, for in them the humor being cold and dry.
is most unapt to receive putrefaction, having also strayte passages, by the
which venim must pass. The lar^inus cinus.
diete convenient for that time is to abstein from meres inflaming and opening
the pores also from the heat of the son, from to much heat of fire, or
garmenus, from very hot herbs, and much use of tart things, except onions
and cikory, or radishe with vinegar for they do resist against venim, from
wine very furnishe, exercise incontinent after meals, from swetting, from all
thing is that will cause oppilations and putrefaction, from things hot and
moist, where moisture has the dominion in degree, specially being not
sufficiently boiled: also from milk, except it be in a littel qua^tite, and
that with a litel sugar. Frutis and herbs cold and dry, and there with sour or
somewhat bitter, are not prohibited. If ye eat figs, grapes, or sweet
cheries, eat after them of an orange with salt. If ye eat things cold and
moist, as cucu^bers, melones, fyshe soft and fresh, or damsyns, eat by and by
after some fenell, and orange with salt, drinkinge therwyth a draughte of good
wine. Beware of musherons, much purslane, gourdis, and all other things, which
will sone putrify: not wythstandynge, I will not forbid eating of lettyse,
with a few myntes, or myxt with cynamom. All things sour ar commended, as
well in diete co^seruatiue, as in that which is curatiue or heals, except
where there is straytnesse of the breast, or weakness of the stomach, than
ought they to be tem, pred with sugar salt, almond milk, cynamom, pepper,
fenell, saffron, eggs / and some thing that is fat or unctuous. Capers ar
good to be used with vinegar. Chese very fat and salt / is not commended / no
more is colewortes / or any kind of pulse / except chittes: great peason /
rapes / nor spynache is good. Also there be forboden rokat and mustard / much
wine and eggs / except they be eaten with sorell sauce / vyneger / or juice
of orenges: persely and also parsnepes be good. new wynes be noyfull / let the
meat be somewhat more than drink. but yet susteyn not to much hunger nor
thyrst. beware of lechery / of a clowdy wether and close / eschew much resort
or thronge of people / wyndes com mynge from fe^nes or mores / from sleep at
none: use with your meat this poulder / sa^ders read / half an ounce /
cynamom three drammes and a half / saffron half a dram. After your meat /
eat a little of coriander sede / well prepared. In the morning / at a
temperate fire kembe your herd backwarde / cleanse your body and heed of all
superfluities: use also moderate fricasies / with sweet perfumes / and odours /
wash oftentimes your face and hands with pure vyneger mixed with rosewater. In
cold wether mixed it with myntes / baulme / rue / or myrtes / and some time
cloves. In hot summer with roses or vio lettes. Above all things use to take
white wine good / white vyneger rosette / water of roses / in equal porcio^s /
put there unto a littell seruale / or of the rynde of a citron, and drink
thereof a little and oftentimes wash therewith your hands and visage.

Medicynes preseruatyue against the pestilence, which be always most ready,
are these, a fygge with rue, and a wall nutte eaten fasting, also triakle, or
mithridate, to old men a dram weyghte, to young men half a dram, or a
scruple dissolved in vinegar and rose water, or in water of tormentyll,
seabiose or balm, if the plage be in summer: if it be in winter, put to the
waters some white wine. Also the pylles called commonly. Pillule Rasis, but in
deed they were invented by Rufus are very excellent, specially if the al^^,
which i^ it, be washed, and thereunto added a little Bolus armenus, and terra
sigillata. And if the person be of hot completion, a quantity of sorell
sede, and red coral, this confectioned with syrope of citrons, in cold
complexions or to old men with wine, use them every third day one pille at a
time, three hours or four before dinner or supper. If ye take triakle or
Mithridate, absteyne from meat at the least syx hours after. A piece of the
(...) of setuall, borne in the mouth preserves, from infection. In likewise
does sorell chewed fasting, and the juice sucked down. To poor men, Marsilius
was wont to grue a toste of bread steped in vinegar, with a piece of an onyon
or rewe. Al things which be cordial, that is to say, which do in any wise
comfort the barte, do resyste pestilence, vehement anger, or heuinesse, be
very perniciouse. Other more exquisite and costly preseruatyues, I purposely
pass over, which Marsilius, and othre physicians, do write of abundantly, for
as much as I desire to be in this warke compendiouse. One thing I had
almost forgotten, that there is no better preseruatyue, than to flee from the
place corrupted, betyme and far of, and to let none approach you, that has
made their abode, where the plage is fervent. More over receive not into your
house any stuff, that comes out of a house, wherein any person has been
infected. For it has been seen, that such stuff lyenge in a cofer shut by
the space of two years, after that the coffer has been opened, they which have
stand nygh to it, have been infected, and sone after have died. But there I
always except the power of god, which is wonderful, and also merciful, above
man's reason or counsel, preseruyng or strykyng whom, when, and where it shall
like his majesty, to whom be glory and praise everlasting. Amen.

Thus make I an end of this treatise, desiring them that shall take profit
thereby, to defend it against enuyous dysdayn, on whom I have set the
adventure for the love that I bare to my country: requyrynge all honest
physicians to remember, that the intent to my labor was that men and women
redynge this warke, and observing the counsayles therein, should adapte thereby
their bodies, to receive more sure remedy by the medicines prepared by good
physicians in dangerous sykenesses, they keeping good diet, and infourmynge
dilygently the same physicians, of the manner of their affectes, passyo^s, and
sensyble tokens. And so shall the noble and most necessary science of
physic, with the ministers thereof / escape the sclaunder / which they (...)
of long time sustained / and according to the precepte of the wise man / be
worthily honored / for asmoche as the highest god did create the physician /
for man's necessity. And of the earth created medicine / and the wise man shall
not abhor it. Thus fare ye well gentyl reders / and forget me not with your
good report / and pray to God that I be never wars occupied.

Londini in aedibus Thomae Berthe leti typis impress. Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum. ANNO. M. D. XXXIX.


