By the Queen.
A proclamation concernnig the Soldiers appointed to serve in her Majesty's
service beyond the Seas, under the charge Sir John Norris and Sir Francis Drake.
THe Queens most excellent Majesty, having ordered that a certain number of
Soldiers and Sailers shall be forthwith levied and prested to repair into
the parts of beyond the Seas, there to be employed in her Highness service and
pay: the charge of leuying, presting, mustring, arming, transporting and
commanding of which Soldiers and Sailers, her Majesty has by her special
commission, committed to Sir John Norris, and Sir Francis Drake knights, and to
such officers and other persons, whom they or either of them shall by writing
under their hand depute in this behalf: does straightly charge and command,
that all such persons, who have already, or shall receive any pressed money of the
said Sir John Norris, Sir Francis Drake, or of either of them, or of their
abouesaid officers for this service now committed unto them, (...) wherein the
said Soldiers and Sailers, or other persons are to be used, shall duly
observe and keep such order shall be given and limited unto them, for the day
and time of their repair to any place, whereunto they shall be by (...) said
Sir John Norris, and Sir Francis Drake, or either of them, or by their said
officers, appointed for their meeting, ^^^ping, and transportation. And if any
such person or persons shall to the contrary offend, or directly or indirectly
with^^^ themselves after the pressed money by them received: Her Majesty does
hereby notify, that every such person offending, and the offense duly
proved, shall be punished with death by Marshall law. For which purpose, and
for better execution hereof, to the furtherance of this her Majesty's service,
Her Highness has been pleased to ap^^^^ct Peter Crisp Gentleman, to be the
Provost Marshall: unto whom, in this service, her Majesty does will and
^^^^aund all Colonnels and Captains, all Justices, Majors, Shiriffes,
Bailiffes, Constables, Hedboroughs, and other her Officers, Ministers and
Subjects, to be aiding, assisting, and furthering, as they and every of them
will ^^ere for the contrary, at their uttermost peril.

Her Majesty does also hereby notify and straightly charge, that none of
these soldiers, prested as before, this her Majesty's service, shall sell, or
lay to pawn, any his or their Armor, Furniture, or Apparel: nor that person
or persons shall buy the same of any the said soldiers, upon pain to the
buyer, of loss of that he shall so (...), and imprisonment: and to the
soldier, for selling or laying to pawn his Armor, Furniture, or Apparel,
^^^ishment with death by order of Marshal law. And for the better avoiding of
abuse herein, the said souldours ^^^our and Furniture shall be marked with
aspeciall mark, for this purpose. Her Majesty does also further charge (...)
command all her abouesaid officers whatsoever, to make stay of any soldier
(not bringing his Pasport with (...), under the hand of the said sir John
Norris, or sir Francis Drake, or of any their Officers,) and of any other
vagarant persons, and the same to deliver, or cause to be delivered, to the
Provost Marshall, or his deputy or deputies. ^^^ing also hereby authority to
the said sir John Norris, and sir Francis Drake, and to either of them, and to
the quar^^^ Masters appointed by them, to quarter, and cause to be lodged, the
said soldiers and sailers in any City, ^^^ne, Borough, or Village, in their
iourneying and marching toward the Seaside, and during the time that (...)
shall tarry for wind. The contents of this her Majesty's Proclamation, her
Highness does straightly charge command all her Officers, Ministers, and
Subjects whatsoever, in their several charges and rule, to see due^^^^ted, as
they, and every of them, will answer for the contrary at their uttermost
peril.

Given at her Man Manor of Richmond, the three and twentieth day of January,
1588, in the one and thirtieth year of her ^^^^nesse reign.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.


