A proclamacion divised by the kings highness, with thaduise of his most
honorable counsel, for the restraynte of shootyng in handegunnes.
WHere the king our most drad sovereign lord, considerying how expedient it
was to have his loving subjects practiced and exercised in the feate of
shootyng of handegunnes and hagbusshes, as well for the defense of this his
highness realm and other his realms and dominions, as for the annoyaunce of
his maiestees ennemies in time of war and hostilitee, did by his highness
proclamacion set forth, by the advice of his maiestees counsel, according to
the act and statute made at Westminster the.xxviii. day of April, in the.xxxi.
year of his most gracious reign, give license and libertee to all his
maiestees subjects, borne within his graces dominions, being of the age
of.xvi. years, and vpwardes, That they and every of them, from and after the
said proclamation made, might laufully shoot in handgunnes and hagbushes,
without incurryng any forfaiture loss or danger for the same: any statute
thereof made before to the contrary not withstandyng, as by the same
proclamation more at large does and may appear. For as much as it has
pleased god to remove from us the plage of war, and to send unto us a right
honorable and profitable peace, which (by gods grace) shall continue to his
glory, and to the honor and suretee of his maiestee and his succession, and to
the quiet and benefyte of this realm: His most royal maiestee therefore by
this his highness present proclamation, set forth by the advice of his
maiestees counsel, according to the act above mentioned, does not only make
void the said former proclamacion, but also straightly charge and
commands all and syngular his maiestees subjects, that they or any of them,
from the last day of August next coming, shall not shoot in any hand
gounnes, hagbusshes, or other gunnes, nor use or have the same contrary to the
tenor form and effect of his graciouse law and statute made in the
parlyament begun at Westmynster the.xvi. day of January, and continued
until the first day of April, in the.xxxiii. year of his most gracious
reign: Except any of his said loving subjects have his graces license under
his great Seal for the same, or otherwise lycenced or auctorysed by the same
statute made the first day of April, in the said.xxxiii. year of his said
most gracious reygne, upon the pain of the forfayture mentioned in the same
Statute. Wyllyng and commaundynge all and syngular Justices of the peace,
Mayres, Shyreffes, Bayllyffes, Constables, and all other his maiestees
officers, mynisters, and subjects, to have special regard to the dew
execucion of this proclamation, as they tender his maiestees pleasure, and
wolle answer for the contrary al their perilles.

God save the king.
Tho. Berthelet regius impressor excudebat.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendu^ solum.


