By the Queens Commandment.
FOrasmuch, as it is found by good proof, that many persons which have served
of late on the Seas, in the journey toward Spain and Portingale in coming
from Plimmouth, and other Ports of the Realm, have fallen sick by the way,
and diverse dyed infected with the Plague. And that it is likly that many will
have of purpose to come from the said Navy to the City of London, and so
consequently to the Court, whereby danger of infection may come to her
Majesty's household, and so approach to her Sacred person. Therefore it is
commanded by publication hereof both at the Court gate, and in all the Towns
within the Verge, that no person that has served within the said Fleet, shall
come to the Court nor within the Verge, except such as shall be specially sent
from those which were the Generals of the Navy, with letters to the Court:
which persons shall not enter within the Court gates, until the cause of their
coming from the Generals, with Letters of importance be notified to some of
her Majesty's Privy Counsel, and thereupon the Queens Porters warned to
suffer them to enter into the Court.

And if any such person shall contrary to this commandment from this day,
being the xxii. of this Month of July, attempt to come either to the Court or
within the Verge, and shall not immediately upon knowledge hereof depart with
convenient speed, the same shall be apprehended by the Knight Marshall and his
Deputies, or by any Justice or Constable dwelling within the Verge, and shall
be committed to the Marshalseas without any bail until he shall be
dismissed by some two of the Privy Counsel attending on her Majesty's person.

And yet it is not meant, but if any shall have necessary cause to come to the
Court, to exhibit any suite or information concerning his service in the said
Navy, the same person shall cause the same his suite or information to be sent
to the Court in writing, or by message to be brought by a person that has not
been in the said Navy and not known to infected, to be delivered either to
one of her Majesty's ordinary Maiesters of Requests, or to the Knight Marshall
or to some one of the Privy Counsel, by which means the suite may be duly
understood, and so a reasonable answer to be made thereto.

At Nonsuch 22. July Anno 31. Reginae Elizabethae. 1589.
Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most Excellent Majesty.


