A proclamation devised and made by the kings highness, by thaduise of his
majesty's counsel, the.xvi. day of May, in the.xxxvi. year of his highness
reign, that all frenchemen (not being denizens) shall depart this his realm
within.xx. days next after this proclamation publyshed and proclaimed, except
such as in the mean time, shall upon special suite to his highness, be
made denyzens. 16. May 1544
THE KINGS most royal majesty being informed, that where by a statute made
in the parliament, holden at Westminster, in the.xxxii. year of his most noble
reign, it was ordained and enacted among other things, that such of his
subjects as be rehearsed in the same, may reteigne and keep in their service,
certain nombre of strangers, which statute extends only to strangiers
borne in such realms dominions and countries, as be in leage and amity with
his highness, diverse of his graces said subjects, notwithstanding his
proclamations heretofore made, touching the wars and hostility at this time
meued, between his majesty and the french king, by reason whereof, all
frenchemen, not being denizens, may and ought to be reputed and taken for his
gracis enemies, the reteining and norishing of whom in this case, weieth to no
less, then to the nourishying and meintenance of his majesty's enemies: do
still keep and enterteigne great multitudes of frenchemen, not being denizens,
which for many respects and considerations, were mete to be expelled and
avoided out of this realm: His majesty therefore, by the advice of his most
honorable counsel, straightly charge and commands, that all manner of
persons, borne under the french kings obeysaunce (not being denizens) shall
depart and go out of this his highness realm of England, within.xx. days
next after this present proclamation made: Except such, as in the mean
time, shall upon special suite to his highness, be made denizens: Upon pain
that every one of them, doing contrary to this proclamation, shall be forth with
apprehended, and either sent to his gracis Galeys, there to be ordered as shall
apperteigne, or to be otherwise used, as the case shall require.

FVRTHERMORE his highness, considering the dangier of his laws, which his
loving and obedient subjects may incur, by entreteining of any frencheman,
not being denizen, during the time of the wars between his majesty and the
french king, straightly charge and commands, all and singular his subjects
of this his realm of England, that they and every of them, within.xx. days
next after this his majesty's proclamacion shall be made and publisshed, shall
expel and put out from their service families and wages, all manner of
frenchemen (not being denizens) and in no wise, or by any color respect or
means, shall after the said.xx. days next after this present proclamacion,
retain, socour, aid, comfort or meintein within this his highness said realm
of England, any of the said frenchmen, upon pain that every one of them, doing
or attempting contrary to this present proclamation, or any part thereof,
shall be accounted taken accepted and reputed, as an aydour fautour and succourer
of the kings enemies, and shall have and suffer such punisshement for the
same, as the laws of this realm do in such cases appoynte and determine
accordyngly.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
Tho. Berth. regius impressor excudebat.

CVM priuilegio ad imprimendu^ solu^.


