A DECLARATION OF THE CAUSES Moving the Queens Majesty of England, to prepare
and send a Navy to the Seas, for the defense of her Realms against the King of
Spaines Forces, to be published by the Generals of the said Navy, to the
intent that it shall appear to the World, that her Majesty armeth her Navy
only to defend her self, and to offend her enemies, and not to offend any
other, that shall forbear to strengthen her enemy, but to use them with all
lawful favors.

Jmprinted at London, by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. Anno Dom. 1596.

DIEV ET MON DROIT



A declaration of the Causes moving the Queens Majesty of England, to prepare
and send a Navy to the Seas for the defense of her Realms against the King of
Spaines Forces, etc.
TO all Christian people, to whom this Declaration shall come to be read or
heard, greeting. We Robert, Earl of Essex, and Ewe, Uiscount Hereford, lord
Ferrers of Chartley, Bourghcer, and Louane, etc. And Charles lord Howard,
Baron of Effingham, Lord high Admiral of England, etc. having the charge of a
Royal Navy of Ships, prepared and sent to the Seas, by the most excellent
Princess the Lady Elizabeth, Queen of England, France, and Ireland, etc. do
give all men knowledge, that the said Navy under our charge is by her Majesty
prepared and sent to serve on the Seas, for defense of her Majesty's Realms,
Dominions, and Subjects, against such mighty Forces, as we are advertised from
all parts of Christendom, to be already prepared by the King of Spain, and
by further provisions of Men and Ships daily sent for, are to be mightily
increased, to invade her Majesty's Realms: as heretofore in the year of our
Lord 1588. was attempted (even when there was a Treaty continued by both their
Commissioners for a Peace) with a greater Army then ever before in his time was
set to the Seas: though by Gods goodness, and the valor and wisdom of her
Noble and faithful Subjects, the same was notably made frustrate. And because
her Majesty has good intelligence of perfect amity with all Kings and
Princes of Christendom, saving with the King of Spain, who has this many
years most unjustly professed openly great enimitie by diverse actions, both
against her Royal person, and her people, and Countries, without any just
cause first given on her Majesty's part. Therefore we the said Earl, and Lord
Admiral, do ascertaine all persons, that we are most straightly commanded
by her excellent Majesty to forbear from offending in this our Uoyage of any
manner of persons of what Nation soever, except the said Kings natural
Subjects, or such others borne Strangers, as shall give to the said King
manifest aid, with Men, Ships, Artillery, Uictual, and other Warlike
provisions for invasion of her Majesty. Which her Majesty's commandment we
mean duetifully to observe: and do therefore give straight charge to al
persons that shall serve in this Navy underneath us, upon pain of extreme
punishment to observe the same. Yet to avoid all occasions that may breed
question, who they are, being not the King of Spaines Subjects, that shall be
charged by us to be manifest aiders for the furnishing and strengthening of the
said Kings forces, provided either by land or Sea, to attempt any invasion of
her Majesty's Countries: We do for the liquidation of this doubt, earnestly in
Gods Name, require and charge all persons, that are not the said Kings
natural Subjects, and yet that have given him aid with their Ships, Uictuall,
and Munition, as is above said, to withdraw all their said Ships prepared
for the war, and all their provisions of hostility out of any Havens of
Spain, or Portugal, or from the company and service of the Kings Ships
against our Navy, and therewith to return either to their own Countries, or
if they so shall like to come to our Navy: to whom in the reverend name of our
Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, we do promise all security, both for
their persons and gdods to be used and defended as friends, and to suffer al
their Ships and provisions, that were either taken by the King of Spain, or
intended for his service, or that shall be by the owners withdrawn from his
aid, to remain in their own free dispositions, so as the same be used in all
sorts as friends, and not as enemies to the Queens Majesty, and to us her
Generals. And if any shall upon knowledge of this her Majesty's most honorable
order, and of our promise (to observe the same as favorably as we may)
willingly and manifestly refuse to accept this our offer, and shall not
endeavor themselves to perform this reasonable request, tending to their good
and liberty, we shall then be justly moved, as by the law of Arms we may,
to take and use all such so refusing this our offer, as manifest ayders of the
King of Spain, with forces to invade her Majesty's Dominions, and so manifest
Enemies: and in such case of that refusal, if any harm shall happen by any
attempt against their Persons, Ships, and Goods by any our Navy, for the
ayding of the said King: there shall be no just cause for them hereafter to
complain, or to procure their natural Princes and Lords to solicit
restitutions or amends for the same. And for the more notification hereof, we
have thought good to have the Original hereof to be signed with our hands and
with our seals, to be seen by any that will require to read or see the
same: And likewise we have put the same in Print, in French, Italian, Dutch,
and Spanish, and have also caused the same to be distributed into as many
Ports of Spain and Portugal, as conveniently might be for the better
knowledge to be had in the said Ports, as also in all other Parts under his
subjection.

R. Essex. C. Howard.


