ORDERS, thought meet by her Majesty, and her privy Council, to be executed
throughout the Counties of this Realm, in such Towns, Villages, and other
places, as are, or may be hereafter infected with the plague, for the stay of
further increase of the same.

Also, an advise set down upon her Majesty's express commandment, by the
best learned in Physic within this Realm, containing sundry good rules and
easy medicines, without charge to the meaner sort of people, as well for the
preservation of her good Subjects from the plague before infection, as for the
curing and ordring of them after they shall be infected.

Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.

Orders thought meet by her Majesty and her privy Council, to be executed
throughout the Counties of this Realm, in such Towns, Villages, and other
places, as are, or may be hereafter infected with the plague, for the stay of
further increase of the same.
INprimis, all the Justices in every

2 First, they shall inquire, (...) inform habitants of the same Towns and
Parishes are, to be hable to relieve the poor that are or shall be infected, and
to be restrained in their houses.

by name of the County.

4 Item, they shall cause to be appointed in every

5* Item, the houses of such persons out of the the infection happen in houses
dispersed in Villages, and separated from other houses, and that of necessity,
for the serving of their cattle, and manuring of their ground, the said persons
cannot continue in their houses, then they to be nevertheless restrained from
resorting into company of others, either publicly or privately during the
said time of restraint, and to wear some mark in their uppermost garments, or
bear white rods in their hands at such time as they shall go abroad, and if
there be any doubt that the masters and owners of the houses infected, will not
duly observe the directions of shutting up their doors, specially in the
night, then shall there be appointed two or three watchmen by turns, which
shall be sworn to attend and watch the house, and to apprehend any person that
shall come out of the house contrary to order, and the same persons by order of
the Justices, shall be a competent time imprisoned in ye stocks in the highway
next to the house infected: and furthermore, some special mark shall be made
and fixed to the doors of every of the infected houses, and where any such
houses shall be Innes or Alehouses, the signs shall be taken down for the time
of the restraint, and some cross or other mark set up in the place thereof,
to be a token of the sickness.

alms and relief, will be more willing to give some portions of victual, as
corn, bread or other meat, the same shall be committed to the charge of some
special persons, that will honestly and truly preserve the same, to be
distributed as they shall be appointed for the poor that are infected.

7 Item, to appoint certain persons dwelling

8 Item, that in the shire town in every County,







such infection is, or the Justices next adjoining thereunto, to assemble once a
week, to take account of the execution of the said orders, and as they find
any lack or disorder, either to reform it themselves, or to report it at the
general assembly there, to be by a more common consent reformed.

13 Item, for that the contagion of the plague

14 Item, the said Justices may put in execution to the preservation of her
Majesty's subjects from the infection, and to the end their care and diligence
may the better appear, they shall certify in writing the said orders newly
devised, and if any shall wilfully break and contemn the same or any the
orders herein specified, they shall either presently punish them by
imprisonment, or if the persons so contemning them, shall be of such
countenance as the Justices shall think meet to have their faults known to
her Majesty, or to the Council, they shall charge and bind them to appear
before us, and the contempt duly certified, that there may be a more
notorious sharp example made by punishment of the same by order of her
Majesty.



manifestly by these orders, that according to Christian charity, no persons
of the meanest degree shall be left without succor and relief.

17 And of these things above mentioned, the

An advise set down upon her Majesty's express commandment, by the best
learned in Physic within this Realm, containing sundry good rules and easy
medicines, without charge to the meaner sort of people, as well for the
preservation of her good Subjects from the plague before infection, as for the
curing and ordring of them after they shall be infected.
Preservative by correcting the air in Houses.
TAke Rosemarie dried, Preservatives.
or Juniper, Bayleaues, or Frankincense, cast the same on a Chafindish, and
receive the fume or smoke thereof* Some advise to be added Lauender, or Sage.

Also to make fires rather in Pannes, to remove about the Chamber, then in
Chimneis, shall better correct the air of the Houses.

Take a quantity of Vinegar very strong, and put to it some small quantity of
Rosewater, ten branches of Rosemarie, put them all into a basen, then take
five or six Flintstones, heated in the fire till they be burning hot, cast
them into the same Vinegar, and so let the fumes be received from place to
place of your house.

Perfuming of Apparel.
SVch apparel as you shall commonly wear, let it be very clean, and perfume it
often either with some red Sau^ders burned, or with Juniper. And if any shall
happen to be with them that are visited, let such persons as soon as they shall
come home, shift themselves, and air their other clothes, in open air for a
time.

Preservation by way of defense in open air, and common assemblies to be used
outwardly.
IT is good in going abroad into the open air in the streets, to hold some
things of sweet savor in their hands, or in the corner of a handkerchiefe, as
a sponge dipped in Vinegar and Rosewater mixed, or in Vinegar, wherein
Wormwood, or Rue called also Herbegrace, has been boiled.

Preservative by way of inward medicine.
TAke a quantity of Rue, or Wormwood, or of both, and put it into a pot of
usual drink, close stopped, let it lie so in steep a whole night, and drink
thereof in the morning fasting.

In all Summer plagues, it shall be good to use Sorrel sauce to be eaten in ye
morning with bread, And in the fall of the leaf to use the juice of Barberies
with bread also.

Men's bodies are apt to take infectio^, either By the constitution of the
heart, the vital spirits being weak, and the natural heat feeble, in which
case things Cordial are to be used. By repletion, the body being filled with
humors, either Good, and then is the party to be let blood. Evil, and then is
he to be cured with medicine purgative.



Preservatives Cordialls.
Mithridates Medicine.
TAke of good Figs not wormeaten, clean washed, of Walnuts ye kernels
clean picked, of either of them an hundred, of the leaves of green Rue,
otherwise called Herbgrace, ye weight of ii. s. of common Salt the weight of
iiii. d. cut the Figs in pieces, and stamp them and the Walnut kernels
together in a mortar of Marble or wood a good space, until they be very small,
and then put your Rue leaves unto them, stamp and stir them well together
with the rest, last put in the Salt and stamp and stir these things
together, until they be encorporated and made of one substance. Of the which
take the quantity of ii. or iii. Figs every morning fasting, to children the
half will serve, and he that lists to increase or diminish the substance of
this Medicine, shall easily do it, by taking of a greater or less quantity of
the simples according to a due proportion.

A well approved Medicine to preserve.
TAke of the finest clear Aloes you can buy, in color like to a Liver, and
therefore called Hepatica, of Cinamo^, of Myrrh, of each of these the weight of
iii. French crowns, or of xxii. d. of our money, of Cloves, Maces, Lignum
Aloes, of Masticke, of Bole Oriental, of each of these half an ounce: mingle
them together and beat them into a very fine powder. Of the which take every
morning fasting the weight of a grote of this in white wine delayed with water,
and by the grace of God you shall be safe from the plague. No man which is
learned, if he examine the simples of this medicine whereof it consists, and
the nature and power of them, can deny but that it is a medicine of great
efficacy against the plague, and the simples whereof it is made, are easily to
be had in any good Apothecaries shop, except Bole Oriental, which is used in
the stead of true Bolus Armenus, whereof we have seen great store in the shopps
of master Rich the Queens Majesty's Apothecarie, and master Morgans in
Cheapsyde.

Take a dry Fig and open it, and put the kernel of a Walnut into the same
being cut very small, iii. or iiii. leaves of Rue commonly called Herbgrace, a
corn of Salt, then roast the Fig and eat it warm, fast iii. or iiii. hours
after it, and use this twyse in the week.

Take the powder of Turmentill, the weight of vi. d. with Sorrel or Scabious
water in Summer, and in Winter with the water of Valerian or common drink.

Or else in one day they may take a little Wormwood, and Valerian with a grain
of Salt. In another day they may take vii. or viii. berries of Juniper, dried
and put in powder, and taking the same with common drink, or with drink in
which Wormwood and Rue has been steeped al ye night.

Also ye triakle called Diaresserou^, which is made but of iiii. things of
light price easy to be had.

Also the root of Enula Campana, either taken in powder with drink, or hanged
about the br^^t.

Likewise a piece of Arras root kept in ye mouth as men pass in the streets,
is very good Cordial.

Take vi. leaves of Sorrel, wash them with water and vinegar, let them lie to
steep in the said water and vinegar a while, then eat them fasting, and keep
in your mouth and chewe now or then either Setwall, or the root of Angelica,
or a little Cinnamon.

Take the root of Enula Campana being laid and steeped in vinegar, and gross
beaten, put a little of it in a handkercheife, and smell to it if you resort to
any that is infected.

For women with child, or such as be delicate and tender, and cannot away with
taking of medicines.
MAke a tossed of white or of the second bread, as you think good, and sprinkle
on it being hot a little good wine vinegar, made with Rose leaves, and for
want of it any good common or used vinegar, and spread on the tossed a little
butter, and cast thereon a little powder of Cinnamon, and eat it in the morning
fasting. The poor which can not get vinegar nor buy Cinnamon, may eat bread
and Butter alone, for Butter is not only a preservative against the plague,
but against all manner of poisons.

When one must come into the place where infectious persons are, it is good to
smell to the root of Angelica, Gentian or Valerian, and to chewe any of these
in his mouth.

An other preservative for the poor.
IT shall be good to take an handful of Rue, and as much common Wormwood, and
bruise them a little: and put them into a pot of Earth or Tin, with so much
Vinegar as shall cover the herbs: keep this pot close covered or stopped, and
when you fear any infection, dippe into this Vinegar a piece of asyonge, and
carry it in your hand and smell to it, or else put it into a round ball of
Yuorie or Juniper made full of holes of the one side, carrying it in your hand
use to smell thereunto, renewing it once in a day.

To be used after infection taken.
FOr as much as the cause of the plague stands rather in poison* Curati^es.
then in any (...) of humors as other agues do, the chiefest way is to move
sweatings, and to defend the heart by some cordial thing.

Suppositary.
IF the Pacient be costiue and bound in his body, let him take a Suppositarie
made with a little boiled Honney, and a little fine powder of Salt, and so taken
in at the Fundament and kept till it move a stool.

An excellent Medicine made without charges.
TAke of the powder of good Bayberries, the husk taken away from them, before
they be dried, a spooneful: Let the Patient drink this, well mingled in a
draught of good stale Ale or Beer, which is neither sour nor dead, or with a
draught of white Wine, and go to bed and cast himself into a sweat, and
forbear sleep as is aforesaid.

An other sovereign remedy, that is a stilled water.
TAke the inward bark of the Ash tree, a pound, of Walnuts with the green
outward shelles, to the number of 50. cut these small, of Scabious, of Veruen,
of P^timorel, of Howsleeke, of every one a handful, of Saffron half an ounce,
power upon these ye strongest Vinegar you can get four pynts let them a little
boil together upon a very soft fire* and then stand in a very close pot well
sleep all a night upon the embers, afterward distill them with a soft fire, and
receive the water close kept. Give unto the Patient laid in bed and well
covered with clothes, two ounces of this water to drink, and let him be
provoked to sweat, and every six hours, during the space of xxiiii. hours,
give him the same quantity to drink. This Medicine for the worthiness thereof,
and because it will stand the maker thereof in little charge, it shall be very
well done to distill it in the Summer when the Walnutts hang green on the
tree, that it may be ready against the time that occasion serves to use it.

1. Blood letting.
IF the Pacient be full of humors which be good, let him immediately be let blood
upon the Liver vein in the right arm, or in the Median vein of the same arm
(if no sore appear) in the first day.

2. Medicine purgative.
FOr the poor take Aloes ye weight of vi. d. put in the pappe of an Apple: and
for the richer Pills of Rufus to be had in every good Apothecaries shop.

After letting of blood and purging (as shall be needful) some of the
forenamed Cordials are to be used.

These preparations thus used ye first day that the Pacient shall fall sick,
as cause shall be to use the one or the other (no sore appearing) in which case
if the sore shall appear, they are both to be forborne* the next is to use all
means to expel the poison, and to defend the heart by Cordials.

3. Medicament expulsive.
THe poison is expelled best by sweatings provoked by posset Ale, made with
Fenel and Marigolds in Winter, and with Sorrel, Buglosse and Borage in Summer,
with the which in both times they must mix the triacle of Diatessaroum, the
weight of ix. d. and so to lay them selves with all quietness to sweat one half
hour or an hour, if they be strong. For they that be neither full of humors
nor corrupt in humors, need neither purging nor letting of blood, but at the
first plunge may move themselves to sweat with Cordial things mixed with such
things as move sweat, and are before declared.

What is to be done when there is any rising or swelling in any part.
THen if by these three means the poison be expelled outward by Botches,
carbuncles or marks, called Gods marks, according as nature does expel, so
must the further procedings be, providing still, that they continue still in
the use of the cordial and moderate sweating now and then, all the time that
the sores be in healing, which must by the Surgion be handled with great
discretion.

Medicine to be used in ordinary diet.
IT is thought that the powder of hearts horn has a special prerogative, to
be used all the time of their sickness in their broths, and supping, which in
Summer must ever have Sorrel, Borage, Buglosse, and in winter, Betony, and
Scabious, or Morsus* Di^bol^* and if their habilities do not serve, let them
use it with Aleburies made with a little Nutmegge, or one Cloue, or with
Cawdelles in like manner* made with Cloves, Maces, Nutmegges, Sanders or such
like.

Both to preserve and cure the sickness.
TAke an egg and make a hole in the top of it, take out the white and y^lke,
fill the shel with the weight of two french crowns of Saffron* roast the said
egg thus filled with Saffron under the embres, until the shell begin to wax
yelow, then take it from the fire, and beat the shel and Saffron in a (...)
together, with half a spoonefull of Mustard seed* take of this powder a
french crown weight, and as soon as you suspect your self infected, dissolve it
into ten spoonfulles of posset ale, and drink it luke warm, then go to bed
and provoke your self to sweating.

To be used in the first time of the Sickness.
ANother is to take five or six handefull of Sorrel, that grows in the
field, or a greater quantity according as you will distill more or less of
the water thereof, and let it lie infrised or steeped in good Vinegar the space
of xxiiii. hours, then take it of and dry it with a linen cloth put into a
Limbecke, and distill the water thereof: And as soon as you find your self
touched with the sickness, drink four spoonfulles of the said water with a
little sugar, and if you be hable, walk upon it until you do sweat, if not,
keep your bed, and being well covered, provoke your self to sweating, and the
next day to take as much again of it a little before supper.

Item, to provoke vomit with two ounces of rank oil, or walnutte oil, a
spoonefull of the juice of Celendyne, and half a spoonful of the juice of
radice root, so that the party infected do walk and not sleep, is better
then any letting of blood, or any purging. For the disease neither can suffer*
agitatio^ of humors, nor when one is infected, has no time to bleed or to
purge.

Outward medicines for to be applied to the sore.
The first.
TAke of Scabiouse two handefulls, stamp it in a stone mortar with a pestell
of stone if you can get any such, then put unto it of old swynes grease
salted, two ounces, and the yelke of an egg, stamp them well together, and
lay part of this warm to the sore.

The second.
TAke of the leaves of Mallows, of Camomill flowers, of either of them an
handful, of Lineseede beaten into powder two ounces, boil the Mallowe leaves
first cut, and the flowers of the Camomil in fair water standing above a
fingers breadth, boil all them together until all the water almost be spent:
then put thereunto the Lineseede, of Wheat flower half an handful, of swines
grease the skins taken away iii. ounces, of oil of Roses two ounces, stir
the^ still with a stick, and let them all boil together on a soft fire
without smoke, until the water be utterly spent, beat them all together in a
mortar, until they be well encorporated together, and in feeling smooth, and
not rough: then make part thereof hot in a dish set upon a chaf^ndish of
coals, and lay it thick upon a linen cloth applying it to the sore.

Another excellent medicine to ripen and bring out the Sore.
TAke a white Onion cut in pieces, of fresh butter three ounces, of Leven the
weight of twelve pence, of Mallows one handful, of Scabious if it may be had
one handefull, of Cloves of garlic the weight of xx. d. boil them on the
fire in sufficient water, and make a pultesse of it, and lay it warm to the
sore.

Another.
TO the sore it self do thus. Take two handful of Valerian, three roots of
Danewort, a handefull of Smalledge, or Louage, if you can get it, seethe them
al in butter and water, and a few* crommes of bread, and make a pultesse
thereof, and lay it warm to the sore until it break.

Another for the same.
IF you can not have these herbs, it is good to lay a loaf of bread to it,
hot as it comes out of the oven, (which afterward shall be burnt or buried in
the earth) or the leaves of Scabious or Sorrel roasted, or two or three Lilly
roots roasted under embers, beaten and applied.

A general medicine for all sorts of people taken with the plague, to be had
without cost.
TAke of ye root of butter burre, otherwise called pestilent wort, one ounce,
of ye root of great Valerian a quarter of an ounce, of Sorrel an ha^dful, boil
al these in a quart of water to a pint, then strain it and put thereto two
spoonfulles of Vinegar, two ounces of good Sugar, boil all these together
until they be well mingled, let ye infected drink of this so hot as he may
suffer it a good draught, and if he chance to cast it up again, let him take
the same quantity straight way upon it, and provoke himself to sweat, and he
shall find great help.

Time of continuance apart from common assemblies.
SVch as have been infected, should keep their house without being conversant
with the whole, until the sores shall have left running and be perfectly whole
and sound, which in sanguine and choleric persons will be healed sooner, then
in melancholic and flegmatike complexions.

SVch persons may not well be conversant with them which are not infected, for
the space of one month.

Infected clothes.
THe co^tagion suspected to remain in clothes, either woollen or linen, cannot
well be avoided by better means, then by fire and water, by often washing and
airing the same in frosts, and sun shine, with good discretion, and burning
the clothes of small value.

Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty. ()


