These be to require and charge you, and every of you, in the Queen's majesty's
name and behalf by virtue and authority of her graces commissyon to us
directed, that you be and personally appear before us, her majesty's
commissioners at the next coming, bringinge with you, then and there to
deliver unto us, to her highness use, fair written in parchment under your
signs and seals, a true and perfect certificat and answer, of al and every
article and thing hereafter ensuing, so as you will verify the same to be true
at your coming by your corporal other, and answer the contrary at all times
hereafter at your perils.
1 FIrst you shall enquire of al lands, tenements, meadows, pastors, woods,
vnderwodes, reuercions and hereditamentes within your parish which heretofore
did belong or appertain to any late monastery or priory, and were reputed and
taken as par^^l or member of the same, which before this time ought to have
come to the hands and possessyon, of the late kings of famous memory king
Henry the viii. or king Edward the vi. Queen Mary, or to the Queen's Majesty
that now is, by the dissolution of the same by force of (...). several acts
of parliament made at West minster in the xxvii. and xxxi. years of the reign
of the said late king Henry the viii. which have been or be concealed and
wrongfully detayned from her Majesty, her said father, brother, and sister, of
what yearly value the same is: and in whose tenure and occupation.

2 Item, of all colleges, chauntries, fre chapels, chapels of ease, within
your parish having bring within v. years next before the iiii* day of November.
Anno primo Reg. Cvi. (...) of all manors, lands, tenements, rentes, tithes,
pentions, portions, and other hereditaments to them or any of them then
belonging, which ought to come to the hands of the Queen's Majesty by force of
an act of parliament made for the dessolution of the same in the first year of
the reign of the same late king Edward or which by any ways or means, were
desolued or extingguished, since the.iiii. day of February in the.xxvii. year
of king Henry the.viii. being yet concealed from her highness, and so have been
from her graces said brother and sister.

3. Item what lands, tenementes and hereditamentes, were appointed to the
findinge of a priest for ever, and wherewith any priest has been mayntained or
found at any time within the said v. years, which were not in the real
possessyon of the late king Edward the vi. nor Queen Mary: nor yet be come to
the Queen's Majesty that now is.

4. Item what annual rentes, profets, or emolumentes, at any time within the
said v. years have been employed toward the finding of any stipendary priest
(en tended by any act or writing to have continuance for ever) yet concealed
from her highness, and have been co^cealed from her graces said brother and
sister.

5. Item what lands, tenements, hereditaments, profits and other things have been by any conueyance appointed to the finding of a priest for years, and
wherewith any priest has been found within the said v. years, likewise
concealed from her highness as before is said.

6. Item what lands, tenements, and hereditaments have been appointed wholly to
the finding of any Aniuersary, Obite, light, lamp, or other like intent or
purpose for ever, which have been kept within the said v. years, yet concealed
from her highness, and have been concealed from her graces brother and sister.

7. Item, whereas part of the issues of such lands were appointed to the
intents aforesaid for ever, that then you do enquire what greatest some of money
has been employed about thentents aforsaid, in any one year within v. years
above said, yet co^cealed from her highness and have been concealed from her
graces said brother and sister.

8. Item, you shall enquire what sums of money and profits by any manner of
conueyaunces were appointed to have continuance for ever, and what was the
greatest sum of money, that in any one year of the said v. years were employed
by any corporation, fraternity, company, or fellowship of mysteries or crafts
toward the finding of any priest, anniuersarye, light, lamp, or other like
thing: yet concealed from her highness and have been concealed from her graces
said brother and sister.

9. Item, how many brotherheds, guilds, and fratermittes not being felowships
of mysteries or crafts, be within your said parish, and what lands, tenements
and be reditamentes are belonging to any of them, yet concealed from her
highness, and have been concealed from her graces said brother and sister.

10 Item, what goods, cattels, plate, jewels, ornaments, or other moueables
late belonging to any the said colleges, chauntries, free chapel or
stipendary priest for the furniture of their several foundations ar yet with
holden from her majesty, by whom and of what value.

11 Item of al lands, tenements, and hereditaments, goods and cha^tels, which
ought to come to the Queen's majesty, by reason of any attaindor or forfeture of
any person or persons by treason, felony or murder, or such like offense or
offenses, which are concealed from her majesty, or have been concealed etc.

12 Item of all lands, tenementes, and hereditaments which ought to come to
the Queen's majesty's hands by way of escheate, viz. if any parson or persons
being borne without the Queen's dominions, inhabiting within the same have
purchased any manner lands or tenements to them and their heirs for ever, with
out the spetiall license of the prince, or if any parson or parsons holding any
lands or tenements of the Queen's majesty have died thereof seized, without
heir general or special, whereby the same lands ought to escheat to her
highness, or her graces progenitors, and are concealed and wrongfully detained
from her majesty or her said progenitors.

13 Item you shall enquire generally of al lands, tenementes, and
hereditaments given by any of the Queen's majesty's most noble progenitors to
any parson or parsons, for term of life or lyfes, or in tail, which ought
to reuerte and come to her highness hands by any manner of means or ways, in
reuersion or remainder, and have been or be concealed and wrongfully detayned
from her highness, or from her graces most noble progenitors, and if any such
you do find, then to enquire where the same do lie, and in whose possession the
same is, and to what use the same was first given and appointed, together with
the clear yearly value thereof, and who takes the profits of the same.

14 Item what sale and spoil of timber of any Castles, houses, or buldinges
have been made, by whom and to what value, and what has been taken from any of
the same, whereof the Queen nor her progenitors haueben answered any proffet.

15 Item how many of the said castles: manners and other edifices, be so decayed
that they cannot be repaired again with any reasonable charges.

16 Item to value what the stone, timber, glass, Iron and stuff, of suthe
ruinouscastels, or manner places and other edifices, ar worth to be sold.

17 Item what lead and belinettel has been taken from any the said castles,
late monasteries, colleges and chaunteries, by whom and to what quantie and
value.

18 Item what quantity of lead and belinettell is remaining in any such
place.

19 Item if any park be so decade of game, clousure, and wod, that the same
is not to be continued. Then to certify, by whom the same was made, and to
what value the same amounts.

20 Item to certify the quantity and goodness of the ground of every such
park, and for what yearly rent the same may be letten.

21 Item to certefie the state of the Queen's houses, in borowes and towns, and
what willrepayre the same. And whether the rent of any of them be decayed and
how the same may be revived.

22 Item if any be disposed to take a lease of any the said houses for the
term of years at the old rent and with reprations. Let them com to the
commissioners.

23 Item where any the said houses be so decayed that the same cannot be
repeared without over much charge, neither can be letten or de^^sed: Then
tocertefie what the timber, tile, glass, iron, brick: and other stuff of the
same is worth to be sold.

24 Item what timber or wodes have been spoiled by any wodward or other parson,
by color of reprations or otherwise.

25 Item what fines, prophets, or somes of money have been received by any
bailife, collector, or any other for any tenement, house, land, woddes,
heri^tz, ^^^rey or any other casualtie, for the which as yet the Queen is not
answered.

26 Item what fines will be given by any man, for any the Queen's majesty's
lands, tenementes or fermes, lying within your said parish.


