I R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT English royal blazon flanked by
the English lion and Scottish unicorn
By the King. A Proclamation for reforming sundry inconveniences touching the
Coins of this Realm.
ALbeit by sundry Proclamations heretofore published with the advice of Our
Privy Council, We have sufficiently manifested Our care and constant desire
to meet with such inconveniences, as either diminish the plenty, or impair
the just value of the Coins of this Our Realm; yet experience has made it
evident, that neither the severity of Our Laws, nor strictness of Our
Proclamations have effected that good, which in Our Princely care and
providence of the public weal, We have so much aimed at, but against all
Our endeavor and provision, far greater quantities of light Gold, then in any
former age has been known, are daily and continually uttered, to the great
deceit of Our Subjects; and not only so, but the waightiest of our Coin,
being culled out and sorted, is transported into foreign parts, to the
impouerishing of this Our Realm. And therefore finding these evils, (grounded
upon hope of gain) to break through all other politic Constitutions, We
have resolved, in pursuit of our Laws and Proclamations against those abuses,
to make trial, if by proposal of benefit to such as shall further Our
intention, though with Our own apparent loss, We may advance the plenty and
abundance of Coin within Our Realms: And therefore finding that the profit of
Our coinage (though already abated beneath the Rates of former times) does at
this present amount to the sum of twenty six shillings four pence for every
pound weight of Gold coined at Our Mint, besides some gain by sharing at the
same Mint; We have given order, that for and during the space of one year now
next ensuing, the same be reduced to the sum of fifteen shillings only,
including therein also the gain by sharing. And to the intent all Our loving
Subjects, that shall be occasioned to bring any Gold to be coined at Our
Mint, may have a just and full return thereof, without diminution; We do
hereby publish and declare, and it is Our express will and pleasure, that Our
Officers of Our Mint shall from henceforth, according to the ancient Law and
Custom of this Our Realm (ratified by authority of Parliament in the five
and twentieth year of the Reign of Our most Noble Progenitor King Edward the
third, and in the ninth year of the Reign of King Henry the fifth) receive
Gold and Silver into Our Mint by weight, and shall deliver out the Moneys
thereof, when it shall be made, by weight or by number, at the election of him
which shall receive the same without delay or difficulty.

And whereas, for the reducing of Our Gold coin to the same price and value
which it bare in foreign parts, whereby the transportation thereof might more
easily be prevented, We did heretofore advance the same gold Coin in every
twenty Shillings, two Shillings, and according to that proportion in greater
or lesser pieces of Gold, by which means the same Coins are not found so
useful for Our Subjects, both by the unaptness for tale, occasioning
fractions and perplexities in reckonings, and by the inequality of the sum,
causing our Subjects in some disbursements of Gold, to deliver more then other
wise they would, if the Coin were of an even proportion; WE have thought meet
hereafter to forbear the stamping of any more of those unequal Coins, and to
reduce Our Moneys hereafter to be made unto the ancient values of Coin in use
before the said advancement, intending nevertheless, and Our express will and
pleasure is, That such as are already coined, shall continue of the same value
as they be at this present: And therefore for the time to come, to remove such
inequality in Coins, We have resolved of certain Coins of Gold, which
together with those already coined, We will and ordain to be from henceforth
current within these Our Kingdoms of Great Britain, Ireland, and the rest of
Our Dominions (that is to say) One piece of fine Angel gold, of the value of
thirty Shillings sterling, stamped on the one side with Our picture crowned,
and in Parliament robes, sitting in a Chair, and at the feet a Portcullis,
with Our style, IACOBVS D. G. MAG. BRIT. FRAN. and HIB. REX: And on the other
side, Our Arms, with a cross flory, and the number of XXX. A circle about the
Escutcheon of Arms, charged with Flower-deluces, Lions, and Roses, with this
inscription in an outer circle, A DN^O FACTVM ISTVD, ET EST MIRAB. IN OCVLIS
NR^IS. Another piece of fine Angel Gold, of the value of Fifteen Shillings,
stamped on the one side with a Lion crowned, holding a scepter in the one paw,
and Our Escutcheon of Arms in the other, marked with the number XV. with Our
style aforementioned, and on the other side with a spur-rowell, and in the
midst thereof a Rose, and without the points of the rowell Flower-deluces,
Lions, and Crowns, with the forementioned inscription about, A Dn^o factum
istud, and est mirab, in oculis nostris. One other piece of fine Angel Gold of
the value of ten Shillings, stamped on the one side with the picture of an
Angel striking a Serpent, with the number of X. and Our style aforesaid round
about, and on the other side with a Ship with one sail displayed, with Our
Arms thereon, and with the like inscription, A Dn^o factum istud, and est
mirab. in oculis nostris. One other piece of Crown Gold of the value of
twenty Shillings, stamped on the one side, with Our picture Crowned with a
Laurel, with the number of XX. and Our style aforementioned round about, and
on the other side Our Arms crowned, with this inscription about, Faciam eos in
gentem vnam. One other piece of Crown Gold of the value of ten Shillings,
stamped with Our Picture and style last mentioned, and the number of X. on the
one side, and on the other side Our Arms Crowned, with this inscription about,
Henricus Rosas, Regna Iacobus. And one ^^her piece of crown Gold of the value
of five Shillings, stamped on the one side with Our Picture and style last
mentioned, and the number of V. and on the other side with the like stamp as
the ten Shillings piece.

And because the abuse of impairing Our Gold Coin is grown more frequent then
heretofore, by reason the delivering and receiving the same by weight (a matter
agreeable both to ancient and modern Laws and Proclamations) has been of
late greatly neglected, whereby Offenders have had more opportunity and
encouragement to clip, wash, and diminish the same Coins: We have therefore
thought good to quicken the said Laws, and former Proclamations; And therefore
according to the president of a Proclamation made in the Nine and twentieth
year of the reign of Our late dear sister Queen Elizabeth, which continued
in force till her decease, And of the like Proclamation since published by Us,
in the ninth year of Our reign of England, We do hereby declare, That after
the first day of September next, it shall be free and lawful for all and every
Our loving Subjects, to refuse in any payments, all pieces of Gold heretofore
Coined, which shall be lighter then according to the Remedies or Abatements
prescribed by the aforesaid Proclamation, made in the ninth year of Our
reign, That is to say, In every piece of gold current for 33. shillings, The
remedy and abatement shall not exceed 4. grains and a half. 22. shillings,
3. grains. 15. shillings 6. pence, 2. grains and a half. 11. shillings, 2.
grains. 5. shillings 6. pence, 1. grain. 2. shillings 9. pence. Half a
grain.

And all other pieces of Gold hereafter to be coined, which shall be lighter
then according to the remedies or abatements hereafter ensuing, (that is to
say) In every new piece of gold current for 30. shillings, The remedy and
abatement shall not exceed 3. grains. 20. shillings, 2. grains. 15.
shillings, 1. grain and a half. 10. shillings, 1. grain. 5. shillings, Half
a grain.

And to the intent all Our loving Subjects in all parts of this Our Realm may
have good and just Weights for the true weighing of all the said Coins of
Gold, and true and upright grains and half grains for the remedies and
abatements aforesaid, We have commanded the Master of Our Mint within Our Tower
of London now being, (the appointment thereof, being proper and peculiar to Us
only) to prepare and make ready before the said first day of September next a
sufficient number of upright Balances and true Weights, as well of every
several piece of Gold lawfully current in this Our Realm, as of the said
remedies and abatements, to be ready to deliver at reasonable prices, to be
rated by Our Commissioners for Our Treasury, or Treasurer of England for the
time being, to all such Our Subjects as shall require the same; And Our will
and pleasure is, That the chief Officers in all Our Cities, Boroughs and
Towns corporate of this our Realm of England, and Principality of Wales,
shall before the last day of the said month of September next, provide to have
one pair of the said Weights sufficient, at the hands of the said Master of
Our Mint, within every such City, Borough, and Town corporate, well and safely
to be kept, for trial of the Weight of the said Coins, as any occasion shall
be. And We straightly forbid all Our Subjects and others whatsoever, to have or
use any other Weights then as aforesaid for the said Coins of Gold, remedies,
or abatements, or any of them.

Given at Abthorpe the 31. day of July, in the seventeenth year of Our Reign
of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.
Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton, and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty. ANNO 1619.


