A PROCLAMATION concerning eating of white meats.
Published 6o Februarij 1542 Ao 32 Henrici Octaui as apereth by the book of
Martyrs
FORASMOCHE as by diverse and sundry occasions, as well hearrynge, lynges,
saltfyshe, samond, stockfysh, as other kinds of fyshe, ben this year skant,
and also enhaunced in prices above the old rate and comen estimation of their
valor: so that if the kings loving subjects should be enforced only to
bye and provide hearrynge and other salt store of fysshe, for the necessary
and sufficient sustentation and mayntenaunce of their housholdes and famylyes,
all this time of Lent, according is they have been wont in times past to do, and
should not be, by some other honest means releued therein, the same might and
should undoubtedly redounde to their importable charge and detrimente. And for
as much as his highness consydereth, how this kind and manner of fasting,
that is to say, to absteyne from milk, butter, eggs, and chese, and all
other white meats, is but a mere posytyue law of the Church, and used by a
custom within this realm, and of none other forte or necessity, but the same
may be upon good considerations and grounds altered and dispensed with from
time to time by the publyque authority of kings and princis, when so ever
they shall perceive the same to tend to the hurt and damage of their people.
The kings highness therefore most graciously considering and tenderynge the
wealth and commodity of his people, has thought good, for the considerations
above rehearsed, to release and dispense with the said law and custom of
absteynynge from white meats this holy time of Lent, And of his espiciall
grace and mere motion gives and grants unto all and syngular his subjects
within this his realm of England, wales, Cales, Guynes, Hammes, and in all
other his gracis dominions, freelybertis, faculty, and license, to eat all
manner of white meats, as milk, eggs, butter, chese, and suchelyke, during
the time of this lent, without any scruple or grudge of conscience: any law,
constitution, use or custom to the contrary not withstanding. Wherein never
the less his hyghnes exhorts, and in the name of god requires, al such his
faithful subjects, as may, woll, or shall enjoy this his said grant or
faculty, that they be in no wise scruple or doubtefull thereof, nor abuse or
turn the same into a fleshely or carnal liberty: but rather endeavor them
selves to their possible powers with this liberty of eating of white meats,
to observe also that fast, which god most specially requires of them: That
is to say, to renounce the world, and the devil, with all their pompes and
works, and also to subde we and repress their carnal affections, and the
cortupte works of their flesh, according to their vow and profession made
at the font stone. For in these points specially consists the very true and
perfyte abstinence and fasting of a Christen man.

Have (...) and (...) from year to year till the kings highness pleasure (...)
by his Mats p(...) H8 mense martij vide Ao 34 H8 made to continue yearly

GOD SAVE THE KING.
Thomas Berthelet Regius impressor excudebat. CVM PRIVILEGIO.


