CERTAIN select Prayers gathered out of S. Augustines Meditations, which he
calls his self talk with God.

AT LONDON Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate. 1574.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

Of the unspeakable sweetness of God.
O Lord which art the searcher of the heart, and tryer of the raynes, indue me
with ye knowledge of thee: O my comforter, and mirth of my mind, show the
light of thy countenance upon me, and be merciful to me: Appear unto me O my
sovereign delight, my sweet solace, my Lord God, my life, and the whole glory
of my soul. Let me embrace thee thou heavenly brydegrome: Let me possess thee
O endless bliss, let me lodge thee in the bottom of my heart: thou art the
blessed life, and the sovereign sweetness of my soul. Graft in me the true
love of thee, O my God, my helper, the tower of my strength, my castle and
deliverer in all my troubles. Open the entries of mine ears, thou word which
enterest swifter than any two edged sword, that I may hear thy voice. Thunder
down from above (O Lord) with a loud and mighty voice. Let the Sea rore and
the fullness thereof, let the earth be moved and all that is in it. Lighten
mine eye (O incomprehensible light) that I sleep not in death: flashe out thy
lyghteninges, and turn them aside, that they may not look vaynely. O savor
of life, make my taste sound, that it may savor, try, and discern how great
the abundance of thy sweetness is, which thou have laid up for them that put
their trust in thee. Give me a mind that may ever think upon thee, a heart
that may love thee, a soul that may honor thee, an understanding that may
feel thee, and a reason that may always stick fast to thee my sovereign
delight. O life to whom all things live, O life which art my life, and without
whom I am dead. O life whereby I am raised to life, and without which I am
forlorn. O life wh^^by I rejoice, and wherwithout I am sorrowful. O lively,
sweet, and lovely life, always worthy to be had in mind, where art thou I
pray thee, where shall I find thee, that I may give over in my self and stay
upon thee? Be thou near me in my mind, be near in my heart, be near me in
my mouth, be near me in mine ears, be near me to my help: for I pine away
for love of thee, I die for want of thee: As the heart desires the water
brooks, so longs my soul after the O God. The sent of thee refreshes me,
the remembrance of thee heals me: but yet shall I never be suffised, till thy
glory appear which is the life of my soul. My soul faints with longing
after thee, and with thinking upon thee: when shall I come and show my self
in thy presence O my joy. I had rather be a doorekeeper in the house of my God,
then to dwell in the tents of ungodliness? for one day in thy courts is
better then a thousand else where. O Lord hide not away thy face from me, in the
needful time of trouble, but bow down thine ear to me and hear me, make
have to deliver me, make no long tarying O my God. But wherefore hidest thou
thy face away? perchance thou will say, man cannot see me, and live. Behold O
Lord, I can find in my heart to dye, that I may see thee: let me see thee, that
I may dye here. I desire not to live, I had lever dye: I would feign be let
loose, that I might be with Christ: I covet to dye, that I might see Christ: I
refuse to live hear, so I may live with Christ. O Lord Jesus, receive my
spirit. My life, receive my soul. My joy draw my heart unto thee. My sweet
food, let me feed upon thee. My head, direct thou me. Thou light of mine
eyes, inlighten me. My melody, delight thou me. My sweet sent, refresh thou
me. Thou word of God, quicke^ thou me. My praise glad thou the soul of thy
servant. Thou everlasting light, shine thou upon it, that it may perceive
thee, know thee, and love thee. For the cause O Lord why it loves thee not, is
for that it knows thee not: and the cause why it knows thee not, is for
that it perceives thee not: and the cause why it perceives thee not, is for
that it comprehends not thy light, for thy light shines in darkness, and
the darkness co^prehendeth it not. O light of the mind, O lightsome truth, O
true brightness, which inlightenest every man that comes into the world: I
say, which comes into the world, but not which is in love with the world:
for he that loves the world and the things of the world, the love of God is
not in him. Drive away the darkness from the vpperside of the deep of my
mind, that it may see thee by understanding, know thee by perceiuyng, and love
thee by knowing thee. For who soever knows thee must needs love thee. Yea he
forgets him self and loves thee more then him self: he forsakes him
self, and comes to thee, that he may joy in thee. The cause then wherefore I
am not so far in love with thee as I ought to be, is by reason that I do not
thoroughly know thee: and because I have but small knowledge of thee, I have
also but small love to thee: and because I bear but small love to thee,
therefore have I but little joy in thee. By means of outward joys I raunge
from thee the true inward joy, and seek counterfeit comfortes in these outward
things. And so like a wretch as I am, look what love I ought to have yielded
unto thee alone with my whole heart, that have I set upon vanities: and therefore
am become vain by loving vanity. Hereupon also O Lord it is come to pass,
that I delight not in thee, nor stick not to thee: for my mind is busied
about outward things, thine about inward things: my thought is occupied in
carnal things, thine in spiritual things: my talk is inta^gled about
tra^sitorie things, but thou dwell in euerlastingnesse, and art the
euerlastingnesse it self, thou in heaven, and I in earth: thou love high
things, I low things: thou heavenly things, I earthly things. And how then
can these contraries agree together?

Of the wretchedness and frailty of man.
WRetch that I am, when shall my crookedness be made even to thy straightnes?
Lord, thou love solitariness, and I delight in company: thou stillness, and
I noise: thou truth, I leasing: thou love clennesse, and I filthiness. And
what more O Lord? Thou art thoroughly good, and I wholly evil: thou holy, I
profane: thou happy, I miserable: thou righteous, I unjust: thou lightfull, I
blind: thou living, I dead: thou the salve, I the sore: thou the joy, I the
sorrow: thou the souerein truth, I nothing but vanity, as all men living be.
Alas therefore my maker, what shall I say? Hear me O my Creator: I am thy
Creature, and without thee am already forlorn: I am thy creature, and am
already dead: I am thy workmanship, thy hands O Lord have made me and
fashioned me: Lord, despise not the work of thy hands.

I am by nature the child of wrath, a wild olive tree, a vessel of dishonor,
the vessel of Satan, an enemy to thee O God, a lover of my self, a cage of
unclean birds, all that ever naught is: Lord be merciful to my sins, for
they are many, graft me into ye true olive, make me a vessel to honor, take
from me selfeloue, pride and contempt of others, renew a right spirit within
me, that I may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy holy name for
ever and ever.

Behold O Lord, thou have set me down upon thy hands: Lord God read the
writing, and save me. I that am the creature, do groan unto thee that art my
creator: O refresh me. Behold, I thy workmanship do cry unto thee: thou that
art my life quicke^ me. Behold I thy handiworke look up to thee: thou that art
my maker recomfort me. Spare me O Lord, for my days are nothing. What is man,
which is but dust and ashes, that he should talk unto God his maker? Bear
with me for my talking to thee. Pardon thy servant for presuming to speak to
so great a Lord. Necessity has no law. Pain compels me to speak, and the
grief that I endure inforceth me to cry out. I am sick, and I call to ye
Phisician: I am blind, and I hye me to ye light: I have gone astray, and thirst
to return into the way: I am dead, and I labor for life. Thou art ye
Phisicia^, thou art the light, the way, and the life. Jesus of Nazareth have
mercy upon me: O thou son of David have mercy upon me: O welspring of mercy
harken to the diseased which cries unto thee. Thou light which passest by,
tarry for the blind, reach him thy hand that he may come to thee, and let him
see light in thy light. Thou living life, raise up the dead again.

What am I that speaks with thee? woe is me Lord: O Lord spare me. I am but a
rotten carcass, worms meat, a stinking coffin, and food for fire. What am I
that talks with thee? Woe is me Lord: O Lord spare me. I am an unhappy man,
even a sorry man borne of woman, shortliued, full fraught with many miseries:
even a man that is like unto vanity, matched with witless beasts, and
already become like unto them.

Again, what am I? a dark dungeon, wretched earth, a child of wrath, a
vessel meet for dishonor, begotten with uncleanness, living in misery, and
dying in distress. Out upon me wretch, what am I? Alas what shall become of
me? I am a sack of du^g, a coffin of rotte^nesse, full of lothsomnesse and
stinch: blind, poor, naked, subject to exceeding many necessities: woting
neither when I came into the world nor when I shall go out: mortal, and
miserable: whose days pass away as a shadow, whose life glaunceth away as a
shadow by Moonelight, growing as a flower upon a tree, and fading out of hand
again, now flourishing and by and by withering again. My life (I say) is a
frail life, a fleeting life, such a life as the more it lengtheneth the
shorter it is: the further it goes, the nearer it draws unto death. A
deceitful and shadowish life, full of snares of death. Now I am merry, and
anon I am sorry. Now I am lusty, and anon I am weak. Now I am alive, and by
and by I am dead. I seem happy for a while, and I am always wretched. One
while I laugh, and another while I weep. And all things are so subject to
unstableness, that nothing continues at a stay one hours space. Here withal
comes fear, trembling, hunger, thirst, heat, cold, faintness, and grief.
In the neck of these follows importunat death, which snatcheth up wretched
men unawares a thousand ways every day. He kills one with diseases, and
dispatches another with sorrows. He starueth this man for hunger, and pyneth
that man with thirst. He choketh some me^ with water, and strangleth other some
with a halter. He makes a hand of some men by fire, and deuoureth othersome
with ye teeth of wild beasts. He fleas this man with the sword, destroys that
man with poison, and causes some other man to finish his miserable life with
nothing, but some sodein fear. And yet there is one great misery above all
these: namely that whereas nothing is more certain the^ death, yet does not a
man know when he shall dye. Yea even when he thinks him self to have best
footing, then is he shaken down, and his hope perishes. For a man knows not
when, where or how he shall dye, and yet is he sure that he must needs dye.
See Lord how great man's wretchedness is, wherein I am, and yet mistrust it
not: how howge the misery is which I endure, and yet am not grieved, nor make
any move to thee. Lord I will cry out unto thee before I pass away, if
peradventure I may abide in thee, and not pass away. I will tell thee then, I
will tell thee my misery: I will not be ashamed to acknowledge my vileness
before thee. Help me my strength by whom I am underpropped, succor me my
power by whom I am vpheld, come my light by whom I see, appear my glory
through whom I rejoice, show thy self O life wherein I may live, O my Lord
God.

Of Gods Wonderful light.
O Light which Tobias saw, when with his eyes shet, he taught his son the way
of life. O light which Isaac saw inwardly, when his outward eyes were dim, and
yet he told his son what was to come. O light invisible, which beholdest all
the du^geons of man's heart. O light which Job saw when he openly foreshewed his
sons things to come, according as thou had taught him inwardly. Behold
how darkness ouerwhelmeth, ye dungeon of my mind: for you art light. Behold
how mistie dimnesse lies upon the waters of my heart, for thou art truth. O
word by which all things were made, and without which nothing was made. O word
which art before all things, and before which was nothing. O word which
createst all things, and without which all things are nothing. O word which
rulest all things, and without which all things are naught worth. O word which
in the beginning did say, let light be made, and light was made: say also
unto me, let light be made, that light may be in deed, and I may see ye light,
and know what soever is not light. For without thee I take darkness for light,
and light for darkness: and so without thy light there is no truth. Al is
error, al is vanity, there is no discretion. Al is co^fusio^, all is
ignorance, there is no knowledge. All is blindness, and there is no sight:
all is straying, and there is no way: All is death, and there is no life.

Of the mortality of man's nature.
O Lord the word, O God the word whereby all things are made and without whom
there is not any thing made. Woe is me wretch so often blinded, for that thou
art the light and I am without thee. Woe is me wretch so often wounded, for that
thou art the salve and I am without thee. Woe is me wretch so often ouerseene,
for that thou art the truth and I am without thee. Woe is me wretch so often
straying, for that thou art the way and I am without thee. Woe is me wretch so
often dead, for that thou art the life and I am without thee. Woe is me wretch
so often brought to naught, for that thou art the word by which all things
were made, and I am without thee, with out whom nothing was made. O Lord the
word, O God the word, who art the light by who^ light was made, who art ye
way, truth, and life in whom there is no darkness, oversight, vanity, nor
death. O light without which all is but darkness: O truth with out which all is
but leasing: O life without which all is but death. Lord say the word, that
light may be made, so as I may see the light, and eschew darkness: see the
way, and eschew straying: see the truth, and eschew leasing: see life, and
eschew death. Shine forth O Lord my light, my inlightening, and my welfare,
whom I will reverence: my Lord whom I will praise, my God whom I will honor, my
father whom I will love, my bridegroom to who^ I will keep my self. Shine
forth O light, shine forth (I say) to this blind soul of mine which sisteth in
darkness and in the shadow of death, and guide my feet into the way of peace,
that I may pass thereby into the place of thy wonderful Tabernacle, eue^ to
the house of God with the voice of gladness and confession. For true
confession is the way whereby I may enter unto thee which art the way, whereby
I may return from bywayes, and whereby I come again to thee which art the
way, for thou art the very way of life.

Of the fall of the Soul into sin.
AS long as I was without thee, I was as nothing. And therefore I was blind,
deaf, and senseless. For I did neither discern the good, nor shun the
evil, nor feel the grief of my wounds, nor see mine own darkness, because
I was without thee the true light which inlightenest every man that comes
into this world. Woe is me, they have wounded me and I was not sorry, they have
haled me and I felt it not. For I was as nothing, because I was without life
which is the word, whereby all things are made. And therefore O Lord my light,
mine enemies have done what they lifted to me: they have strike^ me, they have
berayed me, they have marred me, they have wounded me, and they have killed me,
because I shrunk back from thee, and am become as a thing of nothing without
thee* Alas Lord my life which made me, my light which have guided me, then
defender of my life, have mercy upon me. Raise me up again O Lord my God. My
hope, my power, my strength, my comfort, have an eye to mine enemies in the day
of my trouble, and rescue me. Let them that hate me flee away from my face, and
let me live in thee by thee. For they have lain in wayt for me O Lord and when
they saw me without thee, they despised me. They parted among them the
garments of the virtues wherewith thou had apparelled me. They made their
way through me, they trampled me under their feet, they defiled thy holy
temple with the filth of their sins, and they left me desolate and forpyned
with sorrow. I went after them blind, and naked, and shackled with the fetters
of sins. They dragged me after them round about from vice to vice, and from
mire to mire: and I went without strength before the face of him that pursued
me. I was a bondslaue, and yet I loved slavery: I was blind, and still I
longed for blindness: I was manacled, and yet I misliked not my manacles: I
thought bitter to be sweet and sweet to be bitter. I was a wretch and wist it
not. And all this came to pass, because I was without the word, whereby al
things are preserved, and without which all things are worse then nothing. For
like as al things were made by ye word, and nothing was made without it: even
so by it are all things preserved and mainteyned what soever they be, either
in heaven, or in earth, or in the Sea, or in any deepes. One piece should not
cleave to another: in a stone or in any of the things that be created, unless
they were mainteyned by the word, whereby all things were made. Therefore will
I stick unto thee O word, that thou may preserve me, for as soon as I step
aside from thee, I am undone in my self, saving that thou which made me have
also renewed me again. For when I had sinned, thou did visit me: when I was
falue, thou did lift me up again: when I was ignorant, thou did teach me:
and when I could not see, thou did inlighten me.

Of Gods manifold benefits.
WRetch that I am, my God, show me how much I am bound to love thee. Make it
appear to me how much I ought to praise thee. Make me to know how much I ought
to please thee. Lord thunder thou down into the inward care of my heart. Teach
me, and save me, and I will praise thee. For thou have created me when I had no
being: thou have enlightened me when I was in darkness: thou have raised me
when I was dead: thou have fed me with thy benefits even from my youth up.
This unprofitable worm which stinketh with sin, thou nourishest with all thy
singular good gifts. Open unto me O thou key of David, which openest and no
man shuts against him to whom thou openest, and shettest and no man opens
unto him whom thou shettest out. Open me the door of thy light, that I may
enter in, and both know, and acknowledge unto thee with my whole heart, that thy
mercy is great toward me, and that thou have delivered my soul from the
bottom of hell. O Lord our God, how wonderful and praise worthy is thy name
through all the earth. And what is man that thou art mindful of him, or the
son of man that thou visitest him? O Lord which art the hope of the Saints,
and the tower of their strength. O God the life of my soul, whereby I live, and
where without I dye. O light of mine eyes, by which I see, and without which I
am sightlesse. O joy of my heart and chearer of my spirits, let me love thee
with all my heart, with all my mind, with all my strength, and with all
intiernesse: for thou have loved me first. And why have thou done so to me O
maker of heaven, and of earth, and of the bottomless deep, who have no need
of me? Whereupon comes it that thou have loved me? O wisdom which openest
the mouth of the dumme, whereby all things were made, open my mouth, and give
me the voice of praise, that I may tell forth all thy benefits, which thou have
bestowed upon me from the beginning O Lord. For lo, I am, because thou have
created me: and the cause that thou did create me and account me in the
number of thy creatures, was thy foreordinaunce from everlasting, before thou
made any thing, even from the beginning, before thou did spread out the
heavens, when as yet there were no deepes, neither had thou yet made the
earth, nor founded the mountains, neither were any waterspringes yet broken
out. Before thou made all these things, which thou made by thy word, thou
foresawest be the most assured providence of thy truth, that I should be thy
creature, and also thou willeddest that I should be thy creature. And whence
comes this to me O most gentle Lord, most high God, most merciful father,
and always most meek? What had I deserved? what kindness had I showed, that
it should like thy royal majesty to create me? I was not, and thou did
create me. I was nothing, and of nothing thou made me somewhat. And what manner
of somewhat? not a drop of water, not fire, not a bird or fish, not a Serpent
or some of the brute beasts, not a stone or a block, not of those sort of
things which have but being only, or of those things that have but only
being and growing, nor yet of those kind of things that have but only being,
growing, and feeling. But above all these things, it was thy will to have me
both of that sort which have but being only: for I am: and of those that have
no more but being and growing: for I am, and grow: and also of those kind of
things which have both being, growing, and feeling: for I am, and also do both
grow and feel. Yea and thou have made small odds between me and the angels.
For I have received reason to know thee, at thy hand as well as they. But I did
well to say there was some odds between us. For they have the happy knowledge
of thee already in possession, and I have it but by hope. They see face to
face, I see thee i^ a riddle through a glass. They see thee fully, and I but
partly.

Of man's dignity in time to come.
1* But when the thing comes which is perfect, then shall the imperfect be
done away, at such time as we shall behold thee uncovered face to face. And
what should let us to be counted little inferior to angels, seeing that thou O
Lord have crowned us with the garland of hope, which is decked with glory and
honor, and seeing thou have inhonored us excedingly as thy friends, or rather as
fellows and coequals in all things with thine angels? Verily even so says
thy truth, they are equal with the angels, and they be the sons of God. And
what be they else then the sons of God, if they be made fellows with the
angels? They shall be the sons of God in very deed: for the son of man is
become the son of God. Truly when I bethink me of this, I am bold to say,
that man is not only little inferior to the angels, yea or haylefelow with
the angels, but also superior to the^, because a man is God, and God is a man,
and not an angel. And in this respect I may say that man is the worthyest
creature, because the word which in the beginning was God with God, the word
whereby God said: let light be made and light was made, (that is to say, the
angelical nature was made) the word whereby God created all things in the
beginning, even the self same word became flesh and dwelt among us, and we
have seen the glory of it. Lo here the glory, wherein I glory, when I glory
discretly. Lo here the joy wherein I joy, when I joy discretly, O Lord my God,
the whole life and glory of my soul. Therefore I acknowledge unto thee my Lord
God, that when thou createdst me endued with reason, thou did create me after
a sort equal with the angels. For by thy word I may be perfect to atteine
unto equality with the angels, so as I may have the adoption of thy children
by thine only begotten word, O Lord, by thy dear beloved son in whom thou
art well pleased, by our only coheyre, which is of the same substance and
euerlastyngnesse that thou thy self art, I even by Jesus Christ our only Lord
and redemer, our inlightener and comforter, our spokesman with thee and the
light of our eyes, who is our life, our savior, our only hope, who has loved
us more the^ him self, by whom we have assured trust laid up in store, and
steadfast faith to theeward, and entrance to come unto thee, because he has
given them power to become the children of God, as many as believe in his name.
I will give praise unto thy name O Lord, who by creating me after thine own
image, have made me capable of so great glory, as to become ye son of God.
This truly can not trees do, this ca^ not stones do, this (to speak generally)
can not any of the things do that move or grow in the air, or in the Sea, or
on the earth, in as much as he has not given them power by thy word to become
the sons of God, because they have not reason. For the power whereby we know,
consists in reason. But he has given this power unto men, who^ he created
reasonable after his own image and likeness. Certesse Lord it is by thy grace
that I am a man, and by grace I may be thy child, which thing, the other can
not be. Whence have I this O Lord the souerein truth, and true souerein, and
the beginning of all creatures? Whence have I this O Lord, that I may become
the child of God, which the other things can not? Thou art he that indurest
for ever, and thou have made all things at once. Thou have made man and beast,
stones and green things of the earth all at once. For there went no desert of
theirs before, there went no good turn of theirs before. Thou have created all
things only of thine own goodness: no creature had deserved more the^ other,
for none of them had deserved ought at all. And why the^ did thy goodness show
it self more in this creature which you have made reasonable, then in all other
that be without reason? Why was not I as all they be, or why are not all they
as I am, or I alone as they be? What had I merited? What had I deserved, that
thou should make me able to become the child of God, and deny the same
ability to all the rest? God forbid that I should think so. It was thy only
grace, it was thy only goodness which brought it to pass, that I might be
partaker of that sweetness. Of that grace therefore whereby thou have created
me of nothing, I beseech thee O Lord to give me the grace to be thankful unto
thee.

Of Gods almightinesse.
THy almighty hand keeping always at one stay, created the angels in heaven
and the silie worms upon earth, and yet was neither higher in the one, nor
lower in the other. For like as none other hand could have created an angel,
so could none other hand have created a worm. Like as none other could have
created heaven: so could none other have created a leaf of a tree. Like as none
other could have made a body: so could none other make a hear white or black,
but only thine almighty hand, whereunto all things are possible alike. For it
is not more possible with him to create a worm then an angel, nor more
impossible to spread out the heaven, than a leaf: nor easier to fashion a
hear, then to fashion a body: nor vneasier to stablish the earth upon the
water, then the waters upon the earth: but all that he listed to do, that has
he done. According as he listed he has made all things in heaven, and in
earth, and in the Sea, and in all deep places: and among all other things he
has also made me according as he listed, could, and knew how to do it.
Certesse Lord thy hand could have made me some stone, or some bird, or some
Serpent, or some beast: and it knew how to have done it: but it would not
because of thy goodness. Why then am not I some stone, some tree, or some beast?
Because thy goodness has so ordained it, and that thou should so ordeine
it, there were no merits of mine going before.

Of the incomprehensible praise of God.
HOw shall I do Lord, whence shall I have praise to praise thee withal? for
like as thou made me without mine advise, as it liked thy self best: so have
thou praise without me, as it likes thee. Thou thy self Lord art thine own
praise. Thy works praise thee according to thy manisolde greatness, thy
praise O Lord is incomprehensible. No heart can comprehend it, no tongue can
measure it, no ear can receive it: for these things pass away, but thy
praise O Lord continues for ever. Thoughts have a beginning, and thoughts
have an end: voices make a sound and forthwith pass away: the ear hears,
and the hearing cease: but thy praise stands fast for ever. Who is he then
that can praise thee? What man is able to utter forth thy praise? Thy praise is
everlasting, and not transitory. That man prayseth thee, which believes thee
to be thine own praise. The man prayseth thee, which acknowledges him self
unable to atteine to thy praise. O praise perpetual which never fadest: in
thee is our praise, in thee shall my soul be praised. It is not we that praise
thee: but it is thou thy self that do it, both thy self, and in thy self:
and we also have praise in thee. The^ have we true praise, when we have praise
of thee, when light allows light, for thou being the true praise yeldest us
true praise. And look how often we seek for praise at any other badies hand
then thine: so often do we forgo thy praise, because the other is shadowish,
but thine is everlasting. If we hunt after the transitory praise, we lose the
eternal praise. O praise eternal, O my Lord God of whom is all praise, without
who^ there is no praise. I am not able to praise thee without thee. Let me have
thee, and I will praise thee. For what am I of my self Lord, that I should
praise thee? I am but dust and ashes, I am but a dead and stinkyng dog, I am
but worms and rotte^nesse I. What am I to praise thee O most mighty Lord God?
How can the breath of no better then flesh, praise thee which dwell in
euerlastingnesse? Can darkness praise light, or death, life? Thou art light, I
darkness: thou life, I death. Can lying praise truth? Thou art truth, and I am
a man no better the^ vanity it self. How shall I then praise thee O Lord?
Shall my wretchedness praise thee? Shall stinch praise sweet sentes? Shall
man's mortality which is here to day and gone to morrow, praise thee? Shall man,
which is but rottenness, or the son of man which is but worms, praise
thee? O Lord, Can he praise thee which is breed, borne, and brought up in
sinfulness? Praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner? O Lord my God, let
thine own incomprehe^sible power, let thy unbounded wisdom, let thine
unspeakable goodness, let thine over passing mercy, let thy superabundant
pity, and let thine everlasting virtue and Godhead praise thee. Praised be
thou by thine own almighty puissance, and also by thy singular gracious
goodness and louingnesse, whereby thou have created us O Lord God the life of
my soul.

Of liftyng a ma^s hope up unto God.
ANd I thy creature will put my trust under the shadow of thy wings, and in thy
goodness where thorough thou have created me. Help thy creature who^ thy
gracious goodness has created. Let not that perish through my naughtiness,
which thy goodness has wrought. Let not that perish through my wretchedness,
which thy singular mercy has made. For what avails it me that you have
created me, if I shall sink down into mine own corruption? O God have thou
made all the sons of men in vain? Thou have created me O Lord: rule thou
the thing that thou have created. Despise not the work of thine own hands O
God. Thou have made me of naught O Lord, and if thou govern me not, I shall
return to naught again. For like as when I was not, thou made me of
nothing: so if thou govern me not, I shall yet again be brought to nothing in
my self. Help me O Lord my life, least I perish in mine own naughtynesse.
Lord, if thou had not created me* I should not have been at all, but
because thou have created me, I am. Now if thou govern me not, I am undone.
For it was not mine own merits, or mine own deseruings that made thee to
create me, but thine own most gracious goodness and mercifulness. That
louingnesse of thine O Lord my God, which made thee to create me, I beseech
thee let ye same make thee to govern me. For what booteth it that thy
louingnesse caused thee to create me, if I must perish in mine own
wretchedness, and that thy right hand govern me not? O Lord my God, let this
mercyfulnesse which caused thee to create the thing that was not created,
cause thee also to save that which is created. Let ye louingnesse which won
thee to create, win thee also to save, since it is no less now than it was
then: for thou art the very love it self and thou continuest always one.
Lord, thy hand is not shortened yt it should not be able to save, nor thine
ear deafed that it should not be able to hear: but my sins have put a
partition between me and thee, between the darkness and the light, between
the image of death, and life, between vanity and truth, between this wauing
life of mine, and that endless life of thine.

Of the snares of concupiscence.
SVch are the shadows of the darkness, wherewith I am covered in the dungeon
of this dark prison, wherein I lie grouelyng till the day may dawne and the
shadows vanishe, and light appear in the firmament of thy power. Let ye voice
of ye Lord in his strength, let the voice of the Lord in his mightfull power,
say: let there be light and let darkness be chased away, and let the dry
ground appear, and let the earth bring forth green herbs and such as bear
the seed and good fruit of the righteousness of thy kingdom. O Lord my
father and God, the life whereby all things live, and where without all things
are as good as dead, leave me not in my naughty thoughts, and give me not up
to the loftiness of mine own eyes. Take away my lusts from me, and give me
not over to an froward and fa^tasticall mind, but hold thou my heart to thee
that it may always think upon thee. Inlighten mine eyes yt they may look at
thee, and not be lifted up before thee which art the everlasting glory: but
that they may have a lowly meaning not medlyng with maruels that are above
them, and which are at thy right hand. Let thine eyliddes go before my
steps, for thine eyliddes peruse the sons of men. Assuage my lust with thy
sweetness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, that I may lust
after thee with endless lo^gyng, so as mine inward fast may not be allured and
deceived by vain things, to take bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter:
darkness for light, and light for darkness: but that I may be delivered from
the mids of so many trappes as are set by the enemy in the way of men's
hauntes, to catch the souls of sinners where the whole world is full: which
thing the Apostle saw, and passed it not over with silence, but said: what
soever is in the world, is either the lust of the flesh, or the lust of the
eyes, or the pride of life. Lo my Lord God, the whole world is full of the
snares of lust, which they have laid for my feet, and who can escape these
snares? Doutlesse even he from whom thou take away his lofty looks, so as
the lust of his eyes catch not hold of him: and from who^ thou take away the
lust of the flesh, that the lust of his flesh attache him not: and from whom
thou take away his froward and fantastical mind, that the pride of life do
not craftily beguile him. O how happy is he to whom thou do so, for he
shall escape unpunished. Now my redemer, I beseech thee by thy self, help me,
that I fall not in the sight of mine adversaries, nor be caught in the snares
which they have laid for my feet to bring my soul to the ground. But pluck
me out thou strength of my welfare, least thine enemies which hate thee may
laugh at me. Up Lord my God my strong champion, break the array of mine
enemies, and let them that hate thee flee away before thee. Like as wax
melts away at the heat of the fire, so let the sinners perish at thy
presence: but let me be hidden in the covert of thy face, and rejoice with thy
children as inioying my fill of all thy benefits. And thou O Lord God the
father of the fatherless, and thou mother of the motherlesse, hear the
shreekyng of thy children, and stretch out thy wings, that we may flee under
them from the sight of our enemy. For thou art the tower of Isreal's strength,
which neither sleep nor slumberest in keeping Israel, because the enemy
that assaulteth Israel does neither sleep nor slumber.

Of man's misery and Gods benefits.
O Light which no other light ca^ see: O brightness which no other brightness
beholds: O light which darkneth all other lights: O brightness which
blinds all outward sight. O light of whom comes all light: O sight of whom
comes all sight: O brightness in comparison whereof all other brightness is
but dimnesse, and all other light is but darkness. O light unto whom all
darkness is light, and all dimnesse, bright. O souerein light which no
blindness can over shadow, which no mist can dim, which no let can forclose,
and which no shadow can keep of. O light which inlightenest all things,
whole, together, at once, and ever, swalow me up into the depth of thy
brightness, yt I may see thee thoroughly in thy self, and my self in thee, and
all things under thee. Forsake me not, least ye shadows of mine ignorance
increase, and my misdeedes grow out of number. For without thee all things
are darkness unto me, and all things are evil, because nothing is good
without thee the true, only, and souerein goodness. This I know, and this I
confess O Lord my God, that wheresoever I am without thee, it is ill with me
for want of thee, not only without me, but also within me: for all abundance
besides thee my God, is nothing else but stark beggerie. But I shall the^ have
my fill, when thou appearest in thy glory. And thou O Lord my blissed life,
make me to confess my wretchedness unto thee, which I am fallen into by
slippyng from the unity of thy goodness the souerein and only good thing:
since which time, the manifoldnesse of te^porall things has carried me away
through my fleshly senses, and scattered me from one into many things: by
reason whereof plenty is become painful to me, and poverty plentiful, while
I raughted after this and that, and was satisfied with nothing, because that in
my self I found not thee the unchangeable, singular, and undivided good:
which had I once atteyned, I should no more want: which had I once gotten, I
should no more be grieved: which had I once possessed, my whole lo^gyng were
satisfied. Alas how misery comes upon misery, when my miserable soul is
fled from thee with whom it has abou^daunce and joy: and follows the world,
with who^ it has evermore scarcity and sorrow. The world calls me to undo me,
thou O Lord call me to revive me, and such is my wicked wretchedness, that
I rather follow him that undoes me, then him that reuiueth me. This is utterly
mine infirmity. O Ghostly Phisician, heal it, that I may give praise unto
thee the health of my soul, with all my whole heart, for all thy benefits
wherewith thou feedest me from my youth unto mine old age, and even till my
last gasp. I beseech thee by thy self, forsake me not. Thou made me when I
was not: thou redeemest me when I was forlorn: yea when I was both forlorn
and dead, thou came down to me, and tookest mortality upon thee. Thou being
my king, came down to thy servant: To redeem thy servant, thou gave thy
self: To the intent that I might live, thou tookest upon thee to dye, and
ouercamest death: Thou did set me up again, by abasing thy self low. I
was undone, I was gone away in my sins, I was sold to sin: the^ came thou
for me to buy me out again, and thou did love me so well, that thou gave
thine own blood for my ransom. Lord thou have loved me more then thy self:
for thou did find in thy heart to dye for me. Upon this condition have you
with so dear a price brought me back from banishment, rau^somed me out of
bondage, rescued me from punishment, called me by thine own name, and sealed
me with thy blood: that the remembrance of thee should be evermore with me,
and that he should never depart from my heart, who for my sake shunned not the
cross. Thou have anointed me with the oil wherewith thou thy self wart
anointed, that I might be called a Christian after thy name Christ. Behold
thou have registered me upon thine hands, to the end that the remembrance of
me might be always present with thee: yet notwithstanding, so as if the
remembrance of thee be always present with me. Thus the^ have thy grace and
mercy always prevented me. For thou have ofte^tymes delivered me from many and
great perils, O my deliverer. When I went astray, thou broughtest me back
again: when I was ignorant, thou taughtest me: when I sinned thou did
chastise me: when I have been in heaviness, you have cheared me: when I have
been in despair, you have reco^forted me: when I have ^ene fallen, you have
lifted me up: when I have stood thou have vphild me: when I have gone, thou
have guided me: when I have come, you have received me: when I have slept, you
have watched me: and when I have cried unto thee, you have heard me.

That God does continually behold and mark men's doings and intentes.
THese and many other good turns have thou done unto me O Lord my God the life
of my soul: and it were a pleasure to me to be always talkyng of them,
always thinkyng upon them, and always giuyng thee thanks for them, so as I
might ever praise thee for all thy good gifts, and love thee with all my heart,
and with all my soul, and with all my mind, and with all my strength, yea and
with the very bowelles and intrayles of my heart and of all my sinews, O Lord
my God the blessed sweetness of all that delight in thee. But thine eyes have
seen mine imperfection. Thine eyes I say are much clearer then the sun,
vewyng thoroughly all the ways of men, and the bottom of the deep, and in all
places always beholding both the good and bad. For in as much as thou
ouerrulest all things, fillyng every thing, and art wholly present at all
times and in all places, having regard of all things which thou have created:
(for thou hate not any of the things that thou have made) thou take such
heed to my steps and my paths, and keep such watch and ward over me day
and night, diligently markyng all my walks like a continual ouerseer: as
though thou had forgotten heaven and earth and all the creatures in them, and
had regard of me alone, without caryng for any of the rest. For the
unchangeable light of thine eye sight increases not to thy selfeward though
you look but upon one thing: neither is it diminished though thou look upon
sundry and innumerable things. For like as thou co^siderest the whole
perfectly at once: so thy whole sight beholds every several thing perfectly
at once, and whole together, be they never so diverse. Nevertheless thou
viewest all things as one, and each one thing as all: thy self being whole
together without division, or change, or abateme^t. Thou therefore being whole
at all times, beholdest me whole, at once, and always, without time, as if
thou had nothing else to think upon. Yea and thou stand in such wise my
guard, as if thou had forgotten all other things, and would task thy
self to me alone. For thou ever show thy self present: thou ever offerest
thy self ready if thou find me ready. Whether soever I go, you forsakest me
not, except I forsake thee first. Where soever I be, thou departest not from
me. For thou art every where, so as which way soever I go, I may find thee by
whom I may be, that I perish not without thee, since I cannot be without thee. I
confess in deed, that what soever I do, and where soever I do it, I do it
before thee, and what soever I do, thou see it better then I that do it. For
what soever I am workyng, thou art ever standing at mine elbow, a continual
beholder of all my thoughts, intentes, delights and doings. Lord, all my
desire is ever before thee, and al my thoughts are before thee. Lord, you
know from whence my spirit comes, where it rests, and whether it
departs: for thou art the weyer of all spirits. Thou know right well
whether the root that se^deth forth fair leaves abroad, be sweet or bitter:
yea thou searchest narrowly eue^ the very pith of the roots within, as a
judge: and by the discussing light of thy truth thou considerest, numbrest,
vewest, and perusest not only the intent, but also the very innermost pith of
ye root of it, that thou may render unto every man, not only according to
his work or intent, but also even according to the very inward and hidden pith
of the root of them, out of which the intent of ye worker proceeds. What
soever I purpose when I work, what soever I think, and wherein soever I
delight, thou see it, thine ears hear it, thine eyes behold it, and
consider it, thou markest it, thou take heed of it, thou notest it, and thou
writest it in thy book, be it good or evil: that afterward thou may render,
for the good, reward, and for the evil, punishment, at such time as thy books
shall be opened, and men shall be judged according to the things that be written
in thy books. And peradventure this is it that thou mentest, when thou saydest
unto us: I will consider the last of them: and which is meant when it is said of
thee O Lord: he considers the end of all things. For in all things that
we do, thou undoubtedly regardest more the end of the intent, then the act of
the deed. Now when I consider this O Lord my God, which art terrible and
mighty, I am abashed with fear of thine exceeding strength, because it
stands us greatly on hand to live justly and uprightly, for as much as we do
all things in the presence of the judge that sees all things.

That man can do nothing of him self without Gods grace.
MOst puissant and mighty-workyng God, ye creator of the spirits of all flesh,
whose eyes are upon all the ways of Adams children, from the day of their
birth, to the day of their departure, to give unto every of the^ according to
his works either good or evil: show me how I may confess mine own poverty.
For I said I was rich and wanted nothing, and I wist not that I was poor,
blind, naked, wretched, and miserable. For I believed I had been somewhat, when
as I was nothing. I said I will become wise, and I became a fool. I thought my
self skillful, but I was deceived, for now I see it is thy gift, without whom
we can do nothing, because that except thou keep the City, in vain does he
watch which keeps it. So have thou taught me to know my self, for thou have
forsaken me to try me: not for thy self that you might know me, but for me
yt I might know my self. For as I said Lord, I believed I should have been
somewhat of my self, I thought I had been a man able enough of my self, and I
perceived not how thou did govern me, until thou had withdrawn thee
a while from me: and then by and by I fell to mine own byas: whereby I saw and
knew, how it was thou that had ruled me, and that my falling was of my
self, and my rising again was of thee. O light, thou have opened mine eyes,
and waked me, and enlightened me. I see that man's life upon earth is but a
temptation, and that no flesh can glory before thee, nor any living wight be
justified, because that if there be any good in them, be it much or little, it
is thy gift, and we have nothing of our own but evil. Whereof then shall any
flesh make his boast? Of evil? That is no glory, but misery. But what?
shall he boast of goodness? Then shall he boast of that which is none of his
own. For goodness is thine O Lord, and thine is the glory. For he that
seeks his own glory by thy goods, and seeks not thy glory, he is a thief
and a robber, and he is like the devil who would have stolen away thy glory.
For he that will be praised for thy gift, and seeks not to glorify thee in the
same, but to glorify himself: although men praise him for thy gift, yet do
thou dispraise him, because yt by thy gift he has not sought thy glory, but
his own. As for him that is praised of men when thou mislikest him, men shall
not defend him when thou iudgest him, neither shall they deliver him when thou
co^demnest him. Wherefore O Lord which did shape me in my mothers womb,
suffer me not to fall into that reproach, that it might be cast in my teeth how
I would have stolen away thy glory. For all glory be unto thee, who art the
owner of all goodness: but shame and misery be unto us, who are owners of all
evil, except it please thee to show mercy. For thou O Lord have pity, yea
thou have pity on all things, for thou hate not any thing which thou have
made, but give us of thy goods, and inrichest us beggars with thy singular
good gifts O Lord God. Yea thou love the poor, and inrichest them with
thine own riches. Behold now O Lord, we thy children and thy little flock are
poor: open us thy gates that the poor may eat and be satisfied, and they
that seek thee shall praise thee. Also Lord, I know by thy teaching, and I
confess that none shall be enriched by thee, but such as feel the^ selves
poor, and acknowledge their poorenes unto thee. For they that take the^ selves
to be rich whereas they be poor, shall find them selves shet out from thy
richesse. I therefore confess my poorness unto thee my Lord God, and thine be
the whole glory, because the good that has been done by me is thine. Lord, I
acknowledge according as thou have taught me, that I am nothing else but all
together vanity, a shadow of death a dungeon of darkness, and a barrein and
wast ground, which without thy blessing bears not any thing, ne yeldeth any
fruit but confusion, sin, and death. If ever I have had any good in me, I
have had it of thee: what soever I have, it is thine, or I have it of thee. If
ever I have stood, I stood by thee: but when I have fallen, I have fallen of my
self: and I should have lain in the mire for ever, had not thou drawn me
out. I had been ever blind, had not thou enlightened me. When I was fallen I
had never risen again, had not thou reached me thy hand. Yea I had
continually fallen after thou had lifted me up, had not thou hild me up
still: finally I had oftentimes perished, but that thou did govern me. Thus
always Lord, thus always have thy grace and mercy prevented me, delivering me
from all evils, saving me from that was past, lifting me up from that was
present, and garding me from that which was to come: and also rippyng a sunder
the snares before me, and taking away all causes of annoyance. For unless thou
had done so for me, I should have committed all the sins of the world.
Doutlesse Lord, I know there is no sin which ever any man has committed, but
that an other man may do the same, if he want his creator by whom he was made
man. But look what I my self could not do, that have thou done. That I
forbear it was thy commandment: and that I believed thee, it was of thy grace
which thou did shed into me. For it was thou Lord that did rule me, both
to thee and to my self: and it was thou that gave me grace and light, that I
should not commit aduoutrie or any other kind of sin.

Of the devil and of his manifold temptations.
THere wanted a tempter, and thou wart the cause that he was wantyng: there
wanted time and place, and thou wart the cause that they wanted. The tempter
was present, and there wanted neither place nor time: but thou hildest me back
that I should not consent. The tempter came full of darkness as he is: and
thou did harten me that I might despise him. The tempter came armed and
strongly: but to ye intent he should not overcome me, thou did restreine him,
and strengthen me. The te^pter came transformed into an angel of light: and
to the intent he should not deceive me, thou did rebuke him: and to the
intent I should know him, thou did inlighten me. For he is that great red
dragon, and that old serpent, called the devil and Satan, which has seven
heads and ten horns, who^ thou have created to take his pleasure in this
howge and broad sea, wherein there creep living wightes innumerable, and
beasts great and small, that is to say diverse sorts of feendes, which
practice nothing else day nor night, but to go about seeking whom they may
devour, except thou rescue him. For it is that old dragon which was breed in
the paradise of pleasure, which draws down the third part of the Stars of
heaven with his tail and castes them to the ground, which with his venim
poysoneth the waters of the earth that as many men as drink of the^ may dye,
which trampleth upon gold as if it were mire and is of opinion that Jordan
shall run into to his mouth, and which is made of such a moold as he fears
no man. And who shall save us from his chappes? Who shall pluck us out of his
mouth saving thou O Lord, who have broken the heads of the great dragon?
Help us Lord. Spread out thy wings over us O Lord, that we may flee under
them from the face of this dragon that pursues us: and fence thou us from his
horns, with thy shield. For his continual endeavor and only desire is to
devour the souls which thou have created. And therefore we cry unto thee my
God, deliver us from our daily adversary, who whether we sleep or wake,
whether we eat or drink, or whether we be doing of any thing else, preaseth
upon us by all kind of means, assaulting us day and night with traynes and
policies, and shootyng his venomous arrows at us, sometime openly and sometime
privily, to flea our souls. And yet are we most lewdly ouerseene O Lord, in yt
whereas we see the dragon continually in a readynes to devour us with open
mouth: we nevertheless do sleep and riot in our own slothfulness, as though
we were out of his danger, who desires nothing else but to destroy us. Our
enemy to the intent to kill us, watches continually and never sleeps: and
yet will not we wake from sleep to save our selves. Behold he has pitched
infinite snares before our feet, and filled all our ways with sundry trappes,
to catch our souls. And who can escape them? He has laid snares for us in our
riches, he has laid snares in our poverty, he has laid snares in our meat,
in our drink, in our pleasures, in our sleep, and in our wakyng: he has set
snares for us in our words, and in our works, and in all our life. But Lord,
deliver us thou from the net of the foulers, and from hard words, that we may
give praise to thee, saying: Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us up to
be torn with their teeth, our soul is delivered as a sparow out of the net of
a fouler, the net is broken and we be escaped.

That God is the light of the righteous.
ANd thou O Lord my light, inlighten mine eyes that I may see the light and
walk in thy light, and not stumble into his snares. For who can escape these
so many snares, except he may see them? And who can see them, except he be
enlightened with thy light? For the father of darkness has hidden his snares
in his own darkness, to catch all such in them as be in his darkness, which
are the children of this darkness, and see not thy light, wherein who so
walks, shall not be afraid. For he that walks in the day, stumbleth not: but
he that walks in the night, stumbleth: because there is no light in him. Thou
art light O Lord, thou art the light of the children of light, thou art the
day which has none euentyde, wherein thy children walk without stumblyng, and
where out of who so walks is in darkness, because he has not thee the light
of the world. Lo, we see daily, that the further of that any man wandreth from
thee, so much the more is he wrapped in the darkness of sin: and the more he
is in darkness, so much the less does he see the snares in his way, and
therefore so much the less knows them, by reason whereof he is oftentimes
caught and falls into them, and (which more horrible is) he knows not that
he is fallen into them. Now, he that knows not his own fall, cares so much
the less to rise again, in as much as he weeneth that he is still upon his
feet. But thou O Lord my God the light of the mind inlighten now mine eyes,
that I may both see and know, so as I fall not in the sight of mine
adversaries. For our enemy laboreth to root us up, but we beseech thee make him
to be melted before our face as wax melts against the fire. For truly Lord,
he is the first thief and the last, and he took counsel to rob thee of thy
glory. But when he was puffed up and advanced, he did burst a sunder, and fell
upon his face, and thou threwest him down from thy holy hill, and from the
midst of the fiery stones in the midst whereof he walked. And now O Lord God
my life, he cease not to pursue thy children: and for hate of thee O mighty
king, he couets to destroy this thy creature, which thine almighty goodness
has created after thine own image to inherit thy glory which he has lost
through his own pride. But beat thou him down O our strength before he devour
us thy lambs: and inlighte^ thou us that we may espy the snares which he has
laid for us, and escape unto thee O joy of Israel. All these things do thou
right well know O Lord, who art acquainted with his stubburnnesse and exceeding
stiff neck, neither say I this to inform thee of it, for thou see all
things, and there is not a thought hid from thee. But I make complaint of mine
enemy at the feet of thy majesty O eternal king, to ye end that thou
should both damn him, and also save us thy children, whose strength thou
art. For why Lord, this is a turnecoate and a writhyng enemy, and hardly shall
a man find out the crinkes of his ways, or discern the looks of his
countenance, except thou inlighten him. For he is now here, now there: now a
lamb, now a Wolf: and seems sometime darkness and sometime light, offering
sundry temptations upon every manner of quality, place and time, according to
the sundry chaunges of things for to deceive the sad, he makes him self sad:
and to beguile them that be merry, he him self also prete^deth mirth: to
disappoint the spiritual sort, he turns himself into an angel of light: to
pull down the strong, he appears as a lamb: and to devour the meek ones, he
shows him self a Wolf. And according to the likeness of his sundry
temptations, he has all these things to work with all: that is to wit, to
scare some with fear of the night, some with the arrow that flies by day,
some with the pestilence that walks in the dark, some with breaking in, and
other some with the noone spright. And who is of ability to know all these
things? or who has discerned his wyles? who shall discover the shape of his
raiment, or who will take account of the teeth in his head? Behold he hides
his arrows in his quiver, and shrowdeth his snares under the covert of light.
And this is the harder to espy, if we get not light at thee O Lord our hope,
that we may see all things. For he hides dangerous snares, not only in the
works of the flesh which are easly known, nor only in vices: but also even
in the spiritual exercises: eggyng men to vice under the color of virtue, and
transformyng him self into an angel of light. These and many other things
does the son of Beliall, even Satan him self practice against us O Lord our
God. He lies in wayt to ketch our souls, one while as a Lion, and an other
while as a draggo^, openly and privily, within and without, day and night. But
deliver us thou O Lord which sauest them that trust in thee: that he may be
grieved at us, and thou may be praised in us O Lord our God.

Of Gods benefits.
I The son of thy handmayd who have commended my self into thy hand by these
my poor complaints, will praise thee my deliverer with all my heart, and call
to my mind all the good that thou have done me from my youth up. For I know
that unthankfulness does greatly displease thee, which is the root of all
spiritual evil, and a wind that blasteth and burns up all good, damming up
the fountain of thy godly mercy for ever. Through it, the works that be dead
already, revive not: and the works that be alive do dye out of hand and
recover not again. But I will give thanks to thee O Lord, least I be
unthankful to thee my deliverer for thy deliueryng of me. How often had that
dragon swalowed me up long ago, but that thou O Lord have plucked me out of his
mouth? How often have I sinned and he stood ready to snatch me up, but that
thou did defend me O Lord my God? When I dealt wickedly, and when I brake thy
commandments, he stood waiting to carry me away to hell, but thou withstodest
him. I offended thee, and thou did defend me. I feared thee not, and yet thou
did keep me. I started away from thee and yielded my self to mine enemy, and
yet thou did fray him away that he should not take me. These good turns have
thou done for me O Lord my God, and I wretch wist it not. For so have thou
oftentimes delivered me out of the devils chappes, plucked me out of the Lions
mouth, and many and sundry ways brought me back again from hell though I
wist it not. For I have gone down to the very gates of hell: but thou have
held me from going in. I drew near to deaths door, but thou have not
suffered it to take me in. Also thou have oftentimes preserved me from bodily
death, O my Savior, when I have been attached with sore sicknesses: And when I
have been in many dangers by Sea, and by land, thou have always stood by me,
deliueryng me from fire and from sword, and from all peril, and mercyfully
preseruyng me. Truly Lord thou know, that if death had dispatched me at that
time, hell had received my soul, and I had been damned for ever. But thy mercy
and thy grace prevented me, rescuyng me from bodily death, and also from the
death of my soul O my Lord God. These and many other good turns have thou
done for me, and I was blind and wist it not, until thou inlightenedst me. Now
therefore O light of my soul, my Lord God, my life whereby I live, the sight of
mine eyes whereby I see, behold thou have enlightened me, and I perceive how I
live through thee. And I yield thee thanks, though little worth and slender and
far under thy benefits, howbeit yet such as my frayltie has to give. For
thou only art my God, and my gracious maker, which love our souls and
hate none of the things that thou have made. Behold I am the chief among the
sinners whom thou have saved, that I may be an example unto others of thy most
merciful loving kyndnesse. I will acknowledge thy great benefits unto thee:
for thou have plucked me out of the bottom of hell, once, and twyse, and
thrice, and a hundred times, and a thousand times. Yea I always made toward
hell, and thou did always bring me back again, when thou might justly
have damned me if thou had would. But thou would not O Lord my God,
because you love men's souls, and bear with men's sins, yt they might
repent: all thy ways be full of mercy. Now therefore O Lord my God I see these
things and discern them by thy light, and my heart is astonished at thy great
mercy toward me, in that thou have delivered my soul from the bottom of
hell, and brought me back again to life. For I was stark dead, and thou have
made me thoroughly alive again. Therefore am I altogether beholden to thee for my
life, and whole as I am I yield my self wholly unto thee. Let my whole spirit,
my whole heart, my whole body, and my whole life live unto thee my sweet life:
for thou have delivered me whole, that thou might possess me whole: you have
made me whole new again, that thou might have me whole again. And therefore
let me love thee O Lord my strength, let me love thee O my unspeakable joy, and
let me live hence forth, not to my self, but unto thee. All my whole life
which was perished in mine own wretchedness, is revived again in thy mercy:
for thou art a pitiful and merciful God* and many are thy compassions toward
thousands, in them that love thy name. And therefore O Lord my God, thou my
sanctifier have commanded me in thy law, that I should love thee with all my
heart, with all my might, yea eue^ from the bottom of my heart, at all hours and
times wherein I enjoy ye benefits of thy mercy. For I should perish for ever,
but that thou rulest me ever. I should ever dye, but yt thou ever quickenest
me: yea every moment thou byndest me unto thee, in as much as every moment thou
bestowest thy great benefits upon me. Therefore like as there is no hour or
instant of time in all my life, that I have not the use of thy benefits: so
ought there to be no moment wherein I should not have thee in remembrance
before mine eyes, and love thee to thee uttermost of my power. But this am I
not able to do, except thou make me able, of who^ comes every good gift and
every excellent gift: for you art the father of light, in who^ there is no
change nor intercourse of darkness: for to love thee comes not of our own
will, or of our own running, but of thy mercy. Lord it is thy gift, whose all
good things are. Thou commau^dest us to love thee, give us that which thou
co^maundest, and command what thou will.

Of the feruentnesse of love or Charity.
I Am in love with thee my God, and I covet to be always in love with thee
more and more. For in deed thou art sweeter the^ all honye, more nourishyng
then all milk, and brighter then all light. And therefore I set more by thee,
then by all the gold, silver, and precious stones in ye world. For I mislyke
all that ever I have to do within this world: in respect of thy sweetness, and
in respect of ye beawtie of thy house which I have loved. O fire which ever
burnest and never go out: O love which ever glowest and never coolest,
inflame me: I say inflame me wholly that I may be wholly in love with thee. For
he loves thee the less, which loves any thing besides thee, except he love
it for thy sake. Let me love thee O Lord, because thou have first loved me.
Where shall I have words to utter ye signs of thy singular great love
toward me, considering thine innumerable benefits wherein thou have brought
me up from the beginning? namely eue^ from the benefit of the creation, when
at the first beginning thou made me of nothing after thine own Image, in
honoring and aduauncing me among the creatures which thou made, and
innoblyng me with the light of thy countenance, which thou imprintedst upon
the lamp of my heart, thereby disseueryng me as well from sensible as from
senseless creatures, and abasing me but little beneath the aungelles. And yet
was all this but a small matter in the sight of thy Godhead. For without
ceassing thou have daily nourished me with the singular and exceeding great
store of thy benefits: and thou have as it were suckled and stre^gthned me thy
little tender babe with the teates of thy comfort. For to the intent that I
should wholly serve thee, thou have appointed all thy creatures to serve me.

That God has put all things under the service of man.
THou have put all things under ma^s feet, to the end that man alone should
wholly be subject unto thee. And to the end that man should be wholly thine,
thou have made man Lord of all thy works. For thou have created all outward
things for his body: his body, for his soul: and his soul for thee: that he
might serve thee only, and love thee only, possessing thee to his comfort,
and all inferior things for his servants. For what soever is contained
under the cope of heaven, is inferior unto ma^s soul, which was made to
inherit the souerein goodness above, and to become happy by possessyng it.
Whereunto if he stick fast, he shall surmount the need of all the inferior
things which are chaungeable, and in everlasting immortality quietly behold
the souerein majesty, whereof he represents ye image. The^ shall he enjoy
those excellent good things in the Lords house, in comparison whereof, all the
things that we see, are accounted as nothing. Those be the things which no
eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor heart of man conceived, which God has
prepared for them that love him. And truly Lord, these things will thou give
unto my soul. With these do thou (which love men's souls,) daily glad the
hearts of thy servants. But why wonder I at these things my Lord God? Thou
inhonorest thine own image and thine own likeness whereunto they were
created. For to the end our body (though it be yet corruptible and bace) might
see: thou have given us the light of the sky by the hand of thine vnweeriable
servants the noone, who according to thy commandment do continual service
day and night to thy children. To the intent it might breath, thou have
granted us the pure air. To the intent it might hear, thou have given us the
diversity of soundes. To the end it might smell, thou have given us the
sweetness of sentes. To the end it might taste, thou have given us the
qualities of savors. To the end it might feel, thou have given us the
substaunces of all bodily things. To help him in his necessities, thou have
given him bearyng beasts. To refresh him with all, thou have bestowed upon him
the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea, and the fruits of the earth.
For every sore or disease of his, thou have created medicine and salve out of
the earth. And for every several evil, thou have prepared a several remedy
to encounter it, because thou art merciful and full of compassion, and thou
our potter know of what metal we be made, and how that all of us are as clay
in thy hand.

That the greatness of the heavenly wisdom is coniectured by the
consideration of the temporal benefits.
O Let thy great mercy be opened unto me: shine upon me yet more with thy light
I beseech thee, that it may be the more opened unto me. For by these least
things, we comprehend thy great things: and by these visible things, we
comprehend thine invisible things O holy Lord God, our good maker. For if thou
send so great and so innumerable benefits unto me for this base and
corruptible body of mine, from the sky and the air, from the land and the
Sea, from light and darkness, from heat and shadow, from dew and rain, from
wind and showers, from fowls and fishes, from beasts and trees, by
diversity of herbs and things that grow upon the earth, and by the service
of all thy creatures seruyng our turns by course in their seasons, to ease us
of our weariness: How excellent I pray thee, and how great and innumerable
shall these good things be, which thou have prepared for them that love thee, in
that heavenly realm, where we shall see thee face to face? If thou do so much
for us in prison, what will thou do in thy palace? Great and innumerable are
thy works O Lord thou king of heaven. For since that all these things be
exceedyng good and pleasant, which thou have delivered to good men and bad men
together in common: what manner of things shall those be, which you have laid up
in store for good men only? If the gifts be so sundry and so innumerable,
which thou dealest now as well to thy foes as thy friends: How great and
innumerable, how sweet and delightful shall those be, which thou will deal
only to thy friends? If thou give so great solace in this time of mournyng:
how great joys will thou give in the day of weddyng. If our prison conteyne so
many delectable things: how much more delectable things contains our fathers
house? O God, no eye without thee has seen ye things that thou have prepared
for them that love thee. For according to the manifoldnesse of thy mighty
works, so also is the great abou^daunce of thy sweetness, which thou keep
in store for the^ that love thee. For great art thou O Lord my God, yea
unmeasurable art thou, and there is no end of thy greatness, nor number of thy
wisdom, nor measure of thy mercy: neither is there end, number, or measure of
thy bounteousnesse. But like as thou thy self art great, so are thy rewards
great. For thou thy self art both the price and the reward of all thy lawful
combaters.

That the sweetness of God takes away all the present bitterness of the
world.
LOrd God which art the sanctifier of thy Saints, these are thy great
benefits wherewith thou will relieve the want of thy hungry children. For thou
art the hope of the hopeless, the comfort of the comfortless, and the crown
of hope bedecked with glory, which is prepared for the^ that get the upper
hand. Thou art the everlasting suffisance, which shall be given to the hungry.
Thou art the endless solace which give thy self to them only that despise
the solace of this world for thy eternal solace sake. For they that have their
comfort here, are unworthy of thy comfort. But such as are turmoyled here, are
comforted at thy hand, and such as be partakers of thy sufferaunces, shall also
be partakers of thy comfortes. For no man can have solace in both the worlds,
neither can a man joy both here and in the world to come: but he must be feign
to for go the one, who soever will be owner of the other. When I consider these
things O Lord my comforter, my heart refuses to have solace in this world, to
the intent it may be thought worthy of thy everlasting solace. For of good
right ought he to forgo thee, who soever has chosen to solace him self in any
other thing more then in thee. And I beseech thee O souerein truth, by thy
self I beseech thee, suffer me not to solace my self in any vain solace. But
I ask of thee, yt all things may be bitter to me, and that thou alone may
seem sweet to my soul: for thou art the inestimable sweetness, whereby all
bitter things are made sweet. For thy sweetness made even the stones of the
brook sweet unto Stephen. Thy sweetness made the greedyron sweet to saint
Laurence. By reason of thy sweetness, the Apostles went away rejoicing from the
counsel of the Jews, for that they had been counted worthy to suffer reproach
for thy names sake. Saint Andrew went quietly and joyfully to the cross,
because he hasted to thy sweetness. This thy sweetness did so replenish the very
chief of thine Apostles, that to come unto it, the one chose the galowes of the
cross, and the other was not afraid to lay down his head to have it stricken
of. To buy this withal, Bartlemewe gave his own skin. Also that he might
taste this, John drunk up a cup of poison vnfearefully. As Soon as Peter had
tasted hereof, by and by forgettyng all inferior things, he cried out like a
drunkenman, saying: Lord, it is good being here, let us make us three tents
here, and let us dwell here and behold thee still: for we want nothing else. It
suffiseth us to look upon thee Lord, I say it suffiseth us if we may have our
fill of so great sweetness. For Peter had tasted but one drop of that sweetness,
and yet he lothed all other sweetness. What think thou he would have said,
if he had tasted the great abundance of that sweetness of thy Godhead, which
thou have laid up for them that fear thee? This unspeakable sweetness, was
also tasted by that virgin of whom we read, that she went to prison as joyful
and triumphyng, as if she had been bidden to a feast. Hereof also (as I trow)
had he tasted which said: Lord, how great is the abundance of thy sweetness
which thou have horded up for them that fear thee? And so had he which
encouraged men, saying: Taste ye and see ye how that the Lord is sweet. For
this is that blessedness O Lord our God, which we look to receive of thy
gift, for which we serve thee in continual warfare, and for which we be
killed unto thee all the day long, that we may live unto thee in thy life.

That all our trust, and all the longing of our heart ought to be to Godward.
LOrd which art the waiting of Israel, and the desire where after our heart
does daily long, make have and forflow thou not. Up, hye thee apace, and come,
that thou may lead us out of this prison, to give praise unto thy name, and
to glory in thy light. Open thine ears to the shreekes and tears of thy
fatherless children which cry unto thee, saying: Our father, give us this day
our daily bread, that we may walk in the strength thereof day and night,
until we come to thy holy hill of Oreb. And I silie soul among the little ones
of thy household O God my father and my strength, when shall I come and stand
in thy presence, that as I now do praise thee for a time, so I may from thence
forth praise thee for ever? Happy shall I be, if I be once admitted to the
beholding of thy brightness. Who will do so much for me, as to get me leave at
thy hand to come to this point? I know Lord, I know and confess, that I am
unworthy to enter under thy roof: but yet give me leave for thine own honors
sake, and confou^d not thy servant which trusts in thee. For who shall enter
into thy Sanctuary to consider thy mighty power, except thou open it unto
him? And who shall open it, if thou shet it? For if thou pull down, there is
none that can build up: and if thou shet up a man, there is none that can let
him out. If thou hold the waters at a stay, all shall be dried up: and if thou
let them go, they shall ouerturne the earth. If thou bring all things which you
have made, unto nothing, who shall gaynesaye thee? But everlasting is the
goodness of thy mercy, whereby you have made all things that thou liftest. Thou O
maker of the world have created us, therefore rule us: thou have created us, and
therefore despise us not, for we be thy work. And truly O Lord our God, we
silie worms and clay, are not able to enter into thine euerlastyngnes, unless
thou which have made all of nothing, do lead us in.

That our welfare comes of God.
ANd I the work of thy hands protest unto thee in thy fear, that my trust is
not in mine own bow, nor that mine own sword shall save me: but thy right
hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance. Otherwise I should
despair, but that thou which have created me art my hope, because thou
forsakest not the^ that trust in thee. For you our Lord God art sweet and long
sufferyng, and orderest all things in mercy. If we sin, we be none of thine,
because we be out of thy books. But we be all of us as a leaf, and all men
living are but vanity, and our life upon earth is but a blast. Be not angry
with us if we thy fo^dlynges fall, for thou O Lord our God do know what
metal we be made of. O God which art of inestimable power, will thou show thy
force against a leaf that is tossed with the wind? or will thou follow upon
dry stubble? Will thou O everlasting king of Israel, will thou condemn a
dog? will thou condemn a flea? Lord we have heard of thy mercyfulnesse, how
that thou make not death, nor delightest in the loss of them that dye. For
this cause Lord we pray thee suffer not the thing which thou made not, to
have dominion over the creature that thou made. For if thou be sorry for our
damnation, what lets thee O Lord which art almighty, that thou should not
always rejoice in our salvation? Thou can save me if thou list: but I cannot
save my self, would I never so feign. Great is ye multitude of my miseries
within me. For why? to will, is present with me: but I find not how to bring
to pass. To will the thing that is good, I am not able, except thou will it:
neither ca^ I do that I would do, except thy power do strengthen me. Again,
that which I ca^ do, of times I have no will to do, unless thy will be done in
earth as it is in heaven. And though I both will and can: yet wot I not how to
do, unless thy wisdom inlighten me. Yea and although sometimes I have
knowledge joined both with will and with ability: yet does my wisdom pass
away imperfect and empty, unless I be helped by thy true wisdom. All
things are in thy will, and there is none that can resist thy will O Lord of
all things, which have the souereintie over all flesh, and do what thou
listest in heaven, in earth, in the Sea, and in all deep places. Therefore let
thy will be done in us, upon when thy name is called, so as this noble
handiworke of thine perish not, which thou have created to shine own honor.
And what man is he (if he were borne of a woman) that lives and shall not see
death, or can deliver his own soul from the hand of hell, except thou only
which art the lively way of all life, whereby all things live, do rescue him?

That ma^s will is unable to do good works, without the grace of God.
I Have even now confessed unto thee that thou art the stay of my life O Lord
my God the strength of my welfare. The time has been that I have trusted in
mine own strength, which notwithstanding was no strength. And so when I would
have run, where I thought my self to stand fastest, there did I most fall,
and was rather cast behind then set foreward: and the thing that I thought to
catch, was further and further of from me. So tryest thou my strength by many
like things. Now know I that thou have enlightened me. For look what I thought
my self best able to do, that was I ever least able to do of my self. For I
said, I will do this, and I will go through with that: but when it came to ye
point, I could do none of them both. When I had a will to do it, I wanted
ableness: and when I was able, I wanted will, because I trusted to mine own
strength. But now I acknowledge unto thee O Lord my God the father of heaven
and earth, that it is not in man's power to strengthen him self, least the
foolish presumptuousnesse of any flesh should boast it self before thee. For
man is not able to be willing to do that he can, nor to can the thing that he
is willing to do, or to know the thing that he both would and could do: but
rather thou art he that guidest men's steps, I say the steps of them which
acknowledge the^ selves to be guided, not by them selves, but by thee. We
beseech thee therefore O Lord by the bowels of thy mercy, that thou will save
that which thou have created, for if thou will thou can save us, and in thy
will rests ye power of our salvation.

Of Gods old benefits.
LOrd remember thine old mercyfulnesse, whereby thou have prevented us with thy
sweet blessings even from the beginning. For before that I ye son of thy
ha^dmayd was borne, thou O Lord my hope while I hanged yet upon my mothers
breasts, did prevent me, making my way for me wherein to walk, that I might
come to the glory of thy house. Before thou did shape me in my mothers womb,
thou knew me, and before I was borne thou did foreordeine of me what
soever pleased thee. How and what things are written of me in the secret book
of thy Consistory, truly I know not: and therefore I am sore afraid. But thou
know it: for what soever I look for by succession of days and times a
thousand year hence in this mortal world: that is already done in the sight
of thy euerlastingnesse, and the thing that is to come is already in doing. Now
then for as much as I stand in this night of darkness, and know not these
things: fear and trembling are come upon me, because I see that many dangers
preace upon me on all sides, and many enemies hunt after me, and I am beset
round about with an innumerable multitude of miseries in this life. And if thy
help were not present with me in these so great miseries, I should despair.
But I have a great hope of thee O most meek prince my God: and the considering
of the multitude of thy compassions cheereth my heart. The former signs of thy
mercy which prevented me before I was borne, and have now specially shyned out
upon me, do assure my hope of the better and perfecter rewards of thy
goodness, which thou reseruest for thy friends, that I may rejoice in thee O
Lord my God, with the holy and lively joy wherewith thou always cheerest up
my youth.

Of Gods predestination and foreknowledge.
Teach me O bottomless deep, O wisdom the creator, which have
counterpeysed the mountains and hills by weight, and hanged the mass of the
earth by three fingers in the balance: hale up the lump of this grossness
which I bear about me, unto thee by thy three unseen fingers, that I may see
and know how wonderful thou art over all the earth. O most ancient light which
shonest before all light in the hill of thy tymelesse eternity, unto whom all
things lay bare and open before they were made. O light which hate all
spottinesse, in as much as thou art most clean and spottelesse, what delight
can thou have in man? What agreement is there between light and darkness? For
what is there in man, that may delight thee? Where can thou make thee a meet
sanctuary for thy majesty, that thou may enter into it, and take thy
delight and pleasure in the same? A clean parlour becomes thee O clensing
virtue, which can not be seen, and much less possessed, but of clean
hearts. But where is there in man so clean a temple, as may receive thee the
ruler of the world? Who can make that clean, which is conceived of unclean
seed? Truly none but you, who only art clean. For who ca^ be made clean by
that which is unclean? For according to the law which thou gave to our
fathers upon the mountain burning with fire, and in the cloud that covered the
darksome water, what soever an unclean person touches, becomes unclean.
But all of us are as a defiles cloth, coming of a corrupt and unclean mass,
and we bear in our foreheades the spots of our uncleanness, which we be not
able to hide, specially from thee who see all things. Wherefore we cannot be
clean, except thou make us clean, who only art clean. And of us sons of
men thou make those clean, whom it pleases thee to dwell in, who^ by the
vnapprochable and secret depth of ye inco^prehensible judgments of thy
wisdom, always rightful though vnespiable, thou have (without any desert of
theirs) predestined before the world, called out of the world, justified in
the world, and wilt glorify the^ after the world. But thou do not this unto
all men, whereat all the wise me^ of the earth (...) marvel and are abashed.
Yea and even I O Lord, when I bethink me of it, am afraid and amazed at the
depth of the riches of thy wisdom and knowledge whereunto I cannot reach, and
at the incomprehensible judgments of thy Justice, for that of one self same
piece of clay thou make some vessels unto everlasting honor, and othersome
unto everlasting shame. Therefore who^ thou have chosen to thy self out of the
multitude to be thy holy temple, the^ do thou make clean, pouryng out
clean water upon the^: the names and number of whom thou know, who only
tellest the number of the stars, and call the^ all by their names. Who
also are written in the book of life, who cannot in any wise perish, and unto
whom all things work to the best, yea even their sins. For when they fall,
they be not broosed, because thou put thy hand under them, and keep all
the bones of them, so as not one of them is broken. But most miserable is ye
death of sinners, I mean of those sinners whom thou have foreknowe^ unto
eternal death before you made heaven and earth according to ye great depth of
thy secret (howbeit always rightful) judgments: the number of whose names
and of their lewd deseruinges is with thee, which reckenest the number of the
sand of the Sea, and have measured the bottom of the bottomless pit: whom thou
have left up to their own uncleanness and unto whom all things work to the
worst, and even their prayer is turned into sin: so yt if they should clymbe
up into the air, and advance their head above the clouds, yea and build
their nest among the stars of the sky: yet shall they be destroyed in the
end as a dunghill.

Of such as first are righteous, and afterward become wicked, and contrariwyse.
GReat are these thy judgments O Lord God, thou righteous and mighty judge,
which iudgest uprightly, and do things yt are deep and unsearchable. Which
when I consider, all my bones quake: for of all men living upon ye earth, there
is none of us sure to serve thee devoutly and purely in fear all the days of
our life, nor to joy in the with reverence, so as our service may be without
dread, and our joy without trembling. He yt puts on armor may not glory as he
yt puts it of: for before thee may no flesh glory, but must quake and
tremble at thy presence. For we have seen O Lord, and we have heard of our
fathers, (which thing I cannot think upon without great dread, nor speak of
without great shudderyng) yt many have heretofore clymbed after a sort up to ye
skies, and built their nest among ye stars, and yet have afterward fallen
down eue^ into hell, and their souls have been forehardened with euilles. We
have seen stars fall from heaven by force of the stroke of ye dragons tail:
and them that lay in the dust of the earth, wonderfully mounted up at the
present help of thy hand O Lord. We have seen the living dye, and the dead
rise from death, and them that walked among Gods children in the mids of
fiery stones, wash away to nothing like a piece of clay. We have seen
darkness quench light, and light proceed out of darkness. For publicanes and
harlots go before ye native people into the kingdom of heaven, and the
children of the kingdom are cast out into utter darkness. And why comes all
this to pass, but because they be mounted up into that hill, whereinto the
first of their race went up an Angel and came down a devil? Now the^ look
whom thou have predestined, them have thou also called, and sanctified and
cleansed, that they may be a meet dwelling place for thy majesty, with who^
and in who^ is thy holy and clean delight, in whom thou have pleasure and
make their youth cheerful, dwelling with them in their remembrance, so as
they be thy holy temple, which is a great dignity and commendation of our
manhood.

That the faithful ma^s soul is Gods sanctuary.
THe soul which thou have created, not of thine own substance but by thy
word, nor of the substance of any of the four elements, but of nothing:
which truly is reasonable, understanding, spiritual, euerlyuing, and ever
mouyng: and which thou have sealed, marked with ye light of thy countenance,
and hallowed by the power of thy washyng, is so made capable of thy majesty, as
it may be filled by thee only and by none other. And when it has thee, the^
has it the full lust, and there remains not any thing else that it can desire
outwardly. But as long as it desires any thing outwardly, it is manifest that
it has not thee inwardly: for be thou once had, there is not any thing more to
be wished for. For since thou art the souereine good, yea and all ye good that
may be: there is no more for it to desire, because he possesses thee which art
all the good. Now if he desire not the whole good, it rests that he desires
somewhat which is not the whole good, and therefore also not ye souerein good:
and so consequently not God, but rather a creature. But if he long after a
creature, he must needs be ever hungry still, because that although he atteine
his desire of the creatures, yet it abides unsatisfied still, in as much as
there is nothing that ca^ fill it, but thou unto whose image it is created. And
thou fillest them that desire nothing but thee, and thou make them worthy of
thee, holy, blessed, undefiled, and Gods friends, who count all things as
dung, that they may win thee only. For this is the blessedness which thou
have bestowed upon man, this is the honor wherewith thou have innobled him
among all thy creatures and above them, that thy name might be wonderful over
all the earth. Behold O most high souereine good, and almighty Lord my God, I
have found the place where thou dwell, even in the soul which thou have
created after thine own image and likeness, which seeks and desires none
but thee alone: and not in the soul that seeks and desires thee not.

That God cannot be found neither by the outward senses nor by the inward
wits.
I Have straied like a lost sheep seeking thee outward which art inward. And I
have taken much pain to seek thee without me, and thou dwell within me, at
leastwise if I have a desire to thee. I have gone about ye lanes and streets
of the City of this world seeking thee and have not found thee, because I did
amiss to seek that thing without, which is as within. I sent abroad all mine
outward senses as messengers to seek thee, and I found thee not, because I
sought thee amiss. For I see O my light, my God which have enlightened me I
see, I did amiss to seek thee by the^, for thou art within me and yet they
wist not where thou came in. For mine eyes say, if he have not some color,
he came not in by us. Mine ears say, if he made no noise, he came not in by
us. My nose says, if he had no sent, he came not in by me. My taste says, if
he had no savor, he came not in by me. And my feelyng says, if he be not
bodily, ask not me of any such matter. But none of these things are in thee
my God. For it is neither shape of body, nor te^porall beawtie, nor sheernesse
of light, nor color, nor the melody of sweet songs and pleasant soundyng
tunes, nor the sentes of flowers, perfumes, oyntme^tes, or spyces, nor honny or
manna delightful to the taste, nor any of the things that men love to touch
and embrace, nor any manner of thing subject (...) (...) senses, which I seek
when I seek my God. Fie of it, that I should take for my God any of these
things which are comprehended even of the senses of brute beasts. Truly when
I seek my God, I seek a certain light above all lights, which no eye can
comprehend: a certain voice above all voices, which no ear ca^ conceive: a
certain sent above all sentes, which no nose can atteine to: a certain
sweetness above all sweetness, which no mouth can taste of: and a certain
embracing above all embracing, which no bodily feelyng ca^ take hold of. This
light shyneth where no place is to hold it: this voice sou^deth where no air
is to carry it: this sent yeldeth (...) where no blast is to shed it: this
savor yeldeth sauourines where as is no feedyng: and this embracing is felt
where no arms are plucked a su^der. It is eue^ my God, and there shall none
other be made account of in comparison of him. This is it that I seek, when I
seek my God. This is it that I love when I love my God. To late have I loved
thee O beawtie so old and so fresh, to late have I loved thee. Thou wart within
and I without, and there I sought thee, and I ilfauoredly rushed against these
goodly things which thou have made. Thou wart with me, and yet I was not with
thee. These things held me far from thee, which could not be without thee.
For I went all aboutes seeking thee, and forsakyng my self for all things. I
asked the earth if it were my God, and it told me, no: and all things in it
did verify the same. I asked the Sea and the great deepes and all the creepyng
things in them: and they answered, we be not thy God, seek him above us. I
asked the wyndie air, and the whole air with all the dwellers therein said
unto me, Anaximenes is deceived, for I am not thy God. I asked the sky, the
Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, neither are we thy God, said they. Then said
I to all the things that stand about me at ye doors of my flesh, Tell me what
you know of my God, tell me somewhat of him: and they cried all with a loud
voice, it is he that has made us. Again I spoke to the mass of the whole
world, saying: Tell me if thou be my God or no? And it answered with a
mighty voice, I am not he, but I am by him: he whom thou seek in me, even
he made me: above me must thou seek for him yt made me and rules me. The
askyng of the creatures is the deep considering of them, and their aunsweryng
is their auouchement concerning God: for all things cry out, it is God that
has made us. And (as the Apostle said) Gods invisible things are understood by
his visible things which are beheld from the creation of the world. Then came
I again to my self, and entered into my self, and said to my self. What art
thou? and I answered, a man reasonable and mortal. And I began to boult out
what that should be, and I said: from whence is this manner of wight O Lord my
God? from whence is it, but of thee? Thou made me, and not I my self. Who
art thou? Thou art he by whom I live, thou art he by who^ all things live. Who
art thou? Thou art the Lord my true and only God, almighty, everlasting,
incomprehensible, and infinite, who live evermore and nothing dies in thee.
For thou art immortal, dwelling in ever lastingnesse, wonderful to the eyes
of the angels, unutterable, unsearchable, and unable to be named. The living
and true God, terrible, strong, beginnynglesse and endless, the beginning and
end of all things, which art before the fou^dations of the world, and before
the originals of all ages. Thou art my God and the Lord of all thy creatures
with thee stand the causes of all stable things, with thee do the originals of
all chaungeable things abide unchangeable, and with thee do the grounds of
all reasonable, unreasonable and temporal things continue everlastingly. My
God, tell me thy humble servant, merciful Lord tell me wretch, tell me for
thy mercyes sake I beseech thee, from whence is this manner of wight but from
thee? Is any man such a workemaister as to make him self? Is being and life
fetched from any where else then from thee? Art not thou the souerein being,
from whence comes all being? for what soever is, it is of thee, and without
thee is nothing. Art not thou the fountain of life from whence all life
flows? for what soever lives, it lives by thee, and without thee does
nothing live. Then is it thou O Lord which have made all things. Shall I
demand who has made me? Thou Lord have made me, for without thee is nothing
made. Thou art my maker, and I thy work. I thank thee my Lord God by whom I
live and by whom all things live, for thou have made me. I thank thee my
creator, for thy hands have made me and fashioned me. I thank thee my light,
because thou have enlightened me and I have found both thee and my self.
As Soon as I found my self, straightwayes I knew my self: As Soon as I found
thee, straightwayes I knew thee: and as soon as I knew thee, forthwith thou
did inlighte^ me. I thank thee my light, for that thou have enlightened me.
What said I? that I knew thee? Art not thou God incomprehensible and infinite,
the king of kings and Lord of Lords, who only have immortality, and
dwell in vnapprochable light, which never man saw, no nor can see? Art not
thou the hidden God, of unsearchable majesty, the alonly peruser and wonderful
vewer of thy self? Who then can know that which he never saw? For thou have
said in thy truth, man shall not see me and live. Thy prophet also has said by
thy truth, never any man saw God. Who then has known that which he never saw?
Also thy truth has said, no man knows the son, but the father, neither
knows any man the father but the son. Thine only Trinity, which
surmounteth all knowledge, is known fully to none but to thy self alone. What
is it then that I vain man have said, that I know thee? for who knows thee
else saving thy self? For thou only O God, in thy most holy and heavenly word
art termed almighty, passing praise worthy, passing glorious, passing exalted,
passing high, and passing substantial, because thou art discerned to be above
all things that can be imagined to be, whether they be to be conceived in
understanding or to be perceived by the senses: and above all names that are
named, not only in this world, but also in the world to come, beyond all that
is, or can be devised to be. For truly, above the reach of all reason,
understanding and being, do thou by thy substantial and secret Godhead dwell
vnapprochably and vnsearchably in thy self, whereas is light vnapprochable,
and brightness unsearchable, incomprehe^sible, and unspeakable, wheru^to no
brightness may come near, because it is certainly unable to be beheld, unable
to be seen, above reason, above understanding, above acces, above all change,
and above all partnershyp, which never any wight neither man nor angel has
thoroughly seen, nor can see. This is thy heaven O Lord, this is thy heaven so
fair engraven, the light so passing privy, so passing understanding, so
passing reason, and so passing all that is: whereof it is said, the heaven of
heavens is the Lords. The heaven of heavens, in comparison whereof all other
heavens are but earth, because it is passing wonderfully heaued up above all
heavens. In comparison whereof even the very fiery heaven it self is but earth:
for this is the heaven of heavens that is reserved to the Lord, because it is
known to none but to the Lord. Unto this heaven came never none but he that
came down from heaven: for no man knows the father saving the son, and the
spirit of them both. Neither does any man know the son, saving the father
and the spirit that proceeds from them both. The Trinity is fully known to
none, but only to thy self O holy Trinity, O passing wonderful Trinity,
surmountyng all utterance, beyond all searchyng, above all approchyng, over
inco^prehensible, over inconceivable, far above all things that be, far
passing all understanding, all reason, all reach and all being of the minds
that are above heaven: which it is not possible either to utter, or to
conceive, or to understand or to discern, no not even to the angels that
behold it. How then come I by the knowledge of thee which art highest above all
the earth and above all heavens? who^ neither the Cherubins nor ye Seraphins do
know perfectly, but are feign to shadow their faces with their wings, when
they look upon him that sittes upon the high and stately throne, crying and
saying. Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts, the whole earth is full of thy
glory. The prophet was abashed and said: Alas I am toungtyde, for I am a man
of unclean lips. My heart was afraid and said, woe is me that I held not my
tongue, because I am a man of unclean lips. But I said I knew thee.
Nevertheless Lord, woe be to them that are tou^gtyde when they should speak of
thee, for there be many that be to full of tongue without thee. And therefore O
Lord my God I will not hold my peace, for you have made me, and enlightened me,
whereby I have found my self and known thee, because thou shynest upon me.
But in what wise have I known thee? I knew thee in thy self. I have known
thee, not as thou art to thy self ward, but as thou art to me ward: and yet
not without thy self, but in thy self: for thou art the light that has
enlightened me. For no man knows thee as thou art in thy self: but as thou
art to me ward by thy grace, thou art known eue^ unto me. But what art thou to
me ward? merciful Lord, tell me thy silie servant, for thy mercyes sake tell
me what thou art to me ward? Say unto my soul, I am thy welfare: hyde not thy
face from me, least I dye. Give me leave to speak before thy mercy, suffer me
that am but earth and dust, to speak before thy mercy, for great is thy mercy
toward me. For I that am but dust and ashes will speak to my God. Tell me
thy silly servant, tell me thy rufull creature, tell me for thy mercyes sake
what you art to me ward. Thou have thundered from above with a great noise into
the inward ear of my heart, and have broken my deafnes, and I have heard thy
voice, and thou have enlightened my blindness, and I have seen thy light, and
have known that thou art my God. And therefore have I said, I knew thee,
because I knew that you art my God. Yea I know thee to be the only true God,
and thy son Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. The time has been that I have
not known thee. Woe worth that time that I knew thee not: woe worth that
blindness when I saw thee not: woe worth that deafness when I heard thee not.
Blind and deaf as I was, I ra^ ilfauoredly through the goodly things that you
made. And thou wart with me: and yet was not I with thee. For the things
held me far from thee, which should not have been at all if they were not in
thee. Thou have enlightened me O light of ye world, and I have seen thee and
loved thee. For no man knows thee but he that sees thee: and no man sees thee
but he yt loves thee. It was late ere I loved thee thou beawtie so old and so
fresh, it was late ere I loved thee: woe worth the time that I loved thee not.

Of the acknowledging of a ma^s own vylenes.
LOrd who is like unto thee, yea even among the Gods? who is like unto thee,
which art of exceeding great holiness, dreadful, praise worthy, and a worker of
wonders? Long it was ere I knew thee the true light, long it was ere I knew
thee. There was a great dark cloud before my fond eyes, so as I could not see
the son of righteousness, and the light of truth. I like a child of
darkness was wrapped in darkness: and because I knew not ye light, I was in
love with mine own darkness. For as much as I was blind, I was in love with my
blindness, and by darkness walked into further darkness still. But who
brought me out of it, when I like a blind wretch sat in darkness and the
shadow of death? who took me by ye hand to lead me out of it? Who is he yt
enlightened me? For I sought not him, but he sought me: I called not him, but
he called me. And who is he? It is even thou my Lord God, merciful, and
pitiful, the father of compassion and God of all comfort. It is even thou my
holy Lord God, whom I acknowledge with my whole heart, yeldyng thanks unto thy
name. I sought not thee, and yet thou soughtest me. I called not upon thee, and
yet thou calledst me. Yea thou have called me by thine own name: with a loud
voice have thou thundered down from above into the innermore ear of my heart,
saying: Let there be light: and there was light, so as ye great cloud went
away, and the dark mist that covered mine eyes melted away, and I saw thy
light and knew thy voice, and said. Truth Lord, you art my Lord God that brought
me out of darkness and out of the shadow of death, and called me into thy
wonderful light, and so now I see, I thank thee mine inlightener. Then turned
I back and looked upon the darkness wherein I had been, and the deep gulf
wherein I had lain, and I trembled and was afraid and said: woe, woe worth the
darkness that I had lien in. Woe woe worth the blindness that let me to see
the light of heaven. Woe woe worth my former ignorance, which let me to know
thee O Lord. I thank thee mine inlightener and deliverer, for that thou have
enlightened me and I have known thee. It was late ere I knew thee O au^cie^t
truth: it was late ere I knew thee O everlasting truth. Thou wart in light and
I in darkness, and therefore I knew thee not. For I could not be enlightened
without thee, neither is there any light without thee.

A considering of Gods majesty.
O Holiest of all holyes, O God of inestimable majesty, O God of Gods and Lord
of Lords, wondrous, unspeakable, inconceivable, who^ the angels in heaven
are adrad of, who^ all the dominations and thrones do worship, at the sight of
whom all powers do tremble, of whose mightiness and wisdom there is no
comprehending, which have founded the world upon nothing, and shet up the sea
in the air as in a bottle, O most almighty, most holy, most strong, O God of
the breath of all flesh, at whose presence the heaven and earth shrink away,
at whose beck all the elements submit them selves. Let all creatures worship
and glorify thee. And I the son of thy handmayd do bow down the neck of my
heart by faith under the feet of thy majesty, yeldyng thee thanks for that
thou have of thy mercy vouchsaued to inlighten me. O true light, O holy light,
O pleasant light, O exceedyng commendable light, O wonderful light which
inlightenest all men that come into this world yea and even the eyes of the
angels. Behold, I see, I thank thee for it. Behold, I see the light of
heaven, the lightsome beams of thy cou^tenau^ce shine down upon the eyes of my
mind, and cheer up my bones. O that thy light were perfected in me. Augment
if I beseech thee O author of light. I beseech thee augment that which shyneth
into me. Let it be enlarged I beseech thee, let it be enlarged by thee. What is
this that I feel? What fire is it that warmeth my heart? What light is it that
spreaddeth his beams into my heart? O fire which evermore burnest and never art
quenched, kindle me. O light which evermore shynest and never art dimmed
inlighten me. O would to God I were set on fire by thee. O holy fire, how
sweetly thou burnest, how secretly thou shynest, how amiably thou warmest. Woe
be to them yt burn not through thee, woe be to the^ yt are not enlightened by
thee. O soothfast light which inlightenest the whole world, and whose brightness
fills ye whole world. Woe be to the blind eyes that see not thee, the sun
that inlighteneth heaven and earth. Woe be to the dazelyng eyes that cannot away
with the sight of thee. Woe be to them that turn not away their eyes from
looking upon vanity. For the eyes that are accustomed to darkness, are not
able to abide the beams of the souerein truth: neither can they that dwell in
darkness skill how to make account of the light. They see nothing but
darkness, they love nothing but darkness, they like of nothing but darkness,
and because they plod on from darkness to darkness, they wot not where they
fall. Wretched are they that forgo they wot not what, and more wretched
certesse are they that know what they forgo, so as they fall with open eyes and
go down alive into hell. O most blessed light which can not be seen but of
exceeding well cleared eyes. Blessed are ye clean in heart, for they shall see
God. O clensing power cleanse thou me and heal mine eyesight, that I may
behold thee with sound eyes, whom none but sound eyes may behold. O
vnapprochable brightness, take away the scales of my forgrowen
dimsightednesse, with the beams of thy inlightenyng, that I may look upon
thee without dazeling, and see thee the better by thy brightness. I thank
thee my light. Lo I see. Lord I beseech thee let mine eyesight be enlarged by
thee. Shore open mine eyes that I may consider the wonderful mysteries of thy
law who art wonderful among thy saints. I thank thee O my light. For lo I
see, howbeit but through a glass and as in a riddle. But when shall I see thee
face to face? When shall the day of joy and mirth come, that I may enter into
the place of thy wonderful Tabernacle, even the house of God, there to behold
him that sees me, face to face, that I may have my longing to the full.

Of the longyng and thirsting of the soul after God.
LIke as the Heart longs for the sprynges of waters: so longs my heart for
thee O God. My soul thirsts after thee O God which art the living
welspryng, when shall I come and prease into thy presence? O fountain of life,
O vein of lively waters, when shall I come out of this desert, waylesse, and
waterlesse land, unto the waters of thy sweetness? that I may see thy power and
thy glory and stau^che my thirst with the waters of thy mercy? O Lord the
fountain of life, I am a thirst, satisfy me. I thirst Lord, I thirst after
thee the living God, O when shall I come Lord and show my self before thy
face? Think ye that I shall see that day, I say yt day of mirth and gladness,
that day which the Lord has made for us to be merry and joyful therein? O
excellent and fair day, which know none euentyde, nor have any Sun going
down, wherein I shall hear the voice of praise, wherein I shall hear the voice
of gladness and thankesgiuyng, wherein I shall hear it said unto me, Enter thou
into endless joy in ye house of ye Lord thy God, where be things great,
unsearchable, and wonderful, that cannot be no^bered. Enter thou into joy
void of heaviness, which contains endless mirth: whereas shall be all goodness
and no evil: whereas shall be all that thou would, and nothing yt thou
would not. There shall be ye lively life, ye sweet life, thee amiable life,
and the life that would do a man good to be always thinking of it. There
shall be none enemy to assault: There shall not be rest at some times and unrest
at other times: but there shall be souerein rest, assured safety, vnimpeached
quietness, quiet mirth, joyful happiness, happy euerlastingnes, everlasting
blessedness, and blessed Trinity, and unity of Trinity and Godhead of unity,
and blessed beholding of the same Godhead, which is the joy of thy Lord God. O
joy over joyful, O joy surmou^ting all joys, without which there is no joy,
when shall I enter into thee, that I may see my God which dwells in thee? I
shall go thither and behold this great sight. What is it that holds me back?
Woe is me that my soiornyng is prolonged. Woe is me, how long shall it be said
unto me, wayt and wayt again. And now, to what purpose is my waiting? My Lord
God, do we not wayt for the Savior our Lord Jesus Christ, to repair our base
bodies unto the likeness of his glorious body. We wayt for the Lord when he
should come from the bridhouse to fetch us into his wedding. Come Lord and tarry
not. Come Lord Jesus Christ, come visit us in peace. Come lead us prisoners
out of prison, that we may rejoice before thee with a perfect heart. Come our
Savior. Come thou that art longed for of all nations, show thy countenance
unto us and we shall be safe. Come my light and my redeemer: take my soul out of
prison, that it may give praise unto thy holy name. How long shall I be tossed
in the waves of my mortality, crying unto thee Lord, and thou hear me not?
Lord hear me how I cry unto thee out of this howge sea, and bring me to the
haven of endless bless. Happy are they O God which are conveyed out of this
Sea, and have obtained to arrive at thee the safest harborough of all hauons. O
happy are they in deed, which are escaped already from sea to shore, from
banishment home into their own country, and from prison into a palace,
enjoying their wished rest. Blessed are they that already have gained ye
garla^d of endless glory which they sought for here by many tribulations, and
joy in happy mirth for ever: O blessed are they in deed, O trebble and four
times blessed are they, which being already quite rid of all miseries, have
obtained to come to the kingdom of beawtifulnesse, and are assured of their
vnapparable glory. O everlasting kingdom, O kingdom of all worlds, wherein
is the light that never fails, and the peace of God which passes all
understanding: wherein the souls of holy folk do rest, where everlasting
joy is upon their heads, where they obtain mirth and gladness, and from
whence all sorrow and sighing is fled. O Lord how glorious a kingdom is it,
wherein all holy folks reign with thee, clothed with light as with a garment,
having crowns of precious stones upon their heads. O kingdom of everlasting
blissfulness, where thou O Lord the hope of the Saints and the garland of
their glory art seen of the^ face to face, gladding them on all sides with thy
peace, which passes all understanding. There is joy endless, mirth
sorrowlesse, health grieflesse, way without labor, light without darkness, life
without death, all good without any evil: where youth never waxes old, where
life never wears out, where beawtie never decays, where love never cools,
where health never appayreth, where mirth never abateth, where is never felt
any pain, where is never heard any groaning, where is never seen any sadness,
where joy is ever, where is no evil to be feared because ye souerein goodness
is had there in possession, which is to behold always the face of the Lord God
of hosts. Happy therefore are those that already have escaped the shypwracke
of this present life, and obtained the grace to come to so great joys. We are
yet still in the waves of the Sea, longing for thee the haven of our Sea. O
country of ours, O quiet country, we ken thee a far of, we hayle thee from
this Sea, we sigh unto thee out of this vale of misery, and labor with tears
if we may by any means atteine unto thee O Christ God of God, the hope of
mankind, our refuge and strength, whose brightness inlighteneth our eyes a
far of, as the beams of the Sea star does in the mistie darkness of the
stormy sea, to guide us unto thee our haven. Lord, govern our ship with thy
right hand by the helm of thy cross, that we perish not in the waves, that
the tempest of the water drown us not, and that the deep swalow us not up:
but with the hook of thy cross pluck us back out of this vast Sea, unto
thee our only comfort, whom we see waiting for us a far of as the morning
star and as the day sun of righteousness, in manner with weeping eyes upon
the shore of the heavenly country. Behold we whom thou have raunsomed do cry
unto thee: yea even we as yet thy banished me^ whom thou have redeemed with thy
precious blood do cry unto thee. Here us O God our savior, ye hope of all the
ends of the earth and of all the^ that be in the sea a far of. We be
co^uersant in a troublesome Sea, and thou standing upon ye shore look at our
perils: save us for thy names sake. Lord grant us so to keep our course
between Scilla and Charibdis, and to hold so with thee, that we may escape ye
danger of both, and come safe to land without less of ship or fraught.

Of the glory of the heavenly country.
THerefore when we shall be come unto thee ye fountain of wisdom, unto thee
the vnfaylable light, unto thee the vnappallable brightness, so as we shall
behold thee, not any more in a riddle or through a glass, but face to face:
Then shall we have our fill of all good things. For there shall be nothing
without us to be desired but only you O Lord the souerein goodness, who shall be
the reward of the blessed, and the crown of their glory, and everlasting joy
upon their heads, quietyng them both inwardly and outwardly with thy peace
which passes al understanding. There we shall see thee, love thee, and praise
thee. By thy light we shall see thy brightness, for in thee is ye welspring of
life, and thy brightness shall give us light. And what manner of light? A light
unmeasurable, a light bodilesse, a light incorruptible, a light
inco^prehensible, a light vnfaylable, a light unquenchable, a soothfast light,
a divine light, which inlightneth the eyes of the angels, which cheareth up
the youth of ye saints, which is ye light of lights and welspring of life,
which is eue^ you O Lord my God. For you art the light in whose light we shall
see light, yt is to wit thy self, in thy self in ye brightness of thine own
cou^tenau^ce, when we shall see thee face to face. And what is it else to see
thee face to face, the^ (as the Apostle says) to know thee as I am known, to
know thy truth and thy glory? And to know thy face, is to know ye power of ye
father, the wisdom of ye son, ye mercifulnes of ye holy ghost, and the one
vndeuidable being of ye three persons in one souereine Godhead. For ye
beholding of the face of the living God is the souerein good, ye joy of ye
angels, and of all holy me^, the reward of endless life, ye glory of all
souls, the everlasting gladness, ye crown of honor, ye obteineme^t of happiness,
ye wealthfull rest, the beawtiful peace, the inward and outward ioyfulnesse,
and the paradise of God. Here is the heavenly Jerusalem, the happy life, the
fullness of blessedness, the joy of euerlastingnesse, and the peace of God which
passes all understanding. This is the full blessedness, and the whole
glorification of man: namely to see God face to face, to see him that made
heaven and earth, to see him that made him, that saved him, and that glorified
him. He shall see him by knowing him, be in love with him by liking him, and
praise him by possessing him. For he shall be the heritage of his people, of his
people the Saints, of his people who^ he has raunsomed. He shall be their
possession of happiness, he shall be the reward and recompense of their lo^gyng.
I will be thine exceedyng great reward says he. For great things beseem great
personages. Verily my Lord God, you art exceedyng great above all Gods and
exceedyng great also is thy reward. But thou thy self art over great, thou thy
self art an over great reward, thou thy self art both he that crowns, and
also the crown: thou thy self art both ye promiser, and the promise: thou art
the recompe^cer, and the recompense: thou art the rewarder, and the reward of
everlasting happiness. Thou the^ art both the crowner and the crown O my God,
and the diadem of my hope which is garnished with glory, a gladdyng light, a
renewyng light, a glorious orname^t, my chief hope, the desire of the hearts of
all saints, and their dear beloved. The seeing of thee the^, is the whole
hyre, the whole reward and the whole joy that we look for. For it is life
everlasting, yea I say, it is thy wisdom. Life everlasting is to know thee
the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom you have sent. Therefore when we shall
see thee the only God, the true God, the living God almighty, single,
invisible, vnboundable, vnco^prehe^sible and thine only begotten son, God of
thine own substance, and everlasting as well as thou, eue^ our Lord Jesus
Christ, who^ for our welfare thou have sent into the world in ye power of the
holy Ghost, three in persons and one in being, the only holy God, besides whom
there is no God: the^ shall we hold that which we now seek, namely everlasting
life, and endless glory, which thou have prepared for them that love thee,
which thou have laid up in store for the^ that fear thee, and which thou will
give to them that seek thee, even to them that seek thy face for ever. And
thou O Lord my God which did shape me in my mothers womb, who has given
me up into thy hand, suffer me not any more to be plucked out of one into many:
but gather me out of these outward things into my self, and from my self
unto thee, that my heart may always say unto thee, my face has sought thee
out, Lord I will seek after thy face, eue^ after the face of the Lord of all
power, wherein stands the whole glory of the blessed sort for ever, which
to behold, is the endless life and everlasting glory of the Saints. Let my
heart rejoice therefore, that it may reverence thy name: Let the hearts of them
that seek God rejoice, but much more ye hearts of them that find God. For if
there be joy in seeking, what manner of joy shall there be in findyng? Therefore
I will always seek thy face earnestly, and incessantly, if at any time the
door and gate of righteousness may be opened unto me, that I may enter into
the joy of my Lord. This is the Lords gate, the rightuous shall enter in
thereat.

A prayer to the holy Trinity.
THou three coequall and coeternal persons and one God ye very father Son and
holy ghost, who dwell alone in euerlastingnesse, and in vnapproachable
light, which have founded the earth by thy mighty power, and rulest ye whole
world by thy wisdom, Holy, holy, holy Lord God of hosts, dreadful,
strong, rightuous, merciful, marvelous, praise worthy, to be beloved, One
God, three persons, one being, power, wisdom, goodness, and one inseparable
Trinity. I cry unto thee, open me the gates of righteousness, and when I am
come in, I will praise thee O Lord. Behold I poor beggar knock at thy door O
souerein householder. Command the gates to be opened at my knockyng, according
as thou have said, knock ye and it shall be opened. For truly O most merciful
father, the desires of my groaning heart, and the cries of my weepyng eyes, do
knock at thy door. All my desire is before thee, and my gronyng is not hyd
from thee. Lord turn not thy face any more away from me, neither flyng thou
away from thy servant in a sum. O father of mercies, hear the houling out of
thy ward, and reach him thy singular good helpyng hand, that it may draw me
out of the deep waters, and out of the lake of misery, and out of the mire of
filthynes, that I perish not, thy pitiful eyes seeing it, and the bowels of
thy mercy beholding it: but that I may wade out unto thee my Lord God, so as I
may see the riches of thy kingdom, and always behold thy face, and sing
praise to thy holy name. O Lord which workest wonders, which chearest my heart
with remembryng thee, and which inlightenest my youth: despise not mine old
age, but make my bones to rejoice, and my hoar hears to wax fresh again as
the Eagle.

FINIS.
SAINT AVstens Manuell, or little Book of the Contemplation of Christ, or of
Gods word, whereby the remembrance of the heavenly desires which is fallen a
sleep may be quickened up again.

AT LONDON Printed by John Day dwelling over Aldersgate. 1574.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

The Preface.
FOr as much as we be set in the mids of snares, we easly become cold in
desire of heavenly things. And therefore we have need of continual defense,
that when we be shronke away, we may be wakened to run back again to our
true God the souereine goodness. In consideration whereof, not through rash
presumption, but for the great love that I bear to my God, I have undertaken
this work to his glory, to the intent I might always have with me a short
and handsome abridgement of the chosen sayings of the holy fathers concerning
my God, by the fire of the readyng whereof, the love of him might be kindled in
me as often as it is waxed cold in me. Assiste me now I beseech thee my Lord God,
whom I seek, whom I love, whom I praise and worship both with mind and mouth,
and with all the power that I am able. My mind being vowed unto thee, and
inflamed with love of thee, sighyng for want of thee, gapyng after thee, and
longyng only to see thee, has no pleasure in any thing but to speak of thee,
to hear of thee, to write of thee, to confer of thee, and to bethink it
self oftentimes of thy glory, so as the remembrance of thee may be some
refreshyng to me among the storms of this world. Thee therefore do I call
upon most earnestly, unto theee do I cry with a loud noise even from the
bottom of my heart. And when I call upon thee, verily I call upon thee in my
self: for I should not be at all except thou wart in me, and except I were in
thee thou would not be in me. Thou art in me, because thou abydest in my
mind: thereby do I know thee, and therein do I find thee. When I remember
thee, I am also delighted in thee and by thee, of whom, by whom, and in whom,
all things be.

Of Gods Wonderful being.
THou Lord fillest heaven and earth, bearyng up all things without being
burdened, filling all things without being enclosed, always doing and yet
always at rest: always gathering, but not for any need: always seeking, and
yet thou missest nothing: loving, and yet not doting, being ielous and yet
still in quiet. It repents thee and yet thou art not grieved: thou art
angry, and yet not out of patience. Thou chaungest thy works, but thou
chaungest not thy purpose. Thou receiuest that which thou have sought out, and
yet you had never lost it. Thou art never needy, and yet thou delightest to
gain. Thou art never covetous, and yet you demau^dest usury. Thou lashest out
where thou owe not, or rather there is always coming into thee that you
may owe. But who has aught yt is not thine? Thou payest dets, and yet art in
no man's dets. Thou forgiuest dets, and yet forgoest nothing. Thou art every
where, and every where you art whole: perceived thou may be, seen thou can
not be. Thou art no where abse^t, and yet art thou far of from the thoughts of
ye wicked, nay look where thou art far of, there art you not away: for where you
art absent by grace, there art thou present by vengeance. So art you present in
all places, and yet can scarsly be found. Thou stand still when we follow
thee, and yet we cannot overtake thee. Thou hold all things, fillest all
things, inuironest all things, surmou^test all things, and susteinest all
things. Thou teach the hearts of the faithful without noise of words: thou
art not disseuered by places, nor altered by times, nor subject unto to and
fro. Thou dwell in vnapprochable light, which never man saw, nor can see.
Abiding quietly in thy self, thou go euerywhere about the whole: for thou
can not be cut or divided, because thou art but one in very deed, and art
not made out into parts or pieces: but being whole thou mainteinest the whole,
thou fillest ye whole, thou inlightenest the whole, and thou possessest the
whole.

Of the unspeakable knowledge of God.
ALthough the whole world were full of books, yet could not thine unspeakable
knowledge be uttered. For in as much as you art unspeakable, you can in no wise
be put in writing or comprehended. Thou art the fountain of godly light, and
the sun of everlasting brightness. Thou art great without quantifie, and
therefore unmeasurable. Thou art good without quality, and therefore very good
and souereinly good, and no man is good but thou alone. Whose will is a work,
for thou can do what thou listest. Thou have created all things of nothing,
and by thine only will have thou made them. Thou possessest all thy creatures
without any want of them, thou gouernest them without pain, thou rulest them
without weerines, and there is nothing that may trouble the order of thy
government, from the highest things to the lowest. Thou art in all places
without place, confeynyng all things without enclosure, and being present
every where without setting or removing. Thou art not the author of any evil,
for you can do none evil. Whereas thou can do all things, thou have not
done any thing whereof it can forthinke thee. It is of thy goodness that we be
made, of thy justice that we be punished, and of thy mercy that we be
delivered. Whose almightinesse governs, rules, and fills all things which
it has made. Yet mean I not by thy filling of all things, that they contain
thee, but rather that thou conteinest them. Neither fillest thou all things by
parcel meal, neither is it in any wise to be thought that each thing receives
thee according to the proportion of it own bigness, that is to wit the
greatest things more, and the smallest things less: but rather that thou thy
self art whole in all things, and all things in thee: whose almightinesse
incloseth all things, and no man ca^ find any shift to escape from thy power.
For he that has not thy favor, shall never escape thy displeasure.

Of the longing of the soul that feels God.
Therefore O most merciful God, I call upon thee for my soul, which thou
preparest to receive thee through the desire which thou breathest into it.
Enter into it I beseech thee, and make it fit for thee, that thou may
possess that which thou have both made and renewed, that I may have thee as a
seal upon my heart. O most pitiful Lord, I beseech thee forsake not him that
calls upon thee: for ere I could call upon thee thou did both call me and
seek me, to the intent that I thy servant should seek thee, and by seeking
thee find thee, and when I had found thee love thee. Lord I have sought thee
and found thee, and I desire also to love thee. Increase my desirousnesse and
grant the thing I crave: for if thou should give me all that ever thou
made, it would not suffice thy servant, except thou give him thy self to.
Give me thy self therefore O my God, restore thy self unto me. Behold, I am in
love with thee: and if that be to little, let me be yet more in love. I am bound
with the love of thee, I burn in desire of thee, I am delighted with the
sweet remembrance of thee. Behold, when my mind styeth upward unto thee, and
busieth it self with thinking upon thine unspeakable loving kindness: the
fardell of my flesh is the less burdensome unto me, the turmoyling of my
thoughts ceasseth, ye weight of my mortality and miseries makes me not dull
as they are wo^t to do, all things are still, and all things are calm. My
heart gloweth, my mind rejoices, my memory is fresh, mine understanding is
clear, and my whole spirit being kindled with desire to see thee, finds it
self ravished with the love of things invisible. Let my spirit take the
wings of an Eagle and fly without ceassing: Let it fly even till it come to
the beawtie of thy house, and to the throne of thy glory, and there let it be
fed at the dyning table of thy heavenly Citizens, in the place of fulfeedyng by
the plentiful runnyng streams. Thou that art our hope, our welfare, and our
redemption, be also our joy. Thou yt shall be our reward, be also our
rejoicing. Let my soul seek thee always, and grant yt in seeking thee it
may never faint.

Of the wretchedness of that soul which loves not, ne seeks not our Lord
Jesus Christ.
WOE is that wretched soul which loves not Christ, nor seeks him: it
abides dry and miserable. He loses his life time which loves not thee O
God. He that cares not to live for thee Lord, is nothing and goes for naught.
He that refuses to live unto thee, is already dead. He that is not wise to
thee ward, is but a fool. Most merciful Lord, I yield, grant, and betake my
self unto thee by who^ I have being, life, and wit. In thee do I put my whole
confidence, trust, and hope, by who^ I shall rise again, live again, and enjoy
rest. Thee do I covet, love, and worship, with whom I shall dwell, reign, and
be blessed. The soul that seeks not ne loves not thee, seeks and loves
ye world, serves sin, is subject to vice, never at rest, never at ease. Let
my mind serve thee always O most merciful. Let my way faring be always to
travel unto theeward, let my heart burn in love of thee. My God, let my soul
rest in thee, let it run out of it self to behold thee, let it sing thy
praises with ioyfulnes, and let this be the comfort of me in my banishment. Let
my mind flee under the shadow of thy wings, from the ragyng heates of the
thoughts of this world. Let my heart calm it self in thee, I say let the
great sea of my heart that swells with waves, calm it self in thee. O God
which art rich of all good deinties, thou most bountiful bestower of
heavenly repast give meat to me that am faint, gather me up that am scattered,
deliver me that am in prison, make me new again that am heawe^ in pieces.
Behold I stand at thy door and knock. I beseech thee by the bowels of thy
mercy, where through thou have visited us in rising from aloft, bid the door
to be opened for me wretch which do knock, that my soul may have free passage
to come in unto thee, and to rest in thee, and to be refreshed by thee with thy
heavenly bread. For thou art the bread and fountain of life, thou art the
light of everlasting brightness, thou art all things whereby the righteous
live which love thee.

Of the longing of the soul.
O God the light of the hearts that see thee, and the life of the souls that
love thee, and the strenghthener of the thoughts that seek thee, grant that
I may stick to the holy love of thee. Come I pray thee into my heart, and make
it drunken with the abundance of thy pleasantness, so as I may forget these
temporal things. It shameth and irketh me to abide such things as this world
does. All that I see of these transitory things is but a sorrow to me: all
that I hear of them, is but a grief to me. Help me O Lord my God, and put
gladness into my heart, come unto me that I may see thee. But to narrow is the
house of my soul for thee, until thou come unto me and make more rowme in it.
Repair it for it is decayed. It has many things that will mislike thine
eyes. I know it and confess it: but who shall cleanse it, or to who^ shall I
cry else but unto thee? Lord cleanse me from my privy sins, and bear with
thy servant for other folks faults. Sweet Christ make me I beseech thee
good Jesus make me to lay away the burden of fleshly desires and earthly
lusts, for love and liking of thee. Let my soul ouerrule my flesh, let reason
ouerrule my soul, let thy grace ouerrule my reason, and subdue thou me both
inwardly and outwardly to thy will. Give me the grace that my heart, my tou^g
and my bones may praise thee. Enlarge my mind, and lift up the eyesight of my
heart: that eue^ with the swift conceyt of my spirit, I may atteine to thee ye
everlasting wisdom which abydest upon all things. I beseech thee loose me
from the fetters wherewith I am shackled, that I may leave all these things and
hye me unto thee, stick to thee only, and attend upon thee only.

Of the happiness of the soul that is let loose from the prison of the body.
HAppy is the soul which being let loose from the earthly prison, flies up
freely into heaven, and there beholds thee her most sweet Lord face to face,
and is no more disquieted with any fear of death: but reioyseth in the
euerlastingnesse of incorruptible glory. For it is safe and out of peril, and
hence forth fears neither enemy nor death. It possesses thee her merciful
Lord whom she has long sought and ever loved. And acco^panying her self with
the quyres of Psalm singers, it sings continually the sugared songs of
everlasting mirth, to ye glory of thee O king Christ, O gracious Jesus. For she
is made dronken with the bou^tifulnesse of thy house, and thou make her to
drink of the stream of thy pleasures. Happy is the fellowship of the heavenly
Citizens, and glorious is the solemnity of all them that return from the
sorrowful travel of this our pilgrimage, to the pleasantness of beawtie, to
the beawtie of all brightness, and to the flower of all excellency, where thy
Citizens behold thee continually O Lord. Nothing that may trouble the mind is
offered there to ye ear. What songs, what instruments, what Carolles, what
melody sounds there without end? There sound always most pleasant tunes of
Hymns, most sweet melody of angels, and most wonderful dities of songs,
which are song to thy glory by the heavenly inhabitants. No harshnesse, no
gallye bitterness has any rowme with in thy realm. For there is neither a
naughty person, nor naughtines. There is none adversary nor impugner, neither
is there any intycement of sin. There is no nedinesse, no shame, no brawling,
no misusage, no excusing, no fear, no unquietness, no penalty, no
doubtfulnes, no violence, no discord: but there is perfect peace full of love,
continual rejoicing and praising of God, careless rest without end, and
everlasting gladness in the holy Ghost. O how lucky should I be if I might
hear the most pleasant Carols of thy Citizens, and their sugared songs
aduauncing the praises of the souereine Trinity with due honor. But over
happy should I be, might I once atteine to sing a song my self, I say to sing
one of ye sweet songs of Sion to our Lord Jesus Christ.

Of the joys of Paradise.
O Lively life, O everlasting and aye blessed life, where as is joy without
sorrow, rest without travel, dignity without fear, riches without loss,
health fullness without impayring, abundance without want, life without death,
continuance with out corruption, blessedness with out abatement, all good
things in perfect love, beawtie and beholding face to face, full knowledge of
all things and in all things: where Gods souereine goodness is seen, and
his inlightening light is glorified of the Saints: where the present majesty of
God is beheld, and the minds of the beholders satisfied therewtall as with the
food of life. The more they see it, the more they desire to see it: yet desire
they it without disquietnesse, and have their fill of it without weariness.
There the daysunne of righteousness cheareth all me^ with the wondrous sight
of his beawtie, and so in lighteneth all the Citizens of the heavenly soil,
that they them selves yield light, even the light that God has behighted them,
light more lightsome then all the brightness of our daysunne, and the^ the
clearenesse of all the stars. For they cleave to the immortal Godhead, and
thereby are made immortal and incorruptible the^ selves, according to this
promise of our Lord and Savior: Father, as for those who^ thou have given me,
I will have them to be where I am, that they may see my glory, and that they may
be all one, as thou father art in me, and I in thee, and that they also may be
one in us.

Of the kingdom of heaven.
O Realm of heaven, O most happy Realm, O Realm without death, O kingdom
without end, where is no succession of time by ages, where the day lasting
continually without night woteth not what time means, where the soldier that
gets the upper hand is rewarded with unspeakable gifts for his labor, and
has an everlasting garland set upon his noble head. Would God that Christ of
his heavenly pity having released the burden of my sins would command me
the basest of his servant to lay aside the fardell of this flesh, that I
might pass into the endless joys of his City, to repose my self, so as I
might keep company with the holy sort above, stand before the glorious
majesty of my creator with the blessed spirits, behold the present
countenance of God, be touched with no fear of death, rejoice in surety of
the incorruptiblenesse of the everlasting immortality, and being linked to him
that knows all things, forgo all blindness of ignorance, nothing esteeming
all earthly things, and not vouchsauyng to look upon this vale of tears or
to remember it any more, whereas our life is a painful life, a corruptible
life, a life full of all bitterness, a life that is mistress of mischief and
ha^dmayd of hell: whom humors make to swell, whom pains abate, whom heat
parcheth, who^ airs make diseased, whom meats puff up, whom fastings
forepyne, whom mirth makes nyce, who^ heaviness consumes, whom thought
pincheth, whom ease dwells, who^ riches pranke up, who^ poverty pulls
down, who^ youth sets aloft, who^ age makes to stoop, whom sickness
defaceth, whom sorrow thrusts down, whom the devil lays wayt for, whom the
world flattereth, whom the flesh delights, where ye soul is blinded, where
the whole man is put out of order. After all which so many and so great
mischieues succeeds cruel death, and in such wise makes an end of all vain
joys, yt when they be once past, they may be thought to have never been.

In what wise God comforts the sorrowful soul after the long morning thereof.
But what praises or what thankesgiuinges are we able to render unto thee O
Lord our God, who ceassest not to comfort us with the wonderful visitation of
thy grace, among the great miseries of our mortality? Behold, while I fear
the end of my life, while I consider my sins, while I stand in fear of thy
Justice, while I think upon the horror of death, while I shudder at the
punishment of hell, while I know not with what straitnes thou do boult out
and wey my works, while I am utterly ignorant with what end I shall close
them up, and while I bethink me of these and many other things to my self in
my heart: thou O Lord God of thine accustomed pity art ready at hand to comfort
me wretch replenished with many griefs: and in the mids of these monynges,
sore complaints, and deep sighs of my heart, thou take up my sad and
sorrowful mind to the tops of the high mountains, eue^ to ye beds of
sweet spyces, putting me in a place of pasture by the rivers of sweet waters,
where thou preparest a table diversely furnished against I come, to refresh my
appalled sprights, and to cheer up my heavy heart: through which deinties I
being at length refreshed, do forget my manifold miseries, and being lifted up
above the height of the earth, do take my rest in thee which art the true peace.

Of the sweetness of the love of God.
I Love thee my God, I love thee, and more and more would I feign love thee. My
Lord God, thou rest of all the children of me^, grant me to long for thee, and
to love thee as much as I would, and as much as I should. Thou art
unmeasurable, and must be loved without measure, specially of us whom thou have
so loved, whom thou have so saved, and for whom thou have made so great and so
goodly things. O love which burnest ever and art never quenched, O sweet
Christ, O gracious Jesus, O my God which art love it self, set me wholly on
fire with thy fire, with the love of thee, with thy sweetness, with
desirousnesse of thee, with likyng of thee, with ioying and rejoicing in thee,
with thy pitifulness and pleasantness, and with the pleasure and delight of
thee, which is holy and good, chaste and clean: that being thoroughly full of
the sweetness of thy love, wholly besmoked with ye flame of affection toward
thee, I may love thee my Lord God most sweet and most beawtifull, with all my
heart, with all my soul, with all my strength, with all my power, with much sorrow of
heart and sheading of tears, with much reverence and trembling, having thee in
my heart and in my mouth and before mine eyes always and in all places, so as
there may be no rowme in me for any counterfeit or unclean love.

Of joy.
O Sweet love, O loving sweetness, let my belly eat thee, and let my bowels be
filled with the pleasant wine of thy love, and let my mind utter forth good
words. O charity my God, sweet honny, snowye milk, the food of Aungelles,
make me to grow in thee that I may eat thee with a sauorie taste. Thou art my
life whereby I live, the hope that I stick unto, the glory that I desire. Hold
thou my heart, rule my mind, guide mine understanding, cheer up my love, lift
thou up my Soul, and draw the mouth of my spirit which thirsts after
thee, up to the water streams that are above. I beseech thee let the
troubleo^^nesse of the flesh cease. Let the fancies of lands, waters, air,
and sky hold their peace. Let dreams and fantastical Revelations, let all
tounges, all signs, and what soever is able to pass, be whist. Yea let mine
own soul be still, and let it ouerpasse it self, not by thinking upon it
self, but by thinking upon thee my God, because thou art in very deed my
whole hope and trust. For in thee O most sweet, gracious, and merciful God O
Lord Jesus Christ, is both the portion and the blood and the flesh of every one
of us. Then look where the portion or piece of me reigns, there believe I my
self to reign also. Look where my blood bears rule, there trust I to bear
rule to. Look where my flesh is glorified, there know I yt I also am glorious,
and although I be a sinner, yet distrust I not this communion of grace. For
although my sins forfend it, yet does my substance require it. And although
mine own transgressio^s shet me out, yet does the communion of nature take me
in.

That the word is become flesh for our hopes sake.
FOr the Lord is not so unkind, as not to love his own flesh, his own
members, his own bowels. Truly I should despair for my sins, vices, faults,
and negligences without number, which I have committed and daily do commit
without ceassing, in heart, word, and deed, and by all means that man's
frayltie ca^ offend in: were it not that thy word O my God is become flesh and
dwells in us. But now I dare not despair, because that he being obedient
unto thee to the death, even to the death of the cross, has taken away the
handwriting of our sins, and nayling ye same to his cross, has crucified
both sin and death. Now then, I look back with a careless eye by means of
him, who sits at thy right hand and seweth for us, and I think long to come
unto thee upon trust of him, in who^ we are already risen again and revived,
already mounted up into heaven, and there do sit among the angels. To thee be
praise, to thee be glory, to thee be honor, to thee be thanks. Amen.

That the more a man museth upon God, the sweeter it is unto him.
MOst merciful Lord which have so loved and saved us, so quickened and exalted
us. Most merciful Lord, how sweet is the remembrance of thee? The more I
think upon thee, the more sweet and amiable art thou unto me, and therefore
am I greatly delighted with thy goods. With clear eyesight of mind, and with
a most pure affection of godly love, according to my small ability, do I
incessantly covet to sue for thy love, and to behold thy wonderful beawtie, in
this place of my pilgrimage, as long as I abide in these brittle members. For I
am wounded with ye dart of thy love, I am sore inflamed with desire of thee, I
would feign come unto thee, I long to see thee. I will therefore stand upon my
guard, and with waking eyes will I sing in my heart: yea I will sing with my
mind, and with all my strength. I will praise thee my maker and renewer: I
will pearce the sky with my mind, and be with thee in desire: so as my body
only shall be held here in this present misery: but in thought, in
desirousnesse, and in longyng, I will always be with thee, for look where
thou mine incomparable desired and dear beloved treasure art, there also is my
heart. But lo my most gracious and merciful Lord, whereas I would consider the
glory of thine unmeasurable goodness and loving kindness, my heart is not
sufficient to do it. For thine honor, thy beawtie, thy power, thy glory, thy
royalty, thy majesty, and thy love exceed all understanding of man's mind.
Like as the brightness of thy glory is inestimable: so also is the
graciousnesse of thine everlasting love unspeakable, where through thou
adoptest those to be thy sons and knittest them unto thee, whom thou have
created of nothing.

That tribulatio^s for Christ's sake are to be desired in this life.
O My soul if we should be feign to suffer torments every day, if we should
be feign to endure even hell fire for a long time, that we might see Christ in
his glory, and be in company with his Saints: were it not meet we should
abide all the sorrow that could be, that we might be made partakers of so great
a benefit, and of so great glory? Let the devils the^ do their spite, let
them tempt while they tempt may, let fastings forpyne the body, let course
apparel grieve the flesh, let labor pinch it, let watching dry it up, let this
man call upon me, let that man or that man disquiet me, let cold make me curle
together, let my conscience bark at me, let heat scorche me, let my head ache,
let my heart burn, let my stomach be wyndie, let my face look pale, let me be
wholly diseased, let my life consume in sorrow, let my years wast away in
sighing and sobbyng, let rottenness lodge within my bones, and let worms
crawle under me: so I may rest in the day of trouble, and that we may go up
together to our people that wayt for us. For, Lord what glory shall the
righteous have? How great shall the joy of the Saints be, when every face
shall shine as the sun? When the Lord having sorted his people into degrees,
shall begin to muster them in the kingdom of his father, and render the
promised rewards to each of them according to his works and deserts: giuyng
to them, for earthly things heavenly things, for temporal things everlasting
things, for small things great things? Verily then shall happiness be
heaped up full to the top, when the Lord shall bring his Saints to the sight
of eternal glory, and make the^ sit down together in heaven, that God may be
all in all.

How the kingdom of heaven may be gotten.
O Happy pleasantness, O pleasant happiness, to see the Saints, to be with
the Saints, and to be a Saint: to see God, and to have God for ever and ever.
Let us think upon this with diligent mind, let us long after this with our
whole heart, that we may soon come unto them. If thou demand how that may be
brought to pass, or by what deservings, or by what helps it may be
compassed: harken, O man: The kingdom of heaven requires none other price but
thy self: the full value of it is thy self: give thy self for it, and thou
shall have it. Why troublest thou thy self about the price of it? Christ has
given him self to purchase thee a kingdom to God the father. So then give
thou thy self that thou may be his kingdom, and that sin may not reign
in thy mortal body, but that the spirit may reign to the atteinement of life.

What Paradise is, and what it has.
O My soul, let us return to the heavenly City wherein we be registered and
made free Citizens. For like as we be fellow Citizens of the Saints and the
household meynie of God: and like as we be the heirs of God and coheires of
Christ: so let us consider the happy royalty of our City so far forth as it
is possile for us to consider it. Let us say with the Prophet, O how glorious
things are spoken of thee thou City of God: for thou art the dwelling place
of all them that rejoice, the joy of the whole earth is founded upon thee.
There is not in thee any age, nor misery of age. There is not in thee any
maimed person, any lame man, any crook back, nor any misshapen body. For all
be growe^ up to perfect men, after the full measure of the age of Christ. What
blesseder thing can there be the^ such a life, where there is no fear of
poverty, nor weakness of disease? No man is harmed there, no man is
displeased there, no man enuyeth there. There is no burning of covetousness,
no desire of meat, no ambitious sewing for honor and authority, there is no
dread of devil, no snares of feendes, no fear of hell fire. There is no
death, neither of body nor of soul, but pleasant life assured of
immortality. The^ shall there be no miseries, then shall there be no debates,
but all things shall be at agreement, because all the Saints shall agree in one.
Peace and mirth hold all things together, all things are calm and quiet.
There is continual light, not such as is now here, but so much the brighter as
it is much happyer. For (as we read) that City shall need no S^^ne, nor
Moon, because the Lord almighty shall shine in it, and the lamb shall be the
light of it. Where the Saints shall shine as the stars for ever without end,
and such as have taught many in the way of righteousness, shall be as the
brightness of the sky. Wherefore, there shall be no night, no darkness, no
meeting of clouds, no painfulness of heat or cold: but there shall be such a
temperatnesse, as never eye has seen, ear heard, nor heart of any man
conceived, saving only of them that are counted worthy to enjoy the same,
whose names are written in the book of life. But yet it is far above all
these things to be in fellowship with the companies of Angels, Archaungels,
and all the heavenly powers, to behold the patriarchs and Prophets, to see the
Apostles, and all the Saints, yea and also to see our own parents. Glorious
are these things, but much more glorious is it, to behold the present
countenance of God, and to see his infinite brightness. A passing excellent
glory shall it be, when we shall see God in him self, and when we shall both
see and have him in our selves, of who^ we shall never have seen enough.

What thing God requires like unto him self in us.
GOd the father is Charity, God the son is louyngnesse, and God the holy
ghost is the love of the father and the son. This love, this charity and
this louingnesse requires some like thing in us, that is to wit charity,
whereby we be associated, and knitte unto God as it were by some alyance of
kindred. Love passing not for dignity looks for no reverence. He that loves,
comes boldly of him self unto God, and speaks familiarly unto him, without
any fear or without any stickyng. His life is but loss, which loves not. But
he yt loves has his eyes evermore to Godward, who^ he loves, who^ he longs
for, who^ he thinks of, in who^ he delights, upon who^ he feeds, in whom
he battleth. Such a one as is thus disposed, does so sing, so read, and is so
forecasting and circumspect in all his works, as though God were present
before his eyes, and so is he present in deed. He prays in such wise as if
he were taken up and presented before the face of Gods majesty in his high
throne, where thousands of thousands do him service, and ten hundred thousand
are sta^dyng about him. Look what soul love visits, ye same does it awake
out of sleep. It monisheth, softeneth, and wou^deth his heart. It inlighteneth
the dark places, vnlocketh the shet places, warmeth the cold places, meekeneth
the sturdie, fumish and impacient mind, chaceth away vice, bridleth fleshly
affections, amendeth manners, reformeth and renews the spirit, and
restreineth the light motions and actions of slipperie youth. All these things
does love when it is present. And as soon as love is gone away, by and by the
soul begins to droope, like as a boylyng cawldron cools if a man draw
away the fire from under it.

Of the boldness of the soul that loves God.
Love is a great thing, where through the Soul preaceth boldly of it self
unto God, and sticks steadfastly unto God. The Soul that loves God asks
questions of him familiarly, and takes counsel of him in all cases. It can
think upon nothing else, it can speak of nothing else, it despises all other
things, and it lotheth all other things, saving God. What soever it myndeth,
what soever it speaks, it sauoureth of love, and it smells of love, so
wholly has the love of God won it unto him. He that will have knowledge of
God, let him love him. In vain comes he to reading, studying preaching, or
praying, which loves not. The love of God breeds the love of the soul, and
makes it intentife thereunto. God loves to the intent to be loved again.
When he loves he means nothing else but to be loved: for he knows that they
which love him are blessed by their love. The soul that loves God,
renounceth all her own affections, and gives her self wholly to nothing else
but love, to the end she may answer love for love. And when she has utterly
spent her self in love, how small a thing is it in respect of that everlasting
stream of the heavenly love? There is great odds in the match between the
love and the lover, between the soul and God, between the maker and the
creature. And yet if the soul love thee whole, where the whole is there is no
want. Let not the soul be afraid which loves, but let the soul be afraid
which loves not. The soul that loves is carried with desirousnesse, drawn
with longing, disclaymeth deserts, shetteth the eyes of majesty, opens the
eyes of pleasure, sets her self in safety, and deals boldly with GOD.
Through love, the soul withdraws and departs aside from the bodily senses,
so as it feels not it self, to the end it may feel God. And this is done,
at such time as the mind being allured with the unspeakable sweetness of
God, does after a sort steal away from it self, or rather is ravished and
slippeth away from it self, to the intent to enjoy God to her delight. Nothing
could be so pleasant, if it were not so gezon. Love procures familiarity
with God, familiarity procures boldness, boldness taste, and taste continual
hungering. The soul that is surprised with the love of God, can think of
nothing else, nor wish nothing else: but with often sighs says: Like as the
Heart thirsts after the water springes, so thirsts my soul after thee my
God.

What God has done for man.
FOr love to manward, God came to man, God came into(...)

The remembering of the wounds of our Lord Jesus Christ.
WHen any foul thought assaulteth me, I run to the wounds of Christ. When
my flesh presses me down, I rise up again by remembryng the wounds of my
Lord. When the devil lays wayt for me, I flee to the bowels of the mercy of
my Lord, and he departs away from me. If the heat of lechery provoke my
members, it is quenched with calling to mind the wounds of our Lord the son
of God. In all adversities I find no remedy so effectual as the wounds of
Christ. In them I sleep without care, and rest with out fear. Christ has
died for us: Now is there nothing so bitter to the death, which is not salued
by the death of Christ. All my whole hope is in the death of my Lord. His death
is my desert, and my refuge, my welfare, life, and resurrection, and the
mercyfulnesse of the Lord is my merit, I am not poor of merit, so long as he
the Lord of compassio^s fails not. As long as he is manifold in mercy, so
long am I also manifold of deserts. The mightier that he is to save, the more
am I without care.

That the remembrance of Christ's wounds is an effectual remedy against all
adversities.
EXceedyng greatly have I sinned, and mine own conscience finds me guilty of
many offenses, and yet do I not despair, because that whereas sin has
abounded, there has grace ouerabounded. He that despayreth of the forgiveness
of his sins, denies God to be merciful. Great wrong does he to God, which
distrusteth his mercy. For (as much as in him lies) he denies God to be
loving, true, and mighty, which are the things wherein my whole hope
consists, that is to wit in the love of his adoption in the truth of his
promise, and in the power of his redeemyng. Now let my unwise imagination
murmur as much as it lists and say, Who art thou? how great is the glory? and
by what deserts hopest thou to obtain it? and I will answer boldly, I know
whom I have credited, that he of his exceedyng great love has adopted me to be
his son, that he is soothfast of promise, that he is mighty in performance,
and that he may do what he lists. I can not be feared with the multitude of
my sins, if I bethink me of the death of my Lord, because my sins are not
able to ouermatch him. His nails and his spear cry unto me that I am
thoroughly reconcyled to Christ, if I love him. Longiuus has opened me Christ's
side with his spear, and I am gone into it, and there do I rest in safety. He
that is afraid, let him love: for love drives fear out of doors. There is no
remedy so mighty and effectual against the heat of lechery, as the death
of my redemer. He stretches out his arms upon the Cross, and he holds out
his hands in a readiness to embrace sinners. Between the arms of my Savior
mind I to live and dye. There shall I sing safely, there will I exalte thee O
Lord, because thou have taken me up, and have not given mine enemies their
pleasure over me. Our Savior has bowed down his head at his death, to receive
the kisses of his beloved. And so often do we kiss God, as we be thoroughly
touched with the love of him.

The musing of the Soul upon the love of God.
O My soul which art innobled with the Image of God, redeemed with Christ's
blood, betrothed to him by faith, endued with the holy Ghost, garnished with
virtues, and registered among the angels: Love thou him that has loved thee so
much: Serve him that has served thee: Seek him that seeks thee: Love him
that loves thee, which loved thee first, and which is the cause of thy love. He
is the desert, he is the reward, he is the fruit, he is the use of it, he is
the end of it. Be careful for him that is careful of thee: he at leisure for
him, that is at leisure for thee: be clean with him that is clean: be holy
with him that is holy. Look after what sort thou show thy self toward
God, after the same sort shall he show him self toward thee. He is sweet,
meek, and merciful: and therefore he requires to have them that be sweet,
meek, pleasant, and merciful. Love thou him that has plucked thee out of
the puddle of misery, and out of the mire of filthiness. Chose him for thy
friend above all friends, which alone will keep touch with thee when all
things fail thee. In the day of thy buryall when all thy friends shrink from
thee, he will not forsake thee, but will defend thee from the roaring Lions that
wayt for their pray, and will lead thee through an unknown country, and
bring thee to the streets of the heavenly Sion, and there set thee among the
Angels before the face of his own majesty, where thou shall hear this
Aungelicall ditie: holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts. There is ye song
of mirth, the voice of joy and welfare, the voice of thanksgiving and praise,
and the voice of magnifying God for ever. There is the full measure of
happiness, passing excellent glory, superabundant joy, and all good things. O
my soul, sigh heartily, desire earnestly, that thou may come to that City
above, whereof so glorious things are spoken, and wherein is the habitation of
all that rejoice. By love thou may get up thither. Nothing is hard, nothing
is impossible to him that loves. The soul that loves goes up often to the
heavenly Jerusalem, and runs familiarly from street to street, visityng
the Patriarchs and Prophets, salutyng the Apostles, wondering at the hosts of
Martyrs and Confessors, and gazing at the companies of the Virgins. Heaven and
earth and all things that are in them call upon me without ceassyng, to love
my Lord God.

What the knowledge of the truth is.
WHat is the knowledge of truth? first to know thy self, and to endeavor to be
that which thou ought to be, and to amend that which ought to be amended.
And secondly to know and to love thy maker, for that is the whole happiness of
man. See then how unspeakable the graciousnes of Gods love toward us is. He
has created us of nothing, and given us all that we have. But forasmuch as we
have loved the gift more then the giver, and the creature more then the
creator: we are fallen into the deuilles snare and become his bondslaues.
Nevertheless God being moved with compassion, sent his son to redeem us
slaves, and his holy spirit to make us his sons again. He has given his
son to be the price of our ransom, the holy Ghost as an assurance of his
love, and to be short he reserueth him self whole for us to be the heritage of
our adoption. And so God according to his exceedyng gracious goodness and
mercy, has for very love and good will to manward, bestowed not only his
benefits but also him self upon him, to recover him again, not so much to
him self, as to him. To the intent that men might be borne of God, God was
first borne of them. Who is so hard hearted that he will not be softened by the
love of God preventing man with so hearty good will, that he vouchsaued to
become man for man's sake? who can find in his heart to hate a man, whose nature
and likeness he sees in the manhood of GOD? Doubtless he that hates a man
hates God, and so loses all his labor. For God became man for man's sake,
that he might be a redeemer as well as a creator, and that man might be
raunsomed with his own goods, and that one man might love an other the more
heartily. God appeared in the shape of man, to the end that both body and soul
might be made blessed, by renewyng the eye of the mind in his Godhead, and the
eye of the body in his manhood, so that whether man went in or out, he might
find food in him laid up in store by him in his humane nature.

What the sending of the holy Ghost works in us.
FOr our Savior was borne for us, and crucified and put to death for us, to
destroy our death by his own death. And because the grape of his flesh was
carried to the wynepresse of the Cross, and there being pressed yielded forth
the sweet wine of his Godhead: The holy ghost was sent to make ready the
vessels of men's hearts, that the new wine might be put into new vessels: first
to season their hearts for marryng of the wine that should be put into them, and
afterward to hoope them well for leakyng when the wine was poured into them:
that is to wit, to cleanse them from delightyng in sin, and to bind them from
delightyng in vanity. For that which is good could not come in, till that
which is ill was first rid out. The delighting in wickedness defiles: and
the delighting in vanity sheadeth out. The delighting in wickedness makes
the vessel foul, and the delighting in vanity makes it full of cranies. To
delight in wickedness, is to love sin, and to delight in vanity, is to be
in love with transitory things. Therefore cast out the thing that is evil,
that thou may receive the thing that is good. Pour out sowrenesse that thou
may be filled with sweetness. Cast out the spirit of the devil and the
spirit of this world, that thou may take in the spirit of God. The spirit
of the devil works delight in wickedness, and the spirit of the world
works delight in vanity. And these delights are evil: for the one is a
fault of it self, and the other is the occasion of faults. When the evil
spirits be cast out, then will the spirit of God come and enter into the
tabernacle of thy heart, and work good delights, and good love, whereby the
love of the world and the love of sin is driven away. The love of the world
intyceth men to deceive them, and the love of sin defiles and leads to
death. But the love of God inlighteneth the mind, cleanses the conscience,
gladdeth the heart, and shows a man God.

Of the workyng of him that loves God.
HE in who^ the love of God dwells, is always devising when he shall come
unto God, when he shall leave the world, and when he shall escape the corruption
of his flesh. And to the intent he may find true peace, he has his heart and
desire always lifted up above. When he sits, when he goes, when he
rests, or what soever he do, his heart is evermore with God. He exhorts all
men to the love of God, he commends the love of God unto all me^, and in
heart, word, and work he shows unto all men both how sweet the love of God
is, and also how evil and bitter the love of this world is. He laugheth at the
glory of this world, and finds fault with the care of it, showing how fond a
folly it is to put a man's trust in things that be transitory. He marueleth at
the blindness of the men that love such things. And he wondereth that all men
forsake not all these transitory and flightfull things. He thinks that all
men should deem the things sweet, wherein he him self finds so good
taste: that all men should love, that which he loves: and that all men should
be privy to yt which he knows. Oftentimes does he behold God, and is
sweetly refreshed at the contemplation of him: so much the more happily, as he
does it more ofte^ly. For sweet always is that thing to be thought upon,
which is always sweet to be loved and praised.

Of the true rest of the heart.
IN deed the true rest of the heart, is when the heart is wholly settled in
desire, upon the love of God, and coueteth nothing else, but has a certain
happy delight in the thing that he holds him to, and ioyeth in the same
delight. And if it be never so little withdrawn from him by any vain thought,
or business of other matters: he hyeth him as fast as he ca^ to return to him
again with all speed: accountyng it but a banishment to abide any where else
then there. For like as there is no moment wherein man does not inioye or use
the gracious goodness of God: so ought there to be no moment wherein he should
not have him present in remembrance. And therefore no small fault does that man
commit, who when he talks with God in prayer, is suddenly plucked away from
his presence, as it were from the eyes of one that neither saw him nor heard
him. And that is done when he follows his own naughty and unruly thoughts,
and prefers before God, some creature that is for his own profit or
pleasure whereunto the contemplation of his mind is easly drawn away, by
bethinkyng, reuoluyng, or mynding the same oftener th^n God, whom he must
continually remember as his creator, honor as his redeemer, attend upon as his
Savior, and fear as his judge.

What soever withdraws the sight of the mind from God, must in any wise be
eschewed and abhorred.
WHo soever thou art that love the world, look before thee whither thou
go. The way that thou walk is an evil way and full of sorrow. Therefore O
man leave of thine own businesses for a while, and with draw thy self from
thy trouble some thoughts. Cast away thy burdensome cares, lay aside thy
paynefull turmoyles, bestow some time upon God, and rest thy self a while in
him. Get thee into the chamber of thy mind, shet out all things saving God
and such things as further the findyng of him, and seek him with thy door
fast shet to thee. Let thy whole heart say unto God, I seek thy countenance,
it is thy countenance that I seek O Lord. Now then my Lord God, go to,
teach thou my heart where and how it may seek thee, and where and how it may
find thee. Lord if thou be not here, where shall I seek thee when thou art
gone? Or if thou be every where, why see I not thee here? Certesse thou
dwell in vnapprochable light. And how shall I come at thee then? or who
shall lead me and bring me in thither? that I may see thee there? Again, what
marks or what shape shall I seek thee by? I never saw thee my Lord God, I
never knew thy face. What shall this far banished creature of thine do most
high Lord, what shall he do? what shall thy servant do which is careful
for love of thee, and is rejected far from thy presence? Behold, he pants to
see thee, and thy countenance is far from him. He longs to come near
thee, and thy dwelling place is vnapprochable. He would feign find thee, and
he knows not thy place. He is desirous to seek thee, and knows not thy
countenance.

That the seeing of God is lost through sin, and misery found instead of it.
LOrd, thou art my God and my souereine, and yet I never saw thee. Thou have
made me and made me new again, and bestowed all thy goods upon me, and yet
hitherto I have neither known thee nor seen thee. To be short, I was made to
see thee, and I have not yet done the thing that I was made for. O wretched
state of man, that he must forgo the thing for which he was made. O hard and
cursed case as it was. Alas what has he lost, and what has he found? what is
forgone, and what remains? He has lost blessedness, to which he was made,
and found misery, to which he was not made. The thing is gone without which
nothing is luckie, and the thing remains which of it self is all together
unlucky. Man did then eat angels bread, which thing he now hungreth for:
and now he eats the bread of sorrow, which he was not then acquaynted with.
O Lord, how long will thou forget us? for ever? how long will thou turn away
thy face from us? when will thou look back and hear us? when will thou
inlighten our eyes and show us thy face? when will thou restore thy self unto
us? Look back Lord and hear us, and inlighten us, and show thy self unto
us, and restore thy self unto us, that it may go well with us which are so
ill bestad without thee. I have a bitterness at my heart because thou have
forsaken it: Lord I beseech thee sweeten it again with thy comfort. I have
begone to seek thee with a hungry appetite, let me not be sent away from thee
without repast. I am come with a sharp stomach, let me not go away fasting. I
come poor to thee that art rich, I come wretched to thee that art pitiful,
let me not go away empty and despised. Lord I am bowed down, and I can not
look but downward. Raise me that I may look upward. Mine iniquities are gone
over my head, they have overwhelmed me, and they ouerlode me as a heavy
burden. Wind me out, and unload me, that the pit shut not his mouth upon me.
Teach me to seek thee, and show thy self to me at my seeking. For I cannot
seek thee except thou teach me, nor find thee except thou show thy self
unto me. Let me seek thee by longyng after thee, and let me long after thee by
seeking thee. Let me find thee by loving thee, and let me love thee by findyng
thee.

Of Gods goodness.
I Confess Lord (I thank thee for it) that thou have created me after thine
own image, to the end I should be myndefull of thee, think upon thee, and
love thee. But that image is so defaced by the corruption of sin, that it
cannot do the thing for which it was created, except thou renew and reform it
again. I beseech thee O Lord which geuest the understanding of faith, grant
that I may redily understand how great thou art. For thou art as we believe, and
this is it that we believe: namely we believe that thou art some one thing, then
the which there can nothing be thought to be either greater or better? What
art thou then O Lord God? Even that one thing, then the which nothing can be
imagined to be greater or better, that is to say the souereine goodness,
which has his being of it self alone, and has made all other things of
nothing. Thou therefore art righteous, soothfast, blessed and whatsoever thing
else it is better to be then not to be. But how do thou spare the wicked,
seeing thou art wholly and without comparison rightuous? Is it because thy
goodness is incomprehensible? This thing lies hid in the vnapprochable light
which thou dwell in. Verily, the headspryng from whence the stream of thy
mercy flows, lies hid in the most deep and secret gulf of thy goodness.
For although thou be wholly and exceedyngly rightuous: yet art thou also gentle
to the evil, because thou art wholly and exceedyng good: for thou should be
the less good if thou should bear with no evil. For better is he that is
good both to good and bad, then he that is good but to the good only. And
better is he that is good to the evil both by sparyng them and also by
punishyng them, the^ he that is good to them but in punishing them only. The
cause therefore why thou art merciful, is for that thou art wholly and
exceedyng good.

Of the delectable fruition of God.
O Unmeasurable goodness which passest all understanding of heart, let that
mercy of thine come upon me, which proceeds from so passing abou^dance. Let
that flow into me which flows out of thee. Spare me of thy mercyfulnesse,
and punish me not by thy Justice. Awake now my soul, and lift up thy whole
understanding, and consider to the uttermost of thy power how great and of what
sort that goodness is which is God. For if every several good thing be
delectable: cast in thy mind advisedly, how delectable that good thing is,
which conteyneth the pleasantness of all good things: not in such sort as
we find it in things created, but as far differyng, as there is odds
between the creature and the maker. For if the life that is created be good:
how good is the life that created it? If the welfare that is created be
pleasant: how pleasant is the welfare that made all welfare? If the wisdom
that consists in conceiuyng or knowing of things known, be amiable: how
amiable is the wisdom that made all things of nothing? finally, if there be
many and great pleasures in things that be delectable: what and how great
pleasure is there in him which made those delectable things? O what shall he
have, or what is it that he shall not have, which inioyeth this good thing?
Certesse he shall have what soever he will, and he shall not have any thing
that he would not have. For there shall he have all good things, both of body
and soul, such as never eye of man has seen, nor ear heard, nor heart
imagined.

The souereine good is to be sought.
WHy raungest thou then through so many things O silie man, seeking the goods
of thy soul and of thy body? Love ye one good thing wherein are all good
things, and it is enough. Be desirous of the single good thing which is all
goodness, and it suffices. For what is it yt thou love O my flesh? what
desire thou O my soul? whatsoever thou love, it is there: whatsoever thou
desire, it is there. If thou have a mind to beawtie, there the rightuous
shine as the sun. If thou like of swiftnes, strength, or liberty of body,
where against nothing may resist: there they shall be like the angels of God.
For the body is sown a natural body, but it shall rise a spiritual body,
that is to wit spiritual in power but not in substance. If thou desire a
long or healthy life: there shall be healthful euerlastyngnesse, and everlasting
healthfulnesse. For the rightuous shall live for ever, and the welfare of the
rightuous comes of the Lord. If suffisance: They shall be suffised when the
glory of the Lord appears. If drunkenness: They shall be made dru^ken with the
foyzon of Gods house. If melody: There the angels shall sing unto God without
end. If any manner of pleasure, so it be not unclean: The Lord will let them
drink their fill of the stream of his pleasures. If wisdom: The very
wisdom of God shall show him self to them. If frendshyp: They shall love
God more the^ them selves, and one an other as themselves: and God shall love
them more then they love them selves. For they love him, them selves, and one
an other by him: and he loves him self and them by him self. If concord:
They shall all of them delight but in one thing, for there shall be but one will
among them, and that shall be the will of God their souereine. If power: They
shall be masters of their wills like as God is of his. For like as God can do
what he lists by him self: so shall they be able to do what they list by
him. For like as they will not list any other thing then he lists: so will he
list whatsoever they list, and so consequently whatsoever he lists must
needs come to pass. If honor and riches: God will make his good and faithful
^eruau^tes rulers of much goods, yea they shall be the children of God and Gods,
and they shall be the heirs of God and coheyres with Christ. Or if thou desire
assured safety: they shall be as sure that that good state shall never fail
them, as they are sure that they would never forgo it by their own wills,
and that God their lover will not take it away from his lovers against their
wills, and that there is not any thing mightier then God to separate God and
the^ a sunder. Now then what and how great joy is there, whereas is such and so
great goodness?

Of the mutual love between the Saints in heavens.
O Heart of man, O poor heart, O heart unacquainted with misery and
wretchedness, or rather overwhelmed with miseries: how glad would thou be
if thou had abundance of all these things? Ask thy furthest compass of
thine inward conceyt, if it were able to receive the joy of this so great
happiness? Certeinely if any other man whom thou louedst as thy self should
have the same happy state, thy joy would be double, because thou would be
as glad for him as for thy self. But if two or three or a number mo should
have the same thing, thou would be as glad for every one of them as for thy
self, if thou did love the^ as thy self. What joy then shall there be in
that perfect love of the innumerable blessed angels and men, when none shall
love any other less then him self? for every of them shall be as glad for
others as for him self. Now if the heart of man be scarce able to conceive the
joy of any one so great a benefit, how shall it be capable of so many and so
great joys? And doubtless, seeing that according as every man loves another,
so much does he rejoice of his welldoing: therefore like as in that blessed
happiness every man shall without comparison love God more then him self and
all others set all together: so also shall he without estimation rejoice more of
Gods happy state, then of his own and of all other folks with him. Moreover
if they love God with all their heart, with all their mind, and with all their
soul, and yet all their heart, all their mind, and all their soul suffice not
to love him as he is worthy: Out of all doubt, they shall also rejoice with all
their heart, with all their mind, and with all their soul: and yet their whole
heart, their whole mind, and their whole soul shall not suffice to rejoice to
the full.

Of the full joy of the eternal life.
MY God and my Lord, my hope and hearts joy, tell my soul whether this be the
joy whereof thou say unto us by thy son: Ask, and ye shall receive, yt
your joy may be full, for I have found a certain joy that is full and more
then full. For when the heart is full, the mind full, the soul full, and the
whole man full of that joy, yet shall there remain an overplus of joy with out
measure. All that joy then, shall not enter whole into the inioyers of it, but
the inioyers shall enter whole into the joy of their Lord. Lord tell thy
servant, tell me inwardly in my heart, whether this be the joy whereinto those
servants of thine shall enter, which must enter into the joy of their
master. Truly the joy that thine elect shall enjoy, was never seen of man's
eye, nor heard of man's ear, nor conceived of ma^s heart. Therefore Lord I have
not yet said or imagined how much thy chosen shall rejoice. Undoubtedly they
shall so much rejoice, as they dee love thee: and they shall so much love thee,
as they know thee. And how much shall they love thee? Verily, no eye has
seen, ear heard, nor heart conceived in his life, how much they shall know
thee and love thee in that life. I beseech thee my God let me know thee and
love thee, that I may have joy of thee. And although I cannot do it to the full
in this life: yet let me profit from day to day until it may come to the
full. Let the knowledge of thee grow in me here, that it may become full there.
Let the love of thee increase in me here, that it may be full there: so as my
joy may be great in hope here, and full in deed there. O soothfast God, I pray
thee let me receive the thing that thou promisest, that my joy may be full. In
the mean time let my mind be thinkyng upon it, let my tongue be talkyng of it,
let my heart long for it, let my mouth be speaking of it, let my soul hunger
after it, let my flesh thirst after it, let my whole self be desirous of it,
until such time as I may enter into the joy of my Lord, there to continue for
ever world without end. Amen.

All glory, honor, praise, and thanks be given to God alone.
A TABLE OF the Prayers contained in S. Austens books entitled his self talk
with God, and his Manuell.
OF the unspeakable sweetness of God. Of the wretchedness and frailty of man. Of
Gods wonderful light. Of the mortality of man's nature. Of the fall of the
soul into sin. Of Gods manifold benefits. Of man's dignity in time to come.
Of Gods omnipotency. Of the incomprehensible praise of God. Of lifting a man's
hope unto God. Of the snares of concupiscence. Of man's misery and Gods
benefits. How God does continually behold and mark men's doings and intentes.
Of man's imbecillitie without the grace of God. Of the devil and his manifold
temptations. That God is the light of the righteous. Of Gods benefits. Of the
feruentnes of love or charity. That God has put all things under the service
of man. By consideration of earthly benefits we conjecture the greatness of the
heavenly wisdom. That the sweetness of God takes away all the present
bitterness of this world. That all our trust, and longing of our heart ought to
be to Godward. That our welfare comes of God. That man's will is unable to do
good works without the grace of God. Of Gods old benefits. Of Gods deep
predestination and foreknowledge. Of such as be righteous and afterward become
wicked, and contrariwise. That the faithful man's soul is the Sanctuary of
God. That God cannot be found neither by the outward senses, nor by the inward
wits. Of the acknowledgyng of a man's own vileness. A consideration of Gods
majesty. Of the longing and thirsting of the soul after God. Of the glory of
the heavenly country. A Prayer to the holy Trinity.
The table of prayers in his Manuell.
OF Gods wonderful being. Of ye unspeakable knowledge of God. Of the longing
of the soul that feels God. Of the wretchedness of that soul which loves
not, neither seeks our Lord Jesus Christ. Of the longing of the soul. Of the
happiness of the soul that is let loose from the prison of the body. Of the
joys of paradise. Of the kingdom of heaven. Of the comfort of the sorrowful
soul after the long mournyng thereof. Of joy. That the word is become flesh
for our sake. That the more a man museth upon God, the sweeter it is to him.
That tribulations for Christ's sake, are to be desired in this life. How the
kingdom of heaven may be gotten. What paradise, is and what it has. What
thing God requires like unto him self in us. Of the boldness of the soul
that loves God. What God has done for man. The remembryng of the wounds of
our Lord Jesus Christ. That the remembrance of Christ's wou^des is an
effectual remedy against all adversities. The musing of the soul upon the
love of God. What the knowledge of the truth is. What the sendyng of the holy
Ghost works in us. Of the workyng of him that loves God. Of the true rest of
the heart. Whatsoever withdraws the mind from God, must in any wise be
eschewed and abhorred. That the seeing of God is lost through sin, and misery
found instead of it. Of Gods goodness. Of the delectable fruition of God. That
the souerein good is to be sought. Of the mutual love between the Saints in
heaven. Of the full joy of the eternal life.
The end of the Table.
AT LONDON Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


