A Proclamation devised by the kings hyghnes, with thaduise of his most
honorable counsel, to auowe and abolish such english books, as (...)
pernicious detestable errors and heresies, made the.viii. day of July,
the.^^^viii. year of the kings ma^^sties most gracious reign.
THe Kings most excellent majesty, understanding how under pretense of
expounding and declaring the truth of Gods scripture, diverse leude and evil
disposed persons have taken occasion to utter and sow abroad by Books
imprinted in thenglish tongue, sundry pernicious and detestable errors and
heresies, not only contrary to the laws of this Realm, but also repugnant to
the true sense of Gods law and his word. By reason whereof certain men of late
to the destruction of their own body and soul, and to the evil example of
others, have attempted arrogantly and maliciousely to impugn the truth, and
therewith trouble the sobre, quiet and godly religion, united and established
under the Kings majesty in this his Realm: His highness minding to forsee the
dangers that might ensue thereof, and tendering therewith like a most christen
prince the conseruacion of the true religion in his majesty's dominions from
such corrupt and pestilent teaching, as has of late secretly crept in by such
printed books, has thought it necessarily requisite to devise by his
proclamation and authority of the same how to avoid and eschew the said
dangers and inconvenience, and to pourge his commonwealth of such pernicious
doctrine as by books in thenglishe tongue has been of late diuulged abroad in
this his graces realm. For which consideration, having the devil so tempred the
setting abroad of his falsehed as he many times annexed truths thereunto,
whereby to induce and deceive the simple people. So as now the purging of that
which is noisome and hurtefull, can not without taking away some part of that
being tolerable be put in execution, being the books increased to an infinite
number, and unknown diversities of titles and names whereby specially to revoke
adnull or condemn the same. The kings majesty is enforced to use his
general prohibition commandment and proclamation as follows.

First, that from henceforth no man woman or other person, of what estate
condition or degree so ever be or they be, shall after they last day of August
next ensuing, receive take have or keep in his or their possession, the text of
the new Testament of Tindals or Couerdals translation in english, nor any
other than is permitted by thacte of Parliament, made in the session of ye
parliament holden at Westminster in the.xxxiiii. and.xxxv. year of his
majesty's most noble reign: not after the said day, shall receive have take
or keys in his or their possession any manner of book printed or written in the
english tongue, which be or shall be set forth, in the names of Frith Tindall,
Wicliff, Joy, Roy, Basile, Bale, Barnes, Couerdale, Tourner, Tracy or by any of
them, or any other book or books, containing matter contrary to the Kings
majesty's book, called, A necessary doctrine and erudition for any christen
man, or any thing therein contained: or any other book or books prohibited or
forbidden to be had or kept by the act of parliament holden at Westminster in
the.xxxiiii. and.xxxv. year of the kings majesty's most victorious reygne
abouesayde.

And furthermore the kings majesty strayghtly charge and commands, that
who so ever, of what estate degree or condition so ever they or he be has now
in his or their custody and such book printed or written in english, as does
contain matter contrary to the said doctrine set forth by the kings majesty,
or be set forth in the name of Frith Cuidall, Wicliffe, Joy, Roie, Basile,
Bale, Barnes, Couerdale, Turner, Tracy: Or else the same book or books in
english be the new Testament of Tindals or Couerdales translation, or any
other prohibited by the said act made Anno.xxxiiii. and.xxxv. shall before the
last day of August next coming, deliver the same english book or books to
his master in that householde, if he be a servant or dwell under any other.
And the master or ruler of the house and such other as dwell at large, shall
deliver all such books of the fortes aforesaid as they have, or shall come to
their hands de^^uered as before or otherwise to the Mayre, bayliffe or chief
constable of the town, where they dw^ll, to be by them delivered over openly
within.xl. days next following after the said delivery to the sheriff of the
shyre, or to the Bishop, chancellor, or commissary of the same diocese, to
the intent the said bishop chancellor, commissarye, and sheriff, and every of
them, shall cause them incontinently to be open^y ^^^^^ed, which the kings
majesty's pleasure is, that every of them shall see executed in most
effectual sort, and of their doings therein make certificat to the kings
majesty's most honorable counsel, before the first of October next coming.

And to the intent that no man shall mistrust any danger of such penal statutes
as be passed in this behalf, for keeping of the said books. The kings majesty
is most graciously contented by this proclamation to pardon that offense to the
(...)


