By the Queen.
A Proclamation for restraint of transportation of grain beyond the seas.
THE Queens Majesty understanding of the sudden increase of the pryces of
grain, for the more part universally in the Realm, as it is to be coniectured
partlye by the unseasonableness of the late harvest time, and partlye by
reason of excessive transportation of grain out of the Realm, into the
parties beyond the seas, whereby if stay be not speedily made for any further
transportation, there may follow a great dearth, which shall hardly be borne
of a great number of her good loving subjects: does therefore straightly charge
and command all manner her subjects, and other inhabitauntes within this
Realm, to forbear from the day of the publication hereof, from the shyppyng
or ladyng into any vessel, any manner of grain, to the intent the same
should be directly or indirectly carried and transported into any parts
beyond the seas, upon pain of imprisonment, and other further punishments,
due by the laws of the Realm. And if any officers, in any port Towns, as
Customers, Comptrollers, Searchers, or such like, shall either themselves
offend herein, or shall not do their endeavor to stay any such transportation,
or if they cannot conveniently stay the same, shall not make due and speedye
infourmation thereof to her Majesty, her privy counsel, or to the principal
officers of her Exchequer, then they, besides the former punishments, to
forfeyte their offices. And consyderying it cannot be well avoided, but that
some quantity of grain is to be carried from one port to another port, to
serve the necessity of some other part of the Realm: in such case, the
officers of the ports shall diligently see, that good sureties with bonds be
taken of persons being of valor aunswerable for the same, to bring due
certificates from the ports where the same shall aryue and be unladen: And
that for more assurance thereof, the officers of the ports, shall thereof
make their certificates into the Exchequer within two months after the
ariuall thereof, upon pain of forfeiture of their offices.

And for that it is thought, that it shall appear by the end of October next,
what effect shall follow hereof, to the diminution of the excessive prices, her
Majesty means that this manner of restraint shall not continue by force of
this Proclamation, but to the end of the said month of October now following.

Given at Woodstocke, the xvi. day of September 1572, the fourteenth year of
her Majesty's reign.
Imprinted at London in Powles Church yard, by Richard Judge, Printer to the
Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


