A proclamacion of the peace and unity, concluded between the kings maiestee,
and the right high and mighty prince, Francis the french king.
THe king our sovereign lord having always before his most gracious eyes the
manyfolde benefyttes and commoditees of peace, and consyderyng how necessary
it is at this time not only for his gracis own realms and dominions, but also
for the hole state of christendom, that christen princis should agree and
join in perfect love concord and amitee together, whereby they shall first
please god, and be the more able to maynteyne their estates, and also procure
great wealth and quietness to their subjects, being the wars of late years
entered between his maiestee and the right high and mighty prince the French
king, has upon beliberate advise and consideracion removed all kind of
enmity displeasure and unkindness, that has been between them, and has
upon most godly and honorable conditions passed concluded and agreed a good
perfect sincere fyrme assured and perpetual amity peace intelligence
confederacion union and amity, to remain and continue for ever between his
most excellent maiestee, and his heirs and successoures on the one party,
and the said right high and mighty prince the French king on the other
party, their realms countries cities towns lands dominions territories and
seigniories places castelles vassalles and subjects by sea land fresshe water
and else where, by the which peace it is provided and ordained, that from
henseforthe all hostilitee and war shall cease on either party. And the
said princes their heirs and successors with all their vassalles and
subjects, to live together in peace, amity, intelligence, concord, love,
unity, and frendeshyppe. And that it shall be lefull to all and syngular the
subjects of either of them, of what estate or condition so ever they be,
freely quietely peasybly and at libertee, and without any saulfconduct or
license to enter into the others realms, there to remain, demourre, haunt,
frequent, be conuersaunt, dwell, sotourne, abide, or through the same to pass
at their pleasure: And all feats of marchandyses intercourse exchange biyng
selling or other business what so ever it be, not prohibited or defended by
the laws of the realms, to use occupy do and exercise: And from the same to
pass and repasse with their goods marchaundyses ships carts carriages
horses armures and other things what so ever they be, not prohibited, without
arrest stop molestacion contradiction or impediment: And generally all other
things to do use and exercise as freely quietely and liberally as they have
done in time of peace taken between the realms of England and France
heretofore accordyngly. In which peace also is comprehended the most high and
mighty prince Charles by the grace of god Emperor. etc. with all his realms,
dominions, lands, countreies, and subjects, and no manner of thing touching
the frendeshyp and perpetual amity with him, nor any intercourse of
marchaundyses or other thing is by this present peace in any wise violated
broken empayred diminished or hindered, but all remainying in full and perfect
strength and virtue as fyrmely wholly entierly as they were before.

This Proclamation was proclaimed 13 Junij 38 H8 being Whitsunday 1546. God
save the king.
Tho. Berthelet regius impressor excudebat.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendu^ solum.


