portrait of Charles I CHARLES BY THE GRACE OF GOD King of England, Scotland
France and Ireland, defendor of the faith, etc:


HIS MAJESTY'S Declaration, CONCERNING His Proceedings with His Subjects of
SCOTLAND, Since the Pacification in the Camp near Berwick.

LONDON, Printed by R. Young, His Majesty's Printer for Scotland, and R.
Badger, Printer to the Prince His Highness. M.DC.XL.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

By the King.
WE did make account that the Pacification which We were pleased to condescend
unto, the last year in the Camp near Berwick, and to grant to Our Subjects
of Scotland, even then when they were in the height of their rebellion, and in
the field in Arms against Us, had given such demonstration to the world of Our
inclination to peace, and desire to spare the blood of Our people, and to win
them to the obedience which they owe unto Us, as that all misunderstandings had
been utterly taken away (as they were on Our part) and that such conditions as
were then agreed upon, should have been really performed by them, according to
those bonds of Allegiance, duty, and promise in which they stand obliged to
Us. But We have since found, to our unexpressible grief, that Our Princely
goodness and mildness in passing by that offense, has produced nothing but
extreme ingratitude, and insufferable insolences against Our Government: And
farther, by sundry libellous Pamphlets, and most false and seditious discourses
sent from Scotland, and dispersed purposely in this Our Kingdom of England,
especially in our City of London, that the cause of these disorders is sought
to be shifted off from the Rebels in Scotland, and most unjustly cast upon Us.
Wherefore We hold Our self bound in that duty which we owe to God and love to
truth, not to suffer Our honor to be thus betrayed and vilified by faction and
rebellion, but to vindicate it from all calumny and clamor, by giving hereby
a clear and just account to all the world of Our proceeding with Our Subjects
of that Our Kingdom, and of the most material and remarkable occurrents since
that Pacification, that so all those that are not partial, or will not
wilfully shut their eyes against the truth, may judge, who they are that have
been the disturbers, and infractors of the peace, and that under the mask and
visour of Religion, seek to undermine and subvert all Monarchical and civil
Government. Which account follows thus.

After We had been some time in the Camp near Berwicke, and that Our
Subjects of Scotland had encamped with their Army in view of Ours, upon an
overture from them, We were contented to condescend to the receiving of a
Petition, in which it is expressed, that, they, falling down at Our feet, did
most humbly supplicate Us to appoint some of this Our Kingdom of England to
hear, by some of them, their humble desires. Which We having granted, and
several meetings by those of both Kingdoms having been held, at all which Our
self, (to show Our hearty and earnest desire to meet Our subjects in a peacable
way) were contented to be present, (much beyond their own expectation, as they
have since acknowledged, and We are sure exceedingly beyond their merit) at the
last those of Scotland were commanded to make their demands in writing, in
which after they had presented their desires, (of which one was, That the acts
of the late assembly at Glasgow holden by Our Indiction, might be ratified in
the ensuing Parliament,) they profess, It is their grief that We should have
been provoked to wrath against them Our most humble and loving Subjects, and
that it shall be their delight upon Our gracious assurance of the preservation
of their Religion and Laws, to give example to others of all civil and
temporal obedience which can be required or expected of loyal subjects.
Whereupon We letting them know, that for the better clearing of particulars, We
expected from them the grounds and reasons of their desires, but that We would
not surprise them, and therefore gave them time to come prepared with their
grounds in writing, The Lord Lowdon said, Their desires were only to enjoy
their Religion and Liberties, according to the Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws
of the Kingdom; and in clearing particulars, they would not insist upon any
that were not such. This We willed him to set down in writing under his hand,
which he did in these words.

Memorandum, that our desires are only the enjoying of our Religion and
Liberties according to the Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws of His Majesty's
Kingdom; To clear by sufficient Grounds, that the particulars which we humbly
crave, are such, and shall not insist to crave any point which is not so
warranted; And that we humbly offer all civil and temporal obedience to Your
Majesty, which can be required or expected of loyal subjects.

Signed, Lowdon.

To which We answered, That if their desires were only the enjoying of their
Religion and Liberties according to the Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws of Our
Kingdom of Scotland, We do not only agree to the same, but shall always
protect them to the uttermost of Our power. And if they shall not insist upon
any thing but that which is so warranted, We will most willingly and readily
condescend unto it, so that in the mean time they pay unto Us that civil and
temporal obedience which can be justly required and expected of loyal
subjects.

This being the ground of the agreement on both sides, We were pleased to
proceed to a final determination of this business, which was brought to a
conclusion upon the 17. of June, 1639: And Our Declaration of that date
conformable to these grounds was thereupon made, which was not only accepted
by those that came in the name of all those of the Covenant, but most humble
thanks were given to Us by them for Our gracious answer vouchsafed to their
Petition in the said Declaration; which was fully agreed upon, together with
sundry Articles, by all parties.

The Pacification thus concluded, the Articles on both sides were to be
performed accordingly: Those on Our part were in the Declaration following.

We having considered the papers and humble petitions presented to Us by those
of Our subjects of Scotland who were admitted to attend Our pleasure in the
Camp, and after a full bearing by Our Self of all that they could say or
allege thereupon, having communicated the same to Our Council of both
Kingdoms there present, upon mature deliberation, with their unanimous advice
We have thought fit to give this just and gracious answer; That though We
cannot condescend to ratify and approve the acts of the pretended General
Assembly at Glasgow, for many grave and weighty considerations which have
happened both before and since, much importing the Honor and Security of that
true Monarchical Government lineally descended upon Us from so many of Our
Ancestors; yet such is Our gracious pleasure, that notwithstanding the many
disorders committed of late, We are pleased not only to confirm and make good
whatsoever our Commissioner has granted and promised in Our Name; but also We
are farther graciously pleased to declare and assure, that according to the
Petitioners humble desires, all matters Ecclesiastical shall be determined by
the Assemblies of the Kirk, and matters Civil by the Parliament, and other
inferior Iudicatories established by Law, which Assembly accordingly shall be
kept once a year, or as shall be agreed upon at the General Assembly.

And for settling the general distractions of that Our ancient Kingdom, Our
will and pleasure is, that a free general Assembly be kept at Edinburgh, the
sixth day of August next ensuing, where We intend (God willing) to be personally
present; and for the Legal Indiction whereof, We have given order and command
to Our Counsel, and thereafter a Parliament to be holden at Edinburgh the
twentieth day of August next ensuing, for ratifying of what shall be concluded in
the said Assembly, and settling such other things as may conduce to the peace
and good of Our Native Kingdom, and therein an Act of oblivion to be passed.

And whereas We are farther desired, that Our Ships and Forces by land be
recalled, and all persons goods, and ships restored, and they made safe from
invasion, We are graciously pleased to declare, That upon their disarming, and
disbanding of their forces, dissolving and discharging all their pretended
Tables and Conventicles, and restoring unto us all our Castles, Forts, and
Ammunition of all sorts, as likewise Our Royal Honors, and to every one of Our
good subjects their liberties, lands, houses, goods, and means whatsoever
taken and detained from them since the late pretended General Assembly, We
will presently thereafter recall Our Fleet, and retire Our land Forces, and
cause restitution to be made to all persons of their ships and goods detained
and arrested since the aforesaid time; whereby it may appear, that Our
intention of taking up of arms, was no way for invading of Our Native
Kingdom, or to innovate the Religion and Laws, but merely for the maintaining
and vindicating of Our Royal Authority.

And since that hereby it does clearly appear, that We neither have, nor do
intend any alteration in Religion or Laws, but that both shall be maintained by
Us in their full Integrity, We expect the performance of that humble and
dutiful obedience, which becomes loyal and dutiful subjects, and as in
their several Petitions they have often professed. And as We have just reason
to believe that to our peaceable and well-affected subjects this will be
satisfactory, so We take God and the world to witness, that whatsoever
calamities shall ensue by Our necessitated suppressing of the Insolences of
such as shall continue in their disobedient courses, is not occasioned by Us,
but by their own procurement.

These Conditions in this Declaration that refer to the time past, have been
the most part of them already punctually complied with by Us, that clause
excepted in which We express, We intended to have been at the General
Assembly at Edinburgh; which yet being but an Intention, We had assuredly
performed, but that We were diverted by the disorders committed by Our
tumultuary Subjects in Edinburgh, upon the persons of Our High Treasurer, the
Earl of Kinnoull Our Justice General, Sir James Hamilton, Counselors of that
Our Kingdom, and diverse others Our good Subjects there; which gave Us just
cause to suspect, that there could be no safety for Our Person, among people
enraged so immediately after Our clemency showed to them in the Pacification.

But one of the greatest discouragements We had from going thither, was the
refusing of such Lords and others of that Nation whom We sent for, to come to
Us to Berwick; by which disobedience they manifestly discovered their distrust
of Us: and it cannot be thought reasonable, that We should trust Our Person
with those that distrusted Us, after so many arguments and assurances of Our
goodness toward them.

The Articles of Pacification agreed upon were these.















On Tuesday the 18. of June, those of Scotland came to Our Pavilion, and there
We signed the aforesaid Declaration, and the Articles were signed by them, who
also signed another paper of submission to Us, as follows.

In the Camp, 18. June, 1639.
In obedience to His Majesty's Royal commands, we shall upon Thursday next,
the 20. of this June, dismiss our Forces, and immediately thereafter deliver
His Majesty's Castles, etc. and shall ever in all things carry our selves like
humble, loyal, and obedient subjects.

Signed, Rothes. Dumfermlin. Lowdon. Douglas. Alex. Henderson. A. Iohnstoun.



Those of Scotland did likewise further promise and undertake, that Our
foresaid Declaration should be read and published in their Army; which was
accordingly done by Lion King of Arms of Scotland, on Thursday the 20. in the
presence of the Earl of Morton, Sir Edmund Verney, and Sir John Borough, Our
Commissioners sent thither to see the same performed.

How these Articles have been performed, on their part, comes now to be
considered, and will appear by that which follows.



Some Conditions of His Majesty's Treaty with His Subjects of Scotland before
the English Nobility, are set down here for remembrance. Wherein are contained
such untruths and seditious positions, and so contrary to that which was
concluded in the Articles of Pacification, as thereby it did plainly appear,
that however they pretended a desire of peace, yet they intended nothing less.
This false and seditious paper coming to Our knowledge, was after, by the
Advice, and upon the humble Petition of Our Privy Council here in England,
and particularly, by such Noblemen as were pretended by them to be witnesses to
the same, ordered to be damned by Proclamation, and publicly burnt by the hand
of the Hangman: which was done accordingly.

putting themselves again in arms against Us.



of that Our Kingdom, and Our express warrant; In which Conventicles they
daily vex and trouble such of Our Subjects as do not adhere to their
rebellious Covenant, and pretended assembly at Glasgow, and the acts of the
same.





Kinnoul, Our Justice General Sir James Hamilton, and others Our Counselors
and good Subjects, so does it clearly evince, that nothing was less intended
then obedience to Our authority, or performance of what was promised, or is
due to Us in right of Our Crown, and by the laws of that Our Kingdom.



Us, and have attended Our person, with the vile aspersion of Traitors to God
and their Country, threatening to proceed against them with censures
accordingly, as though the due respect given by them to Us, and their adhering
to Us, and their assisting Us in their persons, were Treason: whereas by right
of that Our Crown, and the Acts of Parliament of that Our Kingdom, all Our
Subjects are to rise with Us, and to assist Us with their bodies and goods, and
whosoever refuses, or rises in Arms or rebellion against Us, or commits any
act of Hostility against Our Sacred Person, are declared Traitors, and are to
incur the pain of High Treason.

and to the heavy damage of Our good Subjects, who were thereby frustrated of
Justice, taking by this means Our Royal Power out of Our hand, which alone
belongs to Us, none but Our self being to command Our Subjects to attend the
Session, or to discharge their attendance, as We in Our Princely wisdom and
justice shall think fit.

Having laid these insolent and seditious foundations for a Parliament, it
could not in reason be expected but the structure to be raised thereupon must
be full of disorder and confusion, and indeed it prooved all of a piece, for in
all the progress of the Parliament their actions and demands were full of
undutifulnesse and disloyalty, denying to Us the most essential, and inherent
prerogatives of Our Crown, and striving by all means to change and alter the
Constitutions of the Parliament, and frame of Government, as appears by their
first Act, at and after the choosing of the Lords of the Articles, where, in a
most insolent and peremptory way, they protested, that nothing done, or to be
done in Parliament should be valid, except the form of electing the Articles
heretofore observed were altered, every Estate allowed to choose their own
Articles, contrary to the form kept in former Parliaments for many years, as
will clearly be evinced by the Records, and will be made appear by persons of
all qualities yet living, who assisted at the Parliaments, and were members of
the same, in the Year 1612. and 1609. and contrary to the provisions and
conditions mentioned in the Act, 1587.

By their Act likewise concerning the defining of the power of the said
Articles, they press totally to subvert the frame and power thereof. The
Articles have been, as is acknowledged by themselves, ever since K. David Bruce
his time, which is about 300. years; and by the Lords of the Articles all
businesses are prepared, and from them brought to the Parliament, as appears
by diverse Acts of Parliament, and particularly by the fourth Parliament of K.
James 6. Cap. 218. in which for eschewing of confusion and impertinent motions,
all Propositions to be made in Parliament are to be delivered to the Clerk
Register, and by him presented to the Lords of the Articles, that all frivolous
and improper motions may be rejected; which ancient Constitutions they would
subvert by the aforesaid Act.

So by the Act concerning the Constitution of the Parliament in time to come,
they urge, and thereby strive totally to alter the frame of the Parliament, and
to confound and take away the third Estate, wherein the Civil power of Kings
is so much concerned, as Our Father, and all His Predecessors in former
Parliaments, both in time of Popery, and since the reformation of Religion,
have been most careful to preserve and maintain the Dignity, Honor, and
Privileges of the third Estate, as appears in Anno 1560. when all
Church-Jurisdiction in the persons of Bishops, is alleged to be abolished: and
in Anno 1587. when all the Temporalties of Benefices were annexed to the
Crown, the Clergy retained still their Vote in Parliament, and represented the
third Estate, and the Civil power and privileges of the Church were still
preserved, and again ratified, as appears by the first Parliament of K. JAMES
6. Cap. 24. and by diverse Acts of Parliament, Anno 1587. 1597. and 1609. By
all which, and diverse other Acts of Parliament, it does clearly appear, how
much the Kings Our Predecessors have conceived their Civil Power, and the
Honor of their Crown to be concerned in the maintaining and upholding of the
Honor, Dignity and Privileges of the three Estates. Nay, by a special Act
made in the time of K. JAMES 6. Parliament 8. Cap. 130. it is declared Treason,
to impugn the authority of the Parliament, and three Estates, or to procure
the innovation of the power and authority of the same three Estates, or any of
them: and We would willingly know, how they, or any of them, can deny, but that
they have sought the breach of this Act, and so are guilty of Treason, and
liable to the punishment thereof.

Concerning the Act which they call Rescissory, they do not only thereby seek
to take away the third Estate, which is Treason, as aforesaid, but to annull
many other Acts, formerly made in favor of the Crown; and farther, to bar
Us, in a manner totally, from Assembly, or Assembly business, and cut Us off
from all those powers in Civil affairs, which in the Court of that Kingdom,
are in consequence hereupon; by which it is evident, how far they would
trench upon Regal power, and how different it is from their promise, which
was, to desire nothing that is not warranted by Law.

For the Act of Oblivion, in the narrative and whole streyne of it, as it is
formed, and desired by them to be past in Parliament, they seek to justify
themselves in all their proceedings, and instead of an Act of Oblivion, for
which they petitioned Us at the Camp, they urge an Act which amounts to a
Justification to be recorded in the Books of Parliament, altogether contrary
to the nature of an Act of Oblivion, and to that which ever heretofore has
been desired in like case, as appears by the Act of Oblivion in Anno 1563.

And whereas by the Act of Pacification, restitution is ordained to be made to
every one of Our good Subjects of their liberties, lands, goods and means
whatsoever, taken and detained from them by any means, since the aforesaid
time, this is not only not yet performed, but as appears by the binding part
of this Act, it is never intended.

And as by the abovesaid act of Oblivion, so by their Act of Relief, they
depart from that which was condescended to at the Camp; for whereas upon their
humble desire We were graciously pleased by a Commission dated at Berwick 2. of
July 1639. to allow them the liberty of convening and meeting until a
certain day, for distributing of their pretended charges, amongst such as
should willingly condescend thereunto, they have not only without Our warrant
kept their Conventicles, and Tables, since the expiring of the aforesaid
Commission, contrary to the positive laws of the Kingdom, and the Act of
Pacification, and their own acknowledgement in petitioning for the aforesaid
Commission, but by their said Act of relief they do most impudently urge upon
Us, that by an Act of Our Royal Power, all Our good Subjects who in the late
troubles and Commotions did adhere to Us, and show themselves ready to defend
Our Royal Authority, should be made equally, if not more liable to the
defraying of their pretended charges. So by the Act it self. We are pressed to
justify and authorize all their Rebellions and Treasons, and to constrain the
innocent and those that have suffered most for being faithful and loyal to
Us, to contribute to those Rebellions and Treasons; then which there can be
nothing more Tyrannical, nor contrary to Justice and Our Honor.

Concerning their demands, although in all their Petitions, Declarations and
Remonstrances, they profess, that they will never incroach upon Soveraigntie,
nor diminish Our Royal Authority, yet notwithstanding by their demands made in
Parliament, and the reasons of them given to Our self, they strike at the very
root of Our Regal power. For they desire,





any stranger, but such as have a competencie of land-rent in Scotland.





All which, though they are so essentially belonging to Us as their King, that
for the most part they answer themselves; yet We have thought it not unfit to
give the world this satisfaction concerning them.



Downebarton. This is a most dangerous and seditious practice, to raise again
the partition wall between the two Nations, and to divide them, thereby to
awaken those ancient National animosities, which have been most happily laid
asleep by the blessed union of the two Crowns; And besides, the great
dishonor to the English, that they should not be held worthy to enjoy any
dignities or privileges in Scotland, as well as the Scots do in England: It
is an injury to themselves, For it is most just, that by the same rule the
Postnati of Scotland (who are now admitted here to all Dignities, Privileges
and Offices, and do enjoy them as freely as any English whatsoever) should be
likewise excluded from them, for which most of their Countrymen here would
give them little thanks. But what Religion there can be in showing themselves
such Incendiaries, We leave it to the world to judge.

To the fourth: Some of themselves have obtained from Us the heritable Rights
of Justiciary, over a considerable part of that Our Kingdom, and why Our power
should be more limited to others then to them We understand not.



They further boldly demand the rescinding the Acts of Parliament concerning
the Civil government, namely, the Act concerning the Judicatorie of the
Exchequer, the Act concerning Proxies, the Act concerning confirmation of
Ward-lands, by which they would overthrow both Our Government and Revenew.

When We found them thus pertinaciously resolved to persist in these their
insolent and unsufferable demands, contrary to all Religion and Laws, though
they so much pretend them both, We signified Our pleasure to Our Commissioner
the Earl of Traquair to this purpose, That whereas it did evidently appear
unto Us, that the aim of diverse of Our Subjects was not now for Religion, as
they have always pretended (for it was manifest by the proceeding of Our said
Commissioner, how willing We had been to give satisfaction both in Assembly
and Parliament, touching all such things as were promised by Us, or sued for by
them under that name of Religion) And that We did perceive by many new strange
Propositions, that nothing would give them content but the alteration of the
whole frame of the Government of that Kingdom, and withal, the total
overthrow of Royal Authority, We held it must now be Our care and endeavor to
prevent that which did so nearly concern Us in safety and Honor, and if
thereupon we should immediately command the dissolving of the Parliament, it
were no more then justly might be expected from Us. Nevertheless, such was
still Our tenderness of their preservation, and of the establishment of a
perfect peace in that Our native Kingdom, as We were pleased rather to
prorogate the same, and to hear such reasons as they could give for their
demands. Wherefore We commanded Our said Commissioner to prorogate the
Parliament until the 2. of June next ensuing, and that (since they had
disputed it) by Our authority only; We holding it no way fitting, that any
assent of theirs but obedience should be had to that act, which does so
properly belong to Us as their King, and if they should presume to protest, sit
still, and disobey this our Royal command, Our further will and pleasure was,
that Our said Commissioner should discharge their so doing under pain of
Treason. But in case of their obedience and dissolving according to Our
command, then We did require Our said Commissioner to declare unto them, that
We would not only admit to Our presence such as they should send unto Us to
represent their desires, and the reasons of them, but would likewise, as We
were always ready to do, punctually perform whatsoever. We did promise. In the
interim We commanded himself with all convenient speed to repair hither, and
to bring with him all that had passed, or had been demanded, both in Assembly
and Parliament, that so we might not only be more perfectly informed of all
proceedings, but likewise consult with him and those of our Council, what
course would be best for the preservation of Our honor, and the happy
accommodation of this business.

This Our command being signified to the Parliament by Our Commissioner, was
not assented unto without a Protestation, which they call a Declaration of the
Parliament to this purpose. That

Whereas John Earl of Traquair His Majesty's Commissioner, honored with a
most ample Commission, according to His Majesty's Royal word having closed the
Assembly, and sitting in Parliament with them a very long time for debating and
preparing such Articles as were to be represented in face of Parliament, did
now take upon him, and that without the consent of the Estates and without any
offense on their part, who have endeavored in all their proceedings to witness
their loyalty to the King, and duty to His Grace, as representing His Majesty's
sacred person to prorogate the Parliament upon a private warrant procured by
sinister information against His Majesty's public Patent under the Great
Seal, etc. whereby he heavily offends all His Majesty's good Subjects, and
endeangers the peace of the whole kingdom, for which he must be liable to His
Majesty's animadversion, and to the censure of the Parliment, this being a new
and unusual way, without president in this Kingdom, contrary to His Majesty's
honor so far engaged for present ratifying the Acts of the Kirk, contrary
to the laws, liberties, and perpetual practice of the Kingdom, by which all
continuations of Parliament once called, convened, and begun to sit, have ever
been made with express consent of the Estates, as may be seen in the Reigns
of sundry Princes, etc. Jac. 6. Qu. Mary. Jac. 5. Jac. 4. Jac. 3. Jac. 2. and
Jac. 1.
Therefore we the Estates of Parliament, etc. are constrained in this
extremity to manifest and declare, etc. that as we have not given the least
cause or smallest occasion of this unexpected, or unexemplified Prorogation; so
we judge and know the same to be contrary to the constitution and practices of
all preceding Parliaments, contrary to the liberties of this free and ancient
Kingdom, and very repugnant to His Majesty's Royal intentions, promise, and
gracious expressions in the Articles of the late Pacification, etc. And we do
further declare, that any Prorogation made by the Commissioners Grace alone,
without consent of the Parliament, by himself or any Commissioner in his name,
under the Quarter Seal, or by the Lords of the Council, who have no power at
all in matters of the Parliament during the sitting thereof, shall be
ineffectuall and of no force at all to hinder the lawful proceedings of the
Subjects, and the doers thereof to be censurable in Parliament. And further we
declare, that the Commissioner his nomination of the Articles by himself, his
calling together those Articles, and commanding them to sit continually and
proceed, notwithstanding their daily Protestations to the contrary; his keeping
frequent sessions of Council, and determining causes in Council during the
time of session in Parliament; his calling down and calling up of money during
the session of Parliament, without consent of the Estates of Parliament,
notwithstanding the Parliament had taken the money to their consideration, and
had purposed to have given their advice for a determination thereanent; his
frequent prorogating of the riding of the Parliament, without consent of the
Estates, or mentioning in the Acts of Prorogation, the consent of the Articles,
although it were done by their advice, are contrary to the liberties of the
Kingdom, freedom and custom of Parliament; and that they be no preparatives,
practiques, nor prejudices in time coming against us, or our successors. But
because we know that the eyes of the world are upon us, that Declarations have
been made and published against us, etc. that our proceedings may be made
odious to such as know not the way how these commandments are procured from
His Majesty, nor how they are made known nor intimate to us, and do as
little consider that we are not private Subjects, but a sitting Parliament; or
what national prejudices we have sustained in time past by misinformation,
and what is the present case of the Kingdom; We therefore declare, that
whatsoever by the example of our predecessors in like cases of necessity, by
His Majesty's Indiction, and by the Articles of Pacification we might do
lawfully in sitting still, and which in this extreme necessity were justifiable
not only before so just a King, but to the faces of our Adversaries; yet out
of our most reverend regard, and humble desire, to render not only all real
demonstrations of civil obedience, but to put far from us all show or
appearance of what may give His Majesty the least discontent, we have
resolved for the present only to make remonstrance to His Majesty of the
reason of our propositions and proceedings in this Parliament, etc. and in
expectation of His Majesty's gracious answer to these our humble Remonstrances,
some of each Estate having power from the whole body of the Parliament, remain
still here at Edinburgh, to attend the return of His Majesty's gracious answer
to our humble and just demands: and further to remonstrate our humble desires
to His Majesty upon all occasions, that hereby it may be made most manifest
against all contradiction, that it was never our intention to deny His Majesty
any part of that civil and temporal obedience which is due to all Kings from
their Subjects, and from us to our dread Sovereign after a more especial
manner, but merely to preserve our Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom,
without which Religion cannot continue long in safety: And if it shall happen
(which God forbid) that after we have made our Remonstrances, and to the
uttermost of our power and duty used all lawful means for His Majesty's
Information, that our malicious enemies, who are not considerable, shall by
their suggestions and lies prevail against Informations, and general
Declarations of a whole Kingdom, we take God and men to witness, that we are
free of the outrages and insolences that may be committed in the mean time,
and that it shall be to us no imputation, that we are constrained to take such
course as may best secure the Kirk and Kingdom from the extremity of
confusion and misery: Which Declaration above written, we the Estates of
Parliament required the Clerk to insert in the records thereof, and grant
extracts thereof under his hand and subscription.

This Declaration was produced and read in the outer house of Parliament, upon
December. 18. 1639. according whereunto the Nobility nominated and appointed the
Earls of Lothian, and Dalhouse, the Lords Yester, Balmerino, Cranston, and
Naper: The Barons nominated the Commissioners of the three, Lothians, Fife, and
Tweddell: The Burroughes nominated the Commissioners of Edinburgh, Linlithgow,
Sterline, Hadington, Dunbarre, to attend at Edinburgh the return of His
Majesty's gracious answer to their humble Remonstrances.

In this Protestation or Declaration, though there be a specious show, and
sundry professions of obedience to Us, yet it is evident they have wounded Our
Authority in the person of the Earl of Traquair Our Commissioner, who did
nothing in that Prorogation but by Our special commandment; and therefore for
that they cannot censure Him, without reflection upon Us; And besides, it is
positively affirmed, that any Prorogation made by the Commissioner alone,
without consent of the Parliament, shall be ineffectuall, and of no force,
which necessarily implies, that We have no power to prorogue, whereas the
contrary is most manifest truth. And though upon Our command there was a show
of Prorogation, yet they continued part of their Body at Edinburgh, upon
pretense of receiving Our answer to their Remonstrance; which, if it shall not
be to their liking, they conclude with a menacing Protestation, that It shall
be no imputation to them if they be constrained to take such course as may best
secure the Kirk and Kingdom from the extremity of confusion and misery,
having first taken God and Men to witness, that they will be free of all
outrages and insolences that may be committed in the mean time, then which
nothing can be more boldly and insolently spoken.

After this, these divided members of that distracted Parliamentary Body
remaining thus at Edinburgh, did send the Earl of Dumfermlin, and the Lord
Lowdon, as their Deputies, to make their Remonstrance to Us; but because We
understood, that they came without warrant or license from Our Commissioner,
and had not acquainted Him with what they were to propound unto Us, We held
this like the rest, a great and insufferable disobedience, and would not admit
them to Our presence coming in this manner; and so commanded them to return
without hearing them.

Then Our Commissioner came hither, and made a report to Us of the state of Our
affairs there, with which We thought fit to acquaint the Lords of Our Council
of England, as also with this carriage of the Parliament in Scotland, and to
advise with them what was to be done for redress of these disorders.
Whereupon We commanded Our said Commissioner the Earl of Traquair, to make
relation to the Board of all their exorbitant demands, of which some account
had been formerly given them by the Lord Marquess Hamiltoun. Upon this Our
command the Earl of Traquair made a large and exact representation to the
Board of the most considerable matters proposed and agitated in Parliament, and
of the insolency of their demands, and the Petitioners themselves sent from
Scotland, have since their coming to Us insisted upon all and every particular
of Our said Commissioners relation, and in a most bold way offered to justify
them all, by which they have more then justified the report of the said Earl
of Traquair: Whereupon We were further pleased to acquaint the Lords, that they
had lately sent Us a Petition, which carried some show of submission and
humility, but was indeed nothing less, wherein they desired, that some might
be allowed to come from them to Us, to represent their affairs; which to make
Our Subjects of Scotland the more inexcusable, We todl the Lords We had
granted, though We had little cause to hope for any good from those that had
so much forgotten their duty and allegiance to Us.

When the Lords had heard the relation of Our Commissioner, We thought fit
upon the whole matter to put this question to them, Whether considering the
insolency and height of these demands, even concerning civil obedience, it
were not fit to reduce them to their duty by force, rather then to give way to
these demands, so prejudicial to Us in honor and safety. To this We
commanded every one of Our Council to give his answer, and to declare his
opinion by vote; which was accordingly done, and they unanimously voted in the
affirmative: whereupon soon after We resolved to call a Parliament.

After this, Our Subjects in Scotland, according to the answer We gave them
upon their Petition, having sent up hither four Deputies, viz. the Earl of
Dumfermlin, the Lord Lowdon, Sir William Douglas, and Master Berkeley, We were
pleased to admit them to Our presence, and to receive Petitions from them,
which were after by Our direction subscribed by them; in one of which, they, in
the name of the Assembly convened at Edinburgh, gave Us thanks for that We
had made known to them, that all matters Ecclesiastical should be determined
in free national Assemblies, and matters Civil in Parliaments; and desired
Our ratification of the Constitutions of the Assembly, in Parliament: And in
the other they desired to be heard before Us, and some of Our Council of both
Kingdoms; and that the report made by the Earl of Traquair to Our Council
here in England, might be delivered them in writing under his hand; which was a
most insolent demand.

Immediately after this, We thought fit to appoint a special Committee of
some of Our Council to hear them, and accordingly gave order to the Earl of
Traquair to assign them a day to come to that Committee. They refused to come,
alleging that they had order and instructions to treat with none but Our
Self: Whereupon We appointed them to attend Us at the Committee, though it
were the day of Our appointed remove to Hampton Court, at which time they did
attend Us accordingly.

There the Lord Lowdon made a long speech, the effect whereof was, a
Protestation of the independencie of the Parliament of Scotland, and that it is
subject to no other Judicatory, a profession of their loyalty and affection to
Us, and a justification of their proceedings in the Assembly and Parliament, as
agreeable to the Articles of Pacification, and to the Laws and Practices of
that Kingdom; and thereupon a desire that We would ratify and confirm those
their proceedings, and to that purpose command that the Parliament might
proceed freely for the determining of all the Articles delivered in to them,
and the establishing of Religion and Peace in the Kingdom, undertaking that
whatsoever objections or informations should be made against their proceedings
in Parliament, if they might receive them in writing, they would make answer to
them.

This discourse ended, We demanded what power and commission they had to give
Us satisfaction, and to oblige those from whom they came, seeing if they had
none, We should hear them upon great disadvantage, they expecting
satisfaction from Us, who have power to give it, but they none to render the
like to Us. They answered, that which they should propose, being agreeable to
Law, they were confident would give Us satisfaction. We asked who should be
Judge of that; They answered the Laws would be so clear, that there should be
no need of a Judge; and though We insisted much hereupon, they would give Us no
other satisfaction; they avowing they had powers, and would bring them to Us:
they were ordered to do so at the next meeting, and so for that time were
dismissed.

After Our return from Hampton Court, they attended Us at the Committee
again, where they produced Instructions, signed by some Scottish Lords, and
others, persons of no great eminency; which Instructions having been read,
were judged by Us (all the Committee concurring in the same opinion) to be no
commission, nor that they had any power or authority by them to give Us
satisfaction, or to oblige those, from whom they said they came, to any thing
that We should yield to, or desire.

Wherefore We demanding whether they had any other powers, they said they had a
paper formerly subscribed by some of the Lords in Parliament, by which the
Earl of Dumfermlin and Lord Lowdon only were authorized to come and present
their justification to Us, and they could for the present have no other, the
Parliament now not sitting. Whereupon We advising seriously with the Committee
what were best to be done in this weighty business, and considering that if
they should be dismissed without further hearing, they would take occasion to
clamor: Although We held Our Self bound neither in Honor nor Justice to
hear them any further, they having offered no foundation for an accommodation,
nor having power to do it; yet to the end that no color of sinister
construction might be left, and that We might justify Our Self to God and
the World, that We have omitted nothing on Our part that might tend to peace,
and to the settling of a better intelligence between Us and them, We did
resolve, that We would continue to hear them, and make Our objections to such
particulars as had been proposed in Parliament; and against which We had just
ground of exception, that so it might appear, whether they could give Us that
satisfaction which they promised and presumed.

This We having declared to them, not one of them made show of the least sense
of this Our grace and goodness so expressed to them; which the Lord Marquess
Hammiltoun observing, took occasion of himself to say, that though he were
not of their company, yet being a Scottishman, he held himself obliged to
acknowledge with all humility this Our singular and Princely favor to his
Country, and besought Us to accept his most humble thanks for it. This drew
them to do the like, and so they presented their humble thanks to Us on their
knees.

At the next meeting of the Committee, the said Petitioners produced the paper
abovementioned, subscribed by some of the Lords remaining at Edinburgh, as
aforesaid, by which the Earl of Dumfermlin and Lord Lowdon only were
heretofore authorized to come and present their justification to Us; which
paper being read, the whole Committee agreed that the Petitioners had no power
by this paper, no more then by the former, to give Us any satisfaction, or to
oblige those from whom they came, but only to endeavor to justify
themselves, and the former proceedings of the Parliament. Of all this We were
pleased to give account to Our whole Council of England, who unanimously
concurred in opinion with the Committee, that the abovementioned papers gave
them no power at all. Nevertheless We were contented, according to Our
promise, to hear them; and We did make objections to the most exorbitant of
their demands: but their answers were very impertinent, and rather
justifications of them, then any way satisfactory: Which could not be
otherwise, seeing those demands were for the most part so contrary to Law and
Monarchical government, that they did answer themselves, as by Our answers to
them, formerly set down, more particularly may appear.

Concerning Our promise of a free Parliament, no man of ordinary sense can
imagine We ever intended it should be so free, as not to be limited with their
own conditions, subscribed by the Lord Lowdon, which were to enjoy their
Religion and Liberties, according to the Ecclesiastical and Civil laws of
that Our Kingdom; and if they pass those bounds, as it is evident they have
done, We remain dis-obliged, unless they will have Us only obliged, and
themselves left at all liberty to fly at Our Monarchical government, without
control, to wrest the Scepter out of Our hand, to rob Our Crown of the fairest
flowers belonging to it, and to destroy Our Regal power and authority, as
manifestly they have endeavored to do by their insufferable intended Acts and
Demands, contrary to all law and reason.

If it be further objected, that they assume this liberty by Our allowing of
the Covenant, and commanding Our former High Commissioner the Lord Marquess of
Hamiltoun, and other Our subjects, to subscribe it; the answer is very ready,
That there is a great difference between the Covenant and Band subscribed by
Our Commandment, and their Band; for that Covenant and Band was made by Our
late Father King James of blessed memory, Anno 1580. and obliges those that
swear to it, that they should mutually assist one another, as they should be
commanded by the King, or any authorized by him. But this new Band was made
without Our consent, and by it they swear mutually to assist one another, not
excepting the King, which is indeed a mere cunning combination against the
King. Besides, when any have been required to subscribe the Covenant, as the
Lord Marquess Hamiltoun was, and did, and in that sense which he declared in
print, the principal Heads of them did not only refuse it themselves, but
dissuaded (as much as in them lay) all Our good subjects from subscribing it,
though the Covenant were all one with theirs, and so acknowledged by
themselves: whereby it does evidently appear, that it was not Religion they
aimed to secure (as they pretended) for then they would have acquiesced with
these Our commands, but merely by adhering to their own Band, to keep Our
Subjects in that condition, as they might be always tied, and conceive
themselves obliged by Oath to take up Arms against Us whenever the time
should be fit for a total Rebellion; which they have never left endeavoring
till they have brought to pass: so that by Our approbation of the old Covenant
and Band, or by the subscription of Our Commissioner, they can have no solid
foundation to justify their now proceedings; and it will handly appear that
ever any Covenant was made in the Christian world (except in cases of Rebellion
and Treason, as this is) where the Head was left out, or had not a negative
voice.

Neither can the Earl of Traquair Our High Commissioner his subscription or
allowance of the subscribing of the Covenant, be any warrant for their
rebellious courses, seeing, as appears by their own Petition to him, they
declare, that, Now following the laudable example of their Predecessors, they
do humbly supplicate for the same, and that they may be allowed and warranted
to subscribe it: which clearly evinces, that what they did before, and of
themselves, without warrant of Authority, was neither laudable nor warrantable:
As also before the allowing thereof by the said Earl of Traquair, it is
acknowledged (as appears by that which is prefixed to his subscription) that it
is one and the same Covenant with that of 1580. which, as appears by the
Reasons heretofore deduced, will no way infer any ground, or the least shadow
of reason for their treasonable combinations, or taking up of Arms against Us,
or Our authority, or any denial of Our negative voice.

Now upon debate of this point at the Council Board, the Lords were of
opinion, that until the Petitioners sent from the Covenanters, would
acknowledge that the Supreme Magistrate must have authority to call Assemblies,
and to dissolve them, and to have a negative voice in them, as is accustomed in
all Supreme Powers of Christendom, they ought not to be heard.

If they shall allege (as they did when they came to the Committee) that their
Demands aforesaid were but matters in fieri, and not absolutely resolved nor
concluded, it is to be answered, That the impediment was not on their part that
they were not concluded: Nay, the Lord Lowdon in his first speech to Us at the
Committee, did not only justify their proceedings in the Assembly and
Parliament, as agreeable to the Articles of Pacification, and to the Laws and
practice of that Kingdom, but did desire that We would ratify and confirm
those their proceedings, and to that purpose command that the Parliament might
proceed freely, and determine anent all those Articles delivered in to them:
Howsoever, good subjects ought to be wary how they come near the suspicion of
Rebellion or Treason, much more how they make Demands that carry with them more
then a suspicion of rebellious and treasonable intentions, as these
abovementioned most manifestly do.

Now besides the Insolences and Acts of Rebellion and Treason abovementioned,
committed before and in the Assembly and Parliament, We cannot but observe and
publish to the world, that their carriage has been no less exorbitant since
the Parliament, and since the coming of their Petitioners hither, then before:
for without any Authority or Commission from Us, they have taken upon them to
levy and raise forces in several parts of that Our Kingdom, in great
numbers, which they have continually exercised and trained, and have assigned
them a Rendezvous, and a day to be in a readiness to march.

They have made provisions of great quantities of Artillery, Munition, and
Arms from foreign parts, which they have ready in Magazine to make use of
against Us their Sovereign.

They have of themselves laid taxes and impositions of ten marks in every
hundred upon all and every Our Subjects according to their several Revenewes,
to be levied upon their Estates, for the maintenance of this Rebellion; and
this they have exacted with the greatest rigor and tyranny that can be
imagined, howsoever they pretend the contribution to be voluntary.

They have caused to be framed and published, as well in Manuscript as in
Print, sundry false, seditious, and scandalous Papers and Pamphlets, concerning
Our proceedings with them; and amongst others, one entitled, An Information
from the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland to the Kingdom of England, etc.
which having come to Our knowledge, We caused it to be read publicly at Our
Council Table, and the Lords in detestation thereof became humble suitors to
Us, that it might be suppressed by Proclamation, and burnt by the hand of the
Hangman; which has been done accordingly.

They have refused the Lord Estrick, Governor of Our Castle at Edinburgh,
timber and other materials necessary for reparation of the works lately
fallen down there, notwithstanding Our express commandment by Our Letters to
them upon their Allegiance to furnish him.

They have committed sundry outrages and violences upon the persons of some of
the Garrison at Edinburgh, that came out of the Castle to buy victuals.

They have begun to raise Works and Fortifications against the said Castle,
thereby to block up that Our Royal Fort, and to render it unusefull: And they
have fortified sundry other places in that Our Kingdom, and particularly
Inchgarrie, where they have mounted diverse Pieces of Ordnance.

They have lately imprisoned the Earl of Southeske one of Our Privy Council,
and sundry others of quality, for not adhering to them, and for their fidelity
to Us.

And whereas We have upon sundry occasions signified Our pleasure to the
Magistrates of Edinburgh for the performance of such things as have concerned
Our service, in stead of yielding obedience, they have made answer, That they
have delivered up the power of governing the Town into the hands of the
Committee of the pretended Tables, by which they have not only voluntarily
disabled themselves to serve Us, but have incurred the guilt of High Treason,
by conferring upon any that power of Government which they derive and hold from
Us alone, and cannot be resigned to any other without Our special warrant and
command.

But to fill up the measure of their Treasons, they have endeavored to settle
Intelligences in parts beyond the Seas, and practiced to let in Foreign power
into that Our Kingdom, as We are able to make appear under the hands of some
of the chiefest of them; as if the fire, which by their own Rebellions they
have already kindled within the bowels of that State, were not sufficient to
consume it, unless they added fuel to it from abroad. And herein appears
first their malignity to Us their natural Sovereign, in that they had rather
prostitute themselves to a Foreign Government, and that such as is different
in Religion, then yield conformity to Ours: And then secondly We cannot but
take notice that the interests and safety of Our Self and this Our Kingdom of
England, are highly concerned herein; For if a Stranger once take footing in
those Northern parts, it is not hard to judge how easily he may be invited
by such guides as they, and such an entrance as they will readily give him, to
draw nearer to this warmer Climate of the South; and then how much the English
Nation are likely to be beholding to their Scottish Neighbors for such
Inmates, is left to every true English heart sadly to consider, and in time to
endeavor to prevent, lest he be overtaken unawares by the mischief which
threatens every one in particular, and the whole Nation in general; and yet
all this with them is Religion and Laws.

But because the World shall see that We charge them not but upon very good
and sure grounds, We have thought fit to set down here their own Letter: Of
which We have given Our good Brother the French King account, being confident
he will not assist any Rebels against Us. The Letter follows, with this
endorsement, Au Roy, which in France is always understood from those Subjects
only to their natural Prince.

SIRE,
Vostre Majeste (estant l'asyle and sanctuaire des Princes and Estats affligez)
nous avous trouv^ necessaire d'envoyer ce Gentilhome le Sieur de Colvil, pour
representer a V.M. la candeur and natuete tant de nos actions and procedures,
que de nos intentions, lesquelles nous desirons estre grave^es and escrites a
tout l'wuivers avec un ray du Soleil, aussy bien qu' a V. M. Nous vous
Supplions doncques treshumblement (Sire) de luy adjouster foy and creance, and
a tout ce qu'il dira de nostre part, touchant nous and nos affairs; estans
tresasseures (Sire) d'une assistance esgale a Vostre clemence accoustumee
cydevant, and si souvent monstree a ceste Nation, laquelle ne cedera la gloire
a autre quelconque d'estre eternellement,

Sire, de V.M. Les treshumbles and tresobeyssants and tresaffectionnes
serviteurs, Rothes. Montrose. Leslie. Mar. Montgomery. Loudoun. Forrester.



Englished thus:
SIR,
Your Majesty being the refuge and fanctuary of afflicted Princes and States,
we have found it necessary to send this Gentleman M. Colvil, to represent unto
Your Majesty the candor and ingenuity, as well of our actions and proceedings,
as of our intentions, which we desire to be engraved and written to the whole
World with a beam of the Sun, as well as to Your Majesty. We therefore most
humbly beseech You (Sir) to give faith and credit to him, and to all that he
shall say on our part, touching us and our affairs, being most assured (Sir)
of an assistance equal to Your wonted clemency heretofore, and so often
showed to this Nation, which will not yield the glory to any other whatsoever
to be eternally,

Sir, Your Majesty's most humble, most obedient, and most affectionate
servants, Rothes. Montrose. Lesly. Mar. Montgomery. Loudoun. Forrester.



Now these affronts to Our Government, and dangers to Our State, which have no
relation at all to Religion and Law, but in the violation of them both, have
necessitated Us to put the forces of this Our Realm in order, and Our Self
into a condition to be able (by Gods help) to vindicate Our safety and honor
against all those, that under pretense of Religion and Law, have already risen,
or shall rise up against Us, and to preserve and keep in safety Our good and
loyal Subjects, and to take care that the gangrene be cut off before it
spread too far, to the endangering of this Our Kingdom of England.
Nevertheless We profess before God and all the World, that We never did, nor
ever will hinder them from the enjoying of their Religion and Liberties,
according to the Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws of that Our Kingdom, and
according to Our promise and their desires, subscribed by themselves at the
Pacification; but that We will govern them as a just and religious Prince: In
assurance whereof, if they will yet acknowledge their former crimes and
exorbitancies, and in an humble and submissive manner, like penitent
Delinquents, crave pardon for what is past, and yield obedience for the time to
come, they shall still find that We will be more sensible of their
Conversion, then We have been of their Rebellions; and that We rather desire
their Reformation, then their Destruction. But if they persist in their
Rebellious courses, and by that which they call the enjoying of their Religion
and Liberties according to the Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws of that
Kingdom, will understand nothing but the trampling of Our Crown and Royal
Authority under their feet, and the endeavoring to subvert all Laws and
Religion, as they have done hitherto by their proceedings in the Assembly and
Parliament, then We hold Our Self obliged, in discharge of that duty which We
we to God; and the Government which he has entrusted to Us, to have recourse
to Our coercive power, to prevent so many imminent dangers as threaten the
public. This We take God to witness We are necessitated to, and shall not
undertake without extreme sorrow and reluctation. Nevertheless We trust that
God, whose Vicegerent We are, and by whom alone Kings reign, being likewise a
God of truth, and a severe punisher of all falsehood and imposture, will no
longer suffer his glory to be despised and profaned in Our person, by gross
Hypocrisy, under the counterfeit habit of Religion, but will arise and scatter
His and Our enemies. And for this noble English Nation, whose glory it has
been to have been governed many hundreds of years under a Monarchy, We doubt
not but they will, as it becomes loyal and faithful Subjects, continue their
affection to Us and Monarchical government, and not suffer themselves to be
debauched and betrayed into an Anarchy, by such as envy the happiness they
have so long enjoyed, and the many glorious victories which they have
achieved, under Kingly government, but following the example of the Lords of
Our Council and of Our Servants, will cheerfully assist Us in this Our just
cause, wherein Our Honor and Safety, together with theirs, are so highly
concerned.

Our subjects in Ireland, by their late Declaration in Parliament, have not
only given Us a considerable supply toward Our present Preparations, to reduce
Our disaffected Subjects in Scotland to their due obedience, but have humbly
offered Us their persons and estates, even to the uttermost of their abilities
for Our future supply, in a Parliamentary way, as Our great occasions (should
that distemper continue) shall require. And this they desire may be recorded as
an Ordinance of Parliament, and that it may be published in print for a
testimony to all the world, and to succeeding ages, of their loyalty and
affection to Us, as it well deserves. This is a singular comfort to Us in the
midst of these distractions, and We have no cause to doubt but Our Subjects of
England, who are nearer to the danger, will show the like tenderness of Our
and their own honor and safety, which will be no less contentment to Us, and
make Us, as a Father of Our people, take the same care of their preservation
and prosperity, that We shall of Our own. And this We assure them in the word
of a Prince We shall ever do.

FINIS.

