A PROCLAMATION ordained and made by the kings highness, with the advice of his
most honorable counsel, the.xxi. day of May, in the.xxxvi. year of his
majesty's reygne, lymyttyng how and at what pryces beef mutton veale porke
wyldefoule and other kinds of vitailes shall be sold.
FORASMOCHE as it is come to the knowledge of our sovereign lord the king, that
bochers and other victailers, having more respect to their own private lucre
and advantage, then the common wealth of this his hignes realm, have reised the
prices of flesh, as of beeffes, muttons, veales, and other kind of pultrey and
victailes, to such excessive and high prices, that his loving subjects cannot
gain with their labors and salary, sufficient to pay for their convenient
victailes and sustenance: onles that spedy remedy be provided in that behalf.
HIS highness therefore, by the advise of his most honorable counsel, and by
the authority of the act of parliament, made in the.xxxi. year of his
majesty's reign, straightly charge and commands, that all and every the
said bochers and victuallers, selling flesh by retayle, as well within the
city of London and the suburbs of the same, as in all other places within
this his realm of England, as well within fraunchises and liberties as
without, shall from and after.xiiii. days next ensuing this present
proclamation published and proclaimed according to the said statute, sell the
flesh of beef mutton veale porke and lamb, being good and wholesome for man's
body, by retaile by weight, not above the pryees and rates hereafter ensuyng:
That is to say, between the.xv. day of June, and the feast o the birth of our
lord god yearly, every pound of beef to be sold, not above the price of
half penny and half ferthyng the pound: Every pound of mutton, not above the
price of a penny the pound: and every pound of veale, not above the price of a
penny the pound. And that the flesh of beeffes, muttons, and veales to be
sold between the said feast of the birth of our lord god, and the said.xv.
day of June, not above the pryces and rates hereafter following: That is to
say, the pound of beef to be sold, not above three ferthinges the pound, the
pound of mutton, not above a penny the pound, and every pound of veale, not
above three ferthinges and a half ferthyng the pound. And furthermore that the
flesh of lamb and porke shall be sold at all times in the year, not above
the prices and rates herafter following. That is to say, the best lamb to be
sold, not above the price of. ii. s. The second lamb, not above the price of
xx. d. and the meanest lamb, not above the price of.xvi. d. And the half and
quarters of every such lambs, to to be sold, not above the rates of the said
pryces of lambs. And also the flesh of porke to be sold by retayle or
otherwise, not above the price of three ferthinges the pound.

AND furthermore his highness, by the same authority, straightly charge and
commands all and singular his subjects, inhabiting within the cities of
London and Westminster, and in the suburbs of the same, and in the borough of
Southwarke, being free men of the said cities and borough, or of any of them,
to sell all manner of wyld foul and pultrey wares not above the rates and
prices herafret ensuing. That is to say, the best swanne, not above the price
of five shillinges: the best crane bustard or storke, not above the price of
four shillinges: Herneshewes shouclars and byttours of the best, not above
the price of.xviii.d. the piece. Pecocke old, the best, not above the price
of.xx. d. Pechikins the best, not above the price of.xiiii.d'. the piece: The
capon of greece of the best, not above the price of.xx.d'. Capon of Kent,
otherwise called boiling capon of the best, not above the price of.viii.d.
Capon good, not above the price of.xiiii.d. Hen of greece the best, not above
the price of.vii. d. Brewe and egrete of the best, not above the price
of.xii.d'. the piece: Bytters of the best, not above the price of.xii. d. the
piece: Gulles of the best, not above the price of.xii. d. the piece: Grene geese
fat, sold between Ester and Midsomer, not above the price of. vii. d. the
piece: Geese great, sold between midsomer and shrouetide of the best, not above
the price of.viii.d. the piece: Goodwithez fat, not above the price of.xii.d.
the piece, A dosen of dotterelles of the best, not above the price
of.iii.s^.iiii.d. the dosen: Quayles of the best, the dosen, not above.iiii.s^.
sparrowes the dosen, not above.iii.d'. the dosen: Pigeons of the best, not
above.viii.d'. the dosen: Rabbettes suckars fat, not above.xviii.d'. the dosen:
Conies, between Easter and Alhalowtide the best, not above.ii.s^. the dosen:
winter conyes, between halowtide and shrouetyde, not above.ii.s^.vi.d'. the
dosen: Malarde of the best, not above.iii.d'. the malard: Teeles of the best,
not above.ii.d'. the teele: wygeons fat, not above.iii.s^. the dosen:
woodcockes of the best, not above.iiii. the piece. Plouers grene of the best,
not above.iii.s^. the dosen: Bastard plouers fat, not above.ii. s^.vi.d'. the
dosen: Marles of the best, not above.xviii.d'. the dosen: Hen Snyttes of the
best, not above.xviii.d'. the dosen: Larkes of the best, (...) vi.d'. the
dosen: Buntynges of the best, not above.iiii.d'. the dosen: Great birds of the
best, not above.vi.d'. the dosen (...) (...)


