Articles for the due execution of the Statutes of Apparel, and for the
reformation of the outrageous excess thereof, grown of late time within the
Realm: Devised upon the Queen's Majesty's commandment, by advise of her
Counsel, the.vi. of May.
FIrst the Queen's highness pleasure is, xxiiii. ^en.viii. i. and.ii. Phil. and
Ma.
that the laws heretofore made touchying the reformation of the excess of
Apparel, and namely the laws made in Anno.xxiiii. Henrici.viii. and in
Anno.i. and ii. Philippi and Marie, be observed, and withal diligence put in
execution.

And forasmuch as no sort of people have so much exceaded, or do daily more
excede in the excess of Apparel, contrary to the said Statutes, then such
as be of the meaner sort, and be least hable with their liuinges to maintain
the same: Her Majesty's pleasure and straight commandment is, that all
Justices and officers to whom the reformation thereof may appertain, have
special regard to the observation and execution, with all severity of the
law made.i. and.ii. Phi. and Ma.
Anno.i. and.ii. Philip and Marie, purposely for that respect.

For the better order in the due execution of which statutes: for her highness
Chaumber, it is ordained, the Lord Chaumberlayne and the Vicechaumberlayne:
The order in the Court.
And for her Majesty's household, the Lord Steward, the Treasourer, or the
Comptroller, to appoint such trusty officers, as they shall think fit to have
in those two places special regard to all such as shall after. xiiii. days
next following the publication of this ordinance, presume to enter into the
Court, otherwise apparayled, then is permitted by the said statute, and
straight to apprehende and to commit them to ward, there to remain, till they
shall be duly punished for their offenses, Time of execution.
and until such time, as they shall have thoroughly paid and satisfied the
penalty of the said statute: Examining them first, how long and how often
they have sithen the time above written after the publication of this
ordinance, worn the said apparel, who is their master, Punishment The
master.
and how long they have served him, and how long it has been, that he has
known them to wear any part of the same Apparel. Upon which examination,
the master straight to be sent for, to appear, if the offense be found in the
Chaumber, before the Lord Chaumberlaine, or Vicechaumberlayne, and before the
Lord Steward, Treasourer, or Comptroller, if it be found in the household.
And in case it shall appear by any due mean, that the said master had
knowledge of the said servants abuse, so long time as in the said statute is
prescribed: then to take of him a band of two hundred marks, Punishment of
the master
to the Queen's highness use, to answer the forfayture fallen upon him by the
said statute, which band if he shall refuse, then to commit him to ward,
there to remain till he shall have satisfied the penalty. The said
examination and obligation to be sent to one of the Queen's highness
remembraunces in the Exchequer, to be by them called upon, according to the
effect of the said statute: Forfayture.
The parties appointed to this execution, to have for their pains, the moitie
of the forfayture appointed by the law. Provided that in case it shall be
thought fit to be dispensed withal within the Court for any person upon
reasonable cause, the Lord Chaumberlayne, or the Lord Steward, knowing first
her highness pleasure, Dispensatio^.
shall and may license them by writing subscribed with one of their hands,
testifying her Majesty's said pleasure, foreseyng that none of them do thereby
use any apparel inhibited unto them, but during such time as they shall
attend upon her highness person.

In London.
And within the City of London and the Liberties of the same, the Mayor and
Court of Aldermen shall take and observe the like order. That is to say, to
appoint in every ward four substanciall and well meaning men, to see the said
statute executed, in such sort as it is ordained in the Court, and the said
four, or any of them, to examine all offenders in the sort above written, and
apprehending them, to bring them to the Alderman of the ward, he to commit
them to prison, and to certify the examination and confession, and such
knowledge of judgment of the truth of the matter, as he can attain unto,
as well touching the master, as the man, to the Mayor and Court of Aldermen: and
they to certify the same indelayedly into the Exchequer, to the intent the
forfaytures may be answered. The said four following the execution of the
statute, Forfayte.
to have the moitie of the forfayture.

Innes of Court.
The like order to be taken and followed within the four Innes of Cout, and in
all the houses of Chauncery, by the principalles and auncientes of the houses,
where are noted to be so great disorders at this present, as behooves to be
looked upon.

Suburbs and places trempted.
The same order to be followed in like sort in the Suburbs, out of the liberties
of London, and in Westminster, and in all other exempted places, by the
officers of those places.

Cities and Towns.
And finally like order to be observed in all Cities, Towns, and Villages
throughout the Realm. In all Cities and Towns corporate, the order to be
executed by the Mayor, Bayliffes, and other head officers. And in all Towns
and Villages, the Justices of peace in every several Shire, to follow the like
order, for the apprehention, examination, taking of bands, committing to
prison, and certificate into the Exchequer, according as is above said. The
moitie of the penalty to fall to the officer and officers, appointed to the
execution of the law.

County Palentine.
The County Palentine of Lancaster and Chester, to make certificate into the
Exchequer there, and the Exchequer there, to the Chauncelour of the Duchy, and
he to certify the same into the Exchequer here, to the intent above said.

The doings herein of all officers as well in the Court, Certificat.
as in London, in Cities and Towns corporate, and of the Justices of all other
places through the Realm, to be certified during the first two months after
the publication of this ordinance to be made, to the Lord Chauncelour of
England, or to the Lord keeper of the great Seal, every. xv. days, and after
the said two months expired, the same to be made every. vi. wekes, during
the space of one whole year, and so to continue as by the said Lord
Chauncelour, or Lord keeper, shall be prescribed. And finally that all Justices of
Assise in all their circuites, Justice. of Ass.
do enquire specially hereof.

It is not meant by any thing above written, to take the liberty from any man,
to make information against any offendour in the premises, and to enjoy, if
the party be convicted, such part of the penalty as by the said law is
appointed, foreseyng that no man be twice convicted for one offense.

And to the intent such as shall be appointed in the Court to the xecution of the
premises, may work the more certainly: It is ordained they shall have
delivered unto them a brief of the said statutes, the like also to be
delivered and sent printed by them selves, to all parts and parties, where the
particular knowledge thereof may be thought fit, for the better execution of
the same.

Creat hose.
And for the reformation of the use of the monstrous and outrageous greatness of
hosen, crept a late into the Realm, to the great Claunder thereof, and the
undoing of a number vsyng the same, being driven for the maynteynaunce thereof,
to seek such unlawful ways, as by their own confession have brought them
to destruction: It is ordained as above said, that no Taylour, Hosier, or
other person whatsoever he shall be, after the day of the Publication hereof,
shall put any more cloth in any one pair of hosen for the outsyde, The outside.
then one yard and a half, or at the most, one yard and three quarters of a
yard of karsey, or of any other cloth, lether, or any other kind of stuff
above that quantity. And in the same hosen to be put only one kind of lynyng,
besides linen cloth next to the leg, if any shall be so disposed, The lining.
the said lynyng not to lie loose, nor to be bolstered, but to lie just unto
their legs, as in ancient time was accustomed: Sarcenet, Moccado, or any
other like thing used to be worn, and to be plucked out for the furniture of
the hosen, not to be taken in the name of the said lynyng. Neither any man
under the degree of a Baron, to wear within his hosen any Velvet, Satin, or
any other stuff above the estimation of Sarcenet, Velvet and Satin. etc.
or Taffata.

For the due and better execution and observation whereof, the Mayor of London,
and the rulers and officers of the Suburbs, and of Westminster, and other
exempted places, shall immediately after this Proclamation made, call before
them in every of their several jurisdictions, all Hosiers or Taillours making
hosen, dwelling within the precinctes of the same, and shall bind every of
them in the su^me of. Hosiers to be bound.
xi. pounds or more, as cause shall require, to the Queen's highness use, to
observe this part of this said Proclamation touching hosen, without any manner
fraud or guile: which bands as any shall be found to offend contrary to this
ordinance they shall certify into the Exchequer, with the name of every such
ouendour. In all other Cities or Towns corporate, the Mayor and head officers,
shall do in all points the like: And in all other places, the Justices of
peace. The officers of the Exchequer, to certify the Lords of the Queen's
highness privy counsel at the beginning of every Term, Certificat.
what bands have come, or have been sent into that office, touching the
premises till that day, and what number of them have been executed.

If any Hosier shall refuse to enter into such band, to be immediately
committed to ward, and to be suffered no more to continue his occupation.

The Mayor of London, Search.
and all other officers in their jurisdictions and liberties, to make or cause
to be made search once within every. viii. days in every Horsiers house, to
see what kind of hosen they shall make, and fyndyng any such as be inhibited
by these orders, to see the punyshement thereof, as is above written.

Finally, no men vndispensed with, in such sort as is above said, be so hardy
after. xiiii. days following the publication of this ordinance, to presume to
show him self in the Court, or in any other place within this Realm, in any
pair of hosen passing the syse above said: that is to say, containing in the
nether stocks and upper stocks, more then one yard and a half, or about one
yard and three quarters at the most, of the brodest karsey, or with any other
stuff beyond that proportion, or with me lynynges then one, and that plain
and just to the legs, as is above said, neither with any Shurtes having
double ruffes, Ruffes of Shurtes.
either at the collar or sleues, which ruffes shall not be worn otherwise,
their single, and the singlenes to be used in a due and mean sort, as was
orderly, and comely used before the coming in of the outrageous double ruffes,
which now of late are crept in. Or being under the degree of a knight, with
any gylted spurs, or any damaskyng or gylt sword, rapyer, or dagger, upon
pain of forfayture of the same, Gilt spurs swords

and of imprisonment and fine at the Queen's highness pleasure for every such
offense, to be executed within the Court, by such as shall be appointed, in sort
as is above said, by the Lord Chaumberlaine, Vicechaumberlayne, the Lord
Steward, the Treasourer, and Comptroller. Execution.
And in London, and within the liberties thereof, to be executed by the
Sergeauntes, and such others as shall be appointed in form aforesaid by the
Mayor and Aldermen. In the Suburbs, Westminster, and other priuileged places,
by the officers, rulers, and governors of them. In all other places, by the
head officers and Justices of peace.

In the two universities, Universities
the Chancellor, or in his absence the Vicechauncellour or Comissary, to see
to the execution of the said Statutes, and of all the other orders: and none
other Justice or officer there to meddle, but as shall be by them or one of them
appointed. In which places is thought meet to have an vuiformitie of
apparel, according to every several vocation.

The heddes of Colleges and Hawles of the said universities, to be warned by
them to see the Scollers under their government to observe thoroughly the said
statutes and orders, and to abate their ruffes and other unseemly excesses, and
to have in their apparel regard to the observation of their statutes, and to
the decency of vsyng of them selves therein, as heretofore has been used:
wherein if either the master shall be found to forget his duty, or the
scoller to lack obedience, the Queen's highness shall be forced to appoint others
to see unto the due punyshement of both the sorts.

Ladies and Gentilwomen.
Ladies and gentilwomen attendinge upon the Queen, or resortyng to the Court,
and their gentylwomen, to be appareled according to the ancient order of the
Court: whereof the orders in time past to be put in ure, by the gentilmen
ushers, at the appointment of the Lord Chaumberlaine, to the intent there may be
a difference of estates known by their apparel, after the commendable custom
in times past used in the Court. Which order is to be sought, renewed, and out
of hand to be put in ure by the said Lord Chaumberlayne, or otherwise to be
devised for a certayntie of all degrees.

Swords, Rapyers, Daggers.
And where as an usage is crept in, contrary to former orders, of wearing of
long Swords, and Rapyers, sharpened in such sort, as may appear the usage
of them can not tend to defense, which ought to be the very meaning of
wearyng of weapons, in times of peace: but to murder, and evident death, when
the same shall be occupied. Her Majesty's pleasure is, that no man shall after.
x. days next followyng this Proclamation, wear any Sword, Rapier, or any
weapon in their stead, passing the length of one yard and half a quarter of
blade, at the uttermost: neither any Dagger above the length of. Buckler.
xii. inches in blade: neither any Buckler, with a sharp point, or with any
point above two inches of length, upon pain of forfayting the Sword or Dagger
passing the said length, and the Buckler made otherwise then is prescribed, to
whomsoever will sease upon it, and the imprysonment of his body, that shall be
found to wear any of them, and to make fine at her Majesty's will and pleasure.
And if any Cutler or other artificer, Cutler.
shall after the day of the publication hereof, sell, or have within his shop
or house to be sold, or shall make or cause to be made, any Rapier, Sword,
Dagger, or Buckler, contrary to this order, to forfaite the same, his body to
be imprisoned, and to make fine at the Queen's highness pleasure, and to remain
in prison, till the said fine be fully satisfied, and being taken with the
fault the seconds time, never to be permitted after, to use that occupation.
Which in the Court is to be executed by the officers aforesaid. In the City
and liberties by the Mayor and Court of Aldermen, and such as by them shall be
appointed in that sort, Execution.
as well sergeauntes as others beforesayd. In Westminster, the Suburbs, and
other priuileged places, by the officers of the same. In Towns corporate, by
the Mayor and other head officers, and in all other places, by the Justices of
peace.

And finally her Majesty straightly charge as well the said Lord Steward,
Treasurer, and Comptroller of the household, as the Lord Chaumberlayne, vice
chaumberlayne, and such as under them shall be appointed and assigned, the Mayor
of London and all other Majors, Shriefes, Bailiefes, Constables, and al
Justices of peace, all Principals and auncientes of the Innes of Court, and
Chauncery the Chauncelour and vicechauncelour of both the universities, and the
hedes of Haules, and Colleges of the same, and all other her highness officers
and ministers, each of them in their jurisdictions, to se these orders being
set forth and confirmed by her Majesty's Proclamation, to be duly and spedyly
executed in form aforesaid, as they will answer for the contrary at their
perilles, and will avoid her highness displeasure and indignation.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard, by Richard Judge and John Cawood:
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


