A REPORT and Discourse written by Roger Ascham, of the affairs and state of
Germany and the Emperor Charles his court, during certain years while the
said Roger was there.

AT LONDON. Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

Cum Gratia and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis, per Decennium.

John Astely to R. Ascham.
I Now find true by experience, which I have often heard of others, and
sometimes read my self: that me^ make no such account of commodities when they
have the^, as when they want the^. I mean this by our friendly fellowshyp
together at Cheston Chelsey, and here at Hatfield her graces house: our
pleasant studies in readyng together Aristotle's Rethorike, Cicero, and Liuie:
our free talk mingled always with honest mirth: our trim co^ferences of
that present world: and to true judgments of the troublesome time that
followed.

These commodities I now remember with some grief, which we then used with much
pleasure, besides many other fruits of frendshyp that faithful good will
could affourd. And these thinckynges cause me often to wish, either you to be
here with us, or me to be there with you: but what wishyng is nothing else but a
vain waylyng for that which will wants* I will cease from wishyng, and seek
the true remedy for this sore. And that is whilst we mete again in deed, in
the mean while to ease our desires with often writing the one to the other: I
would in deed I had been partaker in your company, of that your pleasant
absence out of your country: And because I was not, I pray you let me be
partaker by your letters of some fruit of that your journey.

We hear of great sturres in those parties: and how the Emperor a Prince of
great wisdom and great power has been driven to extreme shifts, and that by
the policy of mean men who were thought to be his friends, and not by the
puisantnes of others who were known to be his open enemies. I know you were
wont in markyng diligently and notyng truly all such great affairs: And you
know likewise how desirous I am always to read any thing that you write. Write
therefore I pray you, that we your friends being at home may enjoy by your
letters a pleasant memory of you in this time whilst you be absent abroad.
Farewell in Christ from Hatfield.xix. Octobris. 1552.

R. Ascham, to John Asteley.
SAlutem Plurimam in Christ^ Jesus. That part of your letters from Hatfield,
decimo nono October. renewing a most pleasant memory of our fre^dly fellowship
together, and full of your wonted good will toward me: I answered immediately
from Spires by Fraunces the post: which letter if it be not yet come to your
hand, ye might have heard tell of it in M. Secretary Cicels chamber in the
Court.

As concerning the other part of your letter, for your wish, to have been with
me, in this mine absence from my country: and for your request, to be made
partaker by my letters of the stir of these times here in Germany. Surely I
would you had your wish: for then should not I now need to bungle up yours so
great a request, when presently you should have seen with much pleasure, which
now peradventure you shall read with some doubt, less things may increase by
writing which were so great in doing, as I am more afraid to leave behind me
much of the matter, then to gather up more then has sprung of the troth.

Your request contains few words but co^prehendeth both great and diverse
matters. As first the causes of the open invasion by the Turk: of the secret
workyng for such soddeyne brechesse in Italy, and Germany: of the fine fetches
in the French practices: of the double dealyng of Rome with all parts: the^
more particularly why Duke Octauio, the Prince of Salerne, Marches Albert, and
Duke Maurice brake so out with the Emperor, which were all so fast knit unto
him as the bonds of affinity, loyalty, blood, and benefits could assure him
of them: Octauio being his son in law, the Prince one of his privy chamber,
Marches Albert his kynsman, and Duke Maurice so inhaunsed with honor and
enriched with benefits by him, as the Duke could not have wished greater in
hope, then the Emperor performed in deed. Here is stuff plenty to furnish
well up a trim history if a workman had it in handlyng. When you and I read
Liuie together if you do remember, after some reasonyng we concluded both what
was in our opinion to be looked for at his hand that would well and advisedly
write an history: First, point was, to write nothing false: next, to be bold to
say any truth, where by is avoided two great faults, flattery and hatred: C.
Caesar. P. Iouius.
For which two points Caesar is read to his great praise, and Iouius the
Italian to his just reproach. Then to mark diligently the causes, counsels,
acts, and issues in all great attemptes: And in causes, what is just or
unjust* in counsels, what is purposed wisely or rashly: in acts, what is done
courageously or fayntly: And of every issue, to note some general lesson of
wisdom and warines, Polibius. Phi. Comines.
for like matters intime to come: wherein Polibius in Greek and Phillip Comines
in French have done the duties of wise and worthy writers. Diligence also must
be used in keeping truly the order of time: and describyng lively, both the site
of places and nature of persons not only for the outward shape of the body:
but also for the in ward disposition of the mind as Thucidides does in many
places very trimly, Thucidides. Homer.
and Homer every where and that always most excellently, which observation is
chiefly to be marked in him. And our Chaucer does the same, very praise
worthily: mark him well and confer him with any other that writes of in our
time in their proudest tongue whosoever list. Chaucer.
The style must be always plain and open: yet sometime higher and lower as
matters do rise and fall: for if proper and natural words, in well joined
sentences do lively express the matter, be it troublesome, quiet, angry or
pleasant, A man shall think not to be readyng but present in doing of the
same. And herein Liuie of all other in any tongue, Titus Liuius.
by mine opinion carries away the praise.

Sir Thomas More in that pamphlet of Richard the third, Tho. Morus.
does in most part I believe of all these points so content all men, as if the
rest of our story of England were so done, we might well compare with France,
Italy, or Germany or in that behalf. But see how the pleasant remembrance of
our old talk together has carried me farther then I thought to go. And as for
your request* to know the cause and manner of these late sturres here ye shall
not look for such precise order now in writing, as we talked on then. No it is
not all one thing to know perfectly by reading and to perform perfectly in
doing I am not so unadvised to take so much upon me, nor you so unfriendly to
look for so much from me. But that you may know that I have not been
altogether idle in this my absence, and that I will not come home as one that
can say nothing of that he has seen and heard abroad: I will homely and rudely
(yet not altogether disorderly) part privately unto you such notes of affairs
as I privately marked for my self: which I either felt and saw, or learned in
such place and of such persons as had wills to seek for, and ways to come
by, and wits to way the greatest matters that were to be marked in all these
affairs. For no wieke almost has past in the which there has not commonly
come to my hand for the most part of the notable things that have been
attempted in Turkey, Hungary, Italy, France, and Germany. In declaryng to you
these things I will observe only the first two points of our wont
communication: that is to my writing I will set forward nothing that is false,
nor yet keep back any thing that is true. For I playing no part of no one
side, but littyng down as indifferent looker on, neither Imperial nor French,
but flat English do purpose with troth to report the matter. And seeing I shall
live under such a Prince, as king Edward is, and in such a country as England
is (I thank God) I shall have neither need to flatter the one side for
profit, nor cause to fear the other side for displeasure. Therefore let my
purpose of reportyng the troth as much content you, as the mean handlyng of
the matter may mislike you. Yet speaking thus much of troth, I mean not such
a hid troth as was only in the breast of Monsieur d'Arras on the Emperors
side, or in Baron Hadeck on Duke Maurice side, with whom and with on other of
his counsel he only conferred all his purposes three years before he brake
out with ye Emperor: but I mean such a troth as by conference and common
consent amongst all the Ambassadors and Agentes in this Court and other witty
and indifferent heads beside was generally conferred and agreed upon. What
better commodity to know the troth any writer in Greek Latin or other tongue
has had, I can not perceive, except only Xenophon, Caesar, and Phillip
Comines: which two first worthy writers wrote their own acts so wisely, and
so without all suspicion of parcialitie, as no man hitherto by mine opinion
has borne him self so uprightly in writing the histories of others: The third
having in a manner ye like opportunity has not deserved like commendations, at
least as I suppose. England has matter and England has me^ furnished with all
ability to write: who if they would might bring both like praise unto them
selves, and like profit to others, as these two noble me^ have done. They lay
for their excuse the lack of leisure which is true in deed: But if we
consider the great affairs of Caesar we may judge he was worthy to win all
praise that was so willing and witty to win such time when his head and his
hands night and day were ever most full, would to God that these out me^ as
they are ready to praise him were even as willing to follow him, and so to win like praise them selves.

And to keep you no longer with my private talk from the matter it self, I
will begin at the spryng of the matter from whence all these mischiefs did
flow, the which now has so ouerflowed the most part of Christendom, as God
only from heaven must make an end of this miserable tragedy, wherein these
two great Princes take such pleasure still to play. The cause of ye sturres in
Italy and Germany.
In Religion and liberty were said to be of many men the very causes of all
these sturres: yet in mine opinion and as the matter it self shall well prove
it, unkindness was the very sede, whereof all these troubles did grow. Unkyndnes.
A Knight of England of worthy memory for wit learning and experience old Sir
Thomas Wiat wrote to his son that the greatest mischief amongst men and
least punished is unkindness: the greatest mischief truly and least punished
also by any ordinary law and sentence, yet as I have seen here by experience,
unkindness has so wrought with men, as the mean were not affrayd to attempt
their revenge, nor the Emperor able to withstand their displease. Yea
unkindness was only the hoke, which Henry the French king has used these late
years to pluck from the Emperor and draw to him self, so many Princes and
great commodities as he has: with this hoke bayted with money the bayte of all
mischief, the French king has not ceased, to angle at as many hearts in Italy
and Germany as he knew any matter of unkindness to be ministered unto, by the
Emperor. There be few Princes in all the Empire but if I had leisure, I could
particularly prove, and when I come home in our private talk I will fully
declare that some good big matter of unkindness has been offered unto them by
the Emperor. Yea Ferdinando his brother, Maximilian his nephew and son in
law, the Dukes of Bauarie and Cleues which have married his nieces have been
shrewdly touched therewith. Also ye Papisticall Bishops as Mentz, Pamburge,
Herbipolis, Saltzburge, and diverse others have felt their part herein. Few
Princes or states, Protestants or Papists, but have been troubled therewith.
But even as a quaterne in the beginning is a wanderyng disease in the body
unknown what it will turn unto, and yet at last it draws to certain days
and hours: even so these grieves in the whole body of the Empire did first
work secretly and not appear openly, until this melancholy unkindness did so
swell in men's stomaches that at length in Insburgh it brast out into a
shrewdsicknes, whereof the first fit was felt to be so dangerous, that if the
Emperor and we had not more spedely changed the air, I am affrayed and sure
I am we were well affrayd then, the sickness would have proved also to us that
were present with him very contagious. Well this grief growyng this to certain
fittes, and I my self being not greatly grieved at ye heart with it but had
leisure enough with small ieoperdy (I thank God) to look quietly upon them
that were sick, because I would not be idle amongst them I began daily to note
the workyng of this sickness, and namely from the xix. of May. 1552. when we
ran from Insburgh till the first of next January when the siege of Metz was
aba^doned. Nevertheless before I come to these ordinary days I will shortly
touch how the Emperor being in peace with all the world. 1550. when we came to
his Court, had soon after so many enemies as he knew not which way to turn
him.

The Turk.
The brech with the Turk.
THe date of peace betwixt the Emperor and the Turk had to expire an.1551. The
Emperor hearing what preparation the Turk had made the year before for war
and specially by Sea, which must needs be against Christendom, thought it
better for him to end the peace with some advantage, the^ that the Turk
should begin the war with too much strength and therefore in summer.1550. he
sent John de Vega Viceroy of Cicile and Andrea Dorea into Barbaria, who wan the
strong town of Africa from Dragut Rays sometime a Pirate and now the Turks
chief doer in all the affairs of Affrike and mare mediteraneo. This Court
raised up other rumors of this brech with the Turk how that this enterprice
was made for Seripho sake a hethen king. But the Emperors friend in Barbaria to
whom Dragat Rays had done great wrong, yet men that knew the truth, and are
wont also to say it, have told me that the town of Africa stood so fit to
annoy Spain for the Turk when he lift, that the Emperor was compelled to
seek by all meaner to obtain it, much fearyng, lest when he was absent in
Germany, the Turk would be too nigh and to homely a get with him in Spain
whenever the peace should be expired. The whole story of winnyng Africa ye
may read when you list being well written in Latin by a Spaniard that was
present at it.

Africa was earnestly required again by the Turk, and fair promised again
by the Emperor, but being in deed not delivered, the Turk for a revenge the
next year, first assaulted Malta and after wan Tripoly from whence the Turk
may easily and soddenly whenever he list set upon Cicelie, Naples, or any
cost of Italy or Spain and most commodiously, what soever the Emperor does
hold in Barbary* so that the gain of Africa is thought nothing comparable
with the loss of Tripoly.

When Tripoly was besieged by the Turks, Monsieur Daramont was sent
Ambassador to Constantinople from the French king: and ariuyng by the way at
Mal^a, he was desired by the great master of the order to go to Tripoly, and
for the frendshyp that was between France and the Turk to treat for the
Christians there. Daramont did so and had leake of the Turks general to enter
the town and talk with the Captain. And by this madness they within yielded,
on this condition to part safe with bag and baggage which was granted by the
general. But as soon as the Turks entered the town they put old and young,
man, woman, and child to the sword saving two hundred of the strongest men to
be their Galley slaves for ever. The general being asked why he kept no
promise made this answer: If the Emperor had kept faith with my master for
Africa I would not have broken with them of Tripoly, and therefore (says he)
with Christen men which care for no trothe promises may justly be broken. This
Turkish cruelty was revenged this last year in Hungary, when like promise of
life was made, and yet all put to the sword the Christians biddyng the Turks
remember Tripoly. To such beastly cruelty the noble feats of arms be come
unto betwixt the Christen men and the Turks. And one fact of either side is
notable to be known, yet horrible to be told and fouler to be followed: and
it is pity that ma^s nature is such, as will commonly commend good things in
readyng and yet will as commonly follow ill things in doing.

The Bass^ of Bud^, took in a skirmish a ge^tleman of the king of Romans for
whose delivery men for entreaty and money for his ransom were sent to Bud^.
An horrible face.
The Bass^ appointed a day to give them answer and at time and place
assigned, called for them and sent for the gentleman likewise. And soddenly
com^ out two hangmen bare armed with great butchers knives in their hands
bringing with them certain ^andogge^ musled kept hungry without meat: of
purpose: the Bassa bad them do their feate: who coming to the gentleman
stripped him naked, and bound him to a pillar, after with their knives they cut
of his flesh by gobbets and flang it to the dogs. Thus ye poor gentleman
suffered grief great for ye pain, but greater for the spite: nor so tormented
in feelyng his flesh mangled with knives, as in seeing him self piece meal
devoured by dogs. And thus as long as he felt any pain they cut him in
collops, and after they let their dogs lose upon him to eat up the residue
of him, that ye grief which was ended in him being dead might yet continue in
his friends lookyng on. They were bad depart and tell what they saw, who ye may
be sure were in care enough to carry home with them such a cruel message.

Not long after this, three Turks of good estimation and place, were taken by
the Christen men: for whose ransom great sums of gold were offered. Answer
was made to the messenger that all the gold in Turkey should not save the^. And
because ye Turks will eat no swines flesh, you shall see if swine will eat
any Turkish flesh. And so likewise great bores were kept hungry, and in sight
of the messenger the three Turks were cut in collops and thrown amongst them.

For these foul deeds I am not so angry with the Turks that began them as I
am sorry for the Christen men that follow them. I talked with a worthy gentleman
this day both for his great experience and excellent learning Marc Anthonio
d'A^^la Ambassador of Venice with the Emperor: The great Turk.
who told me that the great Turk him self (Religion excepted) is a good and
merciful, just and liberal Prince, wise in making and true in performyng any
covenant, and as sore a revenger of troth not kept. Mustapha the Turks ^ldest
son
He prayed God to keep him long alive: for his eldest son Mustapha is clean
contrary, given to all mischief cruel, false, gettyng he cares not how
unjustly, and spendyng he cares not how vnthriftely what soever he may lay
hand on, wilye in making for his purpose, and ready to break for his profit
all couenantes, he is weary of quietness and peace, a seeker of strife and war,
a great mocker of mean men, a sore oppressor of poor men, openly contemnyng
God, and a bent enemy against Christ's name and Christen men. But to go forward
with my purpose. The Turk being onest disclosed an open enemy to the Emperor,
many mean men began to be the bolder to put out their heads to seek some
open remedy for their private injuries: France being at every man's elbow to
harten and to help, whosoever had cause to be aggreued with the Emperor.
Brech of Italy.
And first Octauio Duke of Parma, much agreued as nature well required with his
fathers death and besides that fearing the loss not only of his state, but
also of his life, fell from the Emperor in the end of the year.1550.

Pietro Aloysio Farnesio son to Papa Paulo tercio Duke of Place^tia: father
to this Duke Octauio Duke of Parma which married the Emperors base daughter,
Octauio.
and to Horatio Duke of Castro, who of late has married also the French kings
base daughter, and the two Cardinals Alexandro and Ramusio Farnesy, was slain
men say by the means of Ferranto Gonzaga governor of Millan by whose death
the state of Placentia belonging then to the house of Fernesia came into the
Emperor hands. The whole process of this man's death is at length set out in
the stories of Italy: my purpose is only to touch it, because hereby rose
such a heat betwixt the whole famely of Fernesia and Don Ferranto Gonzaga as
has stirred up such a smoke in Italy betwixt the Emperor and France. as is
not like to be quenched but with many a poor man's blood, as Horace notes
wittely out of Homer, saying: What follies so ever great Princes make:
The people therefore go to wrake.


Octauio being sorest grieved with his fathers death and being best able to
revenge it was so feared of Gonzaga that he thought him self never assured for
Petro Luis death as long as Octauio his son should live: for men never love
when they have just cause to fear, but must needs still mistrust without all
hope of reconcilyng whom they have before hurt beyond all remedy of amends.
And yet I heard a gentleman of Millan say (who was sent hither to the Emperor
by Gonzaga) that Octauio is such a Prince for good nature and gentle behavior
that he supposed there was not one in Italy but did love him except it were his
master Gonzaga. These two Princes being neighbors the one at Millan the other
at Parma showed small frendshyp the one to the other. But Octauio was evermore
wrong to the worse by many and sundry spites, but chiefly with daily fear of
his life by poisoning: for the which fact certain persons in Parma were taken
and laid fast. Nevertheless Octauios nature is so far from seeking blood and
revenge and so given to pity and gentleness, that although they went about not
only to give away his state by treason, but also to take away his life by
poysonyng, yea, and after that the deed was proved plainly on them, and
sentence of death pronounced openly against them, yet he gave them life and
liberty which would have taken both from him.

And when Monsieur Thermes earnestly told him that where the evil were not
kept in with fear of Justice, the good should never live in surety and
quietness: his answer was that he so abhorred the sheddyng of blood in others
as he would never wash his hands in any: let his enemies do to him the worst
they could. Addyng, that he thought it his most honor to be vnlykest such for
his gentleness which were misliked of all me^ for their cruelty: whereby he has
won that he which of good nature can hurt none, is now of right loved of all
and only hated of him who^ no man in Italy for his cruelty does love. And this
talk is so true that it was told in an other language but in the self same
terms at an honorable table here in Bruxels by a gentleman of Millan an agent
in the Court, a doer for Gonzaga, who the same time was prisoner in Parma.

And although Octauio by good nature was harmeles in not seeking revenge, yet
he was not careless by good reason in seeking his remedy but made often and great
co^plaintes of his grieves to the Emperor, which were not so hotely made, but
they were as coldly heard, that at length Octauio findyng least comfort, where
of right he looked for most aid, and seeing that displeasures could not be
ended in Gonzaga nor could not be amended by the Emperor: then he compelled
against his nature turned his hate due to Gonzaga to revenge this undeserved
unkindness in the Emperor, even as Pausanias did with Phillip king of
Macedonie, who conqueryng with policy and power all outward enemies, was
slain when and where, he thought him self most sure of his dearest fre^d, for
unkindness, because Phillip ought and would not revenge Pausanias on him that
had done him a foul displeasure.

Octauio seeing what was done to his father even when his graundfather was
Bishop of Rome, thought, that now as his house decayed, so his iopardy
increased. And therefore against a desperate evil began to seek for a
desperate remedy, which was set from Rome a shop always open to any mischief
as you shall perceive in these few leaves if you mark them well.

Octauio complained to Iulio tercio of the wro^ges of Gonzaga and of the
unkindness of the Emperor, desiryng that by his wisdom and authority, he
would now succor him or else not only he should leese his life but also the
Church of Rome should lose her right in Parma, as she had done before in
Placentia. The Bishop gave good ear to this talk, for he spied that hereby
should be offered unto him, a fit occasion to set the Emperor and France
together by the ears. He thought the Emperor was to big in Italy having on
ye one side of Rome Naples under his obedience, on the other side Siena,
Florence and Genoa at his commandment, besides Placentia, Millan,
Monteferrato, and a great part of Piemount.

The Emperor being thus strong in Italy, the Bishop thought his own state to
be his so long as it pleased the Emperor to let him have it: and therefore if
Parma were not left an entry for France to come into Italy, he might ouersoone
be shut up in present misery when all outward aid should be shut out from him.

The Popes counsel was that Octauio should put him self under the French
kings protection whom he knew would most willingly receive him: Parma lying
so fit for the French king, when soever he would set upon the enterprice of
Millan. This practice of the Pope Monsieur de Thermes the French kings
Ambassadors did utter before the consistory of Cardinals at Rome: proving
that the Pope, not the king his master was the occasion of that war.

When Octauio with the whole house of Farnesia became thus French, the Emperor
more fearyng the state of Millan then lamentyng the loss of Octauio persuaded
on his side the Bishop of Rome to require Parma as the Churches right, and to
punish Octauio as the Churches rebel, promising that he him self as an
obedient son of the Church would stretch out his arm and open his purse in
that recovery of the Churches right: nevertheless the Bishop must bear the name
of the war because he might not break peace with France. Thus Princes
openly co^tena^cing quietness and privily brewyng debate although they got
others to broch it, yet God commonly suffers the^ selves to drink most of the
misery thereof in the end. The Bishop seeing that he must either begin the
mischief or else it would not on so fast as he wished to have it, set lustely
upon it: and first cited Octauio, after excommunicated him, and shortly after
besieged Parma aided both with me^ and money by the Emperor: which thing the
French king began to stomach, Breach with France.
thinckyng that ye Emperor did offer him both wrong and dishonor in not
suffering him being a king to help a poor man that fled to his aid. And thus
these two Princes first helpyng others began by little and little to fall out
them selves. And that the Pope did set these two Princes together, a Pasquill
made at Rome and sent to this Court does well declare. And seeing that you so
well understand the Italian tongue and that if it were turned into English it
would leese the whole grace thereof, I will recite it in the tongue that it was
made in.

Interlocutori Pasquillo et Romano.
Pasq. HAnno un bell gioco il Re, et l'Imperatore
per terzo el Papa, e giocano a Primera.
Romans che v' e d' in vito? Pasq. Italia tutta intera.
Romans Chi vi l' ha messa? Pasq. il coglion del pastore.
Romans Che tien in mano il Re? Pasq. Ponto magiere
el Papa hacinquant' vno, e se despera.
Romans Caesar che Ponto sa? Pasq. lui sta a Primera
Romans che gli manca? Pasq. danari a far sauore
Il Papa dice a voi, e voll Partito:
Caesar Pensoso sta Sopra di questo,
teme a Scropir di trouar moneta
Il Re dico, no, no, Scoprite Presto,
che io tengo Ponto, a guadagnar l' in vito
I ho li danari, et Caesar se gli aspeta.
Tutti stanno a vedetta.
Chi di lor dui guadagni. Romans il Papa? Pas. e fuora
vinca chi vol, lui Perda, in sua mal hora.
Le Jmperatore anchora.
Teme, etien stretto, e Scopre Piau le carte.
e qui, la sort gioca, pin che l' Art.
Metra questi indisparte.
Stabilito e nel Ciel quelle, che esserde,
ne giona al nostro dic, questo Sara questo e.
The French king in the summer.1551. proclaimed war against Charles king of
Spain, abusing that name for a sottlety to separate ye whole quarrel from the
Empire: when the Emperor would not be persuaded at Augusta that either the
Turk would, or the French king durst make him open war, or that any Prince
in Italy or Germany could be entised to break out with him.

Monsieur Mariliacke the French Ambassador at Augusta ever bare the Emperor
in hand that such rumors of war were raised of displeasure and that his master
intended nothing so much as the continuance of amity, yea this he durst do,
when many in ye Emperors court knew that the war was already proclaimed in
France.

The Emperor blinded with the over good opinion of his own wisdom, likyng
only what himself listed, and contemnyng easily all advise of others (which
self will condition does commonly follow, and as commonly does hurt all great
wits) did not only at this time suffer him self thus to be abused: but also
afterward more craftily by the Pope for the continuance of war at Parma, and
more boldly by Duke Maurice for his repair to Inspruke, and not the least of
all, now lately at Metz by some of his own counselors for the recovery of
that town.

But Princes and great personages which will hear but what and whom they
list, at the length fail when they would not, and commonly blame whom they
should not: But it is well done that as great men may by authority contemn
the good advise of others: so God does provide by right judgment that they
have leave in the end to bear both the loss and shame thereof them selves.

Thus ye see how the Pope was both the brewer and brocher and also bringer of
ill luck to both these Princes, and as it came well to pass drank well of it
him self both with expenses of great treasures, and with the loss of many
lives and specially of two noble gentlemen, the Prince of Macedonia and Il
Seign^. Gionan Baptista di Monte his own nephew: but the Popes care was
neither of money nor men, so that he might set the two Princes surely together.
And therefore was not only content (as a man might say) to hasard Parma on the
meyne chance: but to make the two Princes better sport and fresher game, set
also eue^ then Mirandula on a bye chance that mischief enough might come
together.

When the Princes were well in and the one so lusty with good luck that he
had no lust to leave, Pope.
and the other so chafed with leesyng, that still he would venture. Besides
their playing in sport for the Pope at Parma and Mirandula, Parma.
they fell to it a good them selves in Piemou^t, Mira^dula.
Loraigne, Flaunders and Picardy, the French king robbyng by Sea and spoiling
by land, with calling in the Turk, and sturryng up all Princes and states that
had any occasion to bear any grudge to the Emperor. Of all their neighbors
only our noble king, and the wise senate of Venize would be lookers on.

And when the Pope saw they were so hot at it as he well knew as the one would
not start in so great good luck: so ye other could not leave by so much shame
of loss. And although it did him good to see them cope so lustely together:
nevertheless he thought it scarce his surety that they should play so nere his
elbow so earnestly, least if they fell to far out and the one should win to
much of the other, then he peradventure would compel at length the Pope
himself which began the play to keep him sport afterward for that that he had
in Italy. And therefore very craftily he gat them to play in an other place, The
Popes practice.
and took up the game for Parma and Mirandula taking truce with France for
certain years, and bad them make what sport they would farther of in Loraigne
and Picardy. And that there should lack neither injury nor spite in the Popes
doings, when the Emperor saw that whether he would or no, the Pope would
needs fall in with France, then he desired the Pope that such bastilians and
fortes of fence as were made about Mirandula when it was besieged might either
be delivered to his men's hands or else defaced that the Frenchmen might not
have them, which request was very reasonable seeing the Emperor had been at all
the charge in making of them: But they were neither delivered nor defaced, nor
left indifferent, but so put into the French men's hands, that Mirandula now is
made very strong to the French faction by Emperors money and the Popes
falsehode.

This fact was very wrongful of the Pope for the deed: but more spiteful for
the time: for even when Duke Maurice had won Augusta, even then the Pope gave
up the siege of Mirandula and fell in with France that care enough might come
upon the Emperor together both out of Germany, and out of Italy at once. And
eue^ this day.25. June. 1553. when I was writing this place, comes news to
Bruxells, that the Pope has of new played with the Emperor more foul play at
Siena, then he did before at Mirandula: For when the Emperor had been at
passing charges in keeping a great host, for the recovery of Siena from December
last unto June: the Pope would needs become stickler in that matter between
the Emperor, the French king and Siena promising such conditions to all, as
neither of the Princes should lose honor and yet Siena should have had
liberties. The Emperor good man yet again trustyng him who so spightfully had
deceived him before dismissed his host, which done Siena was left still in the
French men's hands: who thereby have such opportunity to fortify it, as ye
Emperor is not like by force to recover it Piramus Secretary to ye Emperor told
this tale to Sir Phillip Hobby and the Bishop of Westminster openly at ye
table: which Piramus is a Papist for his life: and being asked how he could
excuse the Popes unkindness against his master ye Emperor: He answered
smilyng Julius tercius is a knave but ye Pope is an honest man, which saying is
common in this court. And although they will understand both ye spite of ye
pope, and ye shame of their master, yet are they content still to speak of ye
pope though he nevertheless still do ill to ye Emperor.

And thus to return to my purpose how the Pope set the two Princes together,
and shift his own neck a while out of the halter, leauyng most unfriendly the
Emperor when he was farthest behynd hand: and how Octauio for fear of
Gonzaga, and unkindness of the Emperor fell with all his famely to be French, I
have briefly passed over for the have I have to come to the matters of Germany.

The Prince of Salerne.
THe Emperor being thus set upon by the Turk and France with open war, and
troubled by the house of Fernesia with so soddeyne breaches, and most of all
encombred with the fear of the sturres in Germany which secretly were then in
workyng: the Prince of Salerne also declared him self an open enemy.

This Prince in this court is much beloved for his ge^tlenes and openly praised
for his wisdom, and greatly lamented for his fortune, who before time has
done so good and faithful service to the Emperor: that I have heard some in
this Court say, which love the Emperor well and serve him in good place, that
their master has done the Prince so much wrong, as he could do no less then
he did: who being so unjustly handled by his enemies, the Uiceroy of Naples,
and so unkindly dealt with all by his master ye Emperor, was driven by
necessity to seek an unlawful shift.

The Uiceroy Don Pietro de Toledo uncle to ye Duke of Alua, and father in law
to ye duke of Florence used him self with much cruelty over ye people of
Naples by exactions of money without measure, by Inquisition of men's doyngs
without order, and not only of men's doings, but also of men's outward
lookyngs, and inward thinkynges, using the least suspicion for a sufficient
witness to spoil and to kill who^ soever he lysted. Me^ that had suits unto
him, had as leave been away with the loss of their right, as have come to his
presence to abide his lokes and tau^ts: And (as I heard a wise ge^tlema^ of
Italy say) he gave audience in such time and place, as he may easlyer in this
Court speak with Monsieur d'Arras then he could in Naples with the Uiceroyes
Porter. And commonly he would not hear them whilst an hundred suitors should
come at once, and then the Porter let them in by one and by one even as he
favored not as the matter required, commau^dyng them to be short or else they
should come short in the next time. And so men's suits were pulled from common
law to private will, and were heard not in place open to Justice but in private
Parlors shit up to all that came not in by favor or money. And therefore
judgments were allotted not as law appointed, but as the Uiceroy listed. This
fault ( Cicero says) vndyd Caesar who drew the common law into his own house,
and so in having other men's goods lost all men's hearts and not long after his
own life: for even those that did help him pluck down Pompey, did after kill
him for pulling down the laws: So we see that Princes not in gatheryng much
money, nor in bearing over great swinge but in keeping of friends and good laws
live most merely and reign most surely. But such as gape always for other
men's goods commonly never enjoy ye fruit of their own: for they never cease
to win by wrong till at length they leese by right goods life and all. And
therefore it is notable yt Dion. in Plato writes to Dionisius ye tyrau^t, how
Euripides in every tragedy brings for some great vice one or other great
Prince to ruin and yet not one does complain thus: Out out alas alas, I dye
for lack of goods. But every one sings this song: Out out alas alas, I dye
for lack of friends.

For a Prince that will take men's goods when he lists without order shall
want men's hearts when he needs without pity: but in having their hearts he
shall never lack their goods, as the good king Cirus said to the rich king
Craesus. And to have the peoples hearts the next way is to be gentle to every
one, just to all and liberal to many and especially to such as either by
excellency of wit or good will in true service do well deserve it. Also to set
his chiefest joy not in private pleasure like Sardanapalus, but in common
wealth as we have example of Titus Vespasianus: and to think his treasure
greatest, not when his coffers be fullest as Craesus did, but when his
subjects be richest as Cyrus did and that through his wisdom and care as all
praise worthy princes have ever hitherto done. And what will the people render
again to such a Prince? A small subsidy, with a great grudge? no, but their
whole hearts to love him: their whole goods to aid him: their hands ready to
defend him, and their lives as ready to dye for him when soever he shall have
need. A Prince that thus does live and thus is loved at home may be enuyed
with much praise, and hated with small hurt of any power abroad.

And therefore have I heard wisemen discommend the government in France in
making their people almost slaves, and from thence a common saying of some in
England, Sir John Gates wish.
that would have the people neither witty nor wealthy when wit is the meare
gift of GOD: So that to wish men less wit that have it, is to count God scarce
wise that gave it. And wealth of the people as Scripture says: is the glory of
a Prince, and surety of his reign. But suspicion in all governing breeds
such sayings, when wrong does bear such swing, as ill conscience does
always wish that men should lack either wit to perceive or ability to
amend whatsoever is done amiss. But God send such Achitophels better end
then their counsels does deserve which would seen wise by other men's folly, and
would be rich by other men's poverty.

To return to the Uiceroy of Naples the common opinion of those in this Court
which have private cause to say well on him do speak it boldly and openly, that
he was such a one as never could content his covetousness with money, nor never
satisfy his cruelty with blood: And so by this foul mean many gentlemen in
Naples have lost some their lives but more their livings, and almost all their
liberty. And there be at this day as men say here that know it a good sort of
thousands Neapolitanes, named Foriensuti, who being spoiled at home by
violence, rob other abroad for need, which comber so the passage betwixt
Rome and Naples, as no man departs commonly from Rome without company which
comes to Naples without robbyng.

The whole body of the kingdom of Naples was so distempered inwardly with this
misorder, with a little outward occasion it would easily have burst forth into a
foul sore. A less matter then the rauishyng of Lucrece, A meaner aid then
the help of Brutus, was thought sufficient to have stirred up this inward
grudge to open revenge. But see how God provided for the Emperor and the quiet
of that kingdom: For God in taking away one Spanyard has made Naples now more
strong, then if the Emperor had set xx. thousand of the best in Spain there:
for even this last Lent. 1553. Don Pietro di Toledo dyed at Florence by whose
going away men's hearts in Naples be so come again to the Emperor, as he shall
now have less need either to care for the fine fetches of France, or to
fear the great power of the Turk. A gentleman of this Court a true servant
to the Emperor said merely in a company where I was, that his master the
Emperor had won more in Naples by the death of the Uiceroy, then he had lost
in Lorraigne by the forgyng of Metz.

But to my purpose not many years ago diverse in Naples made their complaint
to the Prince of Salerne of their griefs, who was thought would be most
willing for his good nature, and best able for his authority to seek some
remedy for them by way of intercession to the Emperor.

The Prince being here at Bruxels humbly besought his Majesty to pity the
misery of his poor subjects: who by this suit gat of the Emperor for his
cliantes, words without hope: and of the Uiceroy for him self hatred without
end. The Prince yet always bare him self so wisely, that he could not
without some stir be thrust down openly: and ridyng on his journey he was
once shot with a dagge secretly.

Thus he seeing no end of displeasure in the Uiceroy no hope of remedy in the
Emperor, when he saw the Turk on the Sea, the French king in the field, Duke
Maurice and the Marches up, and a good part of Italy either risen, or ready to
rise, thinkyng the time come of their most hope for help by the Princes, and
of least fear of punishment by the Emperor, came forth to play his part also
amongst the rest: who when flying first to the French king and after by his
counsel as it is said to the Turk, is compelled to venture upon many hard
fortunes. And what succes he shall have either of help in France or comfort
of the Turk, or mercy of the Emperor I can not yet write. But this last
winter he has lain in the I Will of Cio, and now I hear say this summer he is on
the Sea with 63. Gallyes of the Turks at his commandment, what enterprice he
will make, or what success he shall have when we shall hear of the matter, I
trust I shall either by some private letter from hence or by present talk at
home fully satisfy you therein.

Albert Marches of Bradenburge.
Marches Albertes book and the co^tents thereof.
ALbert Marches of Bradenburge in the beginning of his stir.1552. wrote a
book and set it Print wherein he declared the causes of his falling from the
Emperor wittely alledgyng common misery as a just pretense of his private
enterprise making other men's hurtes, his remedy to heal his own sores and
common wrongs his way to revenge private displeasures: showing liberty to be
last, and Religion to be defaced, in all Germany, lamentyng the long captivity
of the two great Princes: and all the dispossessyng of his father in law Duke
Otto Henrick: sore enueyng against the pride of the Spanyardes and the
authority of strangers, which had now in their hands the seal of the
Impiere, Sore and just complayntes.
and in their swing the doing of all things, and at their commandment all
such men's voices as were to be called the Imperial Dietes: co^pellyng the
Germans in their own country to use strange toungs for their private suits,
wherein they could say nothing at all, or nothing to the purpose: using Camera
Imperialis at Spires for a common key to open all men's coffers when they listed
and these were the chiefest points in Marches book.

The Marches also sore enueyed against Luice de Auila for writing, The book of
Luice de Auila.
and against the Emperor for suffering such a book as Luice de Auila wrote:
wherein the honor of Germany and the Princes thereof and by name Marches Albert,
who was in ye first wars on the Emperors side, was so defamed to all the
world: yea the Marches was so thoroughly chafed with this book, yt when I was in
the Emperors court he offered ye combat with Luice de Auila, which the Emperor
for good will and wise respects would in no case admit.

Not only the Marches but also the Princes at the Diet of Passan this last
year made a common complaint of this book. I knew also the good old Prince
Frederick Palsgraue of ye Rhene in September last when the Emperor lay at
Landaw beside Spires, going with his great army to Metz, complained to the
Emperor him self and to his counsel of a certain spightfull place in that
book against him: The good prince told me this tale him self at his house in
Heldibirge when I carried unto him king Edwardes letters, the Lord Ambassador
him self being sick at Spires.

The duke of Bauiere unkindly handled.
And wise men say that the Duke of Bauiere, also is evil contented for that
which is written in that book against his father when he deserved of the
Imperials, to have been rewarded rather with praise and thanks then with any
unkind note of blame and dishonor: of whom the Emperor in his wars against
the Lansgraue and the Duke of Saxony received such kindness, as no Prince in
Germany for all respects in yt case was able to affourde him: as first he had
his whole country of Bauiere for a sure footyng place, to begin the war in:
and had also both men and vittaile of him what he would, and at length should
have had that country his only refuge, if that in war he had come to any
vnderdele as he was like enough to have done. But it was Gods secret will and
pleasure to have the matter then go as it did: And for that cause men say Duke
Albert of Bauiere that now is that has married the Emperors niece, was more
strange this last year to the Emperor, when he was driven to that extremity
to fly away on the night from Inspurge and was more familiar with duke
Maurice, and more friendly to the Princes confederate then else peradventure he
would have done.

And here a writer may learn, of Princes affairs a good lesson to beware of
parcialitie either in flattery, or spite: For although thereby a man may
please his own Prince presently yet he may perchance as much hurt him in the
end as Luis de Auila did hurt ye Emperor his master in writing of this book.
In deed this book was not ye chiefest cause of this stir in Germany: but
sure I am that many Princes in Germany were sore agreeued with it, as the
Emperor wa^ted both their hearts and their hands when he stood in most need
of friends: Just reprehension of all vices as folly, unjust dealyng, cowardice,
and vicious living, must be freely and franckly used, yet so with that moderate
discression as no purposed malice or bent hatred, may seem to be the breeder
of any false reproach which humor of writing follows so full, in Paulus Iouius
books, and that by that judgment of his own friends, as I have heard wise
and well learned men say: that his whole study and purpose is spent on these
points, to deface the Emperor, to flatter France, to spite England, to belie
Germany, to praise the Turk, to keep up the Pope, to pull down Christ and
Christ's Religion, as much as lies in him. But to my purpose again.

The matters before of me briefly rehearsed, were at large declared in Marches
Albertes book: yet that you may know what secret workyng went before this
plain writing and open doing. And because the Marches part has been so
notable in all this pastime, I will by more particular circumstaunces lead you
to this general complaints.

There be at this day five Marchesses of Bradenburge: Ioachimus Elector,
Ioha^nes his brother who for Civil service is Imperial with might and main,
and yet in Religion a Christian Prince with heart tongue and honesty of life:
Doctor Christopher Monte, both a learned and wise man, our kings Majesty
servant and his Agent in the affairs of Germany has told me diverse times,
that this Marches John and the Duke of Swaburg, be two of the worthiest Princes
in all the Empier either in considering wisely, or executing courageously any
great affair. The third is Marches George who dwells in Franconia not far
from Noremberg. The fourth Marches Albert the elder the mighty Duke of Prusia
hable for his power to cope with any Prince, Duke of Prusia.
and xv. years together he did stoutly withstand in continual war the
strength of the king of Pole. He has so fully banished Papistry and so surely
established the doctrine of the Gospel in Prusia, as no where hitherto in
Germany is more diligently done, he loves learning and honoreth learned men,
and therefore. an.1544. he founded a new University in Prusia called Mons
Regius bryngyng thither with plentyfull things excellent learned men in all
tounges and sciences. He is uncle to this notable Marches Albert, and lackyng
children has made him his heir, and has already inuestured him in the
Dukedom of Prusia.

The fifth is Marches Albert of whom I purpose to write on: whose father was
Cassimirus descended from the kings of Pole, and for his noblenes against the
Turk called Achilles Germanicus: and therefore might very well engender such a
hoate Pirrhus. Marches Albert in his young years as I have heard wise men say,
was rude in his manners, nor did not show any token of towardnes likely to
attempt any such affairs as in deed he has done. It might be either for the
lack of learning and good bringyng up (a great and common fault in great
Princes of Germany) or else for his bashful nature in youth, which property
Xenophon wittely feigned to be in Cyrus at like years iudgyng bashfulnes in
youth to be a great token of virtue in age. Xenoph. ^. (...).


Marches Albert is now at this day about xxxj. years old: of a good stature,
neither very high, nor very low, thick without grosenes: rather well boned for
strength, then ouerloded with flesh: his face fair, bewtifull, broad, stern,
and manly: somewhat resemblyng my Lord Marches of Northt. when he was of the
same years, his eyes great and rowlyng, making his countenance cherefull when
he talks: and yet when he gives ear to other he keeps both a sad look
without sign of suspicion, and also a well set eye without token of malice:
And this behavior I marked well in him when I dyned in his company at the
siege of Metz, in the County John of Nassaus tent, his voice is great and his
words not many, more ready to here other then to talk him self. And when he
talks he so frames his tongue to agree with heart, as speaking and meaning
seems to be always at one in him, and herein he may be well called the son
of Achilles whom Homer wittely does feign to have such a free open nature:
whose saying in Geeke is excellent, but being turned in the wrong side into
English, it shall less delight you yet thus much it signifies: Who either in
earnest or in sport,
does frame him self after such sort:
This thing to think and that to tell,
my heart abhors as gate to hell.


Homer, meaning hereby that a Prince of noble courage should have his heart, his
look, his tongue, and his hands so always agreeyng together in thinkyng,
pretending, and speaking, and doing, as no one of these four should at any
time be at jar with an other, which agreeyng together in their right tune, do
make a pleasant melody in all men's ears both sweetest and loudest, called in
English (honor) and most fitly in Greek (...), the price and praise of virtue.

And though the Marches be free to say what he thinks, yet he is both secret
in purposyng and close in workyng what soever he goes about. Now very
skillfull to do harm to others, and as ware to keep hurt from him self, yet
first bet unto it with his own rod: for in ye former wars of Germany being on
ye Emperors side he fell into the hands of Duke John Fridericke of Saxony,
which chance he is charged sore withal by Luice de Auila and that with so
spightfull and open a mouth, as moved the Marches to offer him the combat as I
said before. He is now most courageous in hardest adventures, most cherefull in
present ieoperdy, and most paynefull in greatest labors: having no soldier
under him, that can better away with heat and cold or longer suffer hunger and
thrist then he him self. His apparel is soldier like, better known by his
fearce doings then by his gay going: His soldiers fear him for his
stoutnes, and love him for his liberality: which wins to him authority fit
for a stout Captain, and works in them obedience due to good soldiers.

This last year a little before his agreement with the Emperor his soldiers
for lack of money and meat fell to mutenyng and then fell the Marches fastest
to hangyng, not hidyng him self for fear, but coming abroad with courage,
did protest that neither the proudest should make misorder without punishment
nor yet the prodest should lack as long as either he had penny in his purse or
loaf of bread in his tent. And after this sort of outward behavior and inward
condition in Marches Albert, as I have marked his person my self and as I have
learned his doings by such as by experience knew them well and for their
honesty would report them right and now how he fell from the Emperor I will as
briefly declare.

The Marches served the Emperor as I said before in the former wars in
Germany against the Lansgraue and the Duke of Saxony, where he lost some honor
and spent much money. The Emperor shortly after came down hither to Bruxels
having the Marches in his company, who lookyng for a great recompense of his
costs, and receiuyng little, and seeing his honor not only defaced in the field
presently when he was taken prisoner, but also defamed for ever by writing
confirmed by the Emperors privilege to grow abroad in the world began to take
the matter so unkindly, that he left coming to the Court, and kept his own
house: rising every day very early: and writing all the forenoone very
diligently yet what he did no man knew: so that his absence breed a talk in
the Court, and his soddein and secret study wrought a wonderful gelousy of his
doings in the Emperors head: for he knew the Marches to have courage enough
to attempt matters over great: and therefore sent Mo^sieur Granduill: unto the
Marches house as of him self to grope out his doings, who declared unto the
Marches ye Emperors great goodwil toward him, showing that his Majesty was
purposed to make him a great personage, and to begin withal had in mind to
give him a goodly and profitable office in all his Mintes.

The Marches answered roundly and plainly to the first, that the Emperor
could not make him greater then he was, being Marches of Bradenburge: And as
for ye office in the Minte, he said smiling, he used not often to tell his own
money, and therefore he thought not to make the account of others and so made
nothing of the Emperors offer: only he desired Grandeuill that the Emperor
would give him leave to go home to his own, which he obtained: And at his
departure ye Emperor gave him a patent of 4000. crowns by ye year: But ye
Marches was not well four miles out of Bruxels, when he sent the patent by
post to ye Emperor again saying: his Majesty might better bestow it on some
that had more need of it. And in deed the Marches is as loath to receive of
his friends by benevolence, as he is ready to take from his enemies by violence
which comes somewhat of to stout a courage.

Thus the Marches came home not best contented as it may well appear: nor saw
not the Emperor after till he met him at the siege of Metz. Casmirus his
father and the Marches him self were great spenders and deep detters: the one
for his stoutnes in war, the other for his lustines in youth. And therefore
became quick borrowers and slow payers, which thing brought the Marches into
such trouble as he had with the City of Noremberge with his neighbors the
Bishop of Herbipolis and with his Godfather the Bishop of Pamberge.

The Marches was no sooner come home, but these Bishops spying their time, when
he had left the Emperors Court, and had quite lost or much lessened his
friendship there, began to trouble him with new suites for old debtes in Camera
Imperiali, at Spires, where the Marches because he lacked either favor in the
Court, or experience in young years, or good matter on his side, was always
wrong to the worst, and to stuff up his stomach with more matter of unkindness
against the Emperor, it is said that letters from the greatest in the
Emperors Court were never lackyng at Spires to help forward process against
the Marches.

Shortly after this time began the siege of Madenburg where Duke Maurice by the
Emperor was appointed general. The Marches either weery of leesyng at home by
suits, or desirous to win abroad by war, or else purposing to practice some
way to revenge his displeasures made him ready to serve against Madenburg with
500. horse. And in the beginning of the spryng of the year.1551. he set
forward and in his way went to visit Ernestus his cousin Duke of Saxony brother
to John Fridericke the prisoner with the Emperor. The self same time Lazarus
Swendy was sent from the Emperor as Commissary to duke Ernestus with earnest
commandment that the Duke and all his, should receive the doctrine of the
Interim. And that I may accomplish my purpose, which is to paynt out as cruelly
as I can, by writing, the very Image of such persons as have played any not
able part in these affairs: and so you being absent shall with ^o^e more
pleasure read their doings. This Lazarus Swendy is a tall and a comely
personage, Lazarus Swendy.
and being brought up in learning under Oecolampadius at Basile making (as it
was told me by an honest man that was thoroughly acquainted with him there) more
account of his tall stature, the^ of any bewty of the mind, began to be weary
of learning, and became desirous to ^eare some brag in the world* and so made
a soldier, inard a scholar, and because he would make a lusty change from
the fear of God and knowledge of Christ's doctrine, he fell to be a perverse
and bloody Papist: ever at hand in any cruel execution against the poor
Protestants as commonly all such do which so wittingly shake of Christ, and
his Gospel: such a Commissary you may be sure would cruelly enough execute his
office.

Duke Ernestus told the Commissary that he his lands and life were at his
Majesty's commandment, his Majesty knew how quietly he bare him self
always, and therefore his trust was as he willingly served the Emperor with
true obedience* so he might as freely serve God with right conscience: for he
would rather leave his lands and goods and all to the Emperor, and go beg
with his wife and children, then they would forsake the way of the Gospel
which God has commanded them to follow.

And mark how evidently God did declare both how much such a Commission sent
out abroad in Germany against him and his word did displease him: and also how
much the prayers and sighyng hearts of just men do in time prevail with him:
for as a man of much honesty and great knowledge in all the matters of Germany
did tell me, as soon as this Commission was once abroad, the practices in
Germany began to stir, yet not so openly as the Emperor might have just
cause to withstand them, nor so covertly but he had occasion enough to mistrust
them: and thereby he both lacked help for open remedy, and wanted no
displeasure for inward grief.

Duke Ernestus, Marches Albert, and Lazarus Swendy sat at supper togethers:
and as they were talkyng of ye Interim, the Marches soddenly brast out into a
fury saying: what devil? will ye Emperor never leave striuyng with God in
defacyng true Religion and tossyng the world in debarryng all men's liberties?
addyng, that he was a Prince unkind to every man, and kept touch with no man,
that could forget all men's merits, and would deceive whom soever he promised.

The Duke liked not this hoate talk in his house and at his table, but said:
Cousin you speak but merely, and not as you think, adding much the praise of
the Emperors gentleness showed to many, and of his promise kept withal. Well
(quoth the Marches) if he had been either kind where men have deserved or
would have performed that he promised: neither should I at this time accuse
him, nor you have sit here in this place to defend him, for he promised to
give me this house with all the lands that thereto belongs: but ye be
affrayd Cousin (quoth ye Marches) lest this talk be to loud, and so heard to
far of: when in deed if the Commissarie here, be so honest a man as I take
him, and so true to his master as he should be, he will not fail to say what
he has heard, and on the same condition Commissary I bring thee good luck,
and drancke of unto him a great glass of wine. Lazarus Swendyes talk then
sounded ge^tly and quietly, for he was sore affrayed of the Marches. But he was
no sooner at home with the Emperor, but word was sent straight to Duke Maurice
that the Marches who was as the^ come to Madenburg if he would needs serve
there, should serve without wages.

Ye may be sure the Marches was chafed a new with this news who already had
lost a great sort of his men and now must leese his whole labor thither, and
all his wages there, besides the loss of his honor in taking such shame of
his enemies, and receiuyng such unkindness of the Emperor.

The Marches was not so grieved but Duke Maurice was as well contented with
this commandment: for even then was Duke Maurice Secretary practisyng by
Baron Hadeckes advise with the French king for the stir which did follow: and
therefore was glad when he saw the Marches might be made his so easily which
came very soon to pass: so that the Marches for the same purpose in the end
of the same year went into France secretly, and was there with Shertly as a
common Lance Knight, and named himself Captain Paul, lest the Emperor
spials should get out his doings: where by the advice of Shertly he practiced
with the French king for the wars which followed after. This matter was told
unto me by John Mecardus one of the chief Preachers in Augusta, who being
banished the Empiere, when and how ye shall hear after was feign to fly, and
was with Shertly the same year in France.

The Marches came out of France in the beginning of the year.1552. and out of
hand gathered up men, but his purpose was not known, yet the Emperor
mistrusted the matter, being at Insburg, sent Doct. Hasius one of his counsel,
to know what cause he had to make such stir. This Doct. Hasius was once an
earnest protestant, and wrote a book on that side, and was one of the
Palsgraues privy counsel: But for hope to clime higher, he was very ready to
be entised by ye Emperor to forsake first his master and then God: By who^ the
Emperor knew much of all ye Princes Protestants purposes, for he was commonly
one whom they had used in all their Dietes and private practices: which thing
caused the Emperor to seek to have him: that by his head he might the
easelyer overthrow the Protestants, and with them God and his word in all
Germany.

This man is very like M. Parrie her graces cofferer in head, face, legs and
bellye. What answer Hasius had I can not tell, but sure I am the Marches then
both wrote his book of complayntes against the Emperor, and set it out in
Printe. And also came forward with banner displayed, and took Dillyng upon
Danuby the Cardinal of Augustus town, which Cardinal with a few Priests
fled in post to the Emperor at Inspurg, where he found so cold cheer, and so
little comfort, that forthwith in all have, he posted to Rome.

Horsemen and footmen in great companies still gathered to the Marches: and in
the end of March he marched forward to Augusta, where he, Duke Maurice, the
young Lansgraue, the duke of Mechelburg, George, and Albert, with William Duke
of Brunswycke, and other Princes confederate met together and besieged that
City, Where I will leave the Marches till I have brought Duke Maurice and his
doings to the same time, and to the same place.

Duke Maurice.
NOt many years ago whole Saxony was chiefly under two Princes: the one duke
John Frederick borne Elector, who yet lives, defender of Luther, a noble
setter out, and as true a follower of Christ and his Gospel: The other his
kynsman Duke George who is dead, Knight of the order of the Golden Fleece, a
great man of the Emperor, a mayntainer of Cocleus, and a notable pillar of
Papistry.

Duke John Frederick is now 50. years of age, John Frederick Duke of Saxon.
so byg of personage as a very strong horse is scarce able to bear him and yet
is he a great deal bygger in all kind of virtues, in wisdom, justice,
liberality, stoutnes, temperancy in him self, and humanity toward others,
in all affairs, and either fortunes using a singular troth and stedfastnes:
so that Luice de Auila, and the Secretary of Ferrare who wrote the story of the
first wars in Germany, and profess to be his ernest enemies both for matters
of state and also of Religion, were so compelled by his worthynes to say the
truth as though their only purpose had been to write his praise. He was five
years prisoner in this Court, where he wan such love of all men, as the
Spanyardes now say: they would as gladly fight to set him up again as ever
they did to pull him down: For they see that he is wise in all his doings,
just in all his dealings, lowly to the meanest, princely with the biggest, and
excellyng gentle to all, whom no adversity could ever move, nor policy at any
time entice to shrincke from God and his word. And here I must needs commend
the Secretary of Ferrare, who being a Papist, and writing the history of the
late wars in Germany, does not keep back a goodly testimony of Duke
Frederickes constancy toward God and his Religion.

When the Emperor had taken the Duke prisoner he came shortly after before the
City of Witemberg: and being advised by some bloody cou^sellours that Duke
Frederickes death should, by the terror of it turn all the Protestants from
their Religion, caused a write to be made for the Duke to be executed the next
morning upon a solemn scaffold in the sight of his wife children, and the
whole City of Wittemberg.

This write signed with the Emperors own hand was sent over night to the Duke,
who when the write came unto him was in his tent playing at Chesse with his
Cousin and fellow prisoner the Lansgraue of Lithenberg, and readyng it advisedly
over laid it down quietly beside and made no countenance at all at ye matter,
but said Cousin take good heed to your game, and returnyng to his play as
quietly as though he had received some private letter of no great importance
did give the Lansgraue a trim mate.

The Emperor (I doubt not) chiefly moved by God: secondly of his great
wisdom and natural clemency, when he understood his merueilous constancy
changed his purpose and revoked the write, and ever after gave him more
honor, and showed him more humanity then any Prince that ever I have read of
have hitherto done to his prisoner.

He is also such a lover of learning as his Library furnished with books of
all tounges and sciences, passes all other Libraries which are yet gathered in
Christendom: For my friend Ieronimus Wolfius who translated Demosthenes out of
Greek into Latin, who had seen the French kings Library at Augusta, has told
me that though in six months he was not able only to write out the titles of
the books in the Fuggers Library, yet was it not so byg as Duke Frederickes
was which he saw in Saxony. I think he understands no strange tongue save
somewhat the Latin and a little the French: And yet it is merueilous that my
friend Johannes Sturmius does report by writing, what he heard Phillip
Melancthon at a time say of this noble Duke: that he thought the Duke did
privately read and write more every day the^ did both he and D. Aurifaber which
two were counted in all men's judgments to be the greatest readers and writers
in all the University of Wittemberg.

And as he does thus read with such diligence, even so he can report with such
a memory what soever he does read, and namely histories, as at his table on
every new occasion he is accustomed to recite some new story which he does
with such pleasure and utterance as men be content to leave their meat to hear
him talk: and yet he him self is not disdaynfull to hear the meanest nor
will ouerwhart any man's reason. He talks without tauntyng, and is merry
without scoffyng, deludyng no man for sport, nor nippyng no man for spite.

Two kinds of men as his Preachers did tell me at Vilacho he will never long
suffer to be in his house: the one a common mocker, who for his pride thincketh
so well of his own wit as his most delight is to make other me^ fools, and
where God of his providence has given small wit he for his sport will make it
none, and rather then he should leese his pleasure, he would an other should
leese his wit: as I hear say was once done in England, and that by the
sufferaunce of such as I am sorry for the good will I bear them to hear such a
report: the other a privy whisperer a picktha^cke a tale teller meddling so with
other men's matters, as he finds no leisure to look to his own: one such in
a great house is able to turn and toss the quietness of all. Such two kind of
men says the Duke besides the present troubling of others never or seldom
come to good end them selves. He loves not also bold and thick skinned faces,
wherein the meaning of the heart does never appear. Nor such hid talk as lies
in wait for other men's wits. But would, yt words should be so framed with
the tongue, as they be always meant in the heart.

And therefore the Duke him self thincketh nothing which he dare not speak, A
noble nature.
nor speaks nothing which he will not do. Yet having thoughts grounded
upon wisdom, his talk is always so accompanied with discression and his
deeds so attend upon true dealyng, as he neither biteth with words, nor
wringeth with deeds, except impudency follow the fault, which Xenophon wittely
calls the farthest point in all doing, and then he uses to speak home as he
did to a Spanyard this last year at Villacho, who being of the Dukes guard,
when he was prisoner, and now preasyng to sit at his table when he was at
liberty, Because many nobles of ye Court came that day to dine with the duke,
The gentleman Husher gently desired the Spanyard to spare his rowme for that
day for a great personage* But he countenancyng a brave Spanish brag, said,
Seignor ye know me well enough, and so sat him down.

The Duke heard him, and preuentyng his man's answer said: In deed you be to
well known, by the same toke^ the last time you were here you took a gobblet
away with you, and therefore when you have dyned you may go without farewell,
and have leave to come again when ye be sent for. In the mean while an honest
man may occupy your place. But in remembryng so good a Prince I have gone to
far from my matter: And yet the remembrance of him is never out of place,
whose worthynes is never to be forgotten.

Duke George of Saxony a little before he dyed having no child did dishinherite
Duke Henry his brother by his last will because he was a Protestant, and gave
away his whole inheritance to Ferdinando king of Romans.

But Duke John Frederick by force of arms set and kept his Cousin Duke Henry
in his right: And he dying soon after left behynd him two sons Duke Maurice
and Duke Augustus, who likewise in their youth were defended in their right by
the wisdom and force of Duke John Frederick. Duke Maurice was brought up in
Duke John Frederickes house as if he had been his own son and married the
Lansgraues daughter.

After it came to pass that the Emperor attempted to establish Papistry in
Germany with the sword, against which purpose the Lansgraue and duke John
Frederick armed them selves not to resist the Emperor as the Papists say,
but to keep Gods Religion up, if any by violence would pull it down, refusing
never, but requiryng always to refer them and their doctrine to a lawful
and free general Council where truth in Religion might be fully tried in the
hearing of even and (...)* words always used in Thucidides in decidyng common
controversies.
equal judges and that by the touchstone of Gods Canonical Scriptures.

Duke Maurice in the beginning of his war was suspected neither of the
Lansgraue nor of Duke Frederick being son in law to the one and nighe
kinsman to the other and agreeyng in Religion with both. Yea he was not only
not suspected. But as I heard skilful me^ say he was ready with his counsel
and promised his aid to help forward ye enterprice, or else Hance Frederick
being a Prince of such wisdom would not have left at home behind him an enemy
of such a force.

Francisco Duke Maurice Agent with the Emperor was asked, I being by at
Augusta, how he could excuse his masters unkindness toward John Frederick who
had been such a father unto him. He granted that Duke Frederick had been
great friend unto him, and might have a greater if he had would, and the^ less
strife had followed then did. And troth it is (said he) as Duke Frederick kept
my master in his right, so afterward he put him from part of his right, when in
his young years he chopped and changed lands with him when he listed: which
thing my master coming to man's state much misliked, and often complaynyng could
never obtain remedy therein. Kyndnes should rather have kyndly increased, so
unkindly have decayed specially when the one was trusted withal, and the other
of such years, as he had neither wit to perceive nor power to amend if any
injury were offered unto him. Troth also it is that my master was brought up in
Duke Frederickes house: but he has more cause to complain on them that
brought him thither, then to thank such as brought him up there, where he had
always plenty of drink and as much scant of good teaching to come to such
virtue and learning as did belong to a Prince of his state.

Now whether this talk was altogether true, or, an ill excuse was made to
cover a foul fact I can not tell: but sure I am Francisco said thus. I have
heard wise men say that it is not like, that for such a private strife Duke
Maurice would have so forsaken not only his friend and kinsman, but also his
father in law or would for the loss a little, or rather for the change of a
piece have so hassarded his whole estate, which was once in the first war all
gone save Lypsia, and one other town, beside the loss of love in whole
Germany and his good name amongst all Protestants, in the midst of whom all
his liuinges do lie.

Why Duke Maurice left his dearest friends and fell in with the Emperor.

Ambition.


Well surely there was some great cause that could stir up so great a strife,
and that was as wise men and well willing on Duke Maurice side in mine opinion
have truly judged, the foul vice of ambition.

O Lord how many worthy men has this one vice beareft from good commonweals,
which for all other respects were most unworthy of that end they came unto. My
heart weeps for those noble men of England, whose valiantnes in war, whose
wisdom in peace this Realm shall want and wayle and wish and wish for in time
to come, which of late by this only vice have been taken from us. Examples,
less for our grief and as fit for this purpose be plenty enough in other
states.

Over many experiences do teach us, though a Prince be wise stout liberal
gentle merciful and excellently learned, though he deserve all the praise,
that virtue nature and fortune ca^ affourd him, yea that wit it self can wish
for as we read that noble Julius Caesar had, and that by the testimony of those
that loved him not, nevertheless if these two foul verses of Euripides.

Do right always and wrong refrain.
Except only for rule and reign.
If these verses I say do not only sound well in his ear, but sincke deep
also in his heart, surely there is neither kindred, friendship, law, oath,
obedience, country, God, nor his own life, but he will hassard to leese all
rather then to pursue this foul vice: For Polynices, for whom this verse was
first made in Greek, did fill not only his own country full of dead
carcasses, but also whole Greece full of weepyng widows. And Caesar for whom
the same verse was turned into Latin did not only turn vpside down the
goodliest common wealth that ever GOD suffered to stand upon the earth: but also
lossed the whole world with battle and slaughter even almost from the sun
setting unto the sun rising. And did not stop to bring soldiers to do
mischief further then any man now dare journey by land either for pleasure or
profit.

But see the fruit and end which this ungodly great growing brings men unto:
Both these Princes were slain the one by his brother the other by his own
son, of whom in life, nature and benefits would they should have taken most
comfort of. But men that love to clime to hye have always least fear, and
therefore by reason fall most soddenly and also fardest down: yea the very
bowghes that helped him up will now whip him in falling down: For who so in
climyng trusts when he is going up any bough at all over much, though he
seem to tread never so surely upon it yet if he once begin to slyp the same
self bough is reddiest to beat him that seemed before surest to bear him.
Examples hereof be seen daily and forgotten hereby.

An other mischief chances commonly to these high climers: that they will
hear no man so gladly as such which are ever hartenyng them to clime still. If
wise and good men durst speak more freely then they do: great men should do
both others and them selves less harm the^ they are wont to do. He hates him
self and hastes his own hurt that is content to hear none so gladly as
either a fool or a flatterer. A wonderful folly in a great man him self and
some peace of misery in a whole common wealth, where fools chiefly, and
flatterers may speak freely what they will and wise men and good men shall
commonly be shent, if they speak what they should.

And how comes this to pass? it is the very plague of God for great men's
sins, and the plain high way to their just punishment. And when God suffers
them so willingly to grant freedom to folly and so gladly to give hearing to
flattery: But see when the great man is gone and has played his part, fools
and flatterers be still upon the stage. Such live in all worlds, such laugh in
all miseries: such Daui and Getae, have always the longest parts: and go out
who shall they tarry in place still. I know also many a good mitio, which have
played long parts whom I pray God keep long still upon the stage. And I trust
no man will be miscontent with my general saying except conscience do prick
him of his own private ill doing.

There be common wealths where freedom in speaking truth has kept great me^
from boldness in doing ill: for free and friendly advise is the trimmest glass
that any great man can use to spy his own fault in: which taken away they
run commonly so far in foul doing, as some never stay till they pass all
remedy save only to late repentance. And as I would have no flattery but wish
for freedom: So in no wise do I commend overmuch boldness, or any kind of
railing. But that liberty in speaking should be so mingled with good will and
discretion, as no great person should be vnhonorably spoken upon, or any mean
man touched out of order either for sport or spite: as some unquiet heads
never contented with any state are ever procuryng* either secretly with raylyng
bills, or openly with tauntyng songs, or else some scoffing common play.

An other kind of to bold talkers surpass all these selly rumors, who are
called, and so will be, common discoursers of all Princes affairs. These make
a great account of them selves and will be commonly foremost in any prease, and
lustly with out blushing shoulder back others: These will seem to see further
needs, in any secret affayre then the best and wisest cou^sellor a Prince
has. These be the open flatterers and privy mislikers of all good counselors
doings. And one common note, the most part of this brotherhode of discoursers
commonly carry with them where they be bold to speak: to like better Tullies
Offices, then S. Paul's Epistles: and a tale in Bocace, then a story of the
Bible.

And therefore for any Religion earnest setters forth of present time: with
consciences confirmed with Machiauelles doctrine to think say and do
whatsoever may serve best for profit or pleasure. But as concerning flatterers
and raylers to say mine opinion whether I like worse, surely as I have read few
men to have been hurt with bitter poisons: so have I heard of as few great men
to have been greatly harmed with sharp talk: but are so ware therein, that
commonly they will complain of their hurt before they feel harm. And flattery
again is so sweet, that it pleases best, when it hurts most, and therefore
is always to be feared: because it always delights, but in lookyng aside to
these hye climers, I have gone out of the way, of mine own matter.

To return to Duke Maurice, he saw that Duke Frederickes falling might be his
rising, and perchance was moved with some old injuries, but being of young
years and of nature full of desire and courage he was a trim pray for old
practices to be easily carried away with fair new promises sounding altogether
to honor and profit, and so he forsook his father and his friend, and became
wholly the Emperors till he had brought both them into prison. Duke Frederick
was taken in the field and so became the Emperors just prisoner. Yet as long
as the Lansgraue was abroad, the Emperor thought his purpose never achieved,
and therefore practiced a new with duke Maurice to get him also into his hands.

Duke Maurice with Ioachim Elector of Bradenburge became means betwixt the
Lansgraue and the Emperor. Conditions both of mercy from the one, and of
amends from the other were drawn out. Maurice and the Marches bound them
selves sureties to the La^sgraues children, for their fathers safe return: for
amongst the rest of conditions this was one of the chiefest, that he should
come in no prison. And so at Hala in Saxony, he came boldly to the Emperors
presence, who received him not very cherefully, nor gave him not his hand which
in Germany is the very token of an assured reconsiliation.

The Duke of Alua made the Lansgraue a supper, and called also thither Duke
Maurice, and the Marches of Brade^burg where they had great chere: but after
supper it was told Duke Maurice and the Marches, that they might depart for the
Lansgraue must lodge there that night.

On the morrow, they reasoned of the matter wholly to this purpose that the
Emperors promises not the Lansgraues person ought to be kept. Answer was
made that the Emperor went no further then conditions led him which were that
he should not be kept in everlasting prison: and they again replied he ought
to be kept in no prison. When I was at Villacho in Carinthia I asked Duke
Frederickes Preacher what were the very words in Dutch, whereby the Lansgraue
against his lookyng was kept in prison. He said the fallacion was very pretty
and notable and took his pen and wrote in my book the very words wherein
the very controversy stood, duke Maurice said it was.

Nicht in emig gefengknes.i. Not in any prison. The Imperials said no, but thus.

Nicht in ewig gefengknes.i. Not in everlasting prison. And how soon emig, may
be turned into ewig, not with scrape of knife, but with the least dash of a pen
so that it shall never be perceived, a man that will prove, may easily see.

Moreover Luice d'Auila in his book does rejoice that the Lansgraue did so
deceive him self with his own conditions in making of which as d'Auila says,
he was wont to esteem his own wit above all other men's. Well, how so ever it
came to pass the Lansgraue was kept in prison. And from that hour Duke
Maurice fell from the Emperor thinckyng him self most unkindly handled, that
he by whose means chiefly the Emperor had won such honor in Saxony, must now
be rewarded with shame in all Germany, and be called a traitor to GOD, and his
country, his father, and his friend. And though he was grieved inwardly at the
heart, yet he bare all things quietly in countenance purposing though he had
lost will yet would he not leese his profit, and so hiding his hurt presently,
whilst some fitter time should discover some better remedy, he went with the
Emperor to Augusta, where according to his promise he was made Elector. Yet
the same night after his solemn creation, two verses set upon his gate might
more grieve him, then all that honor could delight him, which were these.

Seu Dux, seu Princeps, seu nunc dicaris Elector.
Mauricij Patriae proditor ipse tui.
After that he had gotten that he looked for, he gat him home into his
country: from whence afterward the Emperor with no policy could ever bring
him, he always alledgyng, the fear that he had of some stir by Duke
Frederickes children.

Hitherto the Germans much mislyked the doings of Duke Maurice. But after
that he had felt him self so unkindly abused as for his good service to be
made the betrayer of his father, he took such matters in hand and brought them
so to pass, as he recovered the love of his country and purchased such hate
of his enemies, as the Spanyardes took their displeasure from all other, and
bestowed wholly upon the Duke Maurice* and yet he bare him self with such
wit, and courage against them, as they had always cause to fear him and never
occasion to contemn him: Yea if he had lived he would sooner men think have
driven all Spanyardes out of Germany, then they should have hurt him in Saxony,
for he had joined unto him such strength, and there was in him such policy,
as they durst never have come upon him with power, nor never should have gone
beyond him with wit. He had so displeased the Emperor as he knew well neither
his lands: nor his life could make amends when x. pounds of Benefits which
he was able to do, could not way with one ounce of displeasure that he had
already done: and therefore never after sought to seek his love which he knew
could never be gotten: but gave him self wholly to set up Maximilia^, who being
him self of great power, and of all other most beloved for his worthynes in
all Germany, and now using the head and hand of duke Maurice and his friends,
and having the help of as many as hated the Spanyardes, that is to say almost
all Protestants and Papists to in Germany, he should easily have obtained
what soever he had gone about. But that bond is now broken: for even this day
when I was writing this place, came word to this Court, that Marches Albert,
and Duke Maurice had fought, where the Marches had lost the field, and Duke
Maurice had lost his life: which whole battle because it is notable, I would
here at length describe, but that I should wander to far from my purposed
matter: and therefore I in an other place, or else some other with better
opportunity shall at large report the matter.

Ye see the cause why and the time when Duke Maurice fell from the Emperor.
And because he was so notable a Prince, I will describe also the manner how he
proceeded in all these doyngs, as I learned amongst them that did not greatly
love him. And because it were small gain to flatter him that is gone, and
great shame to lie upon him that is dead, for pleasyng any that be alive, I so
will report on him as his doings since my coming to this Court have deserved.

He was now of the age of xxxij. years well faced in countenance complexion
favor and heard not much unlike to Sir Raffe Sadler but some deal higher, and
well and strong made to bear any labor and pain. He was once (men say) given
to drinckyng, but now he had clean left it, contented with small diet and
lit^e sleep in this last years, and therefore had a wakyng and workyng head:
and became so witty and secret, so hardy and ware, so skillfull of ways, both
to do harm to others, and keep hurt from him self, as he never took
enterprise in hand wherein he put not his adversary always to the worse. And
to let other matter of Germany pass, even this last year within the compass
of eight months he professed him self open enemy against four the greatest
powers that I know upon earth. The Turk, the Pope, the Emperor, and the
French king, The Turk.
and obtained his purpose and wan praise against the^ all four: For he in
person and policy and courage dispatched the Turks purpose and power this
last year in Hungary.

The Pope
The Council at Trent which the Pope and the Emperor went so about to
establish he only brought to none effect: first by open protestation against
that Council, and after by his coming with his army to Insburge, he brought
such fear to the Bishops there gathered, that they ran every one far away
from thence, with such speed as they never durst hitherto speak of meeting
there again. The Emperor.
And how he dealt with ye Emperor, both in forcyng him to fly from Insburge,
and compellyng him to such a peace at Passo, my whole Diarium shall at full
instruct you.

French king.
And of all other he served the French king best, who fair pretending the
delivery of the ij. Princes captives, and the maintenance of Religion and
liberty in Germany, purposed in very deed nothing else, but ye destruction of
the Emperor, and the house of Austria: for what cared he for religion abroad,
who at home not only follows none him self privately in his life, but also
persecuteth the troth in others openly with the sword. But I do him wrong to
say he follows none, who could for his purpose be content at one time to
embrace all: and for to do hurt enough to the Emperor would become at once by
solemn league, Protestant, Papish, Turkish, and deuillish. But such Princes
that carry nothing else but the name of bearing up Gods word, deserve the same
praise and the same end that that Prince did, who seemed so ready to bear up ye
Ark of the Lord, and yet otherwise pursued Gods true Prophets and his word.

Again how much the French king cared for the liberty of Germany he well
declared in stealyng away so vnhonorably from the Empire the City of Metz. But
he thinckyng to abuse Duke Maurice for his ambitious purpose, in very deed and
in the end Duke Maurice used him as he should: for first he made him pay well
for ye whole wars in Germany as it is said.200000. crowns a month: And
after when the French king fell to catching of Cities, duke Maurice tendryng ye
state of his country brake of with him, and began to parle with the good king of
Romans at Luiz, which thing when the French king heard came within ij. miles
of the Rhene, he straight way hyed more hastly and with more disorder, for all
his great have, out of Germany, as they say that were there, then the Emperor
being sick without company and pressed by his enemy did go from Insburg.

And see how nobly Duke Maurice did which for ye love of his country, durst
fall from the French king before he achieved any thing against the Emperor.
And rather the^ Germany should leese her Cities so by the French king, he had
lever hassard, both the leesing of his enterprice, and also the leauyng of his
father in law still in prison with the Emperor. But as he had wit to take
money plenty of the French king: so had he wit also to furnish him self so
from home as he durst first fall out with the French king, and durst also after
to set upon the Emperor till he had brought his honest purpose to pass. For
there is not almost any in this Court but they will say duke Maurice did
honestly in delivering his father by strong hand, which before left no fair
mean unproven to do that humbly by entreaty, which after, was compelled to
bring to pass stoutly by force. And I pray you first mark well what he did
and then judge truly if any thing was done that he ought not to do.

For first he him self with ye Marches of Bradenburge most humbly by private
suit labored for the Lansgraues delivery offering to the Emperor, princely
offers, and not to be refused: as a huge sum of money: a fair quantity of
great ordinance, Duke Maurice offer for the La^sgraues delivery.
certain holds of his, some to be defaced, some given to ye Emperor: and
also personal pledges of great houses for his good haberaunce all the residue
of his life.

After when this suit was not regarded they again procured all ye Princes and
states of Germany being at ye Diet at Augusta. an.1548. to be humble
intercessors for him, offering ye self same conditions rehearsed before addyng
this more to become sureties them selves in any band to his Majesty for his
due obedience for time to come.

Thirdly by the Prince of Spain Duke Maurice never left to entreat ye
Emperor, yea he was so careful of ye matter, that his Ambassadors followed
the Prince even to his shipping at Genoa: who had spoken often presently
before, and wrote earnestly from thence to his father for ye Lansgraues
delivery, and it would not be. And wise me^ may say it was not yt wisest deed
that ever ye Emperor did, to deny ye prince this suit: for if ye Prince had
been made ye deliverer of ye ij. princes out of captivity, he had won thereby
such favor in all Germany, as without all doubt he had been made coadiutor with the
k. of Romans his uncle, And afterward ye Emperor. Which thing was lustly
denied to ye Emperor by the Electors, though he labored in yt matter so sore
as he never did in any other before.

Fourthly this last year a little before the open wars duke Maurice procured
once again, not only all ye Princes and free Estates of Germany, but also the
king of Romans Ferdinand, Maximilian his son king of Boeme, the king of
Pole, the king of De^marke the king of Sweden, to send also their Ambassadors
for this suite, so that at once xxiiij. Ambassadors came before the Emperor
together at Insburge. To whom when the Emperor had given very fair words in
effect concerning a double meaning answer, and that was this: That it did him
good to see so noble an Embassage at once. And therefore so many Princes should
well understand yt he would make a good account of their suit. Nevertheless
because duke Maurice was the chiefest party herein he would with speed send
for him, and use his head for the better endyng of this matter. But Duke
Maurice seeing that all these Ambassadors went home with out him, and that the
matter was referred to his present talk who was never heard in the matter
before, he wisely met with this double meaning answer of the Emperors with a
double meaning replica again: for he promised the Emperor to come, and at
last in deed came so hastly and so hotely as the Emperor could not abide the
heat of his breath: For when duke Maurice saw that all humble suits, all quiet
means were spent in vain, and had to bear him just witness therein all ye
Princes of Germany: First with close policy, after open power both wittely
and stoutly, he achieved more by force then he required by suite: For the
Emperor was glad to condescend (which surely in an extreme adversity was done
like a wise Prince) without money, without artillery, without defacyng of
holds, without receiuyng of pledges, to send the Lansgraue home, honorably
accompanied with (at the Emperors charges) the nobility of Brabant and
Flaunders.

This last day I dined with the Ambassador of Venice in company of many wise
heads, where duke Maurice was greatly praised of some for his wit: of other
for ye execution of his purposes. Well says a lusty Italian Priest, I can not
much praise his wit, which might have had the Emperor in his hands and would
not. Lo such be these Machiauels heads, who think no man to have so much
wit as he should, except he do more mischief then he need. But Duke Maurice
purposing to do no harm to the Emperor, but good to his father in law,
obtainyng ye one pursued not the other. Yea I know it to be most true when we
fled from Insburg so hastly, Duke Maurice sent a post to ye good king of
Romans, and bad him will the Emperor to make no such speed for he purposed
not to hurt his person: but to help his friend, whereupon the Diet at Passo
immediately followed.

I commend rather the judgment of John Baptist Gascaldo, John Baptist Gascaldo.
the Emperors man and ye king of Romans general in Hungary, who is not wont
to say better, or love any man more then he should specially Germans, and
namely Protestants. And yet this last winter he wrote to the Emperor that he
had marked Duke Maurice well in all his doings against the Turk, and of all
men that ever he had seen, he had a head to forecast the best with policy and
wit, and a heart to set upon it with courage and speed, and also a discressio^
to stay most wisely upon the very prick of advantage.

Marches Marignan told some in this Court four years ago that Duke Maurice
should become the greatest enemy to the Emperor that ever the Emperor had:
which thing he judged (I believe) not of any troublesome nature which he saw in
Duke Maurice, but of the great wrongs that were done to Duke Maurice, knowing
that he had both wit to perceive them quietly and also a courage not to bear
them over long.

Some other in this court that loved not duke Maurice, and having no hurt to do
him by power, went about to say him some for spite and therefore wrote these
two spightfull verses against him.

Iugurtham Mauricus prodit Mauricius vltra,
Henricum, Patruum, Socerum, cum Caesare, Gallum.
He that gave me this verse added thereunto this his judgment, well (says he)
he that could find in his heart to betray his friend Duke Henry of Brunswicke,
his nigh kinsman Duke Frederick, his father in law the Lansgraue, his
sovereign Lord the Emperor, his confederate the French king, breakyng all
bonds of frendshyp, nature, law, obedience, and oath, shall besides all these,
deceive all men if at length he do not deceive him self. This verse and this
sentence, the one made of spite, the other spoken of displeasure be here
commended as men be affectioned. For any part as I can not accuse him for all:
so will I not excuse him for part. And yet since I came to this Court I should
do him wrong if I did not confess that which as wise heads as be in this
Court have judged on him, Duke Maurice.
even those that for country and Religion were not his friends, that is, to
have showed him self in all these affairs betwixt the Emperor and him:
first, humble in intreatyng, diligent in pursuyng, witty in purposing, secret
in workyng, fearce to foresee by open war, ready to parle for common peace,
wise in choice of conditions, and just in performyng of couenaunts.

And I know he offended the Emperor beyond all remedy of ame^des: So would I
be loath to see as I have once seen, his Majesty fall so again into any
enemies hands: less peradventure less gentleness would be found in him then
was found in Duke Maurice, who when he was most able to hurt, was most ready to
hold his hand and that against such an enemy, as he knew well would never love
him, and should always be of most power to revenge. If Duke Maurice had had a
Machiauels head or a cowardes heart, he would have worn a bloudyer sword the^
he did, which he never drew out in all these sturres, but once at ye Cluce and
yt was to save ye Emperors me^.

Hitherto I have followed the order of persons which has caused me somewhat to
misorder both time and matter, yet where diverse great affairs come together, a
man shall write confusedly for the matter, and unpleasantly for ye reader, if
he use not such an apt kind of partitio^ as ye matter will best affourde,
which thing ( Plato says) who ca^ not do, knows not how to write. Herein
Herodotus deserves in mine opinion a great deal more praise then Thucidides,
although he wrote of a matter more confused for places, time, and persons, then
the other did.

In this point also Appianus Alexandrinus is very commendable, and not by
chance but by skill does follow this order, declaryng in his Prologue just
causes why he should do so. Our writers in later time, both in Latin and other
tounges commonly confound to many matters together, and so write well of no
one. But see master Astley I thincking to be in some present talk with you,
after our old wont do seem to forget both my self and my purpose.

For the rest that is behind I will use a gross and homely kind of talk with
you: for I will now as it were carry you, out of England with me, and will lead
you the same way that I went even to the Emperors Court being at Augusta.
an.1550. And I will let you see in what case it stood, and what things were in
doing when we came first thither. After I will carry you and that a pace, because
the chiefest matters be thoroughly touched in this my former book, through the
greatest affairs of ij. years in this Court. Yet in order till we have
brought Duke Maurice (as I promised you) to join with Marches Albert in
besiegyng Augusta. And the^ because privy practices brast out into open sturres
I might better mark things daily then I could before. And so we will depart
with the Emperor from Insburg, and see daily what chances were wrought by
fear and hope in this Court till his Majesty left the siege of Metz, and came
down hither to Bruxels: where then all things were shut up into secret
practices till lastly of all, they brake forth into new mischiefs, betwixt the
Emperor and France in Picardy, and also betwixt Duke Maurice, and the Marches
in high Germany which things I trust some other shall mark and describe a
great deal better then I am hable to do.

FINIS.

