The Fraternitye of Vacabondes.

As well of ruflyng Vacabondes, as of beggarly, of women as of men, of Gyrles as
of Boys, with their proper names and qualities. With a description of the
crafty company of Cousoners and Shifters.

Whereunto also is adjoined the.xxv. Orders of Knaves, otherwise called a
Quartern of Knaves. Confirmed for ever by Cock Lorell.

(*)

The Vprightman speaks.
Our Brotherhood of Vacabondes,
If you would know where dwell:
In graves end Barge which syldome stands,
The talk will show right well.
Cock Lorell answers.
Some orders of my knaves also
In that Barge shall ye find:
For no where shall ye walk I crow,
But ye shall see their kind.
Imprinted at London by John Awdeley, dwelling in little Britayne street
without Aldersgate. 1575.

The Printer to the Reader.
THis brotherhood of Vacabondes,
To show that there be such in deed:
Both eustices and men of Lands,
Will testifye it if it need.
For at a Sessions as they sat,
By chance a Vacabond was got.
Who promysde if they would him spare,
And keep his name from knowledge then:
He would as strange a thing declare,
As ever they knew since they were men.
But if my fellows do know (said he)
That thus I did, they would kill me.
They granting him this his request,
He did declare as here is read,
Both names and states of most and least,
Of this their Vacabondes brotherhood.
Which at the request of a worshipful man
I have set it forth as well as I can.
FINIS.
The Fraternitye of Vacabondes both rufling and beggarly, Men and women, Boys
and Gyrles, with their proper names and qualities. Whereunto are adjoined the
company of Cousoners and Shifters.
An Abraham Man. AN Abraham man is he that walks bare armed, and bare legged,
and fayneth himself mad, and caryeth a pack of wool, or a stycke with baken
on it, or such like toy, and names himself poor Tom. A Ruffeler. A Ruffeler
goes with a weapon to seek service, saying he has been a Seruitor in the
wars, and beggeth for his relief. But his chiefest trade is to rob poor
wayfaring men and market women. A Prygman A Prygman goes with a stycke in his
hand like an idle person. His propertye is to steal clothes of the hedge,
which they call storing of the Rogeman: or else filtch Poultry, carrying them to
the Alehouse, which they call the Bowsyng In, and there sit playing at cards
and dice, till that is spent which they have so fylched. A VVhipiacke A
Whypiacke is one, that by coulor of a counterfaite Lisence (which they call a
Gybe, and the seals they call earckes) does use to beg like a Maryner, But his
chiefest trade is to rob Bowthes in a Fair, or to pilfer ware from staules,
which they call heauing of the Bowth A Frater. A Frater goes with a like
Lisence to beg for some Spi^i^e house or Hospital. Their pray is commonly upon
poor women as they go and come to the Markets. A Quire bird. A Quire bird is
one that came lately out of prison, and goes to seek service. He is commonly
a stealer of Horses, which they term a Priggar of Paulfreys. An Upright man.
An Upright man is one that goes with the trunchion of a staff, which staff
they call a Filtchma^. This man is of so much authority, that meeting with any
of his profession, he may call them to account, and command a share or snap
unto him self, of all that they have gained by their trade in one month. And
if he do them wrong, they have noremedy against him, no though he beat them,
as he uses commonly to do. He may also command any of their women, which they
call Doxies, to serve his turn. He has ye chief place at any market walk and
other assembles, and is not of any to be co^troled. A Curtall. A Curtall is
much like to the Upright man, but his authority is not fully so great. He uses
commonly to go with a short cloak, like to gray Friars, and his woman with him
in like livery, which he calls his Altham if she be his wife, and if she be
his harlot, she is called his Doxy. A Palliard. A Palliard is he that goes in
a patched cloak, and his Doxy goes in like apparel. An Irishe toil. An
Irishe toil is he that carries his ware in his wallet, as laces, pins,
points, and such like. He uses to show no wares until he have his alms. And
if the good man and wife be not in the way, be procures of the children or
servants a fleece of wool, or the worth of xij. d. of some other thing, for a
peniworth of his wares A Jack man. A Iackeman is he that can write and read,
and sometime speak latin. He uses to make counterfaite licenses which they
call Gybes, and sets to Seals, in their language called Iarkes. A Swygman. A
Swygman goes with a Pedlers pack. A washman. A Washman is called a Palliard,
but not of the right making. He uses to lie in the hye way with lame or sore
legs or arms to beg. These me^ ye right Pilliards will often times spoil, but
they dare not co^playn. They be bitten with Spickworts, and sometime with rats
bane A Tinkard. A Tinkard leaves his bag a sweating at the Alehouse, which
they term their Bowling In, and in the mean season goes abroad a begging. A
wild Roge. A wild Roge is he that has no abiding place but by his color of
going abroad to beg, is commonly to seek some kinsman of his, and all that be
of his corporation be properly called Roges. A Kitchen Co. A Kitchen Co is
called an idle run agate Boy. A Kitchen Mortes. A Kitchen Mortes is a Gyrle,
she is brought at her full age to the Upryght man to be broken, and so she is
called a Doxy, until she come to ye honor of an Altham. Doxies. Note especially
all which go abroad working laces and shirt stringes, they name them Doxies. A
Patriarch Co. A Patriarch Co does make marriages, and that is until death
depart the married folk, which is after this sort* When they front to a dead
Horse or any dead Catell, then they shake hands and so depart every one of them
a several way.
The company of Cousoners and Shifters.
A Curtesy man. A Curtesy man is one that walks about the back lanes in
London in the day time, and sometime in the broad streets in the night
season, and when he meets some handsome young man clenly apareled, or some
other honest Citizen, he makes humble salutatio^s and low curtesy, and shows
him that he has a word or two to speak with his mastership. This child can
behave him self manerly, for he will desire him that he talks with all, to
take the upper hand, and show him much reverence, and at last like his familier
acquaintance will put on his cap, and walk side by side, and talk on this
fashion: Oh sir, you seem to be a man, and one that favors men, and
therefore I am the more bolder to break my mind unto your good maistership.
Thus it is sir, there is a certain of us (though I say it both same and
handsome men of their hands) which have come lately from the wars, and as God
knows have nothing to take to, being both maisterles and moniles, and knowing
no way whereby to yerne ^n^ penny. And further, where as we have been welthely
brought up, and we also have been had in good estimation, we are a shamed now
to declare out misery, and to fall a craving as common Beggars, and as for to
steal and rob (God is our record) it strikes us to the heart, to think of
such a mischief, that ever any handsome man should fall into such a dannger
for this worldly trash, Which if we had to suffice our want and necessity, we
should never seek thus shamefastly to crave on such good pityfull men as you
seem to be, neither yet so daungerously to hasarde our lives for so vile a
thing. Therefore good sir, as you seem to be a handsome man your self, and
also such a one as pitieth the miserable case of handsome men* as now your eyes
and countenance shows to have some pity upon this my miserable complainte:
So in Gods cause I require your maistershyp, and in the behalf of my poor
afflicted fellows, which though here in sight they cry not with me to you, yet
wheresoever they be, I am sure they cry unto God to move the hearts of some
good men to show forth their liberality in this behalf. All which and I with
them crave now the same request at your good masterships hand. With these or
such like words he frames his talk. Now if the party (which he thus talks
withal) profereth him a penny or.ii. d. he takes it, but very scornfully, and
at last speaks on this sort: Well sir, your good will is not to be refused.
But yet you shall understand (good sir) that this is nothing for them, for whom
I do thus shamefastly entreat. Alas sir, it is not a great or.xii. d. I
speak for, being such a company of Seruiters as we have been: yet nevertheless
God forbid I should not receive your gentle offer at this time, hoping
hereafter through your good motions to some such like good gentleman as you be,
that I, or some of my fellows in my place, shall find the more liberality.
These kind of idle Uacabondes will go commonly well appareled, without any
weapon, and in place where they meet together, as at their host ties or other
places they will beat the port of right good gentlemen, and some are the more
trusted, but commonly they pay them with stealing a pair of sheets, or
Couerlet, and so take their farewell early in the morning, before the master
or dame be sturring. A Cheatour or Fingerer. These commonly be such kind of
idle Vacabondes as scarcely a man shall (...), they go so gorgeously, sometime
with waiting men, and sometime without. Their trade is to walk in such places,
where as gentlmen and other worshipful Citizens do resort, as at Poules, o^^^
Christ's Hospital, and sometime at ye Royal exchange. These have very many
acquaintauntes, yea, and for the most part will acquaint them selves with every
man, and feign a society, in one place or other. But thiefly they will seek
their acquaintance of such (which they have learned by diligent enquiring
where they resort) as have received some portion of money of their friends, as
young Gentlemen which are sent to London to study the laws, or else some young
Merchant man or other kind of Occupier, whose friends has given them a stock
of money to occupy withal. When they have thus found out such a pray, they will
find the means by their familiarity, as very courteously to bid him to
breakefast at one place or other, where they are best acquainted, and closely
among themselves will appoint one of their Fraternity, which they call a
Fyngerer, an old beaten child, not only in such deceites, but also such a
one as by his age is painted out with gray hears, wrinkled face, crooked back,
and most commonly lame, as it might seem with age, yea and such a one as to
show a simplicity, shall wear a homely cloak and hat scarce worth.vi. d. This
nimble fingred knight (being appointed to this place) comes in as one not
known of these Cheatours, but as unawares shall sit down at the end of the board
where they sit, and call for his penny pot of wine, or a pint of Ale, as the
place serves. Thus sifting as it were alone, mumblyng on a crust, or some such
thing, these other yonckers will find some kind of merry talk with him, some
times questioning where he dwells, and sometimes enquiring what trade he
uses, which commonly he tells them he uses husbandry: and talking thus
merely, at last they ask him, how say thou Father, wylt thou play forthy
breakfast with one of us, that we may have some pastime as we sit? This old
^arle making it strange at the first says: My masters ich am an old man, and
half blind, and can skyl of very few games, yet for that you seem to be such
good Gentelmen, as to profer to play for that of which you had no part, but
only I my self, and therefore of right ich am worthy to pay for it, I shall
with all my heart fulfill your request. And so falls to play, sometime at Cards,
and sometime at dice. Which through his cou^terfait simplicity in the play
sometimes over counts himself, or plays sometimes against his will, so as he
would not, and then counterfaiteth to be angry, and falls to swearing, and so
leesing that, profereth to play for a shillyng or two. The other thereat having
good sport, seming to mock him, falls again to play, and so by their
^ergerdemane, and cou^terfaiting, wins each of them a shilling or twain, and
atlast whispereth the young man in the ear to play with him also, that each one
might have a fling at him. This young man for company falls again to play
also with the said Fyngerer, and wins as the other did which when he had
lost a noble or.vi. s. makes as though he had lost al his money, and falls a
entreating for part thereof again to bring him home, which the other knowing
his mind and intent, stoutely denies and iesteth and scoffeth at him. This
Fingerer seeming then to be in a rage, desires the^ as they are true
gentlemen, to tarry till he fetches more store of money, or else to point some
place where they may meet. They seeming greedy hereof, promises faithfully
and clappeth hands so to meet. They thus ticklyng the young man in the ear,
wills him to make as much money as he can, and they will make as much as they
can, and consent as though they will play booty against him. But in the end
they so use the matter, that both the young man leeseth his part and as it
seems to him, they leesing theirs also, and so makes as though they would
fall together by the ears with this fingerer, which by one wyle or other at
last conueyeth him self away, and they as it were raging like mad bedlams, one
runs one way, an other an other way leaving the loser in deed all alone.
Thus these Cheatours at their accustomed hosteries meet closely together, and
there receive each one his part of this their vile spoil. Of this fraternity
therebe that be called helpers, which commonly haunt tauernes or alehouses, and
comes in as men not acquainted with none in the company, but spying them at
any game, will bid them God speed and God be at their game, and will so place
him self that he will show his fellow by signs and tokens, without speech
commonly, but sometime with far fetched words, what cards he has in his
hand, and how he may play against him. And those between the^ both gets
money out of the others purse. A Ring faller. A Ryng faller is he that gets
fair copper rings, some made like signets, and some after other fashio^s, very
fair gylded, and walks up and down the streets, til he spieth some man of
the country or some other simple body whom he thinks he may deceive, and so
goes a little before him or them, and lets fall one of these ringes, which
when the party that comes after spieth and takes it up, he having an eye
backward, cries half part, the party that takes it up, thinking it to be of
great value, profereth him some money for his part, which he not fully denies
but wills him to come into some alehouse or tavern, and there they will
common upon the matter. Which when they come in, and are set in some solitary
place (as commonly they call for such a place) there he desires the party that
found the ring to show it him. When he sees it, he falls a entreating the
party that found it, and desires him to take money for his part, and tells
him that if ever he may do him any friendship hereafter shall command him, for
he makes as though he were very desirous to have it. The simple man seeing him
so importune upon it, thinks the ring to be of great valor, and so is the
more lother to part from it. At last this ring faller asks him what he will
give him for his part, for says he, seeing you will not let me have the ring,
allow me my part, and take you the ring. The other asks what he counts the
ring to be worth, he answers.v. or.vi. pound. No says he it is not so much
worth Well (says this Ringfaller) let me have it, and I will allow you.xl. s.
for your part. The other party standing in a doubt, and looking on the ryng,
asks if he will give the money out of hand. The other answers, he has not
so much ready money about him, but he will go fetch so much for him, if he will go
with him. The other that found the ring, thinking he means truly, begins
to profer him.xx. s. for his part, sometimes more, or les, which he very
scornfullye refuses at the first, and still entreats that he might have the
ring, which makes the other more fonder of it, and desires him to take the
money for his part, and so profereth him money. This ring faller seeing ye money,
makes it very strange, and first questioneth with him where he dwells, and
asks him what is his name, and tells him that he seems to be an honest
man, and therefore he will do somewhat for friendships sake, hoping to have as
friendly a pleasure at his hand hereafter, and so profereth him for.x. s. more
he should have the ryng. At last with entreatye on both parts, he gives the
Ring faller the money, and so departs, thinkyng he has gotten a very great
Jewel. These kind of deceyuing Uacabondes have other practices with their
rings, as sometimes to come to buy wares of men's Prentesies, and sometimes of
their Masters, and when he has agreed of the price, he says he has not so
much money about him, but pulls of one of these rings of from his fyngers,
and profereth to leave it in pawn, till his Master or his friends has sent
it* impro^^^ing to bring the money, the seller thinking he means truly*
lets him go, and never sees him after, till perhaps at Tyburne or at such
like place. There is another kind of these Ring choppers, which commonly carry
about them a fair gold ring in deed, and these have other counterfeit rings
made so like this gold ring, as ye shall not perceive the contrary, till it be
brought to ye touch stone. This child will come to borow money of the right gold
ring, the party mistrusting the Ryng not to be good, goes to the Goldsmith
with the party that has the ryng, and tries it whether it be good gold, and
also wayeth it to know how much it is worth. The Goldsmith tries it to be good
gold, and also to have his full weight like gold, and warenteth the party which
shall lend the money that the ring is worth so much money according to the
weight, this yoncker coming home with the party which shall lend the ^^ones
and having the gold ring again, puts up the gold ring, and pulls out a
counterfaite ring very like the same, and so delivers it to the party which
lends the money, they thinking it to be the same which they tr^^ed, and so
delivers the money or sometimes (...), and thus vily be deceived.
The.xxv. Orders of Knaves, otherwise called a quarterne of Knaves, confirmed
for ever by Cock Lorell.
1 Troll and Troll by. TRoll and Trol by, is he that sets naught by no man,
nor no man by him. This is he that would ^^^^e (...) a place, and has ^
authority nor thank, and at last is thrust out of the door like a knave. 2
Troll with. Troll with, is he yt no man shall know the servant (...) ye
Master. This knave with his cap on his head like Capon hardy, will sit down
by his Master, or else go cheek by cheek with him in the street. 3 Troll
hazard of trace. Troll hazard of trace is he that goes behind his Master as
far as he may see him. Such knaves commonly use to buy Spicecakes, Apples or
other trifles, and do eat them as they go in the streets like vacabond
Boys. 4 Troll hazard of tritrace. Troll hazard of tritrace, is he that goes
gaping after his Master, looking to and fro till he have lost him. This knave
goes gasyng about like a fool at every toy, and then seeks in every house
like a Maisterles dog, and when his Master needs him, he is to seek. 5 Chafe
Litter. Chafe Litter is he that will pluck up the Fetherbed or Matrice, and
pysse in the bedstraw, and will never rise uncalled. This knave berayeth many
times in the corners of his Masters chamber, or other places inconvenient, and
makes clean his shoes with the couerlet or curtains. 6 Obloquium. Obloquium
is he that will take a tale out of his Masters mouth and tell it him self.
He of right may be called a malapart knave. 7 Rince Pytcher. Rince Pytcher is
he that will drink out his thrift at the ale or wine, and he often times drunk.
This is a licoryce knave that will swill his Masters drink, and dry be his
meat that is kept for him. 8 Ieffrey Gods Fo. Ieffery Gods Fo is he, that will
swear and maintain oaths. This is such a lying knave that none will believe
him, for the more he sweateth, ye les he is to be believed. 9 Nichol Hartles.
Nichol Hartles is he, that when he should do ought for his Master his heart
fails him. This is a Trewand knave that faineth himself sick when he should
work. 10 Simon soon agon. Simon soon agon is he, that when his Master has
any thing to do, he will hide him out of the way. This is a loytring knave that
will hide him in a corner and sleep or else run away. 11 Grene winchard. Green
Winchard is he, that when his hose is broken and hang out at his shoes, he
will put them into his shoes again with a ^^^ck, but he will not amend them.
This is a slothful knave, that had leauer go like a beggar then cleanly. 12
Proctour. Proctour is he, that will tarry long, and bring a lie, when his
Master sends him on his er^and. This is a flibber gibber Knave, that does
feign tales. 13 Commitour of Tidinges. Commitour of Tidings is he, that is
ready to bring his Master Nouels and tidinges, whether they be true or false.
This is a tale bearer knave, that will report words spoken in his Masters
presence. 14* Gyle Hather. Gyle Hather is he, that will stand by his Master
when he is at dinner, and did him beware that he eat no raw meat, because he
would eat it himself. This is a pick thank knave, that would make his
Master believe that the C^^^^ is the (...). 15 Bawd Physic. Bawd Physic,
is he that is a Cock, when his Masters meatelis evil dressed, and he thallen
ging him therefore, he will say he will ate the rawest morsel there of
himself. This is a sausye knave, that will contrary his Master always. 16
Mounch present. Mounch present is he that is a great gentleman, for when his
Master sends him with a present, he will take a taste thereof by the way.
This is a bold knave, that sometime will eat the best and leave the worst for
his Master. 17 Cole Prophet. Cole Prophet is he, that when his Master sends
him on his errand, he wyltel his answer thereof to his Master or he depart from
him. This tittiuell knave commonly makes the worst of the best between his
Master and his friend. 18 Cury fauell. Cory fauell is he, that will lie in his
bed, and cory the bed bordes in which he lies in steed of his horse. This
slothful knave will buskill and scratch when he is called in the morning, for
any have. 19 Dyng thrift. Dyng thrift is he, that will make his Masters horse
eat pies and rybs of beef, and drink ale and wine. Such false knaves often
times, willsell their Masters meat to their own profit. 20 Esen Droppers.
Esen Droppers been they, that stand under men's wales or windows, or in any
other place, to hear the secrets of a man's house. These misdeming knaves will
stand in corners to hear if they be evil spoken of, or wait a shrewd turn.
21 Coplogyke. Choplogyke, is he that when his master rebukes him of his fault
he will give him.xx. words for one, else bid the deulls Pater noster (...)
silence. This proud prating knave will maintain his ^^^^gh ^^nes when he is
rebuked for them. 22 Unthrift. Unthrift, is he that will not put his wearing
clothes to washing, nor black his own shoes, nor amend his his own wearing
clothes. This rechles knave will always be lousy: and say that he has no more
shift of clothes, and slander his Master. 23 Ungracious. Ungracious, is he yt
by his own will, will hear no manner of service, without he be compelled
thereunto by his rulers. This Knave will sit at the alehouse drinking or playing
at dice, or at other games at service time. 24 Nunquam. Nunquam, is he that
when his Master sends him on his errand he will not come again of an hour or
two where he might have done it in half an hour or less. This knave will go
about his own errand or pastime and says he cannot speed at the first. 25
Ingratus. Ingratus, is he that when one does all that he can for him, he will
scant give him a good report for his labor. This knave is so ingrate or
unkind, yt he considreth not his friend from his fo, and will requit evil for
good and being put most in trust, will sonest deceive his master.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by John Awdely dwelling in little Britain street without
Aldersgate, ()


