A New Plot Discovered IN IRELAND.

May, 4. 1642.

BEING, A True Relation of a Joyful Discovery of that Damnable and Hellish
Conspiracy, Acted by the Lord Dempsey a notorious Rebel in that Kingdom, at
a Castle called Castle Patrick, not far from the Neweries, against the whole
Protestant Army, but by the Providence of the Almighty, they were discovered
and prevented.

Wherein is showed the number of the Men, Horses, and Barrels of Gunpowder
that were in the Castle, With the Names of those two that revealed their
inhumane intentions to the Protestant Captains.

Sent over by Captain Alton to his Uncle, now resident in London, May the 6.
1642.

London, Printed for William Reynor. 1642.

A New Plot in Ireland. discovered the 4. of May, 1642
Several changes in these times we may daily perceive, in our latter times
every age acting vicessitude upon the ample Theater of this world, for nosooner
are we seated in the glorious and firm establishment of religion, (whose
splendant and radiant Lusture, has added a more shrill note to the Trumpe of
Fame) but instantly our hearts are f^^feited with the truth, and take an
appetite to the blood thirsty Stratagems of Hell forged Conspiracy.

Of all dismal and periculous acted intentions there is none more obnoxious to
State or Common wealth, then those of conspiracy, whose malicious and
braine-sicke projects are continually, and hourly forging destruction upon the
Anvill of Envy and hate, which is the Mother of all pernicious imaginations,
(examples of conspiracy are manifold,) but to omit those fore-past relations, I
will here fully and truly declare a late divelish and hellish Plot, first
intended, and long concealed by the silent tongue of secrecy, yet the Al-seeing
Eye of Gods divine Justice, has found out their projects, and dissipated their
malicious intentions.

Not far from the Neweries, there is a Castle commonly called by the name of
Castle-patricke, inhabited by the Lord Dempsey, the antientest Rebel now in
Ireland, the said Lord bought all the best Warlike and comeliest horses he
could get at any rate, he also took up Oxen, Sheep, Butter Cheese, and other
Commodities necessary for humane sustenance to be unprised and unbought, and
also diverse quantities of Powder and Ammunition, he also set 100. Smiths at
work ever since four years before the Rebellion, knowing what their evil
and damnable intentions were, he has remained in this Castle for the space of
four years and a half, still waiting for his opportunity, and having
intelligence, that the Protestant Army were fully resolved to assault the said
Castle, (not knowing what Damnable Plots were in agitation against them.) He
made it known to his servants; where he got every thing in Order ready to blow
up the whole Army, but one of those which were in the Castle, being troubled in
mind, and fore seeing what would follow, thought it expedient to impart it to
one of his Companions, who consulting together got out of the Castle, and came
to the Protestant Army, where they made it known to some of the chief
Commanders, who with all speed hastened toward the said Castle; but ere they
came thither the Lord Dempsey was got out, with all his horsemen and Arms,
saving only one old man who was left to give fire to the powder, there he was
to loose his own life voluntarily.

The intention of this prodigious design is not yet openly manifested to the
popular expectations of the said Commons, the vulgar censure is variable and
we may well and justly. imagine that as it proceeds from the devil - so
the intention could, not but be diabolical and nefarious.

O the Engendered malice of man? O the intestine and irremeable Laborinth of
wicked and pernicious intentions, when Superstition and Roman Idolatry, works
in secred mischief and private evil, then does it so infinitely swell with
impious cogitations that it suddenly bursts into extremes and by Gods all
seeing providence, demonstrats it self hateful detestable and infamous.

Conspiracy may fitly be compared to to a Hidra having many Heads and one Body,
seems prodigious and wonderful to the spectators.

It is then full time to cast our eyes toward our selves, so shall we we in
despising our selves, learn how to Praise the God of Iakcob for his manifold
blessings and preservation of this happy Island.

FINIS.

