A perfect DECLARATION Of The Barbarous and Cruel practices committed by
Prince Robert, the Cavalliers, and others in his Majesty's Army, from the time
of the Kings going from his Parliament until this present day.

Also the names and places of all those whose houses have bin plundered, and
lost their lives and estates, compared with the bloody cruelties of the Rebels
in Ireland, whose examples they follow and make use of them as their Agents to
act their cruelties in England,

Together with the new Oaths, and blasphemous Speeches they do daily invent,
and how Prince Roberts Captains offer sums of money to those that can study
new Execrations against the Roundheads.

Also a Justification of Prince Robert his cruelties, and that his Vindication
lately printed, only forged and invented by some of his followers.

Collected by R. Andrews Chyrurgion, who is now a prisoner amongst the
Cavalliers, and was taken at Kynton battle.

Printed at London for Fr. Coule. 1642.

A perfect Declaration of the barbarous and cruel practices committed by
prince Robert, the Cavalliers, and others in his Majesty's Army, etc.
NOt to parallel the present distractions of England with the Wars of Germany,
which were no dispa(...)y, I shall only apply my self to set forth the truth
of such carnages that have happened since the beginning of these present wars
by reason of the cruelty and insolency of the Cavalliers that are in his
Majesty's Army, and because I have not to multiply discourse or to spend time
in relating those things which are not so pertinent to my present purpose. I
will not stand to particularize the fair promises and pretenses wherewith
those that have bin chiefly entrusted by his Majesty have deluded and deceived
the people nor the trai(...)us practices of those that have pretended good to
the King and Country, as that of Colonel Goring betraying the Town of
Portsmouth, under the specious vizard of some special service to be done for
the King and Parliament; but to give a true relation of those bloody and cruel
practices that have bin committed by the Cavalliers, whose wicked enterprises
have not only purchased them hatred and disdain in those places where they
have bin* but render them odious to the whole world.

I shall begin with that barbarous and inhumane act committed by the Cavalliers
at Leicester, where after they had gotten entrance into the Town, and falling
on plundering and pillaging thereof and when there was no man opposed them they
seemed as fierce as Lions, and swore damme me and sink me if we do not kill
all the Puritans and Roundheads in the town. There was a good Religious
honest woman named Jane White, that hearing them so notoriously to swear and
blaspheame began to reprove them for it, offering no manner of resistance unto
them: whereupon one of this wicked rabble shot her with a brace of bullets
thorough the back and belly, upon which she immediately dyed; she being great
with child^ and within three weeks of the time of her delivery, and burnt many
honest men's houses which did refuse to make division, and to separate the King
and the Parliament, and plundered sir Edward Roodes his house in Yorkshire, and
afterward burnt it down to the ground, and took away all his Goods, killed
one of his Servants, and violently used others, and the like insolences have
they committed by pillaging, burning and spoiling in every Country where they
come, setting on fire whole fields of Corn immediately before Harvest: as at
Broad-way, when sir William Walter was justly apprehended there by one Master
Steevens that was chief Constable: When the Cavalliers came from Oxford they
rescued away the said sir William Walter* and burnt the Corne-fields of the
said Master Steevens, and attempted to fire his Houses and would most cruelly
have put him to death if they could have come at him; and since they have taken
the said Master Steevens prisoner, where he is d^^^yned with hard and cruel
usage: And in Leichestershire and Staffordshire they spoiled his Majesty's
good subjects, and many were murdered and barbarously used, ravishing of
women, and bloudily killing others, not sparing those that were great with
child, nor pitying poor little infants: nay such was their inhumanity that at
the late Battle fought near Kynton, when they saw they were not able to
revenge their malice upon the Parliaments Army: they left fighting with
Soldiers and fled about the Country, killing of men women and children that
were altogether unable to defend themselves, killing any living creature that
they met with; for they slew the very Dogs and all, and as if the most cruel
and merciless of this Nation could not invent cruelties answerable to their
bloody minds: they do entertain into their Army a great number of the Irish
Rebels, whereof are great store of Irish women, which pillage and rob in the
Countries where they come worse than the Soldiers, and are more cruel and
merciless than they: and at the Battle at Kynton did not only get the best
pillage of the dead Corpse at the time when the battle was a fighting; but
those that they found wounded or maimed that they were not able to get off from
the place (although otherwise might have recovered* they most cruelly cut their
throats with great Knives which they carry for that purpose, or else knocked
out their brains with their Pole-axes.

When the Cavalliers were at Shrewsbury they plundered most of the honest men's
houses both in that Town and Country adjacent, and took their Cattle, and
did drive them to their quarters, and what they could not eat they drove to
some other places and there sold them, and when they had made a prey of all
that they could meet with about Shrewsbury, they played the like prankes at
Bridg-north, and other places thereabouts, and at their going away out of that
Country, besides what hurt they did at Kittermaster and Bewdly, which bought
their freedom at a very dear rate; they carried away with them all the
Butter, Cheese, Bacon and other provisions they could find, which has bred a
great scarcity thereof.

From thence they went to a Town called Burmegam in Warwickshire, where without
any respect of persons they fell to plunder the whole Town, and took all the
money, plate, and other things that were of any value that they could find,
and not being content therewith* they came to diverse persons of ability (which
by reason of their forwardness to give them entertainment* and showing them
friendship^ expected other usage at their hands) and held their pistols charged
against their breasts, with many wicked imprications, that if they confessed
not where the rest of their money was, they would shoot them thorough; by which
means they got the whole wealth of that Town, and spoiled their (...) of
household-(...) and other things which they were not able to carry away with
them, and so left in a (...)ble condition: and yet their wicked desires to do
mischief not being satisfied* they made an attempt to fire the whole Town; but
by reason that they were suddanely put to fight through fear of the
Parliaments Forces which were marching after them, they went away unsatisfied
in that particular.

In York when they had continued long in that City, and exceedingly
impoverished the inhabitants taking all the provision that was in the City, and
drinking out both beer and wine without giving any satisfaction for the same,
at last they fell to plundering and pillaging the City, and plundered a great
part thereof, and imprisoned those that withstood them, threatening to kill
diverse of the ^est Ministers. When they came to Banbury, although his Majesty
himself gave his hand and Seal to the Major that no injury nor violence
should be offered to that Town to any of his Subjects, yet such was the
barbarous carriage of the Cavalliers at that Town, that without charity or
respect of the Kings honor, having engaged his word to the contrary, they
plunered the whole Town, taking from thence not only money, plate, jewels, and
other things of good value which they found in their houses, but took their
Catell, horse, sheep, etc. and carried them away, and also took away the
cloth and other commodities that were in Trades-mens shops, to the ruin and
destruction of the Inhabitants, saying that the King does not know the
condition and state of War; and likewse have plundered the Lord Say his house
there, leaving nothing but the walls, drove away his Cattle, destroyed his
Dear, and such as they could not kill, they plucked down the pales to let
them out: At Abington it was not sufficient to plunder the Town, after they
had gotten a great sum of contribution money, and to leave the Inhabitants in
as naked a condition as they did those at Banbury, but there being an honest
man of good repute, William Wright in the said Town, that before the
Cavalliers came thither, gave counsel and advice to the rest of the
Inhabitants to stand up on their guard, and oppose them, and thereby to keep
the said Town from violence and oppression: And that the Ammunition that was
in that Town might be secured out of their hands, that so it might not be
employed against the Parliament. By the special command of Prince Robert this
person was condemned by martial Law, and banged up at his own door: such is
the bloody mind of Prince Robert, that it would make any Christian man's heart
to ache, to think of it, for as he was begot in the heat of a bloody war, so he
lives and hopes to thrive by his bloody practices: But the nearer their
approach is toward London, the more sad demonstrations we shall find
concerning this subject. Then they began to burn houses, the pillaging of
goods will not suffice, nor the like enormities which before is rela(...)e, but
the violating of all laws both humane and divine.

Two Gentlemen of good repute being traveling from London into the Country,
were taken in their way at Hounsloe at the sign of the Kathern-wheel by the
Cavalliers, who had been forraging up and down the Country to see what booty
and pillage they could get, who violently broke into the chamber where they
were, and when they had taken them prisoners they hasted into the stable and
seized on their horses and forced these Gentlemen to ride behind two of them
to Eggham, and there they found Prince Robert, who had made a Vow, never to
undress nor shift himself till he had brought King Charles to white hall; and
being examined by him it was laid to one of these Gentle-mens charge that his
wife was a Roundhead, and if they had her there present, they did swear they
would hang her, and it was alleged against the other that he was a Preacher
in a tub, but nothing being proved they were carried to the Court of Guard, and
a Captain that was a French man had the charge over them, who set them in such
a smoky chimney, that they were almost quite choked, yet they durst not stir
for a strong guard was set over them which threatened, and swore God damme them,
they would pistol them.

And that night Prince Robert being to march to Hounsloe, these Gentlemen
(rather out of their cruelty, or to make them merry then otherwise) were made
their conducts, and following them with pistols, they swore that if they led
them but a yard out of the way they immediately would shoos them. And they were
not suffered to eat or drink one drop, though they offered to pay for it, and
were ready to starve for cold and hunger, but were pursued with reproachful
words, as lead on lead on, you Parliament dogs, we will hang you in chains, as
we did your friend ^lague and such other Round-headed rascals we will pistol
you, etc. and were driven on with many other prisoners, being coupled with
cords two and two together,

The 28. day of this month was apprehended a Gentleman clothed in very good
habit, and hanged in a with upon a Tree, for saying he was for the King and
Parliament, and for speaking in honor of the Parliament; and no man suffered
to cut him down or cover his face until he had been made a public
spectacle to the whole Army. At a town called Istle-worth the Cavalliers took
an other honest Religious man called good man Bray, who because he said he was
for the King and Parliament, they most inhumanly d^d cart of his Ears and gave
him besides thirty wounds in his body, and not being content with this
Butchery they threw him after wards on the Dunghill; with this most unchristian
scoff, Let the dogs lick him whole. They took another in the same town who
flying from their fury got into a house, and having barred fast the gate, his
wife coming he was enforced to open it for her; and the Cavalliers rushing
violently in after her fastened a coard upon his feet and dragged him about the
streets, and being weary of their own cruelty: they said why should we weary
our selves any longer with this Parliament dog; and so discharged three
pistolls at him, and so eased him of his torments, and his life together.

When the Cavalliers came to Brainford about five thousand of them, with many
pieces of Ord^ance fell upon Collonell Hollis his Regiment, being all that were
quartred at that town, who fought very courageously before they would yield to
their merciless cruelty, insomuch that the Cavalliers said that they were
either Saints or D^vills: for if they could have done execution upon any thing
(...)able the great vollies of shot they bestowed upon they had quickly
killed every man of them in the place, but after many hours fight having taken
many of them prisoners they put them in a pound and pinnioned them together
being stripped to their shirts and without stockings or shoes and the next day
drove them like sheep* whipping them like dogs to Hounsloe over furrs and
bushes, which was more torment than of death it self. And some of Collonell
Hollis his Soldiers fl(...) into the Thames for safety, where the Cavalliers
shot at them till they were drowned, amongst which was one Captain Lacy a
stout and Valliant man, they took five of the Earl of Essex his Soldiers
prisoners, and tied their hands and forced them into the River, and a Trooper
rod into the water after them and forced them into the depth, where they were
drowned.

And when the fight began at Brainford they placed ten of the Earl of Essex his
Soldiers whom they had formerly taken prisoners at Kynton pinioned in the
front of their men at a breast-worke to receive the bullets that came from
Collonell Hollis his Regiment: but such was the providence of God, that none of
them were hurt though shot through the clothes in many places; when they had
possessed themselves of the town, first they drank and wasted the Beer and
wine in the several Innes and other places, and that which they could not
drink they let it out upon the ground.

They likewise pistolled to death one Francis who lived at Vxbridge, because he
said he was for the King and Parliament, just as he came out of his Inn riding
home to his wife and children.

But one of the most inhumane actions that they did at Brainford was the
pillaging of one Mr. Pierce a Brewer, who not only took away all his beer and
his chief brewer, but ten or twelve stout horses, and not being contented
therewith they came into his house, and drove his wife forth thereof into the
high way, she being in her smock with her child in her arms, though she had
lain in but a week, who suddenly dyed after it; and had like to have fired his
house; such was their cruelty and inhumane actions at this poor Town.

Also his next neighbor one Master Smith a servant to the King, being one of
his guard, and well known to some of them, had much a do to preserve his
house from pillaging, his life and his wives from pistolling, and his house
from firing; for they shot diverse times at it, but yet mist it, thanks be given
to God; And at their flying away from thence they took from the inhabitants
their money, Linen, woollen, bedding, wearing apparel, horses, cowes, swine,
henns, etc. and all manner of victuals* also Pewter, brass; Iron-pots and
kettells, and all manner of grocery, chanlery, and appothecary ware, and many
of the feather beds which they could not bear away, they cut the tikes into
pieces and scattered the feathers in the fields and streets. And to be short,
they made spoil and hovocke of all things that were worth any thing in the
town: sparing neither rich not poor, but either spoiled or carried with them,
all things from the costliest jewels, apparel and hangings of many Gentlemen
of great quallity, even to the poor alms-women, and the poor beggars, that
begs at the towns end. And when they had used the town in this manner, they
defaced the houses and set one of fire, of purpose to have burnt down the said
town, though afterward it was happily quenched by an inhabitant.

Nay their insolency and cruelty appeared yet greater for they set drawn
swords and Pistolls cockt to men and women's breasts; threatening them with
death, if they brought not out all their money, and that they would cut of
their noses; and pluck out their eyes, calling them Parliament dogs,
Round-headed Rogues, beatting, laming, and wounding them, tying others with
ropes and (...) and being stripped to the shirts, were carried away prisoners;
and as one was leading toward O^tland being very thrifty, he stooped to take a
little water in his hat to drink, they most cruelly beat him and bruised him,
for offering to do it. When they came to Kingston, they used the like violence
to that town, as they did to Brainford, except to some few that were of the
Malignant party, and therein they showed more humanity at this town^, then I
have heard of before or since, for at other places they made no destinction of
any. All is fish that comes to net to them; for neither Carrier nor Trava^ler,
man nor horse shall escape them; for they have robbed diverse men, especially two
while I was an eyewitness; namely one Mr. Sparks a Draper, and one Mr.
Thomas a Bookseller of Bristoll, they took from the first all his money and
his sword, from the other his watch, his money, and his sword, being threatened
with their lives, and looked every hour when they would kill them, but they
esaped with their lives, they search all men under pretense for conveying
lette^s bu^ instead of letters, they take away their money and rings.

Yet such is the heathenish barbarousnesse of this accursed generation, that I
cannot without some prejudice to my precedent discourse, and likewise injury to
the indifferent Reader conclude this Tragical story without speaking a word
and no more concerning these unhumane creatures* whose practice is far worse
then the heathenish Turks or Caniballs, for they are not contented with the
exercise of all the bloody cruelty that all the malice in the world if it were
contracted within the breasts of these furies of hell, could devise in
murdering and most cruelly handling men women, little Infants, etc. but that
the generation to come, might have every way cause to curse them, they
endeavor to usher into this Kingdom the miserable calamity of famine, for
they now begin daily to burn houses, fire Towns and Villages, destroy the
Corn, both in the field and in the barn, cut down and destroy the woods, and
plants which the earth is bringing forth, drive away all manner of Cattle both
of Horse, Oxen, Sheep, and other Cattle making no distinction of fat or lean
barren, or those that are great with young but drive them all away that they
light on, both out of Bucking-shire Bark-shire and a great part of
Oxfordshire, and other places, carrying them into such Towns where they are
quartered, and these that they cannot eat, they kill and destroy, and cast
into the dirt or to the dogs.

These are those cursed Ismaell(...) which do not only dishonor and abuse God
his Anointed by their oaths and blasphemies and would if it were possible pull
God out of heaven, for they make it a common saying amongst them* We will
drink and be drunk, whore, and be damned, and will not be beholding to God to
save us* And that they had rather be in hell with their Comrades, then in
heaven with the Roundheads: And they have such new invented oaths*
imprications, and healths, ^o full of wickedness and blasphemy, that the like
were never heard of before amongst other Turks or Pagans, for it is usual
amongst them to say: The Devil that made us damme us, and damme me, and ram
me into the mouth of a Canon, and shoot me nine miles into hell, etc. They
make proclamations amongst themselves that if any Gentleman or soldier that
can invent new oaths to damme and destroy Py(...) and his Adherents, shall have
100. l. for so doing. They drink a health to King Charles in whom they live,
move, and have our being. And although their being is in him that is but a
mortal man, they at another time will wish him without being* in whom they say
their being consists, for when they were upon their hot march toward London, in
the expectation of the fruition of plentiful and rich treasure, where they
placed their summum bonum: His Majesty sleeping something long one morning,
which hindered them of an hours march, they wished that he might sleep a
whole fortnight together, that they might the more eagerly pursue their bloody
intentions, and drunk healths to his confusion, and the confusion of our
Savior Christ himself, and his Gospel, if his Majesty concluded of a Peace
without their consent or privity.

They do boast that the King cannot stir a quarter of a mile without their
knowledge, but they do watch him as a cat does watch a mouse, they have a
perpetual eye over him and his actions, and so powerful they are with his
Majesty, that if his Majesty resolve to have a thought of Peace and to come
to his Parliament, they presently have their agents about his Majesty, that
they can presently alter and change his mind like a weathercock.

They likewise drunk the destruction and confusion of these worthy Gentlemen,
who stand up for the King and Country; calling them Traitors, vowing to be
avenged especially of them, and of the City of London, the County of Essex, and
also of Kent as namely.

The Lord Kimbolton now Earl of Manchester. Sir, Arthur Hasting. Master
Denzell Hollis. Master John Pym. Master Stroud. Master John Hampden. Sir John
Hotham. The Earl of Essex. The Earl of Warwick. Isaac Penington Lord Major of
London. Sergeant Major General Skippon. Colonel John Ven. Sheriff Fouke.
Colonel Manwayring.
And the whole burden of their songs at the drinking of their healths, is And
for Roundheads we will have none,
But hang them all up one by one.


Therefore what outrages and cruelties will not these Sons of Belial commit
against the Creature, seeing all that they can invent will not satisfy their
malice, but as much as in them lies, do abuse the Creator and the sacred
person of our Savior Christ himself.

Here would I feign make an end, for as the consideration of these inhumanities
and barbarous cruelties cannot but pirce the hardest heart that has any love
or regard to his native country, for it makes my pen weary in writing these sad
and pensive lines, to think that such horrid wicked practices should be acted
in this land, and by our own nation, which was first hatched in hell, and by
the working of the divill; were afterward practiced in Ireland amongst the
Rebels, and from thence by the example of those Rebels together with their
aid and assistance is now daily acted in England.

FINIS.

