THE Doctrine and Directions But more especially The Practice and Behavior of a
Man in the act of the NEW BIRTH.

A TREATISE By way of APPENDIX to the former.

By ISAAC AMBROSE, Minister of Christ at Preston in Amounderness in Lancashire.

LONDON: Printed by J. F. for Nathanael Webb and William Grantham, at the
Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard.

MDCL.

AN APPENDIX, Containing both the Doctrine and Directions, but more especially
the Practice and Behavior of a man in the act of The Second Birth.
The occasion of this TREATISE.
HItherto I have given the Doctrine and Application of the Soul-saving Second
Birth; but some there are whose hearts are so steely, that all this cannot work
upon them: If any such desire yet any more (and desire they must, or there is
no remedy for them) I have, for their help in the practice, brought a
Practitioner before them. It was Cesars great praise, that he bade his Soldiers
still, Come; and if men had but many Cesars or leaders in these practical
points, I suppose there would be more followers. A plain Doctrine may win some,
and a particular Direction may win more, but a good Example wins most.
Howsoever then, concerning the New Birth, I have delivered the Doctrine in the
Sermons, and Directions in the Appendix; yet one thing is wanting, which may
help more then either, to wit, the Practice of some Saint in this one necessary
thing: And what Saint? what man that has writ more on this subject, then T. H?
it was said of blessed Mr. Mr. Boltons funeral Sermon by Mr. Estwick.
Bolton, That for himself, he could profess to his comfort on his Deaths-bed,
That he never taught any godly point, but he first wrought it on his own heart;
the same, do I more then probably think, was the practice of this man. Now
therefore I thought fit, not only to contract his Books in this Appendix
(which some without his privity have unskilfully put out) but also, and that
more especially, to set before you (whosoever you are) those prime, powerful,
pathetical expressions of his Soul-pangs in the New Birth, as matter for your
imitation: These expressions indeed are they I most especially aim at, which if
you observe, are always delivered in the first person [I] and I verily believe
they were not fained, but feeling from his own heart and soul. What needs more?
if either Doctrine in the first part, or Direction in the second part, or
Practice in the third part of the Book (which consists most of Practice) can
work on your souls, I hope some of these, or all of these, will help you on in
the way from Corruption to Christianity, and from the state of Nature into the
Kingdom of Grace.

CHAP. I. The Souls Preparation.
BEfore the Soul can share in Christ's Merits (to speak in the Authors style or
language, without any alteration) two things are required:

1. A preparation to receive and entertain Christ. 2. An implantation of the
Soul into Christ.
That there must be a Preparation, is the first ground we lay; and herein
observe we The Matter Manner Means
of this Preparation.

1. For Matter: The soul of a sinner must be prepared for Christ, before he can
entertain him. When Kings go to any place, they send (to make readiness) their
Harbengers before them; if Christ (the King of Saints) come into a Soul, there
must be a Preparation before he enter; and good Reason, he is not a mere man,
an ordinary person, but a King, a King of Glory. David in this case could call
upon his Soul (so we may expound his Gates and Doors) Lift up your heads, O ye
Gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting Doors, and the King of Glory shall
Psalm. 24. 7.
come in; as who should say, Be enlarged Love, Joy, Hope; set open, give way,
for the Lord is coming: But who is the Lord? it is the Lord of Hosts, the Lord
strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in Battle: And with that he knocks again,
Lift up your heads, O ye Gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting Doors, and
the King of Glory shall come in; as if he should say, What, shall the Lord
knock? shall the King of Glory stand? open suddenly, and make all preparation.

2. The Manner of this Preparation consists in these three passages: First, the
Soul breaks that League which formerly it has had with Corruptions, and
reserves it self for Christ: And secondly, the Soul is most willing to give way
to Christ Jesus, and to let him overthrow whatsoever shall oppose him: Thirdly,
the Soul is content that God should rule all, not only the eye, or hand, or
tongue, or heart, but the whole man; it opens all the Gates, and desires Christ
to come, and take all the Keys of the house upon him.

3. The Means of this Preparation is the powerful Ministry, which God has
appointed for this work; and it is discovered in three particulars: First, in a
particular Application of the Truth to the Souls of men with courage: Secondly,
in a confirmation of the Truth by soundness of Argument, and plain evidence of
Scriptures: Thirdly, in a kind of Spiritual heat in the heart and affections
of the Minister, answerable to that which he communicates to the people. And
this powerful Ministry works on the soul, 1. By discovering what is in a man's
heart, so that the soul sees that it never saw before, and so is driven to a
stand. 2. By driving the soul into an awe of sin, so that it dares not now
meddle with sin, as formerly it has done.

If any soul that has enjoyed these Means any while, is not yet fitted and
prepared, it is a fearful suspicion, that God will Use.
never confer any good to that soul: Go home then (if there be any such) and
reason with your own souls, and plead with your own hearts, saying, Lord, why
not yet am I humbled and prepared? will Exhortations never prevail with me?
will Terrors and Reproofs never break my heart into pieces? I have heard
Sermons that would have shaken the very stones I trod on, that would have moved
the very seat I sat on; the very fire of Hell has flashed in my face; I have
seen even the plagues of Hell, and if any thing can do me any good, why not
then those. Exhortations, Instructions, Admonitions and Reproofs that I have
often had? I have had as powerful means as may be, which never yet did me good.
The Lord be merciful to such a poor soul; the Lord turn the heart of such a
poor sinner, that he may lay hold of mercy in due time.

CHAP. II.
SECT. 1. The general Circumstances of Preparation on Gods part.
BUt for a further distribution, which shall be our method: In this Preparation
two things are considerable; The General circumstances. Substantial parts.


The general circumstances are twofold, some on Gods part. Man's part.


On Gods part they are these, 1. The offer of Christ and Grace. 2. The
condition of this offer. 3. The easiness of this condition.


On Man's part, two things are considerable: 1. That corruption does oppose this
Grace. 2. That God will remove this corruption.


The first general circumstance of the souls Preparation, is on Gods part;
wherein is The offer of Christ Jesus, The condition of this offer, and The
easiness of this condition; we may have all in this one Comparison: As with a
Malefactor convicted of High Treason, for plotting some wicked practice against
his Prince, if (after the discovery of all passages) the King make a
Proclamation, That upon the surceasing of his Enterprises, he shall be
pardoned; nay, if the King shall continue to send Message after Message,
secretly to tell him, that would he yet lay down his arms and take a pardon, he
shall freely be remitted, and graciously accepted into favor again: if this
Traitor now should rather fling away his Pardon then his Weapons, then should
the King raise an Army and overcome him, and take him, and execute him without
any pity or mercy, I appeal to your own Consciences, is he not justly rewarded?
What will the world say? he had a fair offer of Pardon, and the King sent
Messenger after Messenger unto him; seeing therefore he refused and neglected
such offers, it is pity but condemnation should befall him: thus would all say.
Why, this is the condition of every poor soul under heaven, we are all Rebels
and Traitors; by our Oaths and Blasphemies, we set our mouth against heaven;
and yet after all our pride and stubbornness, and looseness and profaneness,
and contempt of Gods Word and Ordinances, the Lord is pleased to proclaim Mercy
still to every one that will receive it: All you that have dishonored my Name,
All you that have profaned my Sabbaths, and contemned my Ordinances, All you
cursed wretches, Come; Come who will, and take Pardon; therein is the Offer:
only let them lay aside all their weapons; therein is the Condition: and then
have Christ for the taking; therein is the Easiness of the condition.

Blessed God (may every Soul say) if I will not do this for Christ, I will do
nothing; had the Lord required a great matter of me to have attained salvation;
had he required Thousands of Rams, and Ten thousand Rivers of Oil; had he
required the firstborn of my body for the sins of my soul; had he required me
to have kneeled and prayed until mine eyes had failed, until my hands had been
wearied, until my tongue had been hoarse, and until my heart had fainted, one
drop of mercy at the last gasp would have quit all this cost: But what goodness
is this that the Lord should require nothing of me, but to lay down my weapons,
and to receive Christ offered? Lo the Lord this day has sent from heaven, and
offered Salvation unto you Sons of men; the Lord Jesus is become a suitor to
you, and I am Christ's spokesman, to speak a good word for him: O that we may
have our errand from you! O that there were such an heart in my people (says
God) to fear Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
me, and keep my Commandments always! Shall the Lord and his Messengers thus
woo and entreat? and will any yet stand out against God, and say, I will none
of Christ, I will try it out to the last? O then, if the great God of Heaven
and Earth shall come with Ten thousand thousand of Judgments, and execute them
upon that man; if he shall bring a whole Legion of Devils, and say, Take him,
Devils, and torment him, Devils, in Hell for ever; because he would not have
mercy when it was offered, he shall not have mercy; because he would not have
salvation when it was tendered, let him be condemned: If God should thus deal
with that man, the Lord should be just in so doing, and he justly miserable.

SECT. 2. The general Circumstances of Preparation on Man's part.
THe second general circumstance of the souls Preparation, is on Man's part; and
herein is observable,

1. That Corruption opposes Grace. 2. That God will remove this Corruption.
First, The first is clear, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man receives not the
things of the Spirit of God, neither can he know them; and 1 Cor. 2. 14.
Acts 7. 51. Ye stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye Acts 7.
51.
do always resist the Holy Ghost, as your fathers did, so do ye: Give us a man
in the state of Nature, and though all the Mininisters under heaven should
preach mercy unto him; though all the Angels in heaven should exhort and
entreat him; though all glory and happiness were laid before him, and he were
wished only to believe and take it, and it should be his for ever; yet in his
natural condition he could have no power to receive so blessed an offer:
howsoever, this hinders not but he is to wait upon God in the means. And then
--

Secondly, God may remove this Corruption, which he himself cannot do: Herein
observe we The Author Time
of this Grace.

First, The Author is God: I will take away their stony hearts (says God) and
give them an heart of flesh; I will remove that Ezekiel. 11. 19.
sturdy heart which is in them, and will give them a frameable, teachable
heart, which shall ply, and yield to whatsoever I shall teach them: The taking
away of the indisposition of the soul to any duty, and the fitting, framing and
disposing of a soul to perform any Spiritual service, is the alone work of God.

Quiet then thy soul, and content thy heart; thou may say, 1 Use of Comfort.
I have an hard heart within, and it will receive no good from without, the
Word prevails not, the Sacraments have no power over me, all the means, and
cost, and charges that God has bestowed upon me is lost, and my heart is not
yet humbled, my corruptions are not yet weakened: But in this be thou comforted,
though means cannot do it, which God uses at his pleasure, yet the Lord can do
it, there is nothing difficult to him that has hardness it self at command.

Be then Exhorted, you that have stony hearts, to have recourse 2 Use of
Exhortation.
unto this great God of heaven: Should a Physician set up a Bill, That he would
cure all that were troubled with the Stone in the Reins, and that we should
hear of many healed by him, this would stir up all to repair to him, that
labored of this Disease: Why, the Lord this day has set up a Bill, That he
will cure all stony hearts that will but come to him, and all the children of
God have found to the proof hereof, to the comfort of their souls: You wives
therefore, that have husbands with stony hearts, and you parents, that have
children with stony hearts, tell them, You have heard this day of a Physician
that will cure them, and exhort them to repair unto him.

Secondly, the Time of this Grace is either in regard of the Means. Men.


1. In regard of the Means; and that is, when the Sons of men have the Gospel
shining in their faces; if ever good work upon their hearts, it will be then.

This should teach us how thankful we ought to be unto the 1 Use of Instruction.
Lord, that enjoy these liberties in the Land of the living; That a man was
born in such a time, in the last Age of the World, in such a place, in this
Kingdom, wherein the way of life and salvation is so fully, so plainly, and so
powerfully made known, that the Sun of the Gospel shines full in his face, and
is not yet set: O how thankful should he be!

And for those that neglect the Means of their Salvation, 2 Use of Reproof.
how should we pity them? Me thinks I see a poor creature, that slighted mercy
and Salvation when it was offered him; me thinks I see that soul lying upon his
deaths-bed, light is departing from his eyes, and his soul is departing from
his body; O the name of a Minister, of a Church, they are as Bills of
Indictments against coming the Soul of this man; me thinks I hear such a man
say at his last gasp, The day is gone, the gate is shut, and now it is too late
to enter: And thus the soul departs from his body, the body to the grave, and
the soul to hell; O what bitter lamentations will that soul make in hell, O the
golden time that I have seen, and not regarded! O the gracious opportunities of
Salvation that my eyes have beheld, and yet I neglected! O the mercy, and
grace, and goodness of God, that have been offered unto me! All these I have
contemned, and trampled under my feet, and therefore now must I be tormented
with the Devil and his Angels, from everlasting to everlasting. Now the Lord
give us hearts to take notice of these things. If I were now breathing out my
last breath, I would breathe out this Legacy to all surviving Christians, This
is the accepted time, this is the day of Salvation. Do you hear? This day is
Grace offered, and if any here would entertain it, O what comfort might he
have: I was never humbled before (might he say) but this day I was humbled; I
could never before receive mercy, but this day have I received it; O this was a
good day to me, now blessed am I for ever.

2. In regard of men on whom God works; that is to say, on some in their tender
age, on some in their ripe age, on some in their old age: But however the Lord
does at several times convert several of his servants, yet most, and most
usually before their old age; and that some Interpreters wittily observe out of
the Parable of the Vineyard, Mat. 20. 3, 4, 5. The master of the vineyard
(says the Text) went out at the third, sixth and Mat. 20. 3, 4, 5
ninth hour, and saw some standing idle, and he sent them into his vineyard: He
went then (say Interpreters) on purpose to see and hire, and to send in
laborers to work in his Vineyard, but he went out at the eleventh hour, not to
hire any, he expected not then to have seen any idle; he went out upon some
other occasion, and therefore seeing them standing, he wondered at it, saying,
Why stand ye here all the day idle? as if he should say, No man will hire you
now, it is but an hour to night, and therefore rather a time to leave working,
then to begin to work.

O let this provoke us, that while the flower is in prime, we would use all
means for our good; let us now in the heat and Use of Exhortation.
summer of our days, improve our selves in good works, that so when the harvest
comes, we may be gathered into Gods Barn: O would we be exhorted to take the
best time and opportunity of salvation, then might we receive the fruits of our
labors, the salvation of our souls.

CHAP. III. The substantial parts of Preparation on Gods part; or his
dispensations of his work on the Soul.
HItherto of the general Circumstances of the souls preparing for Christ. Now
the Substantial parts of this Preparation are generally two: The Dispensation
of Gods work on the soul. Disposition of the soul by Gods work.


The Dispensation of Gods work discovers it self in drawing the soul From sin.
To himself.


But because these two are made up by one action and motion, we shall therefore
handle them together; and the sum is this, That God by an holy kind of
violence (which is called Drawing, John 6. 44.
Joh. 6. 44.) does pluck the soul from those sins that harbor in it unto
himself: wherein we may consider two things; 1. What the nature of this drawing
is. 2. The means whereby God draws.


First, for the nature of this drawing, it is of a double kind: 1. There is a
Moral drawing, when by Reasons propounded, and good things offered to the
Understanding and Will, a man comes thereby to have his mind illightened, and
his will moved to embrace things offered: Thus was it with Paul, when he was
constrained by Lydia to abide in her house, Acts 16. 15. 2. There is Acts 16.
15.
a Physical drawing, when the Lord is pleased to put a new power into the soul
of a sinner, and withal to carry the will to the object propounded, that it may
embrace it; when the Lord not only offers good things to the soul, but enables
the soul to lay hold upon the things offered: And thus the Lord draws a sinner
from sin unto himself.

Secondly, for the means whereby he draws, they are these four:

First, the Lord lets in a light into the soul of a poor sinner, 1 Means.
and discovers unto him that he is in a wrong way: This the soul marvels at,
because usually it comes on a sudden, the sinner perceiving nothing less, Isa.
66. 1. Isa. 66. 1.


Secondly, though a man would defeat the power of this light, yet God still
follows it with forcible Arguments, and draws 2 Means.
with the cord of his Mercy; I taught Ephraim to go (says God) taking them by
the arms; I drew them by the cords of love, and Hosea 11. 4.
with the bonds of a man. This mercy consists in these bonds, or this love is
made up of four cords:

1. The Lord reveals himself to be ready to receive, and willing and easy to
entertain poor sinners when they come unto him: Let the wicked (says the
Prophet) forsake his way, and Isa. 55. 7.
the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and be
will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon; the
word in the Original is, He will multiply pardons: Have thou multiplied
rebellions? the Lord will also multiply pardons: The bowels of compassion are
still open, and the arms of mercy are still spread abroad; he pardoned
Manasses, and Paul, and Peter, and so will he thee, his pardons are multiplied,
there is yet mercy for thee also, and for a thousand thousand more.

2. The Lord is not only ready to forgive when men come to to him, but that
they may come, he also calls and commands them: O but may I (says a poor
sinner) shall I, dare I go unto the Lord God for mercy? may I be so bold to
press in for favor at the hands of the Lord? I have been a grievous sinner, and
have heaped abomination upon abomination, I am afraid therefore to approach
near unto the Lords presence. Is it so? hear what the Lord says, Come unto me,
ye rebellious people, and I will heal Ier. 3. 22.
your rebellions. You that never prayed, never came to hear, all Rebels, come
unto me: and then the people answer, Behold, we come unto thee, for thou art
our God. This is great encouragement to a poor sinner, he begins now to wonder,
and say, Lord, shall all my sins be pardoned? shall all my oaths and
abominations be forgiven? I that slighted so many mercies, and committed so
many follies, shall I be entertained? Yes (says the Lord) come unto me, and
thou shall be forgiven; come, I command you come.

3. The Lord does not only command a poor sinner to come in, but when he is
nice in this case, saying, There is mercy with God, but not for me; the Lord
then follows him still, and sends another cord after him, that if it be
possible he may win him, and woo him to receive mercy of him: If command
therefore prevail not, he entreats and beseeches him to come and receive mercy,
and this (me thinks) should move the hardest heart under heaven. We (says the
Apostle) are ambassadors for Christ, as 2 Cor. 5. 20.
though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be reconciled
unto God: rather then you should go away from Christ, even Mercy it self will
come and kneel down before you, and beseech you, and entreat you, for the Lord
Jesus sake to pity your poor souls, and to receive pardon for your sins: A
sinner is not able to comprehend this, but he begins to be at a stand, and at
amazement, What, that the Lord should beseech him! O that thou would receive
pardon for thy sins, and be blessed for ever! Good Lord (says the Soul) is
this possible, that the great King of Heaven should come and beseech such a
Traitor, such a Rebel as I am, to take pardon? That a King on Earth should
proclaim a pardon to some notorious Traitor, this were much; but that the King
of Heaven should lay down his Crown, and come creeping to me, and beseech me
(on his knee as it were) to take mercy; this is a thing beyond all expectation:
What, shall Heaven stoop to earth? shall Majesty stoop to misery? shall the
great God of Heaven and Earth, that might have condemned my soul, and if I had
perished and been damned, might have took glory by my destruction -- Is it
possible, is it credible, that this God should not only entertain me when I
come, and command me for to come, but entreat and beseech me to come and
receive mercy from him? O the depth of the incomprehensible love of God!
Imagine you saw God the Father entreating you, and God the Son beseeching you,
as he does this day, Come now, and forsake your sins, and take mercy, which is
prepared for you, and shall be bestowed upon you: Would not this make a soul
think thus with it self, What, for a Rebel? not only to have mercy offered,
but to be entreated to receive mercy, it were pity (if I will not take it) but
I should go to Hell and be damned for ever. The Lord he complains, Why will ye
dye? as Ezekiel. 18. 31.
I live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner: Turn ye, turn ye,
why will ye dye, ye sinful Sons of men? Mercy is offered Ezekiel. 33. 11.
you, the Lord Jesus reaches out his hand to you: fain would he pluck the
Drunkard out of the Alehouse, and the Adulterer from his Whore: O if you break
this cord, I know not what to say to you, this is able to break a Mountain in
pieces; Shake, O Mountains (says the Prophet) Why? because God has redeemed
Isa. 44. 23.
Jacob: The Redemption of Jacob was enough to break a Mountain, let his Mercy
break our hearts; it is God that begs, the blessing is our own.

4. If yet all this prevail nothing at all, the Lord will then wait, and stay
in long patience and suffering, to see if any time a sinner will turn unto him.
Our Savior follows poor sinners from Alehouse to Alehouse, and says, I beseech
you, Drunkards, take mercy, and have your sins pardoned: The Lord (as we may
say) tires himself, and wearieth himself with waiting one day after another,
and one week after another: It may be (says Christ) this week, this Sabbath,
this Sermon a sinner will turn unto me; what, will it never be? Are you not
ashamed (my friends) that the Lord Jesus should thus wait your leisure, and
follow you from house to house, and from place to place; nay, that Christ
should every morning appear to your understanding, and every night come to your
bedside, saying, Let this be the last night of sinning, and the next day the
first day of your repentance: O when will you be humbled? when will you receive
mercy, that it may go well with you, and with yours for ever! If none of the
other will move you, yet for shame let this cord draw you to the Lord: Hear,
hear his doleful pangs, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean? O
when will it once be? A Ier. 13. 27.
woman that is in travel, O how she expects and longs for her delivery I now a
throb comes, and then she cries; anon comes a second throb, and then she cries
again, O when comes deliverance? Thus God the Father takes on him the person of
a traveling woman; he travels and travels until he bring forth a son, until
some soul be converted, and brought home unto him, O Jerusalem, will thou not
be made clean? when will it once be? I have waited one, ten, twenty, thirty,
forty years long have I waited on this generation; when will it once be? The
Lord thus travels in patience, looking when we will receive mercy, will never
our proud hearts be humbled? will never our stubborn hearts be softened? will
never our profane hearts be sanctified? when will it once be? Christ has
waited this day, this week, this month, this quarter, this year, these ten,
twenty, thirty, forty years on us: You old sinners, that are gray headed in
your wickedness, how long has the Lord waited on you? O for shame let him wait
no longer, but turn, turn ye unto him, that ye may receive mercy from him.

Thirdly, if bonds of love move not, the Lord has iron cords, that will pluck
in pieces; to wit, the cords of Conscience: which 3 Means.
thus disputes, He that being often reproved, does still harden his heart,
shall perish everlastingly:

But thou being often reproved, do still harden thy heart, therefore thou
shall perish everlastingly.

In this Syllogism are contained the Monition Accusation Condemnation
of Conscience.

In the first Proposition, Conscience gives the sinner a Monition, to come from
sin, upon pain of the heaviest Judgment that can be inflicted. It is the Lord
that sends the Conscience on this errand, Go to such a man, and tell him, You
have blasphemed Gods Name, and you have spoken against Gods Saints, and you
have broken Gods Sabbaths, and you have contemned Gods Ordinances; Be it known
then unto thee (says Conscience when it delivers the Message) That I have a
command from Heaven, and from God, I charge you, as you will answer it at the
dreadful day of Judgment, take heed of those evils and sinful practices that
heretofore you have committed, lest you damn your souls for ever. Will you
question his Commission? see Prove. 29. 1. He that being Prove. 29. 1.
often reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed; if you be
often reproved, and will not be bettered, then the Lord says, and Conscience
from the Lord tells you, Be it at your own peril, ye shall suddenly be
destroyed. No sooner Conscience thus perks upon the crown, but the sinner hangs
the wing, and withdraws himself from his former lewd courses. But now when
wicked persons see their companion is gone, they make after him amain, and then
Conscience plucks one way, and they pluck another way; at last, by carnal
company, and cursed persuasions, the soul is drawn back again to his former
wicked courses, and so perhaps this twist is broken, and the sinner is gone.

2. If so, then Conscience, that was a Monitor, now turns Accuser in the minor
Proposition; before it was only Gods Herald to forewarn him, but now it is
become a Pursevant and Sergeant to Arrest him: it follows him to the Alehouse,
and pursues him home, then takes him in his bed, and Arrests him in his sleep;
there (by a Meditation) it hales the soul before the Tribunal seat of God,
saying, Lo, Lord, this is the man, this is the Drunkard, Adulterer, Blasphemer,
this is he, Lord; an enemy to thy Servants, an hater of thy Truth, a despiser
of thy Ordinances; at such a time, in such a place, with such a company this
man despised thy Truth, this is he, Lord, this is the man. And when Conscience
has thus dragged him before God, and accused him, then Take him, Jailer, take
him, Devil (says the Lord) and imprison him; let vexation, and horror, and
trouble, and anguish lie upon his soul, until he confess his sins, and resolve
to forsake them. In this case was David, when he was forced to say, My bones
waxed old through my roaring all the day long; for day and night thy hand was
heavy upon me, my moisture is turned into the Psa. 32. 3, 4, 5.
drought of summer: What then? O then (says David) I acknowledged my sin unto
thee, -- I confessed my transgressions unto thee, O Lord, and so thou forgavest
the iniquity of my sin. David he folded up his sins at the first, and therefore
his bones were consumed, and he roared continually; when the Lord had him on
the Rack, he made him roar again, and would never leave tormenting, till David
came to confessing; but when he confessed this sin, and the other sin, then the
Lord forgave him the iniquity of his sin. Thus Conscience brings the soul of a
sinner on the Rack (as Traitors are used, that will not confess otherwise) and
makes him to confess his sins, and then he cries, O the abominations I have
committed which the Sun never saw; in such a place, at such a time, O then I
railed on Gods servants, and blasphemed Gods Name, I profaned Gods Sabbaths,
and contemned his Ordinances: what then? Conscience will make him confess more
yet, to the Rack again with him; and then he cries and roars for anguish of
spirit, then he confesses all, and resolves to amend, then he will pray, and
hear, and sanctify Gods Sabbaths, and lead a new life. Thus Conscience
receives some satisfaction, and begins to be quiet; and now having got some
quiet, his cursed Companions set upon him again, Refresh (say they) your soul
with some of your ancient dalliance, etc. To this and the like Temptations of
Satan, he listens again, and then he begins to follow his old sins, perhaps
with more violence and eagerness then ever he did before; and now is another
twist broken likewise.

3. If so, then Conscience that was a Monitor and Accuser, now turns
Executioner. The first Proposition admonished, the second accused, if neither
of these prevail, then Conscience concludes, Thou must to execution, thou shall
perish everlastingly. And now Conscience cries, Monitions or Accusations could
not prevail with this man; Come, come ye damned ghosts, and take away this
Drunkard, this Blasphemer, this Adulterer, and throw him headlong into the pit
of Hell; he would not be amended, let him be condemned, he would not be
humbled, therefore let him be damned. The man hearing this, then he is amazed,
and thinks himself past hope, past help, past cure: Did you ever see or hear a
tormented Conscience in these pangs? Now he calls, then he cries, Lo where
Devils stand, the Heavens frown, God is incensed, Hell-mouth is open: And now a
Minister is sent for, who displays to this despairing soul, the Mercy and Grace
of God in Christ Jesus; O (replies he) this is my bane, my damnation, if I had
never heard of Mercy, if I had never lived under the Gospel, and the means of
Salvation, then had I been an happy man: Alas! it is Mercy I have neglected, it
is Salvation I have contemned, how then should I be saved? O the persuasions of
the Lord that I have had! the Lord has even wept over me, as he did over
Jerusalem, O that thou had known the things belonging to thy peace! yet all
these persuasions have I contemned, and therefore certainly to Hell I must go.
The Minister replies, Truth it is, you have done thus, but would you do so
still? is it good now to be drunk, or to blaspheme, or to rail on Gods Saints,
or contemn Gods Ordinances? O no, no (says he) I now find what the end of
those wicked courses will be: Gods Word could not prevail with me, the Minister
could not persuade me; O the good Sermons that I have heard, the very flames of
Hell have even flashed in my face, the Minister has spent his pains, and would
have spent his blood for the good of my poor soul! But alas, I despised the
Word, and mocked the Minister: Woe, woe unto me for ever; now my Conscience
gnaws, and tears, and terrifies my soul here, and I shall to Hell hereafter,
and perish for ever and ever. The Minister replies again, The truth is, you
have done thus, but would you do so now? would you still blaspheme, and curse,
and be drunk, and riotous? or rather would you not now part with all these, and
take mercy in stead of them? Then the poor soul cries out, Now the Lord for his
mercies sake remove these sins from me: O I had never so much delight in my
sins heretofore, as now I have woe, misery and vexation for them; but (alas) it
is not in my power to help my soul; if the Lord would do this, let him do what
he will with it. What (says the Minister) you are then willing and content to
part with your sins: O yes, (says the soul) I would rather offend all the
world then God; I had rather go to hell, then to the committing of a sin; if it
would please God to help me, I would forsake my sins with all my heart. Why,
now the poor soul is coming again, and God is drawing him again from his
corruptions and sinful distempers.

Fourthly, when the soul is thus loosened, the Lord then fully 4 Means.
plucks it by the cord of his Spirit: with an Almighty hand he cuts the soul
off from sin, and takes it into his own hand, that he may govern him, and
dispose of him according to his own good will and pleasure. Thus much of
preparation for the substance of it on Gods part.

CHAP. IV.
SECT. 1. The substantial parts of Preparation on Man's part, or the disposition
of the Soul by Gods work.
NOw are we to observe the disposition of the soul on man's part, which God
works on the hearts of whom he draws. It is known in two works:

Contrition, whereby the soul is cut off from sin. Humiliation, whereby the
soul is cut off from it self.
For so it is, that either the soul sees no need to depart from sin, or else
it thinks it can help it self out of sin; the first is called Security, when
the soul being blind, takes rest, and seeing no need to be better, desires it
not therefore: Against this the Lord sends Contrition, causing men thereby to
know the misery of sin, and to see need of a change: The second is Carnal
Confidence, when a sinner begins to seek succor, and to scramble for his own
comfort in his self-sufficiency; against this the Lord works Humiliation,
causing the soul hereby to see the weakness and emptiness of its Duties, and
that there is enough in its best services to condemn him for ever. Before we
speak of the works, it is not amiss to begin with the lets.

The first is Security: When the soul is taken up with a secure course, and
rests it self well apaid in his own practices, and therefore it never sees any
need of a change, nor ever goes out for a change: Now while a man lives thus,
and blesses himself in his sin, it is impossible that ever he should receive
faith, or by the power of faith repair unto Christ: where faith comes, it ever
works a change, Old things are done away, and then all things are become new;
the Lord therefore to remove this let, he burdens the soul extremely, and
says, You will live in drunkenness, in covetousness; you will have your sins,
then take your sins, and get you down to hell with them. At this voice the
Sinner begins to see where he is: Is this true? (says he) then I am the most
miserable creature under heaven; therefore as they said, Men and Acts 2. 37.
brethren, what shall we do? We have been thus and thus, but if we rest here,
it will be our ruin for ever, O what shall we do? So the soul comes to a
restless dislike of it self, and says, I must either be otherwise, or else I
am but a damned man for ever.

2. When the soul is thus resolved that it must of necessity change, when it
sees his wound and his sin ready before him to condemn him, and it has (as it
were) a little peep-hole into hell; the soul in this distress sends over to
Prayer, and Hearing, and holy services, and thinks by his wits and Duties, or
some such like matters, to succor it self; and it begins to say, My hearing and
my prayer, will not these save me? Thus the soul in conclusion rests on Duties:
I will not say but these Duties are all good, honorable and comfortable, yet
they are not Gods, but the Ordinances of God. It is the nature of a sinful
heart, to make the means, as meritorious to Salvation: A man that sees his
Drunkenness and his base contempt of God, O then he voweth and promises to
take up a new course, and he begins to approve himself in reformation of his
ways, then he cries, Now I will have no more drunkenness, now no more scoffing
and scorning at those that go to hear the Word: and then he thinks, What can I
do more? to heaven I must go. All this is but a man's self: Why so? Christ (who
is the Substance of all) and the pith of a Promise is forgotten; a Christ in
hearing, a Christ in praying is not regarded, and therefore the poor soul
famisheth with hunger. Mistake not, I pray you, these Duties must be had and
used, but still a man must not stay here: Prayer says, There is no Salvation
in me; and the Sacraments and Fasting say, There is no Salvation in us: all
these are subservient helps, no absolute causes of Salvation. A man will use
his bucket, but he expects water from the well; these Means are the buckets,
but all our comfort, and all our life and grace is only in Christ: if you say,
your bucket shall help you, you may starve for Christ, if you let it not down
into the well for water: So though you boast of Praying, and Hearing, and
Fasting, and of your Alms, and building of Hospitals, and of your good deeds,
if none of these bring you to a Christ, or settle you on a Christ, you shall
dye for Christ, though your works were as the works of an Angel. As it is with
a graft therefore, first it must be cut off from the old stock; secondly, it
must be pared, and made fit for implantation into another: so the soul by
Contrition being cut off from sin, then Humiliation pares it (pares away all a
man's privileges) and makes it fit for the ingraffing into Christ Jesus. Thus
much of the lets, and of the works of Contrition and Humiliation in general.

SECT. 2. A sight of Sin.
BUt for a further discovery of these two necessary things, we shall now enter
into particulars, and begin first with Contrition; which contains these steps:

A sight of sin. Sense of Divine wrath. Sorrow for sin.
The first step is A sight of sin; and sin must be seen Clearly. Convictingly.


First, Clearly: It is not a general sight, and confused sight of Sin that will
serve the turn; it is not enough to say, It is my infirmity, and I cannot amend
it, we are all sinners: no, this is the ground why we mistake our evils, and
reform not our ways; a man must search narrowly, and prove his ways, as the
Goldsmith does his gold in the fire: I considered my ways, (says David) Psa.
119. 50.
and turned my feet unto thy testimonies; in the Original, I turned my sins
upside down, he looked all over his ways. And this clear sight of Sin appears
in two particulars:

1. A man must see his Sin nakedly in its own proper colors, we must not look
on Sin through the Mediums of profits, and pleasures, and contentments of this
world, for so we mistake Sin: but the soul of a true Christian that would see
Sin clearly, he must strip it of all content and quiet that ever the heart
received in it; as the Adulterer must not look upon Sin in regard of the
sweetness of it, nor the Covetous man on his Sin in regard of the profit of it:
you that are such, the time will come when you must dye, and then consider what
good these sinful courses will do you: How will you judge of Sin then, when it
shall leave a blot on your Souls, and a guilt on your Consciences?

2. A man must look on Sin in the venom of it; and that you may do partly, if
you compare it with other things, and partly, if you look at it in regard of it
self. 1. Compare Sin with those things that are most fearful and horrible; as
suppose any soul here present were to behold the damned in Hell, if the Lord
should give any one of you a little peep-hole into Hell, that you saw the
horror of the damned, then propound this to your heart, What are those pains
which the damned endure, and your heart will shake and quake at it; yet the
least Sin that ever you did commit, is a greater evil (in its own nature) then
the greatest pains of the damned in Hell. 2. Look at Sin simply as it is in it
self, what is it, but a professed opposing of God himself? A sinful creature
joins side with the Devil, and comes in battle Array against the Lord, and
flies in the face of the Lord God of Hosts. I pray you in cold blood consider
this, and say, Good Lord, what a sinful wretch am I? that a poor damned wretch
of the earth, should stand in defiance against God! that I should submit my
self to the Devil, and oppose the Lord God of Hosts!

Secondly, Convictingly, that Sin may be so to us, as it is in it self; and
that discovers it self in these two particulars:

1. When we have a particular apprehension in our own person, that whatsoever
Sin is in general, we confess it the same in our own souls: It is the cursed
distemper of our hearts, howsoever we hold the Truth in general, yet when we
come to our own Sins, to deny the particulars. The Adulterer confesses the
danger and filthiness of that Sin in gross, but he will not apply it to
himself: The Rule therefore is, Arrest thy soul (whosoever thou art) of those
sins particularly whereof thou stand guilty; To this purpose, say, Is
Murder, and Pride, and Drunkenness, and Uncleanness such horrible sins? O
Lord, it was my Heart that was proud, and vain; it was my Tongue that did speak
filthily, and blasphemously; my Hand that wrought wickedness; my Eye that was
wanton, and my Heart that was unclean and filthy; Lord, here they are: Thus
bring thy Heart before God.

2. When the soul sits down with the audience of Truth, and seeks no shift to
oppose Truth revealed: when the Lord comes to make racks in the hearts of such
as he means to do good to, the Text says, He will reprove the world of sin;
that is, He will John 16. 8.
convince the world of wickedness: he will set the soul in such a stand, that
it shall have nothing to say for it self, he cannot shift it off. The Minister
says, God hates such and such a sinner; And the Lord hates me too (says the
soul) for I am guilty of that sin. Thus many time, when a sinner comes into the
Congregation (if the Lord please to work on him) the mind is illightned, and
the Minister meets with his corruptions, as if he were in his bosom, and he
answers all his cavils, and takes away all his objections: with that the soul
begins to be in a maze, and says, If this be so (as it is for ought I know)
and if all be true that the Minister says, then the Lord be merciful unto my
soul, I am the most miserable sinner that ever was born.

You that know not your sins, that you may see them Convictingly, Use of Advice.
get you home to the Law, and look into the glass thereof, and then bundle up
all your sins thus: So many sins against God himself in the first Commandment,
against his Worship in the second, against his Name in the third, against his
Sabbath in the fourth: Nay, all our Thoughts, Words and Actions, all of them
have been sins, able to sink our souls to the bottom of Hell. And secondly,
that you may see them clearly, consider of their effect, both in their Doom,
and in the Execution: Only to instance in their Doom; Me thinks I see the Lord
of heaven and earth, and the Attributes of God appearing before him, The Mercy
of God, the Goodness of God, and the Wisdom of God, the Power of God, the
Patience and Long-suffering of God, and they come all to a sinner, an
hypocrite, or to a carnal professor, and say, Mercy has relieved you, Goodness
has succored you, Wisdom has instructed you, Power has defended you,
Patience has born with you, Long-suffering has endured you; now all these
comfortable Attributes will bid you adieu, and say, Farewell damned souls, you
must go hence to Hell, to have your fellowship with damned ghosts: Mercy shall
never more relieve you, Goodness shall never more succor you, Wisdom shall no
more instruct you, Power shall never more defend you, Patience shall never more
bear with you, Long-suffering shall never more endure you: and then shall you
to endless, easeless and remediless torments, where you will ever remember your
sins, and say, My Covetousness and Pride was the cause of this, I may thank my
sins for this. Think of these things (I beseech you) seriously, and see your
sins here, to prevent this sight hereafter.

SECT. 3. Sense of Divine Wrath.
THe sinner by this time having his eyes so far opened, that he beholds his
Sins; he begins then to consider, That God has him in chase: And this sense of
Divine Wrath discovers it self in these two particulars:

1. It works a fear of some evil to come. 2. It possesses the soul with a
feeling of this evil.
First, the soul considers, That the punishment which God has threatened shall
be executed on him sooner or later: he cries therefore, What if God should damn
me? God may do it: And what if God should execute his vengeance upon me? Thus
the soul fears, that the evil discovered will fall upon him: This is the reason
of those phrases of Scripture, We have not received Romans 8. 15.
the spirit of bondage to fear again; the Spirit shows our bondage, and thence
comes this fear: Again, God has not given us the spirit 1 Timothy 1. 17.
of fear; that is, the spirit of bondage that works fear. It is with a soul in
this fear, as it was with Belshazzar, when he commanded the Cups to be brought
out of the House of the Lord; An handwriting came against him on the wall, and
when he saw it, his thoughts troubled him, and his face began Dan 5. 6.
to gather paleness, and his knees knocked against one another; as if he should
say, Surely there is some strange evil appointed for me; and with that his
heart began to tremble and shake: just so it is with this fear, he that runs
riot in the way of wickedness, and thinks to despise Gods Spirit, and to hate
the Lord Almighty, and to resist the work of his Grace: now it may be there
comes this fear and handwriting against him, and then he cries, These are my
sins, and these are the Plagues and Judgments threatened against them, and
therefore why may not I be damned? why may not I be plagued?

Secondly, the Lord pursues the soul, and discharges that evil upon him which
was formerly feared; and now his Conscience is all on a flame, and he says to
himself, O I have sinned, and offended a just God, and therefore I must be
damned, and to Hell I must go: Now the soul shakes, and is driven beyond it
self, and would utterly faint, but that the Lord upholds it with one hand, as
he beats it down with the other; he thinks every thing is against him, he
thinks the fire burns to consume him, and that the air will poison him, and
that Hell-mouth gapes under him, and that Gods wrath hangs over him, and if now
the Lord should but take away his life, that he should tumble down headlong
into the bottomless Hell: Should any man, or Minister, persuade the soul in
this case to go to Heaven for Mercy, it replies in this manner, Shall I repair
to God? O that is my trouble! Is not he that great God, whose Justice, and
Mercy, and Patience I have abused? And is not he the great God of Heaven and
Earth, that has been incensed against me? Oh, with what a face can I appear
before him, and with what heart can I look for any mercy from him? I have
wronged his Justice, and can his Justice pardon me? I have abused his Mercy,
and can his Mercy pity me? What, such a wretch as I am? If I had never enjoyed
the means of mercy, I might have had some plea for my self, but Oh, I have
refused that mercy, and have trampled the Blood of Christ under my feet, and
can I look for any mercy? No, no, I see the wrath of the Lord incensed against
me, and that is all I look for.

SECT. 4. Sorrow for Sin.
THe next step is Sorrow for Sin; concerning which, are two questions: 1.
Whether it be a work of saving grace? 2. Whether God work it in all alike?

To the first, I answer, There is a double Sorrow, one in Preparation, the
other in Sanctification: They differ thus; Sorrow in Preparation, is when the
word of God leaves an impression upon the heart of a man, so that the heart of
it self is as it were a Patient, and only bears the blow of the Spirit; and
hence come all those phrases of Scripture, as wounded, pierced, pricked, in the
passive voice: So that this Sorrow is rather a Sorrow wrought on me, then any
work coming from any Spiritual ability in me: But Sorrow in Sanctification
flows from a Spiritual principle of Grace, and from that power which the heart
has formerly received from Gods Spirit; so that in this a man is a free
worker: Now both these are saving Sorrows, but they differ marvellously; many
think, that every saving work, is a sanctifying work, which is false, Those
whom he calls (says the Rom 8. 30.
Apostle) them he also justifies, and whom he justifies, he glorifies: You may
observe, That Glorification in this place implies Sanctification here, and
glory hereafter; now before Glorification, you see there is Justification and
Vocation, and both these are saving.

To the second, I answer, Howsoever this work is the same in all for substance,
yet in a different manner it is wrought in most: Two men are pricked, the one
with a pin, the other with a spear; two men are cut, the one with a penknife,
the other with a sword: so the Lord deals kindly and gently with one soul, and
roughly with another: There is the melting of a thing, and the breaking of it
with hammers; so there is a difference in persons: for instance, if the person
be a scandalous liver, and an opposer of God and his Grace: Secondly, if a man
have harbored a filthy heart, and continues long in Sin. Thirdly, if a man have
been confident in a formal civil course. Fourthly, if God purpose by some man
to do some extraordinary great work: In all these four cases he lays an heavy
blow on the heart, the Lord will bruise them, and rend the kall of their
hearts, and make them seek to a faithful Minister for direction, and to a poor
Christian for counsel, whom before they despised. But if the soul be trained up
among godly Parents, and live under a soulsaving Ministry, the Lord may reform
this man, and cut him off from his corruptions kindly, and break his heart
secretly, in the apprehension of his Sins, and yet the world never see it. In
both these we have an example in Lydia and the Jailer: Lydia was a sinful
woman, and God opened her eyes, and melted her heart kindly, and brought her
to a taste of his goodness here, and glory hereafter: But the Jailer was an
outrageous, rebellious wretch, for when the Apostles were committed to prison,
he laid them up in stocks, and whipped them sore; now there was much work to
bring this man home: when the Apostles were singing Psalms, there came an
Earthquake, which made the prison doors fly open, and the prisoners fetters to
fall off, but yet the Jaylors heart would not shake: at last the Lord did shake
his heart too, and he came trembling, and was ready to lay violent hands upon
himself, because he thought the prisoners had been fled; but the Apostles cried
to him, Do thy self no Acts 16. 30.
harm, for we are all here: with that he fell down before them, and said, Men
and brethren, what shall I do to be saved? For Conclusion, give me a Christian
that God does please to work upon in this extraordinary manner, and to break his
heart soundly, and to throw him down to purpose, though it cost him full dear,
this man walks ordinarily with more care and conscience, and has more comfort
coming to himself, and gives more glory unto God.

Is it so, that the soul of a man is thus pierced to the quick, and Use 1. of
Instruction
run through by the wrath of the Almighty? then let this teach all how to carry
themselves toward such as God has thus dealt withal: Are they pierced men? O
pity them! let our souls, O let the bowels of commiseration and compassion be
let out toward them! let us never cease to do good to them, to the very
uttermost of our powers! And to the performance of this, Reason and Religion,
and pity (methinks) should move us: Hear the cry, Oh (says the poor soul)
will these and these sins never be pardoned? Will this proud heart never be
humbled? Thus the soul sighs and mourns, and says, O Lord, I see this sin, and
feel the burden of it, and yet I have not an heart to be humbled for it, nor
to be freed from it: O when will it once be? Did you but know this, it would
make your hearts bleed to hear him: Oh! the sword of the Almighty has pierced
through his heart, and he is breathing out his sorrow, as though he were going
down to hell, and he says, If there be any mercy, any love, any fellowship of
the Spirit, have mercy upon me a poor creature, that am under the burden of
the Almighty! O pray, and pity these wounds and vexations of Spirit, which no
man finds nor feels, but he that has been thus wounded. It is a sign of a
soul wholly devoted to destruction, that has a desperate disdain against poor
wounded creatures: Is it possible there should harbor such a Spirit in any man?
if the Devil himself were incarnate, I cannot conceive what he could do worse.

2. If ever thou would be comforted, and receive mercy from God, labor never
to be quiet, till thou do bring thy heart Use 2. of Exhortation.
to a right pitch of sorrow; thou have a little slight sorrow, but Oh! labor to
have thy heart truly touched, that at last it may break in regard of thy many
distempers; remember, the longer seed-time, the greater harvest: Blessed are
they that mourn, for Mat. 5. 4. Amos 6. 1.
they shall be comforted; but woe to you that are at ease in Zion: Thou had
better now be wounded, then everlastingly tormented; and therefore if thou
desire to see Gods face with comfort, if thou would hear Christ say, Come,
thou poor heavyhearted sinner, I will ease thee, Labor to lay load on thy
heart, with sorrow for thy sin; O what a comfort shall a poor broken heart
find in that day!

SECT. 5. The extent of this Sorrow.
HItherto of Contrition; the next work is Humiliation, which differs from the
other, not in substance, but circumstance: For Humiliation (as I take it) is
only the extent of Sorrow for Sin, of which we have spoken; and it contains
these two Duties: 1. Submission, 2. Contentedness,
to be at the Lords disposal.

The first part of Humiliation, is Submission, which is wrought thus: The
sinner having now had a Sight of his Sins, and a Sorrow in some measure for
Sin, he seeks far and wide, improves all means, and takes up all Duties, that
(if it were possible) he might heal his wounded soul: Thus seeking, and
seeking, but finding no succor in what he has or does, he is forced at last
(in his despairing condition) to make trial of the Lord: It is true, for the
present he apprehends God to be just, and to be incensed against him, he has
no experience of Gods favor for the while no certainty how he shall speed, if
he go to the Lord; yet because he sees he cannot be worse then he is, and that
none can help him but God, if it would please him: therefore he falls at the
footstool of Mercy, and he lies grovelling at the gate of Grace, and submits
himself to the Lord, to do with him as pleases himself, or as it seems good
in his eyes.

This was the Ninevites case, when Jonah had denounced that heavy Judgment,
and (as it were) thrown wild fire about the streets, saying, Within forty days
Niniveh shall be destroyed: See what they resolved upon, They fasted, and
prayed, and put on Jonah 3. 9.
sackcloth and ashes; who can tell (said they) but God may turn, and repent him
of his fierce wrath, that we perish not? as if they had said, We know not what
God will do, but this we know, that we cannot oppose his Judgments, nor succor
our selves: Thus it is with a sinner, when he sees hell fire to flash in his
face, and that he cannot succor himself, then he says, This I know, that all
the means in the world cannot save me, yet who can tell, but the Lord may have
mercy on me, and cure his tdistressed Conscience, and heal all these wounds
that sin has made in my soul? This is the lively picture of the soul in this
case.

Or for a further light, this Subjection discovers it self in four particulars:

First, he sees and confesses that the Lord (for ought he knows) will proceed
in Justice against him, and execute upon him those Plagues that God has
threatened, and his Sins have deserved; he sees that Justice is not yet
satisfied, and those reckonings between God and him are not yet made up, and
therefore he cannot apprehend, but that God will take vengeance on him: What
else? when he has done all he can, he is unprofitable still; Justice remains
unsatisfied, and says, Thou have sinned, and I am wronged, and therefore thou
shall dye.

Secondly, he conceives, that what God will do, that he will do, and he cannot
avoid it; if the Lord will come, and require the glory of his Justice against
him, there is no way to avoid it, nor to bear it: and this crusheth the heart,
and makes the soul to be beyond all shifts and evasions, whereby it may seem to
avoid the dint of the Lords blow.

Thirdly, he casts away his weapons, and falls down before the Lord, and
resigns himself into the sovereign power and command of God. Thus David, when
the Lord cast him out of his Kingdom, he said to Zadock, Carry back the Ark of
God into the City, if I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he 2 Samuel
15. 25, 26.
will bring me back again, and show me both it and his Habitation: But if he
thus say to me, I have no delight in thee; behold, here I am, let him do with
me as seems good in his eyes. This is the frame of a poor soul; when a poor
sinner will stand upon his privileges, the Lord says, Bear my Justice, and
defend thy self by all thou have or can do: and the soul answers, I am thy
Servant, Lord, do what is good in thine eyes, I cannot succor my self.

Fourthly, the soul freely acknowledges, That it is in Gods power to do with
him, and dispose of him as he will; and therefore he lies and licks the dust,
and cries, Mercy, mercy, Lord: he thinks not to purchase Mercy at the Lords
hands, but only says, It is in Gods good pleasure to do with him as he will,
only he looks for favor, and cries, Mercy, Lord, mercy to this poor distressed
soul of mine: O (replies the Lord) do thou need mercy? Cannot thy Hearing,
and Praying, and Fasting, carry thee to heaven without hazard? Gird up now thy
loins, and make thy ferventest Prayers, and let them meet my Justice, and see
if they can bear my Wrath, or purchase any Mercy: No, no (says the sinner) I
know it by lamentable experience, that all my prayers and performances will
never procure peace to my soul. nor give my satisfaction to thy Justice, I
only pray for Mercy, and I desire only to hear some News of Mercy, to relieve
this miserable wretched soul of mine; it is only Mercy that must help me, O
Mercy (if it be possible) to this poor distressed soul of mine* Me thinks the
picture of those poor famished Lepers, may ^itly resemble this poor sinner,
when the Famine was great in Samaria; There were four leprous men sat in the
gate of the City, and they said, Why sit we here until we dye? if we enter into
the 2 King. 7. 3, 4
City, the famine is there, and if we sit here, we dye also; now therefore let
us fall into the hands of our enemies, and if they save us alive, we shall
live, and if they kill us, we shall but dye: They had but one means to succor
themselves withal, and that was to go into the Camp of the enemies, and there,
as it happened, they were relieved. Thus is the lively picture of a poor sinner
in this despairing condition, when he sees the wrath of God pursuing him, and
that the Lord has beset him on every side; at last he resolves thus with
himself, If I go and rest on my privileges, there is nothing but emptiness;
and if I rest in my natural condition, I perish there also: let me therefore
fall into the hands of the Lord of Hosts. I confess he has been provoked by
me, and for ought I see he is mine enemy; I am now a damned man, and if the
Lord cast me out of his presence, I can be but damned. And then he comes to the
Lord, and he falls down before the footstool of a consuming God, and says, as
Job did, What shall I say unto thee, O thou Preserver of men? I have no reason
to plead for my self, and I have no power to succor my self, my accusations are
my best excuse, all the privileges in the world cannot justific me, and all my
Duties cannot save me; if there be any mercy left, O succor a poor distressed
sinner in the very gall of bitterness. This is the behavior of the soul in this
work of Subjection.

The second part of Humiliation, is, Contentedness to be at the Lords disposal;
and this point is of an higher pitch then the former: For example, Take a
debtor who has used all means to avoid the creditor, in the end he sees he
cannot avoid the Suit, and to bear it he is not able, therefore the only way
is to come in, and to yield himself into his creditors hands; but suppose the
creditor should exact the utmost, and throw him into prison, to be content now
to undergo the hardest dealing, it is an hard matter, and a further degree. So
when the soul has offered himself, and he sees that Gods Writs are out
against him, and he is not able (whenever the Judgment comes) to avoid it,
nor to bear it, therefore he submits himself, and says, Lord, whether shall I
go? thy anger is heavy and unavoidable; nay, whatsoever God requires, the soul
lays his hand on his mouth, and goes away contented, and well satisfied, and
has nothing at all to say against the Lord. This is the nature of
Contentedness.

Or for a further light, this Contentedness discovers it self in these three
following particulars:

First, the Soul reflects on Gods Mercy, which though he begged when he
submitted, yet now he sees so much corruption and unworthiness in himself,
that he acknowledges himself unfit for Mercy: O Mercy, mercy Lord! What (says
the Lord) I had thought your own Duties would have purchased mercy: O no (says
the Soul) it is only Mercy that must relieve, and succor me; but such is my
vileness, that I am not fit for the least mercy and favor; and such is the
wickedness of this wretched heart of mine, that whatsoever are the greatest
plagues, I am worthy of them all, though never so insupportable: All the
Judgments that God has threatened, and prepared for the Devil and his Angels,
they are all due to my wretched soul. O (says the Soul) had the Devils the
like hopes, and means, and patience that I have enjoyed, for ought I know they
would have been better then I am: It is that which shames the Soul in all his
sorrows, and makes him say, Had they the like Mercy? O those sweet Comforts,
and those precious Promises that I have had! How many heavy journeys has the
Lord Jesus made to me? How often has he knocked at my heart, and said, Come to
me, ye rebellious children; turn ye, turn ye, why will ye dye? O that Mercy
that has followed me from my house to my walk, and from thence to my closet;
here Mercy has conferred with me, and there Mercy has wooed me; yea, in my
night-thoughts when I awaked, Mercy kneeled down before me, and besought me to
renounce my bad courses, yet I refused Mercy, and would needs have mine own
will; had the Devil but such hopes, and such offers of Mercy, they that tremble
now for want of Mercy, they would (for ought I know) have given entertainment
to it; and what, do I seek for Mercy? shall I talk of Mercy? What, I Mercy? the
least of Gods Mercies are too good for me, and the heaviest of Gods Plagues are
too little for me; I suppose (for so is my opinion) that God cannot do more
against me then I have justly deserved, but be sure, God will not lay more upon
me then I am justly worthy of: Nay, sure it is, the Soul cannot bear nor suffer
so much as he has deserved, if God should proceed in rigor with him; therefore
it reasons thus: I only for one sin deserve eternal condemnation, for the
wages of all sin is death, being committed against Divine Justice, and against
an Infinite Majesty; and then what do all these my sins deserve, committed and
continued in, against all checks of Conscience, and Corrections, and the light
of Gods Word? Hell is too good, and ten thousand hells too little to torment
such a wretch as I am: What, I mercy? I am ashamed to expect it; With what
heart (I pray you) can I beg this Mercy, which I have trodden under my feet?
The Lord has often wooed me, and when his wounds were bleeding, and his side
gored, and his hideous cries coming into mine ears, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? then, even then this Christ have I slighted, and made nothing
of his Blood; and can this blood of Christ do me now any service? Indeed I
crave grace, but how do I think to receive any? All the Pillars of the Church
can testify, how often Grace and Mercy have been offered and offered, but I
have ever refused; How then can I beg any grace? O this stubbornness and
villainy, and this wretchedness of mine! What, I mercy? it is more then I can
expect, I am not worthy of any; Oh no, I am only worthy to be cast out for
ever.

Secondly, the Soul reflects on Justice, and now it acknowledges the Equity of
Gods dealings, be they never so harsh; he confesses that he is as clay in the
hands of the Potter, and the Lord may deal with him as he will: yea, the Soul
is driven to an amazement at the Lords patience, and that he has been pleased
to reprieve him so long, that God has not cast him out of his presence, and
sent him down to hell long ago: It is the frame of the Spirit which the poor
lamenting Church had, It is the Lords mercy that we are not confounded, because
his compassions Lam. 3. 22.
fail not. When the Lord has humbled the heart of a Drunkard or Adulterer, he
begins thus to think with himself, The Lord saw all the evils I committed; and
what then? O then the Soul admires that ever Gods Justice was able to bear with
such a monster, and that God did not confound him in his drunkenness or burning
lusts, and cast him down into hell. Oh (says he) it is because his mercies
fail not, that my life and all have not failed long ago. Hence it is that the
Soul will not maintain any kind of murmuring, or heart-rising against the
Lords dealings; or if Nature and Corruption will be striving sometimes, and
say, Why are not my prayers answered? I know such a soul humbled, and I see
such a foul comforted, and why not I as well as he? then the Soul stifles, and
crusheth, and choaks these wretched distempers, and does also abase it self
before the Lord, saying, What if God will not hear my prayers? What if God will
not pacify my Conscience, does the Lord do me any wrong? Vile Hell-hound that
I am, I have my sin and my shame; Wrath is my portion, and Hell is my place,
thither may I go when I will, it is mercy that God thus deals with me. And now
the Soul clears God in his Justice, and says, It is just with God that all the
prayers which comes from this filthy heart of mine, should be abhorred, and
that all my labors in holy Duties should never be blessed; It is I that have
sinned against checks of Conscience, against Knowledge, against Heaven, and
therefore it is just that I should carry this horror of heart with me to the
Grave; it is I that have abused Mercy, and therefore it is just that I should
go with a tormenting Conscience down into hell: And O that (if I be in hell) I
might have a spirit to glorify and justify thy Name there; and say, Now I am
come down to hell amongst you damned creatures, but the Lord is righteous and
blessed for ever in all his doings and dealings, and I am justly condemned.

Thirdly, hence the Soul comes to be quiet and frameable under the heavy hand
of God in that helpless condition wherein he is, it takes the blow, and lies
under the burden, and goes away quietly and patiently: O this is an heart
worth gold! O (says he) it is fit that God should glorify himself, though I
be damned for ever, for I deserve the worst: Whatsoever I have, it is the
reward of my own works, and the end of my own ways: if I be damned, I may thank
my pride, and my stubbornness, and my peevishness of spirit: What, shall I
repine against the Lord, because his wrath and his displeasure lies heavy upon
me? Oh no! let me repine against my sin, the cause of all; let me grudge
against my base heart that has nourished these Adders in my bosom, but let me
bless the Lord, and not speak one word against him. Thus David, I held my
tongue (says he) and spoke nothing, because Psalm 39. 9.
thou Lord have done it: So the Soul, when the Sentence of condemnation is even
seizing upon him, and God seems to cast him out of his favor, then he cries, I
confess God is just, and therefore I bless his Name, and yield unto him; but
sin, sin is the worker of all this misery on me. Jeremiah pleading the case of
the Church, now going to Captivity, Woe is me for my hurt (says Ier. 10. 19.
he) my wound is grievous; but I said, Truly this is my grief, and I must bear
it. Such is the frame of an heart truly humbled, it is content to take all to
it self, and so to be quiet, saying, This is my wound, and I must bear it; this
is my sorrow, and I will suffer it. Thus you see what is the behavior of the
Soul in this Contentedness to be at the Lords disposal.

Object. But some may object, Must the soul, or ought the soul to be thus
content to be left in this damnable condition?

Ans. For answer, This Contentedness implies two things: First, a carnal
security, and a regardlesness of a man's estate, and and this is a most cursed
sin. Secondly, a calmness of Soul, not murmuring against the Lords dispensation
toward him; and this Contentedness is ever accompanied with the Sight of a
man's sin, and Suing for Mercy: It ever improves all means and helps that may
bring him nearer to God; but if Mercy shall deny it, the Soul is satisfied, and
rests well apaid. And this, Contentedness (opposed against quarrelling with the
Almighty) every humbled Soul does attain to, although in every one it is not so
plainly seen. To give it in a Comparison: A Thief taken for Robbery, on whom
the Sentence of Death has passed, he should not neglect the means to get a
Pardon; and yet if he cannot procure it, he must not murmr against the Judge
for condemning him to death, because he has done nothing but Law: So we should
not be careless in using all means for our good, but still seek to God for
Mercy: yet thus we must be, and thus we ought to be contented with whatsoever
Mercy shall deny, because we are not worthy of any favor. The Soul in a depth
of Humiliation, it first stoops to the condition that the Lord will appoint, he
dares not fly away from God, nor repine against the Lord, but he lies down
meekly. 2. As he is content with the hardest measure, so he is content with the
longest time, he will stay for mercy be it never so long: I will wait upon the
Lord (says Isaiah) that has hid his face from Jacob; and I will look for him:
so the humbled sinner, Although the Lord hide his face, and turn away his
loving countenance from me, yet I will look toward Heaven, so long as I have
an eye to see, and a hand to lift up; the Lord may take his own time, it is
manners for me to wait: nay, the poor broken heart resolves thus, If I lie and
lick, the dust all my days, and cry for mercy all my life long, if my last
words might be Mercy, mercy, it were well I might get mercy at my last gasp.
Thirdly, as he is content to stay the longest time, so is he content with the
least pittance of mercy; Let my condition be never so hard (says the soul) do
Lord what thou will for me, let the fire of thy wrath consume me here, only
recover me hereafter; if I find mercy at the last I am content, and whatsoever
thou give I bless thy name for it; he quarrels not, saying, Why are not my
graces increased, and why am I not thus and thus comforted? No, he looks for
mercy, and if he have but a crum of mercy he is comforted and quieted for ever:
And now (you may suppose) the heart is brought very low.

Hence we collect, 1. That they which have the greatest parts, Use 1. of
Instruction.
and gifts, and ability, and honor, are (for the most part) hardly brought home
to the Lord Jesus Christ; they that are most hardly humbled, are most hardly
converted: what is Humiliation, but the emptying of the soul from whatsoever
makes it swell? the heart must not joy in any thing, nor rest upon any thing,
but only yield to the Lord, to be at his disposing and carving: now these
parts, and gifts, and abilities, and means, are great props and pillars for the
heart of a carnal man to rest upon, and to quiet it self withal; whence the
Apostle, Not many wise men after 1 Cor. 1. 26.
the flesh, not many mighty men, not many noble men are called: Indeed (blessed
be God) some are, but not many, few (that have so much of themselves) are
brought to renounce themselves; and no wonder for a rich man to become poor,
and a noble man to be abased, and a wife man to be nothing in himself, this
will cost hot water; and yet this must be in all that belong to the Lord: not
that God will take away all these outward things and parts, but that they must
loosen their affection from these, if they will have Christ.

2. That an humble heart makes all a man's life quiet, and marvellously
sweetneth whatsoever estate he is in; indeed sometimes he may be tossed and
troubled, yet he is not distracted, because he is contented; as it is with a
Ship on the Sea, when the billows begin to roar, and the waves are violent, if
the Anchor be fastened deep, it stays the Ship: so this work of Humiliation is
the Anchor of the soul, and the deeper it is fastened, the more quiet is the
heart: when Job in time of his extremity gave way to his proud heart, he
quarreled with the Almighty, his friends, and all; but when the Lord had
humbled him, then, Behold, I am vile, and base; once have I spoken, yea twice,
but now no more. Job 40. 4.


And this Humiliation quiets a man both in Fiercest Temptations. Heaviest
Oppositions.


1. In fiercest Temptations; when Satan begins to besiege the heart of a poor
sinner, and lays battery against him, see how the humbled heart runs him out of
breath at his own weapons: Do thou think (says Satan) to get mercy from the
Lord, when thy own conscience dogs thee? nay, go to the place where thou
live, and to the chamber where thou lie, and consider thy fearful
abominations, sure God will not respect the prayers of any such vile sinners.
True (says the poor soul) I have often denied the Lord when he called upon me,
and therefore he may justly deny me all the prayers I make; yet thus he has
commanded, that seek to him for mercy I must, and if the Lord will cast me
away, and reject my prayers, I am contented therewith; What then Satan? What
then, says the Devil? I thought this would have made thee to despair; but this
is not all, for God will give thee over, and leave thee to thy self, to thy
lusts and corruptions, and thy latter end shall be worse then thy beginning;
thou may call and cry, and when thou have done be overthrown; God will leave
thee to thy self, and suffer thy corruptions to prevail against thee, and thou
shall fall fearfully, to the wounding of thy conscience, to the grieving of
Gods people, to the scandal of the Gospel, to the reproach of thy own person.
To this answers the humbled soul, If the Lord will give me up to my base lusts,
which I have given my self so much liberty in, and if the Lord will leave me to
my sins, because I have left his gracious commands; and if I shall fall one
day, and be disgraced and dishonored, yet let the Lord be honored, and let not
God lose the praise of his Power and Justice, and I am contented therewith;
what then Satan? What then, says the Devil? I sure thought now thou would
have despaired; but this is not all, for when God has left thee to thy sins,
then will he break out in vengeance against thee, and make thee an example of
his heavy vengeance to all ages to come; and therefore it is best for thee to
prevent this untimely Judgment by some untimely death. To this replies the
Soul, Whatsoever God can do or will do, I know not, yet so great are my sins,
that he cannot, or (at least) will not do so much against me as I have justly
deserved: Come what will come, I am contented still to be at the Lords
disposal; what then Satan? and thus he runs Satan out of breath.

The want of this Humiliation many times brings a man to desperate stands, and
sometimes to untimely deaths: Alas, why will you not bear the wrath of the
Lord? it is true indeed, your sins are great, and the wrath of God is heavy,
yet God will do you good by it, and therefore be quiet. In time of war, when
the great Canons fly off, the only way to avoid them, is to lie down in a
furrow, and so the bullets fly over: So in all Temptations of Satan, lie low,
and be contented to be at Gods disposing, and all these fiery Temptations shall
not be able to hurt you.

2. In heaviest oppositions: when Satan is gone, then come Troubles and
Oppositions of the world, in all which Humiliation will quiet the Soul. A man
is sometimes Sea-sick, not because of the Tempest, but because of his full
stomach, and therefore when he has emptied his stomach he is well again: So it
is with his Humiliation of heart, if the heart were emptied truly, though a man
were in a sea of oppositions, if he have no more trouble in his stomach, and in
his proud heart, then in the oppositions of the world, he might be very well
quieted. Cast disgrace upon the humble heart causlesly, and he cures it thus,
He thinks worse of himself then any man else can do, and if they would make him
vile and loathsome, he is more vile in his own eyes then they can make him: O
that I could bring your hearts to be in love with this blessed grace of God!

Is there any Soul here that has been vexed with the Temptations of Satan,
oppositions of men, or with his own distempers? and would he now arm and fence
himself, that nothing should disquiet him, or trouble him, but in all, to be
above all, and to rejoice in all? O then be humbled, and then be above all the
Devils in hell: Certainly they shall not so disquiet you, as to cause you to be
misled, or uncomforted, if you would but be humbled.

What remains then? Be exhorted (as you desire mercy and favor at Gods hands)
to this Humiliation. And for Motives, Use 2. of Exhortation.
consider the good things that God has promised, and which he will bestow upon
all that are truly humbled: I shall reduce all to these three following
Benefits:

First, by Humiliation we are made capable of all those treasures 1 Motive.
of Wisdom, Grace and Mercy that are in Christ.

Secondly, Humiliation gives a man the comfort of all that 2 Motive.
good in Christ: Many have a right to Christ, and are dear to God, yet they
want much sweet refreshing, because they want this Humiliation in some measure.
To be truly humbled, is the next way to be truly comforted: The Lord will look
to him that Isa 62. 8.
has an humble contrite heart, and trembles at his word: The Lord will not
only know him (he knows the wicked too in a general manner) but he will give
him such a gracious look, as shall make his heart dance in his breast. Thou
poor humbled Soul, the Lord will give thee a glimpse of his favor, when thou
art tired in thy trouble; when thou look up to heaven, the Lord will look
down upon thee, and will refresh thee with Mercy; God has prepared a sweet
morfel for his child, he will revive the humble: O be humbled then, every one
of you, and the Lord Jesus, who comes with healing under his wings, will
comfort you, and you shall see the Salvation of our God.

Thirdly, Humiliation ushers glory. Whosoever humbles himself as a little
child; shall be greatest in the kingdom of heaven; 3 Motive. Matthew. 18 4.
He shall be in the highest degree of grace here, and of glory hereafter: for
as thy Humiliation, so shall be thy Faith, and Sanctification, and Obedience,
and Glory.

And now (methinks) your hearts begin to stir, and say, Has the Lord engaged
himself to this? O then (Lord) make me humble. Now the Lord make me, and thee,
and all of us humble, that we may have this mercy. See how Everlasting
happiness and blessedness looks and waits for every humbled Soul; Come (says
Happiness) thou that have been vile, and base, and mean in thy own eyes; Come,
and be greatest in the Kingdom of heaven. Brethren, though I cannot prevail
with your hearts, yet let Happiness, that kneels down, and prays you to take
mercy; let that (I say) prevail with you: If any man be so regardless of his
own good, I have something to say to him, that may make his heart shake within
him. But Oh! -- Who would not have the Lord Jesus to dwell with him? who would
not have the Lord Christ, by the glory of his Grace, to honor and refresh him?
Me thinks your hearts should yearn for it, and say, O Lord break my heart, and
humble me, that Mercy may be my portion for ever; nay, me thinks every man
should say as St. Paul did, I would to God that not only I, but all my
children and servants were not only thus as I am, but also (if it were Gods
will) much more humbled, that they might be much more comforted and refreshed.
Then might you say with comfort on your deaths-bed, Though I go away, and leave
wife and children behind me, poor and mean in the world, yet I leave Christ
with them: when you are gone, this will be better for them, then all the beaten
gold or honors in the world. What can I say? but since the Lord offers so
kindly, now Kiss Psalm. 2. 12.
the Son, be humble, yield to all Gods Commands, take home all Truths, and be
at Gods disposing: Let all the evil that is threatened, and all the good that is
offered prevail with your hearts, or if means cannot, yet the Lord prevail with
you; the Lord empty you, that Christ may fill you; the Lord humble you, that
you may enjoy happiness and peace, and be lifted up to the highest pinnacle of
Glory, there to reign for ever and ever.

CHAP. V. The Call on Gods part, for the Soul to close with, and to rely on
Christ.
HItherto of our first general, to wit, The Preparation of the Soul for Christ:
The next is, The Implantation of the Soul into Christ; and that has two parts:

1. The putting of the Soul into Christ. 2. The growing of the Soul with
Christ.
As a graft is first put into the stock, and then it grows together with the
stock: These two things are answerable in the Soul, and when it is brought into
this, then a sinner comes to be partaker of all spiritual benefits.

The first part is, The putting in of the Soul: when the Soul is brought out of
the world of sin, to lie upon, and to close with the Lord Jesus Christ; and
this has two particular passages: The Call on Gods part. The Answer on man's
part.


The Call on Gods part is this, When the Lord by the Call of his Gospel, and
work of his Spirit, does so clearly reveal the fullness of Mercy, that the Soul
humbled returns Answer.

In which observe the Means Cause
whereby God does Call.

1. The Means is only the Ministry of the Gospel; the sum whereof is this,
That There is fullness of Mercy, and Grace, and Salvation brought unto us
through the Lord Jesus Christ. Hence the phrase of Scripture calls this Gospel,
or this mercy, A treasury; All the treasures of wisdom and holiness are in
Christ: Col. 2. 3.
not One treasure, but All treasures; not Some treasures, but All treasures:
where the Gospel comes, there is joy for the sorrowful, peace for the troubled,
strength for the weak, relief seasonable Isa. 61.
and suitable to all wants, miseries and necessities, both present and future.

If then sorrow assail thee (when thou art come thus far) look not on thy sins,
to pore upon them; neither look into thy own Use.
sufficiency, to procure any good there. It is true, thou must see thy sins,
and sorrow for them, but this is for the lower Form, and thou must get this
lesson beforehand; and when thou have gotten this lesson of Contrition and
Humiliation, look then only to Gods Mercy, and the riches of his Grace in
Christ.

2. For the Cause: The Lord does not only appoint the Means, but by the work
of the Spirit, he does bring all the riches of his grace into the soul truly
humbled: if you ask, How? First, with strength of evidence; the Spirit presents
to the brokenhearted sinner, the right of the freeness of Gods grace to the
soul: And secondly, the Spirit does forcibly soak in the relish of that grace,
and by an over-piercing work, does leave some dint of supernatural and
spiritual virtue on the heart.

Now the word of the Gospel, and the work of the Spirit always go together, not
that God is tied to any means, but that he tyeth himself to the means: Hence
the Gospel is called, The power of God to Salvation, because the power of God
ordinarily, Romans 1. 16.
and in common course appears therein: The waters of life and salvation run
only in the channel of the Gospel; there are golden mines of grace, but they
are only to be found in the Climates of the Gospel: nay, observe this, when
all arguments prevail not with corruption, to persuade the heart to go to God,
one Text of Scripture will stand a man in stead above all humane learning and
inventions, because the Spirit goes forth in this and none else.

This may teach us the worth of the Gospel above all other Use 1. of
Information.
things in the world, for it is accompanied with the Spirit, and brings
salvation with it. What if a man had all the wealth and policy in the world,
and wanted this? he were a fool: What if one were able to dive deep into the
secrets of Nature, to know the motions of the Stars, to speak with the tongues
of men and Angels, and yet know nothing belonging to his peace, what avails it?
Why do we value a Mine, but because of the gold in it? or a Cabinet, but
because of the Pearl in it? O this is that pearl we sell all for.

Would thou know whether thou art carnal or spiritual? observe Use 2. of
Examination.
then, if thou have the Spirit, it ever came with the Gospel: See then how the
soul stands affected with the Gospel, and so it stands affected to the Spirit.
Is it so (may every soul reason with it self) that I will not suffer the word
to prevail with me? then shall I miss of the Spirit, then will Christ none of
me. O remember, the time will come when you must dye as well as your neighbors,
and then you will say, Lord Jesus forgive my sins; Lord Jesus receive my soul:
But Christ will answer, Away, be gone, you are none of mine, I know you not.
Any man, whether noble or ignoble, let him be what he will be, if he has not
the Spirit he is none of Christ's: His you are to whom you obey; but Pride and
Covetousness you obey: Pride therefore will say, This Rom 6. 16.
heart is mine, Lord, I have domineered over it, and I will torment it:
Corruptions will say, We have owned this soul, and we will damn it. You
therefore that have made a tush at the Word, This wind shakes no corn, and
these words break no bones, little do you think that you have opposed the
Spirit: What, resist the Spirit? methinks it is enough to sink any soul under
heaven: Hereafter therefore think this with thy self, Were he but a man that
speaks, yet would I not despise him; but that is not all, there goes Gods
Spirit with the Word, and shall I despise it? There is but one step between
this and that unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost, only adding Malice to
my Rage: I oppose the Father, perhaps the Son mediates for me; I despise the
Son, perhaps the holy Ghost pleads for me; but if I oppose the Spirit, none can
succor me.

CHAP. VI.
SECT. 1. The Answer on man's part for the Soul to close with, and to rely on
Christ.
HItherto of the Call on Gods part; now we are come to the Answer on man's part.
No sooner has the Gospel and Gods Spirit clearly revealed the fullness of Gods
mercy in Christ, but then the whole soul (both the Mind that discovers mercy,
and Hope that expects it, and Desire that pursues it, and Love that entertains
it, and the Will that rests on it) gives answer to the Call of God therein.
Mercy is a proper object of all these, of the Mind to be illightned, of Hope
to be sustained, of Desire to be supported, of Love to be cheared: Nay, there
is a full satisfactory sufficiency of all good in Christ, that so the will of
man may take full repose and rest in him; therefore the Lord says, Come unto
me, all that are weary and heavy laden; Come Mat. 11. 28.
Mind, and Hope, and Desire, and Love, and Will, and Heart: they all answer,
We come: The Mind says, Let me know this Mercy above all, and desire to know
nothing but Christ and him crucified: Let me expect this Mercy (says Hope)
that belongs to me, and will befall me: Desire says, Let me long after it: O --
says Love, let me embrace and welcome it: O, says the Heart, let me lay hold
on the handle of Salvation; here we will live, and here we will dye at the
footstool of Gods Mercy. Thus all go, Mind, Hope, Desire, Love, Joy, the Will,
and all lay hold upon the Promise, and say, Let us make the Promise a prey, let
us prey upon mercy, as the wild Beasts do upon their provision. Thus the
faculties of the soul hunt and pursue this mercy, and lay hold thereupon, and
satisfy themselves herein.

SECT. 2. A sight of Christ, or of mercy in Christ.
BUt for a further discovery of these works of the soul, we shall now enter
into particulars: And for their order, First, the Lord lets a light into the
mind, for what the eye never sees, the heart never desires, hope never
expects, the soul never imbraceth: If the soul then seems to hang afar off,
and dares not believe that Christ will have mercy on him, in this case the
Spirit lets in a light into his heart, and discovers unto him, that God will
deal graciously with him. It is with a sinner, as with a man that sits in
darkness, happily he sees a light in the street out of a window, but he sits
still in darkness, and is in the dungeon all the while, and he thinks, How good
were it, if a man might enjoy that light? So, many a poor humble-hearted broken
sinner sees, and has an inckling of Gods mercies, he hears the Saints speak
of Gods love, and his goodness, and compassion; Ah (thinks he) how happy are
they, blessed are they, what an excellent condition are they in? but I am in
darkness still, and never had a drop of mercy vouchsafed unto me: At last, the
Lord sets a light in his house, and puts the candle into his own hand, and
makes him see by particular evidence, Thou shall be pardoned, and thou shall be
saved.

The manner how the Spirit works this, is discovered in three passages:

First, the Spirit of the Lord meeting with an humble, broken, lowly,
self-denying sinner (he that is a proud stout-hearted wretch knows nothing of
this matter) it opens the eye, and now the humbled sinner begins to see (like
the man in the Gospel) some light and glimmering about his understanding, that
he can look into, and discern the spiritual things of God.

2. Then the Lord says before him all the riches of the treasure of his grace;
no sooner has he given him an eye, but then he lays colors before him (the
unsearchable riches of Christ) that he may see and look, and fall in love with
those sweet treasures; Ephesians. 3. 9.
and then says the soul, O that mercy, and grace, and pardon were mine! O that
my sins were done away! the Lord says, I will refresh them that are heavy
laden; then says the soul, O that I had that refreshing! you shall have rest,
says God; O that I had rest too, says the soul! And now the soul begins to
look after the mercy and compassion which is laid before it.

3. The Spirit of the Lord does witness or certify thoroughly and effectually
to the soul, that this mercy in Christ belongs unto him; and without this, the
soul of an humble brokenhearted sinner has no ground to go unto Christ: what
good does it an hungry stomach to hear that there is a great deal of cheer and
dainties provided for such and such men, and he have no part therein? Take a
Beggar that has a thousand pounds told before him (he may apprehend the sum of
so much gold and so much silver) but what is all that to me (says he) if in
the mean time I dye and starve? It falls out in this case with a brokenhearted
sinner, as with a prodigal child: The Prodigal he has spent his means, and
abused his Father, and now is there a Famine in the Land, and poverty is
befallen him; he knows indeed there is meat and clothes enough in his Fathers
House, but (alas) what can he expect thence but his Fathers heavy displeasure?
if a man should say, Go to your Father, he will give you a portion again; would
he (think you) believe this? No (would he say) it is my Father I have offended,
and will he now receive me? yet should a man come and tell him, that he heard
his Father say so, and then show him a Certificate under his Fathers hand that
it was so, this would sure draw him into some hope that his Father meant well
toward him: So it is with a sinner when he is apprehensive of all his
rebellions; if a man should tell such a soul, Go to God, and he will give you
abundance of mercy and compassion; the soul cannot believe it, but thinks,
What, I mercy? no, no: Blessed are they that walk humbly before God, and
conform their lives to his word, let them take it; but for me, it is mercy I
have opposed, it is grace I have rejected; no mercy, no grace for me: But now
if God send a Messenger from Heaven, or if it come under the hand of his
Spirit, that he will accept of him, and pass by all his sins, this makes the
soul grow into some hopes, and upon this ground it goes unto the Lord: But here
observe me, that none either in heaven or in earth, but only Gods Spirit can
make this Certificate; when it is night, all the candles in the world cannot
take away the darkness; so all the means of grace and salvation, all the
candlelight of the Ministry, they are all good helps, but the darkness of the
night will not be gone, before the Sun of Righteousness arise in our hearts.
Hence it is that it proves so difficult a matter to comfort a distressed soul;
I shall one day perish, says David, I shall one day go down to hell: says the
soul, Let all the Ministers under heaven cry, Comfort ye, comfort ye: still he
replies, I mercy? and I comfort? will the Lord pardon me? It is mercy I have
despised and trampled under my feet, and I mercy? no, no: Thus we Ministers
observe by experience, Some that in their own apprehensions are gone to the
bottom of hell, we make known to them Reasons, and Arguments, and Promises, but
nothing takes place; what is the Reason? O none but Gods Spirit can do it, he
must either come from Heaven, and say, Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, or it
will never prevail: let me speak therefore to you that are Ministers, you do
well to labor to give comfort to a poor fainting soul, but always say, Comfort
Lord, O Lord, say unto this poor soul, that thou art his salvation.

SECT. 3. Hope in Christ.
THe mind being thus illightned, the Lord calls on the affections; Come
desire, Come love: but the first voice is to Hope, now Hope is a faculty of the
soul that looks out for mercy, and waits for the same; So the Apostle, Phil. 1.
20. According to my earnest expectation: It is a similitude taken from a man
that looks after another, and lifts up himself as high Phil. 1. 20.
as he may to see if any be coming after him; so here the soul stands as it
were a tip toe, expecting when the Lord comes; he has heard the Lord say,
Mercy is coming toward thee, mercy is provided for thee: now this affection is
set out to meet mercy afar off, it is the looking out of the soul: O when will
it be Lord? Thou say mercy is prepared, thou say mercy is approaching;
the soul stands a tip-toe, O when will it come Lord! here is the voice of
Hope; This sinful soul of mine, it may through Gods mercy be sanctified; this
troubled perplexed soul of mine, it may through Gods mercy be pacified; this
evil and corruption which harbors in me, and has taken possession of me, it
may through Gods mercy be removed; and when will it be, Lord?

The manner how Gods Spirit works this, is discerned in three particulars: 1.
The Lord does sweetly stay the heart, and fully persuade the soul, that a man's
sins are pardonable, and that all his sins may be pardoned, and that all the
good things he wants, they may be bestowed; this is a great sustainer of the
soul: when a poor sinner sees his sins in their number, nature; when he sees
no rest in the creature, nor in himself, though all means, all help, all men,
all Angels, should join together, yet they cannot pardon one sin of his; then
the Lord lifts up his voice, and says from Heaven, Thy sins are pardonable
in the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. The Lord does sweetly persuade the soul that all his sins shall be
pardoned; the Lord makes this appear, and persuades his heart that he intends
mercy, that Christ has procured pardon for the soul of a brokenhearted sinner
in special, and that he cannot but come unto it; by this means Hope comes to be
assured, and certainly persuaded to look out, knowing the Promise shall be at
the last accomplished: the former only sustained the heart, and provoked it to
look for mercy, but this comforts the soul, that undoubtedly it shall have
mercy: The Lord Jesus came to seek and to save that which was lost: now says
the broken and humble sinner, I am lost; Did Christ come to save sinners?
Christ must fail of his end, or I of my comfort: God says, Come unto me, all
you that are weary and heavy laden: I am weary, and unless the Lord intend good
unto me, why should he invite me and bid me come? surely he means to show me
mercy, nay he promises to relieve me, when I come therefore he will do good
unto me.

3. The Lord lets in some relish and taste of the sweetness of his love, some
scent and savor of it, so that the soul is deeply affected with it, and carried
mightily unto it, that it cannot be severed; it is the letting in the riches of
his love, that turns the expectation of the soul another way, yea it turns
the whole stream of the soul thitherward.

This Reproves, 1. Those that cast off all Hope. 2. Those that 1 Use. of
Reproof.
without ground will do nothing but Hope. 1. If the Lord stir up the heart of
his to hope for his Mercy, then take heed of that fearful sin of Despair.
Despair we must in our selves, and that is good; but this Despair we speak of,
is heinous in the eyes of God, and hurtful to thee. 1. Injurious to God, thou
go to the deep dungeon of thy Corruption, and there thou say, These sins
can never be pardoned, I am still proud, and more stubborn, this distress God
sees not, God succors not, his hand cannot reach, his Mercy cannot save. Now
mark what the Prophet says to such a perplexed soul, Why say thou thy way
is hid from the Isa. 40. 27.
Lord? the Lord says, Why say thou? is any thing too hard for the Lord? O
you wrong God exceedingly, you think it a matter of humility, when you account
so vilely of your selves: Can God pardon sin to such unworthy creatures? It is
true (says the soul) Manasses was pardoned, Paul was converted, Gods Saints
have been received to mercy, But can my sins be pardoned? can my soul be
quickened? No, no, my sins are greater then can be forgiven. Why then, poor
soul, Satan is stronger to overthrow thee, then God to save thee; and thus you
make God to be no God, nay you make him to be weaker then Sin, then Hell, then
the Devil. 2. This sin is dangerous to thy own soul, it is that which takes up
the bridge, and cutteth off all passages, nay it plucks up a man's Endeavors (as
it were) quite by the roots: Alas (says he) what skilleth for a man to pray?
what profits it a man to read? what benefit in all the means of grace? The
stone is rolled upon me, and my Condemnation sealed for ever: I will never look
after Christ, Grace, Salvation any more; the time of grace is past, the day is
gone. And thus the soul sinketh in it self, Will the Lord cast me off for ever,
and will he show no favor? Psalm 77. 7^
I said (says David) this is my infirmity: the word in the Original is, This
is my sickness; as who should say, What, is mercy gone for ever? this will be
my death, then is life gone.

2. This Reproves and Condemns that great sin of Presumption, a sin more
frequent, and (if possibly may be) more dangerous; as they said, Saul had slain
his thousands, and David his ten thousands: So has Despair slain his
thousands, but Presumption his ten thousands. It is the counsel of Peter, That
every man should be ready to give an account of his faith and hope that 1 Pet.
3. 15.
is in him. Let us see the Reasons that persuade you to these groundless
foolish Hopes? you say, You hope to be saved, and you hope to go to heaven, and
you hope to see Gods face with comfort; and have you no grounds? it is a
foolish hope, an unreasonable hope.

But comfort ye, comfort ye, poor drooping spirits; They that Use 2. of
Comfort. Isa. 40. 31.
wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength: you say, You cannot do this,
and you cannot do that; I say, If you can but hope, and wait for the Mercy of
the Lord, you are rich Christians. If a man have many Reversions, they that
judge of his Estate, will not judge him for his present Estate, but for the
Reversions he shall have: Happily thou have not for the present the sense and
feeling of Gods love and assurance; away with that feeling, do not dote upon
it, thou have Reversions of old Leases, ancient Mercies, old Compassions, such
as have been reserved from the beginning of the world, and know thou have a
fair Inheritance.

You will say, Were my hopes of the right stamp, then might Use 3. of
Examination.
I comfort my self; but there are many false, flashy hopes, and how should I
know that my hope is sound and good? I answer, you may know it by these
particulars:

1. A grounded hope has a peculiar certainty in it, it does bring home unto
the soul in special manner, the goodness of God, and the riches of his love in
Christ Jesus. It stands not on Is's and And's, but says, It must undoubtedly,
it must certainly be mine; and good Reason, for this hope has a Word to hang
and hold upon: What is that? I will wait upon the Lord, and I hope Psa. 130. 5.
in his Word; it is a Scripture-hope, a Word hope: the Word says, The Lord
came to save those that were lost; why, I find my self Matthew. 18. 11.
to be lost, says the soul, and therefore I hope: The Lord will seek me,
though I cannot seek him; I hope the Lord will find me, though I cannot find
my self; I hope the Lord will save me, though I cannot save my self. So the
Word says, He appoints them that mourn in Sion, to give unto them beauty for
ashes: will you have a Legacy of Joy, Mercy and Pity? here it is, the Lord
Christ left it you, I bequeath and leave this to all brokenhearted sinners, to
all you humble mourning sinners, this is your Legacy, sue for it in the Court,
and you shall have it for ever.

2. A grounded hope is ever of great power and strength to hold the soul to the
truth of the Promise; hence take a poor sinner when he is at the weakest, under
water, when all Temptations, Oppositions, Corruptions grow strong against him,
and he says, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul, this proud, foolish,
filthy heart of mine will be my bane, I shall never get power, strength and
grace against these sins. Here is the lowest under of a poor soul. If a man
should now reply, Then cast off all hope and confidence, reject the means, and
turn to your sins: Mark how Hope steppeth in, and says, Nay, whatsoever I am
and do, whatsoever my condition is, I will use the means; I am sure all my help
is in Christ, all my hope is in the Lord Jesus, and if I must perish, I will
perish seeking him, and waiting upon him. Why, this is Hope, and I warrant,
that soul shall never go to hell; I will wait for the Lord, yea though he has
hid himself from Isa. 8. 17.
the house of Jacob.

The last Use is of Exhortation: I desire you, I entreat you Use 4. of
Exhortation.
(I will not say, I command you, though this may be enjoined) if you have any
hope of Heaven, if you have any treasure in Christ, labor to quicken this
affection above all: The means are these --

1. Labor to be much acquainted with the precious Promises of God, to have them
at hand, and upon all occasions: These 1 Means.
are thy comforts, and will support thy soul, as the body without comfort is
unfit for any thing; so it is here, unless a man has that provision of Gods
Promises, and have them at hand daily, and have them dished out, and fitted for
him, his heart will fail.

2. Maintain in thy heart a deep and serious acknowledgement of that supreme
Authority of the Lord, to do what he will, and 2 Means.
how he will, according to his pleasure. Alas, we think too often to bring God
to our bow, We have hoped thus long, and God has not answered, and shall we
wait still? Wait! Ah wait, and bless God that you may wait: If you may lie at
Gods feet, and put your mouths in the dust, and at the end of your days have
one crum of Mercy, it is enough; therefore check those distempers, Shall I wait
still? It is a most admirable strange thing, that a poor worm, worthy of hell,
should take up state, and stand upon terms with God: He will not wait upon God;
Who must wait then? must God wait, or man wait? It was the Apostles question,
Will thou now restore the Kingdom of Israel? to whom our Savior answered, It is
not for you to know the times and seasons; as who should say, Hands off, it is
for you to wait, and to expect mercy, it is not for you to know: If you begin
to wrangle, and say, How long, Lord? When, Lord? And why not now, Lord? Why not
I, Lord? now check thy own heart, and say, It is not for me to know, it is for
me to be humble, abased, and to wait for mercy.

SECT. 4. A desire after Christ.
When the soul is humbled, and the eye opened, then he begins thus to reason,
O happy I that see mercy, but miserable I, if I come to see this, and never
have a share in it! O why not I (Lord?) why not my sins pardoned? and why not
my eorruptions subdued? my soul now thirsts after thee as a thirsty Land, my
affections now hunger after righteousness both infused and imputed; Now this
desire is begotten thus:

When the soul is come so far, that after a through conviction of sin, and
sound humiliation under Gods mighty hand, it has a timely and seasonable
revelation of the glorious mysteries of Christ, of his excellencies,
invitations, truth, tenderheartedness, etc. of the heavenly splendour, and
riches, of the pearl of great price; then does the soul conceive by the help of
the Holy Ghost, this desire and vehement longing: And (least any cousen
themselves by any misconceits about it, as the notorious sinner, the mere civil
man, and the formal Professor) it is then known to be saving:

1. When it is joined with an hearty willingness and unfeigned resolution, to
sell all, to part with all sin, to bid adieu for ever to our darling-delight;
it is not an effect of self-love, not an ordinary wish of natural appetite
(like Balaams, Numb. 23. 10.) of Number. 23. 10.
those who desire to be happy, but are unwilling to be holy; who would gladly
be saved, but are loath to be sanctified; no, if thou desire earnestly, thou will work accordingly; for as the desire is, so will the endeavor be.

2. When it is earnest, eager, vehement, extremely thirsting after Christ, as
the parched earth for refreshing showers, or the hunted Heart for the
Waterbrooks. We read of a Scottish Penitent, who a little before his
confession, freely confessed his fault, See the Preface written by G. Abbot, D
D. before the examination of George Sprot, p. 23.
to the shame (as he said) of himself, and to the shame of the Devil, but to
the glory of God; he acknowledged it to be so heinous, and horrible, that had
he a thousand lives, and could he dye Ten thousand deaths, he could not make
satisfaction: Notwithstanding (said he) Lord, thou have left me this comfort in
thy word, that thou have said, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy
laden, and I will refresh you: Lord, I am weary, Lord, I am heavy Matthew. 11. 28.
laden with my sins, which are innumerable, I am ready to sink, Lord, even into
hell, unless thou in thy mercy put to thine hand and deliver me: Lord, thou
have promised by thine own word out of thy own mouth, that thou will refresh
the weary soul: And with that he thrust out one of his hands, and reaching as
high as he could toward Heaven, with a louder voice and a streined, he cried,
I challenge thee, Lord, by that word, and by that promise which thou have made,
that thou perform and make it good to me, that call for ease and mercy at thy
hands, etc. Proportionably, when heavy-heartedness for sin has so dried up the
bones, and the angry countenance of God so parched the heart, that the poor
soul begins now to gasp for grace, as the thirsty Land for drops of rain; then
the poor sinner (though dust and ashes) with an holy humility thus speaks unto
Christ, O merciful Lord God, Thou art Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
end; Thou say it is done, of things that are yet to come, so faithful and
true are thy Decrees and Promises; That thou have promised by thine own word
out of thy own mouth, that unto him that is a thirst, thou will give him of the
fountain of the water of life freely. O Lord, I thirst, I faint, I languish, I
long for one drop of mercy: As Rev. 21. 6.
the Heart pants for the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God,
and after the yearning bowels of thy wonted compassions: Had I now in
possession the glory, the wealth, and pleasures of the whole world; nay, had I
Ten thousand lives, joyfully would I lay them all down and part with them, to
have this poor trembling soul of mine received into the bleeding arms of my
blessed Redeemer. O Lord, my spirit within me is melted into tears of blood, my
heart is shivered into pieces; out of the very place of Dragons and shadow of
death, do I lift up my thoughts heavy and sad before thee, the remembrance of
my former vanities and pollutions, is a very vomit to my soul, and it is sorely
wounded with the grievous representation thereof: The very flames of Hell,
Lord, the fury of thy just wrath, the scorchings of my own conscience, have so
wasted and parched mine heart, that my thirst is insatiable, my bowels are hot
within me, my desire after Jesus Christ, pardon and grace, is greedy as the
grave; the coals thereof are coals of fire, which has a most vehement flame:
And, Lord, in thy blessed Book thou call and cryest, Ho, every one that
thirsts, come ye to the waters. In that great day of the Isa. 55. 1.
feast, thou stoodest and cryed'st with thine own mouth, If any man John 7. 37.
thirst, let him come unto me and drink; and these are thine own words, Those
who hunger and thirst after righteousness shall be Matt. 5. 6.
filled. I challenge thee, Lord, in this my extremest thirst after thine own
blessed self, and spiritual life in thee, by that Word, and by that Promise
which thou have made, that thou perform, and make it good to me, that lie
grovelling in the dust, and trembling at thy feet: Oh! open now that promised
well of life, for I must drink, or else I dye.

The means to obtain this desire, are these three:

1. Be acquainted thoroughly with thine own necessities and 1 Means.
wants, with that nothingness and emptiness that is in thy self; a groundless
presumption makes a man careless; see into thine own necessities, confess the
want of this desire after the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. Labor to spread forth the excellency of all the beauty and surpassing
glory, that is in the Promises of God: Could thou 2 Means.
but view them in their proper colors, they would even ravish thee, and
quicken thy desires.

3. After all this, know it is not in thy power to bring thy heart to desire
Christ, thou can not hammer out a desire upon 3 Means.
thine own Anvil, dig thy own pit, and hew thy own rock as long as thou will;
nay, let all the Angels in Heaven, and all the Ministers on Earth provoke thee,
yet if the hand of the Lord be wanting, thou shall not lift up thine heart, nor
step one step toward Heaven; then go to him who is able to work this desire in
thy soul. It is the complaint of a Christian, O they are troubled, because they
cannot fetch a good desire from their own souls, and one falls, another sinks,
a third shakes, and they are overwhelmed with discouragement: What a wretched
heart have I? (faith one) I grace? No, no, the world I can desire, the life of
my child I long for, and I say with (Rachel) Let me have honor or else I dye:
but I cannot long for the unconceivable riches of the Lord Jesus Christ; and
will the Lord show any mercy upon me? Is it thus? remember now, desires grow
not in thy garden, they spring not from the root of thy abilities: O seek unto
God, and confess, In truth Lord, it is thou from whom come all our desires, it
is thou must work them in us as thou have promised them to us; and therefore,
Lord, quicken thou this soul, and enlarge this heart of mine, for thou only
art the God of this desire. Thus hale down a desire from the Lord, and from the
Promise, for there only must thou have it: The smoking flax God will not
quench: flax Mat. 12. 20.
will not smoke, but a spark must come into it, and that will make it catch
fire and smoke; thus lay your hearts before the Lord, and say, Good Lord, here
is only flax, here is only a stubborn heart, but strike thou by thy Promise
one spark from heaven, that I may have a smoking desire after Christ, and
after grace.

SECT. 5. A Love of Christ.
WE have run through two affections, Hope and Desire, and the next is Love: A
possible good stirs up Hope, a necessary excellency in that good, setleth
Desire, and a relish in that good settled, kindles Love. Thus is the order of
Gods work: If the good be absent, the understanding says, It is to be desired,
O that I had it! then it sends out Hope, and that waits for that good, and
stays till it can see it; and yet if that good cannot come, then Desire has
another proper work, and it goes up and down wandering, and seeks and sueth
for Christ Jesus. After this, if the Lord Jesus be pleased to come himself into
the view of the heart, which longs thus after him, then Love leads him into
the soul, and tells the Will of him, saying, Lo here is Jesus Christ the
Messiah, that has ordered these great things for his Saints and people.

The Motive or ground of this Love, is Gods Spirit in the Promise, letting in
some intimation of Gods love into the soul; thus Psalm. 42. 8. The Lord will
command his loving kindeness in Psalm. 42. 8.
the day time: This is a phrase taken from Kings and Princes, and great
Commanders in the field, whose words of Command stand for Laws; so the Lord
sends out his loving kindeness, and says, Go out, my everlasting love and
kindeness, take a Commission from me, and to go that humble, thirsty and
hunger-bitten sinner, and go and prosper, and prevail, and settle my love
effectually upon him, and fasten my mercy upon him; I command my loving
kindeness to do it. Thus the Lord does put a Commission into the hands of his
loving kindeness, that it shall do good to the poor soul, yea though it
withdraw it self, saying, What, I mercy? will Christ Jesus accept of me? No,
no; there is no hope of mercy for me: indeed if I could pray thus, hear thus,
and perform Duties with that enlargement, and had those parts and abilities,
then there were some comfort, but now there is no hope of mercy for me. We
demand, Is this your case? is it thus and thus? are you thus humbled? and have
you thus longed for the riches of his Mercy in Christ? Lo then, the Lord has
put a Commission into the hands of his loving kindeness, saying, Go to that
poor soul, and break open the doors upon that weary weltering heart, and break
off all those bolts, and rend off that veil of ignorance and carnal Reason, and
all those Arguments: Go (I say) to that soul, and cheer it, and warm it, and
tell it from me, That his sins are pardoned, and his soul shall be saved, and
his sighs and prayers are heard in heaven; and I charge you do the work before
you come again.

Here is the ground of Love, Gods love affecting the heart and settled upon it,
it breeds a love to God again; We love him, because John 4. 19.
he loved us first: The burning-glass must receive heat of the beams of the
Sun, before it burn any thing; so there must be a beam of Gods love to fall
upon the soul, before it can love God again: I drew them with the cords of a
man, even with the bands of love; Hosea 11. 4.
God lets in the cords of love into the soul, and that draws love again to God:
He brought me into the banqueting house, and his banner over me was love; stay
me with flaggons, comfort me Cant. 2. 4.
with apples, for I am sick of love. When the banner of Christ's love is spread
over the soul, the soul comes to be sick in love with Christ.

Now this love of God does beget our love in three particulars:

First, there is a sweetness and a relish which Gods love lets into the soul,
and warms the heart with; you shall see how the fire is kindled by and by: As
when a man is fainting, we give him Aqua-vitae; so a fainting sinner is cold at
the heart, and therefore the Lord lets in a drop of his loving kindeness, and
this warms the heart, and the soul is even filled with the happiness of the
mercy of God; Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth (says the Spouse in
the Canticles) for his love is better then wine: Cant. 1. 1.
The kisses of his mouth, are the comforts of his Word and Spirit; the soul
says, O let the Lord refresh me with the kisses of his mouth, let the Lord
speak comfort to my heart, and this is better then wine.

Secondly, as that sweetness warms the heart, so the freeness of the love of
God let in and intimated, begins even to kindle this love in the soul, that it
sparkles again: God sets out his love toward us, seeing that while we were
yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. This commends the love of God, the Lord sends
to Romans 5. 8.
poor and miserable, sinful brokenhearted sinners, and says, Commend my mercy
to such a one, and tell him, That though he has been an enemy to me, yet I am
a friend to him, and though he has been rebellious against me, yet I am a God
and Father to him: When the poor sinner considers this with himself, he says,
Is the Lord so merciful to me? I that loved my sins, and continued in them, had
it not been just that I should have perished in them? but will the Lord not
only spare his enemy, but give his Son for him? O let my soul for ever rejoice
in this unconceiveable goodness of God! Be thy heart never so hard, if it have
but the sense of this, it cannot but stir thee to Humiliation.

Thirdly, the greatness of the freeness of this mercy of God, being settled upon
the heart, enflames it, the sweetness warms the heart, this freeness kindles
the fire, and when the greatness of the sweetness comes to be valued, this sets
the heart all on a flame; the Apostle desires, that the Ephesians being rooted
and grounded Ephesians. 3. 17, 18.
in love, might be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth and
height of the love of God in Christ; as if he had said, The unmeasureablenes of
Gods mercy will blow up the soul, and inflame the heart with admirable love of
God again, and will make the soul say, What, I that have done all that I could
against this good God? O it breaks my heart to think of it! there was no Name
under heaven that I did blaspheme and tear in pieces, more then this Name; no
Command under heaven I so much despised, as the Command of God and of Christ;
no Spirit that I grieved, so much as the good Spirit of God; and therefore had
the Lord only given me a look, or spoken a word to me, it had been an infinite
Mercy, but to send a Son to save me, it is incomparable: I could not conceive
to do so much evil against him, as he has done good to me: O the breadth of
that Mercy beyond all limits! O the length of that Mercy beyond all time! O the
depth of that Mercy below a man's misery! O the height of that Mercy above the
height of my understanding! If my hands were all love, that I could work
nothing but love, and if mine eyes were able to see nothing but love, and my
mind to think of nothing but love, and if I had a thousand bodies, they were
all too little to love that God that has thus unmeasureably loved me a poor
sinful Hell-hound: I will love the Lord dearly (says David) O Lord my
strength. Have Psalm. 18. 1.
I gotten the Lord Jesus to be my comfort, my buckler and my shield? if I have
any good, he begins it; if I have any comfort, he blesses it: Therefore I will
love thee dearly, O Lord my strength, O how should I but love thee!

Me thinks there is a poor sincere soul that says, My understanding are not so
deep as others, my tongue runs not so glib as Use 1. of Comfort.
such and such; I cannot talk so freely of the things of grace and salvation, I
have meaner parts, and cannot enlarge my self in holy Duties and holy Services;
I cannot dispute for a Savior, or perform such Duties as others can do: yet,
sweet soul, can thou love Christ Jesus, and rejoice in him? O yes! I bless
the Name of the Lord, that all I have, all my friends, and parts, and means,
and abilities, are but as dung and dross in comparison of Christ Jesus; it were
the comfort of my soul, if I might be ever with him. Say you so? Go thy way,
and the God of heaven go with thee: This is a work of God that will never leave
thee, it is a badge and proper livery that the Lord Jesus gives only to his
Saints; never a mere Professor under heaven ever wore it, never any Hypocrite
under heaven to whom God did intend it, but only to those whom he has
effectually called, and whom he will save; therefore though thou wantst all,
thou have this to comfort thee in the want of all; and thou may say, I can
say little for Christ, my tongue faulters, and my memory is weak, yet the Lord
knows I love the Lord Jesus. This is enough, David desired no more, but what
God was wont to do to his children that loved his name, Do to me (says the
text) as thou usest to do Psalm. 119. 132.
unto those that love thy name; I know thou love them that love thee, and
wilt save and glorify them in the end, I desire no more but this, do as thou
usest to do to those that love thy name. And does David, a King, desire no
more? sure then if thou (poor soul) have so much as he had, it is enough, be
quiet with thy childs part, Thy lot is fallen into a mavelous fair ground.

Some may say, this is all the difficult, How may I know whether Object.
my love be a true love, or a false love? How may I know, that my love is of
the right stamp.

Let every man put his love upon the trial, and examine thus, Answ.
Whether do thou welcome Christ and grace, according to the worth of them?
if thou do, it will appear in these particulars: 1. Observe the root and
rise from whence thy love came, can thou say, I love the Lord, because he
has loved me? then thy love is of the right mettle, and know it for ever, that
that God which cannot but love himself, he cannot but like that love which came
from himself: is thy soul affected and enlarged in love to the Lord, because
thou have felt and retained the relish and sweetness of his grace? can thou
say, The Lord has let in a glimpse of his favor? and the Lord has said in his
truth, he looks to him that trembles at his word, the Minister said it, and the
Spirit says it, that my mercy is registered in heaven: Oh how should I love the
Lord! my sins are many, which I have bewailed, my sighs and sobs I have put up
to heaven, and at the last the Lord has given me a gracious answer: Oh how
should I love the Lord my strength dearly? If it be thus with thee, thy love is
sound, and will never fail.

2. If thou entertain thy Savior, as it beseems him, thou must entertain him as
a King, and that is thus; give up all to him, and entertain none with him upon
terms of honor, but such as retain to him, or be attendants upon him; love all
in Christ, and for Christ, but express thy love and joy to Christ above all: He
is as a King, and all the rest are but as retainers; he that loves any thing
equal with a Christ, it is certain he did never love Christ; to set up any
thing cheek by jole with Christ, it is all one as if a man did put a slave into
the same Chamber with the King, which is upon the point to drive him away.

3. The soul that rightly entertains Christ, and studies wholly to give him
contentment, he is mavelous wary and watchful, that he may not sad that good
Spirit of God to grieve him, and cause him to go away as displeased: See this
Cant. 3. 4, 5. the Spouse sought long for her beloved, and at last brought him
Cant 3. 4, 5.
home, and when she had welcomed him, she gives a charge to all the house, not
to stir nor awaken her love, till he please. When a Prince comes unto the house
of a great man, what charge is there given to make no noise in the night, lest
such and such a man be awakened before his time? the soul when it has received
the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, does thus; he gives a peremptory charge to
keep watch and ward, and gives a charge to hope, and desire, and love, and joy,
and the mind, and all, not to grieve and molest the good Spirit of God, Let
there be no motion but to entertain it, no advise but to receive it, and do
nothing that may work the least kind of dislike unto it.

4. He that truly entertains Christ, rejoices in the good and glory of Christ:
When Mephibosheth had been wrongfully accused to David, and when David who had
taken away all the inheritance from him, was returned in safety; Then said
David to comfort him, Thou and Ziba divide the land: nay, said Mephibosheth, 2
King. 19. 30.
Let him take all, forasmuch as my Lord the King is come again in peace, it
matters not for inheritance, and for my self and my life, I pass not, since the
King is returned in peace; it is enough that I enjoy thy presence, which is
better to me then goods, life or liberty: So it is with a kind loving heart,
which cannot endure to see Christ's honor and glory laid in the dust, but if
his praise be advanced, then is he glad, Lord, I have enough (says the soul)
that Christ is mine, and that his honor and glory is magnified, whatsoever
becomes of me it matters not; let the world take all, if I may have Christ, and
see him praised and magnified: Let this try any man's spirit under heaven, and
labor to bring the soul to this pitch: A Minister in his place, and a Master in
his place, and every Christian in his place; let it be our care to honor God,
not our selves; and let it be our comfort, if God may be better honored by
others, then by our selves: This is our baseness of spirit, we can be content
to lift up Christ upon our shoulders, that we may lift up our selves by it; but
we should be content to lie in the dust, that the Lord may be praised; and if
any of Gods people thrive and prosper more then thou, let that be thy joy.

5. He that welcomes Christ truly, covets a nearer union with Christ: Love is
of a linking and gluing nature, and will carry the soul with some kind of
strength and earnestness, to enjoy full possession and fellowship of the thing
that is loved; it cannot have enough of it: Nothing (says the soul) but
Christ, still I desire more of that mercy, and holiness, and grace, and love in
Christ Jesus: As it is with parties that have lived long together in one house,
and their affections are linkt together in way of marriage, they will ever
desire to be talking together, and to be drawing on the marriage; so the soul
that loves Christ Jesus, and has his holy affection kindled, and his spirit
enlarged therein; when the Lord has let in some glimpse of his love, he thinks
the hour sweet when he prayed to the Lord Christ, he thinks the Lord's Day
sweet, wherein God revealed, by the power of his holy Ordinances, any of that
rich grace and mercy of his: it is admirable to see how the heart will be
delighted to recover the time and place, and means, when and where the Lord did
reveal it; Oh this is good (says the soul) Oh that I might ever be thus
cleared and refreshed! Or as the spouse contracted, thinks every day a year,
till she enjoy her beloved, and take satisfaction to her soul in him: So the
soul that has been truly humbled, and enlightened, and is now contracted to
Christ Jesus, Oh when will that day be (says it) that I shall ever be with my
Jesus! he takes hold of every word he hears, every promise that reveals any
thing of Christ, But oh! when will that day be, that I shall Phil. 1. 23.
ever be with Christ, and be full of his fullness for ever?

And now let me prevail with your hearts, and work your souls to this duty,
Love the Lord, all ye his Saints; whom will 2 Use. of Exhortation.
you love, if you love not him? Oh you poor ones, love you the Lord, for you
have need; and all you rich ones, love you the Psalm 31. ^^.
Lord, for you have cause; and you little ones too (if there be any such in the
Congregation) he knocks at every man's heart, and persuades every man's soul,
Love ye the Lord.

The means are these, 1. Labor to give attendance daily to 1 Means.
the promise of grace, and Christ; drive away all other suitors from the soul,
and let nothing come between the promise and it; forbid all other bands, that
is, let the promise confer daily with thy heart, and be expressing and telling
of that good that is in Christ, to thy own soul. If all things be agreed
between parties to be married, and there wants nothing but mutual affection;
the only way to fix their affections upon one another, is to keep company
together, so as they meet wisely and holily: So let the soul daily keep company
with the promise, and this is the first way.

2. Labor to be thoroughly acquainted with the beauty and sweetness of Christ in
the promise: Now there are three things 2 Means.
in the promise we must eye and apprehend, that our hearts may be kindled with
love in the Lord: 1. The worth of the party in himself, Christ is worthy of it.
2. The desert of the party, in regard Christ deserves it. 3. The readiness of
the party in himself to seek our good, Christ seeks it.

1. Christ is worthy in himself: if we had a thousand hearts to bestow upon
him, we were never able to love him sufficiently; as Nehemiah said, The name of
the Lord is above all praise; will you let out your love and affections? you
may lay them out here with good advantage: what would you love? would thou
have beauty? then thy Savior is beautiful, Thou art fairer then the children of
men, Psalm. 45. 2. Would thou have strength? then is thy Savior strong, Gird
thy sword upon thy thigh, O most Psalm. 45. 2.
mighty, Psalm. 45. 3. Would thou have riches? thy Savior is Psalm. 45. 3.
more rich (if it be possible) then he is strong, He is heir of all things,
Heb. 1. 2. Would thou have wisdom? then thy Savior Heb. 1. 2.
is wise, yea wisdom it self, In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, Col. 2. 3. Would thou have life eternal? Col. 2. 3.
Christ is the Author of life and happiness to all that have him; and he has
not only these in himself, but he will infeoff thee in them, if thou will but
match with him.

2. Christ deserves our love, in regard of benefits to us; be man never so
worthy in himself, yet if he have wronged, or expressed the part of an Enemy, a
woman says, I will not have him though he had all the world, this takes off
the affections; it is not so with the Lord Jesus: as he is worthy of all love
in himself, so he has dealt mercifully and graciously with you: In your
sickness, who helped you? in wants, who supplied you? in anguish of heart, who
relieved you? it was Jesus Christ: Oh therefore love him, deal equally with
him, and as he deserves, so enlarge your hearts to him for ever.

3. Christ seeks our love: Here is the admiration of mercy, That our Savior,
who has been rejected by a company of sinful creatures, should seek their
love: for shame refuse him not, but let him have love ere he go: Had the Lord
received us, when we had come to him, and humbled our hearts before him; Had he
heard, when we had spent our days, and all our strength in begging and craving,
it had been an infinite mercy: But when the Lord Jesus Christ shall seek to us
by his Messengers (it is all the work we have to do, to woo you, and speak a
good word for the Lord Jesus Christ; yea, and if we speak for our selves, it is
pity but our tongue should cleave to the roof of our mouth) when the Lord Jesus
shall come and wait upon us, and seek our love, O this is the wonder of
mercies! think of this, O ye Saints! The Lord now by us offers love to all you
that are weary and have need, What answer shall I return to him in the evening?
shall I say, Lord, I have tendered thy mercy, and it was refused: Brethren, it
would grieve my heart to return this answer: O rather let every soul of you
say, Can the Lord Jesus love me? In truth, Lord, I am out of love with my self,
I have abused thy Majesty, I have loved the world, I have followed base lusts,
and can the Lord Jesus love such a wretch as I am? yet says the Lord, I will
heal their backslidings, I will love them freely. Hosea. 14. 5.
He looks for no portion, he will take thee and all thy wants; get you home
then, and every one in secret, labor to deal truly with your own hearts; make
up a match in this manner, and say, Is it possible that the Lord should look so
low? that a great Prince should send to a poor Peasant, that Majesty should
stoop to means? Heaven to Earth, God to man? Has the Lord offered mercy to me?
and does he require nothing of me but to love him again? call upon your hearts,
I charge you, and say thus, Lord, if all the light of mine eyes were love, and
all the speeches of my tongue were love, it were all too little to love thee: O
let me love thee dearly! If you will not say thus, then say hereafter, You had
a fair offer, and that a poor Minister of God did wish you well. Alas, be not
coy and squemish, the Lord may have better then you; lie down therefore, and
admire at the mercy of the Lord, that should take a company of dead dogs, and
now at the last, say as the Prophet did, Lift up your heads, O ye gates! Psalm.
24. 7, 9.
and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the King of Glory shall come in.

SECT. 6. A relying on Christ.
WE are now come to the work of the Will, which is the great wheel and
Commander of the soul. The former affections were but as handmaids to usher in
Christ and the Promises; the mind says, I have seen Christ: Hope says, I
have waited: Desire says, I have longed: Love says, I am kindled: then says
the Will, I will have Christ, it shall be so: and this makes up the match, the
spawn and seeds of faith went before, now faith is come to some perfection, now
the soul reposeth it self upon the Lord Jesus.

And this reposing or resting it self, discovers a fivefold act:

First, it implies A going out of the soul to Christ: When the soul sees this,
that the Lord Jesus is his aid, and must ease him and pardon his sins, then let
us go to that Christ, says he, it is the Lords call, Come to me all ye that
are weary: now this voice coming home to the heart, and the prevailing
sweetness of the call over-powering the heart, the soul goes out, and falls,
and flings it self upon the riches of Gods grace.

Secondly, It lays fast hold upon Christ: when the Lord says, Come my Love, my
Dove, O come away! Behold, I come (says Cant. 2. 16.
she) and when she is come, she fasteneth upon Christ, saying, My beloved is
mine, and I am his: Faith lays hold on the Lord, and will not let Mercy go, but
cleaves unto it, though it conflict with the Lord; Should he slay me (says
Job) yet will I trust in him: Job 13. 15.
The case is like Benhadads, who being overcome by Ahab, his Servants thus
advise him: We have heard that the Kings of Israel 1 King. 20. 31, 32, 33.
are merciful Kings, we pray thee let us put ropes about our necks, and
sackcloth on our loins, and go out to the King, peradventure he will save thy
life: Thus the Servants go, and coming to Ahab, they deliver the Message; Thy
Servant Benhadad says, I pray thee let me live: and he said, Is he yet alive?
he is my brother: Now the men diligently observed whether any thing would come
from him, and did hastily catch at it, and they said, Thy brother Benhadad, and
they went away rejoicing: This is the lively Picture of a brokenhearted
sinner, after he has taken up arms against the Almighty, and that the Lord
has let in Justice, and he sees (or has seen) the anger of God bent against
him; then the soul reasons thus, I have heard, though I am a rebellious sinner,
that none but sinners are pardoned, and God is a gracious God, and therefore
unto him let me go: with this he falls down at the footstool of the Lord, and
cries, O what shall I do! what shall I say unto thee? O thou preserver of men!
O let me live, I pray thee, in the sight of my Lord! The soul thus humbled, the
Lord then lets in his sweet voice of mercy, and says, Thou art my Son, my
Love, and thy sins are pardoned: These words no sooner uttered, but he catches
thereat, saying, Mercy Lord? and a Son Lord? and love Lord? and a pardon Lord?
The heart holds it self here, and will never away.

Thirdly, it flings the weight of all its occasions and troubles (guilt and
corruptions) upon the Lord Jesus Christ: He that walks in darkness, and has no
light, let him trust in the name Isaiah 50. 10.
of the Lord, and stay upon his God; that is, if a man be in extremity,
hopeless in misery, and walks in desperate discouragements, yea and has no
light of comfort, Let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God:
As when a man cannot go of himself, he lays all the weight of his body upon
another, so the soul goes to a Christ, and lays all the weight of it self upon
Christ, and says, I have no comfort, O Lord, all my discomforts I lay upon
Christ, and I rely upon the Lord for comfort and consolation: Who is this,
says Solomon, Cant. 8. 5.
that comes up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved, Cant. 8. 5. The
party coming is the Church, the wilderness is the troubles and vexations the
Church meets withal, and the beloved is the Lord Jesus Christ; now the Church
leans her self all upon her Husband, she walked along with him, but he bare all
the burden: Cast all your care upon him (says Peter) for he 1 Pet. 5. 7.
cares for you, 1 Pet. 5. 7. the Original is, Hurl your care upon the Lord:
The Lord will not thank you for carrying your cares and troubles about you, he
requires that you Hurl them upon him, for he cares for you.

Fourthly, it draws virtue, and derives power from the Lord Jesus Christ for
succor and supplies, and here is the especial life of Faith, it goes for mercy,
and grace, and comfort in Christ, he knows it is to be had from him, and
therefore he fetches all from him; With joy shall ye draw water out of the
Isa. 12. 3.
wells of salvation, Isa. 12. 3. The fountain of Salvation is Christ, and all
the waters of life, of grace and mercy, are in Christ Jesus: Now it is not
enough to let down the bucket into the well, but it must be drawn out also; it
is not enough to come to Christ, but we must draw the water of grace from
Christ to our selves; They shall suck and be satisfied (says Isaiah) with the
breasts of her consolations, that they may milk out, and be delighted with Isa.
66. 11.
the abundance of her glory: The Church is compared to a child, and the
breasts are the Promises of the Gospel; now the Elect must suck out, and be
satisfied with it; the word in the Original is, Exact upon the Promise, and
oppress the Promise: as the Oppressor grindes the face of a poor man, so with
an holy kind of oppression, you should exact from the Promise, and get what
good you may from it.

Fifthly, Faith leaves the soul with the Promise; yea, notwithstanding all
delays, denyals, discouragements from God, faith brings on the heart still, it
will be sure to lie at the gate, and keep the soul with the promise, whatever
befalls it. Excellent is that passage, Genesis 32. 26. when the Lord and Jacob
were wrestling, Let me go, says the Lord, I will leave thee to thy self, Genesis
32. 26.
I care not what becomes of thee; No, I will not let thee go, until thou have
blessed me, says Jacob: So the faithful soul lays hold upon the Lord for
Mercy, Pardon, Power and Grace, and though the Lord seem to give him up to the
torment of Sin and Corruption, yet the soul says, Though my soul go down to
hell, I will hold here for Mercy, till the Lord comfort and pardon, and subdue
graciously these cursed corruptions, which I am not able to master my self. As
it is with a Sun-dyal, the needle is ever moving, and a man may jog it this way
and that way, yet it will never stand still, till it come to the North-point:
So when the Lord leaves off a believing heart with frowns, and with the
expression of displeasure, and the soul turns to the Lord Christ, and will
never leave till it go Godward, and Christ-ward, and Graceward, and says, Let
the Lord do what he please, I will go no further, till he be pleased to show
Mercy. Thus the soul once come to Christ, it will never away, but ever cleaves
to the Promise, and is toward God and Christ, whatsoever befalls it.

But (poor soul) art thou yet shut up in Unbelief? do then as the Prisoners in
Newgate, what lamentable cries do they utter Use 1. of Instruction.
to every Passenger by? So do thou, look out from the gates of Hell, and from
under the bars of Infidelity, and cry, that God would look on thee in mercy,
and say, Spare, Lord, a poor unbelieving wretch, locked up under the bars of
Unbelief, good Lord succor, and deliver in thy due time. David could say, Let
the Psalm. 79. 11.
sighing of prisoners come up before thee; that indeed was meant of bodily
imprisonment, yet the argument prevails much in regard of the Spiritual: Good
Lord, let the sighing of prisoners come up before thee; let the sighing of poor
distrustful souls come up before thy Majesty: O send help from heaven, and
deliver the soul of thy servant from these wretched distempers of heart. Is
there no cause thus to pray? He that believes not (says our Savior) John 3.
18.
is condemned already: He is cast in heaven and earth, by the Law and Gospel,
there is no relief for him abiding in this condition; lay this under thy
pillow, and say, How can I sleep, and be a condemned man? What if God should
take away my life this night? Alas! I never knew what it was to be illightned,
or wounded for sin; I can commit sin, and play with sin, but I never knew what
it was to be wounded for sin; I never knew what it was to be zealous in a good
cause; O I confess I have no faith at all! Beloved! would you yield this, then
were there some hopes that you might get out of this condition and state, to
have a sense of its want, to go to the Lord by prayer, and to ask hearty
counsel of some faithful Minister, are the first steps to obtain it. And to
help a poor wretch in this case, O you that are gracious, go your ways home,
and pray for him: Brethren, let us leave preaching and hearing, and all of us
fall to praying and mourning: In truth, I condemn my own soul, because I have
not an heart to mourn for him; we reprove his sin, and condemn him of his sin;
and we must do so: but where are the heart-blood petitions that we put up for
such a one? Where are the tears that we make for the slain of our people? You
tenderhearted Mothers and you tenderhearted Wives, if your children or
husbands be in this woeful case. O mourn for them, let your hearts break over
them, and say, O woe is me for my children, O woe is me for that poor husband of
mine!

Or secondly, have thou gotten faith? then labor to husband this grace well,
and to improve it for thy best good. It is a mavelous Use 2. of Instruction.
shame, to see those that are born to fair means (I mean the poor Saints of
God) that have a Right and Title to Grace and Christ, and yet to live at such
an under-rate: I would have you to live above the world, for the Lord does not
grudge his people of comfort, but would have them live cheerfully, and have
strong consolations, and mighty assurance of Gods love: Is there not cause?
why, faith (if it be right) will make the life of a Christian most easy, most
comfortable. Unfaithful souls sink in their sorrows upon every occasion; but
faith gives ease to a man in all his conversation: 1. Because faith has a
skill, and a kind of flight to put over all cares to another: We take up the
Cross, but faith hurls all the care on Christ; an easy matter it is to lie
under the burden, when another bears all the weight of it. Look how it is with
two Ferry-men, the one hales his Boat about the shore, and cannot get off, but
tugs and pulls, and never puts her forth to the Tide; the other puts his Boat
upon the stream, and sets up his sail, and then he may sit still in his Boat,
and the wind will carry him whither he is to go: Just thus it is with a
faithful soul, and an unbeliever; all the care of the faithful soul, is to put
himself upon the stream of Gods Provividence, and to set up the sail of Faith,
and to take the gale of Gods Mercy and Providence, and so he goes on
cheerfully, because it is not he that carries him, but the Lord Jesus Christ:
whereas every unfaithful soul tugs and pulls at the business, and can find
neither ease nor success; Alas! he thinks by his own wits and power to do what
he would. 2. Because faith sweetens all other afflictions, even those that are
most hard and full of tediousness; and howsoever it apprehends all troubles and
afflictions, yet withal it apprehends the faithfulness of God, ordering all for
our good: and that is the reason why all our troubles are digested comfortably,
without any harshness at all: When the Patient takes better Pills, if they be
well sugered they go down the easier, and the bitterness never troubles him: So
it is with Faith, it takes away the harshness of all inconveniences, which are
bitter Pills in themselves, but they are sweetened and sugered over by the
faithfulness of God, for the good of the soul; and therefore it goes on
cheerfully.

You will say, if faith bring such ease, how may a man that has faith, improve
it to have such comfort by it? I answer, the rules are four:

1. Labor to gain some evidence to thy own soul, that thou 1 Rule.
have a title to the promise: The reason why poor Christians go drooping, and
are overwhelmed with their sins and miseries, is because they see not their
title to mercy, nor their evidence of Gods love, To the word, and to the
Testimonies: Take one evidence Esaias 8. 20.
from the word, it is as good as a thousand, if thou have but one promise for
thee, thou have all in truth, though all be not so fully and clearly perceived.

2. Labor to set an high price on the promises of God: One 2 Rule.
promise, and the sweetness of Gods mercy in Christ, is better then all the
honors or riches in the world; Prize these at this rate, and thou can not
choose but find ease, and be contented therewith.

3. Labor to keep thy promises ever at hand: what is it to me 3 Rule.
if I have a thing in the house, if I have it not at my need? If a man ready to
sound and dye, say, I have as good cordial water as any in the world, but I
know not where it is; he may sound and dye before he can find it: So when
misery comes, and thy heart is surcharged, O then some promise, some comfort to
bear up a poor fainting, drooping soul, my troubles are many, and I cannot bear
them: Why, now Christ and a promise would have done it; but thou have thrown
them in a corner, and they are not to be found: Now for the Lords sake let me
entreat thee be wise, for thy poor soul; there is many a fainting and aguish
fit and qualm comes over the heart of many a poor Christian; persecutions
without, and sorrows and corruptions within, therefore keep thy cordials about
thee, and be sure that thou have them within reach, take one, and bring
another, and be refreshed by another, and go singing to thy grave, and to
heaven for ever.

4. Labor to drink in hearty draught of the promise; bestow thy self upon the
promise every hour, whenever thou do find the fit: coming; and this is the
way to find comfort, Eat O Cant. 5. 1.
friends, and drink ye abundantly O welbeloved: The Original is, in drinking
drink; ye cannot be drunken with the Spirit, as you may with wine, drink
abundantly, were dainties prepared: If an hunger-starved man comes in, and
takes only a bit and away, he must needs go away an hungered: Think of it
sadly, you faithful Saints of God; you may come now and then, and take a snatch
of the promise, and then comes fear, and temptation, and persecution, and all
quiet is gone again, it is your own fault brethren, you come thirsty, and go
away thirsty, you come discomforted, and so you go away. Many times it thus
befalls us Ministers; when we preach of consolation, and when we pray, and
confer* we think we are beyond all trouble; but by and by we are full of fears,
and troubles, and sorrows, because we take not full contentment in the promise,
we drink not a deep draught of it: of this take heed too; 1. Of Cavilling and
Quarelling with carnal reason. 2. Of attending to the parlies of Satan's
temptations; if we listen to this chat, he will make us forget all our comfort.

CHAP. VII. The growing of the soul with Christ.
HItherto of the first part of the souls implantation; to wit, of the putting
of the soul into Christ: We are now come to the second, which is, The growing
of the soul with Christ. These two take up the nature of ingrafting a sinner
into the stock Christ Jesus. Now this growing together is accomplished by two
means:

1. By an union of the soul with Christ. 2. By a conveyance of sap or sweetness
(all the treasures of grace and happiness) that is in Christ to the soul.
First, Every believer is joined unto Christ, and so joined or knit, that he
becomes one spirit. 1. He is joined; as a friend to a friend; as a father to a
child; as an husband to a wife; as a graft to a tree; as the soul to a body:
So is Christ to a believer, I live, not I, but the Lord Jesus lives in me:
Hence the body Gal. 3. 10. 1 Cor. 12. 12.
of the faithful is called Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. 2. So joined, that the
believer comes to be one spirit with Christ; this mystery is great, and beyond
the reach of that little light I enjoy: Only I shall communicate what I
conceive, in these three following Conclusions: 1. That the Spirit of God (the
third person in the Trinity) does really accompany the whole Word, but more
especially the precious promises of the Gospel: 2. The Spirit (accompanying the
promise of grace and salvation) it does therein, and thereby leave a
supernatural dint and power, a spiritual, and over-powering virtue upon the
soul, and thereby carries it, and brings it unto Christ: it is not so much any
thing in the soul, as a spiritual assisting, and moving, and working upon the
soul, by virtue whereof it is moved and carried to the Lord Jesus Christ. 3.
The Spirit of grace in the promise working thus upon the heart, it causes the
heart to close with the promise, and with it self in the promise; and this is
to be one spirit. As it is with the Moon (the Philosopher observes, That the
ebbing and flowing of the Sea, is by virtue of the Moon) she flings her beams
into the sea, and not being able to exhale as the Sun does, she leaves them
there, and goes away, and that draws them, and when they grow wet, they return
back again; Now the sea ebbs and flows, not from any principle in it self, but
by virtue of the Moon: so the heart of a poor creature is like the water,
unable to move toward heaven, but the Spirit of the Lord does bring in its
beams, and leaves a supernatural virtue by them upon the soul, and thereby
draws it to it self.

Hence an Use of Instruction: This may show us that the sins Use 1. of
Instruction.
of the faithful, are grievous to the blessed Spirit; not only because of
mercies, bonds and engagements which the believer has received; but because a
man is come so near to Christ and the Spirit, to be one Spirit with Christ:
Should a wife not only entertain a whoremonger into the house, but also lodge
him in the same bed with her husband, this were not to be endured; and will thou receive a company of base lusts, and that in the very face and sight of
the Lord Jesus Christ? What? lodge an unclean spirit, with the clean Spirit of
the Lord! the holy Ghost cannot endure this: Let no filthy communication come
out of your mouth, Ephesians. 4. 29. What if there do? (you may say) what? a
Christian Ephesians. 4. 29.
and a Liar? a Christian and a Swearer? O grieve not the holy Spirit of God,
because by it you are sealed unto the day of Ephesians. 4. 30.
Redemption: The good Spirit of the Lord has sealed you unto Redemption, and
knit you unto himself, and will you rend your selves from him and grieve him? O
grieve not the holy Spirit!

2. For Examination; If thy heart be therefore estranged from such as walk
exactly before God, because they are humble Use 2. of Examination.
and faithful; it is an ill sign; when they are made one spirit with Christ,
will thou be of two spirits with them? I confess a godly heart will have his
fits and excursions now and then, but all this while this is poison, and the
soul of a godly man sees this and is weary of it, and is marvellously burdened
with it, and says, O vile wretch that I am, what would I have! and what is he,
that I cannot love him? Is it because the good Spirit of the Lord is there?
shall I resist the good spirit of the Lord? and so commit the sin against the
holy Ghost? away thou vile wretched heart, I will love him: Thus the soul
labors and strives for that exactness, and would fain have that goodness which
he sees in another.

Secondly, as there is an Union with Christ, so there is a conveyance of all
spiritual grace from Christ, to all those that believe in him: If you would
know the Tenure of this Covenant, and how Christ conveyeth these spiritual
graces unto us, it discovers it self in these Particulars: 1. There is fully
enough in the Lord Jesus Christ for every faithful soul. 2. As there is enough
in Christ, so Christ does supply or communicate whatsoever is most fit. 3. As
the Lord does communicate what is fit, so he does preserve what he does bestow
and communicate. 4. As the Lord does preserve what he communicates, so he
quickens the grace that he now does preserve. 5. As the Lord quickens what he
preserves, so he never leaves till he perfects what he quickens. 6. As the Lord
perfects what he quickens, so in the end he crowns all the grrace he has
perfected: And now may I read your Feoffment to you, You poor Saints of God,
you live beggarly and basely here: Oh! if you have a Savior you are made for
ever; it is that which will maintain you, not only Christianly, but
Triumphantly; what you want, Christ has, and what is fit, Christ will bestow;
if you cannot keep it, he will preserve it for you; if you be sluggish, he will
quicken it in you; what would you have more? he will perfect what he quickens;
and lastly, he will crown that he perfects, he will give you an immortal Crown
of Glory for ever and ever.

Hence we see whether the Saints of God should go to fetch Use of Information.
succor and supply of whatsoever grace they want, yea increase and perfection
of what they have already; Christ is made all in all to his Servants; why then,
away to the Lord Jesus; he calls and invites, I counsel thee to buy of me
eye salve; if thou be an accursed Rev. 3.
man, buy of Christ Justification; if thou be a polluted creature, buy of
Christ Sanctification: With thee is the wellspring of life Psalm. 31.
(says David) and in thy light we shall only see light: it is not with us,
but with thee; it is not in our heads, or hearts, or performances, it is only
in Christ to be found, only from Christ to be fetched: I deny not but we
should improve all means, and use all helps, but in the use of all, seek only
to a Christ, with him is the well of life; away to Christ, wisdom,
righteousness, etc. all is in him, and there we must have them.

You will say, What are the means to obtain these graces from Christ? I answer:
First, eye the Promise daily, and keep it within view. Secondly, yield thy
self, and give way to the stroke of the Promise, and to the power of the
Spirit; for instance, Imagine thy heart begins to be pestered with vain
thoughts, or with a proud haughty spirit, or some base lusts and privy haunts
of heart, how would you be rid of these? you must not quarrel, and contend, and
be discouraged; No, but eye the promise, and hold fast thereupon, and say,
Lord, Thou have promised all grace unto thy Servants, take therefore this
heart, and this mind, and these affections, and let thy spirit frame them
aright according to thine own good will; by that spirit of wisdom (Lord) inform
me, by that spirit of Sanctification (Lord) cleanse me from all my corruptions;
by that spirit of grace (Lord) quicken and enable me to the discharge of every
holy service: Thus carry thy self, and convey thy soul by the power of the
Spirit of the Lord, and thou shall find thy heart strengthened and succored by
the virtue thereof upon all occasions.

For conclusion (to dart this use deeper into your hearts) If Conclusion.
every believer be joined with Christ, and from Christ there be a conveyance of
all spiritual graces unto every believer; then above all labor for a Christ in
all things: Never let thy heart be quieted, never let thy soul be contented
until thou have obtained Christ. Take a Malefactor on whom Sentence is passed,
and execution to be administered, suggest to him how to be rich, or how to be
pardoned, how to be honored, or how to be pardoned, he will tell you, Riches
are good, and honors are good, but O a pardon or nothing: Ah, but then should
you say, he must leave all for a pardon; he will answer again, Take all, and
give me a pardon, that I may live, though in poverty, that I may live, though
in misery: So it is with a poor believing soul, Every man that has committed
sin, must suffer for sin, says Justice; the Sentence is passed, Every man that
believes not, is condemned Ioh. 3. 18.
already, says our Savior, What would you have now? thou say, thou would
have a pardon, but would thou not have riches? Alas! What is that to me
(says the soul) to be rich and a reprobate? honored and damned? let me be
pardoned, though impoverished; let me be justified, though debased, yea though
I never see good day: Why then labor for a Christ, for there is no other way
under heaven; get a broken-heart, get a believing heart; but O above all, get a
Christ to justify thee, get a Christ to save thee: If I could pray like an
Angel, could I hear and remember all the Sermon, could I confer as yet never
man spoke, what is that to me, if I have not a Christ? I may go down to Hell
for all that I have or do; yet take this along, and understand me Note.
aright, Christ is not only a Savior of all his, but he is the God of all
grace; as he is the God of all pardoning, so he is the God of all purging and
purifying unto the soul of each believer: grace therefore is good, and duties
are good, seek for all, we should do so, perform all, we ought to do so; but
Oh, a Christ, a Christ, a Christ, in all, above all, more then all. Thus I have
showed the way to the Lord Jesus, I have showed you also how you may come to be
implanted into the Lord Jesus; and now I leave you in the Hands of a Savior, in
the Bowels of a Redeemer, and I think I cannot leave you better.

FINIS. Soli Deo Gloria.

