An exact COPY OF A LETTER, Sent to William Laud late Archbishop of
Canterbury, now Prisoner in the Tower, November the 5. 1641. At which his
Lordship taking exceptions, the Author visited him in his own person: and
having admittance to him, had some private discourse with him; concerning the
cruelty, in which he formerly reigned in his power. The substance whereof is
truly composed by the Author himself. Wherein does appear a sign of complying
with the times, and some hopes of his Repentance.



London Printed for H, W. and T.B. 1641.

An exact Copy of a Letter, sent to the Bishop of Canterbury, now prisoner in
the Tower, Novem. the 5. 1641.
My Lord,
YOur participating the sudden evils, and daily alterations incident to terrene
frailty, and Natures imbecility, has occasioned me, as well as others, to
pass my judgment on your former course of life; and though I do with most
consent, you have done evil, yet do I not with many consent, you have done it
knowingly, but rather ignorantly, etc. by imprisoning Gods people, unjust
proceedings, etc. The complainents in this case, are the Delinquents
themselves, many of which will not be persuaded to have such a charitable
thought, as I have of you: and I verily believe, that men do omit the Christian
duty to pray for you; wherefore, my humble request unto your Lordship is, that
you would be pleased to condescend so far below your self, as to vouchsafe by
way of answer hereunto, to vindicate your own innocence, and my charity. So
also, shall they I hope, who are otherwiseminded, be convinced of their harsh
and uncharitable Censure, and so be brought to be otherwise minded: that so J
with them, and they with me, may with one accord say, concerning you, and other
offenders, after the examples of our Savior, Father forgive them, for they know
not what they do: and with his Martyr Stephem Lord lay not this sin to their
charge,

My Lord I am, Your Lordships in all humbleness, A.

THe letter being delivered to my Lords own hand (...) read it over the
messinger being by, to whom (...) told that the Author had abused him: and done
him wrong; which when the author understood, he went himself to him the next
Lords day to the Tower, where he had admittance to his presence.

Of whom first he craved pardon for boldness; but the Bishop, laying aside
that complementing with him, rebuked him for his letter, especially for
charging him with imprisoning Gods people.

He answered, my Lord, quoth he, J have been both an Eye and an Eare-witnesse
at the High commission court, when men truly fearing God, have bin called to
the Bar, and your Lordship has commanded to give them the oath which when they
hove refused, you have committed them to prison? No, quoth my Lord, it is well
known I have showed great favor and clemency to those obstinatemen, in that I
have sometime forborne them a twelve month together; and have in the mean
time referred them to Godly and learned Doctors and Ministers, for satisfaction
in that point: and when they out of willfulness and obstinacy, would not be
satisfied, I could do no less by the order of the Court then commit them to
prison,

Then he told my Lord, that he was confident it was not out of willfulness,
nor obstinacy, that they refused the Oath, but rather out of tenderness of
conscience, they being not satisfied of the lawfullnesse of it.

That is more then ytu know, quoth my Lord?

It may be, quoth he, I know some of the men, and their conversation, that they
are very godly men, and you know my Lord, our Savior warrants to judge the Tree
by the fruits?

Stay, quoth my Lord, you and I differ in that point.

Then my Lord, said the man, it seems you did it ignorantly according to my
thoughts of you not knowing them to be the servants of God?

I had nothing to do to judge their p^s^ns said the Bishop, nor question
whether they were the servants of God or no, I judge all to be the servants of
God until they apparently show the contrary, but their action I judge to be
evil, and what a matter was it to imprison 3. or 4. of them in a twelve months
space, and in the mean time let thousands in the City go free, and if we had
not taken such a course with some of them, the number would have so increased,
and men would have taken liberty to have done what they list. as now we see
they do since we see authority, suppressed?

Then he told the Bishop that he makes no doubt, my Lord, if it please the Lord
that the Parliament go on they will take order that men shall not do what
they list, and though it seem good unto them to suppress that government,
which has bin heretofore, yet I hope they will establish another.

J pray God they may, for it is a lamentable thing to consider what disorder
there is amongst people, at this time when men are suffered to frequent
Conventicles, without Restraint.

Nay, therein my Lord you much mistake, for though I my self am a mean
Scholar: and therefore know not so well as your Grace, what a Conventicle is:
yet have I heard that a conventicle is properly, when a company of men meet
together, to a wicked intent, to plot and devise mischief to the Church or
State: which I am certain, these men you mean are far from; for though I my
self have not much frequented such Assemblies: for which I think, I have
rather cause to condemn, then justify my self. Yet am I sure, that in their
Assemblies, they pray earnestly for the King, and all in Authority*

Tell me, quoth the Bishop, what warrant have they to meet, it may be forty or
threescore together, on such an occasion.

My Lord, quoth he, you know the prophet Malachi says, then they that feared
the Lord, spoke often one to another, and does not the Apostle command us, not
to forsake the fellowship of the Saints, but to edify one another. Then the
Bishop told him, that he said not that, with out the consent of Authority; can
they not do this neighbor, with neighbor in public Congregations.

My Lord, quoth he, it may be these men are persuaded in their consciences,
that the Lord calls them to humbling themselves, in fasting and prayer: and it
may be authority does not see it meet to appoint a day: is it evil in them
then, some two or three families, it may be ten or twelve persons to meet
together to spend a day on that occasion. And they cannot do this alone by
themselves; for men are apt to be dull and drousie when they are alone: and
therefore they think it meet to be together, to stir up one another, as you
know, my Lord, the more fuel is laid on the fire, the hotter it burns, and
the more it flames.

When he heard this, he smiled, and almost laughed out: flames; indeed, I
think so, but said he in your Letter, you quote Scripture, that some in
killing Gods Saidts, shall think they do him service, and you say, you take
me to be one of them. But I think, if you rightly understand your self, you
would take your self to be one of them: for what warrant have you to call me a
sensual man? Ye say you judge the tree by the fruits, I pray you, what fruits
have you seen to judge so of me.

My Lord, quoth he, I have seen and heard such things at the high Commission
Court, as have caused me to conclude undoubtedly: if you had bin enlightened
with the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, you would not have sitten there,
though the place were never so honorable.

Why quoth the Bishop what things have you seen and heard.

First my Lord saw he, I will tell by e^perience as touching m^ self: I have
been seized on by your Pursevant, and had to the registers Office, and been
bound over to the Court, and there taken oath, and have come again to the
Registers Office and there waited many a days, and at last have been examined
and afterward waited again at the Court, and yet never heard more of it: but
indeed it was but the pursevants manner to bring me in. But is not this a
miserable thing, my Lord, that I and others should be thus served, and must
never know their accuser, nor recover any damage.

Then he told him, that it was not in the power of that Court to give damage,
or else I could willingly have given it many times, and as for calling you in
with out any accuser, it was in our power to do it according to the Law of the
Court, and the Kings advocate was to accuse you: but did ever any of you come
to me in the week day, and pray me to let you know your accuser, or dismiss
you and J denied it.

No my Lord, quoth he, I cannot say you did.

Then my Lord asked him what his name was, and what was the matter he was
brought in for: for that you say, quoth he, you were so served.

I pray my Lord; quoth he, spare me in that, for I am not willing to tell you
my name, and indeed the knowledge of it would be no gain to you. but might be
hurtful to me: for it is not impossible, but you may come into authority
again, and then you may call me before you, and chide me for this my bold
attempt.

Even as pleases God, quoth the Bishop: but I will here pass my word before
your friend, meaning the Messenger that carried the Letter, that you shall
never hear more of it: no if you have such thoughts of me, you are deceived in
me, and many of you have bin much mistaken in me.

But yet he told my Lord, he desired to be spared in that. Well if you think it
meet to tell me your name quoth the Bishop, do as you please. Then the Author
took occasion to envy against the Officers of the Court, and especially the
Purseuants, seeing they were the natorion, sest Drunkaods and Swearers as could
be found among-men. And he said, I am persuaded that if your Lordship had bin
enlightened, you would not have suffered such about you. Alas, said he, it
cannot be helped, for none but such will be in those places, I pray consider
that me Lord Mayors Sergeants are not the honestest men.

Then was there speeched had about those men they call Puritans and precisians.
And the Bishop affirmed it twice over, that he thought in his conscience, there
were as honest men given them that name, as any were in London, we cannot, said
he, be too pure, if we consider the strictness of Gods Law: but yet, said he,
I am persuaded, that many of those simple-hearted men are seduced, sometimes by
others that are more cunning then they, but I ever had a tender care over the
conscience of men, I stand not on the word puritan, but if a man be an honest
man, what ever he is I do approve of him. Indeed, my Lord, quoth he, it may
be, there may be some Hypocrites that may have that name put upon them, as you
know among our Saviors Disciples there was one Judas, but yet, my Lord, it is
pity the true-hearted should fare the worse for their sake.

FINIS.

