ADVERTISEMENT, Of a late Book by the same Author, viz. Vates Astrologicus, or
Englands Astrological-Prophet, etc. Sold by Thomas Malthus, at the Sun in the
Poultry.

A Diurnal Speculum, FOR THE Year of our LORD GOD, 1684.

BEING The Bissextile, or LEAP-YEAR, With Annual and Mon^^^^ Predictions and
Progn^stications ASTROLOGICALLY Handled.

(Written and Designed for the Press in Aug, 1683. but its Publication
prevented by the Printers T^merity.)

Wherein was foretold, in D^cemb. 1683. the late and unheard of Frost; with
the Events that may probably and suddenly ensue thereon.

By Richard Kirby, Student in Astrology and Physic.

Coeli ennarant Dei fortis, and opus Manuum ejus judicat expansum coram,

Psalm. 19.1 The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his
Handiwork, etc.

LONDON, Printed by John Bringhurst, at the sign of the Book and Three
Black-Birds, in Leaden Hall Mutton-Market, (who formerly Lived at the Book in
Grace Church Street) 1684.

The Preface to the Reader.
AS the Fall of Man made himself, and all other Creatures subject to Vanity;
so, by Reason thereof, the most Noble and Excellent Arts, wherewith the
Rational Soul was endued, are by the rusty Canker of Time, brought unto
Corruption; for Astrology it self, which the Ancients did so highly esteem of,
is scandalized with bearing the Badge of Conjuration, Witchcraft, and all
Diabolical Sorceries: Many Men there are, that hate the very Name of Astrology;
and why is that? because they understand it not. Therefore, I may very well
say; Pauci intelligunt, multi reprehendunt, and sicut Canes ignotos semper
allatrant; Few understand, many reprehend, and as Dogs bark at those they know
not. I know all, or most of the Objections that are made against the Art; and
could with great Ease answer them, and their reproachful Tongues and Calumnies;
who call it Conjuration, Witchcraft; and therefore unlawful: I could produce
sufficient Arguments, to prove, that Devils know not Future Events any more
than Men do; (i. e.) that is, by the same Signs. And as to the common
Objection, (viz.) That it hinders Prayer, and other Dutie^, and is an
Encouragement to Atheism: It Is no more b^t what is o^j^cted against the great
Doctrine of Election and Reprobation; and ha^h ^he same Answer, though I must not
now stand thereon: For m^ own part, I know no b^^ter Argument against the One,
nor for the Other, than This or That. But, in fine, learn first to be a good
and sound Christian, and afterward a good Astrologer; and thou will see so
much of God's Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, as will make thee love and serve him
the more* and with that holy King David, to say, When I behold, and consider
the Heavens, the Work of thy Fingers, the Moon, and the Stars, which thou have
ordained: What is Man, that thou art mindful of him, etc. For the Heavens
declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his Handywork: Day unto Day
u^tereth Speech, and Night unto Night shows Knowledge; Psalm. 8 19.

And why any Man should be more offended with me, for making Observation, and
giving my Judgment upon the Stars Inclinations; than with a Physician, who by
the Pulse or Urine, tells the Disease of a Sick Patient; I know not; nor will
any, I hope: seeing that if my Conjectures hit, I am not the Cause* and if
(...), they no ways the worse: For it is not to be expect^d, but I should
sometimes miss; for, Mult most de Rebus Coelestibus asiquid co^no^cere; It is
much to know a litile of Heavenly things, the best of us know but in part, and
are of mistaken too; for as we are Men, may err* Yet I may say thus far; Let
Man live merely as a Natural Man, without Spark of Grace, the Influence of the
Stars predominates* but where Grace rules, the Stars obey. This I mean in Men's
Qualities, etc.

But to conclude: I shall say a word or two to the ignorant Inhabitants of
Ful-^^m: which have been either Taylers, Foot-bo^s, Grooms, Brick-place-Boys,
or the like; I mean all those which condemn that harmless, us full, pious, and
judicious Art of Astrology; whom the Ancients and Learned so highl^ esteemed
of, in all Ages; and now is scandalized and condemned by such idle, illiterate
Fellows as those, who scarcely know the h^ssing of a Snake, from a Goose; but,
like Parra^s, talk without Book, etc.

Hence you fiery Zealots: you I dare to tell,
That ^str^logy is from H^aven, and not from H^ll.
It^s no Black Art, nor damned N^cromancy:
^or no Witchcraft, as you Fools please to fancy.
Your shallow Brains thinks all that's hard or high,
Is unlawful, or else Impossibility.
But hence carping Critleks* it is past your Skill*
Hence envious Momes, converting Good to Ill.
Hence dull Conce^pts, which have not true discerning:
Hence all at once, which lack or Love, not Learning.
You thick-scull^d Fops, which presume herein to peep:
And think there is Nonsense, because it is so deep.
I pray sit down, and plod on what you have read:
And learn with your Nails to scratch a wiser Head.
For my Good Name may live, when yours is dead:
Although by your malicious Tongues it is murdered.
Then go you Momes: I am sure it is no sin
To say, You look like Asses in a Lions Skin.
Perhaps some of these Fops will be apt to say, I am no Scholar; and therefore
will reason within themselves, and say, We know his Education and bringing up;
and therefore, how should he u^derstand these Things, etc?

All such I answer with these following Words of the Learned Carden; Ate and a
Scientia, etc. It Is from thy Self, and Science or Learning, and from no Man's
Teaching, etc. as we read in Holy Writ; On whom I will have Mercy, I will have
Mercy, says the Lord. Therefore, since it is the Lord's Mercy and Goodness
toward me, I am bound to render Praise unto Him, for his great Goodness, and
loving Kindness toward me at all times. And thus much from him, who is

A True and Loyal Subject to the King, and a Lover of his Country, Richard
Kirby.
Fulham, August the ^0th. 1683.
Astrological Judgments on the Year, 1684. beginning March the 9th. one Hour
fifty seven minutes past Noon; at which time the Sun touches the first Scruple,
or Point of that Equinoctial sign Aries, the Ascendant of Great Britain, etc.
March the 9th. 1684. one Hour 57 Min. past Noon.

Lat. 51 degrees. 32 min. Londini.



Prudentis est multa Dissimulare:

It is a Wise Man's part, not to take notice of many things.

THE Angles of this Figure are all fixed, and Saturn is in the Ascendant, and
there Retrograde with that notable fixed Star, viz. Cor Leonis.

Attendes in Revolutionibus annorum Mundi, si fuerit, Saturn^s in signo fixo,
quo niam habet tunc significare Mortali^atem, and terrae Nascentium penurium
atque Diminutionem: sed in Leone fortius atque durius, and durabilius quam in
aliis.

Mark: If in Revolutions of the Years of the World, Saturn be found in a fixed
Sign; for that then he signifies Mortality, Penury, and Dimunition of things
growing in and upon the Earch: But if in Leo, more strongly and hardly, and of
longer continuance, than in other Signs.

Si fuerit ejus Latitudo Septentrionalis significat, corruptionem Aeris, and
ejus grossitudinem ac tenebrasitatem in temporibus debitis acconsuetis plus
solito.

If his Latitude shall be North, he bodes Corruption of the Air, thickness and
darkness thereof, at due and accustomed Times, more than usual.

Si fuerit Occidentalis, Pestilentias quae venient in terrae Mortalitaten.

If Occidental, Pestilential Diseases and Mortality to ensue in the Land.

Si Retrogradus gravitates venturas ex accidentibus quae venient hominibus, and
quod prolongabuntur, and erunt durabiles.

If Retrograde, great heaviness proceeding from Accidents that shall befall Men,
and that the same be prolonged, and durable, etc.

And because Saturn applies to a Trine of Mars, by his Retrograde Motion, who
is posited in the 9th. near the Body of Venus, who rules the Mid-heaven:
Therefore, I judge his Holiness feels himself begin to decline; yea, both he
and his whole Dominions: For Saturn's long Transit through the Sign Leb,
besides his Tripple Conjunction with Jupiter in the same, makes Him, and most
of the Italian Princes, begin to look about them; and they find it the best of
their Play, to make Friends with their Neighbor Nations; as England, France,
Germany, Polonia, Denmark, Palestine, Naples, Syria, Burgundy, and many more
Places, which are under the Sign Aries, as may be seen by Saturn's Application
to the Trine of Mars, in the foregoing Scheme. But all this will not do; for
Saturn's Continuance almost Three Years in that Kingly Sign Leo, will show is
dire Effects to those Places under that Constellation, and its opposite Sign
Aquarius. Therefore, Turkey, Italy, and Rome, I forewarn you to prepare your
selves to entertain Showers of Judgment: for as you have taken delight in
spilling of Blood, so ere long you may live to drink it, etc.

Mars is Lord of the Year, by reason he surmounts all the rest of the Planets
in Dignity, as having most Testimonies of strength. Wherein we have great cause
to fear much Thunder and ^ightning, burning of Houses, and the like. For Carden
says, If Mars be Lord of the Year, and posited in a Fiery Sign, great Heat
follows, burning of Houses, with great Lightnings and Wars: And if Mars be
Occidental, and have Meridinal Latitude, (says a Learned Author) many Fears
and Troubles shall fall upon Men; as also, Discords and Comentions, with
Thunder and Lightnings: And yet because Mars is Powerful and Strong, and free
from Affliction, he portends much Felicity and Prosperity to all Martial
Persons in general. Soldiers will now be very successful, and perform many
notable Exploits, and overcome their Enemies, and gain good Esteem and Honor
thereby, and that in those Countries subject to the Sign Aries; perhaps in
Germany, France, Burgundy, and some other Countries not far remote, etc. But by
reason Mars is posited in the 9th. he shows danger in traveling both by Sea
and Land, as sudden Ship wracks, occasioned by several Storms and Tempests: He
also denotes Plundering of Ships by Piracy; and that the Men should be taken
Captives; and those which adventure to the East Indies; being Mars is in Aries,
an Easterly Sign: Mars was in Aries at the Sun's Ingress into Aries, 1682. What
a prodigious Fire did there break out in Wappen suddenly after? But, I hope, no
such thing this Year; for Venus, and the Sun beautifies the 9th. House, as much
as Mars deforms it; and, I hope, ties the Sword of Mars from doing much Damage,
although he be powerful, and strong. But Venus, and the Sun, in the 9th. shows,
that Men of Religious Orders should flight and remove from one House and Place
to another: And, I think, this Judgment may very well be confirmed by the
Position of that violent Mars who is naturally an Enemy to all Religion, and
Religious Persons. In fine, I shall conclude, that many Controversies will
arise in, by, from, and through the Pretense of Religion, and Religious
Matters: And this the more certain, because Jupiter, who is the Natural
Significator thereof, is posited in Virgo, the Place of his Detriment, and
there Retrograde: And because Mercury hastens to an Opposi^ion of Jupiter, we
may expect to find many underhand and pernicious Transactions agitated by the
several Agents, Messengers or Ambassadors of Europe, etc. Mercury in Domus
Mortis, shows, that many Persons should suffer Loss in their Writings, or for
want of Evidences, unhappily lost, or cas^ally destroyed; and consequently,
many Controversies and Lawsuits fomented, and stirred up; by which means many
Fatherless Children and Widows may be wronged of their proper Rights; and that
not only by Law, but by Bankrupts also, etc. Mercury is also the General
Significator of Youth, or Persons of tender Years: Therefore it is an Argument
of Mortality amongst the young and tender Branches, viz. Young Men, Maids, and
Children, etc.

Now we come to consider the Positions of the Moon, who is the general
Significator of the Common People: Her She is posited in the Mid-heaven, in her
Exacation; and no ways impedi^ed, but in Sextil of Mercury, and applying to a
Trine of Jupiter. Therefore, I judge, much of this Evil impending, will be
abated: For the Ancients tell us, That if the Moon be in the 10th. in her
Exaltation, and no ways afflicted in that Year, the People shall be in a good
and Prosperous Condition; should ^e beloved and honored by their King and
Saperiors; and that they shall be very Fort^^^^e and Happy, during the
evolution. But I must tell you, by the way, That Canda (...) the Sixth, and
Saturn, Lord thereof, in the Ascendant, does fore show strange and ^^wholsom
Air; which may cause many prodigious Diseases both to Man and Beast* as violent
Afflictions at the Heart, weak^ess in the Knees, pains in the Back,
Melancholy, Fears, and Grief, a Decay or Consum ^on in the Reins, and inward
Parts; Corruption of the Blood, Black Jaundice, Palsy, Vain Fears, Gouts of
all sorts, and many strange unheard of Diseases and Distempers: I wi^h no
Plague, etc. Neither shall we be free from many open Enemies striving to oppose
and disturb the Government, because Saturn is Lord of the Seventh: But let them
know, that their Fate is so hard, that they will not be so happy as to
accomplish their Designs, etc.

Agentes and Consentientes pari poena puniuntur:

The Doers and Consenters are punished alike.

In the next place, I shall give you an account of the Luminaries Eclipsed this
Year; four times will the Heavenly Lamps be deprived of their glorious Light,
viz. twice the Sun, and as often the Moon: The first will be an Eclipse of the
Sun, which falls on the sixth Day of January, about six at Night Invisible: It
falls in the last Face of Capricorn: It denotes Famine, and the tumultuary
Motions of Princes. The Second Eclipse is of the Moon; and it falls on the
17th. Day of June, at three of the Clock in the Morning, in the first Face of
Capricorn, and Visible. This denotes Suggestions among Men, and untimely Death
or Mischief to some Illustrious and Noble Man. The Third will be an Eclipse of
the Sun, on July the Second, about Three of the Clock Afternoon, Visible to us
in England, and almost Total; for above two Thirds of the Sun's Body will be
darkened from our Sight. It falls in the last Face of Cancer, and is made in the
9th. Angle: This denotes Seditions, Hydropical Diseases, and causes Pestilent
and Grievous Mortalities; also, Winds and Alterations of Weather, which much
troubles the Air; it al^o dries up Rivers and Fountains: Likewise, it denotes
the Death of some Great Person or Ruler, with thundering Noises and Uproars in
and about Religion, etc. But for the general Judgment, see my Treatise of the
Con^unction of Saturn and Jupiter. The Fourth and last Defect, is of the Moon,
and falls on the 11th. Day of December, at Eleven at Night, Visible, and very
great: It happens in the first Face of Cancer. This causes Wars and
Inundations, or Overflowing of the Sea-Banks; and that in Holland, Scotland,
Burgundy, Saxony, Granado, Zeland, P^usia, Hasia, Macedonia, and many more
Places, which are under the Signs Cancer and Capricorn, which are too tedious
for me here to relate; but you may find them written in Mr. G^ley's Clavis
Astrologia, Page 91, 92.

The great Defect of the Sun, happens July the second, 2 Hours, 40 Minutes
afternoon, at which time the last degree of Leo culminates, and 13 Degrees of
Scorpion ascends; the Eclipse it self is made in the 9th House, Mars and
Mercury are sole Rulers thereof. Mars is stronger than Mercury by odds.

Mars being Lord of the Eclipse, corrupts the Air by Heat, breeds Pestilential
Diseases, spoils the Fruits of the Earth, and disturbs the Sea by violent Winds
and Shipwracks: and Albumazar says, That if Mercury be joined with Mars in
signification, it signifies Pestilences, and other Epidemical Diseases by
corruption of Blood. Mercury is here very unluckily tied to the body of Mars,
both of them being in our Summer Solstice a watery Sign, and the 9th. House of
Heaven; which signifies terrible, hasty, furious Doings, violent, tempestuous,
destructive, vehement Winds; the Sea will be so dangerous, Men can scarce pass
it by reason of Shipwreck and Pyracy: And this is the more confirmed, because
Mars is in square to his place in the Revolution, where he was in the 9th.
House, as here he is now. If such things are likely to happen upon the Sea,
judge you what the Land is like to suffer, when a couple of such thieving
Planets are Lords of an Eclipse. Besides all this, the Earth suffers by Thunder
and Lightning, vehement and violent Storms; also Inundations, or Overflowing
of the Sea-Banks; It inclines Men to the taking of such things, as is none of
their own, etc. to pillaging, plundering, and seizing on Malignants Goods. It
also inclines Men to Rapine, Theft, Lying, Depopulation: It likewise procures a
Rottenness, or Corruption in the Fruits, when they are gathered; occasioning
Surfeits and Sicknesses to such as eat them; as Hydropical Diseases, which may
cause petulant and grievous Mortalities: It likewise fore-shews the Diseases of
France, Naples, Spain, England, and indeed all the World Let them as are
inclined to Venery, have a care. Again, it fore shows Sea Fights, long and
dangerous Navigations, with much Loss to the generous and industrious
Merchants; and thundering Noises and Uproars about Religion, as well at home as
abroad, and that by all sorts of People, from the highest to the lowest Degree;
for so many Planets in the 9th. House, in Conjunction in Cancer, and all in
Sextil to Jupiter, who is Exalted therein, can intimate no less than great and
fierce Disputes about Religion, and Religious Matters; Nay, the whole Body of
Truth seems to be rent and torn asunder, and the several Limbs of it in small
Iota's, and diminutive Parcels, are scattered up and down (as it were) upon the
Face of the whole Earth; each Party, and Sect of Professors, grasping at some
small Portion and Seed of Truth; and covering it under various Mixtures of
their own, which many times do steal away the Heart from the Contemplation of
Truth it self: most People eying only the Building which does appear, and
neglecting the Foundation which lies under Ground. But when the Almighty, by
the Chemistry of his Spirit, shall gather up the Fragments of Truth from every
the several Professions, (where it now lies scattered and divided, as
aforesaid) into one entire Body and Lump, How Beautiful will it then appear,
whilst every Party shall see its Hay and Stubble burnt up before their Eyes;
and their Gold (whether little or much) purified, and added to the whole Mass;
and themselves by this means no longer placing their Unity in outward Rites and
Observations, but being united and reconciled in the Common Unity of the same
Spirit, etc?

Therefore I hope now, the True Protestant Divine will begin to weed out those
Apostate Counterfeits amongst us, and disperse them to several Parts of the
World: though it is impossible to lade the Sea dry; for some will remain still,
and swear outward Conformity, etc.

Places subject to the Effects of this Eclipse, are Scotland, Granado,
Burgundy, Holland, Zeland, Prusia, Numidia, Africa, Bethinia, Calchis,
Carthage, Canstantinople, Tunis, Venis, Genoa, Lucaspisa, Millain, Vincentia,
Berne, England, France, Germany, Denmark, Austria, Alsatia, Livonia, York, St.
Andrew's in Scotland, Lubeck, Magdeburg, Whittenburg, Gerlick, Macedonia,
Illyria, Thracia, Bosinia, Albania, Oxford. Gaunt, India, etc.

So much from the great Eye of Heaven.
Prognostications on JANUARY.
Inconsulti facile ruunt.:

Unadvised Men quickly fall to ruin.

THE Year is ushered in with a Trine of Jupiter, and the Sun; but soon after we
have an Opposition between those Malefacts, viz. Saturn and Mars: also an
Eclipse of the Sun in Capricorn. Therefore I conceive, and that upon good
grounds, this Month will produce many grand Consultations, hot Disputes betwixt
the Soldiers and some Persons very Eminent, and Famous (or rather Infamous)
Men, (I mean) that have long been loaded with Authority, but are now about to
be eased of their Burdens: For some must expect to pay for their former
Roguery; for the Heavens are to Justice bent: For we have no less than four
Oppositions this Month; and opposite Aspects will have opposite Effects. If God
divert not the Course of Nature, by his Merciful Providence, in or near this
Month, most strange and wonderful Catastrophes will appear: Where Armies are
near, great Slaughters of Men will be; where prepared Naval Forces are, there
will be great Destruction of Men and Ships; where Towns or Cities are
beleaguered, there will appear and actually be great Effusion of Blood in
several Parts beyond the Seas, in those Countries subject to the Signs Virgo
and Pisces; also much Heart-grudging betwixt the Martialist, and the Gown-Man;
and in all probability; some Men found guilty of what is laid to their Charge:
Also, unwelcom Intelligence to the generous and industrious Merchants of this
Kingdom, etc. Dubious rerus event us.

The Weather.
Very hard Frosts at the Beginning hereof; (...) soon alters, and turns to Snow
or Rain, with high Winds till about the Nineth Day; then expect in more Calm:
yet very sharp and pinching Frosts about the Eirst Quarter, till about the
Twenty-third Day; then expect it to be very blustering for sometime, viz. for
six or seven Days; after which, it proves more calm to the Months End; but
sufficiently Cold and Frosty.

Prognostications on FEBRUARY.
Si Deus nobiscum quis contra nos:

If God be for us, who can be against us?

I Might have very properly discoursed of the Oppositions of Jupiter, Mars,
Saturn, and Mercury, in January's Prognostications; but for some Reasons
occurring to me in the Manuscript, I thought it might not be altogether
impertinent, to insert them where they are: and they manifest ^^to us
Superlative Actions upon the Stage, and old Matters seem to be called in
question: Infor^^tions, Impeachments, Accusations; and (...), those that shall
be found Guilty of Treason, must expect considerable Punishment, viz.
Imprisonment, or Loss of Estate; nay, perhaps, Loss of Life also. But most of
these Actions should appear beyond Sea, or in some Countries not far (...) from
England. Sudden Hopes, and we fear as (...) Alterations; for this Month is
attended with variety of Configurations of the Planets, whose Influences and
Operations may very well merit our Observations. The Opposition of Venus, and
Jupiter, and Saturn, and the Sun, at the beginning hereof, does presage strange
Overtures in the Actions of Men, in several Countries abroad, as well as
amongst our selves at home. Great Animosities in the Courts of Princes. Many
discontented Spirits appear, disturbing the Magistracy of Kingdoms and Nations.
Many loses their Offices or Employments; and some Woman found guilty of
Inconstancy: And the Opposition of the Sun and Jupiter menaces some grave
Magistrates, or Clergymen amongst us, (whether Bishops, or by any other Titles
distinquished) with some very unhappy Casualty or Disaster; it may be, Death it
self. In fine, the Month produces nothing, or very little of Good, but
Contention amongst Grandees; with whole swarms of high ranting Pamphlets and
Libels thrown about, dispersing the Seed of Treason. In This, and the next
Month, Mars is in the Sign Aries; which causes violent Pains in the Heads of
People, insomuch that they are like to go stank mad; but for what, they know
not.

The Weather.
Fine moderate Weather at the beginning of this Month, and may continue till
about the 7th. or 8th. Day: then expect high blustering Winds with Rain, and
much of it for four or five days; and then appears more calm, till about the
20th. day: After which we may expect very notable Weather, viz. both Wind and
Rain, if not Snow; and so continues more or less to the Months end: For
opposite Aspect presage no less, than u^seasonable Weather; because of the
several Apertio Partarums in this Month. I hope, no Flood, etc.

Prognostications on MARCH.
Exurgat Deus, and dessipentur Inimici:

Let God arise, and his Enemies shall be scattered.

THE Configurations of the Planets, are for the most part Benevolent this
Month; and the Malevolent Oppositions of the Planets in the Last, may influence
notable Effects in This, and Those which follow: For in many places Men are in
fear of Danger approaching; but notwithstanding, we have great hopes, there is
but little grounds for such Jealousies or Suspicions. Very notable things may
now be had in Consultation, in England, France, Germany, Polonia, and Burgundy.
The Emperor of Germany seems very active, and is no less successful; and is
very vigilant, in preventing many Inconveniences he apprehends may fall upon
some of his Empires, through and by the means of the Turks. A great Part of
this Month is spent in Counsels, and most Judicious Contrivances, vigorously
managed; still tending to the Reconciliation of Differences yet depending; and
most Persons principally concerned, being almost wearied out with long
Expectations, seem willing to agree with any reasonable Proposals. Saturn is
now Retrograde in Leo. The Turkish Emperor may have cause to look about him;
so may the Pope of Rome also. The Soldiers will be apt to rebel in some
Countries under the Influence of Aries, perhaps in France, or some Countries
not far adjacent from them. The Opposition of Mercury and Jupiter from Virgo
and Pisces, shows some Scribbling Author should be brought upon the Stage, for
abusing Authority. Mars in the Sign Aries being Warlike, adds Courage to the
undaunted Natives of England: and because we have a Sextile and Trine between
Venue, Mercury, and Jupiter, I judge happy Returns to the generous and
indu^tions Merchants of this Kingdom: also very hopeful Intelligence from the
Land of Ireland; and some Person belonging to the Long Robe, as highly
advanced. And to conclude, the Month ends with hopeful Intelligence, by the
Arrival of some Ambassador. Tempus omina Reulat.

The Weather.
Moderate at the Beginning hereof, till about the third Day; then expect flying
Clouds, with fine brisk Galas of Wind, and Rain, or Hail at the New Moon; But
March does not intend to play his part, till about the 22 or 23 Day; then
expect both Wind and Rain, and that plentifully too. After which it becomes
very pleasant, and so continues unto the end, without much Alteration.

Prognostications on APRIL.
Quod capita, tot sensus:

So many Men, so many minds, or so many opinions.

THE Configurations of the Planets this Month are many; from whence we may
expect many Disputes and Controversies to arise, and that chiefly from the
Quartile of Saturn and Mars: for they by their evil Influence, will put forward
many rash Actions, and set several hotheaded Persons a madding. Mars is in
Taurus, the Ascendant of Ireland; I hope, no Rebellion there. Likewise, God
preserve us from all Contagious Distempers, which at this time we may have just
cause to fear. At the beginning hereof, we have a Quartil of Saturn and Venus,
which does inform us of the great Indisposition of some Eminent Lady, that does
labor under some deep Melancholy, and discontent of Mind; which may bring her
Body to the Grave, and will be much lamented by most of her Friends and
Relations. To conclude, the most part of this Month will be taken up with sober
and deliberate Counsels, tending to the healing of Breaches, and composing of
Differences to good Purpose. Many worthy and deserving Persons very highly
advanced, as well the Gown-Man as the Martialist; and this Work is prosecuted
very effectually, to the honor of those Noble Hero's, that appear more than
ordinary active.

Beatissimus civit as, quae a Saplentibus Regitur.

The Weather.
Now we may expect to see the Old Proverb made good; for March borrows three
days of April, and they are ill; but quickly becomes very pleasant, with a show
of fine, pleasant, spreading, white Clouds, till about the 15th. or 16th. day;
then expect fine moderate Showers of Rain or Hail; and about the 25th. day,
expect Thunder and Lightning, and very pleasant to the end of the Month.

Prognostications on MAY.
Ubi Dolor, ibi Digitus:

Where the Pain is, there the Finger is.

MAny are the Configurations of the Superior Bodies, in this Month of May.
Mars, the Sun, and Mercury, do all pass through the Sign Gemini; and we have no
less than five Quadrate Aspects between Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, and
Mercury: I wish, it portends no unhappy Casualty unto the worthy Inhabitants of
the City of London, either by the Heats of Passion, or the private Interests of
a Malicious Crew of Rascals, who pretend Religion and Conscience; and yet
neither fears God, nor honors their King. The Square of Jupiter and Mars,
seems to aggravate the Danger; and shows, that here are too many amongst us,
who do condemn the Worthy and Honorable Clergy; as may be seen by the Square
of Mercury, Mars, and the Sun, to Jupiter. God preserve our Worthy and Famous
City of London, with her numerous Inhabitants, from Fire, Plague, Pestilence,
and other Calamities: For some Prudential People of London, fear an approaching
general Disease amongst us; and others find Molestation by tedious and
troublesome Lawsuits, which too many delight in. Also, many Difficulties arise
in the Councils of Nations; and many Persons are summoned into the other World
by Death, who is the King of Terrors. Therefore, hot Disputes between France
and S^ain, if I mistake not. Mors est inevitabilis.

The Weather.
(...) M^^th (...) near to he very unseasonable; for so many Malevolent Aspects
of the Planets from Earthly Signs, does promise very cold Mornings, with sharp
Frosts; which will be very unwelcome to the Husbvndman: also, they promise
Hail, Rain, and Wind, till about the 25th. day; but afterward becomes very
pleasant, and so lasts to the Months End.

Prognostications one JUNE.
Mala herba non perit:

An evil Weed dies not.

THis Month the two Malefacts, viz. Saturn and Mars, changes their Stations;
Mars passes into the Sign Cancer, and Saturn into Virgo: and we have a Visible
Eclipse of the M^on also, on the 17th. Day in Capricorn, near to an Opposition
of Mars. Now the Ancients tells us, That Eclipses in Capricorn are the
Forerunners of Sterillity of the Earth, and the tumultuary Motions of Princes,
and that in those Places under the Signs Cancer and Capricorn. It likewise
signifies, that some Great and Eminent Person shall depart this Lise, in a
terrible and deplorable Condition; and that Men shall be given to slander, and
betray one another, and that under the Pretense and Species of Religion;
because the Eclipse is made in the 9th. House of Heaven: and because it is made
in the Exaltation of Mars, and near his Opposition, it will excite Men's Minds
to quarrel* and new Attempts of War, with Treachery and Sedition. Holland be
quiet, and meddle not with War; but, Necessity has no Law. Omne malum nascens
facile opprimitur, but every Evil at its first coming up, is easily suppressed.
Mars is now in Conjunction with the Sun in Gemini: Heavens bless an Eminent
Worthy of this World from all Dangers; and let the Hand of Providence be ever
over the City of London, and her numerous Inhabitants; and let Spain seek out
for a good Physician. Were it not in the Heat of Summer, we might expect the
Appearance of another Comet, because of Saturn is leaving the Sign Leo; but
because it is at this time, I shall say no more of it; yet strange Apparitions
may be, if not Gapings of the Earth, etc.

The Weather.
Curious pleasant and seasonable Weather, at the beginning hereof, and may so
continue till about the 7th. day; then expect it to be very tempestuous, viz.
both Thunder and Lightning, if not Wind also; but afterward it continues very
pleasant, till Saturn and Mars change their Stations, and then becomes somewhat
blustering, but continues not long. Expect Rain near the End.

Prognostications on JULY.
Seditiosis nunquam felicites cessit:

It never went well with Seditious Men.

NOw the Jesuits, and Jesuitical Tribe stretch their Wits, even till they
break them, to fight against the Decrees of Heaven; for so says the late
Tribble Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Leo. I hope now the Romish Party
will begin to Repent, their being so cruel to those innocent and harmless
Protestants: Therefore, let them know, that hard is their Fate; for here is a
bitter Potion prepared for them. Saturn has now left the Sign Leo, the
Conjunction will begin to opperate; and to be sure they will feel its dire
Effects. Therefore, if the Turks does enter some of their Territories, let them
think of me. We have a notable Visible Eclipse of the Sun in Cancer, and Mars
suddenly transits the Degree thereof; and so does Mercury too. The Soldier is
all for Plunder in some of the Northern Countries, viz. in those Countries
under Cancer and Capricorn, Virgo and Pisces, Aries and Libra: But we in
England are in a good and prosperous Condition; God continue it: but still
plagued with whole swarms of Pamphlets and Libels stuffing the Ears of People
with strange things. To conclude, the Month produces very notable
Consultations, and that for the general Good. God give us Hearts to be
thankful. Jupiter and Mars is now in Sextil. Oh brave Soldier, be of good
Cheer, the Heavens have allotted a Pharsalia for thee; where thou shall not
lose, but gain. To conclude, much Good may be expected this Month; the Lord
make us fit to receive it! The Sextil of Mercury and Venus, and Mercury and
Jupiter, promise happy and prosperous Returns of our Merchants Ships.

The Weather.
The fourth day or there abouts, we have a Conjunction of Mars and Mercury in
Cancer, which portends both Hail, Rain, and Thunder, and that very
considerable; but continues not long, but grows temperate, and so continues
without much Alteration, to the end of the Month: yet we may expect it to be
very hot, if not Thunder-Storms in some Places about the Full Moon.

Prognostications on AUGUST.
Ubi quis dolet, ibidem and manum habet:

Where one feels it smart, there he lays his hand

VEry notable Consultations in several eminent Places of Europe, a^e held this
Month, which is attended with no less than ^ix Conjunctions of the Planets; but
what those D^bates and Resolutions are, will not be suddenly made public; for
they are Matters of very high Concernment, and will relate to those Countries
under Virgo and Pisces, as Portugal, Normandy, Greece, Carinthia, Babylon, the
Dukedom of Athens, Gallia, Lions, Paris, and Basil. The Conjunction of the Sun
with Saturn, shows that many aged Persons of high and low degree, make their
Exit, and bid Adieu to Thi^ World; some by sudden Deaths, and some otherwise,
perhaps by the Hand Justice; for several guilty Persons, who have lain dormant
along time, now with heavy sorrowful Spirits, fear a fatal Discovery. Toward
the latter end of the Month Mars passes the Degree of the Conjunction (...)
Saturn and Jupiter; which will produce very strange Catastrophes in Italy and
Rome; as burning of Houses, Massacres, and Incursions of Armies, o^ at
leastwise strange Divisions among Themselves At the latter End of the Month,
Jupiter passes into Libra; which brings happy Tidings to the Hou^ of Austria:
but our Young Men die apace; an^ much Complaint amongst the common sort of
People, for want of Trade and Moneys.

The Weather.
Fine pleasant, seasonable Weather, at the beginning hereof, and may continue
till about the 15th. day, without any considerable alteration; therefore,
rejoice Farmer, at the sight of a brave Harvest; but after the 15th. day,
expect considerable Alteration, viz. both Wind, Rain, and Thunder; and so
continues more or less, to the end of Month: Therefore, Tak^ Time whilst Time
does last;
For Time is no Time, when Time is past.


Prognostications on SEPTEMBER.
Perturbato cordi nihil est jucundum.

Nothing is pleasant to a troubled Heart.

VEnus is now with the Body of Saturn in Virgo. Some Eminent Person about this
Time, is much afflicted with Melancholy, and in all probability, may return to
the Rock from whence she was hewn: But this Conjunction of Saturn and Venus,
does not only concern one Woman but many; and I fear, will cause them to shed
Tears, instead of wearing Pearls. Now Mars passes the Ascendant, and the Place
of Saturn in the Revolution. Mars was Lord of the 4th. and Saturn of the 6th.
and 7th. The Great God of Heaven deliver us from Fires, and all Contagious
Diseases, now and for ever more. The Heavens seem now to move toward an Accord;
and when the Celestial Bodies agree, there is some hopes we should do the like.
Jupiter is now with the Body of the Sun, and Saturn, Mars, and Venus, are all
in Sextile with Mercury. O Heavens! now the Man of Learning is exalted, and had
in great Request: and we have very rational hopes of Unity, or at leastwise a
better Understanding amongst the People in general, than has been some few
Years past, etc. Mars in Conjunction with Venus, shows some Eminent Lady in
danger of a Stab, or questioned for her Honesty. About the 18th. or 19th. day,
Mars passes the very Degree he was in, at the Time of the Conjunction of Saturn
and Jupiter; therefore, let all Places under the Sign Virgo look to it; for he
will stir up strange Divisions amongst them. I heartily wish, no Massacre there
in this, or the succeeding Month, etc.

The Weather.
The Conjunction of Saturn and Venus, at the beginning hereof, does promise
very cold Rain; but soon alters, and becomes more mild, till about the 16th.
day; then expect high Winds, but not very Cold, etc. Fine pleasant Weather now:
for 6 or 7 days; but then expect much Rain, viz. about the New Moon: yet the
Month ends very seasonable, etc.

Prognostications on OCTOBER.
Concordia Ecclesia Regenda est:

The Church is to be governed by Concord.

THE ponderous Planet Saturn moves very swiftly forward in the Sign Virgo; but
is suddenly over-taken by Mars, who is not improperly termed a Tory amongst the
Stars: which Conjunction threatens Babylon, Assyria, Gallia, Carinthia, the
Dukedom of Athens, Mesopotamia, Jerusalem, Achaia, Greece, Creet, Lions,
Paris, and Basil, with Mutinies, Tumults, Wars, Commotions of Armies,
Treacheries, Massacres, and strange Rebellion; for Mars is a Stirrer up of
Sedition: Therefore causes great Slaughter of Men, where there is frequent
Motions of Arms. But I hope, that we in England continue in a good and
p^ospe^ous Condition, and our Foundation ^est firm and unshaken; and that we
enjoy both Peace and Quietness, though there be a continual Repining an o^gst
the common and vulgar sort of People, for want of Trade, etc. Great are the
Counsels and Consultations of this Month. God direct our Superiors, or
Representatives, in the Management of those ^^ighty Affairs that are now before
them* In ^ine, Many Persons are very highly advanced, and some struck into as
deep Melancholy of Mind: and some Eminent Lady makes her Exit toward the End

The Weather.
About the Third or Fourth Day, expect very tempestuous Weather; for the
Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in Virgo, seems to aggravate the same, and may
continue very wet and slabby, till the Nineth or Tenth Day; and then appears
more calm, till about the 22th. Day: at which time look for much more Rain, for
Four or Five Days; but afterward it appears more mild, and so continues to the
End.

Prognostications on NOVEMBER.
Tempore fiunt omina:

All Things are done in Time.

MArs now enters the Sign Libra, wherein he was at the time of the second and
last Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, in January and May 1683. The A^strian
Cedars begin to shake; neither does it go ^ell with Alsatia, Livonia, Caspia;
and indeed, all those Places under Libra. The Italian Princes begin to decline,
and Germany fears no less than Devastation; and Polonia, Burgundy, France, and
D^n^ark, are much dissatisfied: But England stands upon a Rock, and her
Foundation rests firm and unshaken. God so continue it to the End of the World.
About the middle of the Month, we have a Conjunction of Jupiter and Venus in
Libra; which may somewhat assuage the Malice of Mars: It also portends the
Marriage of some worthy Lady amongst us; as also the Preferment of some worthy
deserving Person, belonging either to the Ecclesiastical or Legal Function.
Many are the Consultations in this Month of November, and that for the general
Good. The Sun labors to unite Mars and Jupiter; but Saturn destroys their
Hopes. He that is an Artist, knows what I mean. Mars pursues the Body of
Jupiter in the Balance

The Weather.
Fine pleasant Weather at the beginning hereof, Consideration being had to the
Season of the Year, and may continue for the most part, viz. till about the
26th. or 27th. Day, without any considerable Alteration; perhaps now and then
some small Gales of Wind, and gentle Showers of Rain; but about the 27th. Day,
expect some notable Alteratian, with Wind or Rain; but ends pleasant..

Prognostications on DECEMBER.
Difficillimum vincere Naturum:

It is a very hard thing to conquer Nature.

MAny are the Configurations of the Planets, in this Month of December; and
amongst the rest, we ought to ta^e particular Notice of the Conjunction of Mars
and Jupiter, in the Celestial Balance at the beginning hereof. All Men that
are but meanly versed in the Art of Astrology, knows, that Jupiter principally
signifies all things concerning Religion, the more Pu^e and Orthodox Principals
thereof, relating to Church Discipline, or the Worship of God: and Mars
signifies all Martial and Military Affairs, Wars, Commotions, Insurrections,
Massacres, Persecutions, and Murders, Firing of Houses, Cities, and Towns,
Theft, Rapine, and all manner of Tyranny, Oppression, and Villainy. Therefore,
what shall we judge from this Conjunction, but some such unhappy Disaster to
happen in those Countries under Libra; yea, many Contentions to happen amongst
those which are of the highest Degree and Quality. Mercury is both their
Counsels; but he will deceive one in the end; and the Sun will aggravate the
Danger. But how happy are we, if we could but think our selves so? And many
Persons, according to their Merits, are as highly advanced; and our Merchants
have very Prosperous Returns. And so God save the KING. Amen.

The Weather.
This Month begins very turbulent, and will produce either Snow or Rain, about
the 4th. 5th. or 6th. Days; but suddenly becomes more temperate: yet very cold
Mornings, and sharp Frosts now and then, between whiles, till the 19th. Day;
then expect Rain or Snow; but no great quantity, yet Winter-like Weather: But
from the 21st. to the 26th. Day, it proves very moderate; after which expect
notable turbulent Weather to the End.

Reader,
WHereas there is lately come into the World a Pamphlet by one T. T. and is
entitled, Modest Obs^rvations concerning the great Frost, etc. wherein he
says, None of our Astrologers did foresee any such thing. Now although it is
not Modesty in me, for to give him the Lie; yet if I should, he may take it for
his Pains: Witness these following Persons, whom I told of it long before it
happened. But if any one has a Desire to know what manner of Person he is, let
them repair to Mr. John Ga^bury, who is able to give an Account of him. And
farther, let T. T. know, that he is not worthy to carry the Books after our
Annual Writers: Therefore, let him not condemn their Judgments in this, or the
like Case; for indeed, he has reason to say, (and that a great deal too) That
there is something in Astrology, etc.

But for his, or any others further Satisfaction, let them enquire of Mr.
Thomas Ledsom, at the Bell in Cannon-Street, Plummer; Mr. John King, at the
Naggs head in Fulham; John Douff^y and William Botley of Battersea; Philip
Mayle and William Apsl^y at the Neat Houses; Mr. Watts and Mr. To^b^ot of
Chelsey; John Jones of Putney; and several of the Watermen at Fulham, Putney,
and Chelsey: I say, All these are able to satisfy the World, That I told them
almost half a Year before the Frost began, That the River of Thames would be
frozen over before N^w-Years-Day, and would stand for a considerable Time, viz.
till Candlemass, or thereabouts.

Besides, in the Copy of my Almanac which was wrote for the Year 1683. in the
Month of December, was these Prognostications of the Weather:

Remiss of Cold begins this Month, with many dark flying Clouds, producing Wind
and Snow, and now and then a small Frost; but continues not long, and so turns
to Rain and Wind: After which follows sharp Frosts, and k^^n Air; for Saturn
in Virgo produces a sharp Month. What if the River of Thames be Frozen over,
ere this Month ends, etc?

The aforesaid Copy is to be seen at the Publisher's hereof.

A true Systeme of the Visible World, explained according to Copurnicus,
December the 11th. 1684.


ACcording to the foregoing Systeme, the Sun is the Center of the Lower World,
which, without doubt, is the Point and Place of his Situation; and above the
Sun, in the first Orb next the Center, is placed Mercury; who accomplisheth his
Revolutions, through the 12 Signs of the Zodiac, in 88 days. Venus moves in
the next Sphere, and finisheth her Course through the Zodiac Signs, in 225
days. In the next Sph^re is the E^rth, who makes her Course about the Body of
the Sun, in a Year. About the Body of the Earth, is the Sphere of the Moon; who
performs her Course in a Month Next above the Earth, wheels Mars; who performs
his Perambulation in two Years, and no less, because his Orb is much larger
than the Earths. The next is the Sphere of Jupiter; wh^ performs his Revolution
in twelve Years. And lastly, in the highest Orb of all, is old Saturn; who
m^^es his Progress through the Zodiac, but once in t^irty Years.

Dear Countrymen: I having taken this short Survey of the Planetary ^pheres,
and ascended from the Center to the Circumference; (...) am now (...) stand, to
behold the vast Distance of the fixed Stars; when^s so ^xceeding far, that they
are altogether void of Paraliax of the Annual Orb. Therefore i^ is beyond the
Capacity of Man, to obtain their Distance exactly, etc

My present Ta^k in hand is to prove, That the Earth moves about the Sun, and
not the Sun round the Earth: Therefore, I shall have recourse to the former
Figure or Systeme of the ^orld, wherein the great outward Circle represents the
Zodiac, or Eight Sphere, in which the 12 Signs are placed according to their
Natural Order: and that I may the better explain the Figure, I have placed the
Planets b^th Heliocentrical, and Geocentrical to the Meridian of the 11th Day
of December, 1684. Whereof the former is noted with a pr^c^t Line, being
directed from the Sun; but the latter (which is the true Place from the Earth)
with a Black Line; both of them passing through the Body of the Planet, to the
Zodiac, and the Angle made at the Planet, by the In^ersection of the said
Lines, is called the Parallax of the ^nnual Orb: which Angle, as it increases
or decreaseth, in respect of the mutual Position of the Planet, and the Earth,
their separation one from another, or applying one to the other, is the sole
reason, that the Planets are b^th Direct, Retrograde, and Stationary; sometimes
near the Earth, and sometimes far distant, as here in this Figure. The true
place of old Saturn from the Sun represented by the pricked Line A, falls in 12
degrees 30 min.; but his true pl^ce in the Zodiac, as we b^hold it at the Earth is
^7 degrees. 8 min. of the same Sign, as it is showed by the Line Earth b; so that
the Angle Earth (is equal to the Angle A b) and is 4 degrees. 38 min. which is the
Parallax of the Earths Orb; and makes the Planet appear farther in the Zodiac,
at the Earth, than at the Sun; and that you may know whether Saturn be Direct
or Retrograde, we see it plainly by Inspection with our Eyes; for the Earth
moving switter toward z, than Saturn does toward n, it follows, that he is
now Stationary to Retrogradation, and his Place w^ll appear more backward in
the Zodiac, till the Earth comes to z, which will be the Third of May: on
which day, ^aturn becomes Direct, after some few days being Stationary, as you
may perceive by the Scheme.

In ^upiter's Orb you may observe, that his true Place from the Sun are is 12
degrees. 10 min. of: but his true P^ace from the Earth at D, is 19 degrees 50 min, of
the same Sign, whereby the Angle c D, which is equal to the Angle Earth is 7
degrees. 40 min. And because the Earth moves sw^tter toward ^, than Jupiter does
towardt, the Line drawn through the Body of Jupiter, will make him appear every
Day further and further in the Zodiac, ^ntil such time as ^h^ Earth comes to
o: at which time he will seem Station^ry for two or three days: and then will
be apparently Retrograde, until such time as the Earth comes to (...); as you
may see by observing their Motions upon the Figure. Also, if you look upon
Mars, you shall find his Place from the Sun to be 6 degrees. 35 min. of: but if you
take his Place from the Earth, it will be 24 degrees. 11 min of the same Sign; and
you may see also by the Figure, it is not long since he was with the Body of
Jupiter, and in Sextile of Mercury. He has been Direct a long time, and will
continue till the Earth comes to a: then he comes Retrograde, and will appear
of a greater Magnatude than ordinary, because he will be nearer the Earth. Let
any Man observe the Time, and he shall find it most containly true: If Mars be
above the Earth, as I am sure he will, the Time is April the 15th. 1685. In a
word, Venus and Mercury are also both Direct: Mercury is near the Body of the
Sun, Venus is in the Sextile to Saturn, and the Moon goes to an Opposition of
Mercury, and an Opposition of the Sun. She will be in Opposition of the Sun,
December the 11th. about eleven at Hight: at which time she will be almost
totally Eclipsed, and that by the Interposition of the gross Body of the Earth
between the Bodies of the Sun and Moon, as may be seen by the Figure at large,
etc.

Kind Readers, tell me where I have erred in This,
And I^lle correct and mend what^s done amiss.
Let Us pray for our Dread Sovereign's Life each Day and Hour,
That He May still with us remain, and Rule in Power:
Until which Time the King of Kings Him shall remove
From this Lower Orb, into his Throne obove.
ADVERTISEMENT.
This is to give Notice to all Persons, that are desirous to be Resolved any
Lawful Questions in Astrology, They may repair to the sign of the Iron-Jack in
Fetter-Lane, a Smith's Shop, at one Mrs. Adams's; Where the Author will be
ready to oblige all Persons, to the best of his Judgment: not that he designeth
to leave the Town of Fulham, but he will be three Days at Home: and his very
good Friend, viz. Philip Mayle, the other Part of the Week. The Author will
attend Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays himself. He also Calculateth
Nativities, or Teaches the whole Art to those that are desirous to learn such
a harmless, useful, judicious Piece of Learning.

FINIS.

