Protestantisme Revived. OR, The Persecuted CHURCH Triumphing.
IN Sable Weeds I saw a Matron clad,
Whose Looks were grave, whose Countenance was sad;
Pensive with Care, she musing sat alone,
Her State, too too unhappy, to bemoan:
Deep bitter Pangs I saw her undergo,
And pay the tributary Drops of Woe.
So wept Deucalion when he saw the State
And Face of Nature changed and desolate.
By this dumb Elegy a while sh' expressed
The gloomy Sorrows of her troubled Breast.
Then heaving up her Head, she silence broke,
And with a heavy Sigh dejected spoke.
Good God! what Grief surrounds my aged Head!
What new distracting Woes I daily wed!
Who am by spiteful Foes in Triumph led:
They pierce my side with wounds, they break my rest,
And snatch my sucking Children from my Breast:
My elder Sons inhumanely they treat,
My weaker ones they bubble with Deceit.
Thus they insult, thus put me to disgrace,
And spit their frothy Venom in my Face:
My growing sorrows to complete the more,
IN m flouted by a Babylonish Whore.
Put me to death they cannot, since Heaven decreed,
I must not dye, though with my Savior bleed,
But humbly should in aftertimes succeed:
What most my anxious Soul tormented has,
Is, He that should defend, betrays my Faith.
Thus, thus abused, IN m to all Griefs betrayed,
Thus my Delights are double Sorrows made.
Who e're was Curbed by such a Concubine?
Who so perplexed? Was ever Grief like mine?
Then she bowed down her Head, and with her Tears
Bedewed the parched Earth: When straight appears
A Comforter by pitying Heaven sent
To raise her drooping Spirits, almost spent:
Who when he had respectfull Homage paid,
In terms obliging, reverently said,
Mother, I know the Cause of all thy Grief,
IN m sent thy Succor, and thy true Relief:
Thy God has heard thy Sighs, thy faithful Prayers,
And graciously received thy flowing Tears:
I Will wipe them off, I Will rugged Grief expel,
And usu'al Joy shall in thy Countenance dwell:
I Have made thy haughty Domineerers bow,
And own their Lives they to my Bounty owe:
I Have broke your Yoke, I Have freed you from your Chain,
And set you once at Liberty again:
I Have foiled them all, I have disarmed them quite,
They have the Power to Bark, but not to Bite.
To Ease your Pain by the God of Heaven I Am sent,
He acts, and I Am the Honored Instrument.
Then she arose, Joy smiling in her Eye,
And with a cheerful Voice did thus reply:
Thanks Gracious God, thanks thou Victorious Son,
By whom I have my wonted Glory won:
Rejoice my Sons, and Hallelujahs sing,
Unto our Savior, our Triumphant King.
For I an Anthem will compose, and then,
We'll sweetly sound it to our God. Amen.
C. A. Linc. Coll. Oxon.

LON^, Printed for S. Walsall at the Heart and Bible near the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, 1688.


