THE ORTHODOX FOUNDATION OF RELIGION, LONG SINCE COLLECTED by that Judicious
and Elegant man Mr HENRY AINSWORTH, for the benefit of his private company: And
now divulged for the public good of all that desire to know that Cornerstone
Christ Jesus Crucified.

By S. W.

1 Cron. 28.9. Thou Solomon my son, know the Lord the God of thy Father, and
serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind. Joh. 17.3. This is
life eternal, that they may know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou have sent. LONDON, Printed by R.C. for M. Spark junior, and are to
be sold at the Blew Bible in Green-Arbor. 1641.

TO MY MVCH HONORED, THE two virtuous young Gentlewomen, Mris Elionor Carent,
and Mris Elionor War, Cousin Germans in the flesh, Concordants in the Spirit,
and Co-inhabitants under the domesticke government of the Right Worshipful,
and truly religious Matron Mris Amy Long widow, of Steeple Ashton, in the
County of Wilts, my singular good friends, and neighbors, peace of conscience,
and joy in the Holy Ghost, be multiplied here in this life, and endless glory
be assured hereafter, in the life to come.
Sweet Lady,
AS I desire not to flatter your apparent youthful, and future hopeful
deserts, both for your Christian profession, and godly conversation: so for
your farther encouragement herein, I fear not to publish to the World (under
your only protection and countenance) this ensuing Treatise, wherein my aim is
only at Gods Glory, the Churches good, and your acceptance. It has in a
Manuscript long lain by me, as a dead letter, without any vulgar use; but now
having the approbation of some judicious Divines my Friends and Acquaintance, I
am resolved (maugre all the malice of Belial's Brats, who fancy nothing but to
satiate themselves with terrene pleasures and profits) to propose it to the
reading and perusing of all that cheerfully endeavor to know the Lord Jesus,
and him crucified, to the salvation of their souls; in comparison whereof the
whole World, and all things therein cannot afford the least parallel.

Let me make so bold with you (lovely Mris Carent) as to call to your
remembrance, how Solomon (unto whom your Sex is much beholding for divine
instructions) concludes his Proverbs; Favor is deceitful, and beauty is
vanity, but the woman that fears the Lord, she shall be praised: wherein (be
it spoken in verity without any obsequiousness) you have exceeded many of your
Sex, and Age, but yet I know that you acknowledge, Jer. 32.40.
that it is the Lord only that has put this fear in your heart, and I pray
God continue it unto the end; Psalm. 35.18.
then shall his eyes be always upon you, Ps. 34.9.
and nothing shall be wanting unto you, to make you complete in the whole duty
of man, Eccl. 12.13.
and then shall you be incomparably more rare and precious in the sight of God
in respect of your soul, then you are now fair, and comely in the eyes of man
in regard of your body. I doubt not, but you well consider, what an invaluable
thing it is to be one of the Lords Jewels; as all his children are termed, Mal.
3.17. whereas others are compared to the loathsomest of all vessels, Hos. 8.8.
wherein there is no pleasure. Muster up, I pray you, all the devout women,
from Sarah the mother of the faithful, Heb. 11.11. to the Elect Lady, to whom
S. John dedicated his second Epistle, and you shall find a whole Army to
animate you in the Lords battle, and receive in the end with them the Salary
of your victory, 2 Timothy 4.7. Once more, meditate upon the Honorable
Prerogatives Gods children have: for their nobleness they are the Sons of God;
for their education, they are the Scholars of Christ; for their protection,
the Angels are their servants; for their calling, they are Saints; for their
riches, it is Christ, and with him all things else; for their life, it is
spiritual, for their death, it is precious in Gods own sight, and their
birthday to all felicity.

Now to conclude; that you are already of this Tribe, I am thoroughly persuaded,
earnestly imploring the highest Mercy Seat, that you may so persist to the
end. In the interim, let me beseech you diligently to read this your own
Book, and the Lord give his Blessing, that you may increase your knowledge of
him, your faith in him, your delight to serve him, and your fear to offend
him; which the Almighty granting, and you my misprisions pardoning, you have
nobly gratified the poor endeavors of

Your real and affectionate friend SAMUEL WHITE.
Polsholt, the first Month of this hopeful year. 1641.
TO THE READER.
I Do earnestly entreat thee (curieous Reader) whether thou do already
abound in knowledge, and judgment, or having but as yet a little, thou
desire more, to read this Treatise here before thou give any censure upon it,
I doubt not but the Book will commend it self, as others of his works has
done, viz. his Exposition upon the five Books of Moses, and the Canticles, and
his Communion of Saints, long ago published: all which (as in this) he is
famous in accumulating the sacred Text: But for the life of the man, my self
being an eye witness (living somewhile with him in Amsterdam) of his humility,
sobriety, and discretion, setting aside his preposterous zeal in the point and
practice of Separation; he lived and died unblameable to the world, and I am
thoroughly persuaded that his soul rests with his Savior: and therefore once
more I beseech thee, accept of my good will in publishing, and my prayers for a
blessing upon reading, hoping that either for the increasing or confirming of
thy knowledge in grace to glory, thou will gleane something out of this more
fruitful than large field, which shall be the prayer of thy friend and brother

S.W.

A SHORT COMPENDIOUS WAY HOW TO TEACH AND LEARN RELIGION.
Part I.
ALl Religion must be learned of God, Joh. 6.45. Mat. 25.9. God teaches men,
1. inwardly by his Spirit: 2. outwardly, by his Word, 2 Cor. 2.11, 12. Neh.
9.20. Psalm. 119.105. Jam. 1.18. Joh. 17.17.

Gods Word is contained in the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, Mal.
4.4. 2 Pet. 1.21. 2 Pet. 3.1, 2.

The holy Scriptures contain doctrine sufficient for every good work, and to
bring men to salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15.
2 Timothy 3.16, 17.

All people of all sorts should learn to know the Scriptures, and so Gods
fear by them. Deuteronomy. 31.11, 12, 13.


They which have knowledge of Gods Word, 2 Timothy 2.2. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.
and will, should teach others that are ignorant, Deuteronomy. 32.4.

Of men expert in the Law, Mal. 2.7.
some are to be chosen for public Ministers of the Word unto the Church, unto
which work they must attend. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2.


All others that have gifts from God, may teach publicly in order, 2 Cor.
14.31.

Eccles. 4.17. 1 Timothy 1.7
But men that are ignorant themselves, should not presume to be teachers of
others.

The means to attain to the knowledge of Gods Word, Jam. 2.5.
are first, prayer unto God, Psalm. 119.12, 18. Psalm. 119.97, 98. Secondly,
meditation in the Scriptures. Thirdly, conversation with the wise and learned,
Prove. 13.20.

The end of teaching and learning Gods Word, is, that by attending unto faith
and holiness, 1 Timothy 4.16.
men may glorify God in their salvation, Romans 10.17. Ja. 2.22.

He that is to teach Gods Word must have respect unto these two things, 1. for
preparation, and minding of things in himself. 2. for declaration, and
delivering them to others, 2 Timothy 2.15. Mat. 13.32.

In preparation to preach the Word, men may either choose some text of Scripture
to treat of, or without a certain text of Scripture, may handle some ground or
grounds of Religion, and common places, so Luke 4.17, 18.21. here Christ
preached from a text, and Mat. 5.2, 3. here he preached without, binding
himself to any text.

He that is to preach from any text of Scripture, let him first consider the
general scope, and drift of the Scripture, so shall he more soundly explain,
and apply the same: Psalm. 32.1, 2.
So Romans 4.6, 7. here Paul minded aforehand the drift that David aimed at,
which way to show, wherein man's blessedness consisted, namely, in the
forgiveness of sin.

Portions of Scripture are, some for to illuminate our understanding; some for
to sanctify and direct our affections, and actions; some for both of these
together; some to illuminate our understanding, by manifesting the truth, and
persuading it; some by manifesting error, and confuting it: So Heb. 1.8. here
Paul by Scripture proves Christ to be God, and so more excellent than the
Angels. And Act. 17.29. here this Scripture confuteth man's carnal conceit of
God.

Some Scriptures serve especially to direct, and sanctify our affections and
actions, Levit. 19.2.
by persuading to virtue: some by dissuading from vice: Deuteronomy. 32.35.
so 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. and Romans 12.19.

Again, some texts of Scripture treat of single matters; some of sundry
matters, joined together: so Heb. 11.1. here Paul treats of faith, the nature
and effects of it; Hab. 2.4. Lev. 18.5.
Gal. 3.11, 12. here he treats not of says simply, but of confirming a
doctrine, that we are justified by faith, and refuting an error, that we are
not justified by the works of the Law; Joh. 4.24. here is treated of diverse
joined together. This difference the Reader should observe.

Having observed the nature and scope of the Scriptures, to be handled,
Reduction.
let him that teaches the Scripture reduce them to some general head, as to
some one of the Commandments, or to some ground of faith, according to Romans
13.9. Or to Act. 2.25, 30. where Peter reduces David's 16. Psalm. to the
doctrine of Christ's resurrection.

If the Scripture serve not so much to inform the mind, as move the
affections, then consider which of the affections it most concerns, whether
repentance, and sorrow, or hatred and shunning of vice, or love of God and our
neighbor, and of virtue and fear of God, or consolation and patience in
afflictions, or mercy and compassion to the poor and afflicted.

If the text be an history, History.
Romans 15.4.
(for as much as whatsoever is written is for our learning) the teacher should
reduce the story of some general point of doctrine, or doctrines, either of
the Law or of the Gospel; either from knowledge, or conversation. So Mat.
12.41. Christ draws the history of the Ninivites to the doctrine of
repentance from dead works: so the History of Elias is drawn to the doctrine
of Prayer, Jam. 5.16, 17. so the history of Noah, is by Peter applied to the
Doctrine of Gods mercy and judgment, 2 Pet. 2.5. by Paul to the Doctrine of
faith, Heb. 11.7.

If the text divide it self into sundry parts, Division and Order.
or points of doctrine, order in handling must be observed, and point after
point, duly entreated of without confusion, which is hurtful both to the
teacher and learner; according to 1 Cor. 14.40. and to 2 Timothy 2.15. Let not
divisions be curious, or manifold, for they trouble and confound the memory.

Weighing the words.
Every word in the text should be weighed with the true and proper meaning of
the same, for an error in one word, may mar the whole sense of the Scripture,
as in Mal. 2.16. some read it thus ( If thou hate her, put her away) where
the text is corruptly translated, (for he hates putting away) that is, God
hates divorce, Figurative words.
these senses be contrary.

If the Words be against the common light of reason, being taken properly, we
must understand them figuratively, as in Joh. 15.5. reason shows that this is
but a similitude. Figurative speeches are many, and of many sorts, which by
much labor, and observation, must be learned and understood, 2 Pet. 3.16. Luke
8.10.

The coherence, circumstances, and scope of the Scripture handled, must be
carefully weighed: so Paul, Heb. 3.7, etc. and 4.1.7. where he scanneth the
words, and circumstances of that sentence. Scriptures compared.


The surest way to expound the Scriptures is by the Scriptures themselves,
comparing place with place: so Neh. 8.9. so Paul conferreth many Scriptures,
Heb. 1.2.

The principal matters and circumstances in a text are most to be insisted on,
others not to be neglected, but more briefly handled, as Genesis 13.8. here the
nature of contention, and the duties of brotherhood, are duly to be
particularized; 1 Cor. 15.50. here the word brethren is not so much to be
insisted on, as the more weighty purposed doctrine.

Special regard must be had of gathering doctrines, Collecting doctrines.
and applying them: Doctrines may be gathered from the cause of a thing, as
Heb. 1.10. where Christ's Godhead is proved by the making of the world. So also
by the effects, adjuncts, comparisons, contraries, and as the doctrines of
Christ, and his Apostles, every where from the old Testament do manifest.

Application is when the doctrine generally, Application.
or concerning others, is by the teacher applied to the time, or persons
present: Psalm. 95.7, 8.
as in Romans 4.23, 24. So Paul applies that of the Psalm. to his present time,
Heb. 1.7. and 4.1, 2, 3.

Application is to be made in wisdom, according to the time, persons,
occasions, and matters in hand, Heb. 12.7.
so Noah's history is applied by Paul to faith, by Peter to Gods mercy and
judgment, 2 Pet. 2.5. by Christ to the security of men, Mat. 24.37, 38.

The manner of delivering the Word, should be with simplicity, sincerity, and
godly pureness, and not with affected words, flattering speeches, or humane
wisdom. And I brethren, when I came unto you, came not with excellency of
words, or of humane wisdom, declaring unto you the testimonies of God. The
gesture of the body should be grave and sober, the continuance of preaching
ordinarily should not be long, for the Sermons of Christ, and his Apostles
expressed in the Scriptures, are brief.

Deo soli Gratia.
THE MYSTERY OF PIETY, OR, Doctrine of truth, which is according to godliness.
Part II.
DIvinity, Theology, or Religion, Prove. 1.7. Genesis 20.11. Tit. 1.1.
is called in Scripture, the fear of Jehovah, or reverence of God; and by the
Apostle it is named, the truth which is according to godliness; and so the
doctrine of it is likewise called, 1 Timothy 6.3.

The end of teaching, learning, profession, Ephesians. 1.5.6. 1 Pet. 1.5.9. Joh.
17.2, 3. 1 John 3.2. Psalm. 16.11.
and practice of Religion or godliness, is the glory of God in our salvation.
Our salvation shall be the full knowledge, light, and fruition of God, for ever
in Heaven, it is called eternal life.

The way to salvation or life eternal is, 1. by the knowledge and faith of
God. 2. By the service of him. Jo. 17.3. 1. Chron. 28.9.

Of GOD.
This word ( GOD) is used sometimes properly, sometimes improperly: properly it
is a title given to the Creator of all things, so Genesis 1.1. Improperly it is a
title given to principal creatures, as Angels, Psalm. 8.5. Heb. 2.7. and
Princes and Magistrates of the world are called Gods, Psalm. 82.6. Jo. 10.34,
35. But here we treat of God properly so called. GOD.


Of God there are four things to be considered: 1 That there is a God. 2 What
God is. 3 That there is but one God. 4 That there be 3. distinct persons.


That there is a God, is proved, besides the testimony of Scripture, as by the
works of creation, especially man's soul, Zach. 12.1. by works of providence,
especially judgments on the wicked, Esaias 52.5.
Psalm. 9.16. and 58.10, 11. by deliverance of the Saints, Exodus 14.15. and by
the terrors of conscience, Esaias 32.14. God cannot be known by face of us in
this life, Joh. 1.28.
that is to say, perfectly known in this barbarous nature, Exodus 23.20.

Not only our bodily eyes, but also the eyes of our mind, Joh. 36.26.
or understanding and reason, are incapable in this life of God, Prove. 30 4.
and cannot comprehend him, Job. 11.7. Neither can any name or names express
unto us, the infinite, and incomprehensible being of God.

But God of his goodness does make himself known unto us in this life, in
part darkly, and imperfectly, as in 1 Cor. 13.12. and Exodus 33.23.

A Spirit.
God is a Spirit, Job. 4.23. the first and the last, infinite, filling heaven
and earth, Jer. 23.24. most simple, without commixture or composition,
eternal, without beginning or end, 1 Timothy 1.17. Infinite without comprehension
of place, or strength, 1 King. 8.27. Constant without shadow of change. Jam.
1.17. absolute in power, holiness, and glory, Genesis 17.1. Goodness, even
goodness it self.

In that God is a spirit, Act. 17.29. Esaias 46.5.
we ought not to think the Godhead is like to gold or silver, or stone
graven by art, or any invention of man.

In that he is the first, he depends upon no other, neither may any thing
be imagined before him, but whatsoever is, has its being from him: Romans 22.36.
Act. 17.28.

In that God is infinite, 2 Chronicles. 6.18: Job. 36.26.
he is not to be thought as limitable, or bounded within any place, or
restrained to any time, or comprehensible of any, or of all the Creatures.

We may learn to know God both by his Works, God known
Word, and Spirit, Romans 1.20. Psalm. 119.104. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11, 12. Esaias 59.21.
By his Works.


God is known three manner of ways by his works: 1 By the excellency of the
creatures, Job 41.1.
which must needs be much more in the Creator, Psalm. 94.9, 10. 2 By
imperfections and want in the creatures, Esaias 15.29. 1 Timothy 6.16.
which are not in God at all, Psalm. 102.25, 26, 27. 3 By causing and working,
what is good in all things, Esaias 44.24. Jam. 1.17. Phil. 2.13.

The Word of God, and Holy Scripture teaches us to know God. 1 By names, and
titles given unto him. 2 By his Essence. 3 By his Properties. 4 By his effects.


Object. Gods Will, By his Word.
and his Essence be one, then God wills all things that he does, so God is
all things that he does.

Answ. When we say, God wills many things, or knows all things, we speak
not of Gods Essence simply, or absolutely, but all things are subject to Gods
knowledge, which knowledge he is: and some things are subject to Gods will,
that is, God is he to whose knowledge (which is his being) all things are
subject.

Gods Titles.
The names and titles given unto God, do concern some his essence, and eternal
being, as Jehovah Jah, Ehieh, I am he that is, was, and is to come; which show
that God has his essence, being, and existence of himself, and not of, from,
by, or through any other, Psalm. 135.14.
Exodus 3.14. that he gives essence, or existence to all creatures, Act.
17.28. Amos 5.8. that he gives being to his promises, and fulfilleth them,
Exodus 6.3, 4. and 26.2. Esaias 42.8. Romans 4.14. that he is eternal, without
beginning and end.

Some titles set forth Gods Power, and Almightinesse, as all-strong, or
Almighty, Aloah, most mighty, Gelbor, puissant, Mouzzim, almighty, Shaddaie,
sufficient, Adonai, Lord, Stay, or Sustainer.

Some names contain the mystery of the Trinity, as Alohim Adonai, which are in
the form plural, yet joined with other words singular.

Gods Essence.
The essence of God is taught us in the Scripture, either absolutely, or
diversely in respect of the three persons. 1 Cor. 8.6.
Gods Essence is absolutely to be considered (thus set forth) that the Godhead
or Essence of God is one, undivided, Deuteronomy. 6.4.

That the Godhead, or most Divine Essence, is most perfect, absolute, and
sufficient in it self, Esaias 40.28. Romans 11.34, 35. Genesis 17.1.

That the Godhead is a meare act substantially, and therefore cannot suffer any
thing, nor be resisted by any; neither has, or ever had, or ever possibly can
have, to be otherwise than he is, Psalm. 102.27. Jam. 1.17.

Trinity.
The Godhead considered diversely, for the manner of being, is three Persons in
one Essence, the Father, Joh. 5.26.
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, 1 John 5.7.

The Father is the first person of the Trinity, having foundation in none, of
personal substance.

The Son is the second person in the Trinity, having foundation of personal
substance, of whom he is eternally begotten, Joh. 5.26.

The Holy Ghost is the third person in the Trinity, having foundation from the
Father and the Son, from both which, he especially proceeds, Joh. 14.26,
etc.

In the order and manner of the creatures, the original of the actions is
ascribed to the Father, Joh. 5.17.19. The nature and manner of working to the
Son, Joh. 1.3. Heb. 12. The efficacy and power to the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 11,
12.

God has the most excellent understanding, that is, the Essence of God* for
all in God is Essential, therefore this is infinite, and eternal, as the
Godhead is; therefore the things which it understands must also be eternal.
Therefore it must be most perfect, as the understanding is most perfect. But
nothing is more perfect than God, therefore nothing but God can be the eternal
act of Gods understanding. Therefore Gods understanding has reflection
eternally to it self, as when a man's mind thinks upon it self.

The understanding has in it an image of the thing understood; therefore God
eternally understanding himself, conceived a most perfect image of himself.

This most perfect bringing forth of the Image in the Godhead, is rightly
called a conception, or generation, for it is the bringing forth of a thing
most like to God, and the conception or bringing forth of a thing most like it
self, is generation; the more perfect the nature of the begetter is, the more
near, and conjoined is the thing begotten; and Gods life being most perfect,
and it being all an understanding, needs must this conception of his be most
perfect; And so a most perfect generation, which is a second manner of being,
Heb. 1.3.
called the Image, (or person) called the Image of the Son of God, the Image
of his hypostasis. And seeing that which God understands, and his Essence is
one and the same, needs must the Essence, and excellency of the Father, and
the Son, be both one, and eternal. Thus God cannot be minded to be, but with
his coeternall Son.

As there is an understanding in the Godhead, so needs must there be a will
also, and the more understanding, the more, and perfecter is the will, and in
God there being a perfect understanding, there must be also needs a perfect
will; and as the understanding is active essentially in the Godhead, so is the
will; and as he understands himself, as the most perfect thing, so also he
wills himself as the most perfect good; and thus the will reflecteth as did
the understanding. Gods infinite will embracing an infinite willed thing, there
must needs be infinite love, and highest pleasure proceed therefrom: so
whilst the eternal Father conceives his Son, and perfectly wills it,
there must needs be full and perfect love from the Father to the Son, and
from the Son to the Father, so from both proceeds a third manner of being,
called the third person, the Holy Spirit.

It is called a Spirit for three causes; The Holy Spirit.
1 Because love is the enforcing, or motive of the Will, to the thing loved,
and as it were, a spiring and breathing to it; and because the Father breaths
in love to the Son, and the Son again to the Father, therefore the Holy
Spirit is right said to proceed from them both. 2 It is called a Spirit,
because the proceeding of the motive between the Father and the Son, is by a
hidden way. 3 Because Gods children perceive Gods gifts, the gifts of love, by
secret inspiration.

It is called holy to discern it from other spirits, Why called Holy.
and because nothing can be more holy than this in God, and because it makes
holy, and sanctifies the Church.

And seeing Gods Will and Essence is one in him, the Holy Ghost must needs be
one with the Father, and the Son, coequall, and eternal. Thus by undoubted
principles from Gods essence, there are three manner of subsistings in God, and
there can be neither more nor less, unless we will deny God.

The Holy Spirit is taken as spoken substantially, or accidentally;
substantially it means a thing most simple in essence, most active in
efficacy. Again, that it is taken, either essentially, Mat. 10 20
and so it comprehends God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost,
as Joh. 4.24. or personally applied to the third person of the Trinity.
Accidentally, the word is used for a gift or motion of the Holy Spirit, Joh.
7.39. but in the 1 Cor. 12. the Spirit, and the gifts are plainly
distinguished. Trinity.


The three persons have one and the same common Essence, and common works of
the Essence, Deuteronomy. 6.4. 1 John 5.7.
and of one divine Essence there are three persons.

The persons are distinguished from the essence, Inward difference.
as the manner of a thing is from the matter; and they are distinguished one
from another, as the manner of the Essence, one from another. The difference of
the persons, is inward and outward; the inward difference, is the personal
property, which flows from the manner of being.

The Father is of himself, not only in respect of Essence, but also in respect
of being, the Father begets his Image, or Son: the Father sends the Holy
Ghost.

The Son as touching the Essence is of himself, as touching the manner of
being, he is of the Father. The Son is begotten of the Father; the Son
sends the Holy Ghost. Joh. 15.26.


The Holy Ghost in respect of the Essence is of himself, in respect of the
manner of the Essence, he proceeds from the Father and the Son.

Outward difference.
The outward difference is when the persons are distinguished by the effects and
operations toward the creatures.

As is the order of being, so is the order of doing in the persons; the Father
does of himself, the Son in the Father, 3 John 5.19.
and the Holy Ghost in both.

The Father creates, conserveth, and governs the world, the Son Redeemeth
the world, the Holy Ghost sanctifies it.

Gods properties.
Gods properties are either absolute, or they have relations to the creatures.

Properties of the Essence, generally considered, are 1 unchangeablenesse, as
that the Essence of God, is without all corruption, alteration, or local
motion, Jam. 1.17.

2 Infiniteness, as that God cannot be measured, or determined by any, has no
quantity, no determination of his power, virtue, time, and place.

Properties of the Essence specially considered, are understanding, will, and
holiness.

1 Gods understanding is such, as he perfectly knows all things in himself,
without discoursing of things, or distance of time.

2 Gods will is such that he approves the good, and refuses the evil,
himself directly is all good, and indirectly other things are good, as they
carry his image, and whatsoever he will that he can, but not whatsoever he
can, he will.

3 Holiness is that high perfection, and pattern of all virtue, in respect
whereof the holiness, and virtues of all men, and Angels are but shadows; of
this holiness arises high blessedness, and contentation in God.

Gods properties referred to the creatures, are virtues, or virtuous acts.

Gods virtues in respect of his nature, is power, 1 Gods power.
whereby he can effect what, when, and howsoever he will, concerning any
creature, Psalm. 145.6. Job. 41.2.3.

Gods power is only active and not passive, depending on any other, Ephesians. 1.19,
20.

Gods power is infinite in respect of his Essence, of the objects, of the
effects and of the durance.

God can do all things, that absolutely, simply, and in nature are possible;
Job 42.3.

Thus things are absolutely possible to be done, which are not contradictory to
the nature of God, nor to the Essence of other things without God; he cannot
deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13.

Quest. Whether can God do a thing against Nature?

Answ. If against be meant contradictory to Nature, so as it repugneth the
Essence, essential properties, and definition of things, then God cannot do
such; as God cannot make a body should be infinite, a reasonable creature
without reason; for the nature of things are subordinate to the nature of God,
as second causes to the first, and things subordinate overthrow not their
nature: if ( against) be meant above the power of secondary causes, Josh.
10.12. Dan. 3.23, 24, 25. Joh. 2.9.
as of water to make wine, to make water out of stones: or if it be meant the
hinderance of their natural actions, of things flowing from their particular
properties, as to let the fire from burning, the sun from moving, such things
God has done, and can do daily.

2 Foreknowledge.
Gods virtue in respect of understanding, is his foreknowledge; whatsoever is,
or comes to pass in time, be it good or evil, with all the effects and
events of actions, God foreknew before all eternity, for all things are of God,
and his ordering; and he being infinite, 1 Pet. 1.2.
his understanding admits no distinction of time: Psalm. 139.27.
he has all objects always present: Gods knowledge is certain, and
infallible, so as it is not possible things should fall out otherwise, than he
knew; Act. 2.23.
for he has his knowledge from himself, not from the creatures. Gods
foreknowledge imposes no necessity upon the events.

3 Bounty.
Gods virtues in respect of his will are bounty, and justice: Bounty is that, by
which out of love, God procures to every creature the good thereof, and it is
common, and particular: common bounty is toward all creatures, even such as
offend him, directing them to their natural good, and sustaining them therein,
so long as justice suffers, Luke 6.36. God cannot hate his creatures, Ezekiel.
33.11.
as his works, for so they carry a similitude of God, the first cause: and
none can hate himself, or his similitude, for a similitude is something of
himself. Gods bounty to his creatures presupposes not any debt or duty, which
implies imperfection; and if God were bound to his creatures, he should depend
on them, and be imperfect.

Gods bounty which is infinite, gives creatures good things, of nature, of
soul, and body, and of outward things.

Such is Gods bounty, as the creatures suffer no evil, unless Gods justice
require it, or a greater good confirm it; of this virtue God is called
patient, and long suffering.

Particular, or special bounty, is that whereby God loved some men (in Christ)
fallen into sin, Ephesians. 2.4, 5.
and furthereth them to eternal salvation. Gods special bounty, is the first
beginning, both of salvation, and of the means thereto. This bounty is no
inherent quality in us, but we are the object of it, it is a grace making us
grateful, not finding us so. 4 Gods justice.


Gods Justice is a virtue by which he executes his love to reasonable
creatures, giving rewards to the obedient, and punishment to the obstinate, Gen
18.24.

Gods Justice is essential and unchangeable, as he cannot of his bounty
forgive the creatures punishment, unless his justice be satisfied.

Gods virtue in respect of his understanding, 5 Truth.
and will together, is truth, or veracity, whereby he so manifests himself
to the reasonable creature, both by words, signs, and works, as indeed he
is, Revel. 15.3.

God has in himself the pattern of all true things, so that whatsoever in the
creature is true, is so because of the first truth in the mind of God.

Truth in God is essential, and so unchangeable; Rom 3.4.
but truth in man is contingent, and so changeable.

Seeing Gods truth is essential, his testimony must needs be authenticke.
Hither of Gods virtue, now follow their acts, that is, the exercise and the
applications of these virtues, to the manifestation of his glory. Gods Decree.


Gods actions are either the decreeing of things, or the execution of the
decree.

Gods decree, purpose, or counsel, is his purpose of exercising operations
about the creatures, and of decreeing them unto their end: God works all
things after the counsel of his own will, Act. 4.28.

Whatsoever God does in time, that he did decree to do from all eternity even
as he does it. Act. 15, 18. Esaias 46.10.


The execution of the decree is an act, whereby Gods counsel and purpose is
showed forth, and applied to the creatures, by an effectual operation, Ephesians.
1.11. This is either first, or arising of the first.

Creation.
Gods first operation, or execution of the decree, is the creation of the world,
Genesis 1.1. Creation is the first perfect making of all things pure, and good: so
the original word imports, (...)
Genesis 1.1.

Creation is of two sorts, Immediate. Mediate.


Immediate creation, is the making things of mere nothing, Heb. 11.3.

Mediate creation, is the making of things of some former matter, but that
matter so rude as that it is no better than nothing, so God created man of the
dust of the earth, Genesis 2.7.

Creation proceeds from an infinite power, and therefore excludes all
necessary matters, Job 42.2, 3.
for though God made man of the dust of the earth, yet did he this not of
necessity, Psalm. 33.6^
but could have made him also of nothing. If God needed any matter to work
upon, his power were not infinite, but should depend on another thing, and not
be absolute.

6 Days.
The creation of the world was distinguished by the space of six days, in
respect of the effects, and whole world created; and for our better capacity.
And for as much as God is above all time, and of infinite power, it is to be
thought he created every thing particular in a moment, saying, Let there be
light, and there was light, Genesis 1.3.

In the first day were created the heavens, 1 Day.
and the earth, and matter mixed together, and light, Genesis 1.1, 2. Angels, Job.
38.7. minerals, and precious stones.

2 Day.
In the second day was the out-spread firmament, or heaven, the division of
waters above from the waters beneath, Genesis 1.6, 7, 8.

The heavens are threefold, 1 The Air, wherein are the clouds and the fowls
fly, called thereupon the clouds of Heaven; Dan. 7.13. and, The fowls of
Heaven, Psalm. 88. 2 The higher place, wherein are set, the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, Genesis 1.17. 3 The highest heavens, where Gods glory is most manifest,
and the Angels attend upon his Majesty, Mat. 6.9. hereupon Paul mentions the
third heaven, 2 Cor. 11.2. This seems to be made the first day, and the
Angels, the inhabitants therein, Genesis 1.1. Job 38.6, 7. The division of the
waters was such, that some remained below with the earth, some as the watery
vapors, were lift up above the heavens; that is, above the lower region of the
air, wherein they congeale, and after dissolve into rain, snow, and dew.

In the third day was a twofold work: first, 3 Day.
gathering of the nether waters into one place or sea, that the dry land might
appear. Secondly, the bringing forth of herbs, and trees, Genesis 1.9, 10, 11,
12, 13.

In the fourth day was made the Sun, Moon, 4 Day.
and Stars, to give light on the earth, and to be for signs, and seasons,
Genesis 1.14.

In the fifth day was a twofold work; first, fishes: 5 Day.
secondly, fowls, Genesis 1.22, 23.

In the sixth day was a twofold work; first, 6 Day.
beasts of all sorts: secondly men, Genesis 1.24, 25, 26.

Man, as touching his body, was made of the dust of the earth, to admonish him
to humiliation; his soul was imbreathed of God. The woman, as touching her
body, was made of Adams ribbe, to admonish man and wife of their conjunction,
her soul being also imbreathed.

Man, besides natural gifts, had also superiority, Man.
and carries Gods Image, whereof more hereafter.

This whole creation God has so compact together, as that it is one world,
environed about with the heavens; neither have we ground in Gods Word, nor in
reason to think, there are more Worlds than this one.

The world is knit together by the several parts: World.
the heavens to the fire, the fire to the air, air to the Water, water to the
earth, so that it is not possible to find any empty place.

The figure of the world is round.

The perfection of the world consists in the parts, and degrees; perfection
of parts is such, as God sufficiently furnishes the world with variety of
creatures for his glory: perfection of degrees is such, as that all creatures
have such force and virtue, as may serve to Gods glory, conservation of the
world, and use of man.

The beauty of the world is the wonderful property, shape and color, which
appears in all things, the perpetual succession of things by generation,
that plants, and living things dying, are yet continued.

The causes of creating the world were; first, his love toward us: Secondly,
the showing forth of his glory: Thirdly, the fulfilling of his decree.

The end, that God may be known, and honored of his creatures.

The use, for men, generally all, specially the elect.

The seventh day God made a Sabbath of rest, 7 Day.
and of it are to be noted three things, 1 Gods resting from creating: 2 His
blessing it above other days: 3 His sanctifying it for the use of the Church.

Chiefest creatures which God created, were Angels, and men, in whom he
imprinted his own divine Image.

Angels were created of God, Psalm. 148.1, 5. Col. 1.16. Although it be
uncertain what day they were created, yet it may be probably supposed on the
first day.

Angels are spirits finite and complete; Heb. 1.7.
they are finite, as all other creatures are, and so differ from God the
infinite, and uncreated spirit; and they are complete and full, and so
subsisting of themselves, and therein differ from the souls of men, which are
incomplete, and Essential parts of man.

Angels are in nattre more excellent than men, Dan. 10.5, 6. Job 1.6.
and therefore the most excellent creatures; they are called the sons of God,
therefore were created in holiness and truth, the Image of God.

The bodies wherein Angels sometimes appeared, were not essentially united with
them, as men's bodies be, but were assumed for a time, though it be uncertain
whereof they were made.

The end why they were created, was first, to praise, and celebrate Gods glory,
Psalm. 148.2, 3. Job 38.6, 7. Secondly, to execute his Commandments, Psalm.
103.20. Thirdly, to observe and conserve the creatures, Psalm. 91.11. Therefore
Angels are mighty, Psalm. 103.20. they are swift and nimble, Esaias 6.6.
and so fly in their administration: they execute Gods will with all readiness
and cheerfulness.

They are wise, and of great understanding, 2 Samuel 14.20. they are by nature
mutable, and can change from good to evil, as they that sinned are an example,
Jud. 6.

Man the excellentest of all earthly creatures, was made both male and female
in the image of God, Genesis 5.1, 2, 3.

Gods Image in man, Gods Image in man.
was the understanding and mind of man, so as he had the full, right, clear
and orderly knowledge of all things created of God, and of God himself, so
far as concerned man's happiness: Genesis 2.
this is manifest by Adams naming of all creatures, and by the restoring of
Gods Image in us by Christ, which is in all wisdom, and spiritual
understanding, Col. 1.9.

Gods Image was in the will, the perfection whereof was such, as it had a right
inclination, and appetite to that which was good, and a free execution of the
appetite, or a free will, without impediment inward or outward, Ephesians. 4.24.

God Image was in the affections, as the sensitive desires of nature, eating,
drinking, generation, in love, hatred, that these are mere conformable to
truth, reason, and holiness, Ephesians. 4.24.

Gods Image was in the body of man, in that it was perfectly framed, and
disposed in the parts, not subject to death, or disease, his stature upright,
his proportion most exact, Genesis 1.25.
his color amiable, have nothing whereof to be ashamed; these admirable parts
and members, also shadowing Gods virtues, as the eye, Gods all-seeing; the
tongue, Gods Word; the hand, his Almighty power.

Gods Image in the Soul.
The soul carries an image of the unity of the Godhead, and trinity of
persons, in that there is one soul with three faculties; of understanding,
will, and memory: the whole man carries Gods Image, in that he had the rule,
and sovereignty over all the earth, Genesis 1.28. Psalm. 8.

The end of the Image of God in man, was the glory of the Creator, and the
unseparable joy and delight of man, in his own similitude and union with God,
Psalm. 17.51. Genesis 2.25. -- 19.20.

Paradise.
The place where man was set (with this image of God upon him) was the Garden of
Eden, or of pleasure, commonly called Paradise, Genesis 2.8. This Garden seems
by the description thereof, and the rivers therein, to have been about
Mesopotamia, or Babylon, Genesis 2.

In this Garden, watered with a goodly river, God caused to grow every tree,
pleasant to the eye, and good for meat, Genesis 2.9.

The tree of knowledge of good and evil, was forbidden man to eat, upon the
pain of assured death, by eating whereof man should know the difference
between evil and Good, and how heavy a thing it was to disobey the
Commandments of God.

The tree of life was a Sacramental tree, confirming, and assuring man of Gods
grace, favor, and conservation in life for ever, Genesis 2.9. Rev. 2.7.

In all likelihood, this Garden of Paradise, which is now no where to be found,
was defaced by Noah's flood, until which time it was kept, and warded by
Cherubins, that men may seek the paradise which is in the highest heavens,
Genesis 3.24. 2 Cor. 12.4. Luke 23.43.

In the Paradise man was employed, first to serve God his Creator, and procure
his own eternal bliss, Genesis 2.16, 17.
whereunto he was fitted with freedom of will for perfect obedience,
according to the tenor of the covenant of works. Secondly, to dress, and till
the garden.

This covenant of works graven in man's heart, as may be gathered by Genesis 3.8.
and 4.6. Rev. 2.14.16. was sealed with two Sacramental trees; the first the
tree of life, assuring life and glory if he obeyed: the second of knowledge,
assuring death if he transgressed: hitherto of the creation of the world, now
follows the conservation, and government of the same.

Unto the conservation of the world, Worlds conservation.
pertains first the knowledge of God, which is such as he exactly, and fully
discerns all things, what they are, of what sort, what they can do, and what
shall become of them in the end, for from the beginning of the world he knows
all his works.

Gods knowledge is not only in general, Gods knowledge.
but of every particular, and of their several actions, words, and thoughts,
Psalm. 139.2, 3, 4. It reaches to smallest and vilest creatures, Mat. 10.30.

Gods will.
As God knows, so he wills, and appoints all things concerning the
creatures, Jer. 25.5, 6, 7.

Gods Will and appointment extends also to beasts, and the vilest creatures,
Mat. 10.29.

God manifests not all his will concerning his creatures and his dealing with
them, Mat. 24.36. so then Gods revealed will, and his secret will are not
opposite, but only members and degrees of will. Gods will is 1 Absolute. 2
Conditional.

Absolute, are things absolutely promised, or spoken without condition, on our
part: Conditional, when God wills any thing of us, 1 Timothy 2.4.
but with condition; as he wills that all men should be saved, namely if
they will believe in Christ, Mat. 28.20.

As God has a determining will, concerning his creatures, so he has an
appointing will unto them, Heb. 10.5, 6, 7.

Whatsoever God wills absolutely, and of it self, is good, Jam. 1.13. Psalm.
119.12.

God wills sins, Genesis 45.5. and 50.20.
not simply, but by accident, as he knows and means to bring good out of
them. Romans 1.19, 20. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17


Gods appointing will is wholly manifested in the law of nature, and in the
written law.

Gods appointing will pertaines to all men, God would have all to believe, as
belief is a point of obedience, and honor to him; but as belief is a grace,
and a gift of God, he wills not all men to believe, but his elect.

God does not only know all things, Gods providence.
and prescribe his will, but also his providence, and determinate counsel,
reaches unto all his creatures, Jer. 10.23. Lam. 3.37. Gods providence
extends even to the very least things, Mat. 20.29. Prove. 16.9.

Gods providence consists in conserving and governing his creatures; which
creatures are of four sorts: 1 some that have being, as heaven and earth: 2
some that have being and life, as plants, and herbs: 3 some that have being,
life, and sense as beasts, birds, and fishes: 4 some that having being, life,
sense, and reason, as men.

God conserveth in his creatures, their existence, or being, and their virtues.

Gods conservation of their existence, is the continuing of the substance of
the creatures; Act. 17.28.
In him we live, move, and have our being: moving being not only local, bull
the moving of the heart, spirit, reason, will, etc.

Gods government is the ordering, and ruling, and disposing of his creatures,
to his own pleasure and glory, Psalm. 104. Esaias 45.7. Job 12.10.

Gods government in special is toward Angels and Men, for in them first he
determines and orders their actions: secondly, he gives them laws:
thirdly, he executes justice.

God determines, and orders the actions, and inclinations of men, moving
them, and directing them to their end.

Man's actions and inclinations he moves and rules effectually.

God orders them to the good of this life, and of the life to come, which is
the chiefest good.

God orders sin two ways; first, by limitation, and binding it, that it
shall go no further than he please. Secondly, by turning it against the
nature, and will of the sinner into good.

Gods providence is double, mediate, and immediate; mediate is when he
conserveth, and governs one creature by another, as by instruments: immediate
is when he uses no means, or works against means.

God uses not means of necessity, but of pleasure; these means are not to be
excluded from Gods providence, but included: God can use evil instruments for
good, against their power and will. The chief means to govern the world are
Angels.

The end of all is Gods glory, Deus vult gloriam suam necessitate naturae suae,
non libere. The foundation of true glory is virtue, or goodness.

Gods glory is spoken of two ways: 1 As an essential property of his. 2 As
the glorifying of himself, so Gods glory consists in the knowledge of
himself.


God when he had created the world, saw all that he had made, and lo it was
very good: but after, God looked upon the earth, Genesis 1.31.
and lo it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth.
Genesis 6.12.
It is then now to be minded, how corruption, and evil came into the world.
Corruption, or Sin.


The corruption of the world is set forth by diverse names, in respect of truth,
it is called lying, or falsehood: in respect of good, it is called evil: in
respect of righteousness, it is called iniquity or unrighteousness: in
respect of Gods law, it is called unlaw sunesse, or transgression of the law:
Vide
generally it is called sin, Romans 5.12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19. Josh. 22.22, etc
that is, aberration or missing of the scope or mark: in respect of duty, it
is called disobedience, rebellion, defection, or apostasy, disloyalty,
perfidiousnesse: in respect of our first estate, it is called a fault or ruin.

Evil has no efficient cause, The causes of evil, is the changeableness of
the creatures will.
but a deficient; evil has neither nature nor substance, for all such are of
God, but so is not evil; all such are good, but so is not sin.

Evil is an accident cleaving unto natures substance, actions, Romans 7.21. The
creatures were made of nothing, and being of themselves not able to sustain
themselves, have an inclination to come to nothing, if God do not uphold them:
so evil is caused of nothing.

Evil began in Heaven amongst the Angels, 2 Pet. 2.4.
and so spread into other reasonable creatures, as men; is called sin, their
fall, Romans 5.161
and is the privation of Gods Image in them.

God himself cannot do evil, Jam. 1.13.
or be tempted thereto, and he only has this privilege, men and Angels want
it.

The Angels therefore being subject to temptation, Evil Angels.
were tempted of their own motions, and willingly gave place to their evil
thoughts, Job 5.44.
and being not sustained of God did fall, Jud. 5, 6.

Though we know not how many, yet there were many that fell from their
heavenly estate; Mark. 5.9. Luke 8.30. Ephesians. 6.12.
of those many that fell, one seems to be the chief, and others drawn by,
or accompanying him, called therefore his Angels, Mat. 25.4.

Being fallen, they could not of themselves rise again, neither did God
minister any grace or help unto them, therefore they added sin unto sin,
and so do continue sinning still extremely until the appointed time of their
damnation. Esaias 18.10. -- 1 King. 22.23. Zach. 13.2. --


The Angels that are fallen have diverse names to denote their evil condition,
sometime they are called evil Spirits, lying Spirits, unclean Spirits,
Devil, that is, a calumniator, Mat. 25.41. Satan, that is, adversary, or
fiend, Job 1.6. demons, of their knowledge, Mat. 9.34. wasters, or destroyers,
Deuteronomy. 32.17. rugged satyrs, of their horrible hew, Lev. 17.7. dragon, and
serpent, of their craft and venomous nature, Rev. 12.9. the Tempter, Mat. 4.3.
the Malicious one, 1 John 3. the Enemy, Mat. 13.28. Roaring Lion, 2 Pet. 5.8.
the Strong-armed one, Mat. 12.29. Prince of the World, Job. 12.31. that rules
in the air, Ephesians. 6.12. and 2.2. Beliall, the unruly, or without yoke.

Man's first sin is fitly called disobedience, or fall, for the Law was
significatively given to testify man to be subject to Gods Law, and his
obedience. And whereas before man walked with a steady foot in Gods ordinance,
by this fact he stumbled, and fell from the seat of integrity. The efficient
immediate cause was man himself, of his own free will, without any necessity,
inward or outward, transgressing the Law. The efficient cause remote, and
mediate, was the Devil tempting man to sin. The isntrumental cause was the
serpent, whose tongue the Devil abused to frame arguments to beguile with. The
arguments, or causes to move inwardly were first directly persuading for good,
that they should be as Gods. Secondly, persuading from fear of punishment.
Add to these the two qualities in the tree: first, that it was good to eat:
secondly, to be desired in the eye; these two might persuade Adam to eat, if
he could do it carefully, but the other two of Satan was directly to persuade
to sin, as it is sin.

The Angels that fell to be Devils, and malicious, sought leave of God to tempt
mankind, and obtained it, Genesis 3.1. with Job 1.6, 11, 12. and 2.3, 5, 6.

The Devil used the Serpent, the subtillest beast of the field, for his
instrument, for it could more easily creep into the garden secretly, and
carries with it a show of smooth simplicity: he first assault the woman, and
beguiled her, then by the woman the man, Genesis 3. 1 Timothy 2.13. The woman was
stirred to sin by outward means, and by inward motions. The outward means was
partly the alluring words of the serpent, partly the forbidden fruits beauty.
The serpents words, after he had made a subtle entrance of communication with
the woman, contain 4. horrible evils, 1 Fraud, and imposture, Ye shall not
surely die, Gen 3.4. 2 Against Gods Word, and truth, in faying they should not
die, if they did eat, but be like Gods, Genesis 3.4, 5. 3 Calumniation of God, as
if for envy of man's good, he had forbidden the eating of the fruit. 4 Wresting
of Gods Word, and of the name of the tree of knowledge, as if it were so
called, because it had virtue in it, to give men such knowledge of good and
evil, as God himself has, who is to continue in good, and avoid evil for
ever. Thus the serpent sought to alienate the mind and will of Adam from God,
and from his Word.

The inward means to draw unto sin, Genesis 3.6.
was the fairness of the forbidden fruit, which the woman saw to be graceful
to the eyes.

The inward motions of the woman to sin were generally three: first, the lust
of the flesh, for the woman saw that the tree was good for meat. Secondly, the
lust of the eyes, for she saw it was pleasant to the eyes. Thirdly, the pride
of life, for she saw it was a tree to be desired to get knowledge; and of
these three the Apostle speaks: 1 John 2.16.
more particularly her inward motions may be minded by their degrees; first, an
impression of the Serpents suggestions: Secondly, a darting of her thoughts
concerning God, and the image of God within her: thirdly, forgetfulness of
Gods works, and words: Fourthly, Genesis 3.22.
a doubtfulnesse of the truth of God: Fifthly, an affection of a better state,
and more dignity. Sixthly, a belief of the Devils imposture. Seventhly, an
inclination of the will and affections to the forbidden fruit.

The causes by accident were both man's affections, to be like God, which
affections God had given him to be used orderly, for Gods actions made in man
tended to the glorious Image. Secondly, also natural affection to the savoury
tree for conserving and refreshing natural life, the efficacy of all these
causes man could and should have resisted, rejecting the outward, subjecting,
and ordering the inward: had he so done, he had been conserved. The matter
of this sin, is the eating of the forbidden fruit, the unlawfulness of the
act, being forbidden by Gods Law. The end, or final cause of evil is done:
but the end of the act (as it had a show of good) was that man might be as God,
knowing good and evil.

When these lusts had conceived they brought forth sin, for the woman took
of the forbidden fruit, and did eat.

the woman having sinned, sought to propagate her sin, and was the devils
instrument to tempt her husband, and he also did eat: there is no mention of
the woman's persuasion to the man; nor how sin seized upon him; but the same
degrees may be minded in him also, as were in her; this one more especially,
his immoderate love and affection to his wife, that made him yield so suddenly
to her temptation.

Adams sin yielding, and falling as it is set down, Genesis 3.6. notes the
mavelous force and swiftness that is in the first motions of sin, whose
work even in a moment, and suddenly, does deprive of life and grace, even as a
man's natural life is taken away in a moment of an hour, which is many months
ere it came to the perfection of birth.

It added much to the greatness of Adams sin, that the fruit which he eat
was of the Sacramental tree, and so he violate the divine mystery through
ambition to be like God himself.

It much increased their sin also, that they had Gods Image, and perfection
of grace, not for them alone, Romans 5.12.
but for all their posterity, if they had continued in Gods fear; who lost the
same not in themselves only, but deprived all their seed of these blessings:
thus our first parents fall was not only sin, but the cause of sin. Thus
much of the first sin, and entrance of it, now follows a secondary sin,
which is propagation and fruit of the first, and this is of two sorts; first,
native corruption; secondly, actual transgression. The first sin was not
proper to the first parents, but common to all, who sinned in his loins.
Original sin.


Native corruption, which we commonly call original, is that sin, which man
draws with him from his first origin, or beginning, Psalm. 51.5.

This native corruption is called flesh, Joh. 3.5. Genesis 6.3. Romans 7.14. It is
called also lust or concupiscence, 1 Pet. 1.4. Jam. 1.14.

So then not the substance of our flesh, or nature of our flesh is sin, but
the vicious quality adherent, or cleaving thereto.

It is called also, the old man, Col. 3.9. Romans 6.6.
Ephesians. 4.22. by this also it appears that the natural flesh, or substance is
not sin, for that it is not put off, nor crucified.

This native or original is worse than actual sin, Romans 5.14.
because it is more largely spread, even unto infants also, which actual sin
is not, because it is the fountain and cause of other sins, Romans 7.20.23.

This native sin is ours two ways; 1 by imputation; 2 by inhabitation.

By imputation, because Adam being the root of mankind, as he had Gods image
for him and his posterity, so he lost it from himself and his posterity; so
that which in Adam was personal, Romans 5.12.
unto us is natural.

By inhabitation, because there dwells in us an inclination, and disposition
of all the faculties unto evil, Romans 7.20, 23. For by sin we are not barely
berest of Gods image, as rest depriveth man of motion, but this privation, and
bereaving, has within it an inclination of the man to evil; as sickness does
both deprive a man of health, and ill affects the patient, for sin is soul
sickness, Psalm. 103.3. Romans 7.23, 24.

Original sin possesses the whole man, body, and soul, Romans 7.17.
and spirit, as the image of God was not in the body only, but in the whole
man, so was this contrary privation, Romans 7.24.

Native corruption is propagated from parents to children, by reason of the
beginning thereof, not properly by it self, that is to say, that comes from
the parents to the children, whereof this sin may arise, namely a disposition
to such an evil tempter of the man, as was in original sin: There is an
impression from the mother to the children, in her womb, of which impression,
this sin buddeth; as tinder takes fire, which is not fire it self; this
impression children draw, as they do natural diseases, as stone, Psalm. 51.5.
gout, not the actual griefs, but impressions, which are the beginnings of
them: Though the soul be not in the seed, yet is there in it a dispositive
virtue of the body, for the receiving of the soul, which when it is put into
the body, Soul of man.
it conformed in his manners thereunto; hence it is that one angry man
begets another, one hearty man another: for though the feet, which is the
subject of the gout, be not in the head, nor the soul, which is the subject of
anger, be not in the seed, a formative virtue of the natural members, Genesis 5.3.
and a dispositive virtue unto the soul.

The soul is at one instant both created and united unto the body, and
deprived of the grace of the spirit, which Adam had for all, and lost for all;
as actual sin is done by the persons sinning, so original sin is the
sin of nature, done by the will of the beginning of humane nature: for as one
man has many members, so one mankind has many persons; and as one actual
sin done by the hand, and not the reason of the guilt, from the will of the
hand, but from the whole heart, from which, as from a fountain, the motions of
sin are derived unto the members, so from the will of Adam, which was the
beginning of mankind, the whole inordination of nature has the reason of
guilt: and as actual sin, which is the sin of the person, is drawn unto
all the members by some personal act, so original is drawn unto all men, by
natural act, which is generation: and as humane nature is drawn by
gnneration, so the defect of humane nature is drawn also, Romans 5. Psalm. 51.
yet this rather of Gods ordination, than of man's generation, 1 Cor. 15.22.

Original sin remains in the baptized, and in the regenerate, and in their
posterity, Romans 7.22. and man begets children, not by the spirit, but by the
flesh, and therefore he draws not the spirit, but the flesh, Joh. 1.13. Ps.
51.7. yet has not Original sin so great degree and efficacy in the
regenerate, as in the wicked.

The parts of this native sin are four; first, Parts of native sin.
in respect of the mind, want of understanding, a ready inclination to doubt of
God and his will. Secondly, in respect of the will, 1 Cor. 3.5.
a ready inclination to take hold on, and to perform evil. Thirdly, Psalm.
2.13.
in respect of the affections, a prone inclination to too much, or to too
little, as inordinate anger, love, and the like. Fourthly, in respect of the
appetite, Romans 7.23.
a pronenesse to immoderatenesse, as meat, drink, venery, etc. Actual sin.


Actual sin is that which flows from the original, and that which is so
properly called, is the difference from Gods Laws, unrighteousness or
disorder of the action from the Law and Will of God. The unrighteousness of
actions must be discerned, from the actions, and motions themselves, as defects
from effects: as a man goes halting, his halting as it is a moving of the
body, or natural is good, as it is a lame, imperfect, or wrong moving, it is
evil and against nature.

Actual sins are all actions, inward and outward, contrary to Gods law, in
the will, thoughts, purposes, demises, desires, and in the outward members, all
our actions aberring from Gods law.

Sin leaving a spot, or stain in the soul, as the Leopards spo^ in the
skin, Jer. 13.23.

Sin distinguished by the causes, are either ignorance, as Paul's persecuting
the Church, or of infirmity, as Peter through fear and trouble of mind, denied
Christ, and 3. of malice, as Judas betrayed Christ. 4. of negligence, when a
man is not wary of Satan's subtilties. Against ignorance is opposed the
revelation of Gods will to man: against infirmity, the strengthening of the
spirit, to withstand the assaults of the flesh, the world, and the Devil:
against malice is the changing of the stony heart into flesh: against
negligence is true and holy fear in the hearts of the Saints.

Actions are twofold, 1 Inward: 2 Outward.

Inward, of the mind, and appetite: Actual sin of the mind, is an
unrighteousness of man's thoughts, as doubtings of God, false opinions, evil
imaginations, Jer. 10.24. Psalm. 14.2, 3. Actual sin of the appetite, is the
inordinatenesse of the motions of it, called concupiscence, Jam. 1.14.
Concupiscence remains in the regenerate, Romans 7.1. The first motions of
concupiscence or lust, are sin, though there be not a full assent of the will.

Outward sins, are the unlawfulness of, and unorderlinesse in outward
actions, as in false worshipping of God, swearing, killing, stealing, lying,
whoring, and the like.

Sin is pardonable, or unpardonable; sin unpardonable is the sin against
the Holy Ghost: other sins are pardonable, not of their own nature, properly,
but of Gods mercy, against whom they are done.

The sin against the Holy Ghost, is the denying of the faith, and truth, which
was once acknowledged, and this done of mere presumption, and contemned unto
the end, without repentance, Mat. 12.24. Heb. 6. 1 John 5.

This sin is only in the reprobates.

Again, sin either reigns, or reigns not: reigning sin is that, which
is against manifest conscience, that the sinner does please himself with it,
or at least does not repent for it; 1 John 3.
To. 6.12. He that commits sin is of the devil; that is, with will, and
delight falls into it, and continues in it; Not reigning sin, is for which
the sinner is sorry, and repents.

Actual sin, imperfectly so called, is sin of omission, not doing, in
respect of our duty to God, men, our selves, Mat. 25. I was an hungry, etc.

Sin against negative Commandments, as not to preserve life, chastity, good
name, when a man can; or against an affirmative precept, as when one curses
his parents, are sins of omission.

The punishment of sin comes now to be handled: Sins punishment.
touching the Angels that sinned, whom God spared not, but cast them down into
hell, and delivered into chains of darkness, to be kept unto damnation, The
devils.
2 Pet. 2.4. Jud. 6. for overthrowing of mankind: Gods wrath was heavy against
Satan, and his kingdom was threatened to be destroyed, and his head crushed,
Genesis 3.

Touching the serpent, Satan's instrument, The serpent.
there was a curse above all other beasts, creeping on his belly, eating of
dust, and enmity between mankind and him.

Touching the punishment of Adam, and his wife, Adam and his wife.
1 there was a perceiving with shame, of their nakedness: 2 Sorrow and pain
in diseases, and in labor. 3 Grief of mind, and prick of conscience, Genesis 3.
Adams punishment in special, labor and sweat. The woman's punishment in
special, sorrow of childbearing.

Their outward punishment, casting out of Paradise.

All mankind.
The punishment laid on all mankind, was in respect of the mind, and of the body.

Punishments in respect of the mind are these: 1 Ignorance, whereby we cannot
know the truth, nay not often with much labor. 2 Obscurity, and confusion in
the understanding. 3 Hardness to conceive and retain things in the memory.

Punishments in respect of the body are, 1 Common weakness, and frailties of
all men. 2 Special disposition to sickness, and diseases. 3 Pain and labor,
especially in women, pain of childbearing. 4 Deformity, and want of beauty,
and comeliness, through evil proportion of the members, or evil color. 5
Famine, withholding or taking away the fruits of our lands, chattels, etc. 6
Want, or loss of children. 7 Contentions, emulations, reproaches, infamies,
wars among men. 8 Many things against health, good name, goods, and
livelihood; yea there is the punishment of deaths temporal, the separation of
soul and body, and deaths eternal, separation of soul and body from God,
from all felicity and glory, called the second death.

Second death.
The second death is to be minded, first for the parts and degrees of it:
secondly, for the circumstance of time and place.

The parts and degrees are these: 1 the damned have no communion with God, nor
participation of grace, 2 These. 1.9. 2 They are united unto Satan, Mat. 25.41.
and are partakers of his punishments. 3 They are ashamed and confounded,
because their sins are manifested, Rev. 20.12. 4 They are ashamed, and fret,
and envy the felicity of the Saints in Heaven; Psalm. 112.10. 5 They are
horribly pained and tormented with feeling Gods wrath, and the worm of
conscience. Mark. 9.49.


The circumstances of time and place, are these; first, of place, which is
hell, the bottomless deep, the utter darkness, Genesis 16. Luke 13.21. 2 Pet.
2. Secondly, of time, and that will ever break the heart of the damned, (which
is eternity) that he is past hope of ever going out, or having end of his
pains, Mat. 25.46. All sin of its own nature requires punishment, Romans
6.23.

Punishment is evil in respect of the sufferer, good in respect of God that
afflicts it justly for sin.

As sin has taken away the agreement with the nature of God, so punishment
has taken away the communion with the felicity of God. Tit. 2.11.


Man's misery is remediable through the mercy of God; though God spared not the
Angels that sinned, yet the grace of God that brings salvation to all men
has appeared.

The remedy of our misery, consists of two things. Man's remedy for his misery.
1 A deliverance from sin. Secondly, our reformation to the Image of God, Psalm.
32.1. 2 Cor. 3.18.

Our deliverance from sin contains four things. 1 Pet. 1.2.
1 Election to life eternal, by God the Father. 2 Redemption by God the Son.
Psalm. 130.8. 3 Justification, Romans 5.1. 4 Sanctification, and reformation into
the Image of God, by the Holy Ghost.


In our first estate we had two things, Gods favor, and Image. In our fall
and misery we have two things, Satan's Image, and Gods displeasure. In our
restoration are had two things, reconciliation to Gods favor, and restoring
of his Image.

God from all eternity did predestinate, Predestination.
appoint and elect some Angels, and some men, to be for ever heirs of the
riches of his grace, and glory, 1 Timothy 5.2. 1 Pet. 2.8.

God keeps the Angels that they cannot fall, conserving and increasing their
happiness, Joh. 13. Jer. 22.40. Mat. 24.24.

Election is of God the Father, Election:
Ephesians. 1.2, 3. and only some few men are elected unto life, and they out of all
sorts, Jews and Gentiles, Matt. 20.16. Romans 9.24. Rev. 7.9.

Election has two acts and degrees concerning the end, which is eternal
glory, the first of God, then of the creature. Secondly, the means to the end,
Romans 9.11.

The first act touching the end, is Gods purpose, to take some men, which were
to be created to eternal grace and glory, leaving other some.

The second act is his purpose, whereby he ordains these men, being to fall
in Adam, unto eternal glory through Christ, Joh. 3.16. and 6.47. The signs,
testimonies, and benefits of our election in Christ, are an effectual calling,
Romans 8.30. and 9.23, 24.
the gifts of lively faith, Act. 13.4, 5. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13, 14.

Justification, Romans 8.30. and glorification, begun in this life by holiness,
being predestined thereunto, Ephesians. 1.4.

That unto which God has elected us, Romans 8.29. Act. 13.48.
is first, Adoption of sons. Secondly, Sanctification. Thirdly, Eternal
life. The first, and only moving cause of Election, is the good-pleasure, and
love of God, Ephesians. 1.5. Romans 9.18. Ephesians. 1.11. Christ being the groundwork
hereof.

This is further confirmed thus, God is the beginning of his actions, Romans
11.35. The first beginning depends upon no other outward beginning; but God
should depend upon an other outward beginning, if he could not elect whom he
would, without having respect of their faith: faith is the effect of election,
Act. 13.48. therefore it cannot be the cause, or before election. The means
whereby we are predestined, is Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.5. Christ is not the
first moving cause, but the mean, Heb. 2.10, 11, 12.
for he is only Gods Son, and we being predestined to the adoption of
Sons, have the Sonne-ship by communion with Christ.

Gods election is firm, and immutable, Esaias 46.10. 2 Timothy 2.19.

The means whereby we come to be assured that we are elected, are these:
First, the Gospel teaching, that all truly believing shall be saved, Tit. 1.2.
and we knowing we believe, assure our selves by the effects of election found
in our selves, as effectual calling, faith, justification, sanctification, and
good works. Secondly, by the testimony of Gods Spirit in us, 2 Pet. 1.2, 3.
Romans 8.9.16, 17. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11, 12. 2 Cor. 1.21.23. We judge our selves
elect by the judgment of faith, which is infallible, 1 These. 1.4. Adoption.


Adoption is the first and proper thing whereunto we are predestined, and
there is no exceeding benefit, whereof it should not be the effect: as in the
Trinity the Father is first, then the Son, and the Holy Ghost. In the order
of working our salvation: the first is the Father predestinating, the second is
the Son redeeming, the third is the Holy Ghost sanctifying. That the Father is
first in working, see Joh. 5.19.30. and 16.13, 14. Adoption being then the
work of the Father, it is before Redemption, and so before Justification, and
Sanctification. The first work of Grace in bringing us to Christ, is given by
the Father, Joh. 6.65, and 44, 37, 39.

Opposite to Election is Reprobation, Reprobation.
which is Gods decree, to leave some in their sin and misery, and for sin
to damn them; or reprobation is Gods decree, to pass by some and not elect
them, and to permit those to fall into sin, and to punish them eternally for
sin.

Herein are two acts, 1 Negative: 2 Positive.

Negative, to refuse, or not elect: positive, to punish for sin: for that
from which they are reprobate, is from grace and glory, and that whereto they
are appointed, is damnation: the cause of not electing, Gods just pleasure and
will, Mat. 11. Romans 9. without respect of good or evil in the creature; the
cause of the second act, (damnation) is man's sin.

God is he that reprobateth some sinners, Romans 9.18. 1 These. 5.9. This is also
from eternity, Jud. 4. and many are passed by and reprobated, Mat. 20.16. The
things whereof men are reprobate, are true faith, 2 Timothy 3.6. true
sanctification, Tit. 1.16. eternal life, Act. 13.38. compared with 1 These.
5.9. and Jud. 4. The cause of punishing the wicked is their sin, for justice
must needs respect the innocence, or guilt of the creature. The end of
reprobation is properly Gods glory, Prove. 16.14.

The perdition of the Reprobate is also the end, Esaias 46.10.
but by accident: unchangeable also is the decree of God. Thus much of Election
and reprobation.

We are redeemed by Jesus Christ, Of Redemption.
Genesis 3.15. Genesis 22.18. Gal. 3.16. and 3.13. Romans 16.20.

In Christ two things are to be considered, By Christ.
1 his person, 2 his office.

In his person are to be considered two natures, divine, and humane, Romans 9.5.
with 1 Timothy 2.5. and Mat. 1.13.

His natures.
Christ's divine nature, is the same essence with the Father, and the Holy Ghost,
from eternity, Romans 9.5. 1 John 5.20. Heb. 1.10. from Psalm. 102.25.

Our Redeemer was to be God, because the greatness of the evil, wherewith men
were possessed, could not be taken away but by God himself: for Gods wrath
being infinite, could not by any creature which is finite, be overcome: He also
that must be our Mediator, must know us, and all our estate, wants, thoughts,
desires, which no creature can do.

Christ's humane nature is of the same essence, and substance with the sons of
Adam, 1 Timothy 2.5. Heb. 2.14. It could not stand with Gods justice to punish
Christ for our sins, if he had not our nature; neither could it have been
satisfactory for us, if it had not been done by a man.

The union of these two natures, the Godhead, Their union.
and the manhood to make one person, and mediator Jesus Christ, is the great
mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16.

The manner of union of these two natures, is extraordinary, and therefore has
a peculiar name of Person, or hypostaticall union, and it was by the Godhead,
assuming the manhood, as is shown, He. 2.16.

This humane nature was to be particularly, of the seed of Abraham, Genesis 22.18.
of David, Ps. 132, 11. Act. 2.30. of the virgin Mary, Esaias 7. Mat. 1.23. to
fulfull the promises, and to have right to the kingdom of Israel, and to be
free from original sin, which is in ordinary generation, the nature, seed,
or blood of the woman was sanctified and formed by the Spirit of God, and
thereof Christ's flesh created: Christ had the same time, degrees, and
progress, Luke 1.35.
for his formation, as other children have, Luke 1.26, 36, 39, 56. and 2.4, 5,
6. when the forming of humane nature was absolute, so as there was the matter,
and form of a man, then was the Godhead of Christ united thereto, by a
mystical and incomprehensible union, Luke 1. Col. 2.9.

The union is most near, and indissoluble, that Christ from thenceforth for
ever continues God and man in the unity of one person.

The union of natures is not a confounding of them, or of their properties, for
the Godhead remains infinite, invisible, incomprehensible, the body finite,
visible, local, Act. 3.21. 1 Cor. 15.26, 27, 28.

Luke 24.36.
By this union arises the dignity of Christ's person above men and Angels, that
he is next to God, or the Godhead it self, such is the grace of eminency by
the joining of these two natures, Act. 20.28.

Phil. 2.9.
By this union Christ's humane nature purchases habitual grace, as knowledge,
wisdom, holiness, such as a creature cannot have, Mark. 13.32. This
gradation shows, Christ as man to have greater knowledge, than men or Angels.

From this union is given unto Christ, the highest power of office, as to be
head of the Church. In respect of this union, Mat. 20.18.
the whole person of Christ is worshipped, though the direct object of worship
is the Godhead only, Heb. 1.6. Mat. 4.10.

From this union arises a communion both of the names, and titles, and
operations, so as these two natures conjoined, and distinguished, are called
one Christ, Romans 1.4.
Lord, Head, Mediator, King, Priest, Justice, Wisdom. In every work the
operations of the Godhead, are Christ's operations, as equal with the Father,
which gives an infinite worth, and most perfect force together with the
operation of the manhood, unto the work of mediation, Act. 20.28. Heb. 9.14.

From this union also arises, figurative and unproper speeches, as when things
common to the whole person, are attributed to one of the natures: There is one
mediator between God and man, the man Jesus Christ; ^ Tim. 2.5.
whereas Christ is Mediator as God and man; As also when things proper to one
nature, is given to another, as in Act. 20.28. The Church of God which he has
purchased with his blood, yet blood is proper to man, and not God, Luke 24.39.
Hitherto of Christ's person, now of his office, under which name the proper
accidents and effects of Christ's person be contained.

In general, Of Christ's office.
it is to be Mediator between God and man, 1 Timothy 2.5. Without a Mediator man
could not be reconciled unto God, nor saved from his wrath, because it was the
good pleasure of God, Mediator.
by him to reconcile all things to himself, and to set at peace through the
blood of his Cross, both the things in earth, and the things in heaven, Col.
1.19, 20.

And because the Majesty of God was offended by sin, and could not pass it
over without punishment, Romans 3.5, 6.

Christ's Mediatorship contains all the office, and functions, and operations
which he performed for man's Redemption.

By prophecy; first, decerning the cause between the parties differing, as an
arbitrator. Secondly, relation of covenants and conditions, on both parties, as
a messenger. By Priesthood; thirdly, the request or intercession for the
offending party. Fourthly, payment or satisfaction to the party offended.
Fifthly, effectual application of the satisfaction. By kingdom; sixthly, by
defense, and conservation of the parties satisfied for, from all their enemies,
and so sanctification, and restoration of Gods Image.

The office of Mediator requires both divine and humane nature in one person.
God the Father ordained Christ to be the Mediator before the foundation of the
world, 1 Pet. 1.20. Heb. 5.4, 5. God continually conserveth Christ in the
office of Mediation, Esaias 49.8. Christ's Mediatorship is eternal, and
everlasting, Heb. 7.21. Psalm. 45.6.

In respect of this office our Mediator is called Christ Jesus, a Savior that
is anointed of God, Luke 4.18.
for the Father continually and perfectly fills his humanity with plenty of
grace, sufficient every moment to perform the work, Psalm. 48.8. This
anointing comprehends collation of gifts unto the humane nature, and
ordination to office in respect of both natures; it is the person of Christ,
God and man, that is Mediator, Heb. 9. and not one nature only, either Godhead
or manhood.

In the administration of this office, though Christ's whole person do things,
yet must we distinguish of the work, or the action or effecting of the work;
for every work of our Mediator is one, as his person is one, but distinct
actions concur, one of the Godhead, another of the manhood, as the body and
the soul concur in many works: as for example, Christ offering himself for
a sacrifice to God, was a work, and a function of his office common to both
natures, but to accomplish this work, there concurres a diverse operation, one
of the Godhead, another of the manhood; for the manhood suffered the punishment
for our sins, and the Godhead offered it up a most worthy satisfaction to the
Father, Heb. 9.14. The blood of Christ (that was the manhood) which through the
eternal Spirit (that was the Godhead offered himself. Hitherto of Christ's
office in general, now to the several parts or branches: The parts or
branches of Christ's office are three, 1 Prophecy, 2 Priesthood, 3 Kingdom.

Christ's Prophetical office, Christ's Prophetical office.
is a function of his person, whereby he teaches and informs his Church,
Joh. 1.18. Act. 3.22. Deuteronomy. 18.18. Act. 7.37. and of this office he is called
the Word, Joh. 1.1. In this work of mediation is to be considered, 1 what he
does in respect of God: 2 in respect of us. In respect of God, Christ the
Mediator goes up into Heaven, Joh. 3.18. to receive the lively oracles of
life; and speak things as the Father taught him, Joh. 8.28. In respect of men
he came down from Heaven, Joh. 6.38. to teach the doctrine of the Father which
sent him, Joh. 7.16. And to give unto his Disciples the word which the Father
gave to him, Joh. 15.15. even all things that he heard of his Father.

This prophetical office has two parts: first, the function of teaching:
Secondly, the efficacy of things taught.

The function of teaching is, whereby Christ instructs his Church in things
needful to salvation, videlicet, by doctrine, exhortation, dehortation,
conviction, consolation, reproof, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16.

This work Christ fulfilled mediately, and immediately.

Immediately in his own person, Christ's preaching.
when for three years and more, he preached publicly, and privately, with
great power of the spirit, Mark. 1.14. Christ's doctrine was also confirmed by
signs and miracles, which partly belong to his Prophetical, partly to his
Kingly office. The sum of Christ's Doctrine was the two Covenants or
Testaments, the Law and Gospel, Luke 4.18. He preached the Law, Mat. 5, and 6,
and 7. chap.
by showing the true meaning and fulfilling it, against the corrupt and false
glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees. Again, Christ's preaching was more
public, or more private; Joh. 8.20.
public, when he taught in the Synagogues, and Temple; private, when apart he
opened the mysteries of the Kingdom of God unto his Disciples. Mark. 4.35.
Christ also foretold by the Spirit things to come, as the destruction of
Jerusalem, the coming of false Prophets, Mar. 24.
Antichrist, and the end of the world. Christ's preaching was of things present,
and of things to come; of things present he taught, Joh. 3.
1 the doctrines of faith to be delivered, good works to be practiced: of
things to come, as before. Christ confirmed his doctrine by signs and
miracles, by seals and Sacraments, which partly belonged to his Prophetical
office, partly to his Kingdom, and Priesthood.

Mediately Christ preached by his servants, which were Angels and men, Rev.
22.16. 1 Pet. 3.18, 19, 20. By Angels, as at the giving of the Law; by Gabriel
to Daniel, Zacharias, and John. And by men before his coming, as Patriarchs,
Prophets, Priests, 2 Pet. 3.18, 19, 20. Ephesians. 4.11.
After his coming in the flesh, by Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors,
and Teachers. When Christ sends any, he that receives them, receives him;
and he that refuses them, refuses him.

The means whereby he furnishes his Ministers, 2 Timothy 3.16. Joh. 16.13, 14.
are two: 1 the word spoken and written: 2 the Spirit. Thus much of the
function of teaching, the efficacy of the things taught, is a virtue whereby
Christ works in all men by his Spirit, pricking their hearts, illuminating
their understanding, changing their affections, working repentance, faith and
comfort; these effects he works by his Spirit, which he sends into the
hearts of his people, Job. 16.1.

Christ's Priestly office.
Christ's Priestly office, is whereby he is ordained to satisfy for the sins
of the elect, and redeem them to God, Heb. 9.11, 12.

The works of his priesthood are four; first, obedience: secondly,
satisfaction: thirdly, intercession: and fourthly, blessing.

Touching obedience, Gal. 4.4. Romans 8.3, 4. Joh. 17.19.
Christ having taken upon him our flesh, perfectly fulfilled the Law, that his
obedience might be imputed unto us, Romans 5.19.

Touching satisfaction, Christ made satisfaction for sin to Gods Justice,
Esaias 53.5, 6.
that the elect might be delivered from the guilt and punishment of sin; only
the expiation and satisfaction that Christ made, is the proper and perfect
price, that serves for the sins of the world; neither have the works of
sufferings of men or Angels any place herein, Heb. 9.12. The expiation of sin
was made by Christ's suffering, 1 Pet. 3.18.

Christ's sufferings are, 1 Privation of good, Christ's sufferings.
2 Infliction of evil.

Privation of good, is the want of joy, glory, and happiness, which otherwise
he should have had, Joh. 17.5. Phil. 2.7. 2 Cor. 8.9.
had he not willingly emptied himself for our sakes.

Infliction of evil, was all the miseries which he suffered for our sakes:
which we may consider in three ends; 1 the things he suffered in the whole
course of his life: secondly, the special things he suffered before his
death: thirdly, his death it self before his burial. His sufferings in the
whole course of his life, was outward, and inward: his outward sufferings were
hunger, Mat. 4.2. Joh. 4.7. poverty, Mat. 8.20. cold, weariness, injuries,
reproaches, perils, flight into Egypt, and from the Jews, Mat. 2.14. and
11.19. Luke 7.34. Joh. 15.20. 2 Cor. 8.9. Mar. 9.34. and 21, 22. Joh. 8.48, 59.
and 11.57. His inward sufferings were, grief, and sorrow for the hardness of
men's hearts, ignorance and temptation of the devil, Mat. 4.

His special sufferings before his death were inward and outward: inward was
his trouble, agony, deadly sorrow, wherein the Holy Ghost notes the passions,
fear, amazedness, agony, or conflict, grievous trouble, near unto fainting,
Mat. 26.37. Mark. 14.33. that his soul was very sorrowful, even unto death,
Joh. 12.28. Mat. 26.38.

Three things are to be considered in sin, and sinners. First, the turning
away from God and his Law. Secondly, the turning unto Satan, and the pleasures
of sin. Thirdly, the continuance in that sinful estate. Accordingly in Gods
justice or punishment, which God must inflict on sinners, are 3. things to be
considered: 1 The loss, and deprivation of Gods presence, and joys that are
in the same; 2 These. 1.9. Psalm. 16.11. 2 The torments and sensible pains
answerable to the pleasures of sin, Rev. 14.10.18.7. 3 The eternity of the
torments, in such as never break off, nor cease from sin by repentance, and
conversion unto God, Act. 25.18. Romans 1.4. which is the state and case of all
reprobates: and naturally this was the case of all men; but supernaturally, by
the grace of Christ, in the elect, their continuance in sin is broken off by
repentance, and conversion unto God, Act. 25.18. To. 6.1, 4. Where continuance
of sin is not, there Gods justice requires not eternity of punishment, but
only the extremity of it for a time. Christ therefore, suffering but for the
elect, whom he converteth from their sins, was not to suffer eternal
punishment; but temporary, such as for the extremity of it, and in respect of
the dignity of his person, who was God and man, was equivalent to that which
the elect should have suffered: be suffered not for the damned, for why then
should themselves also suffer, seeing Christ's death is not in vain? but he
suffered for them which otherwise should be damned, his blood was shed for
remission of sins, and where sins are remitted, punishment is not inflicted.

This intolerable sorrow in Christ's soul arose from the feeling of the burden
of all the sins of the elect, and of Gods wrath for them, all which as in one
view were set before him, 2 Cor. 5.21 Esaias 35.6. Psalm. 40.12. and 38.3. Psalm.
22.14, 15. here was Christ's conscience afflicting him for the sins of the
elect now made his, the devils and all the powers of hell loading and charging
him, Joh. 14.30. the heavy ire and wrath of God laid upon him, Psalm. 38.3. The
highest degree of Christ's inward afflictions, was on the cross, when he cried,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, Mat. 27.46. The greatest sorrow,
fear, trouble, and temptation that possibly could be in humane nature, without
being overcome, was in Christ; the Lord would break him, and make him subject
to infirmities, Esaias 53. Act. 8.22. 1 Pet. 2.24.

The outward sufferings, was the ignominy, reproach, contempt of men, which he
suffered, Psalm. 22.6. Psalm. 69.20. Heb. 12.13. Mat. 27.

The effects of Christ's sorrows in him were these: 1 prayer, that if it were
possible the cup might pass from him, Mat. 26.39. 2 More fervencie in prayer,
with strong crying and tears, Heb. 5.7. 3 A strong sweat in his agony, and
prayer, like drops of blood falling to the ground, Luke 22.44.

In this agony the blood in the veins, was so troubled, the vital spirits so
forcibly urged, that the blood came out of the veins, and skin, the like
whereof is never seen nor heard of.

In this his agony an Angel appeared from heaven comforting him, Luke 22.48.
Thus Christ was made inferior to the Angels, Heb. 2.9.

Other outward afflictions besides the forementioned, he had, which I thus
particular.

1 The betraying of him into the hands of the Sergeants, and officers, by
Judas, as a thief, Mat. 26.

2 His leading about the city, as a malefactor, to the high Priests house, to
Pilate, to Herod, and back again to Pilate, Mat. 26.5. and 27.2. Luke 23.2,
8, 9, 10, 11. where by the Ecclesiastical Judge, he was condemned of
blasphemy; and worthy to die, Mat. 26.65, 66. he was accused to the civil
Judge, as an enemy to Caesar, but the Judge found him innocent, and so
pronounced him; Mat. 27.78. Luke 23.4. he was by Herod and his servants mocked,
set at naught, clothed with a robe, and sent away with derision, Luke 23.11.
To appease the rage and tumult of the wicked Jews, contrary to justice, and
the manifestation of his conscience, he was condemned of Pilate, Mat. 27.24,
25, 26. he was scourged, crowned with thorns, spit on, and buffeted by the
Ministers and soldiers, a reed was put in his hand, they bowed the knee before
him to deride him, they smote him on the head, that he might prophecy, Mat.
27.29, 30, 31. the Jews cried out, Crucify him, crucify him; Thus they denied
the holy One, and the just, and desired a murderer to be given them: then was
Christ condemned to die, and being led out of the City to execution with two
evil doers, he carried his Cross himself, but being weary and faint, by
reason of his agony and scourging, Simon of Cyren was compelled to help him,
Joh. 19.17. Mar. 15.21. He was hanged upon a cross by nales that pierced him
in his hands, and feet; his death was cursed in respect of God, Heb. 12.2.
Gal. 3.13. in respect of man, shameful; in respect of punishment, painful;
in respect of the extention of the veins, and sinues, and the piercing of them
in the hands and feet (where they all met, and were knit together) it was very
horrible; he was hanged between two thieves, for more shame, and so was
accounted amongst the wicked, being nailed on the cross; he endured thirst,
reproaches, and scoffings of the wicked, they wagged their heads, and derided
him of his faith and doctrine, Mat. 27.42, 43. here he wrestled with the
devil, Mat. 47.46.
and all his Angels, the powers of darkness, Col. 2.15. Heb. 2.14. and by
faith with his Father, who seemed to have forsaken him: at the horror, and
indignity of this his passion, the sun was ashamed, and turned black, the
earth quaked, the rocks rent, and the veil of the Temple clest, Mat. 27 45,
51. and at the last he breathed out the ghost, commending his spirit into his
Fathsrs hands, and so death seized on him, and separated his soul and body;
being dead his side was pierced with a lance, out of which water and blood
issued, but his legs were not broken. Joh. 19.33, 34.


The end of Christ's sufferings were partly in respect of God, of himself, and
of us: as that God the Father, for his wisdom, mercy and justice, might be
glorified in the same, Joh. 13.31, 32. That Christ by suffering might enter
into his glory, Luke 20. that he might bring, and reconcile us unto God, 1 Pet.
3.18. that he might know to pity and succor us, Heb. 2.18. that he might
lend us an example to suffer with him, that he might destroy the devil, that
had the power of death, and death it self, Heb. 2. that he might ratify the
two testaments, Heb. 9. that he might alish sin, Romans 6. that we might be
married to Christ, Romans 7.

Christ was to die by effusion of blood, for to be a perfect sacrifice, and to
confirm the testament by his death, Heb. 9.16, 22.

Christ was not a mere patient only in his death, but an agent also, offering
himself to God willingly, Heb. 9.14. Joh. 10.17, 18. Christ himself was the
Priest, Heb. 9.1. the sacrifice was himself, Heb. 9.14. the Altar was the
eternal Spirit. 9.1.14. the fire was the afflictions he felt in himself, and
the spirit.

Christ's person being God and man, the sacrifice was of more worth, and
esteem, than if all men and Angels had dyed, Act. 20.28. Therefore was his
death, not only a punishment, but a satisfaction: Christ's body was laid in
grave until the third day. Christ's Kingdom is either essential by nature,
Christ's Kingdom.
which he has common with the Father, and Holy Ghost, Prove. 8.22.30, or it is
the second Persons by dispensation, as he is God manifested in the flesh, and
mediator of the Church, Phil. 2.6, 1 Cor. 15.24. Of this latter do we treat of
in this place.

The works and parts of Christ's kingly office, are these; 1 Victory for
himself and us. 2 Glory. 3 The taking of the Kingdom. 4 The administration of
the Kingdom. 5 The resignation of the Kingdom to his Father.

Victory.
Victory, is whereby Christ overcommeth the devil, and sin, and death, and
subdued them under him and his, Heb. 2.14. 1 Cor. 15.54, 57.

Glory.
Glory, is the exaltation and glorification of Christ, and that of the whole
person, but in diverse respects, for his divine nature was exalted, not by
increase of essence, or of glory, his humane nature was exalted, both by
increase and manifestation. Glory is the Kingly dignity, consisting of three
things, 1 Putting off infirmities. 2 Glorification of the humane nature. 3
Triumph over enemies.

Putting off infirmities, was when Christ was delivered from all weakness of
body and mind, which for our sakes he took upon him, as death, pain, hunger,
thirst, sorrow, Romans 6.9. 1 Cor. 15.42, 43.

Glorification of the humane nature, is its perfection, by assuming new habits,
and powers, Joh. 7.39.

Christ's body was glorified, in that it was made incorruptible, 1 Cor. 15.33.
firm, strong, nimble, spiritual, splendent, 1 Cor. 15.43. Mat. 17.2, 3. His
soul was glorified by the perfection of the understanding, such as in his base
estate he knew not, even all things in all places and times, so far forth as
a created mind is capable of, and by perfection of will, and all virtues that a
created will is capable of.

Triumph over enemies, was his resurrection, and manifestation after, Psalm.
68.1. This arising again was the restoring of the humane nature unto life, and
the glorious, and powerful lifting of it out of the grave.

As by Christ's sufferings and death he wrought satisfaction, and justice for
his elect, so by his resurrerection (as the principal cause) he conferreth
the effectual application of justice and satisfaction. Romans 4.25.
The efficient cause of Christ's resurrection was God the Father, Act. 2.24. the
Son, Joh. 17.18. the Holy Ghost, Romans 18.11. The end of his rising is the
glory of God the Father, Romans 6.4. of the Son, Act. 3.15. to fulfill
prophesies and figures, 1 Cor. 15.4. to confirm the legal covenants, Do this
and live: to justify us by applying benefits, Romans 4.25. Romans 1.4. Act 23.32,
33.


The benefits and fruits we have by his resurrection are these: 1 A full
assurance and certainty of faith touching him. 2 Full satisfaction for us, as
our surety, and our applied justification, Romans 4.25. and 8.34. 4 The gift of
the Holy Ghost, to quicken us from sin, Romans 6.4. Ephesians. 2.5. 5 Assurance of
our last resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.12, 20, 22. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. 6 Certainty of our
perseverance in faith, Romans 6.9. Gal. 2.20. 7 Confidence of our hope, and
eternal life, Col. 1.18. Romans 8.17. and 5.10. 1 Pet. 3.20, 21.

The form and manner of Christ's resurrection, was, first his soul returned to
the body: secondly, the time was the third day: thirdly, Genesis 1.31. Mat. 28.1,
2. Genesis 1.1, 2, 3.
the earth trembled for joy, as for horror at his death. As he died the
sixth, wherein Adam was made and fell: so he rose the first day, wherein the
world began to be created. he rose in the dawning, Mat. 28.1, 2. so he was the
Sun, and light of the world. As the Angels served him at his birth, Luke 2. so
did they at his resurrection; Mat. 28 3, 5, ^
Christ was the first that should rise from the dead, Act. 26.23. 1 Cor. 15.

Object. But some rose before him, raised by the Prophets.

Answ. Their resurrection was actual, and imperfect, for they died again
afterward, but Christ's was perfect, never dying more, nor subject to mortality,
Act. 13.34.

The manifestation of his resurrection, was his glorious appearing to his
Disciples forty days, to confirm their faith, and teaching them things
pertaining to the Kingdom of God, Act. 2.3.

Testimonies of his resurrection were, 1 Angels, Mat. 28.3, 4. Luke 24. 2 The
watchmen, Mat. 28.4, 11. 3 His Disciples, to whom he appeared oftentimes, as
to Mary Magdalen at the grave, Mat. 28.9. To Simon Peter; Luke 24.34. 1 Cor.
15.5.
to two Disciples, in the way to Emaus, Luke 24.13. To the company of
Disciples, Joh. 20.19. To Thomas, Joh. 20.26. To his Disciples at the sea of
Tiberias, Joh. 22.1. To James, 1 Cor. 15.7. To his Disciples on the mount at
Galile, Mat. 28.16. To more than 500. brethren at once, 1 Cor. 15.6. To his
Disciples on mount Olivet, when he ascended into Heaven. Another testimony was
the bodies of the Saints which arose: Act. 1.4.12. Luke 24.50.
and prophesies of the Scripture, Luke 24.25, 26. Mat. 27 52, 53.

Christ's taking of his Kingdom, was: 1 By ascending into heaven. 2 By sitting
at Gods right hand, Dan. 7.13, 14. Christ in his natural body glorified, went
up in a cloud through the air, Act. 1.9, 10.
or orbs into the imperial heavens: by his ascension he also made way for us,
and is an assurance that we also shall come thither, Joh. 18.7. Ephesians. 4.8.
Heb. 10.19. Joh. 14.3. Also by his ascension, he furnishes his Church with
gifts of the Holy Ghost, Joh. 7.39.

Christ's sitting at his Fathers right hand means a dignity next unto the
power of God, and is the highest degree of exaltation: whereby he fully
occupies his kingdom, gotten by his battle, by repressing his enemies, and
conserving his Church, Psalm. 101.1 Cor. 15.1. This sitting at Gods right hand,
in respect of Christ's Godhead, Joh. 17.5.
was the restoration of the glory which he had with the Father before the
world was: in respect of the manhood, it is the glorification of him, with the
glory he never had before, above all other creatures.

Christ's Kingdom may be considered absolutely, or specially.

His absolute Kingdom, is the rule which he has over-all creatures, whether
they obey or not, and it may be called the Kingdom of power, 1 Pet. 3.22. Mat.
28.18.


His special Kingdom, is his rule over the Church, Psalm. 2.6. Heb. 12.28.
Esaias 18.36. Luke 17.21.
which may be called the Kingdom of Grace. The nature of this Kingdom is
spiritual, not of this World; the limits of this Kingdom are the ends of the
earth, Psalm. 2.

Administration of Christ's Kingdom is, 1 His giving laws: 2 By executing them.

His giving of Laws are, outward, or inward.

Outward, propounded by the Word, and Ministry. Luke 24.45. Ephesians. 4.14.


Inward, by the Spirit, opening the conscience, and giving power to do them,
Act. 1.3.

Executing Laws is, by rewarding good deeds, and punishing evil. Rewards are,
1 Spiritual: 2 Temporal.

Spiritual, are, remission of sins, victories over temptations,
justification, sanctification.

Temporal, are the things of this life with the condition of the Cross; in
the next life joys of Heaven, Matt. 25.

Punishments are, inward, and outward: Inward are griefs, fears, and torments
of conscience; Outward, are pains, sicknesses, diseases, Apoc. 6.
and in the next life damnation. The course of administration in all ages, are
the opening of the seals, sounding of the trumpets, shedding of the vials,
discovery of Antichrist. The great and last work of his Kingdom, is the last
Judgment; the day as he knew not on earth, so neither we: the manner will be
glorious with innumerable companies of Angels, and flaming fire. The
resurrection of the just, and unjust, 2 These. 1.7, 8.
the change of the living, the separating the good, and evil by the Angels,
the pronouncing of the sentence of mercy to the elect, Mat. 25.
and of judgment to the wicked: in the end the delivering up of the Kingdom
to his Father, that God may be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.24. Hitherto of Christ's
person and office, next follows the object, the people upon whom Christ
exercises his office, whom he teaches as a Prophet, redeemeth as a Priest,
and rules as a King.

The Church.
This people are called his Church, or Congregation, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27.

Object. But Christ is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world, for
all men, 1 Cor. 5.15.

1 John 2.2.
Ans. By the World are meant the elect of all ages, and not the Jews only, or
them that then lived, but the Gentiles also. So, all men, are meant, all the
elect, 1 Pet. 1.2. and 2.5, 9, 24. Heb. 2.9. 1 These. 2.13. Mat. 24.24. compared
with Jud. 4.

Object. In Romans 5.18. it is said, The offense of one man came on all men to
condemnation, so the justifying of one is toward all men to justification of
life.

Answ. The Apostle makes Adam a type of Christ, that as all that came of Adam
have sin, and death by generation, so all that came of Christ shall have
righteousness, and life through him. Adam communicates his sin to none, but
such as are borne of him: so Christ communicates his justice to none, but such
as are borne of him.

Object. In 2 Pet. 2.1. mention is made of some bringing in damnable heresies,
even denying the Lord that bought them; and Romans 14.15. the Apostle says,
Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died: so 1 Cor. 8.11. therefore
Christ dyed for them that perish.

Answ. All professing faith in Christ, profess to be redeemed by him, and so
are to be hoped for of us in charity, until the contrary appear; in this
respect are they said to be bought, and not absolutely.

Object. Adam was redeemed, Genesis 3. and in him all mankind, therefore in his
loins all men are redeemed.

Answ. As Adams house was the visible Church, embracing the promises, so were
they and theirs visibly redeemed in the judgment of men, till the contrary
appeared by their sin, as it did in Cain and his, Mar. 22.24.
but as in the Church many are called, and few elected, so then in Adams
posterity it soon appeared, Genesis 4. and afterward in Noah's seed, Genesis 9.10.
but justice and sin are not alike propagated by Adam, Psalm. 51.
for all borne of him are partakers of sin by imputation, and have it
inherent in them, but all borne of him are not partakers of his faith, and
Christian sanctity, which is not propagated carnally, but by the Spirit of
Christ, Joh. 1.

The truth hereof is laid down thus:

Christ saved his people from their sins, Mat. 1.21. Joh. 10.15. Heb. 9.15. and
10.14. he prayed for them and not for the world, Joh. 17.9. Now if Christ
ready to die prayed not for the world, but for them which his Father had given
him out of the world, then the world is not by him redeemed, that is, the
reprobates of the world.

Christ is the Mediator of the New Testament, which is, that God would put his
Law in their minds, Heb. 9.25.
and be their God, Heb. 9.10. But such is not the state of many wicked, 2 These.
5.2. All men have not faith, Tit. 1.1.
but the Elect, and they believed that Word ordained to life, Act. 13.4.8. and
others believe not, because they are none of Christ's sheep, Joh. 10.26.

Christ says, My sheep hear my voice, Joh. 10.27, 28.
and I know them, and they follow me: but all hear not Christ's voice, nor
follow him; Ergo, he is not a propitiation for the sins of all men in
general, but for the elect in all places and times, which the Apostle means.

The word Church, Church.
is used sometimes more largely, for such an Assembly as profess Christ the
King, Priest; and Prophet; which comprehends in it hypocrites, and
reprobates, as well as Gods elect: in which respect Paul says of the Church of
Israel; All our fathers were under the cloud, all passed through the sea, were
all baptized unto Moses, did all drink of the same spiritual rock, but with
some of them God was not pleased, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3.

Hypocrites, or reprobates in the Church, are not properly of the Church, but
by homonymie of speech, as in the 1 John 2.19.

Strictly, and properly, the Church is the company of them whom the Father has
chosen to life, given to the Son to redeem, Ephesians. 5.25. Joh. 17.2.
sanctifying them by the Spirit, and uniting them together among themselves, by
the bond of faith and love.

The Church is considered generally, and particularly: generally, as it
comprehends all Gods family in heaven and earth, Ephesians. 3.15. and brotherhood
of all Christians, 1 Pet. 5.9. commonly called the Catholic Church.

Particularly, when companies of Christians are united, and compact together,
in particular places, towns, or cities, as Romans 1. 1 Cor. 1. Rev. 2. and 3.
chap.

Hitherto I have spoken of two means of our salvation, Justification.
and remedies of our miseries, namely of election and redemption. Now follows
the third, which is our Justification, being the absolution of sinful man from
punishment, because of the satisfaction of Christ the Redeemer, apprehended by
faith.

This word Justification is used here for Absolution judicial, when God the
Judge absolveth the fault of the man, that is accused before him, and
pronounces him just and innocent; and it is opposed to condemnation, as Romans
8.33, 34. Romans 5.18.
We may not with the Papists understand here Justification to be the infusion
of justice.

This judicial act is in this life exercised in a man's conscience, wherein God
has his tribunal, men's thoughts accusing or excusing, Romans 2.15. After this
life, it shall be exercised by the sentence of Christ, Romans 2.16. As sin is a
difference from Gods Law, 1 John 3 4.
so justice is a congruence with the Law, both of our nature and actions: and
as there is a legal justice inherent in men, by fulfilling the Law, and an
Evangelicall justice, Phil. 3.9.
by God imputed to him that believes the Evangell, Romans 4.5, 6. so is there
also a legal justification, and an Evangelicall: Legal justification, is from
works done, according to Gods Law, we stand in the trial of the justice of
God, Levit. 18.5. Gal. 3.12.

Evangelicall justification is when Gods Law being violated, we are absolved
from the sin and punishment by the grace of God, and mercy of his Son
apprehended by faith: And by him all that believe are justified, in all things
in which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Act. 13.

Before the fall legal justice had place, and shall have again in the life to
come: Romans 4.5. Gal. 3.10.10, 12.
but since the fall in this life the Evangelicall justice is to be sought for.
The reason hereof is, that justification by the Law must be upon the full,
perfect, and continual keeping of the same, Gal. 3.10. which is unpossible by
man's weakness, Romans 8.3.

The Law of God being violated by sin, his justice must be satisfied first,
Psalm. 14. Romans 3.24. and 5 chap.
before any legal justice can be established in us, which being satisfied by
Christ, and so we absolved from our sins past, the legal justice begins
in us again in this life, but shall not be perfected till the next life.

Justification is an act undivided, and all at once, and so it differs from
Sanctification which is done by degrees and parts.

Justification of a sinner in this life is done essentially but once, 1 John
3.9.
though it be often repaired and renewed, as faith once given to the elect, is
never quite taken away, for the seed of God remains in him; Justification
and Faith are most nearly united.

The causes of Justification are either Principal: Isntrumental: Outward,
Inward.



The principal outward cause, is the merit, and satisfaction of Christ, Romans
3.24, 25. which in respect of us is the meritorious cause, in respect of God it
is the cause that is outwardly moving him to pronounce us just. Romans 3.24.


Both these are true, that we are justified for the satisfaction and merit of
Christ, as the outward moving cause, and yet are justified freely of mere
mercy, as the inward moving cause.

Object. How can it be said that God freely forgiveth us our sins, out of his
own grace, and mercy freely, seeing he has required satisfaction to the full
of Christ our head, and surety, and without such satisfaction forgiveth no
sin?

Answ. Though he forgive it not freely in respect of his Son, Col. 2.13.
who was wounded for our iniquities, yet in respect of us that were the
sinners, it is free.

Object. But we merited it in Christ our head, and therefore are not freely
forgiven.

Answ. His merit was not ours by original possession, 1 Cor. 2.9.
or cleaving in us (as sin is from Adam) but only by relation and
application, and this mere grace, that we never thinking on any such thing,
God found this way for our redemption, Romans 5.8, 10. and that he applies his
Sons redemption unto us, that were by no gift or merit disposed to such a
thing, Ephesians. 1.6, 9. and 2.8.

As Christ's satisfaction is most sufficient and full, so as it is sufficiently,
and fully to justify us, without any merit of ours, or any other creatures, 1 John 1.7.
Romans 3.25, 26. Our works being imperfect have no proportion to the justice of
God, neither are they ours, but Gods, due unto him, and proceeding from him:
now that which is not ours originally, or by possession, but is wholly owing
unto another, by it we can merit nothing to our selves.

The principal inward cause of our justification is both, 1 an effectual
calling, 2 the imputation of Christ's merits.

The effectual calling is the more remote cause of our justification, when God
by his Spirit effectually moves the heart, the understanding, will, and
affections, to the acknowledgement of our own miseries, to seek deliverance,
and to believe the promise, or grace.

This inward calling of the elect, differs from outward calling, by the word,
whereby God offers his grace to all in general. to this inward calling a man
is merely passive, in respect of the beginning, Ephesians. 2.1.
that is, he cannot any more prepare, or dispose himself by strength of
nature unto this calling, or justification. Herein therefore the Papists err,
who ascribe to man a preparation to justification, called the fundation of
justification, as faith, that is, a certain general knowledge, and certainty
of the truth of Gods Word: Secondly, an acknowledgement of our sins. Thirdly,
fear of hell: Fourthly, love of God: 2 Cor. 3.5. Phil. 2.13.
Fifthly, repentance. Sixthly, hope of salvation; which sufficiently prepare a
man (they say) to receive justification, but the Apostle says the contrary,
that our sufficiency is of God.

The imputation of Christ's merit, and satisfaction, is the near and next cause
of justification, Romans 8.10.
and constituteth the essence and definition of it, which is, when God for
union with Christ, 2 Cor. 5.14.21. Romans 4.5, 8.
does so apply and make proper Christ's merit to us, as if we our selves had
died, and satisfied for our sins: As from Adam we draw, 1 guilt, 2 native
evil: so from Christ we draw, 1 absolution from guilt, 2 reparation of Gods
Image, called Regeneration.

Faith.
The isntrumental cause of justification is Faith, which is taken sometime
largely, sometime strictly: largely, faith is taken for an assent to those
things written in the Word, called historical faith: strictly, Jam. 2.
faith is justifying, or miraculous; justifying faith, is a trustfull
assurance, which the Spirit of God stirs up in the elect, Romans 10.6, 10.
Gal. 2.20.
firmly to apply the promises of Gods grace. Romans 10.20.
This faith presupposes knowledge, Romans 10.14. but formally it is assertion
toward Gods promise.

Faith justifies not, as it is a quality, passion, or action in us, but as it
is a relation, and uniteth us to Christ, whose satisfaction is imputed for
righteousness to us, Gal. 2.20.

Faith applies the promise to the particular person, Jam. 2.20.
and not the general only: Gal. 2.20. 1 Job. 4.16.

Faith necessarily brings forth good works, yet it justifies not in that
respect, Romans 4.5.

The proper object of faith, is the evangelicall promise of grace in Christ,
Romans 1.16.

Faith has degrees, increasing, and diminishing, yet the essence and force of
justifying remains in the least degree, Romans 12.3. Mark. 9.24.

Faith once wrought in the elect, can never be utterly extinguished, for faith
is of the elect only, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. as the elect cannot perish, Tit. 1.1.
neither can their faith, Romans 8.38, 39.

The immediate effect of justification known, is Adoption, Gal. 3.16*
by which the elect do now actually please God, as his children and co-heires
with Christ.

Another effect of justification, is peace of Conscience, when we perceive our
selves absolved from the guilt of sin, before Gods judgment, and the
judgment of our own conscience, Romans 5.1.

Peace of conscience, has degrees sometimes more, Peace of conscience. Romans
8.15.
sometimes less, Psalm. 30.7. and 51.12, and 38.3. From peace of conscience
arises confidence, that our prayers are heard: Also assurance that our good
works please God; also patient suffering of the cross, arises from the
feeling of justification, Romans 5.3.

Thus much of our deliverance from sin, and the misery thereof, also the
punishment of sin, which was Christ's work in himself. Sanctification.


Now follows our Sanctification or, reformation into the image of God, which
is Christ's work in us; it is the change of our nature into better, that is,
into the similitude of the perfection of God, called also our Glorification, 2
Cor. 3.18.

Justification, and Sanctification differ thus: Justification, is the imputing
of another justice; Romans 8.30.
(to wit Christ's) Sanctification is the impression of justice; that it may be
in us: in Justification there is the satisfaction of Christ; in Sanctification
there is the obedience of a Christian: Justice is perfect and absolute, an
undivided act at once; Sanctification is a work begun, not equal in all:
Justification is first, Joh. 3.5.
Sanctification is after; Sanctification: is a separation from filthiness of
sin, from common profane use, Romans 6.29.
and a preparation, and application to holy use, by the Spirit of God, 2 Cor.
7.1. Absolution.


Absolution from sin is not sufficient to salvation, unless there be also a
restoring, or putting on of good, called Sanctificat^on, Heb. 12.14. As
Election is the peculiar work of the Father, Ephesians. 1.3, 4. Redemption of the
Son, 1 John 2.1, 2. so Sanctification is the proper work of the Holy Ghost,
Romans 15.16.
1 Cor. 6.11.

Christ by his obedience, and death has merited for us the gift of
sanctification of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 1.30. This he has merited with God, who
for his Sons sake gives us the Spirit, Gal. 4.6.

Our Sanctification has two parts, 1 the putting off the old, Ephesians. 4.22.
which is corrupt, through the deceiveable lust: 2 the putting on the new man,
which is after God, Ephesians. 4.24.
created in righteousness, and true holiness.

The putting off the old man, is the subduing, breaking, and abolishing of the
sinful disposition, and inclination that is in our nature, 1 Pet. 4.5. and of
it there be two parts, 1 Death: 2 Burial of the old man.

Death or mortification, is an actual effect of the application of Christ's
death, by the holy Ghost (to our nature) whereby our corruption, Romans 6.6.
or body of sin, receives a deadly wound, is feebled, and dies daily.

Burial, is the going forward of death, and is an effect of the application of
Christ's burial by the Spirit, whereby the old man, our body of sin, is more
and more corrupted, and as it were rotted in the grave, Romans 6.4.

Putting on the new man, is when we take again Godf habits, and disposition
to virtue, and it is called the rising or the quickening of the new man, which
is an effect of the application by the Spirit of Christ's resurrection, whereby
inherent holiness is begun, and by degrees continually increased, Romans 6.4.
Thus Christ's death, burial, and resurrection, is to us, 1 A gift of
justification, 1 These. 1.6.
Romans 5.15.18. 2 A power to mortify, and quicken us, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. and 2.1,
5, 6. And an example or type to follow in ^^r course of life, 1 Pet. 2.21.

The (...). Romans 8.30.


The justified ^ understanding (...) will. 3 The (...). 1 These. 5.23.


The (...) is (...) By teaching and (...) necessary knowledge. Zach. 12.10.
(...) Gods favor to the (...) 4.17. Rom 5.5. 3 By confirming us in the (...)
of persevera^ce, and eternal life, 2 Cor. 1.22.

The will is (...) by making (...) and ready: Right, when the will is inclined
and carried in a straight course to that which is good, rightly known. (...)
when there (...) and faculty to follow, and to the good, ^^rehended, and he
(...).

(...), when our desires of meats, drinks and other things, that we lust
after, are moderated, according to Gods Law, and reason, Romans 13.1^. And, when
our affections of joy, sorrow, love, hatred (...) to Gods Law* (...), and too
(...), and keep the holy mea^^e, Psalm. ^^0, Psalm. 119. Ephesians. 4.26.


This sanctification is, 1 begun: 2 perfected (...) in this life. 1 Cor. 6.11.


Always in this life there is a mixture of the old (...) with the new, an
(...) to good by (...) Gal. 6.17.
are contrary (...)

The (...) Ephesians. 6.13, 14.

The conflict is the resisting of sinful temptations, arising in us, or
suggested any way to us; and the victory is, when we so resist, as sin
rules not in us, Romans 6.14.

The infirmities, and defects of our sanctification, 1 John 2.1.
are forgiven us in Christ.

Sanctification has many degrees, sometime more, sometime less, Rev. 2, and
3. The children of God have some special sin, or sins whereunto they are
most prone, Psalm. 18.23.
which they must have most special care to mortify.

Any one sin reigning in a man, Jam. 2.10.
argues him to be wicked, and unsanctified, Ezekiel. 18.10, 11.

The effect of regeneration or sanctification, is good works, namely, acts and
operations, proceeding from a regenerate will, understanding and affections.

In good works are to be considered, 1 The rule. 2 The partition of them.

The rule of good works is Gods Law, Exodus 19.20.
comprehended in the ten Commandments, which God gave by voice, Commandments.
1 Table.
and by writing on 2. Tables of stone at mount Sinay.

The 1 Table contains four Commandments, informing us of our duties, and
good works toward God.

The first commandment charge us not to be Atheists, without God, Psalm.
14.1. Secondly, not to have false gods with the true, Exodus 20.23. 1 Cor.
10.20. Thirdly, not to have false gods without the true, 2 King. 17.25.
Fourthly, not to have the true God near in thy mouth, Exodus 5.2.
and far from thy heart, Esaias 29.13. (...) 1.16* but requires us to have
Jehovah the true God, and him only and sincerely to be our God, Deuteronomy. 4.35.

The second Commandment forbideth us to make (in Gods worship) any shape,
image, representation or ordinance, whereby to worship God, or to bow down, or
to submit to any such, made by any other, Act. 17.29. Mat. 15.9. Col. 2.23. and
commands us to worship the true God truly, Deuteronomy. 12.32.
according to his own prescription.

The third Commandment forbids all profanation, and abuse of Gods Name,
Word, and Ordinances, and requires a reverent and holy use, Eccles. 4.17. and
5.1. Mat. 6.
and estimation of those means, and instruments, whereby God has made known
himself unto us, and requires to be worshipped of us, Deuteronomy. 19.12. and 23.21.
and 18.20. Lev. 19.12. and 24.11.

The fourth Commandment requires the observation of the due time of Gods
public worship, Lev. 23.3. Luke 4.16. Esaias 56.2. and 58.13.
and of all holy means, whereby we may grow in grace, knowledge, and
sanctification, Act. 15.21. and 16.13. and 17.2, 3. 2 Table.


The second Table contains six Commandments, all teaching love and duty to
our neighbor.

The first requires special duties to our parents, governors, and all
superiors, that we honor them.

The second concerns our neighbors life, and good: Thou shall not kill.

The third concerns his chastity, as our own: Thou shall not commit adultery.

The fourth concerns our neighbors goods: that we steal not.

The fifth concerns his good name, that we bear not false witness, but
speak the truth.

The sixth forbids all lust, or desire to anything that is our neighbors,
and requires us to be contented with our own: Thou shall not covet.

The sum of these Commandments is, to call men from all natural corruption,
or vice, unto the true God, having him in an unfeigned love above all, Rules
touching Gods Law.
and our neighbor as ourselves.

Touching the Law of God, these rules are to be considered.

As the Law was given by God, who is most perfect, so in the keeping of it is
required absolute perfection, Psalm. 19. Jam. 2.10. Genesis 6.4, 5. This perfection
is inward, and outward.

Inward, in the Image of God, expressed in the understanding, will, and
appetite of man.

1 Timothy 1.5.
Outward, in the entire effect of this image showed in operation, Romans 7.14.
Esaias 2.10.

Unregenerate men are utterly unable to keep the Law, the regenerate are able
to keep it in part, but but not fully in this life, Genesis 8.22. Psalm. 14. Ephesians.
2.1. Romans 7.22, 23. 1 John 1.8, 10.

Seeing the Law cannot be by us perfectly fulfilled, Psalm. 143.3.
we may not seek for justification by the works of the same, Gal. 2.16. and
3.10, 13. Psalm. 3 9.

The common use which all men have of the Law, is to bind them to perfect
obedience unto God, though they cannot perform it, and to rule their outward
actions, and inward motions, that confusion be not amongst men, Lev. 18.5.

The special use which the regenerate has of the Law, is, 1 That they may
know sin, To. 3.20. 2 That it might move them to repentance, Romans 7.7.
To. 7.23, 24. 3 That it might move them to desire mercy in Christ, Gal. 3.24.
4 That it may direct their motions, words, and works, which by the
sanctification of the spirit they walk in. Jam. 2.12.


The special use which the unregenerate has of the Law, 1 John 5.3. Psalm.
37.30, 31.
is, 1 To torment their conscience. 2 To restrain them from outrageous sins.

The partition of good works, whereof the Law is a rule, is that some are
referred unto God, some to our selves, some to our neighbors.

Of Prayer.
There appertains to the worship and service of God for his perfection,
wisdom, powers and goodness, the invocation, and celebration of his name.

Invocation or Prayer, is the lifting up of our minds unto God, as to a most
bountiful and good doer, Psalm. 25.1. It is also a pouring out of the hearts
meditation before God, Psalm. 62.8.

In prayer note five essential things.

1 Who is to pray. 2 To whom we must pray, 3 What things are to be asked. 4
For whom we must pray. 5 How we must pray.

1 The Commandment to pray, is given to Christ's Disciples: hypocrites and
infidels sometime so pray, Mat. 6. Luke 11.
as that God hears them, 2 King. 13.2, 4. 1 King. 21.27, 28. yet Gods people
only effectually receive the Commandment, and pray in faith, that is far
from the wicked, but he hears the prayer of the righteous. Prove. 15.8, 29.


2 Prayer is to be made to God only; Mat. 6. Say, Our Father. Psalm. 65.2.
Psalm. 50.15.

Prayer is to be made holily, 1 John 5.14.
according to Gods will, and the directions by him given.

Prayer must be made with preparation, and meditation, Psalm. 10.17. Eccles.
5.1. The preface in the form of prayer teaches thus much, Mat. 6.

There must be a feeling of our wants, and a fervent desire of the thing we
would have, Jam. 1.5. The name of prayer, supplication, or desire teaches
this. Psalm. 51.17. Joh. 16.23.


Prayer must be in faith, and confidence, as to a Father, that is willing, and
in hearing able, Jam. 1.6. It must be in humility as beggars, Heb. 11.6. for
God is in heaven, Eccles. 5.1. our kneeling and prostrating our selves shows
this. It must be in the name of our Mediator. It must be in few words: Babble
not much, Eccles. 5. Mat. 6. No certain words are limited, 1 Timothy 2.8. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. In prayer we must be careful to purge our selves by faith, and
repentance, that sin be not in us before the Lord, 1 Timothy 2.8.
Psalm. 68.16.

We are to pray for others, and not only for our selves: Mat. 6. Say, Our
Father.

The things to be prayed for are taught by Christ, in Mat. 6. and Luke 11.
whereof there are two parts, 1 Petitions. 2 Confession or blessing. 1
Petitions, there are 6, whereof the first concerns the principal end of our
life and being, which is Gods glory, Hallowed be thy Name.

The second concerns the secondary, and subordinate end of our life, which is
our salvation; Thy Kingdom come.

The third concerns the principal means to bring us to the foresaid ends,
which is godliness wrought in us here on earth; Thy will be done.

The fourth concerns the secondary means, to bring us to the aforesaid ends,
which are the outward blessings of this life: Our daily bread.

The fifth concerns the removal of such lets past, as may hinder us from
attaining the foresaid ends, which are our sins committed: Forgive us our
debts.

The sixth concerns the removal of such lets to come, as may hinder us,
which are our future sins and relapse; Lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil.

Confession, blessing, or thanksgiving, is for three things belonging unto God.

1 Kingdom: whereby we acknowledge his Kingly, or Fatherly right, dominion or
authority, over us for ever.

2 Power: whereby we celebrate his might, and ability to do all that he will
for ever.

3 Glory: whereby we magnify this most wise, just, and merciful
administration of all things, according to his sovereignty and might, for which
he is to be celebrated for ever.

Amen, teaches us first, fervently to desire the things aforesaid: secondly,
to believe they shall be accomplished.

Hitherto of Invocation, now follows celebration of Gods name, which is when
we confess our Lord God his properties, and works. This done two ways, by
Speech, by Song. Exodus 18.8.10.


By speech, when rehearsal is made to others, to strangers, and to our
children, of Gods powerful and gracious works.

By songs, when to our selves, or others, Of Singing.
we celebrate Gods works, by Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs, Exodus
15.1.

Songs are of two sorts; 2 Chro. 29.30.
suggested to the mind by the spirit and mouth of man, or prescribed by God in
his word, 1 Cor. 14.26.

Songs of holy Scripture are to be sung in the Church; first, because God has
given his Word partly in prose to be read, partly in meter to be sung, Col.
3.16. 2 Samuel 23.1, 2.

Songs ministered by the spirit, are to be sung by one, 1 Cor. 14.26. Songs by
the spirit, unless in extraordinary person, are subject to error, 1 Cor.
14.29, 32. Songs of Scripture are authenticke as all other Scriptures are, Luke
24.44. Secondly, because God has given men, not only the faculty of speaking,
but also of singing, and all our faculties are to be used, in the praising of
God, Psalm. 103.1, 2. 1 Cor. 6.20. Thirdly, because the Church of old used to
sing such Psalms, 2 Chronicles. 29.28, 29, 30. Fourthly, because all people are
exhorted to sing Psalms, not only by David, but by the Apostles themselves,
Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16. Jam. 5.13.

The manner of singing, is to be holy, reverent, grave, orderly, with
understanding, feeling, and comfort, to the edification of the Church, Psalm.
93.5. and 5.7. and 44. and 7. and 33. 2 Cor. 14.15.19.44. Instruments of
music were coannexed to the songs in the Temple; as incense to the prayers, 2 Chronicles. 29. Such shadows are ceased, but the substance remains. The times of
Psalms were not prescribed, Ephesians. 5.19. Rev. 14.2, 3.
but left to the discretion of the singers; each country therefore is to use
the most decent order and manner of singing, according to form given, 1 Cor.
14.40. Psalm. 93.5.

The rules of singing Psalms are, 1 The glory of God, Psalm. 92.1.
and celebrating his name, 2 Teaching, instructing and comforting our selves,
and one another, Psalm. 78. Col. 3. Ephesians. 5. 3 The allaying of our inordinate
affections, of sorrow, grief, care. 4 The stirring up of good affections in
us, 2 King. 3.14, 15.
as zeal, fervencie, 2 Samuel 6.15, 16. Psalm. 57.7, 8. 5 Faculty and ease to
learn the Laws of God with delight, Deuteronomy. 32.

The saving grace of God teaches us to live soberly, in respect of our selves,
righteously toward God, and godly in this present world, Tit. 4.1, 11, 12.

Of man's duty toward himself.
Our duties toward our selves are:

1 Love of our selves, as is meet, taught all men by nature, Ephesians. 5.29. by Gods
Law, Love thy neighbor as thy self; by the law of grace, 1 Cor. 3.16. and
6.19. but immoderate self-love is vice, 2 Timothy 3.2.

2 Sobriety, or moderation in getting worldly goods; this grace is,
contentation with that a man has, Heb. 13.5. 1 Timothy 6.6, 8. Against which is
covetousness, which pierces men with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.10. Also
contempt of Gods blessings is against this grace, Eccles. 2.16.
Prove. 30.8. Eccles. 7.11.

3 Spending goods gotten, Eccles. 5.13, 17, 18, 19.
neither sumptuously, wastfully, or niggardly, Luke 15.14. Prove. 32.15. but to
use and expend them moderately, and thriftily.

4 Temperance, in eating and drinking, Eccles. 10.16, 17. Opposite hereunto is
gluttony and drunkenness, which surfeteth the body, and corrupts the mind;
Romans 13.13.
and pining the body with two much fasting, or evil fare. 1 Timothy 5.23.

5 Constancy, or chastity, in the sober use of marriage, or in the holy use of
single life; opposite whereunto is excess of venery, whoredom, fornication,
and burning lusts, which destroy body and soul, 1 Cor. 6.18. Prove. 5.8, 9, 11.
and 13.3. 1 Cor. 7.9.


6 Magnanimity or courage in enterprising hard, or laborious things, not being
too bold, nor too fearful, Prove. 28.1. Use of this in the wars, Esaias 7.2, 3.

Patience to bear troubles, with an equal and unbroken mind: against which
are rash thrusting our selves into danger, tempting God, and fear, anger,
impatience, also insensiblenesse of affliction, Prove. 23.35.

8 Modesty in the moderating our desire of honor, and glory, that we desire
it not more than is meet, nor for itself, but for our encouragement to good,
nor from evil men, but from good, and that it be for virtues sake: against
which are ambition and love of vain glory, and too much contempt or neglect of
our own good name or honor, Prove. 22.1. Eccles. 7.1.


9 Diligent labor of the body and mind, in the sweat of our face, but without
too much care of the mind: against which are excessive toil, and sloth, Mat.
6.31, 34. Eccles. 4.8. and 5.17. Prove. 14.23. and 19.24. Eccl. 10.18.

10 To moderate our rest, Eccles. 2.23.
and keep a measure in sleeping and waking, Prove. 6.9, 10, 11. Of Gods Will.


Gods Will means either 1 the faculty of willing, or 2 the act of willing, or
3 the object, that is, the thing willed: In the first and second meaning, Gods
Will differs not really from his essence, or being; in the third, it really
differs, as he wills other things besides himself: In the first and
second meaning there can be no cause properly assigned, for there is no cause
superior to God himself; in the third meaning, vid. the outward object or
thing willed, it has a cause of absolute necessity. God wills himself
only, but of other things without himself, he wills only of conditional
necessity, or most freely: of conditional necessity, because such things as
he actually wills, he cannot but will, seeing his will is unchangeable, most
free he wills, because he was indifferent, by himself to will this, or that
thing without himself.

In the third meaning, Gods will may change, as he would of old be worshipped
by sacrifices of beasts, but now since Christ's death, he will not so be
worshipped, Joh. 4. In the 1. and 2. meaning, Gods will is unchangeable,
neither does God begin to will that which before he would not, nor ever
cease to will that which before he would. So it is one thing for God to
change his will, which can never be; another thing to will the change of the
thing, which before he would, which is often.

Quest. Seeing Gods will is the first, and universal cause of all things, and
that cannot be changed, nor hindered, whether does Gods will impose a necessity
upon the things that he would have done?

Answ. It does on some things, but not on all, for seeing his will is most
effectual, therefore not only are these things done, which he would have done,
but they are done after that manner which he would: now God would have some
things done necessarily, and some things contingently; and therefore he has
for some things fitted necessary causes, by force whereof they are necessarily
done; and for some things contingent causes, whereby they are contingently
done. And seeing his will is unchangeable, and not let, it follows, that
not only those things are done which he would to have done, but also those
things are done contingently, or necessarily, which he would have so to be
done: so things have such a necessity, as God would they should; to wit, either
absolute necessity, or conditional.

Touching evil things, neither is it Gods will they should be, neither is it
his will they should not be, but it is his will to suffer them to be done; it
is not his will that they should be, because they be not good of themselves,
but by accident: it is his will to suffer them to be done, because of his
wisdom, and goodness, he can bring forth good out of sinful actions. Things
must not be esteemed as they are by accident, but as they are of themselves.

God has dominion over all things by creation, Of Gods dominion, and
sovereignty.
exercised as a creator: it may be called Lordly power, which he uses, or may
use without any intention of the good, or profit of the creature.

Secondly, as a King or Father, which power he uses of his goodness, and
sufficient grace, with the intendement of the creatures good also, and thereupon
makes atonement with men, that they might serve him, not so much of duty and
necessity, as of free, and voluntary obedience: wherefore his commandment has
stipulations or duties required of us, and promises of further good, to be
performed unto us: And the covenants of God with men are of two sorts;

1 Legal, when upon condition of present, and continued obedience to all his
precepts, he promises life eternal.

2 Evangelicall, when upon condition of repentance, faith, and newness of
life, he promises forgiveness of sins, and eternal life through Christ.

Thirdly, as Judge and avenger, which power he exercises, when men forgetting
or neglecting his covenant made out of his love, and grace, do sin, and
provoke his wrath, whereupon he inflicteth punishment on the bodies and souls
of sinners. There is not, nor can be imagined, a greater dominion, sovereignty,
and power, than the Creator has over his creatures; for it being absolute, he
may nullify, and bring to nothing his creatures, as he made them of nothing,
if he so please, and so long as the creature has being, he may command it
wholly, and every part: and this power and dominion is so proper to God, as it
cannot be to any other.

After the sin of man, there was due to all mankind, Gods wrath, and our
eternal punishment: but God pitying our misery, has restored us by grace in
Christ, whereupon arises another right, and sovereignty, which God has over
us, not only as Creator, but as restorer; in which name he has power to
command, and we are in duty to obey.

Of Afflictions.
God afflicts his children: 1 For his own Glory. 2 For their good and
salvation. 3 For the profit of others.


First, for his own glory, Israel was afflicted in Egypt, that his power and
goodness might appear in their deliverance.

Secondly, for our good, seven ways. 1 Cor. 12.
1 To humble us, and keep us from sinning. 2 To work repentance in us, Heb. 6.
1 Cor. 11. 3 To make us compassionate toward others. Heb. 4.15.
4 To stir us up to prayer, Psalm. 50.15. 5 To try our faith and patience,
Romans 8.
Jam. 1. 6 To work in us a loathing of this life, and love of a better. 7 To
testify his love unto us, as unto children, Heb. 12.


Thirdly, for the profit of others, three ways. 1 That seeing our affliction
they might take warning. 2 Seeing our faith and patience they might be
comforted. 3 Seeing our deliverance they may be confirmed.


Two-evils we must take heed of when God afflicts us; first, that we despise
them not, Prove. 3.
or make no use of them, Esaias 1. Secondly, that we faint not under the burden
of them. Heb. 12.1. Of the fear of God.


Fear is sometime by figure, put for the whole worship and service of God:
Esaias 29.13. with Mat. 15.9. sometime particularly for an affection of the heart
shunning evil.

Three sorts of fear were in Adam, and are yet in the world: 1 The fear which
he had in his integrity, which is yet in the Angels. 2 The fear which he had
being fallen into sin, which is yet in devils, and wicked men. 3 The fear
which he had when he was regenerated, by the promise and grace of Christ,
which is yet in all Saints.

1 The fear which he had in his integrity, is whereby he eschewed sin, and
the punishment of sin, but without sorrow, because he was without sin, and
free from punishment.

2 His fear, when he was fallen from God, was whereby he was afraid of
punishment, but without faith, or desire of leaving sin, and so fleeing from
God.

3 His fear when he was regenerate, was whereby he acknowledging his sin,
and Gods wrath for it, he was very sorrowful for his sin, committed to the
offense of God, and feared to sin any more, having a care, and desire to
eschew all evil, because he knew and felt Gods mercy toward him in Christ,
Prove. 14.17. God is loved in respect of his goodness, as a Father; he is
feared in respect of his power, and justice, Mal. 1.6.
as a Lord. The fear of the Lord is to hate iniquity, Prove. 8.13. and by his
fear men depart from evil, Prove. 16.6. but the wicked run into evil, and
the fear that is in them is in respect of Gods wrath, Deuteronomy. 25.15. Genesis 20.11.
and their torment, not hating their sin, but God, who punishes them. Godly
fear arises from the feeling of Gods mercy. Psalm. 130.4. Sinful fear
arises from the feeling of man's misery only, Genesis 3.10.

Godly fear draws us near to him, Psalm. 5.7. but sinful fear draws men
from God, as Adam fled from his presence.

Godly fear is in the Saints continually, Prove. 18.14. 1 Pet. 1.17.
Prove. 23.17. Sinful fear is by fits, when God appears, or when his
judgments are revealed, Esaias 7.1, 2. but often times the wicked are secure,
Ezekiel. 8.12. Godly fear is joined with faith, Psalm. 94.1.
hope, and love of God, Psalm. 33.18. Prove. 24.26. Jer. 39.32.40. but sinful is
destitute of faith, 1 John 5.4, 18.
accompanied with torment, and despair.

Godly fear is an holy affection, whereby we fear to offend God, not only
because we shall be punished, but chiefly because we account it most unworthy,
and unjust to offend him, who is most great in power, and good in grace, who
has showed such Fatherly love, and mercy toward us: To whom be all Glory for
ever.

FINIS.

