A PARAPHRASE UPON THE CANTICLES, AND SOME SELECT HYMNS OF THE NEW and OLD
TESTAMENT, With other occasional Compositions IN English VERSE.

By Samuel Woodford. D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for John Baker, at the three Pigeons, and Henry
Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1679.

TO THE Most Reverend FATHER in GOD WILLIAM, Lord ARCHBISHOP of CANTERBURY,
Primate of all ENGLAND, and Metropolitan, And one of his MAJESTY'S most
Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL.
Most Reverend,
WEre I indeed a greater Master of Verse, than the best of those, whether of
our own Countrymen, or Foreigners, whose several manners I have in the
following Compositions, endeavored to imitate, I durst not yet presume to make
an humble Present of them to your Grace, unless invited by the Sacredness of
the most noble Argument. An Argument so Sacred (as to the greatest part of the
Subjects, if not spoiled by my unskilful handling) that it must be ever
acknowledged worthy your Grace; and, beside that the best and most refined
Spirits of the Christian Church have happily labored in them, whose Design his
late MAJESTY of ever Blessed Memory, was particularly pleased to Encourage and
Promote. To attest this, were it either necessary, or pertinent, I might reckon
up several Names, not unknown to your Grace, but shall, instead of all, content
my self with the generally approved Mr. George Sandy's, who first under so
Excellent a Prince, opened the way to Divine Poesy in this Nation, and gave it
a more than ordinary Credit; from whose Hands, as not unbecoming His Royal
Self, He vouchsafed to accept a short Paraphrase upon the Canticles; not long
after the time that the Pious Sieur Godeau had with much success made a
Dedication of the same Divine Song, under the Title of Sacred Eclogues, with
some few other Religious Stanzas to the great Cardinal Richelieu of France.

For Honors sake I here mention the Bishop of Grass, and Mr. Sandy's, and
that thereby I may both Apologize for my self, if there be need, and defend the
best that I can against the most Censorious and Critical, the affixing your
Graces Name, to the same Canticles, and a few other English Rimes; of which,
for the performance, as being my own, tho I have no better opinion than I
ought, or than the great Judges of Verse in the Town shall allow they deserve
(it may be not so good) yet if, as in the first place in this Dedication, they
are intended, they shall serve most humbly to express my Duty without
reflection of Dishonor upon your Grace, and be so received, I shall nor wish
for my self greater Credit, nor for them a better Recommendation to such as
have any gust for Christian Poesy.

That God Almighty may have your Grace in his perpetual and most merciful
Protection, and long, very long continue you an invaluable Blessing to this his
best of Churches, is the daily Prayer of

Hartley Malduit, Hampsh. 1678. Most Reverend, Your Graces most Humble, most
Dutiful, and most Obedient Son, Sam. Woodford.

Upon a Paraphrase of Salomon's Song, Done by his Worthy Friend, Dr. Samuel
Woodford.
WHilst Thou with Sacred Rage inspired do Sing
The Mystic Song of Songs, can Cold Age bring
An Offering fit? Or, without Fire, devote
True Zeal to Verse? Or can I tell by rote
Thy Praises without measure due? Shall I
Confound Thy Consort then, or Modesty
Profane in Print? No, let me silent be
A Monumental Foyl to Poetry and Thee.
Nicholas Stuart. Baronet.

ODE. To his Honored Friend Dr. Woodford, On his Excellent Paraphrase of
SALOMON'S SONG.
SO Eastern Spices, and rich Gums send out
In the warm Limbeck while they pant,
A precious Vapor spreading all about,
Which the cold Mass did seem to want;
But urged with equal heat it up does rise,
The Active Spirit now more nimbly flies,
Ascending Balm in Dew distills,
And far-extended Air with fragrant Essence fills.
An holy Fire, Woodford, in Thee has raised,
Numbers so sweet, so rich, and high,
Methinks I see Thy eager Soul amazed,
In its blessed lyric Ecstasy,
Melting away in Stream of fairest Verse;
Which when to Mortal Ear Thou do rehearse,
With purling Noise it seems to move,
It^s Music Charms the attending Ear, the Soul it is Love.
Hail blessed Flame, that did such Verse inspire!
And to an humble Heart dispense,
From the chaste Touch of an Harmonious Lyre,
Such Angel sounds, such Mystic sense:
High God of Love's Love unto Man he sings;
The Spouses choicest Beauties are the Kings:
Who poured his Blood, here sweetly pours
His Soul out to his Spouse in these Divine Amors.
Immortal Love! Cement of this huge Frame,
Dearest Firstborn of the Mind,
Who were become Impure Romance, a Name,
Thee undebauch'd where could we find?
Yet art indeed wise Natures beauteous Child,
Till with the Bodies fouler steam defil^d;
Here raised to Soul and Mystery,
All pure, all holy thou art again, Love Travestie.
Wisest of Kings and Men, was there sent down
A double Portion of Thy Rage?
And Heavenly Laurel this chaste Brow to Crown?
Greater than Men and Kings did engage,
Thee, happy Wordford, to this lofty Song;
Touched from his Altar with a Coal thy Tongue:
Then we, and no profane Thought near,
May say a greater too than Solomon is Here.
W. Croune. M. D. Fellow of the College.

To my dear Old Friend, the Reverend Dr. Samuel Woodford, On his Sacred Rimes.
I.
WELL! since it must be so, so let it be,
For what do Resolutions signify,
When we are urged to Write by Destiny?
II.
I had Resolved, nay, and I almost Swore,
My Bedridden Muse should walk abroad no more:
Alas! it is more than time that I give over:
III.
In the Recesses of a private Breast,
I thought to entertain your Charming Guest,
And never to have boasted of my Feast:
IV.
But see (my Friend) when through the World you go,
My Lacquy-Verse must shadow-like pursue,
Thin, and Obscure, to make a Foil for you.
V.
It Is true, you cannot need my feeble Praise,
A lasting Monument to your Name to Raise,
Well-known in Heaven by your Angelique' Lays.
VI.
There, in indelible Characters They are writ,
Where no pretended Heights will easy sit,
But those of Serious, Consecrated Wit.
VII.
By immaterial defecated Love,
Your Soul it is Heavenly Origin does approve,
And in least dangerous Raptures soar's above.
VIII.
How could I wish (Dear Friend!) unsaid again
(For once I ranked my self with Tuneful Men)
Whatever dropped from my unhallowed Pen!
IX.
The trifling Rage of Youthful heat, once past,
Who is not troubled for his Wit misplaced!
All pleasant Follies breed regret at last.
X.
While Reverend Don's, and noble Herbert's Flame,
A glorious Immortality shall claim,
In the most durable Records of Fame.
XI.
Our Modish Rimes, like Culinary Fire,
Unctuous and Earthy, shall in Smoke expire;
In odorous Clouds your Incense shall aspire.
XII.
Let the Pagan-World your Pious Verse defy --
Yet shall they envy, when they come to Die,,
Your Wiser Projects on Eternity.
Thomas Flatman

The Reader is desired to Correct the following Errata, which only seem more
than ordinary by the distinction of several Columns, disposed so for his
greater ease.
In the Preface.
Page. Line. For Read. 4 19 Latins, by both of Smectymnuus both which with a
piece that thought to give and whereas in of yet which Latins, or by both.
against Smectymnuus. both with Rhythms. a piece (speaking only of it as a Poem,
but not defending either the Doctrine in all places, or several to me seeming
Extravagances) that thought fit to give. and where, as in. of which yet. 13 23
19 10 18 21 14 26 23 29 5

In the Canticles.
3 12 unhapyy unhappy. 18 25, 26 unslesht unfletcht. 19 26 be spent besprent.
In the Tittle add se^ EPITASIS. 21 7 glim gleame. 24 20 will remember well
remember. 26 In the Tit. CATASTASIS DESIDERIUM. 28 17 gaze graze. 35 15 and to.
37 17 wish with. 38 4 whose where 39 13 they We. 40 4 his the 5 the his. 40 12
BELOVED BEHOLD. 45 5 Twin roses Twin- Roes. 61 18 whose Name whose sacred Name.
97 25 But By 107 19 if err yfere. 105 27 Divorce next Causless Divorce next.

In the Rimes.
16 ult. Land Lands. 21 3 flight-wingd flight wingd. 22 15 unheard unhard. 23
23 Land hand. 28 6 and end an end. 31 27 His prayer It Is prayer. 34 11 Land
hand. 35 28 to sell to Hell. 37 15 Sun Son. 41 28 the Court her Court. 53 3
having having. 55 22 no so not so. 59 3 the Jessaan Jesses. 60 4 to approve to
approve. 61 6 blot out be still which is twice repeated. 62 25 perverted
prevented. 63 28 will which. 64 2 which Ah! 70 8 here hear. 74 14 who whom. 11
blot out and once. 77 30 awful which which the Son with awful. 79 18 Temple
Tempe. 89 19 As life Ah life. In Titulo And Hymn An Hymn. 94 5 Son Sun. 95 6
wrath Wreath. 98 7 pleads Lord Pleads hard. 101 9 fly Rise 103 20 appointed A
pointed. 105 18 these fruits those fruits. 106 25 his foot its foot, at the
bottom 1667. 109 25 from when To where. 111 23 Rome of blood Rome of her blood.
113 18 inclined retird. 116 7 Terrace Balcone. 118 6 needs need'st. 119 12 As
is And as. 120 22 brake break. 123 24 other would others would. 124 25 to be
her like That to be like her. 126 In the add Out of Spanish. 127 Marg. blot out
Out of Spanish. 126 16 Wondrer Wanderer. 21 resents repents. 129 17 of what so
of what is so. 24 Land Hand. 130 22 many come may come. 136 9 but you self but
your self. 10 made'st made. 137 11 did did. 141 22 his foot steps her foot
steps. 143 7 its breast his breast. 8 in his in its. 144 4 and thy supplies and
my supplies. 19 who with him Who wish him. 145 24 well vowed well Rowed. 146 6
has told have told. 150 18 well showed well thew'd. 155 9 The Joys Thy Joys. 12
her Song her Sons. 159 8 And form And formed. 161 1 A'll thou As thou. 164 15
Burgers Burger. 170 13 Approach Approacht. 4 ancienter there ancienter there
were.) 171 17 has here have here. 2 has tried have tried. 172 21 Ambitions
Ambitious. 173 2 see know.

Besides other false pointings and omissions of the Marks of Synaeresis and
Abbreviations, which the Reader is further desired to amend, with some few
literal faults.

The Preface.
HAVING some Years since, before my Admission into Holy Orders, in my Preface
to the Paraphrase upon the Psalms, discoursed at large concerning Christian
Poesy, without resuming that Subject, or prosecuting it any further, I shall
here do very little more than give the Reader an account of the following
Papers.

Being therefore very often solicited to Print, what I had by me in Verse, or,
if not all, such Rhythms at least, as I thought most proper to my present
condition, amongst a great many more, I with difficulty, and but very late
resolved upon those, which are now herewith Published, The Song of Solomon, or
the Canticles; and other Hymns, directly laid down in Holy Scripture, with some
few Compositions more, whose Argument, as to the greatest part of them, is
either thence taken, or thither may be referred.

As for the Canticles, which tho almost last done, is put in the first place: I
was a long while deterred from attempting its Version, or Paraphrase rather;
tho often provoked, I often, and with infinite desire thought of it, by the
sublimeness of the Subject, and that little acquaintance, which not only my
self, I ingenuously confess, but this, and the preceding Ages, I fear, for many
Centuries back, have had with the Eastern Poesy; whose manner of Wit seems to
be altogether different^ from ours, and not to be brought under those Laws,
which the Greek and Latin, and the Modern from them have assigned Verse. For
their Metaphors, as appears in our Prosaic Versions, and especially upon
Collation to any who are but reasonably skilled in the Oriental Languages, are
extremely bold, their Comparisons, Allusions, and Similitudes such, as we on
this side of the World can hardly admit as decent, if at all proportionable;
and their Transitions, with frequent shifting of Persons so (...), (for I
cannot well express it in English, with such large and scarce accountable
Breaches) that there lacks a great number of words to be inserted between
Period and Period, to render the Coherence tolerable. The not thoroughly
considering this (which yet possibly might be avoided, nor it may be would at
all have been, if every Sentence were reduced to its proper place and station,
and that there had not been mistakes in transcribing the Original Copies (as
some think there have) has been one occasion in my Opinion, that of all the
Versions I have met with (either in Greek or Latin, or our own English, and
other the Modern Languages of the best esteem) of the Song^ by me here
`Paraphras'd, and particularly of the Canticles, very few are to be reckoned
Verse, further than the Character of Number, and Cadence reaches, and fewer yet
tolerable Poetry: Bare Translations for the greatest part, but made more
uneasy to be read, and much more perplexed, as to the Sense, by the Tortures
they have been put to for the Verse, or Rhythms-sake. Among the several other
Papers that we have lost of the Excellent and Divine Spenser, one of the
happiest Poets that this Nation ever bred, (and out of it the World, it may be
(all things considered) had not his Fellow, excepting only such as were
immediately Inspired) I bewail nothing methinks so much, as his Version of the
Canticles. For doubtless, in my poor Judgment, never was Man better made for
such a Work, and the Song it self so directly suited, with his Genius, and
manner of Poetry (that I mean, wherein he best shows and even excels himself,
His Shepherds Calendar, and other occasional Poems, for I cannot yet say the
same directly for his Faery Queen designed for an Heroic Poem) that it could
not but from him receive the last Perfection, whereof it was capable out of its
Original. Others, as I hinted before, have since attempted it, and in English
my self now among the rest, but how successfully we must all leave both to
those who have skill to judge, and to those who have not to censure, and sit
down, having pleased our selves, (if yet our selves are pleased) as contented
under their Doom as we can; for since we will be Rhythming, and Printing too
forsooth, I know no other remedy. I must confess it is a Song above the flight
of Mortal Wit, and has been ever looked upon by the Sober and Religious, as the
most Noble, tho most Mysterious, and difficult part of the Old Testament. There
are I know, (but they are but some few I hope) in this, and others there have
been, in the last Age, who, tho else very Learned, and it is to be charitably
supposed truly Pious, without just cause have gone about to question whether it
ever intended any more than it expressed, as to the Letter, and by debasing it
to that, which it seemed most to sound, Humane Love, to call it no worse, have
insinuated at least, (because Theocritus, and some other of the Ancient Greek
and Latin Poets, have a few like Phrases in their amorous Compositions, either
hence first taken, as the most ancient Original in the kind, and not unknown,
as may be conjectured, to the Greeks by the Translation of the LXXII, and by
them Communicated to the Latins, by both light upon by chance) that it is
unworthy the place where it stands; contrary to the opinion of the Jewish
Church, which always had and still has, antiquated, and broken as it is, for it
the greatest Reverence; reputed it through all Ages uncontrovertedly Canonical,
of Sense purely, and only Mystical, and thereupon proclaimed Solomon, the
inspired Author, to be the most Spirituous and Heavenly Interpreter of their
Law: And contrary also to the Judgment of the Christian Church, which from our
Lord's time downward (and in the beginning of the Seventh Century, if not in
the latter end of the Sixth, Gregory the Great, piously Commented upon it) has
trodden in the same steps, enlarging only, as I may say, the Lines of
Communication, and transferring to the Assembly of the Faithful, under the
Gospel, what the Jews confined to the Synagogue: Should we understand it only,
or even chiefly, if at all according to the Letter, terminating our Conceptions
in the bare words, it might very easily become the occasion of Scandal to the
unwary Reader; nay, without doubt had been so to the Jews themselves, at its
first appearance; the severity of that Nation not allowing in the Female Sex,
we may be assured, such open demonstrations of Love, as are more than once
there expressed. And this possibly might be one reason, amongst many other to
be urged from the Propensity, which is in Youth especially, to that passion,
too apt from the least spark to take fire, that this Book, together with the
three first Chapters of Genesis, and the beginning, and end of the Prophecy of
Ezekiel, from the Fortieth Chapter, was only permitted them to read, who had
arrived to the Sacerdotal Age, as St. Jerome notes in his Prologue to that
Prophet, that is, the Thirtieth Year, in whom Youthful Heats, by that time,
were thought to be somewhat allayed, and who thereupon would not be in so great
danger to pervert the Divine Text to impure, and wanton Imaginations. Whether
Solomon at first composed it to represent his own Loves, and as an Epithalamium
upon his Marriages with Pharaoh's Daughter, and the Sulamite, one or both, I
leave to others to dispute; tho for my part, guessing, as we can but guess at
the time of those Marriages, and the penning this Divine Song, I think he only
took occasion thence, as from a thing long before done (if from thence he took
any occasion at all) to give his Muse, as I may call it, an higher flight, and
under the terms of the Spouse and her Beloved, of which latter himself in his
own Person was to be the Type (the Spouse, whether a Stranger of Egypt,
Symbolical of the Gentiles to be called, or of Jewish Parentage, Typical of the
Seed of Abraham) to sing the greatest loves this World e're knew, and which
shall be our employment through all Eternity to admire. The Divine Love to
whole Mankind both Jew and Gentile, (these first called, and those invited
under the Person of the Sulamite to return) expressed in the Incarnation of the
Son of God, (who of two has made One, breaking down the Wall of Partition) and
continued through all the Circumstances, and the very manner of his Appearance
in our Flesh, in order to our Salvation. Some hereby would have the Glories and
Prerogatives of the Jewish State* both Civil, and Ecclesiastical, and even of
their Country under Salomon's auspicious Reign, to be signified under the
Similitude of a beautiful Virgin just marriageable, and the rather because of
those Resemblances taken from Places, which if attributed to the Female Sex, as
according to the Letter they sound, and our kind of Wit, as it is called, are
so hard, in their opinions so uncooth, stiff, and unusual, that otherwise they
cannot be forced, as I said in the beginning, into any tolerable, and
proportionable decence. Yet even those, who thus judge of the Letter, reduce the
whole according to the Allegory, to Christ and his Church, and the sacred
Members of it jointly, and severally. Be the immediate occasion therefore of
its writing what it may, the Jews are very earnest, as they have been from the
beginning, to have it meant of their Synagogue only, the Modern among our
selves, of the Christian Church, exclusive wholly of the Jews, and both so
dress it up with Allegories (for scarce will they permit a Word, or Syllable,
to be sure not a Description of the Time, or Place, etc. to pass without half a
score at least) that according to the Poet, -- Pars minima est ipsa Puella sui.


Without therefore determining its Sense Mystical directly to this, or that,
whether private, or more communicative Interpretation, I have in my Paraphrase
left it, at least endeavored to leave it, as I found it, and even in those
places, where I have taken the greatest Liberty, have not gone far from the
literal Sense, not at all from that, which approached nearest it, in the
Judgment of the most sober Commentators. Such an one I look upon the learned
Jo. Mercerus to be, whom, when I found it necessary to consult the Opinions of
others, I chiefly followed, and by whose pious and elaborate Annotations, if
any shall take the pains to compare my Paraphrase (the mistakes of the Printer
being amended, which are in some place through my absence during the whole
Impression very gross) the greatest difficulties of Sense, or Expressions, may
very easily be resolved. He will moreover find upon Examination, that if he be
content soberly to Allegorize, I have left him as much scope to exercise his
Religious Invention that way, (tho it were to be wished that Invention had not
prevailed too much with otherwise Grave and Religious Expositors) as he can
well desire, and have only debarred him an indeterminate, and almost infinite
Extravagance.

The Rhythms I have purposely designed various, not going always in the same
Tract, lest instead of raising the devout Souls Meditations, I should clap
Weights on them; and create in him a loathing of the most exquisite Delicacies,
by the same one kind of ill dressing. A mere Verbal Translation, with some
heavy Cadences only, I have studiously avoided, because I would not incur the
same Fault, which frequently, whether justly or no, I submit to my Judges to
decide, I am too apt to blame in others; and, where ever occasion was offered,
have enlarged upon an Hint given, or Description, as they fell in my way,
further it may be than will be ordinarily allowed me; defending my self all
along by the Analogy of Faith, Decence, and Proportion, which I have
endeavored to retain. In two or three places I have used a kind of Measure,
which may possibly seem to those, who either take not time to judge of the
occasion, or will not allow it, too light for the subject in hand, because less
usual; tho I only follow therein the Greek and Latin Poets, whose metrical
Foot consisted not always of Dissyllables, by Sponde, Troche, or Iambic, as
ours, the French, Spanish, and Italian, correctly does, but more frequently of
Trissyllables, and sometimes of four Syllables intermixed, of various and
enterchanged quantities, as is seen especially in the Drama, Ode, and Epode,
and the kinds of Verse wherein they are treated; tho no kind of Verse amongst
them is without the intermixture of a several sort of Foot, and the most
ordinary, the Hexameter, as it is called, tho it is the greatest, and the most
majestic, has the Dactyl and Sponde, that is the Dissyllable of two long, and
the Trissyllable, of a long and two short so necessary, that without both the
Verse and Music cannot subsist, yet was never thence accused of Levity. If it
be answered, that we in the Modern Languages have Rhythm, or a coincidence of
Sound in a single Termination, to compensate for the disuse, (rather than want)
of the Trissyllable Foot; I think this is not always sufficient, and the
Critics in Verse are too severe, who would thus altogether restrain, and bind
up us Rhythmers, damning the Trissyllable Foot, and cadence of Sound in the two
last Syllables to the Burlesque only, as the principal of its Characters; tho
why it should be so, if the Matter be otherwise noble, and becoming, for my
part I see no great reason, nor why the number of a Verse should be esteemed
light, and wanton, for an allowable variety only, when the Subject so requires,
if the Language be capable of it, as it must be on all hands confessed the
English is. The Greek and Latin Poets, as I said, admitted as the great
Character of Verse, and its numerousness, this Variety; both because their
Language naturally required it, and because they were perfect strangers to
Rhythm, (the Greeks always, till grown perfectly Barbarous, and the Latins
till after the Irruption of the Goths and Vandals, their Language became
confined to the Cloister, and durst not appear walking delicately in Verse, but
with that chain of Servitude, its Conquerors had thrown upon it). Our Language
a Medly of all the Barbarous Tongues, into which the noble Roman was humbled,
but partaking most of that which most humbled it, beside roughnesses of its
own, has notwithstanding been so refined (as we flatter our selves) that it
will bear Foot, and Quantity, as the Greek and Latin did, but that Rhythm has
in a manner so thrust them out, that contenting, or rather valuing it self (for
the greatness of Sense and Conceit whereof, it is indeed capable, equal with
any of the now living, or long since dead Languages that are, or in any Age
were spoken in the World,) upon the Dissyllable Foot, whether it be Sponde, or
Troche, but chiefly Iambic, instead of all other Quantities, it thinks it self
in single Cadence, a greater Prince of Verse, than either Rome or Athens ever
were in all their admired Variety: And indeed abating this, as the Laws of
Verse now stand with us, tho we have Quantity, yet so uncertain is it in the
same Syllable, and so easy to be made, and used long or short, (except in
words of more Syllables than two, translated from another Language, and some
few Dissyllables in our own, which are so unalterable as to their Quantity,
that they either cannot change it without alteration of their sense, or cannot
be used in Verse but in such certain places according to their Proportion and
Accent) and so great is the number of Monosyllables, which may be either long
or short, as to their use, what ever they are as to their nature, and by
position, that making our Metrical Foot to consist, as we mostly do, but of two
Syllables, it is very hard in English, to compose a Period, but part of it,
whether we will or no, shall as to the number be Verse. Tho therefore Blank
Verse, as we call it, that is number Metrical (as they would have it) without
Rhythm, considering the natural fitness, and customary tendence of our
Language, may do excellently in the Drama, because it comes nearest the
ordinary way of Speech, wherein the Interloqutors are supposed to converse (and
indeed to use Rhythm, or chiming Cadence there, to me seems at least
impertinent, if not at best forced, and a strain beyond decence, such as has
nothing of the Verisimile in it) yet in an Epick Poem, to mention no other, I
know not how with us it can be well maintained. For it wants the proper and
particular Character, which we assign Verse, Rhythm I mean, and were it written
as Prose usually is, in its just Periods, would both be read, and be, as indeed
it is, no other than Poetical Prose; that is, Masculine Prose, dressed up like
Hercules by Omphale, in the attire of one of her Women, but whose Shape and
Warlike Limbs, could not be concealed by the disguise. Take an Instance of it
from that most excellent, and divinely flowing Speech of our first Mother, in
the fourth Book of Mr. Miltons Paradise Lost, than which neither himself ever
said any thing softer, and more Poetical, nor can almost be imagined to be said
of Man.

To whom thus Eve replied; O Thou for whom, and from whom I was formed, Flesh
of thy Flesh, etc. -- That Day I often remember, when from sleep I first awak't,
and found my self reposed under a Shade, on Flowers, much wondering where, and
what I was, whence thither brought, and how. Not distant far from thence, a
murmuring sound of Waters issued from a Cave, and spread into a liquid Plain,
then stood unmoved, pure as the Expanse of Heaven. I thither went, with
unexperienced thought, and laid me down on the Green Bank, to look into the
clear smooth Lake, that to me seemed another Sky. As I bent down to look, just
opposite a Shape within the watery Gleam appeared, bending to look on me. I
started back, it started back, but pleased I soon returned, pleased it returned
as soon, with answering looks of Sympathy and Love. There I had sixth mine Eyes
till now, and pine'd with vain desire, had not a Voice thus warned me, What
thou see, what there thou see, Fair Creature, is thy Self, with Thee it
came, and goes; but follow me, and I will bring Thee where no Shadow stays thy
coming, etc. --

Who now in the World could ever dream that this were Verse, and Verse too the
softest, and most tuneable, and with as great a (...), suitable to the
occasion, as can be conceived? I confess some few words, and manner of
contexture, and an Image of the thing different, and some thing more tender
than that which Prose commonly renders, would make it suspected, that the
Writer was in a Poetical Rapture; but still, through the Disguise, the Prose
appears, or rather cannot be hid, any more than the Verse, in the following
Period; as I ghess of the same Author, in an Apology, in Answer to the Modest
Confutation of a Libel, entitled, Animadversions upon the Remonstrants Defense
of Smectymnuus. The Period is Prose, but I I shall write it in Blank Verse, and
without adding, or diminishing, or transposing a word, only making the Verse
sometime longer, sometime shorter, as in the Pindaric, whether fitly so called
I inquire not here, leave it to the Reader to judge, whether there is not in
both the same numerous Harmony, and Contexture, the same turn of Words,
boldness of Figure, and height of Imaging. Then Zeal, whose substance is
Ethereal,
Arming in complete Diamond, ascends
His Fiery Chariot, drawn with two blazin, Meteors,
Figured like Beasts, but of an higher Breed
Than any the Zodiac yields; resembling two
Of those Four, which Ezekiel, and St. John -- [saw;
The one Visag'd like a Lion, to express
Power, high Authority, and Indignation;
The other of Countenance like a Man, to ca^
Derision, and Scorn, upon perverse,
And fraudulent Seducers.
With these the' Invincible Warrier Zeal, etc. --


I forbear that which follows, for Mr. Milton's sake if he were the Author; if
not, what I have quote* here will not be looked upon to the disgrace of (...)
Learning, for it is not in the least intended so (...) me, or to the
disparagement of any's, who beside hi^ may have been Author of the Apology; for
my d^^sign is only to show by both these Examples, th^^ take away Rhythm from
our English Poetry, and i^ remains undistinguishable, by any other Character^
from Prose; at least not so distinct, but th^^ through the Mascarade it may be
discovered, havin^ the Manly Limbs of this, tho it may be the soft habit of
the other.

Not so the Italian, and Spanish Blank Verse^ from whom the same great and
learned Mr. Milto^^ I believe took his Measures. For tho to instance in the
Italian, and their Compositions of that kind, Anibal Caro, in his most
excellent Translation of Virgil, and Torquato Tasso, in his Set giornate del
Mondo creato, have avoided Rhythms, they yet retained the proper Character of
the Italian Verse; I mean as to the Form, aequivalent to our Rhythm, which ever
ends with a solitary Syllable for the last Foot, unless we make the last Foot
consist rather of three Syllables, by an Antibacchius, as (...)Horrore costume,
or by an Amphibrachus, as in (...)Piume ina^nte, be there Rhythm used, or be
there none; tho if there be Rhythm, the Chime, or Tune, rests both upon the
last, and the last Syllable save one; by which mark or trissyllable Foot
indifferent to both, and the Syllabical quantities of the Italian words, which
approach, and except in some few instances directly follow the Latin; the
Italian even Blank Verse of any Author, howsoever written can no more be
concealed and mistaken for Prose, than the Latin Verse of Virgil, or Ovid.
Take an Example of both from Tasso, and first of the Italian Verse with Rhythm,
in that famous Stanza of his Gierusalemme Liberata, Canto. xx. Stanza 51. which
himself esteemed the most noble of the whole Poem.

Gi'ace' il caval lo' al su'o signo* re' appresso,
Giace il Compagno, appo il Compagno estinto,
Giace il nemico, appo il nemico, and spesso
Sul morto il vivo, il vin^itor su'l vinto:
Non v' e silentio, and non v' e grido espresso,
Ma odi, un non so che, roco, ed indistinto,
Fremiti di furor, mormori d' ira,
Gemiti di chi langue, and di chi spira.
Where every Verse, like our Heroic in English, has five Feet, with a solitary
Syllable in the last liquescing, and of very moderate sound, but whose
Penultima is ever to be pronounced, with Accent, more strong; for they are to
be scanned as we call it at School, (where we are first taught to make Verse a
little it may be of the soonest) just as in the Latin pure lambic, or as in
the Dimetrum, or Senarium, allowing never above two Syllables to a Foot, but
with continual Observation, contrary to us, and which yet is not ever by them
strictly noted, not only of the Synalaepha, which melts down the last Vowel of
the former word into the first Syllable of that which next follows, beginning
with a Vowel, and giving it its sound, but of the Synaeresis in the same word,
contracting two Syllables, be they Vowels, or Diphthongs, into one, except in
some few Irregulars according to the marks of both Feet, and Contraction
pointed out in the first Verse. Upon the solitary Syllable, and that which
precedes it in the last Foot, rests the Sound, or Chime, and which in the
Italian Language, if to this Character of Verse they think fit to add Rhythm,
is but necessary, considering that the Terminations of almost all perfect
words, except some few Particles, end in a Vowel. The example of Blank Verse,
among the Italians, which I shall give, is taken from the Description of the
last Judgment, in the same Tassos Settima Giornata.

E'l Re, del Ci'el, folgo, reggi'an, do' in alto,
Dimostrerassi in bianca nube accolto;
E come nube, ch' e squarciata, o velo,
I cieli a lui dinanzi aperti e scissi,
Vedransi rivelar l' alta possanza;
E mill appariranno, and mill ardenti
D' essercito divin falangi, and squadre,
Risplendendo la su di luce, and d' armi;
Fiammeggiera con l'oro il sino elettro
Entr' a le spaventose oscure nubi;
E vedransi ir vagando a nembo, a nembo:
E piu de tuoni spaventosi udransi
Terribilmente le canore trombe.
Crollati, and scossi i bei stellanti chiostri
Tremar tutti vedransi al gran rimbombo.
Tremara ne 'l horror confusa, and vinta
La Natura creata, hauran temenza
Gli Angeli stessi riverenti in alto,
Al folminante Re staranno intorno, etc.
So that, tho there be no Rhythms, the number is purely metrical (if the
Language also be not so too, both by the turn of the words used, and the manner
of their use, by frequenter Apocopes than would be tolerated in Prose) and
cannot but be owned for such. For were the Blank Verses above recited, written
as Prose, in their just Periods, for those very Reasons, and by the Marks
given, they would be so easily distinguished from it, that any one, who is very
little experienced in the Italian Language and Poetry, tho there be no Rhythms,
would presently pronounce them, and very safely and confidently might, to be
excellent Verse. A thing, which I think^ cannot possibly be contrived for the
English Blank Verse, especially if it be the grace of Prose, and its utmost
perfection, as some imagine, not only to be every whit as numerous, but in the
same way to be^ conceived, I mean; in Blanks. But as this is an^ impertinent
fineness at best, and if studied, and designed so below the gravity of an
Orator, that it (...) able to cast upon the best, and most passionate Speaker
reproach and contempt, it is unfit in my opinion to subserve his great end, the
moving of the Mind, which is so jealous of its Honor, that tho it willingly
suffers it self to be imposed upon, from a principle of good Nature inherent in
it, and connatur^ to its being, as long as it perceives no Artifice used* yet
when that is once discovered, or but suspected, (...) grows obstinate, and puts
a bar to the best that is, (...) can be said. In Verse the Mind is quite
otherwise disposed, and requires naturally another kind of Movement, lively
Images, (...), I think the Greek^ call them, which it has common with Prose,
but more exalted, and as it were with a different kind of light Number also and
Harmony, which Prose has, (...) under another Character, Rhythm in Our Moder^
Languages, or something equivalent to it, varietye^ Feet and Measure, which if
it want, as the Verse is thereby deprived of its greatest and best, and only
distinguishing Ornaments, the mind also that came prepared to tempt its Charms,
and expected them, languishes under the disappointment. This therefore, as I
conceive it was, which made the Italians when they omitted Rhythms, still to
retain that kind of Number in their Blank Verse, which should make it diverse
from Prose; and them the Spanish follow, in their Metrical Compositions, both
which with Rhythms, and without, having most frequently a solitary and
supernumerary Syllable either in, or for the last Foot. The French, as nearer
us in Clime and Manners, come nearer us too in their model of Verse, which they
conceive much after the same Method; only herein I think they have the
advantage, that considering more seriously, the nature of Verse, and of their
Language, never that I know of, have they received the Blank into the Epope, or
indeed any kind of Poem. Nay, so great admirers are they of Rhythm, (tho
whether they have been so long, I leave it to be enquired) that they cannot
abstain from it in the Drama, the very Farce rarely excepted; and these have,
of late at least, been our great Lawgivers, for Affairs of the Stage, (how
properly, it is no business of mine, any where, especially in this place, to
dispute); but never yet have they been able to prevail with us to admit so
frequently, as their best Poets use it, the Dissyllable Rhythm, or Cadence; tho
since it is in so great repute with them, and makes so necessary a part of
Verse with the Italian and Spaniard, when they use Rhythm, that it is else
looked upon as less perfect, and irregular, I know no reason, why if the
Argument be otherwise answerable, and great, we should humble it to the
Burlesque, or Ridicule only, and give either that, or the Trissyllable Foot
none, or the meanest place in serious Compositions. If therefore Our selves, or
the French will use Blank Verse, either in an Heroic Poem, where they should
be I think Couplets, as in Mr. Cowley's Davideis, (for the Quadrains of Sir
William Davenant, and the Stanza of Nine in Spensers Faery Queen, which are but
an Improvement of the Ottava Rima, to instance in no more, seem not to me so
proper) or in an Ode or Sonnet, (which remains yet to be attempted) since we
want that Character of Verse, which the Greek and the Latin had of old, and
those among the Modern equivalently observe, who both lie nearer Rome, and
retain the most visible Traces of its Language, having no means of differencing
it from Prose except by the Rhythm, as the most essential Mark, let us give it
the Character, as to its Form, which it anciently had, a Number and Movement
metrical, with enterchang'd variety, according to the kind of our Verse, of
diverse sorts of Feet. But this we in English have found, by the Experience of
Sir Philip Sidney, Ab. France, and others in the last Age, would never do; and
in the next, even Our now cry'd-up Blank Verse, will look as unfashionable, how
well soever as a Novelty, and upon his Credit, who was the Inventer of it here,
it may speed in this. Not but that I have, and always had, as great an honor
for Mr. Milton's Paradise Lost, as those who admire, him most, and look upon it
as Mr. Driden has very well observed, To be one of the greatest, most noble and
most sublime Poems, take it altogether, which either this Age, or Nation has
produced. Nay, that it shall live as long as there are Men left in our English
World to read, and understand it; and that many Ages hence translated into
whatever speech we shall be then changed (for changing we have been from
Chaucer's time downward with a Witness, however it be called Refining) that
shall survive the Language, wherein it stands written, and therein it self. Yet
still I say, the Learned only must and shall be Judges of this, and that if he
had thought to give it the Adornments of Rhythm, and not avoided them so
Religiously, as any one may perceive he now and then does, to the debasing of
his great Sense, it had been so absolute a piece,* that in spite of whatever
the World Heathen, or Christian hitherto has seen, it must have remained as the
standard to all succeeding Poets and Poesy.

I beg my Readers pardon for this very long Digression, which has swelled much
beyond the limits I intended it, tho I hope not without giving him some
Diversion. For it is, I confess, beside my Province, and if I have taken wrong
measures of Verse, and Versifying, (the Standart of Verse being possibly of
late altered) I submit my private Fancy, and all I have said here, to its great
Judges and Masters, for I only thought to have defended my self against those,
who should object Lightness in a place or two to the manner of my Verse,
because, as I said above, it is only unusual amongst us. For light it cannot
justly be thought by the most rigid, and scrupulous, so long as the Argument
continues the same; nor will it, I am assured, be judged so by those, who know
what are the transports of the noblest Passion, but then especially, when the
pious Soul, rapt beyond it self, falls into an ecstasy of Divine Love. No
wonder in such Circumstances, if its Speech and manner of Expression be also
Exstatical. The roughness of my Verse now and then seems rather to be obnoxious
to a Reprimende, and possibly it may deserve it, but I much willinger chose to
be deficient in the Tuneableness of my Rhythms, than have the Sense broken and
perplexed.

I think I need not take any notice of the several Titles which I have given
each Chapter; for the Song being of all Expositors acknowledged, as to its
general Form, to be Dramatic, because of the several Interlocutors, which are
introduced (tho considered as an Epithalamium for its great Argument,
consisting of many Odes, it has more of the Lyric, whereupon the speeches being
not so directly continued, nor short, and in Repartee, as they say, each to
other, as in the Drama, I have taken occasion to put it mostly in the Lyric
dress) I could not do as I thought any thing more proper. However, to prevent
all manner of Offense that may be taken, I will uncompelled account for it to
the Ingenuous Reader, in as few words as I can. Supposing therefore, which I
think none will deny, that it is, as I said, a Drama, the Persons speaking may
well be allowed to be, as following the best Expositors I have fixed them, The
Spouse, and Her Beloved, with the Friends on either side in the Chorus, tho,
who, according to the Mystery, by these are signified, further than briefly
touched before, I leave to them to interpret. Instead of a Prologue, I have
called the Stanzas immediately preceding the Hymn it self (...), Praecentio, or
Praeludium, tho if I had called them the Prologue, since they serve to the same
end as the Prologue in the Drama, I see no inconvenience, nor any whom the name
can offend, save the Ignorant. That which I have designed instead of the
Epilogue, I have I think by the most regular name, rather called (...), than
Epilogus. For the Song it self sounding as to the letter nothing but Love, and
tho intended by the sacred Penman to be meant of the Divine Love only, too apt
to be distorted to that which is sensual, carnal and brutish, through the
Pravity of our Nature, even untranslated into Meter, and as it lies in the
Text, the Epode serves according to the true sense of its name, Carmen ad
amoliendum quicquid, noxium est, to remove the Vail, and to take away all
occasion of perverting the sublime Mysteries. The Legend further of Love I have
styled it, for honors sake to the great Spenser, whose Stanza of Nine I have
used, and who has Entitled the six Books which we have complete of his Faery
Queen, by the several Legends of Holiness, Temperance, Chastity, Friendship,
Justice, and Courtesy, and to any who knows what the word Legend there, or in
its true and first notion signifies, it will neither seem strange, ridiculous,
or improper: I have made it to consist of three Cantos, agreeable enough to the
nature of an Epode, or Legend, if it be judged indecent, as indeed it is,
considering its length, for an Epilogue; In the first whereof taking occasion
from the Canticles, to which in the beginning it refers, I have endeavored to
show the true Nature of Love, and what it was in the state of Innocence,
describing it by the liveliest Images, which I could form to my self suitable
to a Poetical Composition. In the second I have considered the thing, whatever
it be, vulgarly called Love, under the dominion and government of Sense,
exclusive of Reason, which it too often either draws to its party, or wholly
extinguishes, than which nothing can be conceived more absurd, unreasonable,
extravagant, and inhumane. The third Canto, in the close of it, is designed for
the Restoration of Love, by Sacred Marriage, or Wedlock, according to the
Divine Institutiin, to its ancient Dignity and Luster; The very cause, amongst
others there-under adumbrated, for which Solomon, divinely inspired, wrote this
Song, which subserves thereunto by so noble an Instance, that they only betray
their Impiety, or Atheism, who in an Age so Wise and Critically Rational, as
this would be thought, can find no more becoming occasion to show and vend
their Wit, than what is made by exposing tbe sublimest Mysteries of Our
Religion, and the most glorious displays of Our both present and future
Happiness. If therefore any, who are able to judge, shall chance to find there,
or in any of my Compositions, the least Word, or Sentence, which may choque
them, or escape me, not agreeable to the sentiments of this Best of Churches,
and Good Manners, I hereby utterly disclaim it, and beseech them to give the
place a double thrust, for t^eir own Revenge, and mine, who would not have put
them to the trouble, had my self perceived it. There is more of it a great
deal, than at first was intended, but, I know not how, it grew so strangely
under my hands, that I have been forced to lay aside more thoughts, than I have
been at the pains to dress up, to reduce it within the present Compass.
However, I hope, it is in all parts consonant to sound Doctrine, whose limits,
for tbe greatest glories of Verse, I would not willingly transgress. As to the
Song it self following the Division, or Partition of it, which the Church
allows in the distinction of Chapters, I have called the first Divini Amoris
Ecstasis, or Protasis, tho it may be by the latter Title not altogether so
naturally. But seeing visibly in the Song all the other parts which are by the
Ancients assigned the Drama, (who it may be hence first of all took their
Rules) I fixed the Protasis here as in the usual place, and more designedly,
because in this and the following Chapter, we have as it were the sum of the
whole laid down, and the mind kept in suspense for the event, which was the
business, as is known by the learned, of the Protasis. The next great part of
the Drama was the Epitasis, or the counterturn, as I may call it, of Action,
which I have placed in the third Chapter, under the title of Dolor de Absentia
Sponsi, seu Epitasis, (tho this latter in the Printing off the sheet is
omitted, and with another escape or two consequent thereof, has given me the
trouble of advising the Reader of it here, that he may rectify the mistake)
where, as in the Epitasis excitantur turbae, and caligine quadam res
involvuntur, We find the Spouse all Joy before, Mourning for the absence of her
Beloved, and all things for a while seem to incline to the worst. The
Catastasis before its time in the printed Copy, is entitled to the fourth
Partition, but belongs rightly to the fifth Chapter, or Division (where I have
also caused it, as soon as by seeing the sheets, I perceived the Error of the
Press again to be set, desiring the Reader, instead of that Title in the fourth
Chapter, to put Desiderium) successive of the Epitasis in the third. And it is
a continuance of the Spouses trouble for the absence of her Lord there first
hinted; and whereas in the Epitasis, eadem cernitur rerum perturbatio, but
somewhat greater, and opens the way to the clearing of all in the following
Partitions under their several Titles, till the Drama comes to its last Period
in the Catastrophe, which I have placed at the eighth Partition, tho if any one
will, he may make the Catastrophe begin at the seventh, and in the eighth bring
the Spouse ad Sponsi fores, after the Jewish Custom, in pursuance and
complement of it; That which is signified by the Catastrophe in the Drama,
being the conclusion of the whole, according to its expected or unlookt-for
event. I might add here a great deal concerning the Unity of Action, strictly
observed in this Hymn, and the Chorus, which is every where regular, but I pass
them both over. With respect to what I have already laid down, I will not say
that Solomon designed all, or any of these parts in this Divine Song, or in the
manner that I, following the Ancients, have bounded them; but this I dare say,
that whosoever knows the Motions of the Pious Soul in its love to God, knows
also that these several parts make it up, which I shall endeavor thus briefly
to evidence, and appeal to those who understand it best, and have tried the
great experiment.

No sooner therefore by the Preaching of the Gospel, and the most benign
Operations of the good Spirit of God, comes the devout Soul, to be convinced of
the Divine Love, in it self and infinite Perfections how beyond expression
amiable, to the Soul by ten thousand Experiences how indeared, but being first
loved, and knowing assuredly it self to be loved, it endeavors according to
its unequal measure to return love for love; Is all as it were on a flame
toward its Beloved, and thinks nothing comparative with him Lovely, nothing
for his sake too hard or grievous to be undertaken. The World to such an One
and all its gaudy Pageantry appears, as it truly is, a dead and lifeless and
accursed thing; without any Charms except to betray and ensnare, and with
Pleasures (such as they are) which continue but for a moment, and perish in the
using; nor can it find any relish or satisfaction but in the enjoyment of those
Real and Eternal Beauties, on which Time and Age have no effect, and whose most
frequent use increase only, and heighten their delight. Of these it continually
thinks, loves and admires none but these; and is so wholly transformed into
what it loves, that it is no more it self, nor lives any other Life than what
that inspires. Or in St. Paul's phrase, Being Crucified with Christ,
nevertheless it lives, or Christ rather lives in it, and the Life which it
lives in the Flesh, it lives by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved it, and
gave himself for it. In this Ecstasy, while it continues, the Pious Soul once
enflamed with the Love of God, exults with joy unspeakable; and continue the
Ecstasy will, till either Our love by degrees, as is not unusual (the more
wretched We) grow cold in its once most ardent pursuits, or the violence of a
Temptation intervene, or the most Highest, for either the punishment of our
Remissness, or trial of our Sincerity, for a while withdraw himself; but then,
the happier we once to perceive and take notice of it, how is the Soul that
truly loves, perplexed? This way it runs, and that; and only thoughtful of its
Misery, and what it would find, where yet to find it knows not. Here comes in
the true Epitasis: Another face of things appears than was wont, and instead of
Hymns, and joyous Acclamations, which used before to be its constant
Companions, nothing is heard, in all its Retreats, but the Sighs and Laments,
as of one forsaken. The Soul is overwhelmed almost with Sorrow, which to prove
the most Intense, Hearty, and Sincere, it endeavors all it can, to clear its
Innocence, calling Heaven and God to witness it; of yet which, having paused a
while and not daring in cooler Blood to be too confident, it reflects upon its
former coldness and negligence, and resolves on greater Care and Circumspection
for the future, is angry with it self, and afraid, and mourns bitterly, and
begs but once more to be tried, and professes its Zeal, and passes ten thousand
Promises, binding them with as many Vows, and resolves so thoroughly to be
revenged of it self, that it will never give over its unweary search, till it
has found its Beloved. Away in this heat it flies out of it self as it were,
and seeks, and asks after him of all it meets; and tho affronted frequently by
the way, bears the Indignity with patience, and feels the smart of no Wound
received in the inquiry, comparable to his absence; till almost quite tired,
now and again, and the third time (and it were well if but the three hundredth
time the Epitasis and the Catastasis consequent of it recurr'd). Lo! he whom
the Soul loves, and who infinitely more loves the Soul, taking pity of its
Labors, and approving its Integrity, at length discovers himself anew, with
greater Attractives than before. And now all is perfectly well again. Peace and
Joy, and the tender endearments of a mutual Affection blown up to a Flame,
which no Waters can quench, sparkle in both. No Discourse passes, but of the
constancy of each others Love, its Charms how great, its Renewals how
surprising. The happy Nuptials, which make the Catastrophe seem not to be far
off, and by Faith through the Vail the Soul looks, and sees the Preparations,
and hastens the time by its calls, and even dies with Impatience, because it is
but a moment deferred.

This is the Progress of Divine Love in the holy Soul, adumbrated as I
conceive, in this Mysterious Song, but so coldly and imperfectly displayed by
me (God help poor Mortals!) that suspected thence, as I fear for my self I
justly may, never to have been really touched with it, I can only appeal to
Him, who searches the Heart, with the most earnest Obtestations, that if my
Love to my Lord and Savior be not such as it ought, with a flame so pure, and
great as to warm, and enlighten others, according to the Prerogative of my
Office; it may yet be sufficient to keep my self from either freezing, or
stumbling; especially from either thinking, or speaking any thing unbecoming
it, at least (...), and in the too much despised Rank of a Christian Poet.

As for the other sacred Hymns, they seem to me to be of those parts of
Scripture concerning which I may truly say, omitting their Divine Inspiration,
that being compared with the best and most Majesty of Pindar, or Horace, they
are so far from losing any thing of their Beauty, that they only receive thence
the greater Luster, and cast upon the noblest thoughts of those next to
Immortal Lyrics, whom the Heathen World, and we above all the Heathen most
deservedly admire, the honorable Office of serving but as a proper Foyl, to
make them appear the more Glorious. For nothing can be conceived more Poetical,
nothing more Tuneful and Harmonious, nothing more Dithyrambic and Ecstatical.
Of this latter sort are the Songs of Moses, Deborah, and Habakkuk. And had I
not a design of drawing to an end of this long Preface, as soon as possible, I
might instance in the several Graces, which are proper to the rest, not as
turned by me, but as they lie in the Original; Of which yet they are not wholly
divested by the most barbarous Translation, into any Language, and in some of
which, the Latin particularly of Castellio, and the Italian of Diodati, not to
say our own, which may Vye with the best, they shine with a Ray only second to
what they received upon their immediate Inspiration.

The Compositions, which are my own purely, or Translated occasionally out of
the Originals, noted in the Titles or Margin, are of an infinite baser Alloy;
and all I dare presume to say for them, is; That when I either made, or turned
them, they suited well enough my then present Temper; and I have a kindness for
them, proportionable to the Diversion they at that time gave my self, and have
since given my Friends, at whose request I did some of them. However I had not
been thus confident to Print them now, and publicly own them in this Habit,
but that unknown to me, and unallowed, after very false Copies some of them
have been already Published. I have here and there added the Dates, not for
Ostentation, any one may think, but thereby to give some little account how I
have been wont to spend part of my Time, both before I was admitted into Holy
Orders, and since; and that if some of my Rhythms may not so directly suit with
my present Circumstances, and seem too inflate with the Muses imaginary Profits
and Honors, and idle Tattle to no purpose in the World; the time wherein I did
them, may be my Apology, as it has served others before me; tho there be none
of them I hope, which will not be allowed as a tolerable Diversion for the
severest Divine, their subject being either Religious, or exemplary Moral. And
I am not ashamed to profess, that wearied with more abstruse studies, I have
been wont in a Country Village barren of other Diversions thus to unbend, and
refresh my self. I might amongst the rest have added the Muses Complaint, but
beside that I thank God I have no great need, being content with my Fortune, I
never yet found any good come of it, and Mr. Cowley's, and Mr. Spenser's before
him, will indifferently serve for any of the Trade, and he values himself too
highly who dares expect better fortune than they met. My change of Habit, I
acknowledge, and manner of Living, with increase of Years, have much taken me
off from these kind of Delights, tho had I no greater loss of time at last to
repent, than what has been spent among the Muses, I should, in my own Opinion
at least, be a very happy Man. Nay, I am so far at present from repenting it,
for the main, that as the late Cardinal Palavicino, on the like occasion says,
Giovommi, che in eta, and in professione piu libera, Io sopra modo fui vago
d'alcuni autori, la cui frequente lezione sarebbe ora poco dicevole, alla
maturita de miei anni, ed alla serjeta del mio stato; si che me e auvenuto,
come a coloro, i quali con piu animoso, che sicuro consiglio praticarono
lungamente fra gli aliti pericolosi delle sotterranee miniere, che uscendone
salvi, hannosi comperata, con questo rischio, qualche piu interna contezza
intorno all naturali proprieta, delle gioie and dell' oro. Some of my
Adventures in this kind, I have been at the pains to rehearse (and I might have
added many more) in the Ode, called the Voyage, others I have glanced at in the
Odes of Petrarch, reducing as far as was convenient that excellent Poets sense,
to my own Condition.

And now, having in the body of this Preface troubled my Reader with a
particular defense of Rhythm, as the most natural, and proper Character of
Verse, in the Modern, and it may be in all Languages, that are or ever were
spoken in the World, (the Greek and Latin only excepted) and without which,
especially in English, it cannot appear distinguished from Prose; (and which,
if we look either to the first Original of Rhythm, is so far from being the
Invention of a late Barbarous Age, or People, that it was known, as is judged
by the Learned, and allowed by the Hebrews, and Eastern Nations, long before
the Greeks, and Romans were grown to that height, as to style all but
themselves Barbarous; if to its present Universal use, and particularly with
those, whom the now Civil and Christi^n World more modestly and justly call so,
and who, tho they never heard of the Greeks and Romans, nor it may be till of
late of any People less Barbarous than themselves, have a kind of Number
received from their Ancestors distinct from their Prose, whose Character is
Rhythm or Cadence, seems to be in all Countries the direction of pure Nature,
uncultivated by Art; and) that I may not in Act condemn, what I have in Word
taken upon me the confidence to defend, I have styled the whole Second Part by
the fittest, as I think, of the most Ancient, as well as Modern names, RIMES. I
confess I have consulted none of my Friends in it, nor know I whether they, and
the Censors of English Verse will allow it me, tho Casa, and the ^est of the
Italians, (to instance in no more) are my Compurgators. Yet not purely hence,
and upon their Authority barely have I staid my self, but from a principle of
Modesty, if my Reader dare credit me, that I may neither forestal and deceive
him, nor usurp for such occasional Compositions, an Honor and Title which
belongs not to them. The noble Title of Poems I mean, too great a bearing for
so mean an estate of Verse as that to which of the most they are vulgarly
affixt. If others are of another mind for the Examples sake, (the first it may
be in English of the despised Name given to any thing that was grave and
serious) there is no hurt done; and I am content, (tho whether I be or no, it is
no great matter) that for their own Diversions, they ^^ll them by what Names
they please, so they give me ^he like liberty, as I list, to name mine.

THE TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
The Letter [a] added to the Number of the Pages refers to the First Part, or
the Paraphrase on the Canticles: [b] to the Second Part, or the Rimes.
1 (...). Stanza. Page 3. a Avoid Profane avoid! for such as you.
The Canticles in VIII Partitions.
2 I. Divini Amoris Ecstasis, quae and Protasis. Stanz. p. 6. a False glozing
World, in vain. 3 II Evocatio Sponsae. Couplets. Stanz. Mixed. p. 13. a Earths
glittering Stars, vying with those above. 4 III. Dolor de absentia Spons^ seu
Epitasis. Coupl. p. 21. a 'Twas Night, a sad and dismal Night. 5 IV.
Desiderium. Stanza. p. 26. a Behold, thou'art Fair, my Love, behold, thou'art
Fair. 6 V. Catastasis. Stanza. Coupl. p. 33. a I heard Thee call, my Sister, my
Spouse. 7 VI. Ambitio Sponsae. Stanz. Coupl. Mixed. p. 39. a Whither is Thy
Beloved gone? 8 VII. Amores mutui. Coupl. p. 44. ^ Fair One, who do from
Loins of Kings descend. 9 VIII. Catastrophe. Couplets. p. 48. a I love, but
cannot yet my Love enjoy.
(...) in Three Cantos, or the Legend of Love.
10 I. Canto. Stanzas. p. 54. a Song which the God of Love did first inspire.
11 II. Canto. Stanz. p. 76. a I often am thinking whether Love was known. 12 III.
Canto. Stanz. p. 100. a Tired with the Way I have already gone. 13 To the Right
Reverend Father in God, SETH, Lord Bishop of Sarum. Sonnet. p. 119. a Mindful
whence first she learnt the early skill.
The Six great Hymns of St. Luke.
14 I. The Angels Salutation. Monostrophos. p. 3. b Hail of Heaven highly
grace'd. 15 II. The Salutation of Elizabeth. Stanz. p. 4. b Blessed Thou among
all Women be. 16 III. The Magnificat. Stanz. p. 5. b My Soul does magnify the
Lord. 17 IV. The Benedictus. Stanz. p. 7. b Isreal's great God eternally be
praised. 18 V. The Angelic Hymn. Rondeau. p. 9. b Glory be to God on High. 19
VI. The Nunc dimittis. Stanz. p. 10. b Enough, my God, enough, I beg no more.
20 Comiato to Sir Nicholas Stuart, Baronet. Monostroph. p. 12. b Songs made in
lieu of many more.
The Eight great Hymns of the Apocalypse.
21 I. The Adoration of the XXIV Elders. Stanz. p. 13. b Worthy Thou art all
Honor to receive. 22 II. The overthrow of the Dragon. Stanz. p. 14. b Now is
Salvation, now is come the Hour. 23 III. The happy Dead. Quadrains. p. 15. b
Blessed are the Dead, who in the Lord depart. 24 IV. The Song of Moses and the
Lamb. Stanz. p. 16. b Great are thy Works, and marvelous thy Praise. 25 V. The
Angels of the Waters Lauds. Stanz. p. 17. b Righteous art Thou, O God, who art
and wast. 26 VI. The overthrow of Babylon. Stanz. p. 18. b Hallelujah to our
King. 27 VII. Epith^lamium on the Lambs Marriage. Sta. p. 19. b Praise him ye
Servants of the Eternal King. 28 VIII. The New Jerusalem. Stanza p. 22. b Blessed
state of Innocence! 29 Our Blessed Lord^s Thanksgiving. Stanz. p. 25. b I thank
Thee, Father, Lord of all. 30 The Song of Moses. Ode. p. 26. b Since the
Almighty has in Triumph led. 31 The Well. Stanza p. 30. b Sacred Fountain,
Mystic Spring. 32 The Prayer of Jabez. Stanz. p. 31. b Thus Jabez prayed, and
thus pray I. 33 The Song of Deborah. Ode. p. 34. b Israel the blessed and happy
State. 34 David' s Elegy on the death of Saul, and Jonathan. Stanza p. 43. b
Isreal's delight the Glory of our Land. 35 David' s Thanksgiving and Prayer.
Stanz. p. 46. b Who am I, Lord, and what^s my Family. 36 David's last Words,
Terzetti. p. 50. b Thus David, Jesses Royal Son did sing. 37 The Song of
Hezekiah. Stanz. p. 52. b Revolving the sharp Sentence past.
Three Psalms according to the Ordinary M^tr^.
38 I. Beatus Vir qui non abiit. p. 55. b The Man is blessed, whose doubtful
Pat^s. 39 LVII. Miserere mei, Deus, Miserere. p. 56. b Great God on whom I have
relied. 40 CXIV. In exitu Israel de. p. 58. b When Israel was by Gods address.
41 CLI. Psalm according to the LXXII. Stanz. p. 59. b Youngest of all my
Brethren, and the least. 42 Job cursing his Birth. Couplets. p. 61. b May the
Day perish, and its hasty flight. 43. The Prayer of Habakkuk. Ode. p. 64. b My
God I have Thy Wonders heard. 44 The saying of Cleanthes. Stanz. p. 72. b Lead
me, O Providence Divine. 45 A storm of Thunder. Ode. p. 73. b Great God of
Thunder at whose Voice. 46 The Nativity. Ode. p. 74. b Who would not envy, if
he durst, your Grace. 47 The Star, A Carol for the Epiphany. p. 80. b See how
that glorious Star at Noon does rise. 48 The Passion. Ode. p. 82. b Twice
sixteen Years have almost over Thee past. 49 An Epigram on the same, out of
Latin. p. 87. b When ^y God di'd, I first began to live. 50 Exstasie of Divine
Love, out of Spanish. Stan. p. 88. b That sacred bond of Charity. 51 The flight
Quadrains. p. 92. b No wonder Soul, thou so admirest a Verse. 52 A Hymn and
Prayer to the Holy Jesus. Parode* AIl' Italiana. p. 94. b Jesu the Eternal Sun
of Righteousness. 53 Hymn for V^spers. Out of Greek. Monostroph. p. 100. b J^su
Christ, blessed Light of Light. 54 Lent. A Sestine. p. 101 Welcome, great Queen
of Fasts, thrice welcome, Lent. 55 The fall of Lucifer. Stanz. p. 103. b Son of
the Morning, Firstborn of the Light. 56 Convertimento a Deo. Stanz. p 105
Lord, my First Fruits should have been brought, etc. 57 The Altar. Monostroph.
p. 106 This Altar to thy Name, Great God, I raise. 58 Ad Passagium. Out of
Italian. F. P. Ode. p. 108. b Blessed Soul, in Heaven expected long. 59 To the
Right Reverend Father in God GEORGE Lord Bishop of W^nton. Out of Italian. F.
P. Ode. p. 113. b A Fair and Virtuous Dame. 60 Sonnet of the same. p. 118. b
Prepare Thy Chariot, Love, and heaviest Chain. 61 The Apology. Out of Italian.
F. P. Ode. p. 119. b Citing my old, and cruel Master, Love. 62 Ballad. Out of
Spanish. Profane Love. Stan. p. 126. b Love is a Net, and Love's a Snare. 63
Loves Exaltation. Sonnet. p. 127. b Enlarge Thy Flight, Love, said I, and on
High. 64 The Thoughts. Out of Italian. F. P. Ode. p. 128. b Full of strange
Thoughts and Pensive as I go. 65. Convertimento a Dio. Out of Italian. F. P.
Son. p. 135. b Tired, and almost overcome, with the heavy weight. 66 To the
same purpose. Out of Italian. F. P. Son. p. 135. b Since you and I, my Friend,
so often have proved. 67 To Mrs. M. W. with the Parable of the Pilgrim. Sonnet.
p. 136. b A tedious Age, I like this Pilgrim spent. 68 To the Reverend J. G.
Sonnet. p. 137. b To God it is, my Friend, and you I owe. 69 On a Painted
Crucifix. Out of Italian. Son. p. 137. b Something there was, Great Master,
more than Art. 70 St. Paul, done by Titian. Out of Italian. Madrigal. p. 138. b
Dead to the World, and far from Heaven removed. 71 The Vanity of thinking to
get Fame by Riming. Sonnet. p. 139. b What do Thou, Man, what think Thou,
etc. 72 To give over Riming, and fall to Business. Son. p. 139. b A I one Day
did of my Fate complain. 73 To the Right Reverend Father in God JOHN late Lord
Bishop of Chester, upon his Promotion. Ode. p. 140. b Fair Seminary of the
Flourishing Arts. 74 To the Honorable Sir John Denham, upon his new Version of
the Psalms. Quadrains. p. 146. b It Was but of late that in our Northern Clime.
75 To Mr. Isaac Walton, publishing the Life of Mr. George Herbert. Ode. p. 150.
b Heavens youngest Son, its Benjamin. 76 To the same publishing Mr. Ric.
Hooker's Life. Ode. p. 153. b Hail sacred Mother, British Church, all hail! 77
The Metamorphosis, upon the Death of Mrs. A. W. Idyllium. p. 156. b Down in a
Vale between two shady Groves. 78 To Posthumus. Out of Latin. Horace. Ode. p.
160. b Time Posthumus scuds it with full sail. 79 To Belisa, the excellent Mrs.
Mary Beal. Monost. p. 162 Such would the learned Pallas choose to be. 80 To
Clelia, on his Picture, done by Mr. Flatman, Monostroph. p. 163. b Proof
against Time and Age. 81 Solitude. Out of Latin. Mr. Ab. Cowley. Quad. p. 164.
b The Country, as it is fit, we Poets praise. 82 The Voyage. Ode. p. 166. b As
one that is from a tedious Voyage come.
A PARAPHRASE ON THE Canticles, In English Rhythms.

V. Ad Ephesios, 32. (...).

xxiv. Matthew. 15, PERSONAE.
SPONSA. SPONSUS. CHORI tres.
Primus AMICORUM SPONSI. Alter FILIARUM HIEROSOLYMITANARUM. Tertius MULIERUM e
GENTIBUS.
(...).
I.
AVOID Profane, avoid! for such as you
There is no place, or listening here;
They Are Mysteries, which we sing, and but a few
Receive them with a well-purg'd ear:
To all beside of love they sound,
Mock-love, that does from every Hill rebound,
And is no Virgin, when the painted Eccho's sound.
II.
A Female Love that is, by a truer name
Lust obscene, and dalliance called;
For whom the unhappy wretch, who has a flame,
To fires of his own kindling's haled:
Yet such an Empire has she gained,
So universal, and so well maintained,
That Verse, as well as Men, she'has to'her service trained.
III.
Ah Verse, that e're thou should be thus abused,
That thus thy self thou should abuse!
The Devil, thy enemy, wished thee never worse used,
Than thou thy self, thy self do use:
Quit, quit, thy Chains, er'e it is too late,
At length return to thy'unimprov'd estate,
Laurels yet grow at The Altar, where thou first did wait!
IV.
Laurels there grow, and there is a Love Divine,
Which will completely fill Thy Song;
A Love that is Heaven-born, truly Masculine,
From whom thou'hast banished been too long:
Only returned, this caution take,
As solemn as thou can new homage make,
Both for Thine own defense, and Thy chaste follow'rs sake!
V.
And thou, (...) LIEGE, bright and immortal LOVE,
Who er'e Thou mortal Flesh did take,
Descending from Thy azure Throne above,
An Image of Thy self did make,
In which soft thoughts thou did inspire,
And threw'st large portions of ethereal Fire,
To consecrate the shrine, where Thou would in time retire;
VI.
Thou, who e're made Man, would as Man be known,
And transports infinite to' express,
Sustaind'st a part, which was no more thine own,
Th^n as each greater holds its less,
Would love, and as a Lover sue,
In Words, and Acts, as Mortal Lovers do,
And thus THY SELF, thus thy BELOVED to us show:
VII.
Showing us thus, as we could it conceive,
What had from Ages hidden lain,
The Glorys Thou designd'st Thy SPOUSE to give,
And what to 'effect them was thy pain,
Flesh of our Flesh, Bone of our Bone,
Pure GOD, and perfect MAN, in person One,
The' Great-grand-sires Father, and his Virgin daughters Son:
VIII.
In Thine own Words this Mystery to un^old,
Or still to fold it, guide my Verse;
Inspire me, as Thou Solomon did of old,
That I the Wonder may rehearse:
And when of Love the terms I use,
(Thy self its softest terms did not (...))
The softest to me' indite, the (...) for me choose!
IX.
Make my Verse soft, but make it chaste withal,
These are the Beauties I desire,
Witness Thy self, whom I the Witness call,
How pure, and earthles^ is my Fire:
That pure, and earthless it may thine,
Reader, and Writer from all d^oss (...),
And Thine own Image stamp for'^s guard, on (...) own (...)!
A PARAPHRASE UPON THE CANTICLES.
CANTICUM Canticorum Salomonis.
CAP. I.
DIVINI AMORIS ECSTASIS Quae and PROTASIS.
SPONSA. SPONSUS. SPONSA. Osculetur me osculo.
I.
Sponsa.
FALSE Glozing World, in vain
Juices and Herbs for me Thou do compound;
Juices and Herbs, which never can ease my pain,
Or heal an inward bleeding Wound:
With love (alas!) I Am pierced to the heart,
Beyond Thy skill, or helpless Physics art.
II.
Come then, thou heavenly LOVE,
And with Thee thine own sovereign Medicine bring:
Come! and the cause of all my griefs remove,
That I Thy mighty praise may sing:
Ah! put Thy sacred Lips to mine,
And let us mix souls, as we chaste Kisses join!
III.
Dear Kiss! how sweet it was!
Above those Spirits, which generous wines exhale;
Like perfume how it filled the ambient space,
And in its passage ravished all,
Virgins, who but Spectators came:
Sweet are Thy kisses LOVE; sweeter Thy Name.
IV.
Only to see my LORD
They came, but now like me are all on ^ire;
Draw me, O, draw me by Thy powerful Word,
One pace shall show our joyn^ desire:
Both they, and I will follow Thee,
And Thy unransom'd Captives ever be.
V.
Thy Love at length, blessed King,
Where all her fears may have an happy end*
Into thy Nuptial Chamber please to bring,
Where we Thy praises may intend,
And firmly of Thy self possessed,
Our Mouths with singing fill, with joy our Breast!
VI.
With songs Our Mouths We'll fill,
And to exalt Thy Glories never cease;
The Odorous dews, which from Our Lips distill,
Shall give Thy Land a rich increase:
Above all Wines Thy Love we will raise,
And just Men with us shall record Thy praise.
VII.
I Am black, it is true, but so,
Fair Daughters of Jerus'lem, as the Tents
Of Sunburned Arabs, humble, dark, and low,
But full of Regal Ornaments;
Or as those Curtains Solomon
Draws to conceal from vulgar sight his Throne.
VIII.
Unjust you 're to despise
A Face, which only wants your beaut'ous Charms;
My Country Sun (alas!) has stained my Eyes,
And robbed them of so potent Arms:
From his too near approach I took
What thus you gaze at, my discolored look.
IX.
My Mothers Sons beside,
Careless what burden they on me did lay,
And angry too, to' a Vineyards scorching side,
Bound my attendance every day:
Their Vines too'unfit to keep, when my'own,
With weeds, for want of dressing, were o'regrown.
X.
Dear LOVE, by whom I Am freed
And to a nobler Service now designed,
Tell me, O tell me, where Thy Flocks do feed,
And what cool shades, at Noon they find;
Why should I from Thee go away,
And to the Tents of other Shepherds stray?

SPONSUS, Si ignoras te, O Pulcherrima.
I.
FAIREST of Women, Sponsus.
beaut'ous Shepherdess,
If hitherto Thou have not known
What walks thy Faithful Shepherd does possess,
And where my Flocks find shade at Noon,
This narrow Tract, will to our Sheepcots lead,
Where thy Kids may securely rest, and safely feed.
II.
But, ah, how ill with simple Swains agree
Those beauties, which are all Divine?
Pharao in triumph born, compared to thee,
Does with unequal glory shine;
And tho exalted in his Chariot high,
With more of pomp, wants of thy real Majesty*
III.
To those, who need them, Chains and Bracelets leave,
My Love has beauties of her own;
Beauties, which no advance from Art receive,
Nor owe their flame to' a sparkling stone:
For when these Ornaments she please to wear,
Jewels take luster from her Eyes, gold from her Hair.
IV.
Enough it is that she any place will yield,
Near her, for things I Have common made,
As flints in the City, and as grass in the Field,
And with them deigns to be arrayed:
Tho at her feet the rich Embrodery,
Low as the Earth its bed, worn in her Train does ly.

SPONSA. I.
Dum esset Rex in accubitu suo.
Sponsa.
MY LOVE, my King, when from thy Fold
Returned, Thou shall with me sit down,
The Prisoner in my Arms I Will hold,
And his Head with Spik-nard crown:
He 'twixt my Breasts shall sleep all Night,
And flames inspire pure as the Midday light.
II.
The spicy East, Father of Gums,
Deserves not to be named with Thee,
From whom his Myrrh, and Virtue comes,
Thy self the true Myrrh-bleeding Tree:
Engaddis Camphire, when it blows,
Near Thee does all its scent, and spirits lose.

SPONSUS. Ecce tu Pulchra es amica.
WORTHY my Love, Sponsus.
how art thou fair,
Beyond what mortal Women are!
Chaste, and inno'cent, as a Dove,
Full of mild, and spotless love,
And from whose Eyes a ray does shine,
Than Doves more bright, and as Thine own Divine.

SPONSA. Ecce tu Pulcher es Dilecte.
NOT I, Sponsa.
it is Thou, my LOVE, art fair
Bright as the Sons of Heaven are;
And those perfections Thou giv'st me,
Are what I first received from Thee,
In whom, as in their true Original they be.
Come then, my HEART, lo, all around,
With Greens our Bed, with Flowers I Have strewn the ground!
Come, let us sit down, and beguile,
Unmist the weary Hours awhile;
And when the Night recals us home,
To Our Cedar Palace we will come,
And of each others Love possessed,
With jealous boadings unopprest,
On beds of Ivory take our chaste and welcome rest.

CAP. II.
EVOCATIO SPONSAE.
SPONSUS. SPONSA. SPONSUS. Ego Flos campi and Lilium, etc.
EARTHS glit'tring stars, vying with those above, Sponsus.
Fair Rose, and Lily, emblems of my love,
As far as mortal Flowers proportion bear
To Love, and Beauties, which immortal are,
How gay you look, how pure your flame does shine,
Fit to resemble, tho not equal mine!
My Dearest is a Lilly too,
Tho in differ'nt s^ites we grow,
I ith'rich Valley, she on the' hard cliffs wrinkled brow.
With Thorns, and Brambles girt around,
The Plant not to defend, but wound.
Yet even thus placed, with such a foil,
As is the Curse of any soil;
Tho Lilies one with Thorns compare,
Lilies amongst Thorns are yet less fair,
Less beauteous, and less gay,
And all their glories less display,
Clothed in pure, and genial light,
Clothed or naked in their Virgin white;
Than my BELOVED, amongst the Daughters shows,
With Grace upon her Lips, and terror on her Brows.

SPONSA. Sicut malus inter ligna.
I.
TOO WELL, Sponsa.
my LORD, too well I know,
By what Thou have compared me now,
What to my self, what to Thy love I owe.
II.
Ah, too short age of withering Flowers,
The pride of some few sunny Hours,
But without guard against the Wind, or Showers!
III.
And such, just such a Flower am I,
Whilst on Thy stem, mod'rately high,
Thou a Tree, deck'st with gems the glittering Sky.
IV.
But look how The Apple Tree excels
Its Brother-plants, tho'it humbler dwells,
For wholesome shade, and Fruit and odorous smells:
V.
(Domestic Tree, which left the Wood,
Not to be great, but do more good,
And crown the vilest stock with the noblest bud.)
VI.
No otherwise, my LOVE, do Thou
Thy Brethren all in Grace out-go,
How high so er'e they raised, and Thou how low.
VII.
Hail, happy Tree, under whose shade,
For cool retreat, and pleasure made,
Whether I sit, or walk, or down am laid;
VIII.
Round there attends me pure delight,
With all the charms, that can invite
The gustful palate, or the curious sight.
IX.
Not love himself, tho th'Architect,
(And love the Bower did first erect
Plent'ous in Wines, and beaut'ous in prospect:)
X.
A Bower more lovely could contrive,
His last effort of skill to give,
Or where himself might ever wish to live.
XI.
Thither he brought me; but to prove,
No Charms but his my heart could move:
Love was my guide, His Banner over me Love.
XII.
Whither, O Love, whither do Thou fly?
Look, how smitt'n I wounded lie,
And, if Thou help not, of the Wound must die!
XIII.
Now, e're it be too late, produce
The choicest spirits Thou e're did use,
The wineful Grape, and thy' Apples winy juice!
XIV.
But come Thy self too, for (alas!)
I Am sick of love: Thy left hand place
Under my head, whole me with the right embrace!

SPONSUS. Adjuro vos, Filiae Jerusalem.
I COME -- but (lo!) how peaceful sleep
In downy chains does all her Senses keep; Sponsus.

She sleeps, and will do well, composed to rest,
Of ease, her self, and him she loves, as wished, possessed.
Mean while, you Daughters of Jerusalem,
Who are, and to your selves more glorious seem
In her attendance, than your own fair stemm;
By the Hills, and by the Lawns,
By the Roes, and by the Fawns,
By the Fields, and by the Woods,
By the Springs, and by the Floods,
All that I, or you count dear,
All I love, and all you fear;
I charge you, I charge you not to awake
My Love from the rest, which now she does take,
Till her self pleases the Signal to make!

SPONSA. Vox dilecti mei ecce iste, etc.
WHAT voice was that, Sponsus.
which struck my ^ar?
Ah! 'twas my LOVE, 'twas my LOVES Voice,
Which, were I dead, would make me hear*
And fill me with unutterable joys.
'Twas He, who spoke, and is he gone?
Ah me! e're yet his Words were done,
So far removed hence, and so soon?
But he will return --
He comes, he comes, I see him come,
The very Mountains make him room,
And bow their Heads to yield him way;
The Hillocks dart a brighter ray;
Over the Mountain tops he skips,
Light as the Wind, over the Hillocks trips:
And now he is there, and now he is here,
Swift as the fleet wing-footed De^^*
And now behind our Wall he stands,
Looks at the Window, and commands
My' attendance, at the Lattice, with his beckning hands.
Nay he speaks too, and I hear him say,
"Rise up, my Love, my Fair one, come away!
"Winter at length is past, and gone;
"Look, how the expected Spring comes on!
"Apace it comes, on Zephyrs riding,
"And the Rain, that stopped it chiding.
"The Rain is gone too, and gives place,
"And now appears a clearer face
"Of Heaven, and Earth, than did before:
"Enough of Storms, there is now no more.
"Lo! how the Flowers lift up their heads,
"And start out of their drousie beds.
"Waked by the Quire of Birds, that sing
"And Carol to the new-come Spring.
"They sing, and dance from bough to bough,
"As if they Winter never did know;
"As if they Winter never did fear,
"And 'twould be Summer all the Year,
"And every Night, and every Day,
("Who more rich, or pleased, than they)
"Unbidden, Pipe, and unrewarded, play.
"The Fig Tree too, on every twig,
"Puts out its callow unflesht Fig.
"Unflesht, unripe, unripe tho'it be,
"Hatc'ht at once by its Mother-Tree;
"Born at one pang, without the throws,
"The' hard t^eming Olive undergoes,
"That Gems, and Flowers, and flowring dies,
"E're the half formed Embry'o up does rise:
"Or the slow Vine its clusters brings,
"That gentle Plant, made up of Rings,
"Crispt, and curld, and wondrous sweet,
"But modest too, and veild toth feet.
"Which in their courses, all attend,
"And forth their Odours all do send,
"The Springs to perfume, and thy way,
"Rise up my Love, my Fair One, come away!
Thus, thus but softer 'twas he spoke,
With words a very Rock would break,
And e'ven in Stones impression make;
Hark, and you too, O Friends, may hear him sp^ak*

SPONSUS. Columba mea in foraminibus, etc.
MY DOVE, Sponsus.
that in the Cliffs do dwell,
And there to stones thy griefs do tell,
To stones, which nor Thy plaints can hear,
Nor a part with Thee in them bear,
Not lend one sigh, nor shed one tear,
Come forth of Heaven, and me beloved,
And be to a better Seat removed!
To one less deaf thy prayers direct,
Whom as Thy self, but more they may affect
Make them, my Love, make them to me,
And let me Her, who makes them see!
Thy Voice, tho hoarse with calling grown,
And almost to Thy self unknown,
To me as sweet, as e're it was,
As Charming seems, and full of Grace;
And thy fair Eyes, with tears be spent,
Look through the liquid Crystal far more Orient.
"For why to Heaven no pompous Sacrifice,
"Than Holy Prayer can more accepted rise:
"And the Lambs Bride no richer Garment wears,
"Than simple White, or poudred with her pearly tears.
Come then of Heav^n, and me beloved,
And be to a better Seat removed!
-- SHE comes, she comes, I see her come,
The Cliffs, that held her, make her room;
And stoop their Heads, to plain her way,
Our Lawns reflect her brighter ray!
Take us the while, the Foxes take,
Which in our Vineyards Buroughs make!
The little Foxes, which dispoil
Our Vines, into a Gin beguile;
For there is a blessing in our Vine;
The tender Grape begins to shine,
A blessing of its own, her blessing 't has, and mine.

SPONSA. Dilectus meus mihi, etc.
WHO would not such a Dear One love, Sponsa.

Who thus, and thousand ways does prove,
How constant He, how great my bliss?
My' BELOVED's MINE, and I AM HIS:
His, who amongst the Lillies feeds,
And with them to be crowned, first for them bleeds.
O! were that Day come, and the Night
Gone, which retards Thy gladsome sight!
Hasten it, LOVE, and bring the Day,
The shadows soon will flee away,
If Thou on Bethers top appear,
Swift as the fleet wing-footed Deer;
On Bethers top shedding Thy Light,
Fleet as their heels, and than their horns more bright.

CAP. III.
DOLOR DE ABSENTIA SPONSI.
SPONSA. CHORUS Amicorum Sponsi. SPONSA SOLA. In Lectulo meo per Noctes.
'TWAS Night, Sponsa.
a sad and dismal Night,
Without one glim of cheerful Light;
Silence, and horror seized its place,
And rioted in the empty space;
When wake'd with dread, Lo! all alone
I found my self, my LOVE was gone.
With trembling Hand, to find him out,
I felt, I sought, but found him not.
At last thus to my self I said,
"I Will up, and see whither he' is strayed:
"Fearless the City compass round,
"Nor give over till my LOVE is found.
"No labor spare in the quest, or pains,
"Through the broad Streets, and narrow Lanes,
"But eve'ry Lane, and every Street,
"Measure out with my weary Feet,
"And thus, or find him, or thus prove,
My truth to His, and to my Love.
I spoke, I rose, but in vain sought,
And tired my self, yet found him not.
Him I found not, but they found me,
Who the City-Warders be;
And in their Night-walks compass it,
Amazed a stricter Watch to meet,
And thus themselves first asked to be,
"Him, whom my Soul loves did you see?
My steps scarce from them could I move,
But I found Him my Soul does love.
I held him fast, nor would let go my hold,
Chaste in my Love, and in his Favor bold,
Till to my Mothers House I brought Him,
And all my adventurous search had taught him,
To the glad room, where I was born,
But in my Birth less joyous than in his return.
And now, fair Daughters of Jerusalem,
Who are, and to your selves more glorious seem,
In his attendance than your own fair stem;
By the Hills, and by the Launs,
By the Roes, and by the Fauns,
By the Fields, and by the Woods,
By the Springs, and by the Floods,
All that I or you count dear,
All he loves, and all I fear:
I charge you, I charge you not to awake
My LOVE from the rest, which now he does take,
Till himself pleases the signal to make!

CHORUS Amicorum Sponsi. Quae est ista quae ascendit per, etc.
WHAT fair One's that, Chorus.
who from the Desert comes,
Strait as a Palm, and breathing Odorous Gums;
Or like those Pillars, which from the Altar rise,
Of mystic Smoke, on which Heavens Pavement lies;
The expiring Soul of Myrrh, to its last abode
Hasting, as if 'twould be it self a God?
So choice a Beauty, and Divinely fair,
A mien so lovely, and so bright an Air,
Centred in whom all just Perfections meet,
The Wise, the Good, the Awful, and the Sweet,
Is only worthy him, whose sacred Love,
None equal knows, but his, who reigns above.
Behold his Bed (his Bed that is Salomons,
As far as Heaven admits comparisons)
No Queen need dread the terrors of the Night,
With such a Watch, so 'appointed, and so bright.
About it Sixty valiant Grooms attend,
Such as for triumph Israel forth does send.
All valiant Men, and expert all in War,
Girt as in Fight her mighty Conquerours are;
Each with his Sword upon his guarded Thigh,
And able each an Army to defy,
But whose united Forces all meet here,
To keep the Post and drive thence grizly fear.
A Chair the King, of Cedar too has made,
The cleanest Trees that Libanus e're had,
Whose Balli'sters are of finest Silver wrought,
The floor of Gold, from Ophirs treasures brought;
Its Cano'py of the richest Tyrian dye,
Enough to upbraid a meaner Majesty.
Such the Materials, but Art Divine,
In The Workmanship does Nature far outshine.
For all with winged Loves it is Carved around,
Love in more various postures never was found.
Some on Heavens Message flying, from above,
Thither advancing some our mortal^ love,
Which all refined, like Prophets, others Preach,
But learn of Sions Daughters, whom they seem to teach.
-- These are the shadows, fair One, of that bliss
Awaits Thy love, and all are Myste'ries:
Which none, but he that is Wise, can understand,
Nor any write but with a guided Hand.

SPONSA. Egredimini and videte filiae Sion.
DAUGHTERS of Jerusalem, Sponsa.

The fairest Sprouts of Sions stem,
Come forth, my Friends, come forth, and see
What mine, and what your Honors be!
You will remember th'happy Day,
(And well remember it, you may)
When first your King received his Crown,
King Solomon, and 'twas his own,
Not of the Kingdom but of his Love;
And it the fairer Crow'n did prove.
From 'his Mothers Hands the joyful Son,
On 'his Nuptial Day received the Crown.
But such a Son, and such a Mother,
Vying Glories each with the other,
And such a Crown, and such a Day,
When in chaste Joys dissolved they lay,
The happy Bridegroom, and the Bride,
And you, their Friends, on either side,
If once again you would wish to see,
And greater Joys than those could be,
Come, and my greater SOLOMON behold,
More glorious in his Love, than he in all his Gold.

CAP. IV.
CATASTASIS.
SPONSUS, SPONSA. SPONSUS. Quam Pulchra es Amica mea.
I.
BEHOLD Thou 'art fair, Sponsus.
my Love, behold Thou art Fair,
Let the World know, and know it Thou;
But (alas!) what Thy hidden Beauties are,
Nor thou, nor that, till by me taught, can know:
Till Thee, by all that is Beauteous I compare,
And after all rejoyn, Thou 'art yet more Fair.
II.
Begin my Song! But where shall I begin?
Ah! where, but with Thy Dove-like Eyes,
Those Doors of Dia'mond, which first let me in,
And of my Passion, were the Virgin prize?
Love thence redoubled on me his thick strokes,
But, sallying forth, lay fettered in thy Locks.
III.
Locks of that Head, which does like Gilead shine,
When on the Golden Fleeces there,
The jealous Sun, just ready to decline,
In The midway stops, his Tresses to compare*
But brighter far, and longer too are they,
Than Sunbeam, in the fairest Summer-day.
IV.
Such is thy Hair, thy Teeth like couples thence,
All washed in Aenons streams, and shorn;
In Aenons Silver streams, and rising whence,
To the joyful shearing House new washed they' are born:
Each has its make, and Twins they bear all round,
Nor is a barren One in the number found.
V.
And as Thy Teeth, such are Thy Lips, their Fence,
The purest Wool, with the' noblest Dye;
And every graceful Word, that is uttred thence,
On purple Wings, to Thy' lovers Heart does fly;
Thy Cheeks, hid under Thy bright Curls, appear
Like shaded Pomgranates, but shine more clear.
VI.
But, O, Thy Neck, that Tower impregnable,
How full of Beauty, and of Dread?
Like that of David, built for a Citadel
With thousand spoils of the' Living and the Dead.
A thousand Shields of the Mighty hang up there,
All mighty Shields, and but thy Necklace are.
VII.
Yet such a Citadel, and such a Tower,
To guard those Twins there was but need,
Those two Roe-twins, of all the Herd the Flower,
Which under it, among the Lillies feed;
Thy two fair Breasts, which yet to Lillies give
A tincture brighter, than they thence receive.
VIII.
Till the Day come, my Love, the Bridal-Day,
For which thou less than I do long;
Till the Nights shadows swiftly flee away,
A while I Will leave Thee, a little while be gone:
To the Hills of Myrrh, and Frankincense I Will go,
And fetch the Morning, as it 'gins to blow.
IX.
Yet (ah!) I cannot leave Thee, Love, thus soon,
My Love thus soon I cannot leave;
Our Flocks may gaze, for it is yet scarce High-noon,
And we, till Folding time, the Hours deceive.
Thou art all fair, my Love, all fair Thou art,
And first I Will die, e're from Thee thus depart.
X.
Rather a while, my Love, let 'us hand in hand,
To Liban walk, and Amana;
Shenir, and Hermon, which large views command,
And thence see how our Lambs do feed and play,
Whether unscar'd they from the Lions rest,
Or Leopards paws, and where the' next Folding's best.
XI.
They 'are safe, my SPOUSE, they' are safe, but (Oh) my heart,
SISTER, my Heart (Oh) where is it gone?
For gone it is, I know, by the' pleasing smart;
Welfare poor Heart, that is from its Master flown!
But this one glance, one Eyes bright glance has done:
Who Is proof for both, if thus Thou wound'st with One?
XII.
Yet as Thou' have taken my Heart, so keep it fast!
A single Chain is strong enough,
One link of the Chain, with which thy Neck is graced,
To hold, fast hold a never starting Love;
My SPOUSE, my SISTER, I Am Thy Captive made,
Bind him, nor of Thy Priso'ner be afraid!
XIII.
A willing Captive, Prisoner of Thy love,
Which guess how strong, and fair it is;
So strong 't has drawn me from my Throne above,
And truly hides a God in this disguise:
So fair, that Thee no less to Heaven 't shall raise,
To Crown Thy Maker with Immortal Bays.
XIV.
But this, till to' Heaven we come, I Will let alone,
Nor can Thou understand it yet;
Wherefore Thy Love by things to Thee well known,
As thou cans^ bear, I will before Thee set;
To Wine compare 't, tho better it is than Wine,
And all Thy Odours are of race Divine.
XV.
Thy Lips, my SPOUSE, drop as the Honeycomb,
Honey and Milk are in Thy Tongue;
Some drops for Susten'ance, and for Medicine some,
The Weak to nourish, and confirm the Strong:
Like Libanus, Thy perfumed Garments smell,
Liban, that does all Mounts, for Sweets excel.
XVI.
All, but that Garden, in the holy Mount,
Where I design three Nights to lie,
In Spices wrapped, as Prophets shall recount,
And notice give the World, when the' time draws nigh:
Yet such a Garden, and so sweet art Thou,
My SPOUSE, my SISTER, when Thy Spices blow.
XVII.
A Garden fenced, and all enclosed around,
Locked up, and double is the Key,
With a quick Spring, that waters the' holy Ground,
And all its parching Fervors does allay;
But so sealed up, the curious passer by
With Foot never soild, never saw it with his Eye.
XVIII.
To none but its own sacred Plants it slows,
Making the place a Paradise,
Where nothing noxious, or forbidden grows,
Nothing, but what will make one truly wise:
Or make, or please, or truly keep one so;
For all there planted, as its Trees do grow.
XIX.
The Pomgranate is there, and there the Date,
The Spikenard, and the Cypress Tree,
Spikenard and Saffron, and hi'ther brought of late,
The sweet-Cane, Cinamom, and all sorts that be
Of Frankincense, Myrrh, Aloes, and a Train
Of Princely Spices, wont in the East to Reign.
XX.
There Reign they, but here serve my Love, and me,
Whose Fountain all their drought supplies,
And slows so largely, constant, and so free,
The whole World may have for its necessities:
Jordan that sacred, and perpetual Flood,
Had not more streams, when like the Sea on heaps it stood.

SPONSA. Surge Aquilo and veni Auster.
I.
FATHER Winds, Sponsa.
that gently ride,
On downy Feathers, through the Sky,
You, that in the cold North abide,
And Southern Gales, which cold defy!
II.
North Wind awake, and Thou, O South,
And gently on my Garden blow;
Blow, gentle Winds, with different Mouth,
That all its various scents may slow!
III.
Then on your Wings the Perfumes take,
And bear them with you gently Home;
More grateful your return they will make,
And the young Winds wonder whence you come.
IV.
But why, O Winds, first call I you,
Let my BELOVED rather come!
More than your Gales his Breath can do,
Not show, but make my best Perfume.
V.
Why comes he not? Ah! where is the Let?
Now that his Garden's in its prime,
Now that his Fruits are fit to eat,
And may be worse another time?

V.
CATASTASIS.
SPONSUS. SPONSA. CHORUS. CAP. 5.
SPONSUS. Veni in Hortum meum Soror.
I.
I HEARD Thee call, Sponsus.
my Sister, my SPOUSE,
I heard Thee call, and I came away;
To my Garden I came, and as Lovers use,
Have gathered each Flower in my Walk that lay;
My Myrrh, and my Spices, and all that is rare,
And thus to my Garden I Will often repair.
II.
So pleased I was with each choice delight,
And delights such as Thine I but rarely meet;
That, scarce knowing how, I forgot my self quite,
Nor took time enough to choose only the sweet;
My Honey and Honeycomb at once devoured,
And with my Wine, Milk into the Bowl poured.
III.
Cheer up, my Friends, and eat your fill,
Cheer up, and eat, here is store enough,
Thanks to my bounteous Love,
And drink, drink plenteously, what each one will!
"Who fears excess, or fondly thinks to spare,
"Disparages that Heaven, whose Guests we are.

SPONSA. Ego dormio, and cor meum vigilat.
ALL as I slept, Sponsa.
but with my waking mind,
(My Heart slept not, tho sleep my Eyes did bind,
And on my Temples his soft Fillet ti'd,
But as I slept and) dead to all beside,
Lived to my LOVE, a Voice I seemed to hear,
A shrilling Voice, and pitteous, pierced my ear;
A Voice well known, 'twas my BELOVED's Voice,
And at the Door he made the appointed Noise,
Knocking, and calling, Why comes not my Love?
"Open my SISTER, my 'Undefil'd, my Dove,
"Open, I pray Thee, nor be so unkind,
"Thus to treat him, who is come thy Love to find;
"A long, and weary Journey come in the Night,
"Weary and wet, by the Moon's dusky Light.
"Lo! how my Head with the moist Dew is filled,
"And the Nights drops through all my Curls distilled!
"And art Thou come, I flatteringly replied,
"But why, my Dear, so late, without a Guide?
"I fear it much, but (ah!) I Am now in Bed;
"And many a sad distrust nights horrors breed,
"He're in the dark, in the dark here all alone;
"My Vest's put off, How shall I put it on?
"My Feet are washed too from the Days foul soil,
"Nor with new sullies would I them defile.
"O, how I tremble, and would gladly rise,
"But dare not, (Oh!) I dare not, LOVE how dark it is!
I spoke, but 'twas excuse: To be denied,
Unwilling he, still for admission cried.
Drawing the Latch, and lifting with his Hand
The easy Door; grieving he thus should stand,
My Heart was in me moved, and I began
To pity him, and my' unjust self disdain;
At his so meek attendance did relent,
And of my own unlovelike words repent.
So up I rose in haste, and let him in,
Who was my LOVE, and had so patient been.
I rose, and to the Door like Lightning flew,
To the very place, where he the Latch first drew.
My Hands dropped Myrrh, which on the Door he left,
Pure Myrrh, in eve'ry chink of th'Door, and cleft,
Myrrh on the Lock, in every ward was Myrrh,
And Myrrh, where every busy Finger I could stir.
But opening, -- Woe's me! he was gone;
Himself, my dearest LOVE, had thence withdrawn.
My Soul was gone too, roused as I lay,
And heard him speak, but with him fled away.
So pensive, all about I for him sought,
Sought curiously about, but found him not:
Called him by Name, begged his return to have,
I called, and sought, but he no answer gave.
Nor hear, nor find him could I, but they found me,
They, who the Warders of the City be:
Unlike in Court'sie, tho alike in Name
Those Just ones, to 'whom in my first search I came,
Who let me pass unwrong'd; ^ ese barba'rously
Struck, and did more than strike, have wounded me:
And though by place, and office bound to look
No' assaults be made, my torn Vail rudely took.
But you, fair Daughters of Jerusalem,
From whom much better things to hope I seem,
Worthy your selves, and worthy your bright stem.
If you chance my Love to find,
Virgins, be to' a Virgin kind!
If you chance my LOVE to meet,
Virgins, be to a Virgin sweet!
Sweet, and kind so Love to y'ou be,
As you are kind, and sweet to me!
I charge you, I charge you by all that is dear,
My LOVE to inform, that his Wounds I do bear,
Sick to death with his Love, without his care.

CHORUS Filiarum Hierosolymitanarum. Qualis est Dilectus tuus.
FAIREST of Women, Chorus.
if we find
Thy LOVE, we'll to Thy suit be kind.
Fairest of Women, if we meet
Thy LOVE, we'll be as Thou art, sweet.
(Sweet, and kind, so Love to us be
As we are kind and sweet to Thee!)
Tell him all thou have charged us,
In terms, like Thine, obsequious.
But, if unseasonable it is not,
Nor we be too over curious thought,
Be pleased to advise us, what above
All other Lovers, is Thy LOVE,
In Air, and rich Endowments large,
That us Thou giv'st so strict a charge?

SPONSA. Dilectus meus candidus and rubicundus.
FAIR Ones, Sponsa.
tho that, which you of me require,
And which my self should in your place desire,
Be far above all Art, or Skill of mine
As it deserves in Colors to design,
Yet that I may my just Compliance show,
The best that is in my power I Will gladly do.
Help, help me LOVE, to give each part its grace,
Nor from my humble Verse, or Heart, their Lines efface!
WHITE, and ruddy is my LOVE,
As when the Rose and Lilly strove.
White and pure, as Midday Light;
Ruddy as Clouds that fly the Night,
And even or'e-taken blushing run,
Blushing to o're-take the setting Sun,
And wish him in the Sea headlong plunge down*
The Banner worthy ^alone to bear,
Under which Myriads listed are.
Around his Head a Ray divine,
Bright as the purest Gold does shine.
His Locks as any Raven black,
Hang in loose Curls a-down his Back.
His Eyes like Doves by' a Rivers side,
Well set, and with a decence wide,
As washed in Milk, are lovely white,
But sparkling Fire from the killing sight.
His Cheeks with spicy mixtures flow,
Flourets in the downy Borders grow.
His Lips the choicest Myrrh distill,
Lillies the parting Valley fill.
His Hands with Rings of Berril set,
Of Jacynct, and of Chrysolet.
His Chest's like polisht Ivory,
Whose Veins of liquid Saphir lie.
Two Pedestals of solid Gold
His Marble-pillar'd Thighs uphold.
Libanus only is his Peer,
In The fairest Cedar growing there.
Strait as a Cedar and as tall,
(By Trees to express the Natural)
But when he speaks, so 'himself he is,
With every Grace, and every Bliss,
Whole Liba'nus is unfit to be,
With all its stores, the Pourtraict of his Deity.
Such, fair Daughters of Jerusalem,
Such is my LOVE, and such my Friend;
If such an One you chance to find,
Self him for me, when you have by the Marks discovered him.

VI.
AMBITIO SPONSAE.
CHORUS Filiarum Hieros^lymitanarum. CAP. 7.
SPONSA, SPONSVS, CHORUS alter Mulierum e Gentibus. CHORUS. Fill. Hier. Quo
abiit Dilectus tuus O Pul^^erri^^a?
WHITHER is thy BELOVED gone, Chorus.

Fairest of Women, whither turned aside?
Tell us, if Thou have his retirements known,
Or dei^n Thy self to be our Guide!
In every place, we'll with Thee seek Him out,
And find, (...)
or else be found of Him they sought.

SPONSA. Dilectus meus descend^ in Hor^um.
DOWN to his Garden my BELOVED went.
To' his Garden, as I thought, with full intent,
The Beds of Spices, in his Walk to see,
How fresh and verdant in his Livery.
There to divert a while, and feed his Flock,
And new-blown Lillies gather from his Stock.
-- But (Lo!) I see him, this way the steps incline.
I my BELOVED's AM, and HE IS MINE.
His, none but his, who amongst the Lillies feeds,
And with them to be Crowned, first for them bleeds.

SPONSVS. Pulchra es Amica mea, etc.
I.
BELOVED, Sponsus.
Thou 'art fair, my Love, behold Thou 'art fair,
As Tirza, which for Empire strove
With the holy City', and with it would compare;
Fair as Jeru'salem, coming from above:
So fair art Thou, but dreadful too withal,
As a ranged Phalanx, at the Trumpets call.
II.
Ah! from me turn those killing Eyes away,
Too piercing is their beauteous sight;
I yield, my Love, I yield, Thou have gained the Day,
And all in vain I see it is to fight:
Thou need'st but only look to overcome;
And, bound in Chains, thy Captives are led home.
III.
Chains of that Hair, that does like Gilead shine,
When on the Golden Fleeces there,
The jealous Sun, just ready to decline,
In The Mid-Heav'n stops, his Tresses to compare;
But brighter far, and longer much are they,
Than Sunbeam in the fairest Summer-day.
IV.
Such are Thy Locks, Thy Teeth like couples thence,
All washed in Aenons Streams, and shorn,
In Aenons Silver Streams, and rising whence,
To the joyful Shearing-house, new washed they'are born:
Each has it is make, and Twins they bear all round,
Nor is a Barren one in the number found.
V.
Thy Cheeks, which underneath Thy Temples lie,
And there their modest blushes hide,
In such a Vail, as does all Art defy,
(Nature for Virgins does that Vail provide)
Thy Cheeks, all vaild within Thy Curls, appear
Like shaded Pomegranats, but shine more clear.
VI.
Tho threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines,
And Virgins numberless there be;
Ten thousand Virgins, Concubines, and Queens,
Nor are, nor ever were so fair as She:
She, who is my Dove, my Undefiled, the One,
Mine and her Morthers, more than all, alone.
VII.
The Virgins saw her, and their blessings sent,
Heavens tendrest blessings on her shour'd;
As if the officious drops they on her spent,
Should on themselves again, in streams be poured:
The Queens, and Concubines by different ways,
Whom yet they envied, could not choose but praise.

CHORUS Mulierum e Gentibus. Quae est ista quae progreditur quasi Aurora?
WHAT fair One's that, Chorus.
who like the Day,
From its dark Prison broke away,
Comes gently on, all crowned with Light,
The Rosie-fingred Morn in white;
And as She still does draw more near,
Still more radiant does appear?
How fair She is, as Midnight Moon,
Radiant too as Midday Sun;
Clear, and bright, but terrible withal,
As a ranged Phalanx at the Trumpets call.

SPONSA Sola. Descendi in Hortum Nucum.
DOWN to my Garden am I come; Sponsa.
and here,
How fresh, how verdant all my Fruits appear!
To see I Am come, how my Nuts clusters grow,
How my Vines shoot, and the Pomgranats blow,
But hold! -- What sudden change is it I feel?
What it is I know not, how I cannot tell;
But now, methinks, I mount, and now I fly:
Lo! how the Earth, and Clouds beneath me lie;
And now to the Empyrean I approach,
And starry is my Way, a Cherub is my Coach.

CHORUS Mulierum e Gentibus. Revertere, Revertere Sunamitis.
WHither, Chorus.
O Sulamite, whither so fast,
And why thus soon, to leave us, all this haste?
Return, O Sulamite, return, that we
On equal ground may thy chaste Beauties see!
Return, that we a while may on Thee gaze;
Return, or us together with Thee raise.

SPONSA. Quid videbis in Sunamite?
AH! Sponsa.
too over curious, and too over-bold,
What is it you would in the Sulamite behold?
What is it, when all that you can in her see,
Are but the Lines of a tremendous Majesty.
As when two Armies ready are to join,
And with stern Looks, to the onset give the Sign.

VII.
AMORES MUTUI.
SPONSVS SPONSA. CAP. 7.
SPONSVS. Quam pulchri sunt gressus tui in calceamentis?
FAIR One, Sponsus.
who do from Loins of Kings descend,
The King, whose Empire does over all extend,
Beyond those Worlds, which undiscovered lie,
In The boundless circuit of the All-embracing Sky,
Let others, as they please, recount Thy praise,
I from the ground its Monument will raise.
Those parts of Thee which have the lowest place,
But beauteous in their kind --
Thy Feet, which on their well fixed bases, bear
The fairest Pile, that Nature e're did rear.
How glorious are they, when Thou leadst Thy Flock,
Or on Thy buskins raised, or in thy humble Sock?
The juncture of Thy Thighs like Jewels are,
The Work of the most famed Artificer.
Thy Navil (nor let Scoffers here blaspheme
The Mysteries of the New Jerusalem,
Or to vile Lust debase the noble Theme.)
But like a Goblet round Thy Navil is,
Brim full, and flowing with the richest Juice.
Thy Belly pregnant with a numerous Train,
Which Heavens void space, shall People once again.
Like heaps of Wheat, with Lillies set around,
Thy Children show, and how their Mother's Crowned.
Thy Brest's like two Twin-Roses, and Twins they are,
In all the Herd there is not a lovelier pair.
Thy Neck is like a Tower of Ivory,
Hung with the Trophies of Loves Victory.
Thy Eyes surpass the Silver Streams, that run
By Bathrabbim, to the Pools of Essebon.
Thy Nose, of perfect shape, like a Fort Royal stands,
Off from Thy Cheeks, and the under Plains commands.
Or like Loves Labyrinth, by the Forest side,
Pointing, and to Damascus opening wide.
Thy Head's like Carmel, and Thy purple Hair,
The brightest Dye the Assyrian Fleece can bear.
Fettered in its soft Chains the King does lie,
Enamored of the Bands of his Captivity.
How fair art Thou! how made for all delight!
Slender, clean Limbed, and, as a Palm, upright?
Grow, happy Tree, the Queen of all the Wood,
Grow, as Thou do, less great than Thou art good!
In whose warm Bosom, the Vines clusters rest,
And show, and seem themselves, the swellings of Thy Breast.
Up to the Palm Tree I Will ascend, I said,
Palm in my Hand; with Palm Ill crown my Head;
The blushing clusters with my Lips I Will seize,
And all their winy juice, rich Wines express:
With which enflamed, I Will cooling Apples take,
Apples, the best repast that Lovers make;
Apples, whose Cordial they the best can tell,
Apples, which like Thy perfumed Breath do smell.
Apples, Thy Breath: Thy Speech is generous Wine,
That sparkles in the Cup, and gives its shine;
Moves it self right, to my Beloved goes,
Goes as it can, and all its Wonders shows:
Making the Lips of those, who sleep to speak,
And at one touch their Chains and silence break.

SPONSA. Fgo Dilecto me, and ad me conversio ejus.
I My BELOVED's am alone, Sponsa.

And beside me has he none;
None beside me does he love,
Equal none, and none above.
Mine he is and mine alone,
And beside him have I none;
None beside him do I love,
Equal none, and none above.
Come then my LIFE, ah! come away!
In The City let us not ever stay;
But look how our Fields do smile,
And in the Villas lodge a while.
There, with the Sun, We'll early rise,
And visiting our Nurseries,
See how the Vines their Branches spread,
And the young Grape shoots forth his head:
And how the Pomgranates do blow.
But then my LOVE less ruddy show.
My Loves there will I to Thee give.
Loves in the Country happie'st live.
The Mandrag's there, that Love excites,
The Mandrag, chief in Loves delights;
Which forward now, begins to 'appear,
And fumes our Gates with it is Rosy Hair.
With many a Fruit, and many a Flower,
Which I will in Thy Bosom pour.
Store of Pleasures, new, and old,
More than can of Tongue be told.
More, if possible, than enough,
And all reserved for Thee, my LOVE.

VIII.
CATASTROPHE.
SPONSA. CHORUS Gentium. CAP. 8.
SPONSVS. SPONSA. Quis mihi det te Fratrem meum?
I LOVE, Sponsa.
but cannot yet my LOVE enjoy,
Ah! Love that Thou should have so much alloy!
Still some nice thing to interrupt Our bliss,
Something to fault, which yet we would not miss!
This as I think, I wish Thou were my BROTHER,
Thou my Soul loves, the Son of my own Mother:
How would I 'embrace Thee then, and kiss thine Eyes,
Where e're I meet Thee, safe from base surmize!
Home would I lead Thee to my Mothers House,
And, by her taught, the happy Moment use;
Talk over our Loves, fill, fill the Wine,
The spicy blood of the Pomgranate and Vine.
Satiate with which, Thou should thy Left Hand place
Under my Head, whole me with the' right embrace.
It Is done, and see he sleeps --
Fair Daughters of Jerusalem,
Who are, and to your selves more glorious seem,
In our attendance, than your own bright Stem,
By the Hills, and by the Launs,
By the Roes, and by the Fauns,
By the Fields, and by the Woods,
By the Springs, and by the Floods,
All that I or you count dear,
All he loves, and all I fear:
I charge you, I charge you not to awake
My LOVE, from the rest, which now he does take,
Till himself pleases the signal to make!

CHORUS Gentium. Quae est ista, quae ascendit de deserto?
WHAT fair One's that (but words can never express Chorus.

How fair she is) who from the Wilderness,
Leaning on her BELOVED's Arm ascends,
And hitherward their amo'rous Journey tends.
They 'are come, and now approach't so near,
That were not rudeness, we their privacies may hear.

SPONSVS. Sub arbore malo suscitavi te.
-- THERE 'twas, under the Apple Tree, Sponsus.

Where first I found, and first raised Thee.
Thy Mother there her Fruit disclosed,
And there thou first did lie exposed,
And had lain still, but that I came,
I ^d to Thy rescue, by my first Loves purest flame.

SPONSA. Pone me ut signaculum super Cor. Sponsa.

BLESSED, ever blessed be that Day.
When t^us Thou cam'est, and thus I lay!
O let us never, never part,
But make me' a Scal upon Thy Heart!
A Badg Thou on Thy Arm may wear,
That where Thou art, I may be there,
And never, never from Thee part,
But always on, or next Thy Heart!
" For love, (And who loves more than I?)
" Stronger than Death, does Death defy.
" His Conquests like the Graves, extend,
" And further, up to Heaven his flames ascend.
" But never was there such a Flame,
" As that, in which to me he came;
" So dreadful, scorching, and so bright,
" I blessed, but trembled at the sight.
" A Fire; Love was himself that Fire,
" Which in no Waters will expire:
" But, eve'n in Floods, securely lives,
" And all their watery threats survives.
" Nor quench, nor drown it can the Flood,
" Nor buy it, all the seeming good
" This World, that mighty Chapman, boasts
" In his vast Traffic through all Coasts.
" For so invaluable is its price,
" And its exchange so monstrous high does rise,
" The Universe too little is for 'its Merchandise.

CHORUS Gentium, etc. Soror nostra parva and ubera non habet.
A LITTLE Sister yet we have, Chorus.

For whom we'd Loves assistance crave.
Young, and little, though she 'is yet,
And her Breast not fully set,
Tho as yet no Breasts she has,
Grow our Sister does apace.
But if thus high Loves price does go,
What shall we for our little Sister do,
When the time comes, that we should her bestow?

SPONSVS. Si murus est aedificemus super.
IF, when grown up, your Sister prove a Wall, Sponsus.

We'll on her build a Silver Arcenal;
Defense, and Ornament we'll to her give,
And all her Stones shall, as in the Quarry, live.
If, when grown up, your Sister prove a Door,
With Cedar mouldings we will case her o*re;
With Freeze, and Cornice all her Pillars crown,
And to her sacred Glories add our own.

SPONSA. Ego Murus and ubera mea sicut Turris.
BUT I Am a Wall, and my soft Breasts full grown, Sponsa.

Like Towers, upon the subject Camp look down.
My constancy to guard the Fort does stand,
And dares the rudest Shock, of the roughest Hand.
This as my WELL-BELOVED heard me say,
The Holy Boast he did approve;
And in his Eyes I found such grace that Day,
I dare no longer doubt his Love.

SPONSVS. Vinea fuit Pacifico in ea, etc.
I HAVE a Vineyard, so has Solomon; Sponsus.

His at a distance lies, in Baal-hannon,
To Keepers, and to Under-Keepers set,
And Yearly, for a thousand pieces let.
But mine, the Vineyard that is my own, does lie
In my own care, and ever in my Eye.
Accountable for 'its Fruits to me alone,
And sharers in them, with me, have I none.
Compare we now our Vineyards, peaceful King!
Which does to 'its Lord the greatest Profit bring?
Thine for a thousand Pieces yields its store;
Admit it do; it is worth two hundred more,
But these the Keepers have: Mine is my own,
Accountable for' its Fruits to me alone,
(As for its care) and sharers have I none.
Thou art that Vineyard, Love, my Vineyard Thou,
Who in the Flowery Gardens dwell low;
Low, but with all the Stars of the Garden crowned,
And Thy Companions sitting Thee around,
Attent, and listening to Thy tuneful Voice;
O, make me hear it, and fulfill my Joys!

SPONSA. Fuge Dilecte mi and assimilare, etc.
AND so Thou shall -- Sponsa.

LOVE, bring the Day,
Haste it, LOVE* and come away!
On the Spicy Mountain tops appear,
Swift as the fleet-wing footed Deer!
And driving thence the baleful Night,
On the Spicy Mountains shed Thy Light,
Fleet as their heels, and than their Horns more bright!
Veni Domine, JESV, Veni cito!
SOLI DEO GLORIA.
Cujus Amore inflammato cord haec occini,
Inscius licet, and indignus: Suscipe lauds
Famuli tui. AMEN.

Apud Hartley Maudet. Com. Southton, in Vigilia Ascensionis. MDCLXXVII.
(...). THE LEGEND OF LOVE,
CANTO. I.
I.
SONG, which the God of Love did first inspire,
Not he the blind, and sottish World calls so,
No God, nor ought save a wild raging Fire,
Which with incessant Bellows Lust does blow,
But HE, to whom all things their being owe,
In whom alone they live, in whom they move,
And, by his Love made, to perfection grow,
All who below adore Him, or above,
The Mighty Lord of Hosts, the very GOD of LOVE,
II.
Song, by the very God of Love inspired,
And of a thousand more the sacred Chief,
But wherein Solomon, from himself retired,
Not what his Love, but what was his belief,
(Songs ill became the cause of all his Grief,
If love we to our Mortal Standart bring,
Whose spoils are Robbe'ries, and whose God's a thief)
Under Love's borrowed name to the World did sing,
LOVE is the borrowed Name, Holy Churches FAITH the thing*
III.
Song, which the borrowed Name do understand,
And all the Mysteries which in it lie,
For it is the Dialect of the Heavenly Land,
Nor as to us it sounds does signify,
(Blessed Souls in Love discourse with the most High)
Thou, who know this, and more than this, whence came
The profanation of the Deity,
And how this lustful Earth took the empty Name,
Embracing sulphu'rous clouds, for its Gods purest flame.
IV.
Tell the World, Song, whence first its madness grew!
Who knows not the World is mad? Thou best of all,
Which, if 'twere possible Inno'cence to renew,
To its first Inno'cence would the World recall,
And more than e're it lost in the wretched Fall:
By love Thou callst it, and the Voice is known,
Well known 's the Voice, but we too sensual,
So brutish^ in our Lusts obscene are grown,
That called by it is name, we think it an Idol of our own.
V.
Yet none of ours is what we' have stolen the name,
That Idol, which we thus with Mirtles crown,
But with our form from Heaven at once it came,
From Heaven was with a Silver Cord let down,
And into the Souls mass divinely thrown,
To be its Salt, miraculously contrived;
And first in Heaven the name of Love was known,
From whence at length it hither was derived,
And here a while such, and so called in pleasure lived.
VI.
In pleasure 'it lived, and with its changed abode,
Strangely surprizd, was strangely pleased awhile,
At first perceived not the unusual load,
But in her Face, who should betray 'it, did smile,
As fearless, as unconscious yet of guile:
And to a Body tho it were designed,
A Body, as the Land of its exile,
All parts so' agreeable, and soft did find,
Its Tour seemed thence enlarged more, than confined.
VII.
For all with Spi^rits it did converse before,
It self a Spirit, but when the Eternal Mind
To new displays of his creating Power,
In beings of a lower Rank inclined,
Which Angels yet should not come far behind;
Soon as the great Resolve was past above,
And Man of all those Works the Lord designed,
Love the first mover, and the last, did move,
That He, whom all obeyed, over all should rule by Love.
VIII.
It moved thus, and the motion was embraced,
Als' Love, that made it downwards took its way;
And viewing how the Bodies parts were cast,
Seized, with the Spi^rit, the scarce yet molded Clay,
Nor for partition, or nice choice did stay,
But blending both together, seized the whole;
Both in the whole, whole both in each part lay,
And both together making the humane Soul,
The unactive Matter did both quicken, and control.
IX.
The Spi'rit gave Life, with what to Life pertain,
Sense, Motion, and the several Faculties,
A cheerful, goodly, and a pompous Train,
When ruled, as they' ought, and managed by the Wise;
The wise is Love, that the whole unites, and ties,
And which, where e're it undisturbed does reign,
Makes the earthly frame, with the Heavenly sympathize,
Nor to rebel dare any passion strain,
When over them reason, over that love does hold the rein.
X.
Thus in the first happy Pair, a while Love reigned,
And but a while, with regal Sovereignty,
Who to its Lore so early both were trained,
That Love it self, as rapt in ecstasy,
Wondered what in dull Flesh the' effects might be.
It wondered, but so chaste, and innocent,
So Love-conspiring every part did see,
And so obsequious to its great intent,
That Love it self enamored was of its descent.
XI.
Forthy the happy pair, with severed flame,
Which yet in both was one, to love inclined;
Two downwards only, but rise'n whence it came,
Again collected in one point, and joynd,
And still the higher rise'n, the more refind;
They loved, and so in Heaven to love are seen
Bright Seraphs, nor could Differe'nce be assignd,
But that the Body here did crowd between,
There by pure Spi'rits was dressed out the mighty Scene.
XII.
The new formed Body here did crowd between,
But all to love was so disposed, and made,
In either Sex, and with so Beauteous mien,
That either seemed with other well appay'd,
And Love himself the Hymenaeal said:
(For Love 's an He, who proud of what was done,
And of Man most, as fairest there Pourtraid,
The form assumed, which likest was to' his own,
And will but as a Male, when sung in Verse be known.)
XIII.
Love said it, and Heaven all he said approved,
By signs authentic, which none durst deny;
The new Creation in soft measures moved,
And the whole World of beings, waiting by,
Bowed all a-down, and blessed the Augury,
They bowed, and blessed it, as they waiting stood,
They bowed, and blessed it each, tho near so high,
From the Angeli^ Natures, to the Brood
Of Earth-born Vegetables, and God saw 'twas Good.
XIV.
'Twas good He saw for Man to have his Make,
Man saw no less 'twas good for him to love,
And in his Arms the Virgin Bride did take,
With all the' endearments that affection move,
Nor Hell that looked askaunce could the Rites reprove.
In 'his Arms he took her, as Superior,
She, as one yet, who would be Conquered, strove,
Till safe arriving at the Genial Bower,
And conquered both, Love each saluted Conqueror.
XV.
There gentle purpose did they enterchange,
And all the innocent delights, that make
Blessed Wedlock happy, nor did think it strange,
Connubial pleasures to or leave, or take;
For, nor him Inn'ocence did, nor her forsake,
And they who think it did, or that the place,
Or state forbad such use 'ith sordice rake
Of their own lusty-head, foully miss the case,
And on God's noblest Masterpiece retort disgrace.
XVI.
Think so, who will for me, and bear the shame
Of such sad thought; those just ones thought not so
Nor God, nor Love, who kindled first the flame
Wherewith they in desire alike did glow,
Desire unhappy never till 't would know
Secrets of knowledge unpermitted it,
Unhappy knowledge, source of all our Woe,
Unhappy Tree, in the midst oath, Garden set,
Unhappy seen, but tasted, more unhappy yet!
XVII.
Forbidden therefore 'twas, but that alone,
What else beside Man could, or wish, or crave,
Enclosure, Limit and Restraint had none,
Nor other Law than what Right Reason gave;
Right Reason, unforced yet to be a Slave,
To 'its under Ministers, a Lawless suit
Of stubborn Lusts, when they the Mastery have,
Less of the Man partaking than the Brute,
And are the dire effects of the forbidden Fruit.
XVIII.
Too dire Effects, if God had seen it fit,
Which Natures Course disturbed and altered so,
That all the Bands, which held it were unknit,
And quite reversed the Pyramid did show,
Above a Front unshapely, 'a point below:
Thus while 'twas turning, but once set upon
It Is no Foundation, for so grim a Brow,
Or which was but a point, as good as none,
Down fell the Heap, Hell trembled, and the Earth did groan.
XIX.
Love was that Pyramid, which whilst it stood,
As fixed by Heaven, on its own proper Base,
(Matter, in Mankind, cemented by Blood
Spiritous, where Sense had lowest place,
Reason supreme) whole Nature did embrace;
Which over her Works such Robes of Beauty threw,
And with such Rays did the Universe enchase,
That Instinct some, the' rest Inclination drew,
Only to Love, and what was loved, by Love pursue.
XX.
Love, and Fruition of their Kind, was the' whole,
Whither to 'arrive, most Creatures did aspire,
(By Sense led,) and arrived; but Man, whose Soul
Had particles of an Ethereal Fire,
Aimed at Fruition too, but of what high'er,
And more sublime, was laid up, than his Kind,
Or that part of 'it his Flesh, whence to retire,
In Innocence he found himself inclined,
The beauties of his own, and of the Eternal Mind.
XXI.
His Kind he loved, as all things did beside,
All things beside his Kind he also loved
In their due Rank, but how to be applied
To use, the Hypothesis was to be proved,
And thousand Stones to move, and be removed,
E're Love he to so just an height could raise,
As in his Intellect it was approved,
That he from Earth to Heaven by steps of Praise,
Might hourly mount, and boldly tread God's secrer Ways.
XXII.
Deep in himself was the Foundation laid,
And in those Acts, wherein he did partake
With meaner Beings, for his Empire made,
And of which some for Propagation make,
By their first Institution, called Love by mistake,
Whose name they have engrost; but Love,
Or cause, or sign of Love no more are, take
But the Disguise off, as bare Acts they prove,
Nor higher look, than it is Love naturally to move.
XXIII.
These therefore were laid deep, and of the Pile,
If ought, Substruction, consecrate to Night,
The sense of Touch, too subject to beguile,
Where Reason does not hold the Balance right;
Reason, wherein true Love, and pure Delight
Only consists, and is the Fabrics Scale,
Uninterruptedly to' ascend Heavens height,
To him, who has the skill Heaven thus to assail,
And over the Omnipotent by almighty Love prevail.
XXIV.
The first Man had that Skill, and of his Love,
BEAUTY and GOOD the Object, he it sought
In that bright Sphere, where it on High does move,
And thither by Reduction all things brought,
Which, in their Season, beautiful are wrought;
All that in others, or himself he spied,
Which of the Heavenly Goodness Trace had ought;
And by this Chain did an Ascent provide,
To the Footstool of that Throne, where its first Link was tied.
XXV.
By view hereof He upward did ascend,
Still upward, as he cast his curious view,
The Higher any thing did upward tend,
The better 'twas, and much more Beauteous grew,
And with it from the Earth, Love upward drew:
From the Earth, of which once having lost the sight,
Love more refined became, by Objects new,
And all presented by a clearer Light,
That did exhaust the Flesh, and ravished the Sp'rit.
XXVI.
For having past at length the Atmosphere,
By many a Stage, the Flesh was left behind;
And now another Face of things appear,
And other Beauties, that surprise the Mind,
On which to gaze he did strange Pleasure find:
And tho their Light excessive he scarce bear,
Seeing above his Journey unconfined,
Upward he presses still, and void of Fear,
As perfect grown, above the Skies his Head does rear.
XXVII.
Above the Skies he to those Heavens does mount,
Step after step ascending, where there be
For happy Souls, as sacred Writ does count,
Mansions prepared, for their sublimity,
The third Heaven called, and 'its Furniture does see:
With which he could delighted ever stay,
But that advanced to the last Degree,
That mortal Foot e're touched, a farther way,
By Wing to be dispatched he' espies, Loves last Essay.
XXVIII.
So on he claps his best, and largest Wings,
And swift as thought, but more direct upright
Than Eagle soars, into a Welkin springs,
(If so it may be called) of Flame more bright,
And pure, than what by this Worlds Sun, and Light,
Can be compared; and in blessed Ecstasy,
With sacred Wonder, but without affright,
Those fair Idaeas contemplates, whereby
Himself, and the World was made, and there laid up do lie.
XXIX.
Ascended hither, Love the place well knew,
As whence himself into our World came down,
Eve'n Man as nearer to his God he drew,
New motions felt, and Powers before unknown;
And swallowed up in Speculation,
Forgot what ever he admired below,
Himself, and Her, whom he had left alone,
To wait' his return, and rapt, he scarce knew how,
To the Land of Love, himself a Love transformed did grow.
XXX.
For why that Tract the Realm of Love was styled,
And all, who thither in deducted mind,
Leaving this lower Earth arrive, are filled,
As the bright Region is, with thoughts refined,
And Quintessence of Love; but of what kind,
Impossible it is to be expressed,
And in a Chime of soundful Words designed,
Which but Conceits are, to our Fashion dressed,
And if Immortal, with the mortal Load oppressed.
XXXI.
Suffice it, Angels there Inhabited,
Ranged all in their Trinal Triplicities,
Into a Body, under Love their Head,
And ready all for some Renowned Emprise,
Soon as the mighty Signal given is:
He saw it given, and all before a Throne,
Of Heavenly Diamond, vailing each his Eyes,
Each Angel prostrate on his Face falls down,
And at its Footstool casts his Consecrated Crown.
XXXII.
From simple ANGELS, as the Inferior Band,
To the ARCHANGELS, led by Michael,
Then to DOMINIONS, that the third Rank stand,
To VIRTUES then, whose numerous Banners swell,
And PRINCIPALITIES, of whom none fell
With Rebel Lucifer, 'or abbetted him,
To POWERS then, and to THRONES, whom who can tell?
And so up to the eighth Order, CHERUBIM,
But by the ninth complete, Love-flaming SERAPHIM.
XXXIII.
All these our Father saw, by Love retired
In, and above Himself, but over them all,
One fairer yet, to whom his Mind aspired,
The Incomprehensible Original,
In whom no Blemish, and no Spot can fall:
By Love he saw Him, and in Him the end,
And utmost point of Love, enough to' appall
The Holie'st of his Sons, who should descend
From' his after sinful Loins, and thither after tend.
XXXIV.
But him the sight appalled not, rather filled
With Images more fair his enlarged Breast;
And from the Principles his Love instil'd,
On naught less high could he affix his rest,
Or be content tho of the Earth possessed:
The' whole Earth, that in this Res'very viewed round,
Too scanty seemed an Heaven-born Soul to' invest,
Too scant a Limit, and too scant a Bound,
For what an Infinite was only equal found.
XXXV.
Excursions therefore into that he made,
Often Excursions into Infinite,
Infinite Love, and Beauties seen displayed
In The Prototype, by Intellectual Light,
And Reasons yet undim'd discursive sight:
Tho when that failed, or when it was weary grown,
Through 'excess of conceived Vision, as it might,
The' Almighties self would come in Person down,
And often prevent Man's journey to Him, with His own.
XXXVI.
Or come, or send Him frequent Embassies
Of Angels, who still ready on the Wing,
With hasty flight, from summit of the Skies,
Would seem to vie, who should the Message bring,
And first approach the Favorite of their King:
Tho all the Message, which they bore was Love,
And all their Service was but Ministering
To one below them made, yet who above,
Was Heavens great Care, and greatest Ornament should prove.
XXXVII.
Not much below them, while his Innocence,
On its Foundation did unshockt abide,
And perfect Love, seen in obedience,
The nether World so fast to the upper ti'd,
That Hell between them could not once divide:
One Heart, one Business was in both approved,
One God alike, in both was magnified,
That mighty Axis, round which both were moved,
And whom alike both praised, and whom alike both loved.
XXXVIII.
Alike they loved, and as they loved alike,
All Virtues in that Act did comprehend,
Which did in both an awful Reverence strike,
And careful made them, lest they should offend,
But chiefly Man did thence his Mark intend,
With greater vigor, as on whom was laid
Fear for a Rein, if Hell its Wiles should send;
For Death was threatened, if he disobeyed,
And He not to be' high-minded, chose to be afraid.
XXXIX.
Love made him choose so kind, and wholesome Fear,
From which all Torment yet secluded was,
And but the brighter made his Love appear,
Like Beams reflected upon burnisht ^rass,
That their own Native Luster thence surpass:
So shon his Love, and thence his Temperance,
That the forfended Limit would not pass,
Nor to behold it care'd with wanton Glance,
What ever fond Conceit its Glories might enhance.
XL.
Hence Justice, hence true Magnanimity,
Prudence, and Wisdom, over his Soul did flow,
And sacred Truth, and peaceful Loyalty,
And all the Graces, that to Love do owe
Their Rise, and into' Eternal Rivers grow:
And all upon the Supreme Beauty placed,
That Good, which still the more we come to know,
The more we' admire, till in its Arms embraced,
An end of all our Love we find, the First, and Last.
XLI.
Such was his Love, and like it was his Praise,
A Service, wherein with him Nature joined,
Whole Nature, and each part, by several ways,
As with him in one love they were combined;
And various was the Anthems stops, and kind,
Articulate by Man, their High Priest, made,
And in one sacred Hallelu-jah twined,
Which he, as First Fruits, on Earths Altar laid,
And Heaven with grateful Odours early did invade.
XLII.
Their Orisons, which he each Morning paid,
With his fair Partner, or by Angels taught,
Or whereof capable their Form was made,
By Images from Heaven first thither brought,
And which they into perfect Figure wrought,
By Plastic Art of Words harmonious;
Which to the great Occasion came unsought:
And whether sung in Verse, or said in Prose,
In Prose most powerful were, in Verse most numerous.
XLIII.
For Verse, and all that does to Verse belong
(In this lowe'r World) had its first happy rise
In Innocence, which first invented Song,
And how so e're one may its Charms despise,
Or which is worse, abuse, in Paradise,
By Pause, and Fugue's, adapted to fit strains,
Was first performed; to whose Discoveries
The Sons of Verse now elocate their pains,
And (save from Heaven) expect not their Immortal gains
XLIV.
In Paradise, discovered first was Verse,
And Voice, and Number with it given to Song,
And glorious Subjects, which both did rehearse,
Alternate, and in Chorus, as or long,
Or short returns did to the Ground belong;
But than of Love they sounded nothing more,
Or ofter, or with Breast more large, and strong,
The Love Divine, whom thus they did implore
In raptur'ous Odes, and (as they of it sang) adore.
XLV.
They sang how All things their beginning had,
From Loves diffusive, and Life-giving heat;
How Immaterial Spirits, with Glory clad,
Its Firstborn were, with Love as high, and great,
As from this lower World's removed their Seat:
Then how this lower World from Nothing rose,
And Nowhere, in that beauteous order met,
That Place, and Matter, which the whole compose,
And circumscribe, unconceiv'd Luster did disclose.
XLVI.
Not at an instant made, but by degrees,
As confused Chaos could the impression take,
In Six Days space, and thoroughly purge its Lees,
Hell newly formed more horrible to make,
And its own new made Enmities off-shake,
For of such jarring Parts it was contrived,
And of such contrarieties did partake,
That it by Discord, and Confusion lived,
(A life such as it was) with Death to be survived.
XLVII.
So strove they, thus would they have striven ever;
Till pitying their debate, the Spirit of Love
Calmed the discordant Mole, and did dissever
The Eternal Combatants, placed some above,
Others did to the deep Abyss remove
Fast to be held, in Adamantine Chain;
Whilst those few Parts, that did more ductile prove,
Into Four Principles, which all contain,
Themselves in all contained, were solely left to reign.
XLVIII.
FIRE, which as lightest took the highest place,
And upward raised its towering Head; then AIR,
That follow^d it, but with unequal pace,
And tho it vy'd to be and look as fair,
Forced in the midst to hang, self-ballanc'd there:
Next WATER, which the Surface covered over,
That pregnant Mother of the EARTH, less rare,
In its vast Womb conceived, but which, before
It could emerge, lackt mighty Love to force the Door.
XLIX.
And so it did, but LIGHT was first to shine,
And an whole Day, for that which makes the Day,
But little enough was thought in the Mind Divine,
Through Darkness palpable to clear its way,
And all its various Beauties to display:
Darkness, which tho but counted Privative,
Such claims to th heap, whence 'twas called out, did lay,
That Love like equal shares to both did give,
Alternately, each Day, in Day, and Night to live.
L.
But harder were the teeming Waters Throes,
When on the second Day, Earth nearer came
To its great Birth, like weight, that heavier grows,
Long born, and to break through disjoynts the frame;
The Waters pangs compared thus, were the same,
When they divided burst, but never to close,
Stopped by the solid FIRMAMENT, whose Name
Immovable Partition does suppose,
By' whose Shore disjoined, upper and nether Ocean flows.
LI.
And now the third Day of her Monstrous Child
Half way delivered the Great Mother was;
Monstrous, unsightly yet, with Horror filled,
Which in its Oasy Arms it did embrace,
And, half suppressed, to the' Birth would never let pass,
But, with it joined, one Monstrous Body made,
Above DRY GROUND, below a confused Mass,
Part Earth, with Briny Hatchments overlaid,
Part unmixt Water, upon empty Nothing staid,
LII.
And called SEA; as what appeared was LAND;
Rough, bare, mishape't, tho dry, unbeautifi'd,
It self unbeautiful, vast plains of Sand,
More horribly deformed, with terrors Pride,
Mountains, that to' Heaven aspired, and gaping wide,
With raised up Jaws, threatened to swallow down,
In gorge unsatiate, glories there envied,
And wrinkled Forehead, which scarce made did frown,
And Omens give of Future War, from cause unknown.
LIII.
Nor could there cause be gi'ven, for a new Face
From the' Love Divine it took, and Nakedness
Was clothed upon with all the Charming Grace
Of Fruit, and Flower; and the grim Gyantess,
(Its own Eternal Goodness to express)
Kind Heaven illumined with a double Light,
The fourth Day made, the greater, and the less;
By Day the SUN with vital heat, and bright,
To warm, the MOON with starry Robe to' invest at night.
LIVE.
Nor was this all, but at the fifth Days dawn,
Earth, and her Mother Sea replenished
With new Inhab'itants were, and every Laune,
And every Hill (scared Solitude thence fled)
Legions of FOWL produced, and kindly bred,
Which on large Wings, above the Ground did fly,
But perching on some Tree, made that their Bed;
Whilst Lakes, and Streams, and the huge Sea fast by,
With mighty WHALES were filled, and with the lesser FRY.
LV.
Filled were the Floods with these, but still the Earth,
(As whose Wing'd-People most partook of the Air,
Their haunt) impregnate with a second Birth,
For which disclosed 't had room enough to spare,
Did on the sixth Day to disclose prepare;
And out all BEASTS, and REPTILS, in their kind,
Sprang from the fertile Womb, proportioned fair,
Each to its Nature, but with Look declined,
To the Earth whence taken, to the Earth whereto confined.
LVI.
Of these, and other Works of God they sang,
In Lays harmonious, as Love utterance gave;
Yet these, and others, which they lowdly rang,
Were but as Praeludes, which, with Mast'ry brave,
Their Voice showed, and what compass Verse might have:
Verse which then triumphed in Recitative,
When they all other Grounds resolved to wave,
Sang of themselves, and Him, who at once did give
One power to Sing thus to Him, and like Him to live.
LVII.
A wondrous Work it was, from Nothing thus
All things in weight, and measure up to raise,
And perfect Order formed most beauteous,
Subordinate, as different were the Ways,
Whereby their Maker would direct his Praise:
But none so Wondrous did, and strange appear,
Of Power and Beauty with so rich displays,
As Man's Formation, made the Rule to bear,
And sublimed Earth equal to highest Heaven rear.
LVIII.
That Dust could Live, in what was done before
Was plainly told, but that it too could love,
As Love all life in it contains, and more,
All that or Reason knows, or can improve,
The Eternal Treasures only were enough
To drein, and to be drein'd: For God but spoke,
And all below, and all the Hosts above,
Being, and Life from the great Word did take;
But Hands Divine, Man's model were employed to make.
LIX.
By Hands Divine, his Body first was wrought,
The full Abridgment of this World to be;
With curious Art, to 'its last perfection brought,
But infinitely base, in its degree,
To the Soul the Pourtraict of the Deity,
Into his Nostrils breathed; that in his Brain
Might be infixt the Heavenly Ima'gry,
And Life, with Vital Blood in every Vein,
To the Parts extreme conveyed, the Character retain.
LX.
Love was that Character, in Holiness,
And perfect Purity exemplifi'd,
And Innocence, which that first state did bless,
And Reason with them Empire to divide,
And over the Inferior Appetite preside,
Which it restrained, and furnished with true Skill,
It self, in all its Acts to curb, and guide;
At least had power to do so, and fulfill
The Charge Divine, close backed by Freedom of the Will.
LXI.
Blessed Qualities, which made him Lord and King,
Of all this lower World, and Majesty
On his Erected Countenance stamped, did bring
Heaven down to Earth, and Earth, that flat did lie,
Advance'd to be for Angels Company;
Nay farther, and what Angels did admire,
For its Aetern Exemplar, the Most High,
Who with his Work delighted, would retire
Frequent from Heaven, as to divert, and view it nighe'r.
LXII.
Himself hereby Man dexterously did guide,
And over himself so absolutely reign,
(The greatest Kingdom in the World beside,
And which all other Kingdoms did contain,
In 'it self in Chief, or Vassalages Chain)
That only Peace, and only what was Good,
And only Love was given for Love again;
With Charms, that by no force could be withstood,
And centred in one Point Indivisible GOD.
LXIII.
Hail happy state of Innocence, thrice Hail!
Hail to Thy Love and Thee! And may my Verse,
From thence inspired, with generous Souls prevail,
As they deserve, Thy Wonders to rehearse,
And through the World thy Sacred Name disperse!
No Theme, like that, so high can Numbers raise,
Or render more Humane Mankinds converse;
For if there any Virtue be, or Praise,
They in Perfection shon, in those first happy Days.
LXIV.
Ah! that those Happy Days should be so few,
Ended, cut off, e're scarce they were begun!
Whose early Happiness, when known to Two,
A Third crept in, by whom all was undone,
And Love unthron'd hard drive'n away to run.
Follow him, Muse, for if he should go wrong,
Thou art in danger too, whose Fates are one
With his; Nor can Thou be without him long,
But do it, if thou'hast Courage, in another Song.
THE LEGEND of LOVE.
CANTO. II.
I.
I OFTEN am thinking whether Love was known
To the World Heathen, and what was their sense
Of Man's, and His Origination;
Or if of this first state of Innocence
They any certain knowledge had, and whence
The Notice was derived, and to them came,
Dark as it was; and turn over Books, but thence
Am little satisfied, find there the Name,
It Is true, but Pillars of black Smoke instead of Flame.
II.
Fiction I there find has so Truth disguised,
That hard it is for one to know what is true;
And, amongst all the Vanities they prized,
How much, or little 'twas they truly knew,
And ancient Faith obscured with Fancies new;
Which diversely, as diffe'rent was their Art,
They dressed out, and amongst the People threw,
Part plain, with lame or monstrous Figures part,
As in a scarce, or not discovered Countries Chart.
III.
For there as We' Hippogryphs, and Satyrs place,
Or Seas, or Carra'vans, when there is nothing found
Of certainty, to fill the empty space,
That each Man in his own sense may abound:
Just so did they, but more the Truth confound,
With Fable, as themselves it suited best,
Who, so they did but keep the marked out bound,
Conveyed them by Tradition, for the rest,
Left it to others, as 'twas left them to be ghest.
IV.
A Godlike therefore 'twas, and Golden Age,
Tho little known to them, who called it so,
And of it counted, filled with ancient rage,
Not as it was, but did at distance show;
Tho something, it is confessed, they seemed to know;
And what they of it said, by chance was true,
As to the main, if somewhat we allow,
For the false Light, and those, who 'its Figure drew,
In Plane, or Prospective, and were but Copiers too.
V.
By Negatives the Plane was most designed,
And proved the Fairest, and the luckiest Draught;
The Prospective was stiff, and more inclined
To an hard confused roughness, scarcely brought
To decence, done by Images they sought
In their own Breasts, or Age, by Heavenly Light
Unlumin'd, and by false Priests blindly taught:
Love only made over all to take his Flight,
Came nearest to the Truth, if understood aright.
VI.
For by a Child they Love did represent,
As his best Emblem, under which disguise,
(For such it was) they hid with high intent,
Or rather plainly showed those Mysteries,
Which were concealed from base and vulgar Eyes;
Native Simplicity, pure Innocence,
Absolute freedom from all touch of Vice,
An easy mildness Favors to dispense,
And all those Graces, that its Actions influence.
VII.
Not that they would that Ages Faults approve,
In Lovers, but its Virtues thence propound;
For tho a Child they made, and painted Love,
Scarce such another Child in the World was found,
By whose soft Hands were fiercest Lions bound,
Traind to his Yoke; the Course of Thunder staid;
And all the Gods above, and underground,
Which Gentilisms great Religion made,
(As sottish as it was) in heavy Fetters laid.
VIII.
Naked, it is true, they feigned him; but just so,
As we, who yet esteem our selves more Wise,
In Oratories naked Angels show,
Nor count it blame our selves thus to advise,
How open all we do, or think to Heaven lies;
That from it naught we can, or would conceal,
That from us banished is all Artifice;
All which by 'his Nakedness Love does reveal,
And, from his Step-dames Temples, to the Church appeal;
IX.
But by his Fillet they such Lessons taught,
As the Worlds present Learning far out-goes;
Nor did the Master, who designed the Draught,
And for a Dia'dem put it on Loves brows,
E're think it would his Sacred Head expose;
Tho be 'it a Fillet, what can it intend?
What teach, but that, which every Lover knows,
Eve'ry true Lover, that to choose a Friend,
Barely by sight, 's beginning where scarce Fools would end.
X.
His Eyes were therefore hid (if hid they were)
From all commerce in Love to' exclude the Eyes;
Which judging, as the Object does appear,
Too often impose, imposed by Flatteries,
False mirrors of an Heart, which deeper lies:
The Heart, where Love that is true does first begin,
By Reason guided, its own worth to 'apprize;
Then by Discretion, seld in Lovers seen,
Who still the more's the outward glare, see least within.
XI.
Eyes Intellectual he' had, wherewith agree
Those Wings, which they no less unto him gave;
I Will Furniture for Love, if Blind he be,
Who rather then would want a Guide to have,
Himself from dangers unforeseen to save:
But love himself alone was his own Guide,
Nor needed any others Conduct crave,
And with his Wings spread, and extended wide,
A flight to Heaven attempted, none durst dare beside.
XII.
For why no Love it is, whose vile desires,
Incline it downwards to the Miry Ground;
This Earth of ours, which Sottices inspires,
Preying on Carnage there, or made, or found,
And with ignoble thoughts does most abound:
But that is true Love, and does deserve the Name,
Whose noble Acquists, nothing mean can bound;
And mindful of the Region, whence it came,
Thither aspiring terminates with Heaven its Fame.
XIII.
Like Wings, like Quiver: With bright Arrows filled,
Of different sorts, but with like Mystery,
As is well known to them, who in Love are skilled,
Well taught, what Motions in the Mind there be,
And how both Love, and Hatred there agree;
Hatred of all that bears the' impress of ill,
With love of all that is good, in its degree;
The Choques and just fixed bias of the Will,
Which make up Love, and all its various parts fulfill.
XIV.
The Golden pyl'd its Inclination proved,
Leaden Aversion, never to be denied;
Or if thereof there should be Question moved,
The Torch Love bore, his other Arms beside,
Too bright did shine the Mystic Truth to hide,
That Soul of the World, that all things keeps entire,
In Life, and Motion, nobly Typifi'd;
Noblest of Elements, but yet raised hi'gher
Than place'd at first, when made Loves noblest Symbol, Fire.
XV.
Thus by the Ancients Love was first expressed,
And, tho a Child, their God most ancient owned;
Older than Saturn, whom Jove dispossessed
Of Right usurpt, and in his stead was Crowned:
Son of Urania, (as in Books is found)
Venus Urania, whom we Heaven call
With them, who their Mythologie expound,
Distinct from that Pandeme, who was Thrall
To Vulgar Souls, and had from the Earth Original.
XVI.
Two unlike Mothers of two Sons unlike,
Eros and Anteros, whose opposed Name,
(Which different Sentiments in them did strike)
From their own first great Opposition came,
That from their Nature; and tho judged the same,
In one, and the other Sex, where they preside,
The Male, and Female Hymeneal Flame,
Are two so, that once kindled they divide,
Just like those Fatal Brethrens, who Dead, each defied.
XVII.
Eros was Elder, and the stronger too;
Of Constitution likely to endure
Eternal Ages, if the Spi'rit he drew,
Were not empoyson'd by an Air impure;
Of which consulting how to be secure,
'Twas plainly told him from the Oraculous Throne,
Than that of Themis far more Old, and sure,
A Tripode, which never failed, When two are One,
Then Love in danger is by Love to be undone.
XVIII.
Of two made one, Love well enough conceived,
For that himself had seen, himself had done;
But it by Love could hardly be believed,
That he to' himself so contrary should run,
As to provoke, what most he sought to shun:
Against himself that he should so prevail,
As thence in hazard be, to be undone;
This ev'en to Love, obscured in Mortal Vail,
Abstruse did seem, and by another sai'd might fail.
XIX.
But Time, a little time the Mystery cleared,
When by another Love, this Anteros,
He was betrayed; who that which first appeared,
(And 't was the Sun) when from the Earth he rose,
Adored as his chief God, with sacred Vows;
And many Altars to it after made,
By 'his Votaries, on whom he did impose
The Task Idolatrous, and First Fruits pai'd,
Himself the first Idolater, there profanely laid.
XX.
From Earth first rose this feigned, and Idol Love,
By DIS begot; tho not till after known
Who was his Sire, or what himself would prove;
Of a cursed Father the as cursed Son,
Born Armed for others Ruin, and his own;
With all the Ensigns Love was wont to bear,
By the Heathen read, that if together shown,
All but themselves to' impose on they would go near,
And here is the true Love one would say, and one he is there.
XXI.
Like Youth in both, like Face, and Looks were seen
Like naked Limbs, with covered Impudence
In this, but gesture tending to obscene,
In a free gayety 'hid, to' elude the Sense;
Like Chaplet, for their Brows, and Eyes defense;
Like Wings, like Quiver hung their Backs adown;
Like different Arrows to be drawn out thence;
Like burning Torch, which Flames so like did crown,
Either would seem the true, if single, and alone.
XXII.
Ah! that they had like Grace those Arms to use!
But this was loudly by the False decry'd,
Who only took them, that he might abuse,
The World, by whom he should be Deifi'd,
And acts inglorious in that Visor hide:
Never to use them was his full intent,
Or if he did, not as before well tried;
But to a Love, and Learning different,
Where Sense alone should be supreme in Government.
XXIII.
Love saw all this (for what to Love is hid?)
The true Love saw it, and withdrew in haste;
No place was left him on the Earth to' abide,
Wherefore he to the Empyrean past,
And only Conscience his Vicegerent placed:
With Promise yet, that if in time to come,
Man wiser grew (the Counterfeit uncas'd)
Himself his now left Charge would reassume,
And once again to Man return, as his last Home.
XXIV.
For Man, it is known, scarce the wild Phanto'sm saw,
This Pageant Counterfeit of Love Divine,
But his Allegiance back he straight did draw,
And to the Enemies part from Love decline,
By Sense led, which had quickly sunk a Mine,
Reason, or to surprise, or to overthrow;
And the vain Stratagem had dressed so fine,
With umbrage, that it Good, and Ill should know,
The Fort surrendered was, scarce known for what, or how.
XXV.
But up 'twas given, and therewith given was all,
(For Nothing, or what is worse than nothing, lies)
What ever Man his own, by right might call,
Or by Commission, but sure never did prize
Deserv'dly, since he' it could so soon despise;
His Life, his Soul, what most was of behoof,
To' a Being so disposed, and framed, as His;
Of his Obedience the first easy proof,
And what, as Heaven it self was valuable, his Love.
XXVI.
All were give'n up, and now adieu, blessed Love!
Adieu all Happiness, and Innocence!
Honor, and Virtue, which the same Course move,
And Mortals very rarely visit since!
Adieu unto you all, for Love's gone hence,
And only left your empty Names behind,
Upon the Stage to please, or give offense,
As variously Spectators are inclined,
But wherewith most are pleased, as most against Love combind.
XXVII.
Honor and Love adieu! And now my Song,
Since thou have trace'd them to their first abode,
Rest they a while; and tell, as does belong
To the Mock-Love, the World's, and ^coples God!
But make of every Rhyme an Iron Rod,
Wherewith thou may the Profligate chastise!
And tho thou go a way, as yet untrod,
Despair not but thy Work shall beauteous rise,
And with the Sober find acceptance, and the Wise!
XXVIII.
With these acceptance, but with others scorn,
Who to this Anti-Love blind Vassals made,
By our First-Fathers Act, have Fealty sworn
To a fell Tyran, who must be obey^d,
And will, nor in his furious heats gainsaid:
Unhappy Men, if their unhappiness
They could but know, and how they are betrayed;
Enough unhappy, would they but confess
The little that they know, which words can scarce express!
XXIX.
Slaves of Vile Passions, which drive furiously,
And all that is Sacred, with high Hand bear down;
Themselves, their Ancestors, the Deity,
Reason, and Reasons Guide, Religion,
The Worlds consent attested by their own;
Till to the Winds, and Seas their Faith they gave,
And sought, what else they could not flee, to drown
In bottomless Abyss, nor Shipwrackt have
The least security, they shall their Fraightage save.
XXX.
And yet who more secure? But this their Love,
Their New Love, in whose Service they 're retained,
Gives as his own, and their most urging Proof,
That they, true Conquerors, have the Victory gained,
And broke those Iro'ns, wherewith all else are chained:
Ill Education, brutal Thunders dread,
A fear of what is above, to which they 'are trained,
And what is to come, dreams of the long since dead,
That first made Gods, and what their Fears made, worshipped.
XXXI.
Horrors the Anti-diluvian World never knew,
Or if it did, durst not bare-face'd profess;
Tho from one Seed their Love, and Atheism grew,
Both Ills, but which the greater, which the less,
Is hard to say, almost as hard to ghess:
For either both, in both was either had,
In both, and either lost Man's Righteousness;
In The cause, or in the effect, both equal bad,
And both, that sensually, and this profanely mad.
XXXII.
But for Profaneness, Sense was the Harbinger,
And busily by Love prepared its way;
(For so I^ll call awhile the Worlds Troubler)
Who all its Stages did beforehand lay,
And longer here, and longer there would stay:
Till having the whole Earth compassed, and laid waste,
A Deluge came, and swept their Spoils away,
The Spoilers 'scaping with the few, who past,
By Ship to a new world, where Cham their Standard placed.
XXXIII.
Cham pitched it there; Cursed Cham who for the shame
Done to his Father, just Reproach did bear,
In that Addition to his cursed Name,
Servant of Servants, which his Race still wear:
But never did he Slave so much appear,
Of Slaves the verie'st Drudg, as when he Love
Permitted uncontrolled to domineer,
And lustful War against Heaven, and God to move,
And all below seduce, and defy all above.
XXXIV.
With him Love went (while yet the World was one,
One People, and one Language) unperceived,
And so great Victories by his Conduct won,
That He was openly at last received,
The first, that no more Worlds there were, who grieved:
And yet more Worlds he for his Triumphs found,
Or what is as good, new Coasts to be deceived;
When the divided Earth was Peopled round,
With distinct Nations sown, which stockt the new-broke Ground.
XXXV.
Each Nation was a several World, or as
A World distinct; the Islands most of all,
Which, late discovered, for new Worlds did pass
With those, who by that Name did Countries call,
Surrounded by the wide Seas rolling Wall:
And Love in every Land, and every Isle,
Did reign with Majesty Imperial,
And sway unbounded by the farthest Thyle,
Tho that, as the World's farthest bound, did stand erewhile.
XXXVI.
A mighty Prince, and curious Traveller,
Of sense most exquisite, from each to take,
Each Country, lay it farther off, or near,
What for the gust of Loving most could make,
And the o're-labour'd Appetite awake,
Satiate with loose disport, and rockt asleep,
Of not yet tasted Pleasures to partake;
Which in his dark Serraig'ls he close did keep,
And laid, till time should serve, as the Earths Center deep.
XXXVII.
At length it served; Ah! that it served not now!
And Love by his Conquests had such Subjects gained,
(For to his Yoke the Universe did bow,
And Arts, and Arms were to the Service trained)
That out of fear to lose what he' had obtained,
He only Trophies gave himself to rear,
And the Disguise put off he had sustained;
As the Supreme God would Himself appear,
And above all, that is else called God, his Head did bear.
XXXVIII.
Above the Sun, whom Himself worshipped,
But whom disgraded he to the Persian sent,
Next to himself to be propitiated,
In their Horned Mithra, which to Idols bent,
With thousand others, of obscure descent,
By this time Gentilism Gods had made,
New Deities industr'ious to invent;
Whom or in Hills, or thick Groves hallowed shade,
With Beasts, or Humane Blood they atoned, and to them prayed.
XXXIX.
Their Sons, or Daughters Blood for these sufficed,
But what to him they offered was their own;
Freedom, above their Life, to be appriz'd,
Which how they could disvalue well was shown
By this, if only this had been alone,
That when the Usurper did their Homage claim,
And in 'his true Colors made himself be known,
In throngs they to his Feet, and Altars came,
And kept, with Fires from their own Breasts, perpetual Flame.
XL.
Fires, which consumed, e're felt, the noblest Part,
And all that is good in Man, or great, laid waste,
By the Eyes conveyed most treacherously to the Heart,
Whence to the Liver soon the Burning past,
And Virtues Images in both defaced;
Thence to the Bones, nor did the Flesh 'scape long;
Till Soul and Body in a Flame at last,
The present God, to be denied too strong,
Plunged all into a Sea of Sulphur'ous Flame headlong.
XLI.
Like God, like Victim; To a God unclean,
Of Beasts the Uncleanest offered, Man turned Beast;
Himself the Sacrifice, and Priest obscene,
In which to minister he did divest,
All that above the Brute he once possessed,
And lower than the Brute unforce'd sank down;
With such Unmanly' Indignities oppressed,
He' had scorned them, as he might, by 'another done,
Her rude disgusts, whom he solicited, and his own.
XLII.
For why a SHE 's the Quarry, and the Game,
At which this Mock-Love, and his Haggards fly;
The Sex in either Sex, both worthy blame,
And tho distinguished first for ends more high,
Both equally debaucht by 'his Effrontry,
And acts so mad, and foolish (yet called Love,
Thereby engrossing the' whole Monopoly)
That one would think it should Indignation move,
Such Follies to commit, such Madness to reprove.
XLIII.
A Medly, with part Folly, Madness part,
And is the All of Love, Person, or Thing,
Or Act, or Powe'r, or by the Poets Art
However called, as he can Matter bring,
Of Love in Numbers and in Verse to sing;
And tending all, as Love 's in all the same,
By Images of diverse fashioning,
(If all are yet enough to' expose the shame)
One Spoiler to denote, and LEGION is his Name.
XLIV.
The hardest Devil to be dispossessed;
For e're he came the empty Rooms were swept,
By Idleness the' Housekeeper, and new dressed;
Idleness, only for that service kept,
And who, or so employed, or ever slept:
A brawny Carle, that never did work beside,
But here commanded forward briskly stepped;
And rather than be found unoccupi'd,
The Windows stopped, and all the several Lights did hide.
XLV.
But Fancy well enough did that supply,
Or little mist, Loves next forerunner light;
Who having once uprear'd his tender Eye,
And of the Object taken the distant height,
Made up the view all by Internal Sight:
And with new Beauties unperceived before,
But there displayed, himself did first delight;
Then opened, which he'had to him shut, the Door,
To let in loose Desire, and again tell them over.
XLVI.
So in Desire came, vainest of the Three,
And after him in Triumph rode the Fiend;
Whom seven Spirits, full as bad as he,
Did close behind in Mascarade attend,
And Io sang to Love, that Heaven did rend:
So sang they all, but with unequal grace,
As were their looks; for some their Brows did bend,
And grin'd most horrid, with distorted Face;
Others were blithe, and smiled as they along did pass.
XLVII.
These Folly were, and Mirth, and Dalliance,
Who hardly could their Way for laughing hold,
By Genius closed; the Three, who looked askaunce,
And midst their shouts could hardly cease to scold,
Were Lust, that scorned by the best to be controlled;
And Proteus Sin, who diverse Shapes put on,
As diverse kind, and Names he' had manifold;
And Death, the seventh from Love, mere Skeleton
One half, the other Fantastic clad as shall be shown.
XLVIII.
Folly the First, by' her Habit seemed a Maid,
And by her Face, which was excelling fair;
Tho whether such, was difficult to be said,
Nor safe it may be, since few Men there were,
But in her claimed with Women equal share,
And ill had took't, had she pure Woman been:
A pretty thing to gaze on, but whose Air,
And Gate, and Gesture, made it quickly seen,
She none of the Wisest was, and somewhat lackt within.
XLIX.
Light Gesture, Gate ungraceful, composed Air,
Save when she spoke, or laughed; but then betrayed
A thousand Follies, with prodigious glare;
For by a Glass she with a Shadow played,
(Her self, to whom she frequent Honors made)
And every glance, which she designed to cast,
And every look, by that in order laid;
And to such troublesome Impertinence past,
That every little Word she thereby formed at last,
L.
Mirth was a Youth of beautiful regard,
With cheerful Eyes, plump downy Cheeks, and Chin;
And nothing in his looks, or strange, or hard,
That, if one by the Face could ought divine,
All Beauties there amass't did seem to shine:
All that can Man become, or Love excite
In Loves great Critics, the Sex Feminine;
All but in the Timorous, whom his Whip did fright,
And more deterr, than all his other Charms invite.
LI.
For in his Hand a Bloody Discipline,
With many a' pointed Rowel stuck, he bore;
And wherewith, when unmark't, he saw his time,
Backward reflecting, he his Shoulders tore,
And the smooth Channel filled with purple gore:
But when or Folly called, or Dalliance,
The fretting exercise he soon gave over,
And, as recovered from a sullen Trance,
Met with quick Eyes, and amorous Look each smiling Glance.
LII.
Him Dalliance followed next, a Damsel gay,
Of light behavior, as she well could feign;
And wantonly her Breast did open lay,
The Lover who came next, to entertain;
Tho who the He were of her mighty Train,
She was not much solicitous to know,
Nor much to fancy him her self did pain;
For she like Favors did on all bestow,
And bonnour was to all, how high so e're or low.
LIII.
A Nightgown was the Habit which she wore,
Loosely clapped round her, but so airy thin,
That through its light disguise appeared the more,
What she never strove to hide, her beauteous Skin,
And just proportion of each curious Limb:
With Impudence too luscious to be told,
And speech Lascivious, when she did begin,
Which none, but like her self, unchaste, and bold,
Or unreprov'd could hear, or unasham'd behold.
LIVE.
Next after her in order Genius came,
Of Body somewhat gross, but Humor free;
Whom part called Comus, as by his Surname,
Tho both, or either with him well agree,
Without whom Love, nor merry Life can be:
A right good Fellow, as his Belly showed,
Which in a Swath reached almost to his Knee,
And made him passage through the admiring Crowd;
Which shouting to him louted, as to them he bowed.
LV.
No wrinkle in his Counte'nance did appear,
Nor careful thought seemed to come near his Mind,
Of what should be; but things, which present were,
Variously turned him, as did sit the Wind,
And this way now, now that way he inclined:
Tho if 'twere still, (and sometime still it lay)
Diversions to himself he would make, or find;
And sometimes only muse a live-long Day,
Tho asked on what, he or naught knew, or naught could say.
LVI.
These were the fairest Shows Loves entrance had,
And of the Pomp the sightliest Officers,
Who therefore next the Carr Triumphal staid,
But Spirits Incarnate were, and all as fierce,
Provoke'd once, as those Fatal Ministers
Of his, and more than his, of the Wrath Divine,
Which followed next, with look, and mien perverse;
A Grisly, Horrid, and Prodigious Trine,
Which hardly into shape, Love could by 'his Art refine.
LVII.
Lust was the First, but whether Man, or Beast,
Or He, or She, one could by no means know,
For it both Sexes had, and did invest
Mankind above, and Beast mishape'd below,
And slote divided did for ostent show:
With shaggy Hair the' whole Body covered over,
And poisonous stench, which he around did throw,
Undampt by the Perfumes, which the Satyr bore,
(For so they called him) and about him ever wore.
LVIII.
A very Satyr, whom he nearest came,
In Face, and Guise, but in Deformity
Excelled, the first of the' Family, and Name;
And shameless was his Look, and lewd his Eye,
But sharp withal, Beauties which cloistered lie,
First to discover, then to circumvent,
By Clamor, wherein lowed he was and high,
Nor could forbear, as he in Triumph went;
Prime Vizier of the Port, and Loves chief Confident.
LIX.
Sin followed him, who was his Eldest Son,
And only Child, with place and dignity,
His Parents Titles suiting, and his own;
But on his own he mostly did rely,
And all, but what his own was, did decry;
Would, and did loudly against Lust declame,
As Impotent, courageous to defy,
But who to Handy-blows, or never came,
Or not with such effect, as he, to get a Name.
LX.
For tho but one, a thousand Heads he had,
And twice a thousand Hands boldly to fight;
An Army of himself, and which he made
Greater, or less, as the Cause did invite;
(Love, and Loves Good Old Cause was his delight)
Rebellion, whose design to carry on,
Himself he variously, as 'it hapt, would dight,
A Beasts, or Man's form take now, and anon
Angels, or Fiends, a multitude, one be, or none.
LXI.
But Death the third, the same shape always kept,
If Shape it might be called, that shape had none,
Except in that half of him, which foremost stepped
And to the view exposed a side of Bone,
That seemed with Skin to have been clothed upon,
And Musculage, not many Days before;
For scarcely cleansed was the Skeleton,
And here and there appeared fresh stains of Gore,
And gobbets of green flesh, which from the joints he tore.
LXII.
To'ther half was the Universe, and all,
And every thing, that in the World is found,
Which hastens, or is ready at Death's call,
And are the Ingredients, which he does compound,
Or single, or in Mass to give the Wound:
A dreadful Mixture, and of which to tell,
Almost to think, would the greatest Wit confound;
For since the time that Man from Happi'ness fell,
They were collecting, and had at the bottom Hell.
LXIII.
Where e're he came, these were Loves Company,
With Train and Baggage, which did far extend;
And Meny suiting so great Prince as He,
For Prince and God they called him, tho Pure Fiend:
Unquiet Care, which all his time did spend
Himself to' undo, backed by Suspicion,
Then Impudence, which did to Lechery lend
His unchaste Ear, and Fury bad come on,
By Riotice drawn up, and Irreligion:
LXIV.
Without door Danger, and Distrust did wait,
And Fear, that never was himself at rest,
Or others would permit their Watch to 'abate;
And Jealousy, which tho he were possessed
Of what he loved, for rage tore his own Breast;
And Lust unnatural, and Villainy,
And Revellings, in thousand Anticks dressed;
And Poverty, in Rags clad piteously,
Calling aloud for Death, which did the unhappy fly.
LXV.
It fled him, as one, who from Love was fled,
Under the Disc'ipline, if he had the skill
To use it right, of Sorrow, seeming dead,
But which for a blessed Life prepares Our will,
By that Repentance, which Shame does instill;
Repentance the first step to Innocence,
Whose various parts it makes, or does fulfill:
But whereof Lustful Minds have little sense,
Till Shame sum up the Total of the vast expense.
LXVI.
Death such a Bankrupt therefore flies,
Hasting to those, who called, or called him not,
By Loves own Hands crowned for the Sacrifice,
And or pursue'd, or in the pursuit were hot,
E're well aware to the end of all things got,
By Death inglorious, and with Infamy;
(Of most Luxurious Livers the hard lot)
Yet which Love colored with such Maistery,
That the most followed, what the most did seem to fly.
LXVII.
For Love had thousand Deaths at his command,
And every Lover, might his own Fate make,
Which some did, but by'a way so underhand,
That from the praise of Love it much did take,
And many 'a Lover lost he for their sake;
Tho such he pleaded were by him given over,
(If all might be believed, which then Love spoke)
Nor could to his account be reckoned more,
Than if thus, or a Natural Death they died before.
LXVIII.
Be the Point therefore, as it will for me,
Who list not further of it here to tell;
Enough are Lovers Deaths we daily see,
(And so 'twas then) a Songs scant bounds to swell*
Nor yet for Love, or them contrived so well,
But that one midst the Pomp might easily find
The Mighty, by whose cruel Hands they fell;
And Verdict give the Murder was designed,
By the Pains they felt before, Reproach they left behind.
LXIX.
Pains more than can of Mortal Tongue be told,
And sharper than e're Tyran did invent;
Which the whole Man did in strait Fetters hold,
Till tortured Nature, quite worn out, was spent,
Of Love the Guerdon and the Punishment:
Yet Tyrans Racks found out, the Pale, and Wheel,
And Fire, and all that can by Fire torment,
Or be prepared, the ^x, and derr-doing Steel,
But make no wounds all, set with those which Lovers feel.
LXX.
Thrice, and than thrice more wretched state of Love,
When Innocence and Truth to Heaven were gone!
But seve'n times wretcheder it yet did prove,
When this Mock-love wholly usurpt the Throne,
(As he 'after did) and single reigned alone,
With Name and Power alike usurpt, yet was,
Ah! What not was he? -- But it is time to' have done
With him, who can to Verse give little grace,
And in another Canto to the True Love pass.
(...). THE LEGEND OF LOVE.
CANTO III.
I.
TIRE'D with the Way I have already gone
Longer by many a Stage, than setting out
I thought it would have proved, and where there is none
To guide me, in the search I am about,
How well I shall succeed is my great doubt,
Who almost of the Enterprise repent,
Wishing I better of it first had thought;
At least before me some Espials sent,
Who might have told the hazard of the bold Attempt.
II.
But to repent (alas!) it is now too late,
And in the last Act fail, a wrong to Love,
Which in another I should surely hate,
And cannot in my self unblam'd approve,
What Arguments so e're Distrust may move;
Which many, cogent seem, and weighty all,
But all which by this single^One I reprove,
That well if well, if ill succeed I shall,
It Is not inglorious from the noblest heights to fall.
III.
But help me Love, and I Will not yet despair!
For other Muse I dare not invocate;
None but thy Self, with whom the Treasures are
Of bright Idaeas, tho discovered late
To me, who half my time in Darkness sat,
Ylamped only by a Foolish Fire,
Whose wandering guidance I now deprecate,
Led by it often, and my vain desire,
To whence I could not till Thy Day brake out, retire.
IV.
At length it brake out, and I came to know
How woefully I had mistook my Way;
Shine forth again with double Glory now,
And in my Verse Thy fairest Beams display,
That others with me in it triumph may:
And having their Night Sullys thence refined,
Carol with sacred Hymn's to the Beauteous Day;
Carol to Thee, by Heaven, and God designed,
The Counterfeit to' uncase, and Eyes restore the Blind.
V.
LONG had the Mock-love, by his false disguise,
Upon the Credulous World imposed, but more
Upon himself, if he had been so wise
To think how much 'twould cost him to restore,
And, what by tort he' had snatched, a new pay over;
But this (alas!) came seldom in his thought,
Rather perverse still, as he was before,
The World, which he had into Bondage brought,
Eternally to' enthral, was the only Prize he sought.
VI.
This was his aim, nor to rebate it found,
Save Prophecies of a Supplauters race;
Which well he knew not, and could worse expound,
Wherein the happy Country was the place,
Whence was foretold should come his great disgrace;
But when, or how, tho himself Oracles gave,
Too hard to be resolved was the dark case;
Nor could he any certain knowledge have,
Who should the Mighty Conqueror be, his Thralls to' unslave.
VII.
The happy Country well enough he knew,
Part of his Syria to be 'hight Palestine;
Wherefore he thither his Chief Forces drew,
And seized it first by 'a more than double Trine
Of cursed Nations, from the Great Chams Line,
Cham, who first gave him credit by his Arms,
And then his Empire to him did resign;
Cham, whom he thus rewarded for the harms
He had sustained, to be Camp-Master of his Charms.
VIII.
Seven cursed Nations, of his cursed Seed,
To be its constant Guard Love thither sent;
Who ^^ll'd the Land so with their cursed Breed,
That scarce was left him room for his own Tent,
Less for new Col'onies, if such thither went:
A stup*d, bestial, and unmanly Rout,
That all their Age in Lusts unnatural spent;
Till the time came their Land should spue them out,
Too long oppressed, and bring the dread Foresight about.
IX.
Lov^ saw it coming, and began to fear,
When Jacob's numerous Host, from Bondage led,
Unto the Cananitish bounds drew near,
Seizing the Nations with unusual Dread,
While Seas to make them way rose up and fled;
But never did he more confounded stand,
Than when he Jordan saw recoil to 'his Head,
And to new Armies shared by Lot his Land,
Supplanted e're he did the Supplanters understand.
X.
Before he doubted those would prove the Men,
And therefore when they were upon the Way,
From Madian dressed a Female Stratagem,
By which above two Myriads slaughtered lay,
Tho Madian for it after dear did pay,
And he who gave the Counsel with them fell.
Balam their Priest and his the Sword did slay,
To expiate for the Whoredoms he did sell,
And more advise, than by Prophetic rage foretell:
XI.
But then he knew it, and in every Age,
As Israel did in wealth and power increase,
New Wars would with the Holy People wage,
Wars Amorous, the sad result of Peace;
Nor his Assaults defeated often surcease;
Till David was exalted to the Throne,
With Testimony that he God did please,
As Enoch had, and then Love gave for gone
All he before had gained, and by his Conquests won.
XII.
Ah! that it had been gone! and that his sway
Had here expired! But Jesses Son soon fell,
A victim at his Altars, and a Prey;
Wherewith, and with his Pride he so did swell,
That tho he after had not much to tell,
Nor much to boast more, during his whole Reign,
Eluded was he judged the Oracle,
Nor could there for him ought behind remain,
But what He thus had got, as happ'ly to maintain.
XIII.
This Salomons youth did easily persuade,
( David's next Successor) who tho most wise,
(Love of the Wisest never was yet afraid)
Had other Grandures, which might chance to rise
Higher in Loves account, well placed, than his:
Infinite Riches, Peaceful Government,
The Necks, and Pleasures of his Enemies;
And, what then these was more, a mind intent,
Of Folly, and of Love to make the Experiment.
XIV.
He made it, and in making it was caught,
To his Lands baleful Ruin, and his own;
And both, by him that, he by Love ill taught,
As from a Precipice together thrown,
Never stopped till come to the bottom Headlong down*
Unhappy Prince, who could not single fall!
Whose smiles appeared more fatal than his frown;
The Kingdoms Laws this, for the Criminal,
But bad example those, which further reached to all!
XV.
And now, if ever, Love to the' top was got
Of his unmeasurable Soveraigntie;
So far above his Hope and deepest Plot,
That scarce could he believe what he did see,
And almost trembled in those heights to be,
Compared with which the Honors he had gained,
In the World Heathen, were a low degree;
For there he over the brutish only reigned,
The Noblest, and the Wisest here to 'his Lore were trained.
XVI.
Even God himself most High to serve was made;
And his first Institution, Marriage,
Cement of holy Love, so base allayed,
That it degen'rated to Bestial rage,
And more divided, than it did engage
To mutual Amors and joined Hearts consent:
Madness before begun, but which this Age,
With ancient Rites, indulged long, not content,
Perfected by a new, and wild Establishment,
XVII.
Of sharers infinite in the Marriage Bed,
By this false Loves prime Ministers brought in;
With Artifice, at first, close palliated,
The New-made World, which was but peopled thin,
To stock amain and plausibly begin:
Hence Bigamy, and then Polygamy,
Divorce next, to them near of kin,
On every small dislike, did multiply,
And Children reck'ned were of Loves huge Family.
XVIII.
And so it stood, even in the Holy Race,
(From the Beginning tho it were not so)
For many Ages of permissive Grace,
But more of Hardness that in the Heart did grow
Of those, who no delight in One would know,
And whom Variety would only please:
Yet God at first but One designed, to show
His, and the power of Love, and if Disease
Abused 't should after be, its Remedy and Ease.
XIX.
(For more, if more are sought the drought to allay,
But like strange waters to the Hydropic prove,
And frequent draughts, which in the Bowels stay,
And nor the Thirst, nor the Disease remove;
And such is Change to him, who Change does love,
(The more, the worse) He drinks, and thirsts again,
And still the more he drinks, does more improve
His Thirst, the very remedy is pain,
Yet neither can shake off, of neither but complain.)
XX.
And that Disease 'twould prove, in his Foresight,
Abused once, the Almighty knew, and thence
To 'a single Circle bound the subtle Sp'rit,
Who, one transgrest, was Proof against all fence,
And easi'ly could with Just and Fit dispense;
One Partner in Chaste Nuptials, as enough
Their Ornament to be, and their Defense,
By Sin prevented, all that was above,
Or two, or more, or many, came from this False Love.
XXI.
From him they came All, but successively,
And even the Many yet were but a Few,
Compared with that excess, which grown most high,
In Salomon's Reign, no limits had, or knew,
And into the Band, not One, but Hundreds drew:
Seven hundred Wives, Three hundred Concubins,
Whom the Uxorious King did close pursue,
A Female Army, under Love's Ensigns,
With Treasure infi'nit drein'd, and with exausted Loins.
XXII.
Prodigious Astoreth, be 'it an He, or She,
Or both, or neither, an opprobrious Stock;
For Sex in Idols is a Nicetie
Unknown to the Makers, whom it never did choque
To style as they should please the senseless Block:
Tho if they called it by a Female Name,
More Folly, and less Power, they if ere did yoke;
And, if need served, a Male the God became,
Their own to 'attemper, and expose the Votaries shame.
XXIII.
Be it prodigious therefore, and a She!
And a She this Mock-Love, if so it please!
Prodigious Astoreth! and prodigious He,
Who was her Slave, and Slave to 'a thousand She Is,
On the Rack put by 'his Lusts, or Marriages!
And if it is true, that each a Body makes,
(And true it is) how monstrous with all these,
Must his appear, who has so different stakes,
Where each with only 'him, he with each, and all partakes?
XXIV.
With all partook he, and made up with all
One monstrous Body, which did all contain;
All Lands, and Languages, from the huge Wall
Of Babylon, to where Nile bedds the Main,
Lusty in Egypts Spoils, with Pompous Train:
No Country was there, but sent in some Love,
No Love, but did its Countries Gods retain.
All which he served, if he were Service-proof,
Enough to satiate, not to satify enough.
XXV.
Marriage perverted thus from its design,
Love to enhance, and raise an Holy Seed,
To hinder Whoredoms, and the Rage confine
Of an unruly Passion, which did need
More Reins than Spurs, and of Hells fiercest breed;
But above all, nobly to typify
The Mystic Union, which shall intercede
'Twixt Christ and holy Church, Man and the Most High,
All Mischiefs thence brake in, and all Idolatry.
XXVI.
Thence Whoredoms, Fornications thence brake in,
And, which the Holy People did or'eflow,
Rapes, Incests, and than Incest worse, the Sin
Confusion called, foul Sod'omy, and a row
Of bestial Vices, which 'twere guilt to know,
But more to tell; The 'unwary Course some take
Lust to perstringe by action, or by show,
But teaching more, what does no teaching lack,
And those whose Ign'orance, their whole Innocence does make.
XXVII.
Yet Israel acted all, and did outdo,
Well thew'd in Villainies, their Teachers skill;
And Men with Men, with Women Women too
All Shame put off, and did both parts fulfill,
With Sexes counterfeited, (every Hill,
And Grove with Humane Beasts, and mingled Blood
Promiscuous cast, replenisht thick) the while
Brutes themselves, as less salvage, wondering stood,
Man over them made to reign, should with them change Manhood.
XXVIII.
No wonder thus debased, new Gods they chose,
Gods like themselves, and they new Gods did choose,
Prodigious as their Lusts, on whom they'impose
Horrors the Beast would, if it could, refuse,
Designed for Service and a nobler use:
Baalim and Astaroth, or whatever name
Those Generals include, bleeding Thamuze,
Dagon, and Moloch, Kemos, Moabs shame,
And thousand others, which into the Bead-roll came:
XXIX.
All which they worshipped, and did lowly bow
Before their Altars; lowest bowed their King,
Who Temples made them, and did first allow
Their Rites absurd, (by his strange Wives brought in,
Authentic made, when their establishing
Owned him as Founder) and some think that Verse
Then lustful Orgias first began to sing,
And prostituted Mysteries rehearse,
Which Fabulous Greece did after through the World disperse.
XXX.
Verse it is sure, did early suffer wrong;
And Tyran Love debaucht it, as he' had done
God's noblest Creature, for the chains are strong,
With which he holds it yet, as if his own
It purely were, and were enough alone
All that he else has lost back to regain,
And whence he had been tumbled, to the Throne
Once more advance him, in his Hands the Rein
Of all things, midst an holier People, put again.
XXXI.
It served a little then, its service now
Is wondrously encreast, since Sloth, and Age
Have heightened Vice, and made Verse to it bow;
To the Gods before it was in Vassalage,
And only knew the Pythonesses rage,
Or Priests inspired, to all beside most chaste,
To Virtue did, and to true Worth engage;
And if the Object had been rightly placed,
Might for a real Virtue, and true Grace have past.
XXXII.
But now, (what quickly after it begun)
Retaining nothing but the Ill 'it has gained,
By Lux, and Travel, it does counter-run
To all that is Good, or Honest, or maintained
In The Civil Worlds esteem, with Atheism stained,
(As the next step to many Gods is none)
And all Impiety, has place obtained
With the worst Men, and is so furious grown,
That in its fits it God and King defies alone.
XXXIII.
These it defies, and dare unmasked profess,
(Where'it may be free, and to its full pitch flown)
What e'ven to think abashed mere Heathenness;
Nay when reserved most, and most modest grown,
'Twill others Follies sing, and make its own,
And than the Wise much rather please the Vain:
But since its present State too well is known
To be concealed, my self I shall not pain
To tell it here, or further, tho provoked complain.
XXXIV.
Ah! that it would it self, or could complain!
And of the Lusts, to which it did submit
Unwillingly at first, nor without pain,
But willingly when Custom humbled it,
Betrayed by 'its false and treacherous Mi'gnon Wit:
Her Mistress Verse the treacherous Maid beguiled,
The false Love her; and up they both did set
One shameless Brothel, wanton that, this wild,
Till both of Honor, Virtue, and true Love were spoiled.
XXXV.
Despoiled they were, despoiled, what they did serve,
Honor, and Virtue, and the Love Divine,
And Wedlock, which did covertly preserve
Some Traces of a Vigor Masculine,
Which Lust could never to its Beck incline
So perfectly, but it resistance made,
Weak as it was, and sprung a Counter-mine:
But now aside all Enmities were laid,
And all with one consent did plot Heav^n to invade.
XXXVI.
Which as the Almighty saw into his Mind,
That Mind of his it came, which ever love
To 'his Works did bear, to Man was ever kind,
The madness of such Faytours to reprove,
And what none else could do, the Cause remove;
The cause was this Mock-Love, whom to debase,
Into his Mind it came, by him, who strove
So high to raise him, and who what he was,
Of all Men best did know, did all in Loves surpass.
XXXVII.
Wise Solomon, who when he long had tried
The vain Experiment, at length grew Wise;
Nor longer with him would the secret hide,
Than till the Almighty opened had his Eyes,
And to him cleared the blessed Discoveries:
Till his Repentance had his Loves effaced,
And Credence gained us, that, immerst to rise
Tho hard it be, the Doom may not be past,
If what is too long one Day deferred, yet come at last.
XXXVIII.
Him his great Prophet God most high did raise,
Turning the Tenor of his inspired String,
Of Ancient Honor, and of Future Praise,
But most of Love, the Cause, and end to sing,
And hidden Mysteries to the Light to bring;
The mighty Works the Almighty's Self would do,
For Loves, and his BELOVEDS ransoming:
All which he did to the Royal Prophet show,
And all which, by him taught, his Israel came to know.
XXXIX.
Not as those Works, when finished perfectly
Should be displayed, but as became their state,
And Him, who was, restored, the Type to be
Of all the Glories, which he should relate;
By Figures, and by Shadows adaequate
To Humane Reasonings, and Discourse finite;
By his changed Loves a Love to adumbrate,
Which cannot else be seen by Mortal Light,
God's Love to Man, which different Natures should unite.
XL.
That Love, which God in time from Heaven should bring,
With Man to dwell, and as true Man appear;
Which Man no less, of all his Works the King,
To Heaven, excluded thence by' his Fall, should bear,
And on his Wings triumphantly up-rear:
And all the way, as he does thither rise,
With Idees fill him of the Beauties there;
That Love, in fine, which does all Loves comprize,
Whence Man to 'his Maker lives, his Maker for him dies.
XLI.
Of all which Marriage is the Sacrament;
(Or Symbol call it, if the Name displease)
The closest Union to represent,
'Twixt God and Man, 'twixt Man and Happiness;
And if there closer Union be than these,
Or more (and whether more be meant who knows?
Tho closer none) in one Term all to express;
Marriage, which once confirmed by holy Vows,
Is Loves Reprizal, and in one all Unions shows.
XLII.
So God most High resolved, so Solomon,
By him inspired did carnal Love impeach
Of highest Treason, and Rebellion;
The first, who plainly did the Mystery preach,
And what himself, but late learnt, others teach:
That Love alone, whose long and outstretcht Line,
Through Natures Works, to Natures end does reach,
Their Love, whom God, not Lust or Interest join,
Unequal tho it be, comes nearest the Divine.
XLIII.
As near as was, or fit for us to know,
Or possible, in Mortal Flesh immured;
(Tho God himself the Form would take below)
When brighter Vision could not be endured,
Nor Loves invisible taught else, or secured;
For such is Man, tho of God's Works the chief,
Of things Invisible to be assured,
That from things Visible he must receive
The imperfect Image, and of God by' himself conceive.
XLIV.
His Bodies structure, and his Souls great Powers,
Both which as having God himself propounds;
Tho Acts Organical are purely Ours,
And he the Deity by the shift confounds,
Who makes it what the Parable expounds,
With Senses, and with Parts corporeal,
Loving like us, and with a Lovers Wounds,
Which from the Deity are excluded all,
And only used, that under Sense those Acts may fall.
XLV.
Yet so God loves, so would be known to Love,
As Love in the Marriage Bed, kept undefil^d,
Might figure best, if one the Vail remove,
Our Nature, which of Innocence dispoyl^d,
Till raised, whence sunk, beguiles and is beguiled;
But once restored, is worthy Him, and Us,
Him still to love, with Love us to be filled,
(Of Grace not Debt) become both Amorous,
The Churches Husband He, the Church his Bride and Spouse.
XLVI.
Thus loving, and beloved thus shame on those,
Whose either Atheism, or Impiety,
Dare the Tremendous Figure, or expose,
Or subject make it of foul Raillery,
And to vile Lust embase the Mystery!
That of their Happ'ness have so little sense,
Their God, their Souls, and their Civility,
That they with things most sacred can dispense,
And rather than not give it, take from Heaven offense!
XLVII.
From Thee, most sacred and inspired Song,
The humblest Condescension of Heavens King,
From which my roving Verse has strayed too long,
Led by the Mock-love, and now late does sing;
Next that the humblest, which with Saffron Wing,
Gabriel, the True-loves mighty Harbinger,
Foretold to the' EVER-VIRGIN, e're the thing
Was full accomplished, and thereof did bear,
When done first News, and what the signs to know him were.
XLVIII.
Signs too unlikely, till by Angels told,
Whereby the Maker of all things to find;
For who would think a simple Cratch should hold
Eternal Majesty, mean Swathings bind
The Incomprehensible, and Unconfined;
And that an Ox, and Ass were company,
(To Scorn enured, and labor by their kind)
In an Inns-Stable fit for God Most High,
And that a Babe should be that God, and exposed lie?
XLIX.
Yet signs they were with Heaven which suited best,
And best with God, when God should Flesh appear;
And so was Wedlock, thence to be expressed,
E're that time came, the Image he should bear,
Or rather what our selves, allied to' him near,
(Nearer by Purchase, than Creation)
Should thence become; like Glories with him wear,
And since to us it could not else be known,
Till Man to Heaven should rise, high Heaven to Man bring down.
L.
By Love to bring it: And by Love HE brought it,
Who all the Mysteries of Love did know;
Second alone to Loves dear self, who taught it,
As or above it was, or as below,
And in thee, Song, its Mystic Power did show:
Not as thy Words to 'us sound, but as thy Sense,
To the Church applied, by ^oly Churches Vow,
Must be expounded, with this Difference,
Of God it is Figure All, of Man all Innocence,
LI.
Of Soul and Body, but of Soul the most,
Whose Acts and Motions Thou do most intend,
By views Material, to our Light disposed,
But where the Matter does all Act suspend,
And shadows what it cannot comprehend;
Is nothing, or as nothing, how e're laid,
Compared with what comparison does transcend;
Nor meant at all, tho by it all is said,
That Is said of Love, which through its broken Pipe's conveyed.
LII.
So would Thou, Song, so must Thou be understood;
And short of this, who e're Thy Flight would bound,
To the Deity sacrifices Human Blood,
And fixes on the Impassible that Wound,
Which the Mock-love to offer had astound.
For He soon as he heard the words Divine,
His Sentence in them, and his Doom he found;
At which affrighted, back he did resign
All he before usurpt, nor ought had to rejoyn.
LIII.
Happy he so could escape, tho e're away,
Cast, and condemned, he into Exile went,
The True Love, who long waited for that Day,
Hymen his great Ambassador down sent,
To beg some Exemplary Punishment,
And Caution, that he would return no more:
But all the Caution, which to give he meant,
Was but his Word, nor longer that than Power
Should fail him to attempt, what he had done before.
LIVE.
For Punishment, 'twas yet too early Day,
To move, or hope; Himself enough had done,
By those Spoils, which unforce'd he down did lay,
The Jurisdiction of Heavens Court to own,
Whom that acknowledgment must serve or none:
And out he went, with stern, and bloody Eyes,
And bitter Railings on blessed Hymen thrown;
Who all his Railings did no less despise,
Content (since he no more could get) with the bare Prize,
LV.
Marriage restored to' its Just and Ancient Right,
And all the Intents, to which it was designed;
Marriage, which once secured, does Souls unite,
And made in Heaven, to Heaven so near is joined,
That only there we purer Love can find:
Marriage of th Fallen World the best Estate,
Marriage most Honorable with Mankind,
Which to abuse, a Man his Flesh must hate,
Marriage God's Blessing, when He gave over to create.
To the Muse, ODE PINDARIC.
I. STROPHE.
BUT whither bear Thou me, O Love,
Sovereign Disposer of all things,
Beyond the flight of Verses Wings,
Which after Thee a Course unequal move?
So swift Thy passage is, and wondrous light,
Scarce can I of Thee get the sight;
And all so here, and there,
So unconfined, and every where,
Appear Thou do, and disappear,
A Phantosm Thou would reckned be,
But that whole Nature lives alone by Thee.
I. ANTISTROPHE.
From Heaven to Earth, from Earth again
To Heaven, who has Loves Journey trace't?
Hail ye bright Stars, which saw him last,
And greater Luster by his grant obtain!
You last of all his parting Charge received,
And still to keep it are believed,
In times, and seasons thence,
Which you to all his Works dispense,
With kind and wholesome Influence;
And at his Thrones dread Footstool wait,
Illustrious Guards and Messengers of Fate.
I. EPODOS.
"Happy the Man, whose noble Soul
"Has raised him to a pitch so high,
"That he the Heavens, as they about him roll,
"Undazled can behold with curious Eye;
"And every Mystic note,
"That Is in their Mighty Volume wrote,
"As clearly understand,
"As if acquainted with no other hand:
"Yet happier He by far,
"Who like the Kings, first guided by a Star,
"Obtains like Royal Grace,
"Into the Sacred Presence, ushered thus, to pass!
II. STROPHE.
An Honor done but to a few,
As few there be, who care to join
Their quest to the search of Love Divine,
Thither applying, what from thence they drew;
Heavens Priests, and Loves, who have the lucky skill,
Both Services at once to fill;
Nor like the most all day,
Or Idle stand, or play,
And gaze though on Heaven their Age away:
Of Love, who largely boast the Name,
But never saw his Light, or felt his Flame.
II. ANTISTROPHE.
At once both Services he filled,
Whom the Muse sings, both knows the best
Of any, who e're those Gifts possessed,
In Books so different so divinely skilled;
Natures and God's, the Gloss that, this the Text,
And read together unperplext:
While that, by' it self alone.
Read, as too often is done,
But Altars rears to' a God unknown;
To the True this does a way provide,
But difficult to walk without a Guide.
II. EPODOS.
Not SETH, whose Pillars Fabulous
Survived the all-devouring Flood,
Taught the New World the Half he teaches us,
Were all he taught as well but understood:
Tho when of Love He treats,
And His high Mysteries repeats,
All hear, and what is heard
By all for certain Truth is so revered,
The ravished Soul resents
Its teadious stay, and future joys prevents;
Rapt in Ecstatic Fires
To the Divine Aboads, almost in the Flame expires.
III. STROPHE.
Witness Thou Sarums sacred Pile,
Which from the day Thou first came down
From the parcht neighboring Hill, the Town
Attending Thee, and shouting all the while,
None happier saw than that which made Thee His,
And Him Thine with united bliss.
Thy Streams, Thy Fields, Thy Towers,
By the' Graces led, and Hours,
Daunc'd to their Genius Crowned with Flowers:
Thy very Children bless that time
And their new Era from its date sublime.
III. ANTISTROPHE.
Not but that worthy Thee, and Verse,
There have been Praelats heretofore,
(Tho none so Worthy) had like store
Of sacred Poets been, as now rehearse.
But all (alas!) are in Oblivion drowned,
Unsung laid underground,
Because the Muses aid,
To all the Acquists they made,
Or lacking was, or else unpray'd:
And their fond hopes of Future glory,
Or to dumb Walls confined, or doubtful story.
III. EPODOS.
So Thy first Fathers, so others fare'd
Before, and since Thy great Translation;
And if to' escape 'twas not for some so hard,
The Works they wrote, were their Fames best Foundation;
In which an Age they live,
That Brass, and Marble shall survive.
So Jewel ever lives,
And life to' his very Enemy gives.
So shall Thy Reverend Lord
Long hence be Thine, and His own best Record.
Have to Him Muse, and take
At 'his Knees that blessing, which may Thee Immortal make.
To the Right Reverend FATHER IN GOD, SETH Lord Bishop of SARUM.
MINDFUL, whence first she learnt the early Skill,
In humble strains Almighty LOVE to sing;
And then of Her, to whom she' her Works does bring,
The CHVRCH, and College, both whose Names instill
Like Sentiments, and shall Fames Records fill
With Worthies, fit to 'employ the Noblest string
Of Heav'n-tun'd Verse, and almost tire its Wing,
To bear them, hence translated, up its Hill:
My Muse to You, my LORD, and your great Name,
This LEGEND of the one, and the other LOVE,
(As different as their Ends and Natures prove)
Doubly inscribes; that thence her purer Flame
To Heaven, so offered, may more grateful rise;
The grosser Parts be Wood for the Sacrifice.
FINIS.
A PARAPHRASE UPON Some Select HYMNS OF THE NEW and OLD TESTAMENT, With some
other Occasional Compositions IN English RIMES.

RIMES.
The VI great HYMNS of St. LUKE.
I. HYMN.
The ANGELS Salutation.
Ave Gratia plena. Lucae 1. 28.

HAIL of Heaven highly Grace'd,
Hail, O VIRGIN full of Grace!
Heavens Blessings all on Thee be place'd,
In whom Heavens GOD takes up his Place!
Blessed Thou among all Women be,
Blessed be Thy Name and Memory,
Blessed VIRGIN MOTHER be Thy Style to' Eternity!
II. HYMN.
The Salutation of ELIZABETH.
Benedicta Tu inter Mulieres. Lucae 1. 42.

I.
BLESSED Thou among all Women be,
And blessed the FRUIT, which Thou do bear!
But whence is this great Honor done to me,
That my LORD'S MOTHER should approach thus near
And greater joys suppressed at Home,
In mine to 'assist should hither come?
II.
Yet not at Home those greater Joys,
Tho there suppressed, could Thou wholly leave,
For scarce was heard Thy salutations Voice,
But my glad Womb the Signal did receive:
And there with joy the Babe did spring,
It Is present GOD to' attest, and King,
III.
Thrice blessed the Faith, which firm does hold!
For a Performance there shall be
Of all, that was by the Heavenly Message told,
And, or Thy happy FRUIT concerns, or Thee;
The Sender was the Eternal Lord,
Who having past will Crown his Word.
III. HYMN.
The Song of the BLESSED VIRGIN.
Et ait Maria, -- Magnificat anima, etc. Lucae 1. 47.

I.
MY SOUL does Magnify the Lord,
My Spirit in God my Savior does rejoice;
My Spirit his thankful Praises shall record,
And my Soul, thence awak't, provoke my Voice:
Nor Soul, nor Spirit, my Judgment, or my Will,
My Voice, or Lyre, shall in his Praise lie still,
But all my Powers I Will summon, and their noblest skill.
II.
For (Lo!) his Handmaids low estate,
He from on High has viewed with kind regard;
His Handmaids, to the increase of whose sad Fate,
The Royal Blood, from whence she sprang, pressed hard:
But now all Nations shall Record me BLESSED,
And David^s Seed, of David's Throne possessed,
To' his Blood the Glory shall return, to' his Land its rest.
III.
Great are the things, which He has done,
And done for me, who' Himself is great of Might;
Great tho He be, it is Holiness alone,
Wherein He of all Names does most delight:
All but of 's Mercy, which in him the same,
He to Gen'erations therefore does Proclaim,
And keep with them, who fear Him, and his Holy Name.
IV.
To all beside, by His Arm He is known,
And strength Almighty, which none can repel;
His Arm, that from their height the Proud pulls down,
And open throws their Plots hid deep as Hell:
That Kings and Kingdoms at its Will does sway,
And gives their Crowns to those in the dust who lay,
With good things the Hungry fills, the' Rich empty sends away.
V.
Israel thus has He filled, thus raised,
And raised up thus, will with his Hand uphold;
Israel his firstborn; And our God be praised,
Who mindful o^ the Inheritance past of Old,
Warrants to' His Child, and with it all Decreed
By' His Word to our Fathers, to' Abraham and his Seed,
And all whom Abraham's Faith makes Parties to the Deed.
IV. HYMN.
The Song of ZACHARIAS.
Benedictus Dominus Deus Israel. Lucae 1. 68.

I.
ISREAL'S Great God eternally be Praised,
Who Israel from the Dust at length has raised;
And mindful of his Ancient Care,
Forgotten, when we thought we were,
Israel to visit has himself come down,
The Prison Doors wide open thrown,
And by the Redemption wrought, made his great Presence known.
II.
Redemption for his People has he wrought,
And to the Throne the Royal Prisoner brought;
To David's Throne, and it is his Son
Sprung from his Loins, holds David's Throne;
With Empire, which no place or time can bound,
With Subjects, in all Countries found,
Subjects, which like him shall be Kings, and like him Crowned.
III.
This by his Prophets, which have been of old,
In every Age he wondrously foretold;
(For every Age have Prophets been,
From since the World did first begin,
This to foretell, which now we Celebrate;)
That God our Wrongs would vindicate,
And from one Ruin save us, and our threatened State.
IV.
Not for our Righteousness, but to perform
The Mercy promised, and his Covenant sworn;
Promised the Fathers, who first were,
But which himself did to' Abraham swear,
By Oath most Sacred; for to be no more
Doubted, tho stablisht 'twas before,
By' himself, Heavens greatest Oath, the God most Highest swore.
V.
So God most Highest, so by' Himself he Swore,
And that from Heaven we should receive the Power,
(Delivered from our Enemies Hands,
Their Captive Chains and Servile Bands)
His own more Noble Service to attend,
Fearless of all that may offend,
In Righteousness, and holy Praise, which never shall end.
VI.
And now he comes, O Child, who this has wrought;
He comes, who has the great Salvation brought:
Be thou his Prophet, and his Ways
Prepare, while He a moment stays,
Only till thou before Him can prepare
His Ways, which deep and wondrous are,
Bylaying down his own, the Life of the World to spare.
VII.
Teach the World, Child, and make his Israel know
Whence their Salvations mighty Source does flow;
That from Remission of their Sin,
The mighty Source does first begin:
Through our God's tender Mercy, who the Way
To Pardon does by Penance lay;
Penance, which does the glories of his Grace display.
VIII.
That Grace, whereby the Dayspring from on High,
Now visits us with Streams, which never shall die.
Streams of pure Ethereal Light,
To shine on those, who in darkness sit;
Which Death's pale shadow shall with Rays increase,
And hopes long Prisoners thence release,
And both theirs guide, and our feet into the way of Peace.
V. HYMN.
The ANGELIC Hymn.
Gloria in Altissimis, etc. Lucae 2. 24.

GLORY be to God on High!
In The Highest Great Jehovah bless!
Good will toward Men, on Earth be Peace!
Glory to God on High!
And may this Round, begun thus, last eternally.
VI. HYMN.
The Song of SIMEON.
Nunc dimittis servum tuum, Lucae 2. 29.
etc.
I.
ENOUGH, my God, enough! I beg no more:
Nor Thou, tho begged, can greater Grace bestow;
My Prayers at length are answered, and I 'adore
The Word, which from thy Mouth did go,
The Word, which like thy Self no change does know*
And now Thy Servant is content to die,
Now, as the best time, since Thy Word and Life's so nigh*
II.
Nigh is the Word, which Thou to me did pass,
Nor has Death come, me and Thy CHRIST between;
As nigh is Life, Thy other Word, which I embrace,
And who, that has thus happy been,
In two great Words, fulfilled one, the other seen,
Would not like me desire in peace to die,
And mortal Life exchange for Immortality?
III.
In Peace I die, and Thou dismissest me,
My God, in Peace, since with these very Eyes,
Before their change, I Thy Salvation see,
And lack not from the Dead to rise,
As Prophets must to 'approve their Prophecies:
By Faith they only at a distance saw,
What in my Arms I hold, the end of all their Law.
IV.
Hail, blessed Salvation of the Eternal King!
Hail Thou, who hither bringst it, Blessed Child!
In whom, as holy Bards inspired do sing,
Those wondrous Truths shall be fulfilled,
Which to Immortal Verse shall subject yield!
Hail to you both, prepared of God to be,
This Worlds Redemption, Heavens and Angels scrutiny!
V.
Such is the great Behest; such is Thy Will,
Who now before all Nations do prepare
What shall with joyous Praise all Nations fill,
As in Him all have equal share:
Thy Son, who shall to those who' in darkness are,
Rise, as the World's Sun does, with scattered Light,
But Isreal's Glory be, with Rays like 'his own Flames bright.
Comiato.
To Sir Nicholas Stuart, Baronet.
SONGS, made in lieu of many more,
(And more than Songs,) which to his Love I owe,
Who, when your Master waited at the Door,
First let him in, and sacred Honors did bestow;
(You, blessed Songs, in the Temple first to sing,
And then to Descant, on an humbler thing.)
To his, and your loved Patron go,
And tho you never can recompense
The ease, and leisure both of us have thence,
Proffer the utmost service Verse can do;
And as He is your Ornament,
Be of my grat'itude and his Virtue the fixed Monument.
The VIII Great HYMNS of the Apocalypse.
I. HYMN.
The Adoration of the XXIV ELDERS.
Gratias agimus tibi Domine Deus Optime. Apoc. 11. 17.

I.
WORTHY Thou art all Honor to receive,
Thrice Honored we, who may that Honor give,
Blessed King, who in One undivided now,
The scattered Parts of Time collected, have,
The Future, Present, and the Past;
And every Time and Age do in one moment know.
II.
We praise Thee', Almighty God, for that Thou' have taken
To Thee thy great Power, and at length do Reign*
Thou Reign'st, and tho the Nations troubled are,
Thy Wrath is come, and therewith come the Time,
When Thou will sentence every Crime,
And all the Dead shall for the Great Assize prepare.
III.
Up shall they rise; and as their Works have been,
Or Shame, or Glory, on all Brows be seen;
Thy Prophets, and Thy Saints shall shout for joy,
And all who fear Thy Name, both small and great;
But Vengeance, from Thy Judgment Seat,
The Earths bold Destroyers shall eternally destroy.
II. HYMN.
The Acclamation of Heaven, upon MICHAEL's overthrow of the Dragon and his
Angels.
Nunc facta est Salus and Virtus, Apoc. 12. 10.
etc.
I.
NOW is Salvation, now is come the Hour,
That long expected, never shall be done;
Now Reigns our God, with whom in equal Power,
And strength Enthroned, sits his Anointed Son:
They Reign and Judge, and having Judgment past,
The Brethrens great Accuser, over the Bar have cast.
II.
Both Night and Day the Brethren he accused,
Heavens common Barrettor, with Charge unjust;
(Their Patience, and the Judges Grace abused)
Tho from them the forged Calumny they thrust,
And his false Evidence or'e-rul'd, bore down,
By the Lambs Blood in Court attested, and their own.
III.
These were the Pleas whereby they overcame,
And these the Witnesses called, and allowed;
Which even the Devil their slanderer heard with shame,
And self-condemned, to the just Sentence bowed:
Greater their Word was than could be denied,
But greater yet their Testimony, that they Di'd.
IV.
For this, O Heavens, rejoice, and ye who there
In Sacred Bliss uninterrupted dwell,
Rejoice, and a part with you let them bear,
Who from below shall of your Justice tell!
With joy shall Sing, how the' Dragon overthrown,
From Heavens high-top to the Earth was tumbled down.
V.
But woe worth you, to whom in wrath he is come,
Of Earth and Sea the miserable 'out-cast,
On whom he will seek to be avenged, the Doom
Was on himself, and cursed Abettors past;
With rage he comes, and whole Hells last effort,
Fury incenst, because he knows his time's but short.
III. HYMN.
The Happy Dead.
Beati mortui qui in Domino moriuntur. Apoc. 14. 13.

I.
BLESSED are the Dead who in the Lord depart,
From henceforth Blessed write them down!
For Labors tho, and Pain they have known,
Of neither feel they more the irksome smart.
II.
So says the Spiri't; for but to' enjoy full rest,
From all their Toils are they removed;
And of their Works, by God approved,
That follow close, in Bliss they are possessed.
IV. HYMN.
The Song of MOSES and of the LAMB.
Magna and Mirabilia sunt opera, Apoc. 15. 3.
etc.
I.
GREAT are thy Works, and marvelous thy Praise,
Lord God Almighty, just and true Thy Ways,
Blessed King of Saints; who would not fear
In Thy dread Presence to appear,
Whom Angels, and attending Thrones revere?
II.
Who would not Fear Thee, Lord, and Glorify
That Name of Thine, which Thou have raised so high!
Thy Holy Name by which Thou art known,
(For Holiness is Thine alone,)
But better, than each single Man by' his own.
III.
Take then, Blessed King, what is Thy proper due,
And through all Land^ and Coasts, Thy Right pursue!
That eve'ry Coast and every Land,
Who wondering at thy Judgments stand,
May Worship Thee, and stoop to their Command.
V. HYMN.
The Angel of the Waters Lauds.
Justus es Domine qui es and qui eras, Apoc. 16. 5.
etc.
I.
RIGHTEOUS art Thou, I. Angel.
O God, who art, and wast,
And shall be, when all time is past,
The first who reignedst, and the last:
Righteous art Thou, who have this Day,
Thy Kingdoms Justice to display,
Righteously judged, that Blood shall Blood repay.
II.
Thy Servants Blood they without mercy shed,
And to be' avenged of the happy Dead,
Made by cursed hands the Living bleed:
With big swollen Veins Thy Prophets stood,
Each Saint, the Genius of his Flood,
Poured from his opened Heart true streams of Blood.
III.
For Blood they thirsted; II. Angel.
and to drink have now
Pure Blood, wherewith their Rivers flow:
So worthy they, so Righteous Thou!
Et andivi alterum dicentem, Etiam Domine.
So Righteous Thou, so worthy they,
Who did Thy Saints, and Prophets slay,
For Blood to' have Blood, and Blood in Blood repay.
VI. HYMN.
The holy Company of Heaven rejoicing at the overthrow of BABYLON.
Allelu-ja. Apoc. 9. 1.
Laus and Gloria and Virtus.
I.
HALLELUJAH! To our King,
Honor, Power, and Glory sing:
Laud and Worship to Him bring,
True and Righteous are whose Ways;
Both deserves, and has our Praise.
II.
True and Righteous is his Doom,
For in Judgment overcome,
Chained the great Whore stands, and Dumb*
Chained she stands, and Dumb withal,
Without Friend, or Voice to call.
III.
Judged she is, who the Earth did stain
With her Prostituted Train:
Justly judged to 'Eternal Pain,
And avenged the Blood she shed,
Dying ever, is never dead.
Et dixerunt iterum Halleluja.
IV.
Hallelujah; to our King
Worship, Laud, and Praises bring,
Glory, Power, and Honor sing!
Lo! how up her Smoke does rise,
Who dead ever, never Dies!
Cecideruntque viginti quatuor Seniores, etc.
and dixerunt Amen, etc.
V.
Even so, Lord, be it so!
That the Earth Thy Power may know,
And thence make Thy Praise to grow!
One blessed Song with us may sing,
Halleluja to our King!
VII. HYMN.
Epithalamium on the LAMBS Marriage.
Et vox de Throno exivit dicens, Apoc. 19. 5.
laudem dicite Deo, etc.
I.
PRAISE Him, ye Servants of the Eternal King,
To God your noblest Praises sing,
And make Heavens vault with the loud Echo ring!
Praise Him, all ye, who fear his Name,
And over the Expanse his Lauds proclaim;
Both great and small in tuneful Shouts accord,
And with one Heart and Voice adore our Lord!
Et audivi quasi vocem turbae magnae, and sicut vocem aquarum multaram and
sicut vocem tonitruorum magnorum dicentium Alleluja! quoniam, etc.
II.
Hallelujah! Sing aloud!
Louder still the harmonious Voice,
Till it drown a Thunders Noise,
And with gay Horror fill the admiring Crowd!
For (Lo!) our God Omnipotent does Reign,
And to himself resumes the Rule again.
III.
Let us be glad now, and let us rejoice,
And give him due Honor, who made us this Day;
A Day that compensates for all our Annoys,
And Ages that we for its Coming did pray:
The Lamb's Marriage-day, which tho long e're it came,
We meet, and greet thus with our Songs purest flame.
IV.
It Is come, and does with hallowed Glory shine,
So bright a Day in Heaven did never appear,
(Tho ever Day, and bright it is ever there)
As this, illumined by the Sun Divine,
And for 'his own Nuptials made with high Design.
But yet how bright so e're it is,
His Bride new Luster to it gives,
Who in her Glory waits Him, as He her in his.
V.
See, where She stands arrayed in Glorious wise,
Second alone to Him, who ever lives:
Above the boldest flight winged Seraph strives,
Who never such Beauties with Immortal Eyes,
E're gazed on, save in Him whose is the Prize.
For beside what is Her proper Dower,
(Charms, which the Almighty overcame)
Heaven all its riches on Her Dress does pour.
VI.
Choice of rich Garments has She thence, and store,
(Presented from the Wardrobe of the Lamb)
Of Gems that blaze with an Ethereal flame,
Enough all but the Wearer to devour,
And all but Heaven to apprize them find too poor:
Choice of fine Linen, clean and bright,
Beyond the skill of Mortal Art,
Washed in the Lambs pure Blood, and there made White.
VII.
These are Her Robes, and these Her Lord's delight,
(Who from His Presence never will let Her part,
But thus Arrayed, resigns to Her his Heart)
The Righteousness of the Saints, with sacred Light,
Communicated from his own blessed Sight.
Thrice happy they, thrice happy he!
Who when their Mortal Life is done,
The Bridgroom's Friends, to' his Supper called shall be!
L'envoy.
Thrice happy I, my God, if I be one,
One of the few, whom then Thou shall invite!
No matter how Thou shall dispose of me,
The meanest service Regal Honors does impart.
VIII. HYMN.
The Exultation of Heaven, at the Descent of the New JERUSALEM.
Et audivi magnam vocem de Throno dicentem, Apoc. 21. 5.
Ecce Tabernaculum Dei cum, etc.
I.
BLESSED state of Innocence,
When out of his just Makers Hand,
The first Man came, with sacred influence,
If what he might, he' had kept the' unh^ard Command!
But happier far that state,
To which he is restored, tho late,
By him, who, (made Man) Man did first Create!
II.
A greater Work this was,
(As to redeem it more did cost,
Than barely make;) the one by a Word did pass,
His Life, the WORD to' effect the other lost;
But therewith did provide,
What none could hope, or do beside,
That they should the happiest be, for whom he Died.
III.
Happy were both, but these
By this the more, that when God went
To Paradise, himself in' his Works to please,
And pleased to Heaven strait took his great Asecnt;
A longer stay below,
To make with his Redeemed now,
Heavens richest Grace he does on Earth bestow:
IV.
For now (behold!) his Tent
With Man is pitched, and there He 'l dwell,
Late to (...), and I Am his Herald sent,
(...) News to the whole World to tell;
(...) God to Man comes down,
(...) Man to dwell, as Man be known,
Whose Form assumed, he keeps still joined to' his own.
V.
With them He 'l dwell, and they
His People, he their God will be;
Not as of Old alone, but in a way
Unthought, and of exalted Dignity:
Where each Relations Band,
By various Titles on each hand,
Made Indissoluble, fast knit does stand.
VI.
God from their Eyes all Tears
Away shall wipe, they in his Praise
Endless Eternity shall spend: No fears,
No fighs more tempests in their Breasts shall raise:
Eve'n Death shall be no more,
Nor Sin, that to it opened the Door,
Nor pain: for former things are all past over.
VII.
Past over they are, and gone,
So says the Faithful and the True,
The High, the Holy God, who from his Throne
Pronounces thus, (Lo!) I make all things New!
And thou to whom it is made known,
O Man beloved, The words write down,
Nor doubt; for he who does it, says, It Is done.
Our Blessed Lord's Thanksgiving.
Confiteor tibi Pater Domine. Mat. 11. 25.

I.
I THANK Thee, Father, Lord of all,
Of Heaven, and Earth the Blessed King,
That to reveal Thy Discipline,
The Prudent of this World Thou do not call,
The Mighty, Noble, and the Wise;
But such, whom they, as Foolish, Base, and Weak despise.
II.
From those Thou have Thy Counsels hid,
Who first Thy Counsels did refuse;
And Babes to publish them do choose,
That no Flesh take what Power Almighty did,
And when Thy Hand alone has done
The weighty Enterprise, ascribe it to their own.
III.
Eve'n so, O Father, so it is!
Thy Will, Thy Love do hence appear,
And that great Power, which every where
In all things Rules, but more in none than this;
For so to Thee it seems good,
Thy Grace should none withstand, but those who it withstood.
The Song of MOSES.
-- Tunc cecinit Moses, Exodus 15.
and Filii Israel carmen hoc Domino; and di^^runt, Cantemus Domino, etc.
(...).
I.
SINCE the Almighty has in Triumph led,
Not by c^r Battles, but his Arm ^'re-thrown,
The Proud (...) King, and from his Head,
On ours to put it, (...) Crown,
What more accept^^ Trophy can we raise,
Than an eternal arch of Duty and of Praise?
Begin, my Song and thou Immortal Verse,
(Now truly such, since him Thou do Record,
Who only is the Immortal Lord)
I my self will begin too, and rehearse
The wondrous Conquests of his Word:
To him I Will Sing, who gloriously,
His Promise, and his Ancient Faith to keep,
Has gotten himself, and us the Victory,
And Horse, and Rider hurld, at once, into the Deep.
II.
God is my Strength, and he shall be my Song,
From whom my great Salvation came;
Who is my God, approved in dangers long,
My Father's God, the Puissant, and the Strong,
Israel's tried Champion, and Jehovah is his Name.
Him will I Sing, of him shall be my Praise,
And of the Works, that he has done;
The Eternal Glories he has won,
But ours no less, than his own Fame to raise.
For Pharao and his host,
(Their way, their hopes, themselves in the Ruin lost)
Into the Sea he hurld, the Red Sea, as a Stone
By a Giants arm is lightly thrown,
Him and his chosen Captains at a cast.
They flew; they sank; the wounded Sea did groan,
But into it is bottom headlong let them down,
Through thousand Waves that murmured, as along they whirling past.
III.
There were they Drowned; there covered with the Deep;
There sank they, never to be raised again;
In Adamantine Chains Thou did the Prisoners keep,
The same Thou thr^wst before upon the Main,
And now on them, over both to show Thy equal Reign.
Glorious Thou did that Day, O Lord, appear;
Glorious in Power appeared then thy Right Hand;
Thine Enemies the Shock could not withstand,
And found too late its Wrath was heavier than their fear;
When dashed in pieces they all scattered lay,
And to the Leviathans became a Prey.
So on a sudden were they gone,
So soon, so easily, by Thy Breath o're-thrown,
As when a raging Fire does Stubble seize,
And with it Thorns, to' unequal Battle press.
Such was Thy Wrath, tho in a different kind,
(And different was the Element,
But Death as certain, and as sudden sent)
Thy Wrath toward them, which like a mighty Wind
Stood up and up the Floods bid stand,
As on an heap to let Thy People go;
The Floods obeyed the great Command,
And like a Wall, on either Hand,
Of congealed Crystal, in the heart of the Sea did show.
IV.
This as the Spoyler saw, "It Is now, he said,
"Now is the time an end to make;
"I will pursue, I will o're-take,
"Lo! how the Sea the Fugitives has betrayed,
"And, to leave us a way, its dried up Channel does forsake!
"Now shall my Sword with slaughter glutted be,
"My Lust shall on them now be satisfied,
"Nor till they 'are totally destroyed,
"This Arm withdraw, or let them other Conquerors see;
"With Charms their Leader staind the sacred Flood,
"But I Will the Sea, or perish, new Dye with their Blood.
Scarce said; Thou with Thy Wind
Upon the parted Sea did blow;
The parted Sea its hold invisible let go,
And hollowed to its fellow Waves behind.
They came; and having traverst them around;
The Chamiam Hosts did in their Arms enclose;
A while they floated, diving where they rose,
Till touching thrice the fatal Ground,
Like Lead they sank, and all the Deaths they had threatened, found.
V.
Amongst the Gods, Who is there like the Lord?
Or with Him, who can once compare?
So 'unsearchable His Counsels are,
So great the Wonders of His Word;
In holy Glories, who does all excel,
And Terror strikes in us, who would his Praises tell.
For Thou thy Hand did only wave,
And Isreal's way was Egypts Grave,
Which the opening Earth, and Seas, conspiring gave.
Thus perished they: Thus saved by Thy Right Hand,
Thy ransomed People hitherto Thou' have brought;
Whilst of the Miracles it wrought,
We and our Children living Monuments here stand.
Nations shall hear this, Lord, and be afraid;
Horror on Palestine fast hold shall take;
Courage the Dukes of Edom shall forsake:
And Moabs daring Warriers, ill appaid,
Shall on themselves feel unknown Terrors laid:
Whole Canaan ready to expire,
With dread dissolved, as Wax shall melt before the Fire.
VI.
Trembling and Fear, Anguish, Despair, and Dread,
On every Land shall fall, on every Head.
As Thine Arm is, such shall their Horrors be,
And not a Soul from the' Consternation free.
Close shall they lie within their Dens,
Still as the Rocks, wherewith they are covered, lie;
And fearful once to issue thence,
Scarce to their helpless Gods send forth a cry,
Or let their Groans be heard, while Israel passes by.
Till to Thy Promised Land they are come,
And, where they have been strangers long, their ancient Home.
Thither, my God, through thousand dangers past,
To Sion, by Thy self prepared to be
Thy Dwelling Place to 'Eternity,
The Sanctuary, with Thy Presence graced,
Thither be pleased Thy purchased Flock to bring at last!
So shall Thou through all Ages Reign,
And in all Lands new Subjects to Thy Empire gain.
Sumpsit ergo Maria Prophetissa soror A^rm tympanum in manu sua: egressaeque
sunt omnes Mulieres post eam cum tympanis, and choris, quibus praecinebat
dicens. CHORUS Mulierum.
SIng to the Lord, who gloriously,
His Promise, and his Ancient Faith to keep,
Has gotten Himself, and us the Victory,
And Horse, and Rider hurld at once into the Deep!
The WELL.
Number. 21. -- Tune cecinit Israel Carmen istud. Ascendat Puteus! concinebat.
Puteus quem soderunt Principes, and paraverunt duces multitudinis, in Datore
legis, and in baculis suis.
SACRED Fountain, Mystic Spring,
Lo! how to Thy Dance we Sing,
And Cymbals tuned by thy soft Purlings ring!
Spring eternally, O Well,
Spring up, and into Rivers swell!
For why, no common Well art Thou,
Nor was it chance first found Thee out;
But having for Thee searched about,
To Princes Thou thy rise do owe,
Who dug Thee first, and made Thee flow.
Spring, happy Well, by Princes made,
Without or Mattocks help, or Spade,
(The' ill-boading Instruments of Graves)
But dug by Princes, with their Staves,
And by their Lawgiver surveyed!
'Twas He to the Work those Worthies sent;
Spring Well, and teach his great Intent,
And what He by the Mystery meant!
"That as to all Thy Wate^ ^^ow,
"So should their equal Justice do.
Sacred Fountain, Mysric Spring,
Lo! how to Thy Dance we Sing,
And Cymbals tuned by Thy soft purlings Ring!
Spring Eternally, O Well,
Spring up, and into Rivers swell!
The Prayer of JABEZ.
-- Invocavit autem Jabez Deum Israel, II. Part. 4.
dicens. Si benedicens benedixeris mihi, and dilataveris terminos meos, and
fuerit manus tua mecum, and feceris me a malitia non opprimi! -- Et praestit^^
Deus quae precatus est.
I.
THUS Jabez prayed, and thus pray I;
Great God, O, that it might Thee please,
Thy Servant, who upon Thee does rely,
With Thy choice Favors, and indeed to bless!
It Is Prayer alone can this obtain,
And, but to Thee, even Prayer is vain.
II.
Enlarge those Coasts, wherein I dwell,
Nor let me ever live retired;
But in Thy CHURCH those mighty Wonders tell,
Which have my Verse with Heavenly Flame inspired:
Lord to my House Thy Love secure,
And let it, like Thy Word, endure!
III.
Yet not for Greatness do I pray,
Nor, e're Thy Time is, to be known*
But do Thy Will, I can its Pleasure stay,
Waiting that Harvest, for which Thou have sown:
Only till then, make me content,
And leave to Thee the whole Management!
IV.
Thou know I do Thy Temple love,
I know there is time enough behind;
Why should I make the Enjoyment bitter prove,
By hasting, what I Am sure Thou have designed?
In hope at present, I rejoice,
And both my Heart employ and Voice.
V.
For what concerns my poor estate,
Since I to Thee my All commit;
No time, when e're it falls, shall be too late,
To soon it may, if I encumber it
With Wishes, that unlawful be,
And, vain affects, which move not Thee:
VI.
No! I Will never think the time too long,
How long so e're the time may be;
Let but Thy Hand, through Patience make me strong,
And keep off Evil from disturbing me!
If Jabez thus to Thee did cry,
And could be heard, Lord, why not I?
Haec Sacrorum Ordinum desiderio raptus, mihimet ipsi meus Vates, cecini, III
Nonas December. M.DC.LX.VII. In quos post multas hujusce vitae varietates, media
and matura aetate, ab aerumnosis saeculi curis, and otio (neutiqam licet
ignobili) hoc juxta Vaticinium, biennio post redemptus fui XIV. Kalend. Januar.
Per Reverendum admodum in Christo Patrem and Dominum Dominum GEORGIUM Episcopum
Wintoniensem, cujus R. R. Paternitati hic, impares licet tanto Beneficio,
grates, quas tamen Divino Numini imprimis debeo, secundas saltem, ex toto animo
in conspectu Populi and Ecclesiae refero. -- Manda Deus virtuti and confirma
quod operatus es a Templo Sancto tuo!
Ode.
The Song of DEBORA.
Cecineruntque Debora and Barac filius Abinoem in illo die, Judic. 5.
dicentes. -- Qui sponte obtulistis de Israel, etc.
I.
ISRAEL, the blessed and happy State,
For whom the Almighty all his Wonders showed;
Israel, your great Redeemer celebrate,
And what for you he did, rehearse aloud!
Tell, how he made his ^and and appear,
And when the willing Tribes their Youth an Offering sent,
How God before the Sacred Army went,
And vengeful Ruin followed in the Rear!
And ye, O Kings, (whose awful Sway
The many-headed Multitude obey,
And at whose feet they both their Necks and Tributes lay;)
Princes and Rulers, to my Song attend,
Whose lofty Subject challenges your Ear,
By all that can a Verse commend,
Or greatest Kings persuade to hear,
A tuneful Voice, with Charms divinely strong,
A Woman begs your audience now;
And if that will not do,
Deb'rah a Judge in Israel sings, and Isreal's God's the Song.
II.
Domine cum exires de Seir.
Lord, out of Seir, when Thou did go,
Marching the Hill, before Thine Host adown,
When Thou made Edoms Fields Thy Conquests know,
And with Armed Troops the Wilderness did crown;
Affrighted Earth did at Thy Presence quake,
Heavens labo'ring Machin did the Warning take,
And from its torn sides dreary Tempests shake.
It thundered, and down fell from Heavens high Tower,
Of Stones and scalding Rain a mighty shower;
With Darkness all the Sky was covered over,
Through which the blew-wing'd Lightning flew,
And after it a trail of kindled Brimstone drew.
It struck the Rocks, and they took fire;
The Mountains with excessive heat did melt,
Unusual scorching Sinai felt;
And tho than other Hills exalted higher,
Tho with its head it did to the Clouds aspire,
Sinai nor could resist, nor bear the Flame,
But down in a burning Torrent headlong came.
III.
In diebus Samgar, etc.
Samgar and Jahel wondrous Saviors were,
And did in Counsel and in Arms excel;
Of Jahels Prudence we the Trophies are,
Six hundred Philistims by Samgar fell,
All with an Ox-goad slain, and driven like Beasts to ^ell*
But yet the Roads untrodden lay,
Scared Passengers through Woods did stray,
And but to Dens and Caves led not the Mountainous highway.
Woods, and thick Bushes in all Pastures grew,
The Plough-man, and his Labor ceast,
The Land as Cursed enjoyed its rest,
And not each Seventh alone, but every Year a Sabbath knew.
It rested, till I Debora rose at last,
At last in Israel I a Mother rose,
Then when new Gods the People chose,
And from Rebellion to Idolatry had past.
But see the Vengeance that pursued their Sin,
Slavery and Cowardice at the Breach rusht in,
And not a Shield, or Spear was found midst forty thousand Men.
IV.
Cor meum diligit Principes, etc.
Fly, fly, my Muse, from this unmanly race,
And to new Pomps thy strains address;
Isreal's great Generals, who to efface
Of all our foregone Miseries the very trace,
Courageously did to the Battle press,
And, where in Irons we lay, with Laurels strewn the place.
With them my Heart, with them my Praise shall be.
And ye, O Fathers, who at Home reside,
And you, who equal Justice to dispense,
Unguarded to your peaceful Cities ride,
And Justice done, return unguarded thence;
Judges, and People by their arms set free,
Come in and join with me,
And let us bless the Lord, as we their Spoils divide!
Come let us bless Him, and proclaim
The Wonders of his Reverend Name;
There, whence we exiled were of late,
And at our Fountains first begin,
Where we so often have rescued been,
Scaping the Death we saw upon the Wing;
Our Fountains tuneful numbers will inspire,
And by their purling falls direct the Quire,
Which well tuned there, we may advance in state,
And bring with Harps and Songs our Praises to the City Gate.
V.
Surge, surge Debora, surge, etc.
Awake, O Debora, awake,
And from this hint fresh vigor take!
Encourage, and provoke Thy Lyre,
Till all its speaking Chords conspire,
And with Thy Voice a perfect Concert make!
Up Barak, at the harmonious Sound,
Abinoams warlike S^n arise!
Lo! Thy Captivity stands in Fetters bound,
To be Thy valors early Prize,
And dreadfully adorn Thy entrance with its Exequies!
Lead on, Great Prince, by God ordained
To be Thy Nations Glory, and this Days;
Who have Thy self the heat of the War sustained;
Tho Women with Thee share divided Praise!
And all the while Thou do the sacred Mount ascend,
Boldly Thy Ransomed Peoples shouts attend,
The Bays Thou wearest will Thy Head defend!
Yea, speak Thy self, how God made Thee,
The Captain of his Armies be;
And when retired Thou long had lain at Home,
How forth he called Thee to overcome:
The strange deliv'erance by Thy Hands he wrought,
And how to mine he Judgment gave;
And let the Tribes, which with us fought,
A just Memorial in our Triumphs have!
VI.
Ex Ephraim delevit eos.
Place Ephraim here, Ephraim whose Fortitude
In Amaleks first overthrow was tried,
When stoutly he the Uncircumsised defied,
And with unerring Shafts their flying Troops pursued.
Benjamin, with his Squadron followed close,
And his scorned Life more nobly to expose,
The Tribe, he dearest loved, for witness of his Courage, chose,
From Machir Princes to the Battle came,
And Counselors from Zabulon,
Who to increase the glory of their Name,
Kept by the Sword, what by the Pen they won.
Then Issachar and Napthali,
By Debora that, and this by Barak led,
Both valiant Tribes, and both resolved to die,
Or conquer with so brave an Head.
But had you seen the Emulation there,
And how they strove each other to out-fight;
You would have thought them armed with Heavenly Might,
And (all so terrible they did appear
Such Trophies of Mail'd Corpse did round them rear,)
That every Isra^elite a destroying Angel were.
VII.
Diviso contra se Ruben.
Ruben the while did with his Flocks abide,
And blessed the Flood, whose streams the parted Land divide.
Careless of what his Brethr'en thought,
And what the fears his cold indiffernce wrought;
Strange and distracted fears his cold indifference brought.
But why, O Ruben, why did thou refuse
An Enterprise so great and good?
Was it to hear thy bleating Ews;
Or could thy Honor be so little understood,
That their plain Fleeces thou should choose,
Before a Robe di'd Purple, in thine Enemies blood?
This cold indifference, Ruben, lost thee more,
Than ever thou in Arms had gained before.
Ah! had thou been alone! but far behind,
By thy example, Gilead stayed;
On Shipboard Dan drove on his Trade,
And Asser, that he might be signally unkind.
Tho of pale Death too Womanly afraid,
Rather than yield his aid,
Watched on his naked Beaches, torn with Seas and Wind.
Unlike to Zabulon, and Nepthali,
Who best knew how to Live, yet feared the least to Die.
VIII.
Zabulon vero and Nepthali, etc.
Thither, my Song, behold their Ensigns spread
On the High Places, and how equally endu'd
With Learning, and with Conduct too, they showed,
That never friendlier those best gifts inhabited,
And softer thoughts designs more noble bred.
The Cananitish Kings approacht the Hill,
Tabor, by their defeat to be renowned,
But fearful to ascend its top, did fill
The Plains of Tanaach, with their Camps around,
And loud Megiddos Waters with their shoutings drowned.
They came, and fought, but Heaven, that took our part,
Bore the first shock, and on them turned the War;
A mortal shaft was sent from every Star,
Which sank like Lead, into the Spoilers Heart.
No Gain or Pay, the Sacred Legions took,
But to the Service armed, in Diamond marched on,
And, whom they spared, Kison, that ancient Brook,
Kison in its swollen Torrent carried down.
In vain the Horse assayed the Flood to stem,
Which hurld their Riders with them down the rapid stream.
IX.
Conculca Anima mea robustos.
Enough, my Soul, enough, the chase give over!
Those Enemies thou have seen, thou shall behold no more.
Stop, for at length the War is done,
And thou in Blood, I know, take no delight!
Sound a Retreat, the Day's thine own,
And so shall Sisera too, e're Night,
Finding the Death he would shun by an inglorious flight.
But first confirm a Curse was laid
By our God's Angel, and a Charge divine,
"Curse ye Meros, the Angel said!
"Curse Meros bitterly, and join
Yours to Jehovah's Curse and mine!
Curse all, who dwell there, and be this their Doom,
Who like them to the Almighty's ^tandard will not come!
But blessed above Women be,
Isreal's and Hebers Ornament,
Jabel above all Women blessed in the Tent.
And let this Song preserve her Memory!
Never was greater Name
Recorded, in the Eternal Monuments of Fame.
X.
Aquam petenti lac dedit.
To her on foot Sisa'ra his flight addressed:
The courteous Wife to meet him went:
The courteous Wife invited him into her Tent,
And future Joys with thoughtful Cares suppressed.
He asked her Water, and she ran in haste,
To execute her own, and to prevent his Wish,
And poured him Milk into a Royal Dish:
(A ready and a quick repast.)
And having give'n the fatal Bait,
Humbly at his Feet did wait,
And smiled to see how greedily he drank and slept his last.
"Sleep, Tyrant, sleep she said!
And up a Nail and Hammer took,
The Nail into his Temples struck,
And with his own unbloody Sword smote off his Head.
He bowd, he fell, and at her Feet he lay,
Down at her Feet he bowed, fell, groaned his Soul away,
Where he bowed, there he fell down dead.
XI.
Per fenestram respiciens.
Out at a Window his blithe Mother gazed,
And waiting there his coming, cried,
"Why lies the Dust so long unrais'd,
"Nor Sisara yet, with Captives by his side,
"Exalted high in his triumphal Chariot ride?
Her Ladies answered her, Those Ora'cles of the Court,
Yea, to her self she made her own report.
"Have they not sped, have they not gained the Day,
"Have they not shared the Israelitish Prey?
"To every Man a Dame, or two,
"To Sisara as the General's due,
"Choice of rich Slaves, and choice of Garments too?
"A curious Vest, with Needles wrought,
"With curious Needles wrought on either side,
"And all in Royal Colors died,
"By the Hebrews of their Neighbor Tyrians bought;
"And only sit the Victors bloody arms to hide?
So, Lord, may all Thine Enemies die,
So Conquer, and be Conquered so;
When such, as on Thy Power rely,
In Heaven alone their equals know,
And like the Sun, which triumphs there,
Crowned with illustrious Beams, and robe'd in Light appear.
Comiato.
To the Reverend the now Dr. James Gardener Sub-Dean of Lincoln.
SONG, in the Country little understood,
For my dear Gardener, at the Town inquire,
And all thy heat into his generous Breast inspire,
To mingle with a nobler Fire,
Which lies at present smouldring in his Blood!
Perchance thou may effectual prove,
To make that upward, toward its Center, move,
And him in softest lays rehearse the HOLIEST LOVE.
1668.
David's ELEGY Upon the death of SAUL and JONATHAN.
2 Samuel 1. Considera Israel pro hiis, qui mortui.
I.
ISREAL'S delight, the glory of our Land,
How are the Mighty overthrown!
Before their Enemies Swords they could not stand,
Nor conquered fall by any but their own:
In Thy High Places Israel, both did fall,
A public Victim for their Land, in view of all.
II.
Let not in Gath the mournful News be known,
Nor in Philistia publish it;
Stop the Report, e're it reach Ascalon,
Nor let our Captive names their Arches fit:
Lest fearful Women, whom they left at Home,
With Songs to share the Spoil, and meet their Triumph come!
III.
And ye, Gilboas Mounts, may never Rain,
Or fertile Showers descend on you;
But on your Heads let there abide that stain,
Which Seas, should they pour down, would but renew*
Let the cursed Earth no more an Offering yield,
Nor God expect his First Fruits from the empty Field.
IV.
'Twas there the valiant Saul resigned his Breath,
And there his Shield was thrown away;
Never was such a Trophy reared to Death,
Nor ever sacred arms so scattered lay:
The valiant Readiness, as if he never had been
The Lord's Anointed, or his Chosen Peoples King.
V.
From the pursuit the Bow of Jonathan,
Some Regal Spoil, did daily bring;
Destruction after his fleet arrows ran,
And at the Wounds they made, Death entered in*
The Sword of Saul did never empty come,
But a new Purple, from the Blood of Kings, brought home.
VI.
Alike in Life, in Death alike they were,
Not more in Blood allied, than Mind;
Themselves alone, you with them could compare,
Who none their equals saw, or left behind:
And on their arms there hung such Victory,
That Men they only seemed, because they both could die.
VII.
For as the Eagle, to her Prey does haste,
And hovering over the Quarry flies;
Or the fierce Lion, having once a taste
Of Blood, does all the Shepherds noise despise,
And at their Slings no show of fear does make;
Like Lions they o're-came, like Eagles did o're-take.
VIII.
And you, O Daughters of so great a King,
(Our Tribes support) his Death lament,
Whose Victories you before were wont to Sing,
And clad in Scarlet to adorn them, went:
Now put on Mourning, to attend his Hearse,
Sad as your own complaints, and mournful as my Verse.
IX.
For (Lo!) the Glories of our State, and Land,
(Lo!) how the Mighty are o're-thrown;
Before their Enemies Swords, they could not stand,
Tho Saul by none could perish, but his own:
In thy High Places, Jonathan, thou did fall,
A public Victim, where thou should have reigned over all.
X.
For thee, my Brother, it is for thee I grieve,
The best of Friends, as well as Men;
In whose Death I that fatal Wound receive,
Which closed will never be, till we meet again;
And in the Mansions of the Saints above,
Enjoy, what here we vowed, our more than mortal love.
XI.
Isreal's Delight, the Glory of our Land,
How are the Mighty overthrown!
Before his Enemies Sword one could not stand,
Nor the other fall by any but his own:
In thy High Places, Israel, both did fall,
A public Victim for their Land, in view of all.
DAVID's Thansgiving and Prayer.
2 Samuel 7.
-- Ingressus est autem Rex David and sedit coram Domino, and dixit, Quis ego
sum Domine and quae?
I.
WHO am I Lord, and what is my Family,
The youngest House of the Jessean Race, 1 Paral. 17.

In all things little, but that Grace,
Which Thou on us have shour'd, but most on me?
Who am I, that Thou hitherto
Have brought me, Lord, Thy Bounty and Thy Power to show?
II.
Hitherto Thou have brought me, and that Hand,
Which for a Sling, and Sheephook was designed;
A nobler Service is enjoined,
And Men, instead of Flocks, are my command:
Israel the Flock, and care Divine,
And my exalted Name does midst rich Trophies shine.
III.
Like the great Men's of the Earth, Thou' have made my Name,
And yet (as if all this were not enough,
And thousand Pledges more of Love,
But the foundation only of that Frame,
Thou in Thy mind had cast to raise)
Of future Glories Thou foretell'st, and growing Praise.
IV.
Of Times to come Thou' have told, long hence to come,
And that my House, and Throne upheld shall be;
Like a Prince born, Thou' have treated me,
As having, what Thou' art making for me room;
And are Men, Lord, thus wont to do,
Who rather than exalt the Poor, will keep them low?
V.
Yet thus Thou' have done, and what can I say more,
Or greater, for Thy Honor, Lord, or mine,
Which both here equal issues join,
That all, who the Work admire, may Thee adore?
Greater I Would say, Thou know full well,
And more, but what I know not, how I cannot tell.
VI.
Unless I add, that for Thy great Words sake
Thou did it, that Thou might at once fulfill
The secret Counsels of Thy Will,
And, what they were, known to Thy People make:
For Thine own sake, my God, and mine,
For Thou thy Servant know, and that his will is Thine.
VII.
Great art Thou, Lord, and wondrous are Thy Ways,
The best and greatest, the only God alone;
Beside, or like whom, there is none,
Glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praise:
Thus sing we, who did first receive
The Truth from our Forefathers, but seeing, now believe.
VIII.
For what one Nation, as from them of Old
We' have often heard, with Israel can compare?
For whom Himself God did not spare,
But came from Heaven in Person to behold
The Mise'ries they did undergo,
And not to see alone, but to Revenge them too?
IX.
From Heaven he came, from Heaven himself came down
All clothed in Tempest, and sulphurous Flame,
To get Himself the greater Name,
And do, what by His Word He might have done:
That thus from Egypts Gods set free,
Himself he might declare His Peoples God to be.
X.
This our Forefathers told us; but we' have seen
Our selves as mighty Wonders of Thy Love;
Nor need we fetch from them our Proof,
Who' our selves as mighty Wonders often have been:
Confirmed by Thy after vast expense,
(And more's to come) to be Thy great Inheritance.
XI.
And now, my God, the Word, which Thou have said,
The irrevocable Word concerning me,
Let it for ever stablisht be!
And stablisht be that House, which Thou have made!
Thy Servant David, thus approved,
Establish with his House, nor let them be removed.
XII.
So shall Thy Word and Name be ever praised;
"And Isreal's Holy God, shall Israel sing,
"Is God alone, and Israel's King:
"He His Anointeds Horn on high has raised,
"Of David, and his House approved,
"David and 'his House established never to be removed.
XIII.
Not that I Am worthy, Thou should hear my Vows,
Only Thy self was pleased the Word to pass;
Lord, since I 'have with Thee found this Grace,
To be assured Thou It build Thy Servants House,
Another Grace turn not away,
Which in my Heart I since have found, even thus to pray.
XIV.
Thy Promise it is this holy boldness gives,
That Word of Thine, which like Thy self is sure,
And through all Ages shall endure,
True, as its Speaker, who for ever Lives:
The God of Truth, who cannot Lie,
Nor his own Goodness, promised thus to his Child, deny.
XV.
Please it Thee therefore, may it please Thee, Lord,
Thy Servant, and Thy Servants House to bless,
With Blessings that may never cease;
Blessings, as fixed as Thy Eternal Word,
For Thou, my God, can bless alone,
Thus bless; and once thus blessing me indeed, I 'have done.
The last words of DAVID.
Dixit David filius Isai, 2 Samuel 23.
dixit vir, etc.
Terzetti.
THUS David, Jesse's Royal Son did sing,
Thus spoke the Man, who the great Promise had,
That from his Loins the CHRIST of God should spring.
On whose Eternal Shoulders should be laid
The Government, Psalmist of Israel,
Thus sang he, thus from Heaven inspired he said:
The Spirit of God in Vision on me fell,
And by my Mouth Himself the Almighty spoke,
His Words they are, which I his Prophet tell,
His, who the Care of Israel does take,
And hitherto never falsifi'd His Trust,
Nor will, tho Heaven and Earths Foundations shake.
"The Man, who rules over others must be Just,
"Ruling himself, and them, in the sacred Fear
"Of Heavens dread King, to whom account he must;
"For all the wrongs he does, or makes them bear;
"By an Impartial Judgment to be tried,
"Whose Doom definitive he forced shall hear.
Thrice happy Prince, who (e're that Oyes cried,)
The God within his Breast, his Conscience,
Appealing, and appealed has satisfied!
There, first absolved, with approved Innocence,
His Righteousness shall shine, as Morning Light,
When the early Sun, his Glories to dispense,
New guilds the Sullys of the murky Night;
And without Cloud between his Beams to pass,
As higher he ascends, appears more bright.
So shall he shine; or as the tender Grass,
Shooting its verdant Head above the Ground,
With gems of pearly Dew, midst Flowers, takes place.
This I Will not say, that in my Rule I Have found,
A perfect and uninterrupted Bliss,
(For what is my House, or Rule thus to be owned?)
Yet for my Kingdoms Justice I Will say this,
That with me God a lasting Cove'nant made,
In all things sure, as His great promise is:
Ordered and sure, nor e're to be o^resway'd,
Tho I too often have forfeited His Love,
And when I should have ruled, my Lusts obeyed.
But even then did I, and do now reprove
The Follies I so passionately pursued,
And whose remembrance greater Passions move.
Blessed God forgive me! be Thy Word renewed!
For all before Thee is my whole desire,
All in Thy sight, as it by me is viewed;
Confirm Thy Promise, humbly I require,
Not for my sake, O Lord, but for Thine own;
And double Zeal into my Son inspire!
So shall he grow up as a Plant alone,
And in his Fame, tho dead, I too shall grow,
The happy Father of an happier Son:
Whilst those, who will not to his Scepter bow,
As Thorns shall all of them be thrust away,
Thorns, which the unguarded Hand tho they pierce through,
To the Hook and Fire shall be an easy Prey:
Justice, which in his time from the Earth shall spring,
And Peace, from Heaven descending, meet half way.
The Song of HEZEKIAH.
Ego dixi in dimidio dierum meorum. Isa. 38.

I.
REVOLVING the sharp Sentence past,
And how an end, e're thought was on me come;
How soon, said I, have I approacht my last,
And unawares reached Natures farthest Home?
Ah! now I to the Grave must go,
No more, or Life, or Pleasure know,
But a long doleful Night, in darkness deep below.
II.
No more, my God, shall I see Thee,
Nor the great Works of Thy Almighty Hand;
No more a Votary at Thy Altar be,
Nor in the crowds of them, who praise Thee, stand*
Mankind no more shall I behold,
Nor tell, nor of Thy Love be told,
Eve'n mine to Thee, shall like my ashes, Lord, be cold.
III.
Lo! as a Tent am I removed,
And my lives thread, which I thought wondrous strong,
Too weak to bear the Looms extension proved,
In The midst broke off, too sleasie to run long:
With Sickness I am pine'd away,
And feel each moment some decay,
All Night in Terrors, and in Grief die all the Day.
IV.
For as a Lion hasts to 'his Prey,
And havieg gripe'd it, breaks the yielding Bones;
So on me came the Almighty, whilst I lay
In vain expecting help, but from my Groans:
O take, said I, Thy Hand away,
See how I feel my Loins decay,
All Night in Terrors, and in Grief die all the Day!
V.
Then like a Swallow, or a Crane,
I chatt'red over my Fears, his Heart to move;
The widowed Turtle does not more complain,
When in the Woods she' has lost her faithful Love:
My Eyes, O God, with waiting fail,
Why should Thou thus a Worm assail?
I Am Thine, O let for once the Almighty not prevail!
VI.
Yet do Thy Will, I must confess,
Worse Plagues than these, my Sins deserve from Thee;
The Sentence past is than my Crimes far less,
And only Hell a fit reward can be:
Ah! let my Prayers that Doom prevent!
My age in Mournings shall be spent,
And all the Years Thou giv'st, shall be, but to repent.
VII.
On Thy great Pleasure all depend,
During which only, I and Mankind live;
To teach us this Thou do Diseases send,
And daily claim'st the Life, which Thou did give:
Yet such is Thy resistless Power,
That when our age is quite past over,
What Thou at first did give, Thou can our Life restore.
VIII.
And thus with me, Lord, have Thou dealt,
Tho I for peace had only bitterness;
The effects of mighty Goodness thus have felt,
Beyond what words, or numbers can express:
For from the Pit Thou drew'st me back,
And that I might no pleasures lack,
Upon Thy Self the burden of my Sins did take.
IX.
Triumphant Savior! the still Grave,
For so great Love, Thy Name can never praise;
Nor in the Pit can Thou Memorial have,
Thy Truth, or hoped for, or adored Thy Ways:
The Living, Lord, the Living are
The Men, who must Thy Power declare,
And of them chiefly such, whom Thou like me, shall spare.
X.
They to their Children shall make known,
As I do now, the Wonders of Thy Hand;
How when we eve'n to Hell did headlong run,
To stop our passage, Thou in the way did stand:
Lord, since Thou 'hast thus delivered me,
Thus made me Thy Salvation see,
My Life, and Harp, and Song, I Will consecrate to Thee.
(...) III. ID. NOV. 1667.
Three Psalms according to the old Version, and Meeter, ordinarily used in
Churches, a little altered.
PSALM. I.
Beatus Vir qui non abiit.
THE Man is blessed, whose doubtful Paths
Unrul'd by Sinners are;
Who in their Council never stood,
Nor sat in the Scorners Chair.
But in the Law of God the Lord
Has fixed his whole delight;
And in that Law does exercise
Himself both Day and Night.
He shall be like a Tree, which grows
Close by the Rivers side;
Whose loaded Boughs in Fruits return
Their Tribute to the Tide.
No Storm or Drought shall make him fade,
But he unmoved shall stand;
Nor shall Success less prosperous crown,
What e're he takes in hand.
No so the Wicked, who as Chaff
By Tempests raised on high,
The triumph of fierce Winds are made,
And as they drive them, fly.
Unlike in Life, unlike shall be
The ends which on them wait;
Whilst these in Judgment cannot stand,
And those are praised in the Gate.
For why the ways of Righteous Men
Unto the Lord are known:
But Sinners ways, hid to themselves,
Unto the Dead lead down.
PSALM. LVII.
Miserere mei, Deus miserere.
GREAT God, on whom I have reli'd,
Whose Mercy is my stay;
Under Thy Wings, or let me hide,
Or on them fly away!
Or hide, or fly, until the Storm
Which threatens me is past;
Thou all things for me do perform,
In Thee my hope is placed.
To God I Will cry, who shall descend
From Heaven, in the Fight to close,
And while his Love does me defend
His Truth shall slay my Foes.
With Lions, Lord, my Soul lies down,
shut up within their Den;
Lions so fierce were never known,
Cruel, and bloody Men.
Whose Tongues are Swords, and Eyes all Fire,
With gore and slaughter Red;
And who against me all conspire,
To look, or speak me Dead.
Yet set Thy Glory 'above the Skies,
Over the Earth exalted be;
For tho so high I cannot rise,
Thou may stoop down to me
Thou did so, for as I looked round,
Pensive and full of care;
My prostrate Enemies strewn the Ground,
Each taken in his own Snare.
Fixed is my Heart to sing Thy Praise,
It Is fixed, and I Will rejoice;
Awake my Harp, and with Thee raise,
To Heaven my tuneful Voice!
I will awake too, and my Song
To the Nations shall rehearse
Mercies, whose Praise to Heaven belong,
Worthy an Angels Verse.
Lord, set Thy Glory 'above the Skies,
Over the Earth exalted be!
Lo, how thy Son does thither rise,
Lift from the Grave by Thee!
Turned and Transcribed with the following Psalm, for an Hymn upon Easter Day,
1671.
PSALM. CXIV.
In exitu Israel de, etc.
WHEN Israel was by God's address,
And his Almighty Hand,
From Bondage led, and wondrously
Brought to the Promised Land;
In Judah God his Glory showed,
And did his Power declare;
Israel his great Inheritance,
Temple and Empire were.
The Sea it saw and suddenly
Amazed rose up and fled;
The parted streams of Jordans Flood
Ran trembling to their Head.
Aside the Mountains leapt like Rams,
And to the Hills did show,
(The Hills, which shook like frighted Lambs)
The way which they should go.
What ailed the Sea that all amazed
So suddenly it fled?
And what made Jordans parted streams
Run trembling to their Head?
Why did the Mountains leap, like Rams,
And to the Hills first show,
(The Hills, which shook like frighted Lambs)
The way which they should go?
Confess, O Earth, thy Sovereign Lord,
And at his Presence quake!
Before the Face of Jacob's God
Bow, and Obeisance make!
It Is he, who caused those Rocks to hear,
And when Thy Springs are dry,
Can from their flinty Bowels fetch
Streams, which shall never die.
PSALM. CLI.
According to the LXXII. -- (...). etc.
I.
YOUNGEST of all my Brethren, and the least
In the Jessean House, to' a Service I inclined,
Which both my Age, and Innocence suited best,
And best the Throne, to which I was designed:
My Fathers Flock, was early set to keep,
And how to govern Men, first learn among my Sheep.
II.
I kept and fed them with a pious care,
And as they fed, my Harp, and Pipe assayd;
Them, and my self to please, did Songs prepare,
And variously, as pensive Shepherd, played:
Till having wearied out an humbler String,
A bolder flight I dare'd, Isreal's Great God to Sing.
III.
But who such Praise can worthily rehearse?
I strove my best, and it acceptance found,
With Heavens Blessed King, who to approve my Verse,
A double Glory round my Temples bound;
By' his Prophets Hand there placed the Regal Crown,
(From the Flock calling me) the Poet's with his own.
IV.
I many Brethren had, and great of Might,
All valiant Men, and all renowned in War,
Often tried, but God in them took no delight,
For Causes, tho from us removed far,
To' himself best known, who sees not as Man sees,
But as the Heart is, judges, and gives Dignities.
V.
For that, and his own Pleasure He chose me,
And having chosen, called me forth to fight
With Raphas Giant-son, whose blasphemy
Levelled at Heaven, on his own Head did light:
By' his Gods he cursed me, and his Gods he cursed,
Himself as the chief God propitiating thus first.
VI.
But such curse Proof, I out against him went,
The firmlier armed, as he disarmed thereby;
And certain Death into his Forehead sent,
E're he the place could guard, or turn to fly:
He fell: I ran, to the lifeless Monster came,
From him with his own Sword took his Head, from Israel shame.
Job cursing his Birth.
After this opened Job his Mouth and cursed his Day: And Job spoke and said.
Pereat dies in qua natus sum.
MAY the Day perish, and its hastly flight
Be still, be still retarded by a sluggish Night!
The Day, unhappy Day, whereon 'twas known,
My Mother could that name, and sorrows own.
Let it look black as Hell, no Ray appear,
Nor on it God in common Light draw near!
But unregarded may it from above,
To 'all other Days a different Circle move!
Augment the last Nights gloom, and never be found,
But in a Sea of Rapes, and Murder drowned!
Let Deaths grim Terrors on it ever dwell,
Of if it has Light, let it be such as fell
On Sodom, when avenging Heaven did shower
Tempests of Fire, and floods of Lightning pour!
And for the Night (if yet it were the Night,
For any Day too bad, which first disclosed the sight)
Dark of it self, let Horror on it seize!
And when all others welcome are for the ease,
And respit, which they bring the toilsome care
Of pains, which in their Curtains hidden are,
Let it be Cursed too, and by' a fatal Breath,
Doomed not the shadow of it, but very Death!
Sad, dismal, solitary, know no Joys,
No cheerful shouts, but a dull confused noise
Of Groans and Shrieks, as when the parting Soul
Labors in vain its dest'iny to control!
And as the Criminal, who, to die next Morn,
The pity of the many, and their Scorn,
Curses its shortness, and does think it done,
Sooner than other Nights are well begun;
Let it abide Cursed, and grown Ominous,
Its Tale in some prodigious ruin lose!
Black be its Twilight, in it rise no Star,
But such, as when it is seen, tho from a far,
Famine portends, and Blood, and the Worlds flame,
And all the Plagues that have, or have not Name!
Let it expect the Light, and pine away
To Darkness palpable, but see no Day!
With thousand Curses more --
And Day or Night be' it, Evening, or the Morn,
From the Years account let it be ever torn!
To me, it self, and Heaven and all be lost,
And from the number of the Days be crossed!
O had it never been, or had that Hour
But barred the Gate, and damned the fertile Door
(Unhappy Gate, but Hour unhappy more!)
Sorrow I never had known, nor had these Eyes
Beheld the Light, which none but Fools can prize.
Rather why di'd I not, making the Womb,
At once my busy tyring House and Tomb;
But by the Knees I must perverted be,
And live more Deaths than one to act, more Plagues to see
Draw the hated Breasts only to fetch supply,
After ten thousand Deaths, new deaths to try,
And at the last with greater sense and torment die!
Had I then died, still as the Night, or Grave,
My Voice had been, without a Death to crave.
Still had I lain, and in Oblivion's breast
Enjoyed a sweeter sleep and sounder rest.
The Earth, which does in its cold Lap enfold
All Arts and Arms, Princes and all their Gold,
Which Sepulchers does for their Tombs prepare,
Great in their Dust and in their Ruins fair,
For me, to Die then had I been allowed,
Had marked a place, amidst the awful Crowd,
There where untimely Births in the Pit are thrown,
And through the Earths soft pores the Plains with verdure crown.
An awful place it is, with Company
The best and great'st, where in appartments lie
Kings, and their Counselors, each in his Bed,
With each his Sword clapped underneath his Head.
For there the proud Usurpors terrors cease,
And there the weary are at perfect ease,
And the whole Region riots in the spoils of Peace.
Prisoners enjoy their Liberty, at least know
No other Chains, than what their Jaylors do.
Both small and great there undistinguisht be,
Undisturbed by outworn Authority.
Masters and Servants throw those Names aside,
And for a nobler freedom both provide.
No fear of the Oppressor's there, no wrong,
No Clamours, no Reproach amidst that throng;
But a deep silence fills the profound wast,
Deaf to all calls, but the last Trumpets blast.
Ah, might I rest there! Why is Death denied
To him, who seeks it, in those shades to hide?
Who for it digs, and would more gladly find
That Treasure, than the mines he leaves in the way behind!
Light and this Life, will but increase his pain,
Light and this Life, of which he does complain,
And would for 'one Death exchange, but all in vain.
Why is Life thrust on such a Man, who is dead,
Dead to himself, and God, all comfort fled?
Me why is it thrust on, who the Gift despise,
As the worst of this Worlds great impert'nencies;
Nay more, its greatest Curse; unwelcome Guest,
That never, lets me never be at rest,
Nor Bed, nor Board their just refreshment give;
Which! (who would thus?) thus I Would not always live;
Too long already, to feel what I feared,
Sadder than can be told, too doleful to be heard;
At rest I never was, but compared with this,
All former Grief as gone, and vanished is,
And all, but very Hell, would be a kind of Bliss.
1660.
The Prayer of HABAKKUK.
Hab. 3. Domine, audivi auditionem.
I.
MY God, I have Thy Wonders heard,
And their report like those, who saw them feared,
I heard, what Thou of Old have done,
Revive Thy Work, nor let it die;
But since to make us hope Thou have begun,
Let our Deliverance too draw nigh!
Lord, in the midst of the Years appear,
Nor ever, ever thus forbear,
To put an happy issue to our Fear!
In The midst of the Years Thy Greatness show,
For we are ready if Thou 'art but so!
Let us in Wrath Thy Mercy see,
Remembered this, let that forgotten be!
What tho with us the full Time 's not expired,
With Thee it is ended, and by us desired.
Ages to come, and Ages long since past,
In Heaven, where Thou art, present are,
It Is ever now and now will ever last.
O, Now from Heaven Thy Power declare,
And let it once be here, what it is ever there.
II.
Deus ab Austro veniet.
God came from Teman, and the Holy One,
Descended from Mount Paran, with a mighty Train:
The Earth to Heaven did dart the Rays again,
And as He past the Sky with Glory shone.
Refined Light, without allay,
Such as above makes Angels Day,
Such was His Brightness, and such was His Way.
He was all Light, but from His Side
Shot forth a Beam, so clear, and pure,
That none to see it could endure;
And there, as in the dark, He did His Glories hide.
The Pestilence before Him went,
Gathering new Poisons, as the old were spent;
Ruin and Desolation, at His Feet,
Never to part again did meet,
But sworn to execute His Wrath on Man,
Kissed and embraced each other close, as they before Him ran.
III.
Stetit, and mensus est Terram,
He stood and in His Hand
He held a Line, and measuring Wand,
Both to mete out, and to destroy his Land.
Over the Earth the fatal Line He threw,
And that it level on all sides might lie,
He smote the Nations, and they' in haste withdrew;
The affrighted Earth, that fain would fly,
Seeing it could not stir, the Line did take,
But did with horror, and amazement shake;
The Rocks as it came over their Backs, did quake;
Bowed down their Heads, and grieved they were so high.
The everlasting Mountains scatt'red lay,
And the perpetual Hills sank down, and stole away.
IV.
Pro iniquitate vidi Tentoria.
I saw the Tents of Egypt in distress,
Methoughts I heard their doleful groans;
The Land did tremble, and its emptiness
An hollow murmur added to its moans,
And shriekt a deadly echo from the wounded Stones,
When not content to see their Firstborn slain,
Conquered on Land, they once again
Would try the fortune of the Main.
Since they the Tenth Shock could so stoutly brave,
They scorned to fear the Eleventh Wave,
Till they themselves, and that saw buried in a Grave.
What ailed the Rivers, Lord, what ailed the Flood,
That Thou should make their streams true Veins of Blood?
What could the Sea, against Thee do,
So small against so great a Foe,
Exalted Thou so high, and that so low?
Could it deserve Thy Wrath, or roar so loud,
From Heaven, Thy Throne, to call Thee down;
Or in its swellings was it grown so proud,
It 'sdeign'd a check from a single frown,
Unless in Triumph God would over it ride,
And Seas, from Seas below, as first from those above divide?
V.
Suscitans suscitabis Arcum,
So on the Sea; in the Air his Bow was seen;
Not by Reflection, like the Rainbow made,
Where all the pleasing Colors are together laid,
That Man might be no more afraid
Of a new Deluge to be unsherd in,
And once more drown, what it could never purge, his Sin.
That is his Bow of Peace, but this of War,
The Sky about it was with Darkness spread,
Slaughter, and Gore had stained it red,
Ghastly and terrible it glistned from afar.
A poisoned Arrow on the string did hang,
It hung a while, but when the Bow He drew,
Drawn to the head away it flew,
And flying gave a deadly twang;
The Air a good while after rang.
The sound how loud, the Pile how keen,
How would it enter, when no Mail could come between*
Such was his Word, which did their Way prepare,
The Oath, which to the Tribes He past,
Making them Conquerors every where,
Till they were in Canaan placed,
Till to the Promised Land, He brought them safe at last*
VI.
Semper fluvios scindes T^rrae.
But first the War did rage at Home,
Thirst, a worse Foe than Amaleck, to be overcome.
To God for Drink they cry,
Not with a Wet, but envious Eye;
For Drought long since had made those Cisterns dry.
They cried, and murmured, to' Egypt back would go,
Till from the Rock God bid the Waters flow;
The Rock obeyed, and to the sacred Rod did bow.
Out gusht new Streams, the admiring Earth gave way,
But wondered how such Rivers should come there;
Yet looked again to see her fear,
And as she saw it quak't, and ready cut in Channels lay.
VII.
Viderunt te and doluerunt Montes.
There as He marched, the Mountains saw their God,
And staggered as he shook His Rod;
The surly Deep past silent by,
And fearful any more to look on high,
In humble plains of liquid Crystal flat did lie.
The bolder Waves, which yet would rise,
And with their towering Billows dare the Skies,
Seeing Him, started and shriekt out;
No more of their Defiance thought,
And of His Presence were ashamed to doubt.
As when one sees some Ruin near,
Ready upon his Head to fall,
Which yet he cannot help at all,
Cannot prevent; but with unequal strength must bear;
Expecting the dead weight he stands,
Shrinks in his Shoulders, and lifts up his Hands:
So stood the Waves, and without power to fly,
With raised up Hands and Eyes, had hardly strength to cry.
VIII.
Sol and Luna steterunt.
The Sun amazed stood still, and at the sight,
Bid the Moon stop, and see the bloody Fight;
Never was such a Fight, never so long a Day,
When Heaven it self did waiting stay,
Nor till it saw the Victors went away.
The Lord Himself that Day marched out,
Hailstones and Coals of Fire hurled all about;
In wrath He marched, through the whole Land,
And thresht the Nations, as He past along,
His Arm so weighty, and his Wrath so strong,
None durst against Him stand.
To save his People did He thus appear,
To them so Glorious, to His Foes so full of Fear.
IX.
Percussisti Caput de domo, etc.
To the Earth He stroke their Princes down,
Their Villages destroyed, sacked every Town;
Tho like a Whirlwind, they against us came,
God for us fought in arms of Flame.
Flames, which their blasts made fiercer burn,
And on themselves with double Vengeance turn;
In Fire God came against them, and o'recame:
Did through the Sea on His great Horses ride,
Whilst Waves to make Him room, stood up in heaps, on either side.
X.
Audivi and contu^batus est, etc.
This as I heard my Joints unloos'd,
Through all my Veins chill Horror was diffused.
My Belly trembled, and my Lips did quake,
My Bones for very rottenness did shake.
Afraid I was, yet could not choose but fear,
When I such mighty things did here,
When e're I was aware,
The God, who did them I perceived drew near.
O may I rest, when he to judge shall rise!
For when He does the wicked World chastise,
How heavy then will be His Hand, how red his Eyes!
XI.
Ascendam ad Populum.
From Thee, Lord, then, to my God now I fly,
And for Thy Mercy, on Thy Power rely,
Propitious Thee thy Land has found, and so shall I.
Nothing shall make me quit my trust,
For Thou art Pitiful, as well as Just.
No, tho the Fig Tree blossom not,
And on the Vine the generous clusters rot;
Tho the labors of the Olive cease,
And all the lesser Plants of Life,
With Man, as He is with his God at strife,
Deny to give their rich increase.
Let the Earth threat Famine, bear no Grass,
Iron below, as Heaven above, is Brass.
No Fruit, no Pasture yield,
But be with Thorns and Brambles filled,
And they burnt up, whilst there is a Furnace in each Field;
Let the Flocks die, and in the Stall
The Ox, not by the Knife, but want of Fodder fall;
Yet in my God will I rejoice,
Whose care I am, as I made him my choice.
It Is He 's my strength, and freed from fear,
For me on high He shall His Truth display;
Or when the Desolation's near,
Give me Hinds Feet to escape away. 1663.

Comiato.
Song wherewith I first Begun,
My Great Redeemers Praise to sing;
And from a far more noble string,
(Than I was wont) an Hebrew Descant run,
For the great Harp of Jesses Son,
To be prepared, when Time should be:
Preserve that Times blessed Memory,
And all that, by Thee' inspired, I since have done,
That if with Men no Grace I find,
With Heaven I may, and Peace in my own Mind!
OCCASIONAL RIMES.
The Saying of CLEANTHES.
(...)
(...), Epict. cap. 77.

(...),
(...)
(...).

DVC me Parens, Sen. Ep. 107.
Celsique Dominator Poli
Quocunque placuit, nulla parendi mora est,
Adsum impiger; fac nolle, comitabor gemens,
Malusque patiar, quod pati licuit bono.

I.
LEAD me, O Providence Divine,
Where e're Thou have appointed me to go;
I Will follow willingly, and show,
By my quick pace, that one design,
Tho hid to me, acts Thy unerring Will and mine.
II.
Briskly I Will follow Thee; for so
I shall prevent my Fate, which to decline
Beyond my Compass is, and Line;
Worse by resistance I shall grow,
And after all be driven, whether I will or no.
Upon a terrible Storm of Thunder, Wind, and Rain, 25 July 1670, done by Night
in the midst of it.
I.
GREAT God of Thunder, at whose Voice
The Earth and its Foundations shake,
And Man, whom Thou have made its Lord, does quake,
Still the dreadful, and amazing Noise!
Lo! as Thy People Israel did of old,
By Fear surpised, yet by our fear made bold,
Lord, lest we die, we beg Thou would Thy Voice withhold!
II.
Yet speak, for (Lo!) Thy Servants hear!
And speak Thy self, but not in Smoke, and Flame!
The mighty Storm, that by the Tishbite came,
And rent the Hills, and did the Mountains tear,
The Tishbite saw unmoved, knowing Thou were not there.
At length was heard an awful sound,
Whispers and murmers undistinct around,
With silence waited on profound,
And a soft Voice, in which the Thunders shouts were drowned.
The Prophet listened, and inclined his Head,
Filled with sacred and unusual Dread;
His Face did in his Mantle hide;
For Thou in triumph on the peaceful sound did ride,
And He, who braved the Thunder, bowed and worshipped
III.
With such another Voice Divine,
Lord, speak to us, and we will hear!
Thy Thunder is too loud for our purged Ear,
And dreadfully Thy scorching Lightnings shine.
That voice of Fire, till the Great Day restrain,
Where to be slept out 't shall be strove in vain;
For, even the Dead by it awaked, shall rise again.
The NATIVITY.
An Ode.
I.
WHO would not envy, if he durst, your Grace,
Blessed Shepherds, to whom first the Tidings came,
That God, who neither Time can bound, nor Space,
The Almighty, who upholds this rolling Frame,
Deigned to be born, and did the Breast embrace:
Of the Worlds Maker made himself a Child,
And wrapped in swaths, tho He whole Nature filled?
Too happy News this, in the City to be told,
In The Palace, and at Herod's Court,
Where all the learned Father Jews resort;
E're it reach them, let the report grow cold!
There Is too much Spleen, and Malice there,
Hypocrisy, Distrust, and servile Fear,
Intemp'rance, Lust, Extortion, Cruelty,
And, if than these there greater Vices be,
Pride, which of ills the worst, pollutes the Air.
The Country 'a better place, God for his Birth did choose,
(Tho not so gay,) and Men more Innocent,
To whom He Would show His great Descent:
And when He did Jerusalem refuse,
'Twas to recall the Ancient Time, and Use,
When He to Man in Paradise first went:
That He to Peace, and Justice, might the preference give,
And all the Graces that in the Country safely live:
And lest the Truth should be denied,
In The Country He Would be Born, but in the City Died.
II.
"Fear not, O Shepherds, the Angel said!
And need there was, to bid them not to fear,
Since greater Souls than theirs might be afraid,
That God, unlookt for, should approach so near,
And full Spring-tides of Light, at Midnights Ebb appear.
For Night it was, and posting toward the Day,
Grown darker on a sudden, than before,
The Shepherds by their Flocks expecting lay,
Till their bright Star should ope' the Mornings Door;
When, Lo! a brighter Star brake out,
And sacred Beams Angelic Forms did show,
Fairer than thousand Suns, tho all about
They their united Flames should throw.
'Twas Gabriel, who the Message brought
To the 'ever Virgin that she should conceive;
Gabriel, who now the happy Minute taught,
When his Great Lord the Father's Throne did leave,
A Body fitted for him to receive;
Bright in His Princes glory, bright in 'His own,
All clad in Hallowed Light came down,
Ambassador of God, and Herald to His Son.
III.
On Heavens high Top awhile He stood,
And viewed all Palestine around;
All Palestine in sleep lay drowned,
Eve'n Jordan slumbred to the murmurs of his Flood.
Nor voice of Man, nor noise of Dogs was heard,
The bowing Mountains seemed to nod,
And at the Presence of their God,
Who over them waved his All-commanding Rod,
Inclined their Heads, and the great Spell revered.
Each Field, each Hill did rest,
And equal Night possessed
The painful Labourer, and his weary Beast.
Bethle'hem alone, this Transient Death survived,
And in her Plains some lived,
Yet whom the Sight did so surprise,
They hardly durst believe their Eyes,
Yet durst not but believe, and sent to Heaven their cries.
IV.
So at the last Day shall there some be found
To hear, alive, the Trumpets dreadful sound;
Amazed and trembling shall they stand,
Feel on themselves a Powerful Hand,
And willing, or unwilling take, the great Command.
"Be changed ('twill say) ye Living! and ye Dead
"Wake and arise, and to the Judgment come!
The Living, soon as e're the word is sed,
Shall feel the Terrors they did dread,
And without help of Death, or Grave, reach their Eternal Home.
The Dead with their own Bodies shall arise,
And then the Earth, and Sea, and Skies,
The scattered Atoms shall restore
Of Bodies, which they did devour,
To join with parted Souls, but never to be parted more.
No guilty Criminal his Face shall hide,
Or undiscovered the great Judge avoid,
But from his Hold, tho self-condemned, come and be tried.
V.
Nature it self shall to 'its old nothing roll;
And then Heavens beauteous Scroll,
With all the Mistic Notes that there
(Writ by the Hand Divine)
So wondrous and, and so bright appear,
Shall in one flame with Earth and Sea, more dreadful shine.
Like that, which once the Prophet sent
To Judahs stubborn King; Jer. 36.

A while he heard the Woes, but grown impatient,
With Hands profane the Parchment rent,
And into the Fire the severed parts did sling;
And there they crackled, there did together shrink,
Till all-consum'd they were to Ashes burned.
Ah! sottish Prince, and vain to think
Decrees of Heaven so easily overturned!
Lo! God himself resents the wrong,
Thy self shall be the subject of a longer Roll ere long!
VI.
And so he was, for by the dread Command,
A larger Roll the Prophet did prepare.
By the same Command another Heaven more fair,
In place of this, when it is consumed shall stand.
And there the Thrones shall be for Judgment set,
From awful which the Son with Majesty,
And doubled Grace shall Reign illustriously,
In his own Godhead, and the Exalted Manhood, great.
All Nations then, and Languages,
The Rich, the Poor, the Simple, and the Wise,
With all who Tents inhabited, or Palaces,
Naked to the Bar shall rise,
And answer each Man to his name:
Distinctions shall aside be thrown,
Nor Kings be by their Scepters known,
Or the great Houses which they made, or whence they came.
Around the Bar shall Angels wait,
For Execution armed, and clothed for state,
Sole ministers of Wrath, who only were of Love alate.
VII.
Thither, O Muse, thither bring back my Song,
From which thou wandered have too long;
Of Gabriel, and his second Message sing,
Who now upon the Wing,
The happiest News, e're heard by mortal ears, does bring.
"Attend, he said, and those glad Tidings hear,
"Good Tidings, and of great Joy, which shall be
"Not unto you alone,
"Or from the Father to the Son,
"For one descent alone continued down,
"But unto all who are to come, or wished this day to see,
"For Lo! to you is Born this Day,
"A Savior, which is Christ the Lord,
"In David's Town, which long expecting lay,
"Promised Messiah, and the Incarnate Word.
"To Day He ^s Born, and this shall be the Sign,
"By which the Mighty Infant shall be found,
"In Swaddling Clothes he shall lie bound,
"And in a Manger rests the Babe Divine.
Never was Sight of equal Fame,
Not the first Man of God-like Frame,
For God himself thus Born, a Mortal Man became.
VIII.
He spoke, and with him strait were seen
Myriads of Angels, in their best Array,
Myriads of Angels, who kept Holy Day,
And all their Glories did display,
No Cloud to 'eclipse the Luster came between.
And then they Danced, and then they Sang
Praises, themselves did first compose;
The Starry Vault, with the loud Echo rang,
And the whole Concert doubled over this close;
"Glory to God on High,
"In The highest great Jehovah bless,
"Good Will toward Men, on Earth be Peace,
"Glory to God on High!
And may this Round begun thus last Eternally!
And up they rose, with Bays and Ivy Crowned,
Not such as Mortal Poets wear below,
But what in the Heavenly Temp^e grow,
And with whose Wreaths the first great Makers Brows are bound.
IX.
Go! Shepherds, go! and kiss the Eternal Son!
To Bethle'hem go, and the first Tributes bring
To Isreal's Savior, and Heavens Newborn King!
To you this more than common Honor's done,
To' approach your God, and Worship at his humble Throne.
Make haste, nor by your own delay
For others to prevent your Joys give way;
Why should they first be happy, whilst you only stay?
For Kings shall come e're long, from the East,
By a less Flame than what is your Guide,
Directed hi'ther, to find that Rest,
Which seems not theirs, till by 'you accepted, or denied.
Of you God takes the first, and greatest Care,
Who thus by Angels Summoned are;
When they, tho Kings, and coming from afar,
Shall wait, and both to call, and lead them, only have a Star,
14 Jan. 166^.
The STAR.
A Carol For the Epiphany by the III Kings.
SEe how that Glorious Star, 1. King.
at Noon does rise,
And like another Sun new Guilds the Skies!
Look how it dares the Ruler of the Light, 2. King.

And in His clearest Beams appears more bright,
Calling before its time the sluggish Night!
Rather the Conquered Sun to' its Rays gives way, 3. King.

And but a Phospher seems to its new Day.
The Conquered Sun, etc.
Chorus trium. Sure it is no common Star, 2. King.
see where it goes
A daring Passage it self only knows;
And cross the Heaven points out to Palestine, 1. King.

And as it that way leads more bright does shine:
Come let us follow, where it leads, and see
What may the Cause of its appearing be, 3. King.

Whether it set a Star, or some Divinity.
Come let us, etc.
Chorus alter trium. Some greater Power, 3. King.
which to direct our Way,
Has chose this borrowed Shape, and glorious Ray;
And when we knew not well which Road to go,
Does toward Judea our great Journey show: 1. King.

That way it points, 2. King.
that way we must along,
No fear, when Heaven's out Guide, we should go wrong.
That way, etc.
Chorus trium tertius. Over Bethle'm lo! 1. King.
at length the Flame does rest!
Bethle'm, that with the Prince of Peace is blessed:
Bethle'm, 2. King.
which must by ancient Prophecy
The Tyring-House of the Almighty be,
Where he will cloth Himself with base Humanity.
And that is the House, 3. King.
where we our Gifts must bring
To the World's God, and Israel's Infant King.
Chorus Omnium. Hither 'twas, hither the bright Star did lead,
Let Us enter humbly, and approach with Fear:
The Star, which brought, will show him us more clear,
And be a Glory round the Infants Head:
O this is He! fall down, and worship him! fall down
And kiss his Feet, whose Head even Heaven thus stoops to Crown!
23. December. 1660.
The PASSION.
An Ode.
I.
TWice sixteen Years have almost over Thee past,
Twice sixteen more Thou may as fondly waste,
In expectation, Sylvius, as thou have
The swift-wing'd Years, which in their Passage escaped thee last.
The Calendar is searched, and all in vain
Would Thou have this Day return
To the same Point, as when in 'it Thou were Born,
But 'twill not be this Age, 15. Apr. 1636.
if it e're come again.
Enough it is that Thou once did see
The great Conjunction:
Wait not over long, for what may be
Too late for Thee,
And is sufficient of it self alone,
Without that Circumstance to fill Thy Song.
For grant it now what could to Thee be' applied
But that thy Birth fell out the Night thy Savior Di'd.
II.
Rise then my Muse, but from a nobler Ground,
And sing in Numbers mournful as the Day,
Of Natures fright, and disarray,
Which did Philosophy confound,
And scattered dismal Horrors all around.
When Heaven, and Earth, and Hell partook
In the Darkness, and the Night,
Which like a Sea o'reflow'd the plains of Light,
And all Spectators with amazement struck!
Unlike to that, which once in Egypt reigned,
When solid Night did Rhamases invest,
But Goshen, of the Sun possessed,
Over the Gleam a Prospect gained,
And uninvellopt saw how far the Heavens were stained.
Nor was it to the Antipodes
The Day had hastened his access;
For they unsensible of Light,
Lay buried all the while in Night,
And without Miracle could not behold it bright.
Unless Thou add'st the Prodigy to raise,
(And which none else but Thou, O Muse, dares say)
The Antipodes at Midnight rose to gaze,
And Night Jerusalem less admired, than they the Day.
III.
A thought too wild this, and extravagant,
And which does all but its own airy basis want:
Say rather that the Pangs and Agonies
Of a new, and better World,
Which was thence to take its rise,
Were thus concealed from Mortal Eyes,
And Darkness, as at first, over all the Expansion hurld.
God's sacred Kingdom was that Birth,
The same New Heaven, and new Earth,
Which the beloved Disciple saw,
In all its Beauties, as it did appear,
And to provoke Adventurers there,
A Chart thereof by Vision did exactly draw.
For on the Cross as our great Savior hung,
And just Expiring, bowed his Conquering Head,
From the black Skies bright beams like Lightning sprung
But as the Day, continued long,
Chasing winged Darkness, which before them fled.
And as the first Creations Work begun
By the commanding Word, which He
To Nothing, and to Chaos sed,
Making when He spoke only, "Let there be,
By a no less Word this too was done,
Created by that Voice, which cried, "It Is Finished.
IV.
It Is Finished the Mighty Victor cried,
All reaking in Triumphal Gore,
Which his own Wounds, not Enemies Necks supplied;
For tho with them He Skirmisht had before,
And often rebated had their Power,
He could not thoroughly for us Conquer, till He Di'd.
Alone He did the Wine Press tread,
Of his Just Father's Wrath, alone,
Isreal's to raise, stoopt his own Head,
And to assist Him was there none.
So far from that, that in the pursuit
Of Satan, Sin, and Death, when He cried out,
With fainting Groans, I Thirst,
His Patience some, and some his Conquest Cursed,
And Gall and Vinacre of the bitter Tree, was all the Fruit.
Till having tasted of the Brook in the way,
Anew He followed, till He gained the Day;
And to complete his Victory,
Got thence more Aids, and strength enough to Die.
V.
Blessed Savior, who but Thou could Live so long,
And in one Soul so many Deaths endure,
And different all, and all their Pains so strong,
That their rehearsal does fresh Griefs ensure,
And again pierce those Hearts Thou bledst to Cure?
When in the Garden Thou did first begin,
Gethsemane, for ease designed,
And safe retirements of a troubled Mind,
Purging thence all the effects of Sin,
Which still, tho hid, remaind behind,
The dregs of what on Man in Paradise brake in.
Fatal, but happy Place that, where did grow
Midst whole Woods, no less beauteous, but one Tree,
That even, by Wilfulness alone, could be
The occasion of our Misery;
But in all else, more secret Snares than we
Till by them Caught, shall ever know!
From this to clear it, and restore
To the Garden, what it had before,
And perfect Innocence add, one Beauty more;
As there fallen Man his Life first forfeited,
There, to Redeem him, first the Blood of God was shed.
VI.
How grievous were his Pains there, and how great?
Burning, tho in the frosty shades of Night:
Shivering with Cold, but in a Bloody Sweat;
And all dissolved, at his approaching Passions Sight?
Thrice did He his Disciples leave,
And thrice to his Great Father prayed,
Thrice to himself He answer made,
And by an Angel did support receive;
But, (O!) the Assaults that were within,
Compared with which his Bodies Flame,
Was temperate heat, and scarce deserved the Name,
When in his Soul the Burning did begin,
And Hell to 'encrease the Fire, did Mines of Brimstone bring!
A thousand Fiends about him flew,
And Coals, and bailful Firebrand; threw,
That seized at length the noblest Part,
Beyond the weak defense of Nature, or of Art,
And unconsum'd, did only leave the Heart.
VII.
The Heart did unconsum'd remain,
By the Arch-Fiend
With its own Grief to burst designed,
When in the Judgment Hall again,
He should the Charge renew, but all in vain.
Thither betrayed by 'a Kiss the Traitors bring,
With Fetters bound, Heavens Sacred King;
Where being Cited, and Blasphemed,
Flouted, Scourged, Spat upon,
Derided, and Contemned,
By them Reviled, denied by 'His own,
A Reed in 'his Hand, his Head with Thorns they Crown,
And lead to Golgotha their God, whom they 'had Condemned*
VIII.
Follow, Muse, if thou have the heart, and see
What other Torments they prepare;
I know the utmost of their Cruelty,
And from thy Mouth had rather hear,
The sad Report, than a Spectator be.
Yet, that thou may not stand thy self surpised,
Stripped off his Clothes, in Nakedness disguised,
To the Cross they 'll nail his Hands, it is said,
And bore with Nalls his tender Feet;
Then, all his Sufferings to upbraid,
"Cry, If Thou art the Son of God, let us see it,
"Now from the Tree triumphantly come down,
"Or reign thence, like Thy self alone,
"Or any other Wonder show,
"Whereby Thy De'ity may be known,
"And to its Scepter we will bow.
As if there greater Miracle could be,
Than all that Patience, which they do, but will not see.
IX.
Nor is this all, but when He Is Dead,
His Side they 'll open with a Spear;
Approach the Wound, and look what Blood is shed,
For it Mysterious will appear,
And be another Argument for thee next Year!
A better Spring will thence arise,
Than Helicon, so Famed of old,
There bath thy self, if thou art wise,
Nor fear in those chaste Streams to be too bold.
But see, be sure too long thou do not stay,
For all the while Thou art away,
Tears only from these Eyes will flow,
And in my Fancy I shall double over
All that I have told thee now before,
And all that thou returned will'st tell again, and more,
Beside my Verse will fettered be, and slow,
And want both Wings to fly, and Feet to go.
10. Martii 166^.
EPIGRAM. Out of Latin.

WHen my God Di'd, I first began to Live,
And Life which he refused Heaven me did give
Unlike that Day, O how unlike we were!
Him dead the Cross, me 'alive the Knees did bear.
But may not I die too? This life of mine
I can as well as Thou despise, if not like Thine.
Ah dearest Lord, this Legacy bestow,
A double Life, then to Thy Death I Will owe:
And sanctified thus in my Birth by Thee,
A living Death, my dying Life shall be.
5. December. 1668.
An Ecstasy of Divine Love.
Out of Spanish. S. Teresa.
Aquesta Divina Union, etc.
I.
THat sacred Bond of Charity,
Wherein I uncorrupted Live,
Makes God the Captive Chain receive,
But my pinioned Heart sets free,
Tho causing still such love in me,
To see Heavens King my Prisoner lie,
That I die, 'cause I cannot die.
II.
How teadious now this Life is grown,
The way to Death how hard and long;
How dark the Dunge'on the Ir'ns how strong,
With which my' unwilling Soul's kept down,
And has no trust but hope alone!
These thoughts my Troubles raise so high,
That I die, 'cause I cannot die.
III.
Bitter Life, shall thou be to me,
Where I my God can never enjoy;
But if my Love has no alloy,
My hope as tried and pure may be;
Ah! come my Lord, and set me free!
Take off this weight, which makes me cry,
That I die, 'cause I cannot die.
IV.
By hope alone it is I Live,
Hope that I bear the seeds of Death,
And dying once, a second Birth
Secures that Hope, and Life does give;
O Death, I Will never thy coming grieve,
When Life succeeds, through hope so nigh,
That I die, 'cause I cannot die.
V.
Who can the Charms of Love refuse?
Ah Life, no more my Heart betray,
It Is only thou stand'st in my way,
Which rather than my Love, I Will loose,
And Death for my great Champion choose;
So much alate thy Enemy,
That I die, 'cause I cannot die.
VI.
The Life alone, that is hid above,
Can of true Life the Title claim;
That Toy, which here usurps the Name,
Its pleasure hides, and deads our Love,
And a worse Foe than Death does prove;
Death, for whose sake I Life so fly.
That I die, 'cause I cannot die.
VII.
What can I give, frail Life, but thee
To the God, who in me deigns to live?
Yet how can I the nothing give
Till he first grants me Liberty?
O let me die his Face to see!
But that is so distant from my Eye,
That I die, 'cause I cannot die.
VIII.
Beside, my God, from thee away,
Who would not of a Life complain,
That terrible, and full of pain,
Suffers a thousand Deaths each Day,
A Mortal, but a slow decay?
And this so swells my Misery,
That I die, 'cause I cannot die.
IX.
All Creatures love their Element,
And pleasure there enjoy and rest;
And if by Death they are disseas'd
To their first nothing they are sent:
But I Am beyond kind Death's extent,
And yet so many hardships try,
That I die, 'cause I cannot die.
X.
When in the Eucharist my dull Soul,
Eating thy Flesh it self would ease,
A thousand thoughts for entrance press,
And there not to enjoy Thee whole,
Whole, and alone, I a 'new condole;
For it is the Voice of every Sigh,
That I die, cause I cannot die.
XI.
I please my self in the Hopes, it is true,
E're long, my God, of seeing Thee;
But fearing lest they false should be,
My Torments with my Fears renew,
And both so close my Soul pursue,
Hoping mid both so heartily,
That I die, 'cause I cannot die.
XII.
Lord, from this Death deliver me,
And Life thus begged at length bestow!
Why should I still be kept below?
Look how I die for love of Thee!
And since enjoyed Thou can not be
In this Life's death, regard my cry,
That I die, 'cause I cannot die.
XII.
My dying Life I Will then lament,
And living Death in Tears bewail;
For my Sins sake those Foes prevail,
And all my Age in Mourning's spent:
To my release at length consent,
Nor let me grieve eternally,
That I die, 'cause I cannot die.
L'Envoy.
Blessed Soul! that hither could arrive,
How do I love yet envy Thee,
Wishing my self this Ecstasy,
And that the Example Thou do give,
Would make me less afraid to live;
And to each close of Thine reply!
That I die, cause I cannot die!
20. May, 1668.
The FLIGHT.
I.
NO wonder, Soul, thou so admir'st a Verse,
And countst thy self in its Possession brave;
For it is, what e're thou can desire to have,
On this side Heaven, but more to make, than to rehearse.
II.
It Is the end of Preaching, Loves best Exercise,
The Quintessence of Prayer, Praises refined;
A Change exstatic into the Heavenly Mind,
And on whose soaring Wings above the World I rise.
III.
O, could I always stay where 't first sets me!
How naked looking down would the World appear!
Its Joys how empty, and how vain its Fear;
Another flight would make me leave Mortality.
IV.
For as the sealed Dove so high does tower;
That in the pure Air at last it flying dies;
So should I mount too, and above the Skies,
Rapt to the Etern aboads unfeel my dying Hour.
V.
But I must live still, and my flight to bound,
Till truly sealed, there something, Lord, will be;
Some Work of Thine be' it, be it but a Tree,
Eve'n there I nearer Heaven shall rest, than on the Ground.
22. Jan. 1671/2. noctu. Exsurrexi and adhuc sum tecum
An Hymn and Prayer, To the Holy JESUS my Lord. The hint and manner of stanza
taken from the last Canzoue of Fr. Petrarc. Lib. 11. Virgin ^ella.

Parode.
I.
JESU, the Eternal Sun of Righteousness,
Unlike our Mortal Suns, which Rise, and Set,
Subliming this, and the other World with Light,
Love bids me of Thy wondrous Power to Treat,
But how Thy Power, or Wonders to express,
I know not, till Thou make my Darkness bright,
And with Thy Beams dispel the shades of Night:
Therefore I beg Thy aid,
JESU, to whom IN have prayed,
And still pray, that I worthy Thee may write;
Illustriously over all the Expansion shine,
And if I 'm weak to endure
A Light so pure, dart through my Verse a ray Divine.
II.
JESU, the Wisdom of the Deity,
In whom the Mistic Treasures are concealed,
Be'yond Reasons search, of the Eternal Mind,
And with whose Stripes the Afflicted World is healed;
Proof against Death, the Vanguishts Victory,
Under whose Standart to its God rejoined,
Love for the Noblest Service is designed,
Love that is a Rebel now,
JESU, so Great that Thou
From Heaven Thy self must come his Slaves to 'unbind:
That I some Trophies of Thy Power may boast,
When Thou do Conquering ride,
I Will Crowns provide, and sing Thy Triumphs through his Coast.
III.
JESU, the Virgins, and the Martyrs Wrath,
Who without Spot, or Wrinkle did adorn
The fairest Soul, which in a Body all,
Of Charms was wondrously Conceived, and Born;
Fought'st, and wast fought, resign'dst thy laboring Breath,
The Lost to Save, and from the Dungeon call
Hopes weary Prisoners, and Death's Captive thrall,
To Thrones, at Thy Right Hand,
JESU, as Thou do stand
At Thy Great Father's, in Heavens Judgment Hall;
Grant me the Grace, and Thou the Grace can grant,
That when Thou shall come next,
Tho now perplexed, to attend, Thee then I nothing want.
IV.
JESU, in whom the Godhead does repose,
Infinites Comprehension, and the Bound
Of boundless Majesty, fathomless Deep,
With Thorns first pierced, and e're with Glory Crowned,
Submitted to the Triumphs of Thy Foes,
A Man of Sorrows, and inured to weep;
Substantial God, and Man, who both do keep
Unmixt, and Unconfus'd,
JESU, the Untoucht, and Bruised,
Quickening the Dead, yet who in the Grave did sleep;
It Is Thou have broke our Bands, the Uusurper hurld
Headlong into the Pit,
In whose sides sit the great Disturbers of the World.
V.
JESU, the Way, the Truth, whose Life does give
The' exactest Method how we may direct
Our wandering Course to Thy Divine Abode,
And whence, seduced to stray, is not to Live;
A Way Thy self, while here Unerring trod,
And now Exalted do with Blessings load;
A Way, which rough at first,
JESU, appears and Cursed,
But entered once proves worthy Thee and God;
Show me Thy Way, nor take it in ill part,
Since I am blind and weak,
If I bespeak Thee' in that, whose Guide and End Thou art.
VI.
JESU, Whose Cross the surest Anchor makes,
Both strong and sure, entering within the Vail,
Where Passions waves, how fierce and uncontrolled
So e're, rage not, (and yet they dare assail
The holiest Place, and Heaven in the Tempest shakes)
Thou see how there I have fixed all my hold,
And am in the midst of Storms and Floods grown bold:
Yet still there is a Shelf,
JESU, I mean my Self,
Against which I am in danger to be rolled.
I sink, O now thy saving Hand forth stretch!
Now e're my Head with the Weeds,
Which this Sea breeds, is wrapped, and I Am below Thy reach!
VII.
JESU, how many Tears have I in vain,
How many Sighs, and Prayers in vain poured out,
Tho by the expense my Flame alone's encreast!
My Life from its first Stage, traced all about,
Unchanged by change of Habit, 's naught but Pain,
Anguish and Torment, void of Peace and Rest;
Nay even my Soul Heaven-born, has been oppressed,
And humbled to the Grave:
JESU, make have to save,
Nor tarry, tho of Men I 'have loved Thee least!
Now help, to Morrow may not be so well,
For Misery and Sin.
Have me 'on the Wing, and where they will pitch me who can tell?
VIII.
JESU, one half of me's already gone,
So gone, that tho I have piec'd up the Rent,
Methinks I Am not the perfect thing I was,
Tho happy still in that I am content,
And who shall be more perfect when the World's done,
And One made Three into' One again shall pass:
Unhappy Man, unhappy were my case,
Such doubts gave'st Thou not skill,
JESU, to Reconcile,
Thou who see Past and Future in one Glass!
Dear Lord, for whom too hard there nothing is,
Give all my Griefs such end,
As may intend Thy Honor first, and then my Bliss.
IX.
JESU, my Confidence, my Hope, my Fear,
Able to help in time of Need, and Free,
O leave me not, when my last Hour shall come,
Not for my sake, but His, who Ransomed me!
Merit cries, No. But the Image which I bear
Pleads Lord, and would for Ancient Love make room;
Tho I have been betrayed by Errors doom,
To a Fairy Wood, and Brook,
JESU, my Shepherd, look,
Find Thy lost Sheep, and bring the Stragler home!
Of Streams so troubled, may I drink no more,
Or having found my Way,
Any more stray, or wander as I did before!
X.
JESU, My God, who far off see the Proud,
And hate him, let Thy Blood some pity move,
An Heart all bruised, and contrite to regard,
That does at length bewail its sottish love;
And which, if once it can get free, has vowed,
'Twill that and all things else for Thee discard,
'Twill more than ever eye the adored Reward,
And purged with sacred Flame,
JESU, to Thy great Name,
No cost of Wit, or Verse being basely spared,
Its Life, and Hymns, and Service dedicate,
To Thee own its changed desires,
Kiss the soft Fires, and blame it self that 'twas so late.
XI.
JESU, to whom that Name, as the Prize is given,
Of all Thou did and sufferedst without measure,
The mighty Dowry, which Thou broughtst Thy Wife,
Deaths plague, Hells spoil, but whose exstatic Pleasure
Is for the Marriage Feast reserved, in Heaven,
Whither I haste, to be than hope more rife,
And plentiful; (Lo!) the short Day of Life
Posts swiftly on, and flies;
JESU, in my Agonies,
Tho now with Death and Hell I am at strife,
Let me experience this Names healthful ease,
And after a long War,
With Truces rare, in 'it Conquer, and depart in Peace.
Comiato.
Thus, tho with different heat of Spirit, and Verse,
What Petrarch sang to another,
JESU, Thy Virgin Mother,
The stops in part changed, I to Thee rehearse:
I changed the stops, (for under Thy Broad Seal,
Thou give us no Commission,
Her to Petition) and from her to Thee appeal.
Altro Comiato.
And now be pleased to accept this humble Praise,
Other, and better Fruit,
JESU, of all my Suit,
I dare not beg; eve'n Pardon here is Bays.
And for the Prayers, dropped more from my Heart than Pen,
Since their least part's the Rhyme,
And words, which chime, say, as I to them say, AMEN.
I Will Terzo.
When I sent it to Sir Kingsmil Lucy.
At London, Song, Thy Russet, and Thy Freeze,
Will seem, I fear, but course;
Jesu, they will cry, or worse,
See! the dull fleghm of Solitude and Trees.
Thus will the Fops treat Thee, those Wits by Rote;
Yet one Thou 'lt know, e're long,
Who will own Thee, Song, and see Thy Beauties through Thy Coat.
An HYMN for Vespers.
(...) Out of Greek.

JESU CHRIST, blessed Light of Light,
The Immortal Fathers cheerful shine,
Ray of Glory, all Divine,
Equally with Him fair, and bright;
When we see the Day decline,
Calling the sluggish Evening on,
We praise the Father and the Son,
And in our Lauds the Spirit join,
"Worthy art Thou, O God, we say,
"Worthy, O Son of God, art Thou,
"And Thou, of Life the Lord and Giver,
"Worthy to be Praised for ever,
"Great THREE and ONE to Thee we bow,
"And with the whole World thus Crown each Day!
LENT.
Sestina al' Italiana Convertimento a Dio.
I.
WELCOME, great Queen of Fasts, thrice welcome Lent,
With solemn Penance, and Devotion crowned,
Sweet Abstinence, clean thoughts, and chaste desires,
The Wings, whereby the unpinion'd Soul does fly
Above this lower Circle, and exchange
Substantial Cares, for Joys unmixt and pure.
II.
I well remember, when with thoughts less pure,
Nor more to Piety a Friend, than Lent,
Pleased I could well have been never to exchange
My course of Living, no, tho to be Crowned
With Bays Immortal, and Exalted rise,
In hopes as large, as are my changed desires,
III.
But that time's gone, and with it those desires,
Which held me down, and in their stead a pure
Ethereal Flame, which upward still does rise;
Kind thoughts of what is esteemed severe in Lent,
My Soul (the Victim) has for the Alter Crowned
And even burnt up, nor would I 'again exchange.
IV.
This was Thy Work, Lord, Thou 'twas did exchange
What was beyond my power to curb, stubborn desires,
Making them subject to the Head Thou 'hadst Crowned;
And now I Am Victor, with Robes clean, and pure,
(Pure to what once I wore) and this new Lent,
To 'attend the Triumph, rich in Spoils does rise.
V.
And as that rises, such hope I to rise,
When on the Fasts great close I shall exchange
For Easters Sun, the dewy Pearls of Lent;
Bathing, like Oar, with frequent Tears, desires,
Which only such a Flame can render pure,
Fined from all Dross, and worthy to be Crowned.
VI.
Have Thee, blessed Day, wherein with Glory crowned,
The Worlds great Savior from the Grave did rise;
And credence gives His Spouse, that like Him pure,
She shall rise too, and all her Spots exchange,
For Glories, larger than her vast desires,
And the' Pious Resveries of an holy Lent.
Were Lent, and Primitive Institutes thus Crowned
With purgd Desires, and Lives, their Fame would rise,
And none the Church exchange, to be more Pure.
Sent to my Excellent Patron, Sir Nicholas Stuart, Baronet, 1672/3.
The Song of the ANGELS, At the Fall of Lucifer.
I.
SON of the Morning, Firstborn of the Light,
The once bright Phospher of the Day Divine,
How art Thou hurld into eternal Night,
And hid in Flames, who did with Glory shine!
The bold Usurper of the Almighty's Crown,
Proud Lucifer, to Hell is thrown,
And singed the Heavens, as he from thence fell headlong down.
II.
"Above the Heavens, he said, I will ascend
"And there above the Stars exalt my Throne,
"My Conquests in the North I will extend,
"And God a parted Rule shall have, or none:
"Above the heights never reached before I Will fly,
"And equal made with the Most High,
"Or gain an honorable Fall, or Victory.
III.
Scarce said, a pointed Thunderbolt was sent
From the Hand Divine, which pierced him to the heart.
In vain he sought the Vengeance to prevent,
And to Almighty Strength opposed his Art.
But down he sank, and down the Monster fell,
The stroke, nor bore, nor could repel,
And exiled once the Heavens, the next descent was Hell.
IV.
Hell from beneath to meet him raised its Head,
"And now no longer shall we empty be,
"Since Thou art come, the pale Abyssus said,
Look! How we dress our Flames to welcome Thee!
And all with Flames they Circled him around,
With Flames their Princes Temples bound,
An Heaven of Flames they made him, strewed with Flames the Ground.
V.
Rejoice, O Heavens, for your Oppressor's ceast,
And tho e're long there shall from Earth ascend,
An unknown Race, which shall disturb your rest;
Rejoice, and their Triumphant Arms attend,
For when by these you shall invaded be,
With Tears, and Importunity,
Thus to be Conquered is to gain the Victory.
VI.
Son of the Morning, Firstborn of the Light,
The once bright Phospher of the Day Divine,
How art Thou hurld into eternal Night,
And hid in Flames, who did with Glory shine:
The bold Usurper of the Almighty's Crown,
Proud Lucifer to Hell is thrown,
And singed the Heavens, as he from thence fell headlong down.
L'Envoy.
SONG, that long since were finished,
And for another Place designed,
Than what Thou here do find,
In a long Work, and long since promised;
Say that (the Piles Foundations laid)
The 'unwary Builder all his Charge has lost;
For till begun
As a Wise Man should first have done,
He did not, as was fit, sit down;
Thoroughly the Ground had not surveyed
His Friends, or Strength had tried, or reckned up the cost.
Convertimento a Dio.
LORD, my First Fruits should have been brought to thee,
Whose due I am, and all that is mine,
By Birthright Thou a Title have to me,
And by Command those Fruits are Thine;
But Thine, or mine, neither have bin
Offered before to Sin.
Sin came, and first concealed my right in Thee,
And then usurpt what e're was mine,
But let Redemption clear Thy Right to me,
And then both shall again be Thine,
Both Thine and mine, tho they have bin,
Offered before to Sin,
Instead of First Fruits, Lord, I bring to Thee,
The whole Harvest, which yet is not mine,
Thou in return shall give Thy self to me
And make it so, because it is Thine:
Both Thine and mine, as if 't had bin,
Neve'r offered up to Sin.
Deo Opt. Max. S.
Qui huc usque auxiliatus est and in futurum mihi Providebit.
THIS Altar to Thy Name, Great God, I raise,
The Pious Labor of my too late Praise:
With Stones from Thine own sacred Quarry brought,
Tho by my Artless Hand but rudely wrought.
Artless and rude, tho its Traces be,
Methinks I by it clearly see,
My Past Supports, and Future care,
And what of both 'is my present share,
The Guidance of the Love Divine,
Making me call his Pleasure mine.
O let it in Thy Presence stand,
Inviolable from any Hand.
And when on it thou deignst to look,
Write down the Votary in Thy Book.
Who at his Foot, has his Dependence set,
And in the Inscription thus proclaims Thee Great;
To God, who hitherto has helped; my only Trust,
And for the Future will provide, for He is Just.
Ad Psalmos, 1667.
The following Compositions and Translations are therefore here Printed by the
Authors consent and allowance (suitable enough to the general Title of RIMES,
and he hopes not unbecoming his Habit, tho done the most of them long before
his Admission into Holy Orders) because they have (as to such of them at least,
which he could much rather have wished lost and forgotten) by some too curious
Collector of such Trifles against his will and knowledge, been already from
very false Copies very falsely Published, and he is not wholly out of danger for
the rest, as neither was he till now for a good number of those above, whose
Copies he doubts are in many Hands.

ODE.
Ad Passagium inducendum. Out of Italian of Mr. Fr. Petrarchae lib. 1. canza. 2.

I.
O aspettata in ciel Beata, etc.
BLESSED Soul, in Heaven expected long,
(And long in Heaven may Thou expected be,
Who 'art clothed, not loaded with Humanity,
Like others, but more Resolute, and Strong,
Of God belove'd, those briny Paths to tread,
Which from our unjoyn'd World, unto his Kingdom lead)
Look how a Western Gale,
Does on Thy Barques spread Canvass blow,
Loosed from the Shore long since, with hoys'd up Sail,
A better Port than what Thou leave to know!
The Wind is to Thy Service pressed,
And from this gloomy Vale, where we complain,
Both of our own, and others Wrongs in vain,
Of Thy first Innocence possessed,
In a strait Line will drive Thee to Thy Rest,
And, whether now thou 'art bound, to the true East.
II.
Forse I devoti, etc.
'Twas, that or now the fervent Prayers
Of holy Men, re'inforced by their Tears,
Had on the Eternal Goodness wrought;
Or if both Prayers, and Tears were weak,
And useless Arms to stop the Almighty Justice thought,
Nor used, it may be, its fixed Course to break;
It Was that of His mere Love alone,
Heavens Sacred King, again denied,
Again by 'His Murdr'ous Enemies defied,
In The place where He in triumph Di'd,
In pity thither did at length look down.
He looked, and in the generous Breast,
Of holy Charles revenge inspired;
Revenge, which was too long desired,
Revenge, whose lingering Europe did infest,
But only to be greater was a while deferred.
Thus would He help his Spouse beloved,
And of a War just Heaven approved,
The bare report found Babylon thoughtful, left her moved.
III.
Chiunque alberga 'tra Garonna, etc.
All, who between the Alps and Garoone dwell,
Twixt Rhodanus, and Rhene, and the salt Sea,
The Christian Armies with their Banners swell;
Whole Spain, that Jealous ever used to be
Of others Honor, to the Camp does come,
Leaving the Pirenes behind, to guard its empty Home.
Britain, and all the Isles that lie,
From the Orcades extremity,
To where the Straits do Afric bound,
With all where e're is found
But the first Traces of the Gospels sound,
Various in Garb, various in Arms and Speech,
Chari'ty does to the high Impress provoke, or else beseech.
And worthier her, what could be ever done,
Or who has e're so just a War begun?
Not Menelaus for his Wife, nor Minos for his Son.
IV.
Vna part del mondo e, etc.
Up in the North midst Winter, and thick Snow,
Beyond the Suns auspicious Ray,
Where Clouds and Storms mete out the short lived Day,
Is bred a Nation, which did never know
Peace, and her Charms, or if it did, but as a Foe;
Who never were heard, or Wounds to fly, or Pain,
Or of Deaths Icy Fetters to complain,
That were their Country to upbraid, and Birth to stain.
These, more devout grown than of old,
With German rage, have of the Sword taken hold.
Turks, Arabs, Saracens, and the shame
They go against of Heathen Deities,
Only to know were to despise,
As fit but with their Blood, their bordring Sea anew to name,
A People naked, timo'rous, ignorant of War,
That never struck blow, but from a far,
And only with their Arrows wound the bloodless Air,
V.
Dunque hora e l tempo, etc.
Now is the time, from our too patient Neck,
That ancient Yoke, wherewith we' are galled, to break,
And from our Eyes the Vail to lay aside,
Which both the Ene'mies weakness, and our strength does hide.
And now, my Friend, is an occasion seen,
Wherein you may those Virtues show,
Which part from Heaven you have, and part have gaind below;
The Trophies of your Tongue, and learned Pen
Nor will it longer any Wonder be,
Tho you of Orpheus, and Amphion read,
Whose Songs tamed Beasts, and Stones did lead,
When of your own a greater Miracle you see,
And Men more Deaf, and Salvager than they,
Led by your Skill, go where you point the Way.
When Italy, awak'ned by the sound
Of your loud Voice, and all her Sons around,
Rise from their sleep, expecting that bright Day,
When they' may get him Laurels, who with Thorns was Crowned.
Never had that Aged Mother yet,
An opportunity so fair, her Sons a cause more great.
VI.
Tu e hai per arrichir, etc.
Thou, who to' enrich the Treasure of thy Brain,
Have many a flying Roll turned over,
Of the present Times, and those that went before,
And on those Wings to Heaven aloft do^^ soar,
Seeing the Fates of Empires all beneath Thee plain;
Full well Thou know how in the Roman State,
From the first Day that Mars his Son,
In Blood laid its Foundation,
Till great Augustus, who thrice entered the triumphal Gate,
Rome of Blood was ever free,
And for the Wrongs her Alleys bore,
Without regret that Sacrifice could see:
And shall she now more sparing be,
When stricter Bands, and sacred Piety,
Expect, and challenge more,
Her Savior to revenge, and Sepul cher to restore?
What help can Nature yield, or Art,
Or what saint hopes enforce the Enemies part,
When from Christ's Hand is thrown the first and fatal Dart?
VII.
Pon mente al temerario, etc.
Think of Proud Xerxes bold design,
Who to approach and tread our Shore
Europe and Asia, with a Bridge did join,
And Seas an Outrage bore,
Which Rivers only felt unwillingly before.
The Persian Dames, who thought to Greet
Their Husbands Victo'ries, and their Conquests meet,
At their o're-throw confounded stood,
In Black they Mourned, and the Hellespont triumphed in Blood.
Nor is it this Naval Victory alone,
Which like Success does promise you;
But the unlucky Marathon,
To the Father so, as Thermopyle was to the Son,
When brave Leonidas, with but a few,
Maintained those Straits, and like a Lion flew,
Or Eagle on the Prey, and did more than Subdue.
With thousand Histories more,
Which you^my Friend, have heard and read, and treasured up in store.
Wherefore the least which you can do,
Devoutly is that God to Praise,
Who for such haypy Times, and hopes has cast your Days.
Comiato.
To Rome long since, and Tybers Streams,
Petrarch this Ode, when his, did recommend;
To London now, and the more honored Thames,
Since thus made mine, I it abroad will send,
(Where more judicious Spi'rits its numbers will attend,)
And thence whole Christendom invite,
All other Wars being thrown aside,
In vain 'twixt Brethren for false Glory often tried,
In an Eternal League to' unite,
And where the true may be 'easier gained, with Infidels to fight.
1668.
ODE. To the Right Reverend Father in God GEORGE Lord Bishop of Winton, my very
good Lord. Out of Italian (...) Fr. Petrach, l. 1. Canz. 12.

I.
Vna Donna piu bella.
AFAIR, and Virtuous Dame,
Bright as the Midday Sun, but more Divine,
My tender Age first overcame,
And made me to her part my Fortunes join.
With thoughts uncommon she my Mind inspired,
Then gave me Words their Image to express,
Whilst the dull World judged me to sloth inclined,
Or piti'd, (which was worse) my Unhappiness,
(For such it counts those gifts, which Heav^ n-born Souls possess.)
Through thousand ways she was my guide,
And changing still from what I was,
Tho her fair Eyes she with a Vail did hide,
I felt their Influence through my Liver pass;
So that for love of her I have undergone
Such Hardships, and such Risques have run,
That if at last I shall arrive
At the happy Port, I hope to live
Beyond the power of Death, an Age, which She can give.
II.
Questa mia Donna.
'Twas many a Year, that thus She led me on,
Big with Conceit, and Youthful Fire;
For trial, as I since have known,
If I Would prove constant to my first desire,
Showing me now her Mantle, Shade, or Vest,
But to my Fancy leaving all the rest:
With which yet well enough content,
My Youth I in her Service spent
So pleasantly, that I can scarce the Time repent.
At length, prevailed on by my Prayers,
My Importunity, and Tears,
Her Glories She was pleased to show;
But then how little was it that I before did know?
"'It Was midnight with me sure, I said, till now.
And with the sight there rose a storm of Cares,
Amazed I at the Vision stood,
Wished in my Arms, what yet I feared too good,
A Flame was in my Heart, and Ice was in my Blood.
III.
Ma non me'l tolse la paura.
In this Surprise the heat I felt within
Gave me new Courage, and did make me bold;
Whilst the chil Fetters, which did hold
My Captive Powers, to loosen did begin,
And nearer I approacht to 'admire her Beauties yet unseen.
I came, and gazing stood, when she
Turning to mine her Heavenly Face,
"Now, Friend, that I am Fair, said, you may see,
"Possibly Fairer than you ghest I was,
"I 'm sure more Powerful, for what ever now
"Befits your Years but ask, and I Will bestow.
"'It Is a long time, Fair One, I said,
"That on you only have I placed my love,
"The Joys of which I here most truly prove,
"With Air before, and empty Shadows fed;
"But now so strangely smitte'n, that to require
"Ought but your Pleasure, were my' own ruin to desire.
With a Voice then, and look Divine,
Which chase'd my Fears, and did my Hope refine,
In this most gracious Speech, she answered mine.
IV.
Rado fu al mondo, etc.
"In your mad World, and its Impertinence,
"'It Is rare, but when my Worth is heard,
"The veriest Stock has felt some little sense,
"And my just Service for a time preterr'd:
"In love to me, and my rewards would burn;
"Only my cruel Enemy,
"That seeks what e're I build to overturn,
"Quenches the Flames I kindle with mine Eye,
"And makes all Virtue die;
"Promising largely, what he never can grant,
"Those Pleasures, and that ease he cries my Subjects want.
"But Love, my Friend, has said so much of you,
"And all he said I find so true,
"That you henceforth my Charge shall be,
"Unsought for Honors both to Gain, and Merit too.
"One of my choicest Friends I Will style you now,
"And as to such, a Fairer Lady show,
"Than me you 'admire, where you more richly may your Love bestow.
V.
I 'volea dir, etc.
That can never be, I was about to say,
"When look she added to that Gallery,
('It Was a large Terrace raised on High)
"And if you can my words deny!
"Such Beauties are not seen by all, nor every Day.
I looked, but strait inclined my Head,
With Wonder struck, and sacred Dread;
I looked again, and felt within,
A new, and greater Flame begin:
Which as she saw her Railliery thus she dressed,
"I well enough know where-about you are,
"And as the Sun, when he does first appear,
"Makes every Star its twinkling ray divest,
"Perceive my Eyes now seem less bright,
"Since thus obscured by 'a greater Light;
"Tho to be hers, you need not me to leave,
"For to us both one Seed and Birth did being give,
"She as the Elder first, then I did mine receive.
VI.
Ruppesi in tanto, etc.
A Strain so sweet my Tongue unloos'd,
And fearing now no more the Shame
I had conceived, upon my hasty Flame,
Least my first Love should deem her self abused,
Thus I replied: "If this be true
("And who dare doubt it once, since said by you)
"Thrice happy Father, and thrice happy Day,
"In which you two into the World were brought!
"And such from hence shall all that time be thought,
"Which others tell IN have fondly thrown away.
"'It Is now my Trouble more,
"Than e're it was my Joy before,
"That I reached here so late, or did no sooner stray.
"But if I Am worthy, and it is fit to show
"Of your Condition more than what I know,
"A greater Honor you to none can ever do.
Looking me then to the very Heart,
And with her Eye engraving there,
What e're she spoke, in a deep Character,
Fixed and Composed she thus resumed her part.
VII.
Si come piacque, etc.
"Know then, 'twas our Eternal Father's Will,
"That we, like Him, should both Immortal be;
"But what 's all that to you the while?
"Wretches enamored of your Slavery,
"For whom 'twere better, that the fault were ours,
"Of all the disrespect we find, than that it is only yours.
"Courted and Loved we were of Old,
"But now to such a Pass reduc^d,
"That she to Heaven, and Contemplation used,
"Has taken Flight to reach her ancient hold;
"I stayed behind a while, but have been so abused,
"That thither too I^ ll 'scape e're long,
"And only where she gives the ground, inspire the Song:
"For of my self I Am but her empty shade.
Then turning as about to go,
"But first receive as both our Gift, she said,
"This Wreath, which we for you together made!
And with her Hands she bound
Immortal Bays, my Temples all around.
Comiato.
To FERNHAM, Song, I Would have thee go,
Where thy great Patron at first sight will know
Both what is thy Sense, and Mystery;
Nor needs thou Him, as thou must others show,
When they ask who these Virgins be,
That one is sacred POESY,
The other the Heavenly Maid, THEOLOGY:
With whom thy Master long since deep in Love,
And destitute of Friends,
The fair One in his Suit to move,
Thee on the Message to his Palace sends.
Only remember thou his Leisure wait,
And nor intrude too soon, nor stay too late!
If He says thou art none of mine,
And so to Petrarch more incline,
Tell him our Thoughts were equal, as our Fate;
And that there lacks one Spirit to Write, and to Translate.
1668.
Sonnet of the same.
Ad promotionem in S. S. Ordines.
PRepare thy Chariot, Love, and heaviest Chain,
That for my Muses Sister, this for me,
For I at length have got the Victory,
And loaded thus must grace her pompous Train!
I Am Conqueror, and the Arms, which did obtain
The mighty Spoil, were Importunity,
Freedom renounced, and sacred Vows to be
Her Slave, over whom I should the Victory gain.
Mysterious War! yet since thou do delight,
Great Love, thy Sov'raignty to exercise
In such unheard of Contrarieties,
Lo! how I suit my entrance to the Fight:
The Victor is in Chains led Captive Home,
And she in Triumph Rides, who was overcome.
ODE. The Apology. Out of Italian of Mr. Fr. Petrarcha lib. 2. canza. 7.

I.
Quel antiquo mio, etc.
CITING my old, and cruel Master, Love,
Before that Queen, which holds our part Divine,
And first descending from the Seats above,
In The Brain enthron^d with Heavenly Light does shine,
I showed my self like Gold, by Flames made fine.
Loaded I came, with Horror, Grief, and Fear,
Those heavy Chains my Jailer on me laid,
As is a Wretch, who begs his Judge to hear,
Tho Self-condemned, and of pale Death afraid,
I bowed to the Bar, and all in Tears thus said:
"In an ill Hour, Great Queen, I touched the Land
"Of this false Prince, where Rage, and Pride command;
"And where, even from a Youth, I underwent
"Such different Torments, that with Pain quite spent,
"My Life seemed more a burden than delight,
"And Patience was overcome, tho next to Infinite.
II.
Cosi 'l mia tempo, etc
"In Pains, and Anguish, spending thus my Age,
"How many Seasons did I, Fool, despise,
"My self in Noble Studies to engage,
"Whereby in Wealth I might, and Honor rise,
"Deceived of both by empty Flatteries?
"But where is the Wit that can such Words command,
"And at its pleasure fit Expressions call,
"That others may my Miseries understand,
"And how I Am just to implead this Criminal?
"How little Honey has Love, and how much Gall!
"I tasted both, but both were tempered so,
"The sweet above, the bitter lay below;
"Seducing to fond Amors by surprise,
"A Soul, if I mistake not, made to rise,
"And up in Heaven Exalted look more fair:
"Nor did Love only brake my Peace, but raised new War.
III.
Questi m' ha fatto, etc.
"My God, I Am sure, He less has made me love,
"Ten thousand times less than a Creature ought;
"Nor could I to my self more faithful prove,
"While for a Mistress I by him was brought,
"To slight compared with her all other thought.
"Love was my Counselor, that Enemy,
"Whom here I charge, who 'exciting my desire,
"Whilst all in vain I for Repose did cry,
"Permitted me no leisure to respire,
"But to assuage the burning brought more Fire.
("Alas!) what profit's it to have a mind
"By Heavens best Gifts, and purest Flame refined,
"Since tho my Hairs, through Age I Am changing still,
"I never, O, never can change my' unruly Will;
"Become to this fierce One so much a Slave,
"By use, that it were Death my Liberty to have!
IV.
Cercar m' ha fatto, etc.
"Strange Coasts he' has made me seek, and Foreign Lands,
"And thousand Perils blindly undergo;
"Sometime by Robbers, sometime rolling Sands,
"Ready to be devoured, rude Manners know,
"And Pilgrim like no Guide my way to show.
"Mountains I 'have past, and Vales, rough Storms, and Seas,
"Treading on Snares, too close to be descried;
"And in my wanderings, stranger than all these,
"Have Winter seen on the Wings of Summer ride,
"With Dangers only running by my side.
"But nor him, nor my other Enemy,
"Could I by flight escape, or secrecy;
"So that with Death if I unconquered strove,
"The thanks are Heavens, and none belong to Love.
"This tyran Love, who by my Grief revives,
"Feeds on my Pain, and by my Torment only lives.
V.
Poi che suo fui.
"Not one free Hour, since his, have I enjoyed,
"Nor hope to 'enjoy; eve'n sleep from the sad Night
"Is bannisht, and my former rest destroyed;
"In vain by Herbs, or Charms, I seek my right,
"For what by Fraud he 'has got, he keeps by Might.
"Usurping Tyran! and he knows it is true,
"When I add further, my just Charge to swell,
"The Darkness only did my Pain renew,
"Nor wanted I, often heard, times Passing Bell,
"Who by my Groans the weary Hours could tell.
"What more? Gnawing he in my Breast does lie,
"And long sought Death, does to the assault defy;
"Hence flow my Tears, and hence my Flames arise,
"Hence my Complaints, and all those dolorous Sighs,
"With which my self I tire, and others too,
"Great Queen, who know us both, between us Justice do!
VI.
Il mio Adversario.
I spoke -- but Love all in a rage replied,
"Now the other part, Great Queen, be pleased to hear!
"The Truths which this Ingrate has sought to hide,
"I to your Clemency will make appear,
"And Sentence, till I 'have spoken too, forbear!
"Know then this Wretch, with Mercenary Breath,
"Not Words alone, but Lies had learnt to sell;
"Till I his Youth reclaimed, and from that Death,
"Whither he was hasting, brought him sound, and well,
"In pure Delights, sore 'against his Will to dwell.
"I was his Guide, by me he first arrived
"At the happy Port, where he has safely lived;
"And this he grieves, this he calls Misery,
"And all tho^^ unsought Favors shown by me;
"A Fame, which by his Birth he never had gained,
"Till I who raised his Wit, that Honor too obtained.
VII.
Ei sa che'l grande Atride.
"He knows that Menelaus, and Achilles too,
"And Anibal, and a greater than all these,
"The mighty Scipio I did once subdue,
"And after all their Wars, enslaved in Peace,
"Giving them Waiting-Maids for Mistresses.
"But for him Wretch, a Love so sacred chose,
"And of a Million so beyond compare,
"That Heaven alone such sublimed Beauties knows,
"This World has nothing half so bright, or fair,
"Not Rome it self, tho its Lucrece were there.
"Nor was this all, but gave withal a Voice,
"And of Harmonious Numbers so great choice,
"Such skill to Sing, that nothing base, or low,
"E're reached his Thoughts, except his Malice now.
"These my Deceits were, these my Flatteries,
"For which I Am charged, which other, would as Honors prize.
VIII.
Questo fu il fell, etc.
"This was the Gall, these the Disdains and Ire,
("Favors too great to be so soon forgot)
"By which I kindled the most sacred Fire;
"But see the Blaze my Labor answers not,
"Who for a thankless Man thus long have wrought.
"If under me he has the Skill attained,
"To Ravish all, who do his Numbers hear,
"If with the Good, he such Respect has gained,
"And with the Great, that to' him they Deference bear,
"How high so e're he Soared, I fixed him there.
"Till now perchance some servile Wretch he' had been,
"A Brawler at some Bar, without esteem;
"But I first raised him, made him first be known,
"Nor were those Arts he Riots in, his own,
"But in my School he first procured the Grace,
"And then from her, who next me his great Mistress was.
IX.
E per dir al extremo, etc.
"Yet last of all, hear his grand Slavery,
"And you will think he' has reason to complain:
"From thousand Chains of Vice I set him free,
"By Her, whose Favor he could never gain
"By any Act, which had the smallest stain.
"Temperate, and Modest in design and deed,
"Since a Liege Man of hers, he still has been;
"Who with great thoughts his abject Soul did feed,
"And of her self in the Cure threw so much in,
"That to be her like he did strait begin.
"What e're he boasts then, worthy Praise or Fame,
"From us the Spoilers of his Fortune came;
"But never was Dream so wild, or humorous,
"To it self so strange, as he has been to us;
"For tho by us he is known to God, and Man,
"The Happiness he or repents, or does disdain.
X.
Anchor and questo e qual, etc.
"There Is one thing more, which all the rest out-does,
"I gave him Plumes to mount above the Skies,
"By Mortal things, which, to the Man who knows
"The Learning, like a Towering Pyramid,
"To the first Maker by degrees arise;
"For seeing well how great, and wondrous fair,
"Virtue in her, whom he adored did shine,
"From thence he might to' himself present the Air,
"By Heavenly Vision, of the Cause Divine,
"As himself sings, and proves this Charge of mine.
"But I Am forgot now, and with me that Dame
"I gave him, to support his Life, and Fame.
Whereat I shriekt, and answered, tho in pain:
"Well might he give, who took her soon again.
"Not I, but God, from whom She first did come,
"He smartly turned, with him would have her live at Home.
1967.
XI.
Al fin ambo, etc.
-- Then pressing both to the Bar,
I trembling, clamorous he, and over rude,
Both of us did in one Request conclude:
"Great Queen, we wait what Sentence you will give.
On both she smiled, but did us both deceive;
"Pleased with your Pleadings are we, she replied,
"But it requires more time your Difference to decide.
BALLAD.
Profane Love.
LOVE is a Net, and Love's a Snare,
A Thief disguised is Love;
Poison below, Honey above,
A Serpent under Flowers most fair,
Fatal as Death, whose bitings are:
A Whirl-pool sounded never to be,
And a soul Sea from Tempests never free.
Love is a Lion robbed of his Prey,
A Wolf with Famine pined;
Love is a Fortress undermined,
A Fire, whose flames no Floods allay;
Flattery, which does our Life betray;
A Labrinth pleasant to the Eye,
But without Clew to guide the Wanderer by.
Love is a ^^ck of Ambushments,
A weeping Crocodile;
A Syrene used to Sing, and Spoil,
And all the Lovers false Contents,
Are Frauds which he too late resents:
Love's an incurable Disease,
And War eternal mid vain boasts of Peace.
Dirupisti, Domine, vincula mea,
Tibi hostiam laudis Sacrificabo!
SONNET. Loves Exaltation. Out-of-Spanish.

ENLARGE Thy flight, Love, said I, and on high
Raise my dull Soul, those Beauties to admire,
Which in the Heavenly Treasuries do lie,
And Mortal Breasts with holy Flame inspire!
Show me the Spring of that Celestial Fire,
Designed our Earthy Dross to purify,
But after which in vain below we' enquire,
Who sit down in the warm Sun of a fair Eye!
So up he raised me, but no Tongue can tell,
What I in Rapturous Vision did behold:
My Love I found was Pure, and made me bold:
This only I remember very well,
So high we soared, till on an Arch above,
I saw inscribed, SACRED TO HEAVENLY LOVE.
ODE. The Thoughts. Out of the Italian of Fr. Petrach, l. 1. Canz. 21.

I.
I'vo pensando, etc.
FULL of strange Thoughts, and pensive as I go,
A tenderness, which to my self I owe,
So strongly does my Mind assail,
And so insensibly prevail,
That all in Tears I flow,
But for my own misfortune now,
And not another Cruelty, as I was wont to do.
For seeing every Day my end draw nigh,
A thousand times of God I Have begged those Wings,
With which from this lewd World, and Mortal things,
The unpinion'd Soul to Heaven does fly;
And beg still, but he does the Grace deny.
And tho I Sigh, and Grieve, and Pray,
That Happiness does countermand;
But reason it is, that he, who will not upright stand,
When it is in his own Power, or wilfully must stray,
Low as the Earth should lie, and never find his way.
I see, it is true, the Eternal Arms extended wide,
But my own Fear, and others Fate,
Who have deferred till 'twas too late,
Make me tremble at my present state.
Another Tyran too beside,
Whom often to throw, in vain I often have tried,
Furiously spurs me on. (Ah!) Whither will he ride?
II.
L'un pensier parla, etc.
But (Lo!) what thoughts my mind assault.
And how to it thus One roundly says;
"Why, foolish Thing, why these delays?
"What lookt-for Succor causes such an Alt?
"See thou not how the winged Minutes pass,
"And add more Years to thy Disgrace,
"And yet thy help as far to seek, as e're it was?
"Take, rather take thy last Farewell,
"And do it quickly; every Root destroy
"Of fruitless Pleasure, which could thou enjoy
"In its Perfection, for it thou must sell
"Thy Soul, and Liberty, and in an hurry dwell.
"But since thou never can that expect,
"And in the toilsome quest art tired,
"Of what so much admired,
"Yet which the glozing World, when it does thee neglect,
"May to an He as ill deserving give,
"Why as fixed here do thou live,
"And midst rude Wars, and giddy Vanity,
"Hope for Peace and Constancy?
"Now while thou may dare to be Wise!
"In thine own hand keep fast the Rein!
"And since thou must begin again,
"Stop, and turn back, the Road behind thee lies.
"It Is hazardous thou know too long to stay,
"And till to Morrow leave, what is better done to Day.
III.
Gia sai tu ben, etc.
"Long since Thou have been taught, nor art thou now
"To learn, what Happiness, and Content,
"From the fairest Eyes are sent
"To 'n Heart, that does the Charms of Beauty know.
"But what think Thou both had been,
"What Thy Content, and Happiness,
"The greater Glory, and the less,
"If those fair Eyes had never been seen,
"And in their stead another Flame had entered in?
"Thou well remembrest, (and it is well thou do)
"How their Image seized thee first,
"And thy Heart like Lightning pierced,
"Where it was so much Lord of all the Coast,
"So fatally did overcome,
"That none for other Loves it left, scarce for it self had room.
"With that thou first were set on fire,
"And if its wild fallacious heat,
"Has held thee many Years with vain desire,
"And expectation of what never was yet,
"Nor er'e may come, (that joyful Day
"Which should thy Mise'ries end, and largely for thy waiting pay,)
("For none so silily themselves undo
"As Lovers, and so thanklesly if Poets too)
"Why do thou not to a better hope thy Soul advance,
"And Heavens Immortal Glories view?
"For if one Smile, one pleasing Glance,
"A Song dear purchased, one kind word or two,
"The price of Love can here enhance,
"What will those Heavenly Beauties do;
"And how great must the Pleasure be above,
"Where they do ever Sing, and where they ever Love!
IV.
Da l' altra part.
On the other side, a different thought,
With a sharp, but pleasing pain,
Of Hope and Fear together wrought,
Makes me love it, but complain.
For while with Hope it feeds my Heart,
And profers Fame to crown desert,
The Fear I can despise, and dare the cruel smart.
Insensible it almost renders me,
Of all but its dear self insensible,
The effects of Study I never feel
How hot or cold, how pale so e're I be;
Nor will one Death to kill 't suffice,
One Death to end its Tyrannies,
Since thoroughly slain, it does with greater vigor only rise.
When but a Child, as a Child with me it played,
Just like my self, and as I grew encreast;
Nor will 't I fear permit me any rest,
Till in one Tomb we be together laid.
Dead with my Body, there 'twill lie,
Nor any further with me go;
And then what signifies this Fame, if I
Its best Report can never know?
Since there must once a parting be,
And away the Shade will flee
For the true substance I Will leave it, e're that leave me.
V.
Ma quel' altro voler.
But (Oh!) that Passion like my Soul,
Which in each part is all, and all in the whole,
And as a great, and spreading Root,
To' it self the moisture draws, and starves the Ground about,
How does it Vex, and Torture me,
When I my Pride, and Folly see,
My Ignorance, and Vanity,
Of others writing still, so mindless of my self to be!
Those Eyes I mean, whose heavy Chain,
My captive Will does so restrain,
That Art and Force to break it I employ in vain.
What then, tho my spread Sails are filled,
And that prepared I for the Voyage am,
If yet my Barque midst Rocks is held,
By two such Cables, Love, and Fame?
But Thou, my God, who from those other Bands,
With which the sottish World 's held fast,
Long since my freedom Ransomed have;
Why hear not these Thy great Commands,
And loose the Prisoner, who with shame confounded stands?
Abasht I stand, and like a Man at Night,
Assaulted in his Dreams, with Deaths grim sight,
Fain would resist, but want both words to speak, and Arms to fight.
VI.
Quel ch' i fo veggio, etc.
I well enough know what I ought to do,
Nor does the Ignorance of what is true,
At all deceive me; but this Love,
With which so mise'rably I am oppressed,
Tho all his, and my 'own Follies I reprove,
Too much, and much too long of me possessed,
Permits me not one step to move,
And the true Honors shiny Path intend above.
Yet now and then there does begin,
Something, I know not what, to strive within;
A cruel and severe Disdain,
Thus for ever to remain,
And where of all it may be read again,
This secret thought writes in my Forehead plain.
"What can more unmorthy be,
"The Man, who does to the fairest Prize aspire,
"Than toward Mortal things to be on fire,
"With the same Flame that only fits the Deity?
Nor does it thus alone, but cries aloud
To my Reason, drawn aside,
And behind my Senses hid;
Reason obeys, and strait condemns what it allowd.
But as I Am thinking back to go,
Custom does, or make me stay,
Or leads me to some other way;
I gaze, and that does show
The brightest Eyes, e're shon below,
But born alas for my incurable Disease,
For too much me, too much their cruel selves they please
VII.
Ne so che spatio mi, etc.
How long, or short the space may be,
Which when into this World I first came down,
By Heavens Arrest was granted me,
To undergo Wars misery,
And all those pains, which from my self have grown,
I know as little, as I do the Time,
When this wretched Life shall end;
For both are Mysteries too sublime,
And Mortal knowledge far transcend.
But this I know, and daily find,
That all without, and all within
My Body 's changed, and so 's my Mind.
Gray Hairs appear, nor is the End far behind
When to approach these Harbingers begin.
Like a Man therefore, who much Ground and Day has lost
But wiser made at length by his cost.
I Am thinking often to take the Right Hand way,
Where I see my Journey lay,
And which when first I left, I first began to stray:
But Grief and Shame to have truanted so long,
Hold my one half, Pleasure does the other seize,
Pleasure through Custom grown so strong,
That it with Death dare stand on terms for War or Peace.
Comiato.
SONG, thou see me as I am,
And me more than thou Petrarch sawst of old,
With an Heart than Ice more cold,
Never to be thawed I fear by any Flame,
But that which in 'its embrace the Universe shall hold.
Yet (Lo!) I am resolved again,
Once more the great Experiment to try,
Tho never lived Man in so much pain,
With Death, or in his Heart, or Eye.
But this my Trouble does renew,
That what I would, I cannot do,
And what I hate and would not, that I vigorously pursue.
1668.
SONNET. Convertimento a Dio. Out of Italian of Mr. Fr. Petrarc. Sonnet 59.

Io son sistanco sotto 'l, etc.
TIRED, and almost or'ecome with the heavy weight,
Of my old Sins, by Custom grown so strong,
I Am fearful, lest Life's way being rough and long,
I from it turn, by my own, or Foes deceit.
I have a Friend it is true, that from Heavens height,
Came down to free me, and redress my Wrong,
Of love he came, but quickly 'amidst the throng
I lost him, whose return in vain I wait;
Upwards he flew, and flying thus did cry,
"Burd'ned and weary Souls, behold your Way
"Hither, come hither to me, and find Rest!
What Grace, what Love, my Lord, what Destiny,
Will give me a Doves wings, on which I may
Mount from this Earth, and be of Heaven possessed?
SONNET, To the same Purpose. Out of the same P^^r. Sonnet 76.

Poi che voi and io piu volte, etc.
SINCE you and I, my Friend, so often have proved,
How false our Hopes, and full of Vanity,
To that best Good at length thy Heart apply,
Which still the more it is known, the more it is loved!
The present Life 's a Field, till thus improved,
In which midst Flowers an hidden Snake does lie,
And tho its Verdure please the wanton Eye,
Death from the unwary Foot 's not far removed.
Would you then have a Mind at last secure,
And endless Joys, in which thou may persever,
Follow the Few, to them thy Steps inure,
And all thou can to leave the most endeavor!
Brother, you teach well, but you^self first sure,
Who often have strayed, yet more of late than ever.
SONNET. To the now Mrs. M. W. under the feigned Name of Iarma, with the
Parable of the Pilgrim.
ATEDIOUS Age, I like this Pilgrim spent,
In search of that fair Place, where Heaven designed,
I should an end of all my Travels find;
But still I strayed the more, the more I went,
I strayed till Clelia in a Vision sent
Illustrious Rays, diffused over all my Mind,
And made me see the Way lay far behind,
Whose entrance was my Wanderings to Repent,
She told me what Companions I should take,
How Resolution and Humility,
And Faith and Charity I should provide,
If I a prosperous Journey hope'd to make.
But where dear Clelia do these Graces lie?
Iarma has them all, make her your Guide.
1666.
SONNET. To the Reverend Mr. J. G.
TO GOD, it is, my Friend, and you I owe,
What I have been the twenty Years that last,
In various Changes over my Head have past,
And forty more, if Heaven shall on me throw;
How good so e're I by that time may grow,
(For Great I wish not, and who makes less haste?)
To your account shall be at the Audit placed,
Who Virtues Path by few trod, made me know,
And timely did my wandering Youth reclaim,
By Grave Advice, tho not so reckoned then,
(The more my Folly) how e're it has been since;
But when the Spirit Divine to blow begins,
What Boys we scorned, we follow close grown Men,
And the kind Warner have in greatest Fame.
SONNET. On the Picture of our LORD, represented on the Cross as Dead. The Hint
out of the Italian of Mar^no.

Pietoso quanto accorto, etc.
SOMETHING there was, Great Master, more than chance
That Thou the Pencils Wonders to express,
And therein Thy more wondrous Hands address,
Tookst my Dead Lord, the Colors to advance.
Pity directed Thee that Choice to make,
And (having in Thy Pious Breast designed,
To show how rude the Jews, Thy Self how kind)
His Pale and Lifeless Form resolve to take,
'Twas nobly done; for had Thou made him breathe,
Ever in Torment he had seemed to live,
And from Thy Hands a greater Wound receive.
Than all their Cruelty contrived in his Death,
For such Thy Picture is, now he enclines his Head,
That he would Groan, and Speak, but that he is Dead.
St. Paul done by Titian. A Madrigal. Out of Italian.

DEAD to the World, and far from Heaven removed,
Longed for by him so much, and so much loved
The blessed Paul, while here,
Did really as Dead appear,
But in Thy Colors, Titian, looks so warm and clear:
So Mortified, and yet so full of Life,
That the most curious need not be at strife,
But confidently swear,
If they could both together see,
The true with this designed by Thee:
(Such breathing Strokes do from Thy Pencil fall)
Live Paul's the Draught, Thy Draught the living Paul.
1668.
SONNET. The Vanity of thinking to get Fame by Riming.
WHAT do Thou, Man, what think Thou, to what end
Of old Bards emulous, and their ancient Praise,
In Riming spendst Thou all Thy Strength and Days,
Nor ever what is of more concern intend?
Fame which Thou courtest never did commend
Of true Desert, or if she does, delays
Till 'it be too late; no Monument does raise
But to along since dead, or dying Friend.
And Thou, if Thou desir'st that Friend to be,
What art the better for it in the Grave,
Thither Thy Fame will never follow Thee,
Nor with the Dead shall Thou more Honor have
For Verse, than if Thou Verse had never known,
The Living will not, Dead can give Thee none.
SONNET. To give over Riming, and fall to Business.
AS I one Day did of my Fate complain,
And to Loves Charge the great Occasion laid,
Recounting all the Ways I had assayed
A Name, or Fortune in the World to gain,
And still to' obtain it strive, but all in vain.
Ah! sottish Wretch, with Rage and Scorn, he said,
Me with Thy Artless Follies to upbraid,
When Thou alone art cause of all Thy Pain.
Go, and to Business, Man Thy self present,
Business, the noblest Mistress tho 'it be late,
Who many Servants has, and more will take,
Riming and Modesty never got Estate,
Or Name, or Fortune, it is the Confident
And Busy carry' all. -- Love I did mistake.
ODE. To the Right Reverend Father in God JOHN, late Lord Bishop of Chester,
upon his Promotion thither.
I.
FAIR Seminary of the Flourishing Arts,
Great Wadhams bounteous Legacy,
The last result of Heaven-born Charity,
Who mounting thither from these Frozen parts,
Designed Thee with an high intent,
To be both Hers, and Thy own Pious Founders Monument,
Thee, WADHAM, first of all I sing,
Where in soft Verse I learnt the early Skill,
(Ah! that one so well Disciplined should rehearse so ill,
And have for all Thy care no better Strains to bring!)
Thee, sacred College, who do rise,
Like a new Sion, to the North
Of the Muses City, with Thy Wings stretched forth,
And in their Kingdom have her Royalties,
(OXFORD, the brightest City' and Kingdom, which the Muses have)
Small as thou art, but wondrous brave,
Both Peacefully there to Command,
And send abroad Thy The Right R. R. Dr. SETH Ward, Bishop of Saram. Dr. WALTER
^landford, Warden of Wadham, Bishop of Worcester. Dr. JOHN Wilkins, ^arden also
of Wadham, Bishop of Chester.
Fathers through our Land,
Thee, I, tho far unworthy, Greet,
And at Thy Gates, as does a Son befit,
To lead him to his Stall with Songs, Thy late great Guardian meet.
II.
With Thee, my Song, in Thee this happy Man,
Whilst only Thine, a bold Attempt began,
Whose Fame Posterity shall never let die,
But thence it self instructed how to live,
Due Honors to the first Discoverer give,
And Consecrate his Name to Vast Eternity.
A bold Attempt it was, worthy this Age,
And Him, whom Heaven did with the thought Inspire,
(Yet which this Age can never enough Admire,
How full so e're of Art, and Learned Rage,)
In Natures search alone, and bravely to engage.
At Home he sought, but there
Only some Traces of his Footsteps were.
For tho with Him she long Inhabited,
And lay in his Retreats secure,
Seen but of few, once urged, could not endure
A public Scrutiny, and at the News away she sted.
He followed close, and lodged her in the Town;
LONDON, that was so big, and populous grown,
She hoped, or there to hide, or there to pass unknown,
And midst the Multitude,
The Noise, the Hurry, and the Crowd,
As safely breath, as in a Solitude.
III.
But all in vain, He quickly found Her out,
And having Summond to his Aid,
The Wise, the Learned, and the Stout,
(All noted Champions, and in Wars assaid)
What was before a search to Arms Decision brought.
Levies on both Hands listed were,
And Nature, then Attaqu't, began to fear;
But like a Conqueror, and never known to yield,
To be Obeyed, and not Compelled,
Led up her Self her Troops into the Field.
A mighty Host they made, Encamped wide,
And with their Wings touched Heaven on either side.
Against which a little Party, reinforced
I^y Reason, and Experience,
Approved Arms, for Battery, and Defense,
Both often Tried, and not alone Discoursed,
Came boldly forth, and did Defiance bid;
But in the others shouts were drowned, and in the others Numbers hid,
IV.
And now both Sides had joined the Fight,
One to maintain, the other their Conquests to extend;
When, (look!) between the Camps, a glorious sight,
The British Gardian-Angel clothed in Light,
Did on an Azure Cloud descend,
And to the baleful Quarrel with his Presence put an end.
He came, but not in the Shape he takes above,
For that 's a Form too subtle, and too great,
With its excessive Luster Mortal Eyes did threat,
And in his Fellow Spirits dreadful Wonder move,
But like the Warriers to whom he was sent,
And suiting the Embassy, on which he went,
The Faith's DEFENDER, Heavens best Charge did represent,
In Rings of Polisht Jet, so shon his Hair,
A Color that in Heaven is rare,
But yet in Heaven admired, for such the Almighty Son does wear.
Over his glittering Arm was thrown,
A Military Crim'som Vest;
Close by its Breast his Sword hung down,
And did in his Embroidered Scabard rest.
His Left Hand held a Silver Shield,
Charged with three Leopards, in a Canton of the Field.
Two shiny Talbots in his Right he led,
Such as are in the Heavenly Forests bred,
And over his Godlike Head,
An Eagle her extended Wings auspiciously did spread.
V.
"Give over, He said, give over your Rage,
"A better Fortune both your Arms attends;
"Nor let it be reported, in the next Age,
"That furious zeal, and unknown Ends,
"In Civil Wars destroyed the best and dearest Friends!
"For such you are, and by the High Decree,
"Shall with united force those Trophies raise,
"Over Mankinds common Enemy,
"Proud Ignorance, and blind Credulity,
"As shall gain both deserved Praise,
"And fetch from Worlds as yet unknown for both Immortal Bays.
"You NATURE, and it is Gods Command, not mine,
"To these shall all your Store submit;
"Whose Industry, with Skill shall join,
"To search, Improve, and Husband it.
"Together Reconciled you shall abide,
"My CHARLES shall of his Goodness so provide,
"Who will your FOUNDER, and your PATRON be,
"Call you the ROYAL, and his own SOCIETY:
"And of his special Grace to the new Erected Company,
"With you his rich Hereditary Coat divide,
("As on this Shield:) If any Doubt arise
"In your Inquests, Lo! Heavens and thy Supplies,
"These TALBOTS scent, that EAGLES Wings, and Eyes.
VI.
But whither Muse, Ah! whither will thou rove?
Already thou have strayed enough,
And in thy wild unruly Flight,
Forgot thy Reverend Prelate quite,
And lost of thy first Theme the sight.
He Is gone, but if thou haste do make,
And haste thou oughtst, for my sake, and thine own,
And in his Learned Train make one,
His Learned Train, thou quickly may overtake:
And e're he Chester reach, so slow,
So heavily his Wheels do go,
(Yet not from His, but Friends delay,
Who wish him there, but yet with them would have him stay)
Be ready with the Ancient Dee,
(Dee in praise will join with Thee)
His Entrance to attend, and Installation see.
VII.
Hail! Sacred Stream, Prophetic Flood,
Who could of Old the Fates of Nations tell;
The Fates of Nations now Thou skill'st as well,
As when Thy Channel leaving Thou did bode
Their Misery, 'or their Happiness e're either fell.
For this 'twas that thou gotst the Name
Of Dee the Holy, and Divine,
And amongst Rivers of the loudest Fame,
As rich in Wonders, and illustriously do Shine.
To whom all else Renowned,
And with Genial Honors Crowned,
Or for their pleasant Banks, or Waters pride,
And little Mysteries, which they are said to hide,
All but the Starry Thames, above
Eridan falsely called, their Places yield:
And in the Oceans boundless Field,
Where every Night they meet, in a long Row behind thee move.
Worthy thou art, thrice worthy of my Song;
And worthy Thee, in all Thy Glory,
The Man we both admire, of both expected long,
My Numbers to advance, and to revive Thy Story.
VIII.
Till He was Thine, something there was did want,
To render Thee complete:
The Colony Rome on thy Banks did Plant,
Made Thee not half so great,
Nor is it self so famous for Agricola's, as his Seat.
His happy River, whose vast Spring
Of Real Goodness, and of Learned Arts the best,
A new increase shall to Thy Waters bring;
Joining with which they never shall rest,
Till they those Triumphs end, which EDGAR on thee did begin.
"Well ^ow'd my Braves, the British Monarch cried,
As at the Helm Victoriously He stood,
His Tributary Kings on either side,
(Eight Tributary Kings at the Oar then plied)
Tugging to waft him down the Flood*
Tiber did never Day so glorious see,
Nor could Augustus, in such State,
After his Alexandrian Victory,
Enter Romes Triumphal Gate;
He the Effigies had to show
But of one Queen, and her taken, when Dead too.
EDGAR Throned Kings had Eight,
All in their Robes, on him to wait,
And all with Crowns upon their Heads his Barge to row.
L'Envoy.
At Chester, Song, Thou will behold
The Wonders, which Thou here has told;
But let not all Thy Time be spent,
In a search too inquisitive;
Find out the Reverend Father there, to whom you are sent,
And humbly at his Knees receive
That Blessing, which returned thou may thy Master give!
So shall Thou into Credit grow,
And have from him that Honor, Verse on others must bestow.
To the Honorable Sir JOHN DENHAM, upon his New Version of the Psalms.
I.
IT WAS but of late, that in our Northern Clime,
Verse, which had many Ages been a Slave,
Regained its freedom, and tho bound to Rhyme,
The Tyrans, which had humbled it, did Brave.
II.
Fettered before in gross Impertinence,
And by strange Monsters forced, it Prisoner lay;
Whose Strength was big swollen Words, and empty sense,
And all the Cheats, which Ignorance betray.
III.
To make Vile Anagrams, was its best Art*
And lewdly then to descant on the Text;
Whose Gloss was evermore the dullest part,
And all the Wit to seem, and be perplexed.
IV.
Then motly Metaphors at length stole in,
And that the Poet might his Treasures boast;
Rubies and Pearls were in each couplet seen,
And a poor Sonnet would an Empire cost.
V.
But still the Sun to the hardest Task was pressed*
And wearied with his Journey all Day long,
In The Sea at Night enjoyed but confused rest,
For less the World could want him than a Song.
VI.
These were the Vices captive Verse obeyed,
With thousand worse, to which it did submit;
Till you the Enemies weakness open laid,
And to its ancient Grandeur ransomed it.
VII.
'Twas you, great Sir, who like the Redcros^ Knight,
To save the Damsel Poesy, arose;
Like him did with the Enchanted Dragon fight,
And made her Reign a Queen, amidst her Foes.
VIII.
Wit from your Pen, was quite another thing,
Than what the Ignorant imagined it;
And in your manner skilfully to Sing,
More than to make rich Rimes, and Noises hit.
IX.
It Was Manly, Grave, and full of sprit'ely Fire,
The same that it was sixteen Centuries past;
Able the very Reader to inspire,
And whose fixed Monument shall ever last.
X.
But sacred Poesy lay all this while
Scorned, or Neglected, as it was before;
As if it were no Sacriledg to spoil,
But what from God was once Robbed, to restore.
XI.
Any thing for the Temple would suffice,
No matter how ill dressed the Service were;
To the Institution it did nearer rise,
More like the unpolisht Altar, and Goats Hair.
XII.
Waiting your help it lay, who to redeem
The Credit, which it long unjustly lost;
Have raised it to a more enlarged esteem,
Loved of the best, and Courted by the most.
XIII.
From you the Jewish Psalmist has received
The latest Glory, which he could expect;
And all, who at his barbarous Sufferings grieved,
With Pleasure on them thus expired reflect.
XIV.
You were that Worthy, for whom all did look,
To' attempt, and execute this bold Design;
Nor was there other Way, than what you took,
By Humane Poesy, to restore Divine.
XV.
For as in the Revolutions of Great States,
Civility Religion did produce;
The Muses Kingdoms too have born like Fates*
By' you first made Civil, then Religious.
L'Envoy.
Full often, Song, I Have grieved, thou staydst at Home,
Nor kiss'dst those Hands for which thou were designed;
Sure had Thou ever to His Presence come,
The known He 'had loved, who to the unknown was kind
1668.
To Mr. Isaac Walton, Publishing the Life of Mr. George Herbert. ODE.
I.
HEAVENS youngest Son, its Benjamin,
Divinities next Brother, Sacred Poesy,
No longer shall a Virgin reck'ned be,
(What e're with others it is, how e're called so by me)
A Female Muse, as were the Nine,
But full of Vigor Masculine,
An Essence Male, with Angels in shared Glories join
With Angels first the Heavenly Child was bred,
And, while a Child, instructed them to Sing
The Praises of the Immortal King,
Who Lucifer in Triumph led.
For as in Chains the Monster sank to Hell,
And tumbling Headlong down the Precipice fell,
By Him well showed and tutored well,
"How art Thou fallen, Morning Star, they said!
Too fondly then we 'have fancied him a Maid,
We the vain Brethren of the Riming Trade,
A Female Angel less would Rafaels skill upbraid.
II.
Thus 'twas in Heaven, this Poesies Sex and Age,
And when He thence to 'our lower World came down,
He chose a Form most like his own,
And Jesses youngest Son inspired with holy Rage,
The sprightly Shepherd felt unusual Fire,
And up he took his Tuneful Lyre;
He took it up and struck 'it, and 'his own soft touches did admire.
Thou Po'esy on Him did bestow,
An Honor showed before to none;
And to prepare his Way to the Hebrew Throne,
Gave'st him Thy Empire, and Dominion:
The happy Land of Verse, where slow
Rivers of Milk, and Groves of Laurel grow;
Wherewith Thou did adorn his Brow,
And madst his first most flourishing, and Triumphal Crown.
Assist me Thy great Prophets Praise to Sing;
David the Poets, and blessed Isreal's King,
And with the dancing Echo let the Mountains ring!
Then on the Wings of some auspicious Wind,
Let His great Name from Earth be raised on High,
And in the Starry Volume of the Sky,
A lasting Record find;
Be with His mighty Psaltery joined,
Which taken up long since into the Air,
And called the Harp, makes a bright Constellation there!
III.
Worthy it was to be Translated hence,
And there in view of all Exalted hang,
To which so often the Princely Prophet sang,
And sacred Ora'cles did dispense;
Tho had it still remained below,
More Wonders of it, we e're now had seen,
How great the mighty Herberts Skill had been:
Herbert, who could so much without it do,
Herbert who perfectly its Chords did know,
More perfectly than any Child of Verse does now.
Ah! had we known him half so well!
But then, my Friend, there had been left for you,
Nothing so fair, and worthy Praise to undergo,
Who so exactly all his Story tell,
That, tho we envy not his Bays,
Nor all the Piramids Verse can raise,
Your Hand, and Pen we do, that eternize his Praise.
Herhert, and Donn again are joined,
Here below, as they 'are above;
The Friends are in their old Embraces twined:
And since by you that Enterview 's designed,
Too weak to part them Death does prove,
But in one Book they greet again, as in one Heaven they love.
L'Envoy.
To Wotton too, my Song,
A kind remembrance Thou do owe,
With my Friends Name, who made Thee know
This great Triumvirate of Verse; but long
Too long, I fear, Thou then would be,
If not o're-born, with the mighty subjects Dignity.
To the same Mr. Is. Wa. upon the Publication of the Reverend Mr. Richard
Hooker's Life. ODE.
I.
HAIL, Sacred Mother, British Church, all hail*
From whose fruitful Loins have sprung,
Of Pious Sons so great a throng,
That Heaven to 'oppose their force of Strength does fail,
And lets the mighty Victors, over Almighty Arms prevail.
How art Thou changed from what Thou were of late,
When destitute, and quite forlorn,
And scarce a Child of thousands with Thee left to mourn,
Thy Vail all rent, and all Thy Garments torn,
With Tears Thou did bewail Thine own, and Childrens Fate?
Too much (alas!) Thou did resemble then,
Sion Thy Type, Sion in Ashes laid,
Despised, forsaken, and betrayed.
Sion Thou do resemble once again,
And raised like her, the Glory of the World art made.
Threnes to Thee only could that time belong,
But now Thou art the happy subject of my Song.
II.
Begin, my Song, and where the doleful Mother sat,
(As it in Vision was the Prophet shown)
Lamenting with the rest her dearest Son,
Blessed CHARLES, who his Forefathers has outrun,
And to the Royal joined the Martyrs brighter Crown*
Let a new City rise, with beauteous State,
And beauteous let its Temple be, and beautiful the Gate!
See! how the sacred Fabrique up does rise,
The Architects so Skilful all,
So Grave, so Humble, and so Wise,
The Axes, and the Hammers noise,
Is drowned in Silence, or in Numbers Musical.
It Is up, and at the Altar stand
The Reverend Fathers, as of old,
With Harps, and Incense in their Hand,
Nor let the Pious Service grow, or Dumb, or Cold.
The Inferior Priests, the while,
To Praise continually employed, or Pray,
Need not the weary Hours beguile,
Enough's the single duty of each Day;
Thou thy Self, Woodford, on thy humbler Pipe may play:
And tho but lately 'admitted there,
So gracious those Thou Honour'st all appear,
So ready, and attent to hear,
An easy part, proportioned to Thy Skill may bear.
III.
But where (alas!) where will Thou fix Thy choice?
The Subjects are so noble all,
So great their Glories, and Thy Art so small,
They 'll judge, I fear, themselves disparaged by Thy voice.
Yet try; and since Thou can not take
A Name, so dispicably low,
But 'twill exceed what Thou can do,
Tho Thou thy' whole Mite away at once should throw,
Thy Poverty a Virtue make,
And that Thou may Immortal live,
(Since Immortality Thou can not give)
From one, who has to spare be 'ambitious to receive!
Of Reverend, and Judicious Hooker Sing!
Hooker does to the Church belong,
The Church and Hooker claim Thy Song,
And inexhausted Riches to Thy Verse will bring;
So far beyond it self will make it grow,
That Life his Gift to Thee, thou shall again on him bestow.
IV.
How great, blessed Soul! must needs Thy Glory be,
Thy Joys how perfect, and Thy Crown how fair,
Who made the Church thy chiefest care,
This Church, who owes so much to Thee,
That all her Son^ must Sacrifice unto Thy Memory.
'Twas a bold Work the Captive to redeem,
But bolder the Oppressed to raise,
(Our Aged Mother) to that due esteem,
She had and merited in her younger Days;
When Primitive Zeal, and Piety,
Were her best Laws, and Policy,
And decent Worship kept the mean,
Its too wide-stretcht extremes between,
The rudely scrupulous, and too wanton vain.
This was the Work of Hookers Pen,
With Judgment, Candor, and such Learning writ,
Matter, and Words so' exactly fit,
That were it to be done again,
Expected 'twould be, as its Answer hitherto has been.
Retornata.
To Chelsey, Song, and tell thy Masters Friend,
The Church is Hooker's Debtor, Hooker his;
And strange 'twould be, if he should Glory miss,
For whom two such most powerfully contend.
Bid him cheer up, the Day 's his own,
And he can never Die,
Who after Seventy 's past and gone,
Can all the assaults of Age defy;
Is Master still of so much Youthful heat,
A Child so perfect, and so spirit'ous to beget.
The Metamorphosis CLELIA [chang'd into] A BAIE.
To the Memory of Mrs. A. W. who died in Childbed, 14 January, 1663-4.
DOWN in a Vale, between two shady Groves,
Whose Trees in sighs bewailed their distant Loves,
And over a Stream, which gently glid below;
Stretched their long Arms, and leafy Heads did bow,
As if each others Necks they would embrace,
And murmuring chid the interrupting space;
Sylvius the wretched Shepherd chose to lay,
Clelias remains, and his own Vows to pay.
The Tomb nor Marble was, nor glitterant Brass,
No weighty Pile, but Bank of Turfy Grass,
Which he himself cast up, and all around,
With Winter Roses strewed the sacred Ground.
Close by a mournful Tablet hung, whose Verse
Was thus engraved --
Kind Earth, where I securely trust
My Dearest half, in Peace to sleep;
Be sure thou safely guard her Dust,
And undisturbed the still loved Ashes keep:
But look thou lightly on them fall,
And as in thine own Center have no weight at all!
So shall thou be with Roses Crowned,
And all those Flowers, which now I strew,
Again, as in their Native Ground,
Only more fair, shall in thy Bosom grow;
Maintained by an Eternal Spring,
Which with my constant Tears, I to these Banks will bring.
Witness ye Floods, which deeper run,
By them encreast than heretofore;
And as you purling roll along,
Those ancient bounds you seldom touched, run over;
At my request yet higher swell,
And what is their power, tho in your broken numbers, tell.
With you my Tears, but here is my Fire,
Preserved alive in Clelias Urn;
Never to Languish, or Expire,
But in the next Age to break forth and burn:
When it to Verse a Theme shall give,
And by the Flames it shall inspire, be known to live.
Retired the Valley was from common View,
By none frequented, known but to a few,
Sylvio's best Friends, who thither used to go,
Sometimes with him, and there joynt-Tears bestow.
Belisa, and her Swain, who claimed a share,
By Love, and Friendship in the Pious Care,
Were all his Company, and who alone,
Best knew, and judged his Sorrow by their own.
Yet for their own, tho they some case could find,
In vain they sought it for his troubled Mind.
For still more restless that, and stubborn grew,
And with the Day his Griefs did still renew.
Clelia was all his thought, and with her Name,
He so stirred up the yet increasing Flame,
That the thick Sighs, which from his Breast did go,
Were but as Wind the glowing Coals to blow;
And his exhausted Tears too late did prove,
That Love alone, not they, could quench his love.
And so he lived (if one a Life may call
What was indeed but a long Funeral)
Till as one Morning to the Grove he went,
And to conclude the Ceremony meant,
The Grove he found by a new Tree encreast,
Whose sleeping Root seemed laid in Clelias Breast.
The sight amazed him, but when he drew near,
And saw the Plant, how gay it did appear,
His Clelia in the Plant the Shepherd spi^d,
Nor could the strange disguise her Beauties hide.
'Twas a fair Bay, but so exactly shaped,
That it the perfect Form of Woman kept.
Not as Philosophers feigned Man to be,
In their wild Resve'rys, an inverted Tree,
But standing on its Root, and whose strait bole,
Showed how great once, and gentile was her Soul.
For if Souls can by the Bodies frame be ghest,
Of great the greatest she' had, of good the best.
The beauties of her Bosom did appear,
In swelling Knots that balmy perfumes bear.
To Leaves her Hair was changed, to Boughs her Arms,
Yet both retained their ancient Force and Charms.
A jollier Tree than ever Daphne was,
And much more worthy bright Apollos grace.
For whatsoe^ re in Woman is admired,
When in a Lovers chaste embrace retired,
Was found in her, who did nor coyly flee,
Nor court that Love, the other was proud of when a Tree.
Laura the Thuscan Poets brightest Flame,
Laura, whom Verse has given a lasting Name,
Which all but her own Virtues shall survive,
Laura to be her Emblem does in Numbers live.
Which as the mournful Sylvius viewed, he said,
(Gathering some Leaves to bind about his Head,
The Leaves to bind his Head bowed gently down,
And form themselves into a Laurel Crown)
"Daphne, Apollos, Clelia was my Love,
"Tho both turned Trees, with Fates unequal strove.
"Unlike in Life, alike in Change they were,
"A Mother this, a Virgin that severe:
"Over whom till Plant, Phoebus could not prevail,
(Python He did with more Success assail.)
"Yet as to her he did his Harp resign,
"Clelia with no less Passion shall have mine.
"Grow sacred Plant, the better Daphne be,
"Iarmas and my Consecrated Tree!
L'Envoy.
Poor Pastoral, for simple Shepherd fit,
Without or much of Art contrived, or Wit;
Do as Thou may, the Curious City fly;
Or if Thou thither chance to come,
Concealed as the' Ashes, which Thou herriest lie,
For whose dear sake alone, Thou do thy Fortune try;
Tho, like thy Master, Thou might safer be at Home.
ODE. To Posthumus. Hor. l. 2. Ode 14.

Mortem Vitari non posse.
TIME Posthu'mus scuds it with full Sail,
Nor can thine honest Heart avail,
A furrowed Brow, Old Age at hand,
Or Death unconquered to withstand;
One long Night
Shall hide this Light,
From all our sight,
And equal Death,
Shall few Days hence stop every Breath.
Tho thou whole Hecatombs should bring.
To' atone the' inexorable King,
Who Geryon, and Tytius bold,
In Chains of Stygian Waves does hold;
He 'll not prize,
But despise,
Thy Sacrifice;
Death thou must feel,
It Is so decreed by the fatal Wheel.
The numerous Offspring of the Earth,
That feed on Her, who gave them Birth,
Must have, each Birth its Funeral,
The Womb, and Urn 's alike to all;
Kings must Die,
And as low lie,
As thou and I,
And though they have
Achievements here, there 's none in the Grave.
In vain we bloody Battles fly,
And fear to sail, when Seas are high;
Fear Plagues, or an Infectious Breath,
When every Hour brings a new Death:
Time will Mow
What e're we Sow;
Weal or Woe,
Shall have an end;
And this, though unwilling, Fates must send.
Co^ytus Lake thou must waft over,
Thy tattred Boat shall touch that Shore;
Thou Sisyphus e're long must know,
And into new Acquaintance grow:
Shall, with Life,
Leave House and Wife,
Thy Loves and Strife;
And have no Tree,
But the sad Cypress follow Thee.
Mean while thine Heir shall nobly quaff,
What thou with hundred Locks kepst safe;
Caecuban Wines, and wash the Floor,
With Juice would make an Emperor poor:
Doubt it not,
'Twill be thy lot,
To be forgot,
With all thy Deeds,
E're he puts on his Mourning Weeds.
Tho the Publisher has several Translations of his own, of some of the Moral
Odes, etc. of Horace so falsely Printed, that it would be but Justice to himself
to give them a light review; yet having since their first Publication changed
his Habit, he declines it wholly here; nor would have presumed on the Reader
for Reprinting this, but that it is to do a greater piece of Justice to his
long since deceased Father, b. m. Mr. R. W. and from himself, under whose Name
it now goes, in that false Copy, return it to the right Owner.

To Belisa.
The Excellent Mrs. Mary Beal, upon her own Picture, done by her Self, like
Pallas, but without any Arms, except Headpiece and Corselet.
SUCH would the Learned Pallas choose to be,
With all the Charms of Nature and of Art,
Tho she had neither Shield nor Dart:
For if the mighty Pallas were like Thee,
Without those, she to Conquer, need but come, and see.
But here (alas!) the Goddess nothing can espy,
Except the Garb to own her Figure by;
The Warlike Dress, and that is so Gay,
Such Terror, and such Softness does display,
That that as little as the Face she seems to know;
Wishing that her own Greece had drawn her so:
Says Fabulous Antiquity;
Never gave her half that Grace or Majesty:
That she was never half so Fair,
In her own Beauties, or what e're they feigned,
With such clear Limbs, or with so great a Mind,
As in your Draught, Belisa, she is designed:
And were she to be Born again,
Would from your Hand desire it rather than Joves Brain.
1664.
To Clelia.
On his own Picture done in Watercolors, by the Learned Poet and Limner, Mr.
Thomas Flatman, Fellow-Student with him, and Chamber-Fellow at the Inner Temple.
PROOF against Time, and Age,
And Fortunes Batteries, and Wars outrage;
Able to Triumph over the' Affright
Of an Eternal Night,
Of maigre Sickness, and the rotting Grave,
When no Embalments else can save,
But in themselves their own Consumption have.
When Tombs and Epitaphs shall die,
And in an heap as undistinguisht lie
From the dry Bones, and Dust,
Committed to their trust,
In hopes of Immortality,
As if they were themselves a Portion of the Rust;
This Shadow, Clelia, shall preserve entire
Those Relics incorrupted, and unmixt;
The very Air, and Fire,
The active Youth your presence did inspire,
And that bright Image of your Self it on me fixed.
And tho one common Urn may possibly contain,
(Tho not dispairing of return again)
My Ashes, and a thousand more,
Of such as shall be, or have gone before,
Here Is that will almost give Eternity,
And next his Verse, who made the Draught never let me die.
1661.
SOLITUDE.
Rura laudamus merito, etc.
THE Country, Cl. Abr. Coul^i.
as it is ^it, we Poets praise,
And there alone, like our gay Laurels thrive;
Laurels, which in the Dust great Cities raise,
And from their Sun concealed seem scarce to live.
For Corn in the Strand, or Cheap, will sooner grow,
And self-rais'd Flowers thronged Marketplaces Crown;
Even Grass will sooner all its Lands forego,
To become Burger in some Flint-pav'd Town:
Than in the City midst its confused cries,
A future Harvest of good Verse e're spring;
Verse, that did ever hate the Cities Noise,
And which few Soils to its just growth can bring.
Rather my Life in the Country let me spend,
Thither withdrawn Dioclesian like in state;
To the Town my Envoy'e an Ode I Will send,
And that is enough to' observe, and to relate.
Hail! Beauteous City of the Winged Quire,
Fair Trees, sweet Bowers, inviolable Woods;
The Muses Kingdom, and where they retire,
The Hampton Court of the happy Gods.
Let me reposed within your hallowed Shade,
The Dances of soft-footed Zephyrs hear;
And tired with the Disputes the Schools have made,
Hark how by Leaves and Winds they managed are.
View but the lusty Year, how 'it smiles and plays,
When vigorous heat, through the gross matter hurld,
Provokes to love, and the swelled Womb does raise,
Of the Adult and Marriageable World.
A Summer House here let me ever find,
Where Nature the wise Architect may be;
And who 'would prefer, that is in his right Mind,
A smooth dead Beam to a rough living Tree?
On an Hills flowery Bed, as there I lie,
^'d listen how some Floods new married Streams,
^augh, and tell over their Loves as they ru^ by,
Glittering in Light, and flamed with liquid Gems.
He, tho alone, who wants Employment here,
With Life but labors, as an ill Disease;
Or Prodigal of what most buy too dear.
His Hours puts out to none, or the' worst increase.
Blessed Solitude! sacred Companion*
Of God, and even Mankind, till Numbers (...),
Rank springing up, and thick from the' Trunk of One,
Still as in Arms, increas^ ^n Misery.
It Is Thou, who like a skilful Chariotteer,
The Minds wild Passions dexterously do rein,
Make'st them the Curb receive, approach more near,
And in a straiter Tour their Course confine.
It Is Thou its languid Heats, and fluid Rays,
When by expansion ready to exspire,
Collect'st again, as with a Burning-Glass,
And hatchest to a new and brisker Fire.
In vain, fond London, thy Eternal Spring,
From whence a living Thames of People flows;
London, in vain Thou do Thy Pageants bring,
And to my envy Thy raised Towers expose.
For take but all Thy Gaudy Fools away
And Vices large extended Family;
A Village scarce of those, who after stay,
Almost a Solitude Thou too would be.
1668.
The Voyage. ODE.
I.
AS one, that is from a tedious Voyage come,
And safe, through thousand Storms arrived at Home,
Resolves to put to Sea no more,
Or boldly tempt the flattering Main,
How smooth so e're it lie, or plain,
But having drawn his broken Hull ashore,
To some kind Saint hangs up his Consecrated Oar:
I, who as foul a Sea had past,
The Ocean of rough Poesy,
Where there so many Shipwrackt be,
Or on the Rocks, or on the Quick-sand cast;
Recounting what my self had seen,
And in how many Deaths I 'had been,
Where scarce an empty wish or hope could come between;
With almost as confirmed a Vow,
Resolved no less to Consecrate
Some votive Table, which might show
The Labors I did undergo;
And at a far more easy rate,
Than I them bore a'-late,
Give others the delight to view on Land my dangerous Fate.
II.
Already was the Sacred Plank designed,
And in it how I first assayed the Deep;
When thinking only near the Shores to keep,
There rose a sudden, and tempestuous Wind,
Which made me leave the unsaluted Land behind.
The Sea before was calm, and still,
And gentle Airs did with my Streamers play;
Scarce strong enough my half struck Sail to fill,
And through the yielding Crystal force my way.
Close by did many a Vessel Ride,
Whose Pilots all, with ^ays were Crowned,
And to the murmurs of the Tide,
Voices and Mirth were heard around;
My self made there Anacreon's Harp resound,
Which, sprightly seemed, and wondrous brave, which I gave.
And its old killing Notes to have,
But from the Waters more, than those rough touches,
'Twould still of nothing sound but Love,
Tho I the various stops did often prove;
Wherefore new Loves I did begin,
And intermixed as parts my own,
Which took fresh vigor from the String,
And over the Dancing Floods were quickly blown.
The Carthaginian Queen, I sang, and stolen Joys,
And of his Flames, who 'scapt at Troys:
And as the Thracian Orpheus by his Skill,
To Ransom his Euridice is sed,
And from the Shades bring back the Dead;
My Song as great a Miracle did tell,
And thither chained in Verse, alive Proserpina did lead.
III.
Such was my Song, but when the Storm arose,
Voices, and Mirth were heard no more;
But every Man fell stoutly to his Oar,
And to the Floods all did their Strength oppose,
Hoping to reach some Harbor, but in vain,
They were with greater fury hurried back into the Main.
No lays resounded, which might please,
But dying Shrieks of such as Shipwrackt were;
And those proud Galleys, which before, at ease,
Plough'd up the Deep, no longer did appear;
But to the Waves become a Prey,
Some downright sank, some broken lay,
And by the Billows were in Triumph born away.
My Keell so many Leaks did spring,
That all the Hold, with Water was flowed over;
And a Sea no l^ss dangerous raged within,
Than that which strove abroad the Tempest to outroar.
So Overboard my Lading straight I cast,
With some faint hopes my Barque to save;
But on the Wind away they quickly past,
And my best Safety was no hopes to have.
Yet by me still the great Jessean Lyre I kept,
Which down I from my Bed did take,
(Where it neglected too too long had slept)
And all its numerous Chords I did awake;
Thinking, since I the Waves must try,
Them and the Sea-gods with a Song to pacify.
IV.
I played, and boldly then plunged down,
Holding my Harp still in my Hand,
My dear Companion in those Paths unknown,
But hopeless with it e're to reach the Land;
When lo! the Sage Euarna (in my Song
Iarma rightli'er styled) with Nymphs and Tritons waited on,
As she by chance there past along,
Drove up her Chariot to my side;
And in requital for my humble Song,
Invited me with her to Ride,
And fearless of the Way, with them my Course to guide.
So down she reached her Pearly Hand,
And from the Floods me gently raised;
Whilst all the Crowd upon me gazed,
And waited, e're they further went, some new Command,
Which straight She gave, and at Her Word the Wind,
Backward did scour, before us smooth and plain
The Ocean lay, Storms only raged behind;
And to my Harp I turned again,
No longer was I of the Deep afraid,
But bolder grown, some Anthems played,
And on them put my Chains, who theirs upon the Waves had laid.
Till having many a Country past,
And Coasting the whole Earth around,
(The North-west passage Navigable found)
I on my Native Shore was cast,
And safely touched the British Isle at last.
V.
This Table as in Colors 'twas expressed,
And with Belisas curious Pencil wrought,
With Ivy Garlands and Sea-holm I dressed,
And to my Muses sacred Temple brought,
Hoping it wonld accepted be,
And surely gain my Liberty,
From future Service, and declare me free.
But as I waiting in the Court did stand,
Into a sudden Ecstasy I fell;
And led by an Immortal Hand,
Which entrance for me did Command,
Approach the Fanes most private Cell,
By none e're seen before, where awful Dread, and Reverence dwell.
'Twas not like those strait Oratories here,
Which we by that Name call,
But a Magnifi'cent, and Stupendous Hall,
The Roof with Paintings garnisht all,
And where in Niches, on the Wall,
There did the lively Forms appear,
Of such who for their Verse the Laurel Sert did wear.
Greece and old Rome possessed the chiefest place,
And all the upper Square on the' East their Quarter was.
The sides were into several Coasts designed,
And by their Country you each Name might find.
The Thuscan, French, and Spanish Band,
And others more, as they did with their Titles stand.
Britain as fair a space as any had,
(The' whole Western Square) and tho the lowest laid,
Had no less Honors to her, than to Rome and Athens paid.
VI.
Thither I turned mine Eye, and in the Throng
Of Crowned Heads, translated there,
Whose very Names to count would be too long,
From Chaucer downwards, (tho some Ancienter there
The fair Orinda did appear,
And tho come thither last of all,
Made the most Beauteous Figure on the sacred Wall.
Aside her several Niches were prepared
For those, who after her should come;
(The mighty Cowley since has there obtained a Room,
And Davenant as with her they in the Muses service shared)
With other Names, which there I saw Enrolled,
And in bright Characters enchast;
But who they were must not be told,
Till they the fatal Stream have past,
And after Death ha here their Breathing Statues placed.
My Muse alone those Worthys did outshine,
As she approacht me there in shape Divine,
Her Golden Hair was all unbound
With careless Art, and wantonly did play,
Moved by her Strings harmonious sound,
As on her Shoulders the loose Tresses lay.
A wondrous Mantle on her Back was thrown,
And her gay Mystic Vest below,
In Royal State traild all adown;
An Harp was in her Hand, and on her Head a Crown.
VII.
Amazed I at her Feet did fall,
And Prostrate lay, till up she bid me stand,
Saying, "For this I Thee did never call,
"But boldly to receive my great Command.
"Arise, for (Lo!) a better Fate
"Does on Thy tuneful Numbers wait,
"Than what Thou in the Deep has tried of late;
"Not but that all thy Labors there,
"To Thine own Wish shall amply be repaid,
("How ever for a while delayed)
"For I, by whom enrolled they are,
"Second to none but Heaven in that great care,
"Which of Thy Verse and Thee I ever had,
"Will look so large allowance for them shall be made,
"And all the time Thou have, or shall have staid,
"That the whole Damage, which Thou did sustain,
"Shall not compare with Thy Immortal Gain.
VIII.
"Witness Thy Table which I here accept,
"Worthy for the' Hand designed it to be kept,
"Within my Archives a fair Room to have,
"And Thy mean Name from dark Oblivion save;
"Till to another Temple, that is above,
"Thy Souls true Image I hereafter shall remove.
"Where several, whom Thou here do know,
"Ambitious at their very Names to bow,
"Leaving their wanton Strains behind,
And from all base alloy refined,
"More to resemble the Eternal Mind,
"With several, who were never here,
("So Godlike all their Numbers were)
"As Heman, Ethan, Moises, and the Quire,
"Of Jewish Psalmists, whom Heaven did inspire,
"And Jesses Son, whose Harp thou late did bear,
"In Glory with the first Great Maker live,
"And for your Mortal Bays, a Starry Diadem receive.
IX.
"But first, my Son, Thou 'again to Sea must go,
"And many Towns, and Men, and Countries see,
"In the new World of Heavenly Poesy,
"Part of which long since was designed to be
"The happy Fruits of thy Discovery;
"Where none of all Thy Nation has been yet,
"The Way so dangerous, and the Task so great;
"Nor doubt, but it shall recompense thy cost,
"And, were it more, that Age they cry thou have lost,
"When Thou did Tibers City fly,
"The dusty ruins of Antiquity,
"And for my Service thy old Love to 'her Stones deny:
"And later, since did Laws, and the' Bar forsake,
"And for the long Robe the Ivy Garland take,
"As that which would Thy Name Immortal make.
"Much, I confess, much that alone can do,
"Very much I,
"But more my Elder Sister, Sage Theology,
"Whom thou e're long shall know,
"And from my Service to attend her go:
"Her to attend, but not renounce me utterly.
"For I have Honors to bestow,
"And endless Treasures, tho I rarely show
"The happy Country where they grow.
"And tho some Wretch the Plague endure,
"Of Ridiculous Poverty,
"The fault's his own, and not in me:
"Not that he is my Votary,
"But under that disguse to her an Enemy.
"Not I, but they who count and make me so, are poor.
X.
"Try me this once, and once more tempt the Main!
"Thou shall not unattended go,
"For when thou next putst forth to Sea again,
"I Will be Thy Pilot, and the Passage show.
"Nay, wonder not, for it is no more
"Than what I several times have done before,
"When Tasso I through unknown Straits did guide,
"And made my Bartas over the Surges ride,
"And Collins sacred Mulla deifi'd.
"Those Admi'rals of my Seas, which did extend
"Their Countries Bounds, and Savage Nations made attend
"'It Was I Conducted them those Lands to find,
"Where each did plant his Nations Colonies;
"All spreading less their Sails than Victories,
"And there are yet more Lands for thee behind,
"Or to Discover, or Improve by a nobler kind.
"Let Us go, my Son, and all the way rehearse
"The Birth of things, as they from Nothing rose,
"By that Almighty Word, which shall inspire thy Verse,
"And help Thee all its Wonders to disclose.
"No Storm upon Thy Mast shall rest,
"Nor any Blasts, but Vernal, blow;
"The Sea it self to my great Service pressed,
"In plains of Liquid Diamond shall lie below,
"And its obedience to my Rule in dancing Billows show.
"And when thou Home returned shall be
"And of thy Native Earth once more take hold,
"My self thy Barque will Consecrated see,
"And for this New World thus found out by Thee,
"Make it an Heavenly Sign, next that which saved the Old.
"Or if this pleases not
"Too long laid by, too long forgot,
"And that thy Habit changed, thou changest thy design
"Thy own be the free choice, the Conduct shall be mine.
Made first 1666, and some time after reviewed.
Comiato.
Song, that thou should of all be understood,
I little hope, and less design;
Tho few there be who wish thy Masters good,
And know him, but they something will divine:
That Verse so early he began,
Scarce will the Poet die before the Man.
And that the boasts he makes of Bays,
(The most that almost any of the Trade e're got,
And happy he if this be his Lot)
Is the thin Diet of an Airy Praise,
On which he, like his Brethren, lives his Verse to raise.
1677.
FINIS.

