THE Diocesans Trial. WHEREIN ALL THE SINNEWES OF DOCTOR Dovvnhams Defense Are
brought into three heads, and orderly dissolved. BY M. PAVL BAYNES. Published
by Dr. WILLIAM AMISS.

The questions discussed in this Diocesans trial are these: 1. Whether Christ
(...) ^nstitute, or the Apostles frame any Diocesan form of Churches, or
parishionall only, page 1. 2. Whether Christ ordained by himself, or by his
Apostles, any ordinary Pastors, as our Bishops, having both precedence of
order, and majority of power over others, page 24. 3. Whether Christ did
immediately commit ordinary power Ecclesiastical, and the exercise of it, to
any one singular person, or to an united multitude of Presbyters, page 78.


Imprinted 1621.

THE PREFACE.
MAny writings, and sermons also have cause to wish that the men from whom they
come were less known then they are. For then should they be free from much
prejudice, and find better acceptance with those that they come to. But I wish
nothing more unto this Treatise, which is now coming into the world, then that
the Author of it were thoroughly known un^o all those that shall encet with it;
for then his work would need no borrowed commendation, the title it self
carrying authority with it, even to force respect from every honest Reader, if
either the sharpnes of wit, variety of reading, depth of judgment, aptnes to
teach, holy and pleasant language, heavenly conversation, wise carriage, or any
fulness of grace will so far prevail with him. I do not abuse good words, or
load one with thhem whom they do not belong to, as many p^inters of Sepulchrs
in their funeral Orations use to do: but speak that in short, which M. Baines
his person did largly preach unto all such as came near unto him: and that
which his incomparable writings will sufficiently witness to sutur generations.

Neither is this all that the Authors quality may suggest unto the considerate
Reader: but he may arise from this to more important thoughts; especially if
the remembrance of M. Baines his worth do occasion him to think of many others
like unto him: ^uch as M. Dee^ing* M. More ^. Greenham, M. Perkins, M. Rogers,
M. Cartwright, M. Fenner, M. Brightman, M. Parker, M. Philips, M. Hie^on, and
M. Bradshaw etc. to speak nothing of those which yet live, nor of D. R^inolds,
D. Fulk, and D. Whitakers with many others. For all these being apprehended as
me^ agreeing in one spirit, and having had indeed the spirit of glory resting
on them, as their works do show, together with those letters testimonial which
they left written in the hearts of many thousand Christians, it must needs
cause at the least an inquiry, what the reason should be what such famous men
of God, could never like well of our Bishoply courses in England, nor ever be
favored of them. The case is plain to all: and the cause is as evident to
those that have eyes to see: but no where more apparent then in the person of
M. Baines, and the place where he, and other^ like him were made signs of this
antipathie. Cambridge is or should be, as an eye to all our land: so that the
alterations that fall out there cannot but be felt of all parts. It is the
place of light; the spiritual oppressions which in other corners are covered
with darkness (as all the works of darkness would be) when past all shame
they come to confront the Sun it self, how can they then be hidden?

When M. Perkins had there for many years held forth a burning and shining
light, the sparks whereof did fly abroad into all corners of the land, and
after he had served his time was taken up into heaven, there was none found so
meet for to receive, as it were, the torch out of his hand, and succeed him in
that great office of bearing it before such a people, as this M. Bains, upon
whom also the spirit of that Elias, was by experience found to be doubled. In
this station he so demeaned himself for some years, that impiety only had
cause to complain: for all that favored the ways of God, rejoiced and
gloried in him and his Minist^ry, asa spiritual treasure. But at length the
hour of darkness came from Lambeth, when Arch. Bancroft sent M. Harsenet to
Visit as they call it, that is (if terms may be interpreted by common
practice) to pick the purses of poor men, and to suppr^sse those that are not
f^iends to the Bishops Kingdom. For though in that circuit there were a
multitude of unable and notoriously scandalous Ministers, yet none were found
worthy of censure, but only M. B^in^s, of whom the world was not worthy, and
one other Preacher like unto him. Now it is hard to say, whether the silencing
of him was more odious, or the manner of it shameless. There must be a Sermon
(ye know) at such Visitations, for fashion sake, though the Visiter himself can
seldom find leisure to make it. This part was therefore appointed to M. Bains by
the Visiters* that he might either be ensnared in his words, if he did not
apply himself to their humors, or else grace their ungratious courses, if he
did. But it did not succeed handsomely either way: For he delivered wholesome
docttrine appertaining to the present audience, in such wary manner, that no
specious occasion could be taken thereby of questioning his liberty. Yet fairly
or foully the mischievous intention must not fail. M. Baines having heat his
weak body by straining to speak unto a great audience, retired himself
presently upon his coming down from the Pulpit to provide for his health,
which otherwise would have bin endangered. They in the mea^ time going on with
their business, as they are wont in the masterly form of a master, called for
M. Baines amongst the rest, and upon his not answering, though he was not cited
thither as to a Court, but only entreated to preach, as he did, yet for not
appearing, he was immediately silenced. Afterward in deed, the Chancellor being
informed of that gross nullity, which was in the sentence, urged him about
subscription and conformity; and so to make sure work, silenced him over again.
In which business he was so conscious unto himself of unreasonable and
ridiculous dealing, that when M. B^in^s standing to receive the sentence of a
corrupt man, did lift up his heart and eyes unto God with a heavenly smiling
countenance, as he used, he interpreted that gesture to be a skorne of his
authority. This being don, M. Baines was persuaded by his friends to try the
Archbishops courtesy, unto whom, when he presented himself, at the very first
salutation; the gravity and severity of B. Bancroft led him sharply to rebuke
the good man for a little black-worke, which was upon the edges of his cuffes,
asking him how he durst come before him with such cuffs, telling him very
bishoplike, that it were a good turn to lay him by the heels for so doing.
After this he would have no more to do with such absurd unreasonable men: but
preached sometime where he might have liberty, as his weakness of body would
suffer; and spent the rest of his time in reading, meditating, praying and
writing, saving that upon occasion he did instruct or comfort those which came
to him in private, wherein he had a heavenly gift. He was indeed all his life
after, beside the weakness of his body pressed with want, no having (as he
often complained to his friends) a place to rest his head in: which me thought
was an upbraid^ng of the age and place where he lived with base regardlesnes of
piety and learning: yet he never so much as consulted with himself of denying
his sincerity by pleasing the Bishops, of whom and their courses he was wont
to say, They are a generation of the earth, earthly and savor not the ways of
God. Which saying of his, they, and some Doctors of Cambridge have since made
good, in that they could not endure, that the place from whence they thrust
him, should be supplied by other honest men, though they were comfortable, but
with absolute authority at length forbad it, alleging that Puritanes were made
by that lecture: whereas the truth is, that one lecture has done more good to
the Church of God in England, then all the doctors of Cambridge: though I do
not deny, but some of them have wrought a good work.

By this one instance (of which kind I would there were not a 100 in our land)
it may easily appear to the understanding Reader, that here is as much
agreement betwixt our Bish^ps in their managing of Religion (except some 2 or
3, which went out of their elements, when they ventered on those places) and
those powerful Preachers who have bin the chief means of revealing Gods arm
unto salvation, as there is betwixt the light which comes down from h^aven,
and that thick mist which arises from the lowest pit.

But we need not seek for demonstrations of the spirit which works in our
Hierarchy from this opposition, look but at the fruits of it, where it has al^
fulness of consent, as Cathedral Palaces, or Parishes of Bishops and
Archbishops residence, suc^ as Lambeth is, where all their canons are in force,
and have their full sway without contradiction: nay come nearer unto them, and
take a view of their families, even to them that wait in their chambers, and
see what godliness there is to be found Have there not more of God and his
Kingdom appeared in some one Congregation of those Ministers which they have
silenced for unconformity then in all the Bishops families that are now in
England? Was there ever any of them that could endure such a Parish as Lambeth
is, if they had such power of reforming it as the Archbishops have?

To return therefore unto our Author: whilst he lived a private life, being
thus stricken with the Bishops Planet, he had time to apply his able wit and
judgment unto the discussing of many questions, which if the Prelates had not
forced such leisure upon him, it may be he would have passed by with others.
And among the rest, by Gods providence he was directed to these Ecclesiastical
Controversies which concern our Diocesan state in England: wherein, as in all
other questions which he dealt in, he has showed such distinct and piercing
understanding together with evidence of truth, as cannot but give good
satisfaction to him that in these things seeks light.

He might indeed have chosen other particular corruptions to have written on,
if it had been his purpose either to have taught men, what they daily see and
feel, or to have labored about the branches, and leave the root untouched: But
it was no delight unto him, for to prove that which no man doubted of, as that
the common course and practice of our Prelates, their courts, their urging of
s^bscriptions, with human superstitious ceremonies, are presumptuous
insolences against God and his Church: or preposterously to begin at the end
of the stream for to cleanse the water. He chose rather to search the fountain
of all that foulnes wherewith our Chur^he are soiled: which he judged to be
found in the constitu^ions here in this Treatise examined. And if these few
questions be well considered, it will appear that a multitude of pernicious
abuses do depend on those positions which in them are confuted. One
fundamental abuse in our Ecclesiastical oppression in the disposing of
charges, our placing of Ministers over Congregations: it is called usually
bestowing of Be^efices or Livings, in an earthy phrase which ^avoureth of the
base corruption commonly practiced. For Congregations ought not to be bestowed
on Ministers, but Ministers on Congregations: the benefit or benefice of the
Minister, is not so much to be regarded, as of the Congregation: It is the
calling and charge which every Minister should look at, not his living and
benefice. Now these Benefi^es are bestowed ordinarily by the Patro^ (whether
Popish, profane, or religious, all is one) and the Bishop, without any regard
of the peoples call or consent: so as no lawful marriage is made; no servant
placed: against all Scripture, Councels and ancient examples. Whereby it comes
ordinarily to pass, that Lawyers must determine of Ministers callings, after
long suits and great charges; as if Congregations and Farms were held by one
title and right. And sometime it is found that the Minister is a continual
plague unto his people, living in contention, spi^e and hatred with them, as
many lawsuits do too too plainly witness. What is the reason? Because Parishes
are esteemed as no Churches that ever were ordained by Christ, or received any
power and privileges from him, but as man's creatures, and by man to be ordered
as it pleases him. Another practice of like nature with the former, is that
the minister being called to one Congregation, becomes a Pluralist by taking
another, or more livings, in spite of that Congregation, to which he was first
and is still personally tied. And after this he may be a nonresident, abiding
or Preaching at none of his many livings. Nay he may chop and change, sell and
buy like a merchant, so he do it closely; which is such an abomination, as Rome
and Trent condemns, and hell it self will scarce defend. What is the ground?
Because (forsooth) Christ has not appointed Parishes, their office^s and
offices, and therefore no man is bound further in this kind, then men's Laws,
canons, customs, and injunctions do prescribe unto them. For a grave Doctor of
Cambridge answered one that questioned him for his gross non-residencie, viz.
that Parishes were divided by a Pope: insinuating as it seems, that he
accounted it a point of Popery, for to tie Ministers unto their particular
charges.

A third gross corruption is, that the officers in Congregations, Ministers,
Churchwardens, etc. are made servants to the Bishops, Chancellours,
Archdeacons, etc. being, as it were, their promotors, informers, and
executioners, in all matters of jurisdiction and government, for to bring in
money into their purses: for performance also of which service to them, the
Churchwardens upon every occasion are enforced to take such corporal oaths
as not one of them does ever keep. What other ground of this, beside the
forementioned, that particular Congregations are no spiritual incorporations,
and therefore must have no officers for government within themselves?

Now all these confusions with many others of the same kind, how they are
condemned in the very foundation of them, M. Bains here shows in the first
question, by maintaining the divine constitution of a particular Church, in one
Congregation. In which question he maintains against his adversaries a course
not unlike to that which Armachanus, in the days of King Edward the third,
contended for against the begging F^iers in his book called The defense of
Curates: For when those Friars incroach^d upon the privileges of Parochial
Ministers, he withstood them upon these grounds: Ecclesia Parochialis juxta
verba Mosis Deuteronomy. 12. est locus electus a Deo, in quo debemus accipere cuncta
quae praecipit Dominus ex Sacramentis. Parochus est ordinaritu Parochiani: est
persona a Deo praecepta, vel mandato Dei ad illud ministerium explendum electa:
which if they be granted, our adversaries cause may go a begging with the
foresaid Friars.

Another sort of corruptions there are, which though they depend upon the same
ground with the former, yet immediately flow out of the Hierarchy. What is
more dissonant from the revealed will of Christ in the Gospel, even also from
the state of the Primitive Church, t^en that the Church and Kingdom of Christ
should be managed as the Kingdoms of the world, by a Lordly authority, with
external pomp, commanding power, contentious courts of judg^ment, furnished
with chancellors, officials, commissaries, advocates, proctors, paritors, and
such like humane devices? Yet all this does necessarily follow upon the
admitting of such Bishops as ours are in England: who not only are Lords over
the flock, but do profess so much in the highest degree, when they tell us
plainly, that their Laws or Canons do bind men's consciences. For herein we
are like the people of Israel, who would not have God for their immediate King,
but would have such Kings as other Nations: Even so the Papists, and we after
them, refuse to have Christ^an immediate King in the immediate government of
the Church; but must have Lordly Rulers with state in Ecclesiastical affairs,
such as the world has in civil.

What a miserable pickle are the most of our Ministers in, when they are urged
to give an account of their calling? To a Papist indeed they can give a
shifting answer, that they have ordination from Bishops, which Bishops were
ordained by other Bishops, and they, or their ordainers by Popish Bishops: this
in part may stop the mouth of a Papish: but let a Protestant which doubts of
these matters move the question, and what then will they say? If they fly to
popish Bishops, as they are popish, then let them go no longer masked under
the name of Protestants. If they allege succession by them from the Apostles,
then (to say nothing of the appropriating of this succession unto the Popes
chair, in whose name, and by whose authority o^r English Bishops did all
things in times past) then I say they must take a great time for the satisfying
of a poor man concerning this question, and for the justifying of their
station. For until that out of good records they can show a perpetual
succession from the Apostles unto their Diocesan which ordained them, and
until they can make the poor man which doubts, perceive the truth and
certainty of those records, (which I wiss^ they will do at leisure) they can
never make that succession appear. If they fly to the Kings authority, the
King himse^fe will forsake them, and deny that he takes upon him to make or
call Ministers. If to the present Bishops and Archbishops, alas they are as
far to seek as themselves, and much further. The proper cause of all this
misery is the lifting up of a lordly Prelacy, upon the ruins of the Churches
liberties.

How intolerable a bondage is it, that a Minister being called to a charge*
may not preach to his people except he has a license from the Bishop or
Archbishop: Cannot receive the best of his Congregation to communion if he be
censured in the spiritual Courts, though it be but for not paying of six pence
which they required of him in any name, be the man otherwise never so innocent:
nor keep one from the communion, that is not presented in those Courts, or
being presented is for money absolved* though he be never so scandalous: and
must often times (if he will hold his place) against his conscience put back
those from communion with Christ, whom Christ does call unto it (as good
Christians if they will not kneel) and receive those that Christ puts
back, at the command of a mortal man.

What a burden are poor Ministers pressed with, in that many hundreds of them
depend upon one Bishop and his Officers: they must hurry up to the spiritual
Court upon every occasion, there to stand with cap in h^nd, not only before a
Bishop, but before his Chancellor, to be railed on many times at his
pleasure: to be censured, suspended, deprived, for not observing some of those
canons which were of purpose framed for snares, when far more ancient and
honest canons are every day broken by these Judges themselves for lucre sake,
as in the making of Vtopian Ministers, who have no people to minister unto; in
their holding of commendams, in their taking of money, even to extortion, for
orders and institutions: in their symony, as well by giving as by taking: and
in all their idle, covetous, and ambitious pomp? For all these and such like
abuses, we are beholding to the Lordlinesse of our Hierarchy: which in the root
of it, is here overthrown by M. Bayne, in the conclusions of the second and
^hird Question. About which he has the very same controversy, that Marsilius
Patavinus in part undertook long since, about the time of Edward the second,
against the Pope. For he in his book called Defensor pacis, lays the same
grounds that here are maintained. Some of his words, though they be large, I
will here set down for the Readers information. Potestas clavium sive solvendi
and ligandi, est essentialis and inseparabilis Presbyterio in quantum Presbyter
est. In hac authoritate, Episcopus a Sacerdote non differt, test Hieronymo,
imo verius Apostolo, cujus etiam est aperta sententia. Inquit enim Hieronymus
super Mat. 16. Habent quidem eandem judiciariam potestatem alsi Apostoli, habet
omnes Ecclesia in Presbyteris and Episcopis: praeponens in hoc Presbyteros,
quoniam authoritas haec debetur Presbytero, in quantum Presbyter, primo, and
secundum quod ipsum etc. Many things are there discoursed to the same purpose,
dict. 2. c. 15. It were too long to re^ite all. Yet one thing is worthy to be
observed how he interprets a phrase of Jerome so much alleged, and built
upon by the Patrons of our Hierarchy. Jerome says ad Evagr. that a Bishop does
nothing, excepting ordinati^n, which a Presbyter may not do. Of this testimony
D. Downan avoucheth, that nothing can be more pregnant then it, to prove that
Bishops were superior to Presbyters in power of ordination. But hear what
this ancient Writer says Ordinatio non significat ibi potestatem conferendi,
ceu collationem sacrorum ordinum: sed oeconomicam potestatem regulandi vel
dirigendi Ecclesiae ritus, atque personas, quantum ad exercitium divini cultus
in templo; unde ab antiquis legumlatoribus vocantur Oeconomi reverendi.

It would be over long to declare all the use which may be made of this
Treatise. which being it self so short, forbids pr^lixity in the Preface.
If the Author had lived to have accomplished his purpose in perfecting of this
work, he would (it may be) have added such considerations as these: or at
least he would have left all so clear, that any attentive Reader might easily
have concluded them from his premises. For supply of that defect, these
practical observation^ are noted: which with the dispute it self, I leave to
be pondered by the conscionable Reader. W. Ames.

THE FIRST QVESTION IS, WHETHER CHRIST DID INSTITUTE OR THE APOSTLES frame any
Diocesan form of Churches, or Parishionall only.
FOR determining this Question, we will first set down the Arguments which
affirm it. Secondly, those which deny* Thirdly, lay down some responsive
conclusions, and answer the obj^ctions made against that part we take to be the
truth.

Th^se who affirm the fr^^e of Diocesan Churches, vou^h their Arguments:
p^r^ly from Scripture, partly from presidents, or instances sacred and
Ecclesiastical. Fin^lly, from the congruity it h^^h with reason, that so they
should be constitute.

The first objection is taken from comparing those two Scriptures, Titus 1.5
Act. 14.23. Ordain Elders City by City. They ordained Elders Church by Church.
Hence it is thus argued. They who ordained that a City, with the Suburbs and
^egions about it, should make but one Church, they ordained a Diocesan Church.
But ^he Apostles, who use these phrases as aequ^pollent, To ordain Presby^ers
in every City, and to ordain them in every Church, appointed, that a city with
the suburbs and region about it, should make but one Church. Ergo, the
Apostles constituted a D^ocesan Church.

The reason of the proposition is, because Christians converted in a City, with
the suburbs, villages, and countries about it ^^uld not be so few, as to make
but a Parishionall Church. The Assumption is clear, for these phrases are
used, as ad aequa^e, and being so used, needs it must be that the Apostles
framed cities, suburbs, and regions into one church.

2 They argue from examples Sacred and Ecclesiastical. Sacred are taken out of
the old and new Testament. Ecclesiastical, from the Primitive times, and from
Patterns in our own times: yea, even from such churches, as we hold reformed,
as those in Belgia and Geneva.

To begin with the church of the Jews in the old Testament, whence they
reason thus. That which ma^y particular Synagogues were then (because they were
all but one Common-weal^h, and had all but one profe^si^n) that may many
christian chur^hes now be upon the l^ke grounds. But they then, though many
Synagogues, yet because they were all but one Kingdom, and had all but one
profession, were all one national church. Ergo, upon like grounds many
church^s with us, in a nation or city, may be one national or Diocesan church.

Secondly, the church of Jerusalem in the New Testament is objected. 1 That
which the Apostles intended should be a head church to all Christians in Judea,
that was a Diocesan church. But this they did by the church of Jerusalem. Ergo:
2. That which was more numbersome, then could meet Parishion^lly, was no
Parishional but Diocesan church. But that church was such. First, by growing to
3000. then 5000 Act. 2.41. and 4.4. then to have millions in it, Act. 21.20.
Ergo, the church of Jerusalem was not a Parishionall, but a Dioc^san church.

Thirdly, the church of Corinth is objected to have been a Metropolitan
church. He who writing to the church of Corinth, does write to all the Saints
in Achaia with it, does imply that they were all subordinate to that church.
But th^s does Paul, 1 Cor. 2.1. Ergo. Secondly He who saluteth jointly the
Corinthians and Achaians, and calls the church of Corinth by the name of
Achaia, and names it with pr^heminence before the rest of Ach^ia, does imply
that the church of Corinth was the Metropolitan church to which all Acha^a was
subject. But the Apostle does this, 2 Cor. 9.2. and 11.11.8.9.10. Ergo.

Fourthly, that which was the mother city of all Macedonia, the church in that
city must be, if not a Metropolitan, yet a Diocesan church. But Philippi was
so. Ergo.

The fifth is from the chur^hes of Asia, which are thus proved, at least to
have been Diocesan. 1. Those seven churches which contained all other churches
in Asia strictly taken, whether in city or count^^y; those seven were for their
circuit, Metropolitan, or Dioc^san churches. But those seven did contain all
other in As^^. Ergo. 2. He who writing to all churches in Asia, writes by
name, but to th^se seven, he does imp^y, that all the rest were cont^ined in
these. Bu^ Christ writing to the seven, writes to all churches in Asia, not to
name that five of these were Metropolitan cities, viz. Philadelphia, and
Pe^g^mus, two Diocesan at least, 3. He who mak^th the singular church he
writes to, to ^e a multitude of churches, not one only (as the body is not
one member only) he does make that one church, to which he writes in
singular, to be a Diocesan church. But Christ in his Epiphonematicall
conclusion to every church, which he had spoken to in singular, does speak of
the same as of a multitude. Let him that has ears, bear what the Spirit
says to the Churches. Ergo.

Thus leaving sacred examples, we come to Ecclesiastical.

First, in regard of those ancien^ churches, Rome, Alexandria. It is impossible
they should be a Parishionall congregation 200. years after Christ. For ^f
the multitude of christians did in Jerusalem so increase within a little time,
that they exceeded the proportion of one congregation, how much more likely is
it that christians in Rome and Alexandria did so increase in 200. years, that
they could not keep in one particular Assembly? But the first is true. Ergo,
also the latter. Which is yet further confirmed by that which Tertullian and
Cornelius testify of their times.

To come from these to our modern reformed church^s, these prove a Diocesan
church. That respect which many congregations distinct may have now assembled
in one place, that they may have severed in many places. For the unity of the
place is but extrinsicke to the unity of the congreg^tion. But ma^y distinc^
congregations gathered in one city, may make, we say, one church, as they do
in the Netherlands. Ergo, distinct congregations, severed in diverse places may
make one church. If many churches, which may subject themselves to the
government of one Presbytery, may so make one, they may subject themselves to a
bishop and cathedral consistory, and so make one. But the 24. churches of
Geneva, and the territories belonging to it, do subject themselves to the
government of one Presbytery, and so make one. For so far as two meet in a
th^rd, they are one in it. Ergo.

The third principal Argument is from reason. If city churches only, and not
the churches of Villages, and coun^ry Towns, had bishop^, Presbyters, and
Dea^ons placed in them, then were those city church^s Diocesan churches. But
city chur^hes only had th^se. Ergo, city churches were Diocesan, distingu^shed
from Pa^^shi^nall churches. The Assumption is proved first by Scripture, T^tus
1.5. Act. 14.23. Sec^ndly, this is proved by Ecclesiastical Sto^y. They who
are g^ven to l^bour the convertion of the Regions, rather then ten^ those
alre^^y converted, they were not given to a Parishionall church. But the
Presbyters planted by the Apostles were so. Ergo. They who were set in a church
before Parishes were, could not be given to a Parishionall church. But such
were the Presbyters of the Apostl^s institution, Ergo. For it is plain in the
practice of all ages, from the first division, that no church but the mother
church had a Presbytery and a bishop, but Presbyters only. Nay, it was ever by
councels condemned, and by the judgment of the ancient forbidden, that in
Towns or Villages, any but a Presbyter should be planted. 3. This is also
proved by reason, for it was no more possible to have bishops and Presbyters in
every Parish, then to have a Mayor and Aldermen (such as we have in London) ^n
every Town. 2. If every Parish had a Presbyter, then had they power of
ordination, and furnishing themselves with a Minister, when now they were
destitute. But they were always in this case dependant on the city. Ergo,
there was then a D^ocesan church having government of others. Presbyters could
not ordain, sede vacant, though they did at first, as in the church of
Alexandria. Let any show for 400. years a Parishionall church with a
Presbytery in it.

Now we must muster those forces which oppose these Diocesan churches, allowing
only such churches to be instituted of Christ, which may meet in one
congregation ordinarily.

The word which without some modification super-added, does signify only such
a company as called forth, may assemble Politically, that word being alone,
does signify such a church as may to holy pu^poses ordinarily meet in one.
But the word Church, which Christ and his Apostles did institute, is used
indefinit^ly, and signifies no more, Ergo. Vbi lex non distinguit, non est
distinguendum. 2. The Scripture speaks of the churches in a Kingdom or
Province, always in the plural number, without any note of diff^rence, ^s
^quall one with the other. Ergo, it does not know Provincial, N^tion^ll, or
Diocesan churches. Let a reason be given, why it should never speak in the
singular number, had they been a singul^r church

Sec^ndly, let us come to ex^mples: the churches the Apostles pl^^^ed were such
(...) ni^h^ and did congregate.

Fi^s^, that of H^^rusalem* though there were in it toward 500. ^^nogogues, yet
the christ^^n church was but one, and such as did congre^ate ^n^o one place
ordinarily after the access of 5000. to it. Act 2.46. and 5.12. and 6.1. and
15.25. and 21.22. and 25.22. For their ordinary meeting as it is, Act. 2.46.
daily, could not be a Panegeric^ll meeting. Again, if they might meet
Synodically, why might they not meet then in daily course; though the
universal meeting of a church is not so fitly called Synodicall: And though
they are said to be millions of believers, yet that was by accident of a
circumstance, happily the Passover. We must not judge the greatness of a
water by that it is, when now it is up and swells by accident of some
inundations. They had not a settled state there, by which they did get the right
of being set members. Yea, it is likely, they were and continued but one
congregation. For forty years after they were not so great a multitude, but
that Pella, like to the Z^har of Lot, a little Town could receive them. But
more of this in the answer to the objection.

Secondly, so the Church of Antiochia, was but one Church, Acts 14.27. they are
said to have gathered the Church together. Object. That is, the Ministers, or
representative Church. Ans. 1. For Ministers only, the Church is never used. 2
By analogy, Acts 11. Peter g^ve account before the whole Church, even the
Church of the faithful, Ergo. 3. They made relation to that Church, which had
sent them forth with prayer and imposition of hands, and this Church stood of
all those who assembled to the public service and worship of God. 4. The
people of the Church of Antioch were gathered together to consider of degrees
sent them by the Apostles from Jerusalem. (...).

Thirdly, the Church of Corinth was one congregation, which did for the service
of God, or exercise of Discipline meet together, 1 Cor. 5.4. 1 Cor. 14.25.
verse. 26. 1 Cor. 11.17. verse. 23. in uno and eodem loco. That whole Church
which was guilty of a sinner uncast forth, could not be a Diocesan Church,
neither can the word (...) coming together, ever be showed to signify any
thing else, besides one particular Assembly.

Fourthly, the Church of Ephesus was but one flock. First, it is likely that
it was of no other form then the other. Secondly, it was but one flock; that
flock which Presbyters might jointly feed, was but one. They had no Diocesan
Bishop. If Presbyters only, then none but Parishionall Churches in and about
Ephesus. There may be many flocks, but God ordained none, but such as may
wholly meet with those, who have the care of feeding and governing of them.
Peter indeed, 1 Pet. 5.2. calls all those he writes to, one flock: but that
is in regard either of the mystical estate of the faithful, or in respect of
the common nature which is in all Churches one and the same: but properly, and
in external adunation, one flock is but one congregation. Thirdly, Parishes
according to the adverse opinion, were not then divided. Neither does the long
and fruitful labors of the Apostles argue, that there should be Parish
Churches in Diocesan wise added; but a greater number of ^ister Churches. But
when it is said that all Asia did hear: the meaning is, that from hand to hand
it did run through Asia, so as Churches were planted every where, even where
Paul came not, as at Colosse. There might be many churches in Asia, and many
converted by Peter and others fruitful labor without subordination of
churches.

Examples Ecclesiastical. 1. Ignatius exhorts the church of the Ephesians,
though numberless, to meet together often in one place, Epist. to the
Ephesians, and to the Philippians: where the Bishop is, let the people be
gathered to him, as where Christ is, there is the whole host of heaven. He
calls his church of Antioch a Synagogue of God, which cannot agree to a
Diocesan church: For these were particular congregations, opposed as to that
National church, so to all Provincial and D^ocesan. Neither does he call
himself Bishop of Syria, but as he was, Bishop of the congregation in Syria,
as a Minister styles himself a Minister of the church of England.

2 Iustine and Ireneus knew no kind of church in the world which did not
assemble on the Sabbath. But a D^oc^san church cannot.

3 Tertullian Apol. cap, 39. does show that all churches in his time did meet,
and did worship God, in which prayers, readings, exhortations, and all manner
of censures were performed. He knew no churches which had not power of
censures within themselves.

4 Churches are said at first to have been Parishes, and Parishes within
cities, in Eus^b. lib. 3 44. lib. 4. cap. 21. lib. 2. cap. 6. lib. 4. cap. 25.
and S^int John lib 3. cap. 23. ^aith to the Bishop, read juvenem quem tibi ego
and Christus test Ecclesia tua tradidimus. That church in whose presence John
might commit his dep setum, or trust, was but one congregation, lib. 4. cap.
11. H^g nus and Pius are said to have undertaken the M^nistery of the church of
Rome: which church was such therefore, as they might minister unto, lib 7.7.
Dionisius Alex. writes to Xistus, and the church which he governed. A Diocesan
church cannot receive letters. Before Julian and Demetrius his time, there is
no mention of churches in a Bishops parish. The church of Alexandria was within
the city, lib. 7. cap. 2. Cornelius is said, officium Episcopi implevisse in
civitate Rome ex Cyp. lib. 1. epist. 3 Cornelius Foelicissimum ex Ecclesia
pepulit qui cum tamen de provincia pellare ron potuit. Vide Ruffinum, lib. 1.
cap. 6. suburbicarariarum Eccl^sirum tantum curam gess^t. Cyprian was Pastor
Paroeciae in Carthagiaee, of the Parish in Carthage, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 3. ex
verbis Cypriani, lib. 1. epist. 4.

5 It is the rule of Scripture, that a Bishop should be chosen in sight of his
people. Bishops were chosen long after by the people. As of Rome, and others by
the people committed to them. Cypr. lib. 4. epist. 1. Neighbor Bishops should
come to the people over whom a Bishop was to be set, and chose the Bishop in
presence of the people. Schisms were said to be from thence, Quod Episcop^
universa fraternitas non obtemperat, Cypr. epist. 55. tota fraternitas i. unius
congregationis tota multitudo, ex qua componitur Ecclesia particularis. Sabino
^le universa fraternitatis suffrag^o Episcopatus fuit delatus. Cypr. lib. 1.
epist. 47.58.68. Ecclesiae ^gitur circ^i^us non suit ma^or, quam ut Episcopu^
totam plebem suam in nego^iis bujusmodi c^^vocare potuerit. Soc. lib. 7. cap.
3. de Ag^peto. Convocavit omnem clerum and populum qui erat intra illius
jurisdictionem.

6 The Chorepiscopi were Bishops in Villages; there is no likelihood of the
other notation. Their adversaries in opposing them never object that they were
as Delegates, or Suffragan Bishops to them.

7 Bishops were wont to go forth to confirm all the baptized through the
Diocese.

8 They were neighbors, and might meet a dozen, six, three, in the cause of a
Bishop.

9 They were united, sometimes in Provincial Councels, in which many Bishops
met twice yearly, Ruffin. lib. 1, cap. 6. Victor Vticensis reports in a time
when they were fewest in Africa in persecution Vandalica, 660. fled to save
themselves. Austin says there were innumerable orthodox Bishops in Africa: and
the Provincial Councels do confirm the same.

Now by reason it is clear that churches were not Metropolitan or Diocesan.

1 That church whose causes are wanting, that church is wanting. But in a
Diocesan church causes are not to be found. Ergo.

First, the efficient cause, God ordeyning. For none can take on him to be a
minister Diocesan: no place to be a place, where the Assembly Diocesan should
be held; no people can worship God in repairing to this place and ministry,
without warrant of his word. Ergo. In the National church of the Jews, Aaron
and his sons took not that honor, it was given them: The place of the
National meeting, God chose Jerusalem. The people he precisely bound to
practice some ordinances of worship no where but there, and to appear there
before him. Secondly, the matter of a Diocesan church is people within such a
circuit, obliged to meet at least on solemn days, wheresoever the Diocesan
Ministers and Ordinances of worship are exercised; Pastors who have callings to
tend them and minister to them in this Diocesan meeting now assembled. Finally,
the actual meeting of them to such, end, as such more solemn and public
meetings are ordained to, are no where commanded, nor in any fashion were ever
by any warrant of the Word practiced.

If any say, these are not the causes of a Diocesan Church, but an ordinance of
God binding persons within such a circuit to subject themselves to such a
Church and the ministry thereof, that they may be governed by them.

I answer. First, there is no ordinance of God for this, that can be showed,
that Churches within such a circuit should be tied to a certain head Church
for government. Nay, it is false. For every Church by Christ's institution has
power of government; and the Synagogue had in ordinary matters, the government
that the Church of Jerusalem had; (being all over) except only in some
reserved causes. Secondly, I say, that this will not make a Diocesan Church
formally so called. As a National Church could not formally be without binding
the whole Nation to exercise ordinances of worship in the head Church of it: So
by proportion. Yea, government is a thing which does now ^ccidere to a Church
constituted, and does not essentially concur as matter or form to constitute
a Church of this or that kind. Again, were this true, that the Diocesan
Pastors and Ministers have only government committed to them, then it will
follow, that they only have the governing of particular Churches, who are not
any way Pastors of them, ministering Word and Sacraments to them. But this is
most absurd, that their proper and ordinary Pastors, who dispense Word and
Sacraments to them, should not have potestatem pe^i, nothing to do in
governing those flocks which depend on them. If any say, they were not actu,
but they were virtute potentiae: I say, it is also to make the Apostles
Churches imperfect: and how can this be known but by a presumed intention,
which has nothing to show it, but that after event of things.

From the effect I argue.

2 Those Churches which Christ did ordain, and the Apostles plant, might
ordinarily assemble to the ordinances of worship. But a Diocesan Church cannot
ordinarily assemble. Ergo. For when God will have mercy and not sacrifice, and
the Sabbath is for man, he will not for ever ordain a thing so unequal and
impossible, as is the ordinary assembling of a Diocesan multitude. If any
distinguish the assumption, and consider a Diocesan as she is in her parts, or
as she is a torum, standing of her parts now collected together, and say she
may, and does meet and communicate, and edify her self in the first respect.
I answer. This is nothing, and does prove her to be nothing, as she is a
Diocesan Church: quia quid quid est, ^git secundum quo^est. If therefore a
Diocesan Church were a real Church, she must have the effect of such a Church;
to wit. assembling, as she is Diocesan. The Synagogues through Israel met
Sabbath by Sabbath, but were no National Church in this regard; that is to
say, as it is a National Church, it had her National real meetings.

I reason thirdly, from the subject.

3 That Church which does per se, essentially require local bounds of place,
that must have local limits set forth of God. But a Diocesan Church does so.
Ergo. Whence I thus infer, He who institutes a Diocesan Church, must needs
set out the local bounds of this Church. But God has not set out any local
bounds of the Church in the New Testament: Ergo. He has not instituted any
Diocesan Church. The proposition is certain: for this does enter in the
definition of a Diocesan Church, as also of a National. And therefore God
instituting the National Church of the Jews, did as in a map set forth the
limits of that Nation. So also if he had instituted Diocesan and Provincial
Churches, he would have appointed local bounds, if not particularly described,
yet known and certain. But God has not done this. For the Church of the New
Testament is not thus tied to places; it being so with the power of teaching,
and the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, that it does respicere subditos only
perse, not terminos locales. Civil jurisdiction does respicere solum
primarily, the subjects on it in the second place. As for that commandment of
appointing Presbyters City by City, it is too weak a sparre for this
building. Again, that Church which may be said to be in a City, is not
Diocesan. But the Churches which the Apostles planted, are said to be in
Cities. Ergo. If one say to the proposition, they may; because the head Church
is in the City. Answer. The Churches the Apostles planted are taken for the
multitude of Saints united into such a body Ecclesiastical. But the multitude
of Saints through a Diocese cannot be said to be in a City. Ergo. The soul
may be said to be in the head, though it be in other parts; and God in heaven.
God, because of his most infinite and indivisible nature. And so the soul,
because it is indivisible, and is as all of it in every part, not as a thing
placed in a place containing it, but as a form in that which is informed by
it. But in things which have quantity, and are part out of another, there is
not the like reason.

4 From the adjuncts. That Church which has no time set, wherein to assemble,
is no Church. I suppose the ground above, that nothing but union of a Diocese
in worship, can make a Diocesan Church. But this Church has no time. Ordinary
it cannot have: extraordinary solemnities God has not commanded. Ergo, there
is no such Church. For if it be a real D^ocesan Church, it must have a real
action according to that nature of which it is. The action formal of a Church
indefinite is to meet and communicate in worship. Of a National Church, is to
meet nationally and communicate in (...). If then it must meet, it must have
some time set down, ordinary or extraordinary. But God has done neither. The
Churche^ which the Apostles planted, were in their times most perfect and
flourishing. But Diocesan Churches were not: for in those times they were but
in seminali infolded, not explicated, as the adversaries confess.

4 That which makes Gods dispensation incongruous to his ministers, is absurd.
But a Diocesan frame of Church does so. Ergo. That which makes God give his
extraordinary gifts to ministers of churches in the Apostles times, when now
they had but one congregation, and give ordinary gifts only when now they had
800. churches under them, is absurd. But this does the Diocesan frame. Ergo.

5 The churches throughout which a Presbyter might do the office of a teaching
Presbyter, and a Deacon the office of a Deacon, were not Diocesan. But every
Presbyter might minister in the Word and Sacraments throughout the Church to
which he was called; so might a Deacon tend to the poor of the whole church,
whereof he was a Deacon. Ergo, these were not Diocesan. The reason of the
proposition is; No Pesbyter can through many congregations perform ordinary
ministry. In which regard the Canon law forbids that Presbyters should have
many Churches, cap. 10. quaest. 3. Vna plures Ecclesiae vni n^quaquam
committantur Pesbyter^* quia solus per Ecclesias nec officium valet persolvere,
nec rebus carum necessariam curam impendere.

6 If God had planted Diocesan churches, that is, ordained that all within
city, suburbs, and regions, should make but one D^ocesan Church, then may not
two Diocesses be united into one Church, or another Church and Bishop be set
within the circuit of a D^ocesan Church. But neither of these are so. The
judgment of the African fathers show the one, and the Canon law does show the
other, page 2. cap. 16.41. Ergo:

7 If God appointed the frame of the church Diocesan standing of one chief
church, others united in subjection: then can there not be the perfection of a
church in one congregation: But where there may be a sufficient multitude
deserving a proper Pastor or Bishop, requiring a number of Presbyters and
Deacons to minister unto them, there may be the perfection of a church: But in
some one congregation may be such a multitude. Ergo:

8 Those churches which may lawfully have Bishops, are such churches as God
instituted: But churches in Towns, populous Villages, have had, and may have
their Bishops. Ergo. This is proved by (...) every populous Town, such as our
market towns, and others; ye^ by a synud^cht, villages; for there they taught
as well as in Cities. There were Synogogues in Villages, as well as in Cities.
They excepted against them afterward in unconformity to Law. The testimony of
Zozomen shows what kind of congregations were they of which Epiphanius
testifies. And the fathers of Africa did not require, that a D^ocesan
multitude, but a sufficient multitude, not through every part, for then they
should have had to do in City churches, but in that part of the Diocese
where a Presbyter only had served the turn, should have their Bishop.

If Diocesan churches, and Provincial churches be Gods frame, then we had no
Churches in Britain of Gods frame, before that Austin was sent by Gregory the
great. But here were churches from before Tertullian, after the frame God
requires, at least in their judgments. Ergo.

Now to come to open the terms, and lay down conclusions: whether Diocesan or
Parishionall Churches were at the first constitute.

First, the word Church we understand here, not figuratively; taken
Metonymically for the place, Syn^ed, for Ministers administering ordinances: but
p^operly, for a body politic, standing of people to be taught and governed,
and of teachers and governors.

Secondly, it may be asked, What is meant by a Diocesan church? Answ. Such a
frame in which many Churches are united with one head Church, as partaking in
holy things, or at least in that power of government which is in the chief
Church, for all the other within such, or such a circuit. These phrases of a
Diocese, a Diocesan Bishop, or Church, are all since the time of Constantine,
yea the two last much later. A Diocese seems from the commonwealth to have
been taken up in the Church, from what time Bishops had Territories, ample
demaines, and some degree of civil jurisdiction annexed to them. For a
Diocese by the Lawyers, is a circuit of Provinces, such as the Romans
Praesidents had: or active, an administration of those Provinces with
jurisdiction. L. unica. c. ut omnes sudicet. And in the Canon law, sometimes
Provincia and Diocoesis are used promiscuously, Did. 50. cap. 7. But the
ancientest use of this word was to note the Territory, or Country circuit,
opposed to the City. Thus the Country churches are called Diocaesanae
Ecclesiae, cont. tur. c^p. 8.

Thus Baptismales Ecclesiae were contra distinguished to Parishionall. These
had every one a Diocese, and the inhabitants were called Diocoesani: these
Churches had a moity of houses dwelling in neighborhood that belonged to them;
but at length by a Synecdoche, the whole Church was called a Diocese; though
the Canonists dispute whether it may be so called, seeing the Diocese is the
meaner part by much, in comparison of the City, and should not give the
denomination to the whole. So at length the Bishop was called Diocoesanus, and
the Church which had been called Ecclesia civitatis, matrix, nutrix,
Cathedralis, grew to be called Diocesan. But here we take a Diocesan Church for
such a head Church, with which all Churches in such a circuit has real union,
and communion in some sacred things. Now a Diocesan Church may be put
objective, that is, for a Church in which are ministers and ministry for the
good of the whole Diocese, though they should never assemble, as the worship
in the Church of Jerusalem was for all Judea, and profited, though absent. Or
it may be put formally for a body politic, a congregation of believers
through a Diocese, with the ministers of the same, having some real union and
communion in sacred things. We deny any such Church.

A Parishionall Church may be considered Materially or Formally; M^^erially, as
it is a Church within such local bounds, the members whereof dwell
contiguously one bordering upon the other. This God instituted not, for it is
accidental to the Church, may abesse and adesse, a Church remaining one. If a
Parishionall Church in London should dwell, as the Dutch do, one far enough
from the other, while the same believers were united with the same governors,
the Church were not changed, though the place were altered. Secondly, it is put
formally, for a multitude which do in manner of a Parish ordinarily
congregate; such Churches, and such only we say God erected.

Now for some Conclusions, what we agree in, then what severs us.

Conclus. 1. Churches of Cities, Provinces, Kingdoms, may be called Diocesan,
Provincial, National Churches; as the Churches of the world are called
Oecumenicall, yea happily not without warrant of Scripture: As 1 Pet. 1.1.
writing to all those dispersed Churches, speaking of them singularly, as of one
flock, 1 Pet. 5.2. The reason is, things may be called not only as they are
really in themselves, but according to some respect of reason, under which we
may apprehend them.

Conclus. 2. That ^here may be a real Diocesan, National, or head Church,
wherewith others should be bound to communicate more solemnly in Word and
Sacraments, and in some more reserved cases concerning their government. This
was done in the Church of Judea. Our men are too shie, that fear to come to
this proposition, de posse. I am sure our adversaries will grant us, that our
Parishionall frame might have been so constituted.

Conclus 3. That there cannot be such a frame of Church, but by Gods
institution. No Ministers can take this honor, but they must (as Aaron) be
called to it. When nothing in nature can have further d^gree of perfection,
then the author of nature puts into it; how much more must the degree of
perfection and eminence in things Ecclesiastical, depend on God? We may reason
from the Church of Judea, as a pari, to prove, That there cannot be such a
Church, but that all subordinates must communicate with the chiefest head
Church in some sacred things, which may make them one Church. Thus there would
not have been a Church National of the Jews, but that all the Nation had
union and communion together even in the worship and ordinances of worship. The
men only went up, so the male only were circumcised: but the female
representatively went up in them.

Object. It is enough if the communion be in government, which all our
opposites grant necessary.

Answ. This makes then rather one in tertio quodam separabili, then one
Church: government being a thing that comes to a Church now constituted, and
may be absent, the Church remaining a Church. The first Churches of Bishops,
when now they were divided, did keep all other, who were the Bishops presbyters
strictly so called, and the people also in some communion with the head Church;
for in greater solemnities one and other went up thither. See decret. did. 3.
did 38.

Conclus. 4. We agree in this, that Churches were in their first planting,
either not actually Diocesan, being one congregation without any other
subordinate, or if they had any, yet were they imperfect, wanting many parts or
members of particular Churches, which belonged to them.

That wherein we contradict one another, is, we affirm that no such head
Church was ordained either virtually or actually, but that all Churches were
singular congregations, equal, independent each of other, in regard of
subjection. Secondly, we say, were there a Diocesan granted, yet will it not
follow, that Parish churches should be without their government within
themselves, but only subject in some more common and transcendent cases. As it
was with the Synagogues and that National Church of the Jews, and as it is
betwixt Provincial and Diocesan Churches. If any say there is not the same
reason of a Diocesan Church and Parishionall: for that has in it all the
perfection of a Church. I answer, not; taken in comparison to a Provincial
Church, it is but a part and member, and has not perfection, no more then a
parochial Church has, compared with a Diocesan.

Now follows to answer the Arguments first proposed.

To the first, I answer to the proposition by distinction. Those who ordained
that the Civita^ and V^bs people taken in regard of the whole multitude of the
one, and local bounds of the other, should make but one Church, they did
institute a Diocesan church. But those who so instituted a Church in Ci^y,
Suburbs, Country that their number might be compared fitly to one
congregation, they did not therefore ordain a Diocesan Church. Again to the
assumption. But those who use City by City, and Church by Church as equivalent
(which the Apostles do) they ordained that C^^y, Suburbs, and Count^y should
make but one Church. I answer by the like distinction. They who use City by
City, people being taken for the whole multitude within the extent of these
local bounds, as equivalent with Church by Church, they may be said to have
ordained that city, suburbs and territories, should make but one Church. But
th^s the Apostles do not use them, as of equal signification. For the City
had a reason of an ample continent, the Church of a thing contained. These
phrases are, the one proper, the other metonymicall, and are therefore to be
expounded the one by the other. He placed Presbyters (...), lest we should
understand it of the multitude and local bounds, it is said in the Acts of the
Apostles that they placed them (...), Church by Church: because Presbyters were
not given but to Disciples and Christians now converted ^ut of the multitude
and local limits wherewith cities were bounded. Secondly, there is an
adaequate acception of these phrases per accidens, not because the city and
church was to make but one church, but because the Christians by occasion of
their number, not being then too great, were framed into one church; or because
by occasion there was yet but one church, not because there was to be but one.
Now he who thus us^th them promiscuously, does imply that one church was as
yet constituted, not that there was to be but one through the circu^t of city,
suburbs, and country. Thus likewise it is easi^y answered to the proof of the
proposition: For thus the multitude of citizens converted and unconverted,
could not be a church of one congregation yet the number of those who in city,
suburbs, and territories, were actually converted, was no more then might be
ordered into one church and the Apostles framing these into one on the present
occasion, did not exclude the after constituting of any other within the same
local bounds.

To the second Argument: and first, the objection from the National church of
the Jews. I answer, denying the assumption. That the Synagogues being many,
made one church; because they were all one Kingdom, one posses^ion. For thus
there was one Oecumenicall church, when the world was under one Emperor, and
of one profession. It is accidental to the unity of a Church whether the
kingdom be one or no. If Israel, when God had divided the kingdom into two,
had gone up to Jerusalem, and kept there communion in the worship of that
Church, they had still been one Church, though two Kingdoms. If here were as
many Kings and Kingdoms as have been in England, so many as should belong to
one Provincial Church, should be one Church, though ma^y Kingdoms. The truth
is, they were one Church, because they had union and National communion in the
ordinances of worships, which were in that one Church to which they all
belonged. The high Priest was their proper Priest, he made intercession for
them, blessed them, they were not to offer any where, but there. If any think
this cannot be the cause, why there were one Church, under the government of
one high Priest, for then should Aaron have been as well as M^lehisedeck, a
type of Christ's Kingly office. I answer there is Priestly Prelacy and
government, as well as Princely: They were under Aaron in the former regard,
in which h^ was a sh^dow of Christ.

To the second instance of Jerusalem; we deny the proposition. It might be
intended for a head and mother Church in regard of order, and yet not be a
National Church having power over others: If it should have been a head,
having power accordingly, as it was a mother Church, it should have been head
to all the world. Secondly, we deny the Assumption. That the Apostles ever
intended, that it should be a head to Christian Churches through Judea: as it
had been before under the High Priest. That constitution was typical, and may
better plead for an universal Christian Church, then for a National.
Secondly, there is not the least intimation of Scripture this way. Thirdly, had
this D^vinity been known, the Fathers would not have suffered, that it should
have been made a Diocesan church, and subjected to Caesarea. To the
Prosillogisme. The Church which was so numbersome, that it could not meet
ordinarily, could not be a Parishionall Church. This was so. Ergo, etc. To the
proposition I answer. That which was by inhabitants, who had fixum domicilium,
so numbersome that it could not meet, I grant it. But so this was not; by
accident often many others were there in transitu. Secondly, nay we read that
they did meet ordinarily, as is above said, and in that deliberation about
which the Church of Antioch did send to them, Irenaeu^ affirms, l. 3. c. 12.
Vniversam came convenisse. Luke affirms the same. As for that of millions of
believers, it is certain, they were not fixed members of this Church. For
would Luke, who reckons the growth of them to five thousand, have concealed
so notable accessions, where by they s^y, they grew up to I know not how many
thousands; there is no likelihood. Whether therefore they were such believers
as are mentioned, John 2^ or whether by reason of the Passover, or Pentecost,
or such like feast, they were in tran^tu, only there for the present. How ever
it is, there is no likelihood that they were constant members of that Church,
Nevertheless, say, they were more then could fitly meet, yet might they be
tolerated as in one Congreg^tion. The Apostles seeing such times to ensue,
wherein many of them should translate themselves, and be dispersed hither and
thither. God letting it grow a while more rank and abundant then ordinary
Churches are to be, because it was Ecclesiae surcularis, many of whose branches
were to be transplanted in their time. Yea, had there been five thousand
settled members, we read of some ordinary Auditories, sp^ken to by ordinary
Pastors, as great; as Chrys^stome on Matthew. 24. does signify, to his esteem
they might be five thousand that then heard his voice.

Touching the third instance, As to the first reason, The proposition is
denied: for naming the rest of Achaia with them, does no more signify the
subjection of all Achaians, ther^in the 1 Corinthians. 1.2. naming all Saints in
every place, does signify their subjection. The second reason, has the
sequel of the proposition denied: for the contrary is rather true. He who
without any note of difference calls the church of Corinth by the name of
Achaia, he does imply that it is but one particular church equal with the
other churches in Achaia. To the third, the proposition is again denied, That
he that speaks of all the churches as one, does imply a metropolitan church.
For by the first conclusion we may speak of things not only as they are
really, but according to any respect of reason, under which they are
apprehended. Again, the assumption is false: He speaks not of them as one
church, but as diverse churches in one Province. But it is named and set before
others. Ergo. etc. The sequel is again denied. For it may be named before
other, because it is the most illustrious and conspicuous church; but not
because it has any power over other. Finally, it is too gross to think, that
all in Achaia came to Corinth to be instructed and make their contributions,
every church using the first day of the week when they assembled to make their
collections within themselves.

The fourth instance is Crete; where the many churches in that Island, so full
of cities, are said to be one church of Crete, whereof Titus was Bishop. Those
manifold churches which made but one, whereof Titus was Bishop, those were all
one National church. But the churches of Crete, as says the subscription,
were so. Ergo. Answ. The proposition might be questioned on the ground above:
but the assumption is false: proved by a subscription, which is l^ke his
proof, which was brought out of the book after the Revelation. For first they
are not in the Syria^ke testament. Secondly, they are nor thought of Antiquity
ancienter then Theodoret. Thirdly, the subscription is false, and most
unlikely: For had Paul written from Nicopolis, he would have wished Titus to
come to him to Nicopolis, where he was for the present, and meant to winter,
rather th^n have spoken of it as a place from which he was absent, and whether
he meant to repair.

The fifth instance. Phillip. 3. That church, which was in the chief city of
Macedonia, must needs be at least a Diocesan. But the church of Philippi was
so. Ergo. This will prove an argument, when churches must needs be conformed to
the civil regency of the Emperor: his four chief Governors called
praefecti praetorii, his presidents of Provinces under them, and inferior
Judges, and Magistrates, under these in one city, and the regions of it. But
this is an error giving ground to a Patriarchall and Oecumenicall church, as
well as a Provincial and Diocesan. This rule of planting churches varieth at
man's pleasure: For the Roman Provinces after the people of Rome gave up their
right to the Emperor, were brought all into one, under one head and Monarch,
and Provinces have been diversely divided from time to time. From this
Monarchy arose the Popes plea against the Greek churches for his Oecumenicall
sovereignty. What form of churches must we have amongst them who never
received any such government, nay any constant government at all. If I were a
conformitant I should object otherwise for a Provincial church in Philippi:
viz thus. That church which had many Bishops in it could not be Parishionall
nor Diocesan, but Provincial. For the Provincial church h^th ^he Metropolitan
and Suffragan Bishops in it, and no other. But Philippi had so. Ergo. But the
Proposition is true only when it is understood of Diocesan Bishops, not of
Parishionall Bishops. Paul writes not to the Bishops in the church, but in the
city: Now ma^y Bishops are not in the Provincial city, though many are in a
Provincial church.

Now to come to the churches of Asia. I answer to the proposition of the first
Syllog. by distinction. One church may contain others, as an example does
contain in it a thing exemplified: or as a head Church does Churches united in
subjection to it. Those Churches which contain all other in the latter sense,
it is true, they were at least Diocesan: but in this sense the assumption is
denied. The same answer fitteth the Prosyllog. He that writing to these,
writes to all other by virtue of their subjectionall subordination, he does
imply that all others are contained in these as member Churches under one head.
But he who writing to these, writes to all other as exemplified only in them,
he does not imply any such thing. Now this is manifest, because he writes to
seven Churches: whereas this were superfluous, if Christ did intend his letter
only to head Churches containing other. For then five Churches should have
been written to only, seeing in them all others were contained, as they say.
For by law of this virtuall continency, Philadelphia and Thiatira were included
in two of the other, viz. Sardis, and Pergamus, which were their mother cities.
What needed he have named Philadelphia and Thyatira, which by law of this
virtuall continency did intend to direct his letter only to head Churches?
Again, the assumption is false: For he does write principally to the seven,
and to all other Churches in Asia no further then he writes to all the
Churches in the world. There were other Churches in Asia, such as were Colosse,
Hierapolis, Troas, the Church at Miletum, and Assos, which the Centuries
mention, which depended not on those seven. If Colosse and Hierapolis were not,
as L^odicaea, reedified when John did write the Revelation, yet these other
Churches were not extant. Not to name Magnesia and Tralles, the independancy
whereof is fully cleared whatsoever Doct. Downam objecteth.

To the third reason; from Christ's manner of concluding his Epistles, it is
answered by denying the assumption. For Christ does not use the plural number
in respect of that one Church preceding, but in respect of the seven
collectively taken, it being his will that the members of each singular Church
should lay to heart both severally and jointly, what ever was spoken to them
and to others.

Now to come to the Ecclesiastical examples, as of Rome, and Alexandria, two
hundred years after Christ. And first to answer the reason brought for their
increase, such as could not keep still in a Parishionall meeting. The
proposition is not of necessary consequence; for there were very extraordinary
reasons of that which was effected in the Church of Jerusalem: From Christ
himself, from the residence of all the Apostles; from the state of the people
there assembled; from the state of that Church; from the time in which these
were done. Christ had prayed for them particularly, to which some attribute the
first miraculous conversion by Peter's preaching. Again, it was fit, that being
now ascended into his glory, he should there more abundantly display his
power, and more conspicuously swallow up the scandal of his cross. Again,
this Church had the labor of all the Apostles for a time in it: whose care and
industry we may guess by their ordination of D^acons, that they might not be
distracted. Thirdly, the confluence and concourse to H^erusalem was of much
people, who though explicately they did not believe in Christ; yet had in them
the faith of the Messiah, and therefore were nearer to the kingdom of God then
the common Heathen. The state of this Church was such, that it was to send out
light to all other, a common nursery to the world. Finally, the time being now,
the beginnings of planting that heavenly Kingdom, seeing beginnings of things
are difficult, no wonder if the Lord did reveal his arm more extraordinarily.
It does not therefore follow from this particular, to the so great increasing
of these churches in tract of time, Nay, if these other Churches had enjoyed
like increase in their beginnings, it would not follow, as thus. Those Churches
which within a few years had thus many in them, how numbersome were they many
years after? Because the growing of things has a Period set, after which,
even those things which a great while increased, do decrease and go downward,
as it was in Jerusalem. Not to mention, that we deny the assumption.

But though the Argument is but Topicall, and can but breed an opinion only,
yet the testimonies seem irrefragable. Tertullian testifying that half the
Citizens in Rome was Christians. And Cornelius, that there was besides
himself, and 45. Presbyters, a number-some Clergy.

I answer, That Tertullians speech seems to be somewhat Hyperbolicall: for
who can believe that more then half the City, and world, after a sort, were
Christians? But he speaks this, and truly in some regard, because they were
so potent through the world, that if ^hey would have made head they might have
troubled happily their per^ecutors. Or else ^he might s^y they were half of
them Christians, not because there were so many members of the Church: ^ut
because there were so many who did bear some favor to their cause, and were
it as safe as otherwise, would not stick to ^urne to them. But Tertullian knew
no Churches which did not meet, having prayers, exhortations, and ministering
all kinds of censures: If therefore there were more Churches in Rome in his
time, it will make little for Diocesan Churches.

Touching Cornelius: we answer. It is not unlike but auditories were divided
and tended by Presbyteries. Cornelius keeping the Catherall Church, and being
sole Bishop of them: but we deny that these made a Diocesan Church. For first,
the Cathedral and Parochial Churches were all within the City, in which
regard he is said, Officium Episcopi implevisse in civitate Romae. Neither was
his Church as ample as the Province, which that of Foelicissimus sufficiently
reaches. Secondly, we say that these Parochial churches, were to the mother
church, as chapels of ease are to these churches in metrocomiis, they had
communion with the mo^her church, going to the same for Sacraments and he^ring
the Word, and the Bishop did go out to them and preach amongst them Porsome of
them were not such as had liberty of Baptizing, and therefore could not be
severed from communion with the head Church.

Now to answer further, it is beyond 200. years for which our defense is
taken. For there is reason why people which had been held together for 200.
years as a Congregat^on, might now fifty years after be exceedingly
increased. The Ecclesiastical story notes a most remarkable increase of the
faith, now in the time of Julian before Cornelius. Neither must we think that
an Emperor, as Philippus, favoring the faith, did not bring on multitudes to
the like profession. Secondly, we^ say, there is nothing in this of Corn^lius
which may not well stand, that the Church of Rome, though now much increased,
did not keep together as one Church. For the whole people are said to have
prayed and communicated with the repentant Bishop, who had ordained Novaetus:
and we see how Cornelius does amplify Novae^us his pertinacie: From hence,
that none of the numerous Clergy, nor yet of the people, very great and
innumerable, could turn him, or recall him, which argues that the Church was
not so abo^ndant, but that all the members of it had union and communion, for
the mutual edifying and restoring one of another. And I would feign know,
whether the seven Deacons, seven Subdeacons, two and forty Acolouthes, whether
those exorcistes, L^ctors, Porters about two and fifty are so many, as might
not be taken up in a Congregation of fifteen or twenty thousand? Surely the
time might well require them, when many were to be sent forth to do some part
of ministry more privately. Not to name the error of the Church in
superfluous multiplications of their Presbyters, to vilifying of them, as they
were superfluous in the point of their Deacons. There were six^y in the church
of S^phia for the help of the Liturgy. True it is, the Congregation could not
but be exceeding great, and might well be called in a manner innumerable,
though it were but of a twenty thousand people. But because of that which is
reported touching division by Evaristus, Hyginus, Dionisius, and Marcellinus,
though there is no authenticke author for it; neither is it likely in
Hospinianus judgment. Let it be yielded that th^re were some Parochial
divisions, they were not many, and within the City, and were but as Chapels
of ease to the cathedral or mother Church.

Concerning the objection from the Churches of Belgia, or the low Countries, we
deny the proposition: for we cannot reason thus: If many Masters, and distinct
forme^ of Scholars, in one free^ School, be but one School: then many
Masters and company of Scholars, severed in many Schools, are but one
School. Secondly, they have communion in the community of their Teachers,
though not in the same individual word tended by them. But it is one thing,
when sheep feed together in one common Pasture, though ^hey bite not on the
same individual grass: Another thing when now they are tended in diverse
sheepe-gates. Not to urge, that in the Sacraments and Discipline, they may
communicate as one Congregation.

Touching the objection from Geneva: I answer to the proposition by
distinction. Those who subject themselves to a Presbytery, as not having power
of governing themselves within themselves, as being under it by subordination,
these may in effect, as well be subject to a Consistory: But thus the twenty
four Churches of Geneva do not. They or have power of governing themselves,
but for greater edification, voluntarily confederate, not to use nor exercise
their power, but with mutual communication, one asking the counsel and
consent of the other in that common Presbytery. Secondly, it is one thing, for
Churches to subject themselves to a Bishop and Consistory, wherein they shall
have no power of suffrage: Another thing to communicate with such a Presbytery,
wherein themselves are members and Judges with others. Thirdly, say, they had no
power, nor were no members in that Presbytery, yet it is one thing to submit
themselves to the government of Aristocrasie, another to the Bishops
Monarchical government. For while his Presbyters are but as Counselors to a
King, though he consulteth with them, he alone governs. Geneva made this
consociation, not as if the Prime Churches were imperfect, and to make one
Church by this union: but because though they were entire Churches, and had the
power of Churches, yet they needed this support in exercising of it, and that
by this means the Ministers and Seniors of it might have communion. But what
are all the four and twenty Churches of Geneva to one of our Diocesan Churches?

Now to answer the reasons. The first of them has no part true: the
proposition is denied. For these Churches which had such Presbyters and Deacons
as the Apostles instituted were Parishionall, that is, so conjoined that they
might and did meet in one Congregation. The Doctor did consider the
slenderness of some of our Parishes, and the numbersome Clergy of some
Cathedral Churches, but did not consider there may be Presbyteries much
lesser, and Congregations ampler and fuller, and yet none so big as should
require that multitude he imagines, nor made so little as might not have
Presbyters and Deacons. What though such Mayor and Aldermen as are in London
cannot be had in every Town, yet such a Town as Cambridge may have a Mayor
and Aldermen as Cambridge aff^ords, and the meanest market Town may have,
though not in deg^ee, yet in kind like Governors. So is it in Presbyters and
other Officers: the multitude of Presbyters falling forth per accidens, not
that a Bishop is ever to have a l^ke numbe^some Presbytery, but because the
Church is so numbe^some that actions liturgicall require more copious
assistance, and so wealthy that it can well maintain them. And beside, because
of that Collegiate reason which was in them rather then Ecclesiastical, which
the fathers had in their Presbyteries; for the nursing of plants, which might
be transplanted for supply of vacant Churches, which was a point that the
Apostles in planting Churches no whit intended.

To come to the assumption: But city Churches only had a Bishop with
Presbyters and Deacons. Answer, First, not to stand upon this, that Saint Paul
set no Bishops with Presbyters, but Presbyters only, and they say Bishops were
given, when the Presbyters had brought the Church to be more numbersome, the
assumption is false, that City Churches only had them. For the Scripture
says, they planted them Church by Church, that is, through every Church. Then
every Church had her Governors within her self, we must use as ample
interpretations as may be. Contrarily, the sense which arrogateth this to one
from the rest we cannot without evidence receive it, in ambitiosis restricta
interpretatio adhibenda est. Eclesia does not signify any Church without
difference, Parishionall, D^ocesan, or Provincial; but only a company orderly
assembling, not (...). Such a company therefore as congregate decently to
sacred purposes is a Church by translation. Besides the indefinite is
equivalent to the universal, as, (...) is (...), so (...) is (...). Now their
interpretation beggeth everything without any ground. For when Presbyters may
be taken but there wa^es: divisim, conjuct^m, and divisim, and conjunctim:
divisim one Presbyter in one, another in another, conjunctim, diverse
Presbyters in every Church, neither of these will serve their turn, the latter
only being true: for Scripture making two kinds of Presbyters, without which
the Church cannot be governed, it is sure it did give of both kinds to every
Church they p^anted, Now they seeing some Churches in our times to have many,
and some one conster it both ways Collective, many Presbyters, and Singularly,
one here, and one there, and because many Presbyters cannot be thu^ placed in
our frame of Churches, imagine the Church to contain Parochial and Diocesan
Churches.

But they will not seem to speak without reason; the Scripture say they
placed City by City Presbyters, and therefore in such Churches as occupied
City, Suburbs, and Country, which Parishionall ones do not. But may not a
Church of one Congregation be in a City, without occupying limits of City,
Suburbs, and Country? and if Presbyters be placed in such a Church, may they
not be said to be placed in Cities? Indeed if the Presbyters placed in Cities
were given to all the people within such bounds; the case were other; but the
city is not literally thus to be understood, but metonymically for the Church
in the City. Neither was the Church in the city, all within such bounds; for
the Saints of a place and Church of a place, are all one in the Apostles phrase
of speech. As for that which is objected from Ecclesiastical history, it is
true, that in process of time, the Bishop only had a company of Presbyters.
Before, Churches kept in one Congregation and had all their Presbyters.
Churches should so have afterward been divided, that all should have been
alike for kind, though in circumstantiall excellency some were before other.
What a gross thing is it to imagine, that the first frame the Apostles did
erect was not for posterity to imitate? A sitter example then to take out of
the custom of Metropoles, who sending out there (...), or Colonies, do use to
reserve some cases in civil jurisdiction over them, which the state of later
Churches did express.

THE SECOND QVESTION, WHETHER CHRIST ORDAINED by himself, or by his Apostles,
any ordinary Pastor, as our Bishops, having both precedence of order, and
majority of power above others.
WE will follow the same method: First, setting down the arguments for it,
with answers to them: Secondly, the arguments against it. Thirdly, lay down
conclusions. The arguments for it are: First, taken from Scripture: secondly,
from practice of the Churches: thirdly, from reason evincing the necessity of
it.

The first Argument.
Those whom the holy Ghost instituted, they are of Christ's ordaining. But the
holy Ghost is said to have placed Bishops, Acts 20. Ergo, Bishops are of
Christ's ordaining.

Answer. We deny the assumption: viz. That those Presbyters of Ephesus were
Diocesan Bishops. It is most plain they were such who did Communi consilio
tend the feeding and government of the Church; such Bishops whereof there might
be more then one in one congregation. The common gloss refers to this place
that of Ierom: that at first Presbyters did by common council govern the
Churches. Yea, Doct. Downam does count Ephesus as yet to have had no Bishop,
who was sent unto them after Paul's being at Rome, as he thinks. And others
defending the Hierarchy, who think him to have spoken to Bishops, do judge
that these words belong not to the Presbyters of Ephesus, but are spoken in
regard of others together then present with them, to wit, of Timothy,
Sosipater, Tychicus, who, say they, were three Bishops indeed; but that he
speaks of these who indeed were in company, is quite besides the text.

The second Argument.
Such Pastors as the seven Angels, Christ ordained. But such were Diocesan
Bishop^. Ergo. The assumption proved. Those who were of singular preheminency
amongst other Pastors, and had corrective power over all others in their
Churches, they were Diocesan bishops. But the Angels were singular persons in
every Church, having Ecclesi^sticall pre-eminence and superiority of power.
E^go, they were Diocesan bishops. The assumption is proved. Those who were
shadowed by seven singular Stars, were seven singular persons. But the Angels
were so. Ergo. Again, Those to whom only Christ did write, who only bare the
praise, dispraise, threatening, in regard of what was in the Church amiss, or
otherwise: they had Majority of power above others. But these Angels are
written to only, they are only praised, dispraised, threatened. Ergo. etc.

Answ. 1. In the two first syllogismes the assumption is denied. Secondly, in
the first Prosyllogisme the consequence of the pr^position is denied, That they
must needs be seven singular persons. For seven singular stars may signify
seven Unites, whether singular or aggregative: seven pluralities of persons who
are so united as if they were one. And it is frequent in Scripture to note by a
unity, a united multitude. Thirdly, the consequence of the proposition of the
last prosyllogisme is denied. For though we should suppose singular persons
written to, yet a preheminency in order and greater authority, without majority
of power, is reason enough why they should be written to singularly, and
blamed, or praised above other. Thus the Master of a College, though he have
no negative voice, might be written to, and blamed for the misdemeanors of his
College, not that he has a power overruling all: but because such is his
dignity, that did he do his endeavor in dealing with, and persuading others,
there is no disorder which he might not see redressed. Fourthly, again the
assumption may be denied: That they are only written to. For though they are
only named, yet the whole Churches are written to in them; the supereminent
member of the Church by a Synecdoche put for the whole Church. For it was the
custom in the Apostles times, and long after, that not any singular persons,
but the whole Churches were written unto, as in Paul's Epistles is manifest, and
in many examples Ecclesiastical. And that this was done by Christ here, the
Epiphonemaes testify. Let every one bear what the spirit speaks to the
Churches.

The third Argument.
Those whom the Apostles ordained, were of Apostolical institution. But they
ordained Bishops. Ergo. The assumption is proved by induction.

First, they ordained James Bishop of Jerusalem presently after Christ's
ascension. Ergo. they ordained Bishops. This is testified by Eusebius, lib. 2.
Histo. cap. 1. out of Cl^ment and Hegesippus: yea, that the Church he sat in
was reserved to his time, lib. 7. cap. 19. and 32. This our own author Ierom
testifies, Catalog. Script. Epiph. ad haer. 66. Chrysostom. in Act. 3. and 33.
Amb^os. in Galath. 1.9. Doroth^us in Synopsis. Aug. contra C^es. lib. 2. cap.
37. the general Council of Constable. in Trull. cap. 32. For though he could not
receive power of order, yet they might g^ve him power of jurisdiction, and
assig^e him his Church. So that though he were an Apostle, yet having a
singular assignation, and staying here till death, he might justly be called
the Bishop, as indeed he was. If he were not the Pastor, whom had ^hey for
the^r Pastor?

Secondly, those ordinary Pastors who were called Apostles of Churches in
comparison of other Bishops and Presbyters; they were in order and majority of
power before other. But Epaphroditus was the Apostle of the Philippians, though
they had other called Bishops. Chap. 1.4 Ergo. The assumption; that he is so
called as their eminent Pastor, is manifest by authorities. Ierom. in Phil. 2.
T^erd. and Ch^y^ost. on the same place. Neither is it like this sacred
appropriate name should be given to any in regard of mere sending hither or
thi^her. Yea this, that he was sent, did argue him there Bishop: for when the
Churches had to send any where they did usually entreat their Bishops.

Thirdly, Archippus they instituted at Colosse. Ergo.

Fourthly, Timothy and ^itus were instituted Bishops, the one of Ephesus, the
other of Crete. Ergo. The Antecedent is proved thus. That which is presupposed
in their Epistles, is true. But it is presupposed that they were Bishops in
these Churches. Ergo. The assumption proved. Those whom the Epistles presuppose
to have had Ep^s^opall authority given them to be exercised in those Church^s,
they are presupposed to have been ordained bishops there. But the Epistles
presuppose them to have had Episcopal authority given them to be exercised in
those Churches. Ergo. The assumption proved. 1. If the Epistles written to
Timothy and Titus, be patterns of the Episcopal function, informing them,
and in them all bishops, then they were bishops. But they are so. Ergo. 2
Again, whosoever prescribing to Timothy and Titus their duties as governors
in these Churches, does prescribe the very duty of bishops, he does
presuppose them bishops. But Paul does so: For what is the office of a bishop
beside teaching, but to ordain and govern: and govern^ with ^ingularity of
pre-eminence, and majority of power in comparison of other. Now these are the
things which they have in charge, Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy 5.22. 1 Timothy 1.3.11. 2 Timothy
2.16. Ergo. 3. Those things which were written to inform not only Timothy and
Titus, but in them all their successors who were Diocesan Bishops, those were
written to Diocesan* bishops. But these were so. Ergo, to Diocesan bishops. Now
that Dioc^san bishops were their successors, is proved. 1. Either they, or
Presbyters, or Congregations. Not the latter. 2. Again, Those who did su^ceed
them were their successors. But Diocesan bishops did. Ergo. The assumption is
manifest by authorities. In Ephesus from Timothy to Stephanus in the Counsel
of Chalcedon. And in Crete, though no one is read to have succeeded, yet there
were bishops Diocesan. And we read of Phillip bishop of Gor^i^a the Metropolis.
4. Those who were ordinarily resident, and lived and died at these Chur^hes,
were there bishops. But Timothy was bid abide here, Titus to stay to correct
all things, and they lived and died here. For Timothy it is testified by
H^gisippus, and Clement and Eusebius out of them, whom so refuse to believe,
deserve t^emselves no belief. Ergo, they were there bishops. Again, Jerome. in
Cat. Isidorus de vita and morre Sanct. Antonius par. 1. Tit. 6. cap. 28.
Niceph. lib. 10. Cap. 11. these do depose, that they lived and died there.
Further, to prove them bishops. 5. Their function was Evangelicall and
extraordinary, or ordinary; not the first, ^h^t was to end. For their function
as assigned to these Churches, and consisting especially in ordaining and
jurisdiction, was not to end. Ergo. Assumption proved. That function which was
necess^^y to the being of the Church, was not to end. But the funct^o^ ^h^y had
as being assigned to certain Ch^rches, is necessary to the being of the
Church, Ergo, etc. 6. Finally, that Antiquity testifies, agreeing with
Scripture, is true. But they testify that they were bishops, which the
subscriptions of the Epistles also affirm. Ergo. Eusebius Lib. 5. Cap. 4.
D^^nis. Areopag. Doroth. in Synopsi. Amb^ose p^oe^n. in 1. Tim. 1. Jerome. 1.
Tim. 1.14. 2. Tim. 4. in Catalo. Chrysostom. in Philip. 1. Epiph. in Haer. 5
Primas. prefat. in 1. Tim, 1.1. Theod. praefat. in Tit. O^cum. Sedulius. 1.
Timoth. 1. as it is said in the book of histories. Greg. L^b. 2. Cap. 12.
Theoph. in Ephesians. 4. Niceph. lib. 2. Cap. 34.

Answer.
We deny the assumption of the first Syllogism, with all the instances brought
to prove it.

F^^st, for Iame^, we deny he was ordained bishop, or that it can be proved
from antiquity, that he was more then other Apostles. That which Eusebius
reports, is grounded on Clement, whom we know to be a forged magni^ier of
Romish orders, and in this story he does seem to imply, that Christ should
have ordained Peter, John and James the greater Bishops. Seeing he makes these
to have ordained James after they had got of Christ the supreme degree of
dignity, which these forged deceitful Epistles of Anacletus do plainly
affirm. Secondly, as the ground is suspected; so the phrase of the Fathers,
Calling him the Bishop of that Church, does not imply that he was a Bishop
properly so called. The Fathers use the words of Apostoli and Episcopi amply,
not in their strict and formal propriety. Ierom on the first to the
Galathians, and in his Epistle to Damasus, affirms, that the Prophets and
John the Bishop might be called Apostles. So many Fathers call Phillip an
Apostle. Clem. 5. Consi. cap. 7. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. ul^. Tertul. de Bapt. cap.
8. and others. In like manner they call the Apostles Bishops; not in propriety
of speech, but because they did such things as Bishops do, and in remaining
here or there made resemblance of them. Thus Peter, Paul, John, Barnabas, and
all the rest, are by he Ancients called Bishops.

Object. This is granted true, touching others, but not in this instance of
James: because it is so likely and agreeable to Scripture, a^ well as all other
Story; that when all the rest of the Apostles departed out of Jerusalem, John
the Baptist did still abide with them even to death. Answer. Though this be but
very conjecturall, yet it nothing bettereth the cause here. It follows not,
He did abide with this Church. Ergo, he was the proper Bishop of this Church.
For not abiding in one Church does m^ke a Bishop: but he must so abide in it,
that he must from the power of his office, only be bound to teach that Church:
secondly, to teach it as an ordinary Pastor of it: thirdly, to govern it with
a power of jurisdiction, limited only to that Church. But James was bound to
the rest of the Circumc^sion by his office, as they should from all the world
resort thither. Secondly, he did not teach but as an Ambassador
extraordinarily sent from Christ, and infallibly led by his Spirit into all
truth. Ergo, not as an ordinary Bishop. Thirdly, as the rest in what Provinces
soever they rested, had not their jurisdiction diminished, but had power
occasionally, as well where they were not, as where they were; so it was with
James. This might happily make the phrase to be more sounded out of James, that
he did in this circumstance of residing, more nearly express an ordinary
Pastor then any other. It is plain, Antiquity did hold them all Bishops, and
gather them so to be, a Priari and Post^riori: the Author de quaest. vet. and
nov. t^st. cap. 97. Nemo ignorant Episcopus salvatorem Ecclesiis institius^e
p^^usquam escenderet: imponens manus Apostolis, ordinavit eos in Episcopus.
Neither did they think them Bishops because they received a limited
jurisdiction of any Church; but because they were enabled to do all those
things which none but Bishops could regularly do. Oecum. cap. 22. in Act. It
is to be noted, faith he, tha^ Paul and Barnabas had the dignity of Bishops:
for they did not make Bishops only, but Presbyters also. Now we must conster
the ancient, as taking them only eminently and virtually to have been Bishops,
or else we must judge them to have been of this mind, That the Apostles had
both as extraordinary Legates, most ample power of teaching and governing
suting thereto, as also the ordinary office of Bishops and Pastors, with power
of teaching and governing, such as do essentially and ministerially agree to
them: which indeed Doctor Downam himself confuteth, as Popish, and not without
reason, though while he does strive to have James both an Apostle and a Bishop
properly, himself does confirm it not a little.

Wherefore it will not be unprofitable to show some reasons why the Apostles
neither were nor might be in both these callings.

First, That which might make us doubt of all their teaching, and writing, is
to be hiffed forth as a most dangerous assertion. But to make James, and so
any of them, have both these offices in propriety, might make us doubt. Ergo.
The assumption proved thus. That which does set them in office of teaching
liable to error, when they teach from one office, as well as infallibly
directed with a rule of infallible discerning, when they teach from the other,
that does make us subject to doubting in all they teach and write. But this
opinion does so. Ergo. The proposition is, for ought I see, of necessary
truth, the assu^ption no less true. For if there be any rule to direct James
infallibly, as he was formally the ordinary bishop of Jerusalem, let us hear
it: if there were none, may not I question, whether all his teaching and
writing were not subject to error? For if he taught them as an ordinary
bishop, and did write his Epistle so, then certainly it might err. If he did
not teach them so, then did he not that he was ordained to, neither was he
properly an ordinary Pastor, but taught as an extraordinary Ambassador from
Christ.

Secondly, Those offices which cannot be exercised by one, but the one must
expel the other, were never by God conjoined in one person. But these do so.
Ergo. The assumption is manifest. Because it is plain, none can be called to
teach as a Legate extraordinary, with infallible assistance, and unlimited
jurisdiction, but he is made incapable of being bound to one Church, teaching
as an ordinary person, with jurisdiction limited to that one Church. Again,
one can no sooner be called to do this, but at least the exercise of the
other is suspended. Thirdly, that which is to no end, is not to be thought to
be ordained of God. But to give one an ordinary authority whereby to do this
or that in a Church, who had a higher and more excellent power of office,
whereby to do those same things in the same Church, is to no end. Ergo.

Object. But it will be denied that any other power of order, or to teach and
administer sacraments was given, then that he had as an Apostle: but only
jurisdiction or right to this Church as his Church.

Answer. To this I reply, first, that if he had no new power of order, he
could not be an ordinary Bishop properly and formally so called. Secondly, I
say power of governing ordinary was not needful for him who had power as an
Apostle in any Church where he should come. Object. But it was not in vain,
that by assignation he should have right to reside in this Church as his
Church. Answer. If by the mutual agreement in which they were guided by the
spirit, it was thought mere, that James should abide in Jerusalem, there
tending both the Church of the Jews, and the whole circumcision, as they by
occasion resorted thither, then by virtue of his Apostleship he had no less
right to tend those of the circumcision by residing here, then the other had
right to do the same in the Provinces through which they walked. But they did
think it meet that he should there tend that Church, and with that Church
all the Circumcision, as they occasionally resorted thereto. Ergo. For though
he was assigned to reside there, yet his Apostolic Pastoral care was as
John's and Peter's, toward the whole multitude of the dispersed Jews, Galath.
2. Now if it were assigned to him for his abode, as he was an Apostolic
Pastor, what did he need assignation under any other title. Nay he could not
have it otherwise assigned, unless we make him to sustain another person,
viz. of an ordinary Pastor, which he could not be who did receive no such
power of order as ordinary Pastors h^ve.

Fourthly* that calling which he could not exercise without being much abased,
that he never was ordained unto, as a point of honor for him. But he could
not exercise the calling of an ordinary Bishop, but he must be abased. He
must be bound by office to meddle with authority and jurisdiction but in one
Church, he must teach as an ordinary man liable to error. Ergo, he was never
ordained to be a Bish^p properly. If it be sacrilege to reduce a Bishop to
the degree of a Presbyter, what is it to bring an Apostle to the degree of a
Bishop? True it is, he might have been assigned to reside constantly in that
Church without traveling, and be no whit abased: but then he must keep there
a Pastor of it with Apostolical authority, caring not for that Church, but the
whole number of the Jews, which he might do without traveling. Because who
so kept in that Church, he did need to go for^h as the rest; for the Jews
from all parts come to him. But he could not make his abide in it as an
ordinary teacher and governor, without becoming many degrees lower then he
was. For to live without goi^g for^h, in the mother Church of all the world, as
an ordinary Pa^tor, was much less honor then to travail as Peter one while
into Assyria, another while through Pontus, Galatia, Bithinia, as an Apostle.
Even as to sit at home in worshipful private place is less honorable then to
go abroad as Lord Ambassador ^ither or thither. Honor and ease are seldom
bed-fellowes. Neither was James his honor in this circumstance of the rest,
but in having such an honorable place wherein to exercise his Apostolic
calling. As for that question, who was their ordinary Pastor, it is easily
answered. Their Presbyters, such as Linus, or Clemens in Rome, such as Ephesus
and other Churches had. James was their Pastor also, but with extraordinary
authority. What needed they an ordinary Bishop, which grew needful (as the
favorers of the Hierarchy say) to supply the absence of Apostles, when now
they were to decease? What needed then here an ordinary Bishop where the
Apostles were jointly to keep twelve years together, and one to reside during
his life, according to the current of the story? Thus much about the first
instance.

To the second instance of Epaphroditus, and the argument drawn from it.
First, we deny the p^oposition. For had some ordinary Pastors been so styled,
it might imply but a preheminencie of dignity in them above other: wherefore
unless this be inter^erted, it is unsound, viz. Those ordinary Pastors, who
are called Apostles in comparison of others, because the Apostles did give to
them power of ordination, jurisdiction, and peerless preheminency, which they
did not give to others, they are above others. Secondly, the Assumption is
false altogether: First, that Epaphroditus was an ordinary Pastor: Secondly,
that he was called an Apostle in comparison of inferior Pastors of that
Church. Obi. But the judgment of Ierom, Theodoret, Chrysostom, is that he
was. Answ. The common judgment is, that he was an egregious teacher of theirs,
but further then this, many of the testimonies do not depose. Now so he might
be: for he was an Evangelist, and one who had visited and labored among them
and therefore might be called their teacher, yea an egregious teacher, or
Doctor of them. Nay, Saint Ambrose does plainly insinuate, that he was an
Evangelist: for he says he was made their Apostle by the Apostle, while he
sent him to exhort them, and because he was a good man, he was desired of the
people. Where he mak^th him sent, not for perpetual residence amongst them,
but for the ^ransunt exhorting of them, and makes him so desired of the
Philippians, because he was a good man, not because he was their ordinary
Pastor. Ieroms testimony on this place does not evince. For the name of
Apostles and Doctors is largely taken, and as appliable to one, who as an
Evangelist did instruct them, as to any other. Th^^d. does plainly take him to
have been as their ordinary bishop, but no otherwise then Timothy and Titus,
and other Evangelists are said to have been bishops: which how true it is, in
the next argument shall be discussed. For even Theodoret does take him to have
been such an Apostolic person as Timothy and Titus were. Now these were as
truly called bishops as the Apostles themselves. Neither is the rule of
Theodore^ to be admitted: for it is unlike that the name of Apostle should be
communicated then with ordinary Pastors, where now there was danger of
confounding those eminent Ministers of Christ, with others, and when now the
Apostles were deceased, that then it should cease to be ascribed to them.
Again, how shall we know that a bishop is to be placed in a City, that he
must be a person thus and thus (according to Paul's Canons) qualified: all is
voided, and made not to belong to a bishop. For those who are called bishops,
were Presbyters and no bishops, bishops being then to be understood only under
the name of Apostles and Angels. Thirdly, antiquity does testify, that this
was an honor to bishops, when this name was Ecclesiastically appropriated to
them. But if they ever had been tea^med by the name of Apostles before, this
had been a debasing of them. Neither is there reason why they should be called
Apostles. In jurisdiction Apostolical the Apostles were not succeeded.
Jurisdiction Episcopal they never exercised, nor had, and therefore could not
be succeeded in it. The Apostles gave to Presbyters tha^ which Christ gave
them out of his power; even the power of ordinary government. They are bid
(...), and (...), to feed as well by government as doctrine. They are bid not
to play the Lords over the flock. What fear of tyranny where there is no power
of government? But lay authorities aside, consider the thing from the text it
self. First, Paul seems but occasionally to send him, he having purposed to
have sent Timothy, who as yet could not be employed. I thought it necessary to
send Spa^br^dit us to you. Secondly, he does imply, that Epaphraditus had not
returned to them, but that he sent him; and that therefore he was not the
ordinary bishop of it. It is like, he was but sent till Timothy might be
dispatched to them. Neither is it anything probable he should be called an
Apostle, as their ordinary and eminent Pastor. In the Scriptures, none are said
to be Apostles further then they are in habitude to some sending them. Now this
is undoubted, the Philippians had sent him to Paul. It is then most probable
when he is ^^lled their Apostle, it is in regard he was sent by them, which the
Apostle points at in the next words, who has ministered to me the things
^e^dfull which you sent by him. Object. But it is unlikely that this word
appropriated to the Twelve, should be used of those sent civilie. Not so, for
while the persons sending are signified, they are sufficiently
contradistinguished; it being the Privilege of the Apostles, that they were
the Apostles of Christ Jesus, not simply that they were Apostles. Secondly,
John 13. It is made common to all that are sent. For though Christ mean it of
himself, yet he implies it by a discourse, a genere ad speciem. Thirdly, we
see the like phrase, 2 Cor. 8 The Apostles of the Churches. For Chrysost^me
there understands those whom the Churches had sent for that present. That
does not hinder, they were by Paul to the Churches, therefore the churches
might not send them with their contributions. Neither is this an argument that
he was their bishop, because their church sent him: for they sent Apostles
themselves and Evangelists also more ordinarily, it being their office to go
from church to church, for the edification of them.

For the instance of Archipus I find it not urged.

Now to come to the last instances of Timotheus and Titus.

First, we deny the Antecedent, that they were instituted bishops by Paul. And
in the first presillogisme we deny the Assumption: that the Epistles do
presuppose so much. And to the prosillogisme, tending to prove this assertion
denied, we answer: first, to the propo^ition, by distinguishing the Episcopal
authority, which is considered both in regard of that which is material, and
in regard of the formal reason which does agree to it. The Proposition is
true, understanding it of authority in both these regards; those who are
presupposed to have had authority Episcopal given them, both for the substance
of it, and the formal reason which does agree to it in an ordinary bishop,
they are presupposed bishops: but this is denied. For they are presupposed to
have and exercise power Episcopal for the material of it, as Apostles had
also; but not to have and exercise in that manner and formallity which does
agree to a Bishop, but which does agree to an Evangelist, and therefore they
are bidden to do the work of an Evangelist, to exercise all that power ^hey
did exercise as Evangelists. There is nothing that Paul writes (...) Timothy
to do in Ephesus, or to Titus Cr^te, which himself present in person might
not and would not have done. If we should reason then thus: He who did
exercise Episcopal power in these churches, he is presupposed to have been
bishop in them. This proposition is not true, but with limitation: He who
exercised Episcopal power after that formal manner, which does agree to the
office of a Bishop, he was Bishop; but not ^ee who exercises the power
secundum aliam rationem and modum: viz. after such a manner at does agree to an
Apostle.

To the second maine proof, we deny the proposition. If patterns for
Bishops, then written to Bishops. The reason is, Apostles, Evangelists,
ordinary Pastors, have many things common in their administration. Hence is it,
that the example of the one may be a pattern to another, though they are not
identically and formally of one calling. Counsels have enjoined all Presbyters
to be well seen in these Epistles, as being patterns for them, Vide Aug. De
doctrine. Christ. cap. 16. lib. 4.

To the third reason. Who so prescribing them their duties does propose the
very duties of Bishops, be does take them to have been Bishops. The
Proposition is not true without a double limitation. If the Apostle should
propose such duties of Bishops as they in later times usurped, he does not
therefore presuppose them bishops, because th^se are duties of Evangelists,
agreeing to bishops only by usurpation. Again, should he propose those duties
which, say they, the w^ord does ascribe and appropriate to bishops, yet if he
do not prescribe them as well in regard of matter as form exercised by them,
it will not follow that he does take them for bishops: not that Paul does
purpose the very duties of bishops, both in substance and manner of
performance. Secondly, we deny him to purpose for substance the duties of
bishops. For he does not bid him ordain, as having a further sacramental
power then other Ministers, nor govern with power directive and corrective
over others. This exceeds the bounds of all ministerial power. Thirdly,
Timothy is not bid to lay on hands or do any other act, when now churches were
constituted, but with concurrence of those churches; salv^ uni useuiusque
Ecclesiae iure, the Apostles did not otherwise. For thoug^ Paul wrote to him
alone, that was because he was occupied not only in churches perfectly framed,
but also in the erecting and framin^ of others. Secondly, because they were in
degree and dignity abov^ all other ordinar^ governors of the Church, which
their Cons^^ like preheminencye was sufficient, why they should be written
alone.

To the fourth reason: Those things which were written to inform not only
Timothy and Titus, but all their successors, who were Dioces^ Bishops,
thosewere written to Diocesan Bishops. But these were so, E^^ The Proposition
is not true, because it presupposes that noth^^^ written to any persons, can
inform Diocesan bishops, unless (...) persons to whom it is, written be
formally in that self same ord^^ For if one Apostle should write to another
touching the duty Ap^stolique, it might inform any Doctor or Pastor
wh^tsoever. Seco^ly, we deny Diocesan bishops are ( de jure) successors. As
for equivocall Catalogue which makes all who are read bishops to have been
Diocesan, we shall speak of them hereafter. The bishops between Timothy and
Stephanus in the time of the Chalcedon Council, were not all of one cut: and
there are no churches read in Crete which were not Congregations. Ther^ is no
more to prove Phillip of Gortina a Metropolitan, then to prove Ignatius
Metropolitan of Syria. For what does story relate, but that Phillip was amongst
other a bishop of those Churches which were in Crete. There are many Churches
in England, a Minister of which Churches is such an one, that is one Minister
amongst others of those Churches. To that of their residing there and dying in
these Churches. First, the proposition is not necessary. For as James might
reside exercising an Apostolical inspection in a particular Church, so might
these exerc^se an Evangelicall function how long soever they resided. Secondly,
the assumption will not be found true for ordinary constant residence neither
in Scripture nor fathers. For Timothy, though he be exhorted to stay at
Ephesus, yet this does not argue it, that he was enjoined ordinary residence.
For first it was a sign he was not bishop, because Paul did exhort him, for he
would well have known, he might not, being their ordinary Pastor leave them,
further then the more important good of the Church should occasion. 2. He is
bid to stay there, not finally, but till the Apostle should come to him, which
though he might be delayed, it is plain he then intended. So Titus is placed
in Crete, not to stay there, and set down his rest, but (...), further to set,
as it were, and exedisie the fabric, which Paul had begun. God gave
Ceremonies (...), is not ever a correcting of any thing amiss, but a settling
every thing right, by erecting the substance foreshadowed. But say it were
correcting, it were but such a correction as one might perform in transitu,
with a little longer stay, though not ordinary residence. By Scripture the
contrary is manifest.

For first, it is not like that Timothy was placed bishop after Paul's being at
Rome; for when Paul says he prayed him, when now he was going to Macedonia,
to stay at Ephesus, he does intimate that when he left him they were there
both together. Secondly, when he wished him to abide there, he had a meaning
to come unto Timothy th^ther where he left him, so as at least to call on him,
and see the Church. But Paul after his parting from the Presbyters knew he
should never see the Ephesians more. Act. 20. If we say he does foretell it
for likely, so we may say, that of wolves a^ising was, and call all into
question. Neither is it likely, but that tears would have broke his heart, and
made him yield in the p^remptories of his speech, had not his soul been
divinely persuaded. Thirdly, he had no meaning when he left them to constitute
Timothy to be their Bishop: for he would not have omitted sue h^a^ argument of
consolation to hearts so heavy. Not he does not mention any such purpose when
he did write to them his Epistle. He tells Churches usually when himself
has meaning to see them, or to send others. Fourthly, Timothy was with Paul
while he was in bonds at Rome, as witness those inscriptions of the Epistles
to the C^ll^^^ins and Philippians; yea Timothy was so with him, as to be
employed by him, sent forth, and return to him, which is manifest. Philip. 2.
If he were after this placed in Ephesus, yet he was not placed to be resident,
for in the end of the Epistle, he does bid Timothy come to him, and bring
Mark^, that they might minister to him. Again when he did write the 2.
Epistle, Timothy was not Ephesus, for he does bid him salute Aquila and
Priscilla and Onesiphor^^. Object. But is like these were at Ephesus, for there
Paul left Aquila and Priscilla. They came occasionally, they did not fi^e
there, which Chrysostom also judges. And the house of Onesiphorus, Bernard
takes it, was at Iconium in Lycaonia, so that it is like he was in his native
country at this time, even Iconium, Listra, Derbe, which happily is the cause
why the Scholasticall story does make him Bishop of Lystra, because hither he
was last sen^. He was so here, as that the Apostle did but send him to see
them, for he bids him come before winter. Besides, there are many
probalities he was not at Ephesus, for he speaks of it through the Epistle,
as a place now remote from him. Thou know what Onesiph^rus did for me at
Ephesus, not where now thou art. I have sent Tychius to Ephesus, not to thee,
to supply thy place while thou shall be absent. Finally, after Paul's death
he did not return to Ephesus, but by common consent went to John the Apostle,
and very little before his death came to Ephesus, if ever. As for the: Fathers
therefore in this point, if they testify ordinary residence, which they do
not, we have liberty to renounce them; but they testify only that he
remained in that Church, because his stay was longer there then Evangelists did
use to make, and he is thought to have suffered martyrdom there. So for Titus,
when Paul sent him to Crete to do that work is uncertain; but this is
certain, it was before his writing to the Corinths the second time, and going
to Rome. This likewise that Paul was then in traveling, and as it is like
being in the parts of Macedonia did mean to winter at Nicopolis. When he did
write the Epistle he does show it was not his meaning that Titus should stay
there, for he does bid him to meet him at Nicopolis, where he meant to be as
it is likely, but Titus coming did not meet him there, but at length fo^nd
him in Macedonia, whence Paul did send him to the Corinthians, thanking God for
his promptness even of his own ^^cord to be employed amongst them, 2 Cor.
8.16. which does show he had not been made an ordinary bishop any where. We
find that he did accompany Paul at Rome, 2 Timothy 4.10. and when Paul writ his
second Epistle to Timothy, he was in Dal^atia. Whence Aquina^ does think him
to have been bishop of that place. Wherefore we think him that will be
carried from such presumptions, (yea manifest arguments) by Hegesippus,
Clemens, and history grounded on them, to be too much affected to so weak
authors, and wish not credit with him, who counts him unworthy credit, that
will not swear what such men depose.

Touching the proof that follows, That either function was Evangelisticall
and extraordinary, or ordinary. But their function as assigned to those
Church^s was not extraordinary. We deny this assumption, with the proof of it.
That the function that these exercised as assigned to certain Churches (these
two by name) was necessary to the being of the Church. The reason is, because
they were assigned to do those things which are to be done for ever in the
church after a more transcendent manner; viz. as Evangelists; and assignation
of them to do those things in certain Churches after this manner, was not
necessary to perpetuate the being of the Church. Assignation to churches to do
the work of ordinary Pastors is indeed necessary: no^ assignation to do the
work of Evangelists.

To that final reason, what antiquity does testify agreeing with Scriptures
is true, and so to be taken. What they speak so agreeing, that it is virtually
contained in them, and may rightly be deduced from them, is to be believed and
received by a divine faith. But what they speak not plainly contradicted, but
yet no way included, may be adm^tted side human^, if the first relators be well
qualified witnesses. But what they speak from such as Clement and Hegesippus,
it is is in effect of light credulity. A corrupt conscience bent to decline is
glad of every color which it may pretend to justify it self in declining.

To the assumptio^ we answer. What do not some ancient enough call Timothy?
Ambrose says he was a Deacon one while, a Presbyter another while, and in like
sense others a Primate and a Bishop. Lyra proves him from many authorities to
have been an Archbishop, and Titus a Priest. Beda calls him an Apostle. But
to gather on these, that he was in propriety of speech all these, were absurd.
Object. I, but they call him bishop on other grounds, because assigned to this
Church. Answ. They call him bishop because he was assigned to this Church, not
only to teach, but also to ordain Deacons, Presbyters. For wheresoever they
found this done, and by whomsoever, they did call them bishops, as I noted
before from Oecumen. The fathers therefore may be well construed calling these
bishops, because they made longer stay in these Churches then Evangelists did
usually, and did preach and ordain, and do in these Churches all such things
which Bishopes in their time used to do. But that he was not an Evangelist,
and more then an ordinary bishop they do not deny. Salmeron himself in his
first Disputation on 1 ^im. page 405. Videcus ergo quod fuerit plusqu^^
Episcopus, etiamsi ad ^em^us in ea civitate ut Pastor praedicav^rit and sacr^s
ordi^nes promoveris, unde quidem vocant cum Episcopum. Finally, should they in
rigor and formal propriety make him an ordinary Pastor from the first time
Paul did write to him ordinarily resident to his end; they should testify a
thing, as I hope I have showed, contrary to Scripture, y^a contrary to that
text which makes him to have done the work of an Evangelist. As for the show
from ^he Subscriptions we have spoken sufficiently.

Now to show that they were not properly bishops. First, we have showed that
they were but subrogated to do those supposed Episcopal duties a while, but
were not there fixed, to make their ordinary abode. Therefore not bishops
properly. Secondly, they who did the work of an Evangelist in all that they
did, did not perform formally the work of a bishop. But these did so. As is
vouched of Timothy, Do the work of an Ev^ngelist. Ergo. The Proposition is
proved. If an Evangelist and bishop cannot be formally of one office, then the
act of an Evangelist, and the act of an ordinary Pastor or bishop cannot be
formally one. For when everything does agere secundum quod actis est; those
things which are not the same formally, their work and effect cannot be
formally the same. But the Evangelist and the ordinary Pastor or bishops, are
not formally the same. Ergo. The assumption the Apostle proves, by that
distinct enumeration of those whom Christ g^ve now ascending by the work of
the Ministry to gather and build his Church. For as an Apostle is
distingu^shed from a Prophet, a Prophet from an Evangelist, so an Evangelist
from an ordinary Teacher.

Object. But it may be said, they were not distinct, but that the superior
contained the inferior, and Apostles might be Evangelists properly, as Matthew
and John were.

A^sw. That former point is to be understood with a grain of salt. The
superior contained the inferior virtually and eminently, in as much as they
could do. alti^ri tamen ra^ione, what the inferior did. This sense is
tolerable. But that formally the power of all other offices suites with the
Apostles, is false. My Lord chief Just^^e of England is not formally a
Constable. As for the latter, true, an Apostle might be also a penmen of the
Gospel, but this makes not an Evangelist more then an Apostle, but does per
cecidens, come to them both. And even as a Preacher or Pastor, writing
Commentaries, and publishing other Treatises, this comes per cecidens to his
calling, it does not make him a Pastor, but more illustrious and fruitful in
that regard then another. So Ma^k^ and Luke was not therefore Evangelists
because they did write the Gospels, for then none should have been Evangelists
that had not written, but in this regard they were more renowned then other.
Custom has so prevailed, says Maldonate in his Preface on Matthew, that we
call them Evangelists, ( viz. the Writers of the Gospells) whom the Scriptures
never call Evangelists. These Evangelists Paul speaks of were given at
Christ's ascension, but the first writer of the Gospel, being an Apostle, was
at least eight years after. Secondly, they were a distinct order of workmen
from the Apostles, but two of the penmen of the Gospels were Apostles. Thirdly,
they were such as by labor of ministry (common for the general of it to all
other) did gather Saints, and build Christ's Body. Now writing the Gospel was
not a labor of Ministry common to Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors,
but the publishing of it.

Those degrees which Christ did distinctly give to othersome, and o^hersome,
those he did not give conjoynedly to one and the same persons. But these
callings he gave to some one, to others another. Else he must have said, he
gave the same men to be Apostles and Evangelists, the same to be Evangelists
and Pastors. Ergo.

That calling which is not compatible with the calling of an Evangelist, that
Paul never annexed to an Evangelist. But the call^ng of a bishop is such. For a
bishop is tied to a particular Church. The calling of an Evangelist is a
calling whereby one is called to the work of the Ministry, to gather Saints,
and edify Christ's body, without any limitation to any particular Church. Ergo,
Paul never annexed the calling of a bishop to an Evangelist.

The calling of an Evangelist is not to write the Gospel, nor to preach it
simply: for then every Minister of the Word should be an Evangelist. But this
does difference them, to preach it without limitation or assignation to any
particular church. Thus Phillip thus all those who were the Apostles helpers,
working the work of the Lord as they did were Evang. of which sort some
continued to the time of Commodus the Emperor, as ^usebius reports, Eusebius.
hist. li 5. cap. 9. Now a calling whereby I am thus called to publish the
Gospel, without fixing my self in any certain place; and a calling which
binds during life to settle my self in one Church, are incompatible.

Lastly, that which would have debased Timothy and Titus, that Paul did not put
upon them. But to have brought them from the honor of serving the Gospel, as
Collateral companions of the Apostles to be ordinary Pastors, had abased them.
Ergo, this to be ordinary Pastors Paul did not put upon them. Object. The
assumption it denied, it was no abasement. For before they were but Presbyters,
and afterward by imposition of hands were made bishops. why should they receive
imposition of hands, and a new ordination, if they did not receive an ordinary
calling? we mean if they were not admitted into ordinary functions by
imposition of hands. I answer, This deny all with all whereon it is builded
(...) gross: For to bring them from a Superior order to an Inferior, is to
abase them. But the Evangelists office was superior to Pastors. Ergo. The
assumption proved. First, Every office is so much the greater, by how much the
power of it is of ampler extent and less restrained. But the Evangelists power
of reaching and governing was illimited. Ergo. The assumption proved. Where
ever an Apostle did that part of Gods work which belonged to an Apostle; there
an Evangelist might do that which belonged to him. But that part of Gods work
which belonged to an Apostle he might do any where without limitation. Ergo.
Secondly, every Minister by how much he does more approximate to the highest,
by so much he is h^gher. But the companions, and coadjutors of the Apostles,
were nearer then ordinary Pastors. Ergo. Who are next the King, in his
Kingdom, but those who are Regis Comites. The Evangelists were Comites of
these Ecclesiastical Cheiftaines. Chrysostom does expressly say on Ephesians. 4.
That the Evangelists in an ambulatory course spreading the Gospel, were above
any bishop or Pastor which rests in a certain Church. Wherefore to make them
Presbyters is a weak conceit. For every Prsbyter (properly so called) was
constituted in a certain Church to do the work of the Lord in a certain
Church, But Evangelists were not, but to do the work of the Lord in any
Church as they should be occasioned. Ergo, they were no Presbyters properly so
called. Now for their ordination; Timothy received none as the Doctor
conceives, but what he had from the hand of the Apostle and Presbyters, when
now he was taken of Paul to be his companion. For no doubt but the Church which
gave him a good testimony, did by her Presbyters concur with Paul in his
promoting to that office. Obj. What, could they lay on hands with the Apostles,
which Phillip could no^, and could they enter one into an extraordinary office?
Answ. They did lay on hands with the Apostles, as it is expressly read, both of
the Apostles and them. It is one thing to use precatory imposition, another to
use miraculous imposition, such as the Apostles did, whereby the extraordinary
gifts of the Holy Ghost were conferred. In the first, Presbyters have power.
Neither is it certain, that Phillip could not have imposed hands, and given
the Holy Ghost. For though he could, he might choose in wisdom for their
greater confirmation and edification to let that be done by persons more
eminent. Finally, imposition of hands may be used in promoting and setting one
forth to an extraordinary office. For every extraordinary office is not
attended with immediate vocation from God. As the calling of Evangelists,
though extraordinary, was in this unlike the calling of Apostles and Prophets.
Secondly, men called immediately may be promoted to the more fruitful exercise
of their immediate and extraordinary callings by imposition of hands from their
inferiors, as Paul and Barnabas were. Howsoever, it is plain, that Timothy by
imp^sition of hands, was ordained to no calling, but the calling of an
Evangelist. For that calling he was ordained to, which he is called on by Paul
to exercise, and fully execute. But he is called on by him to do the work of
an Evangelist. Ergo, that calling he was ordained to.

That work which exceeds the calling of an ordinary bishop, was not put upon
an ordinary bishop. But Titus his work did so: for it was to plant Presbyters
Town by Town through a Nation, Ergo. For the ordinary plantation and erecting
of Churches to their due frame, exceeds the calling of an ordinary bishop.
But this was Titus his work. Ergo. Bishops are given to particular Churches
when now they are framed, that they may keep them wind and wether tight, they
are not to lay foundations, or to exedifie some imperfect beginnings. But say
Titus had been a bishop: he is no warrant for ordinary bishops, but for
Primates whose authority did reach through whole Islands. Nay, if the Doctors
rule out of Theodor^t were good, it would serve for a bishop of the plurality
cut. For it is said he placed Presbyters city by city, or Town by Town, who
are in name only bishops, but not that he placed Angels or Apostles in any
part of it. He therefore was the sole bishop of them, the rest were but
Presbyters, such as had the name, not the office and government of Bishops.

Finally, were it granted that they were ordinary bishops, and written to do
the things that bishops do, yet would it not be a ground for their majority of
power in matter sacramental and jurisdiction, as is above excepted.

The fifth Argument.
The Ministers which the Church h^d generally and perpetually the first 300.
years after Christ and his Apostles, and was not ordained by any general
Council, were undoubtedly of Apostolical institution. But the Church ever had
Diocesan bishops in singularity of pre-eminence during life, and in majority of
power of ordination and jurisdiction above others, and these not instituted by
general Counsels. Ergo, The proposition is plain both by Austin de Bapt.
contra Donat. lib. 4. and Epist. 118. and by Ter^ul. Constat. id ob Apostolis
traditum quod apu^ Ecclesias Apostolorum fuit sacrosanctum. For who can think
that all the Churches generally, would conspire to abolish the order of Christ
planted by the Apostles, and set up other Ministers then Christ had ordained.
The assumption it plain: for if the Church had Metropolitans anciently, and
from the beginning, as the Council of Nice test^fieth, much more bishops. For
Dioces in bishops must be before them, they rising of combination of Cities
and Dioces. And the council of Ephesus test^fieth, the government of those
bishops of Cyprus, to have been ever from the beginning, according to the
custom of old received. Yea, that the attempt of the bishop of Antioch, was
against the Canons of the Apostles. Again, Cyprian does testify, that long
before his time, bishops were placed in all Provinces and Cities, besides the
s^cc^ssion of bishops from the Apostles times: for they prove their orig^nall
to have been in the Apostles times. Neither were they instituted by any
general council. For long before the first general council, we read
Metropolitans to have been ordained in the Churches. Yea, Ierom himself is of
opinion, that no council of after times, but the Apostles themselves did
ordain bishops; for even since those contentions wherein some said, I am
Paul's, others, I am Apollos, they were set up by general decree: which could
not be made, but by the Apostles themselves. And in Psalm. 44. he makes David
to prophecy of bishops, who should be set up as the Apostles Successors.

Answer.
First, we deny the proposition. For first, this does presuppose such an
assistance of Gods Spirit with the Church, that she cannot generally take up
any custom, or opinion, but what has Apostolical warrant, whereas the
contrary may be showed in many instances. Keeping of holy days was a general
practice through the Churches, before any council enacted it, yet was no
Apostolical tradition. Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 22. Evangelium non imposuit hoc,
ut dies festi observentur, sed homines ipsi suu quique l^cis ex more quodem
introduxerant. Taking the Eucharist fasting, the fasts on Wednesday, and
Saturday, fasting ^n some fashion before E^ster, ceremonies in baptising, the
government of Metropolitans were generally received before any council
established.

2. It does presuppose, that the Church cannot generally conspire in taking up
any custom, if she be not led into it by some general proponent, as a
general representative council, or the Apostles, who were Oecumenicall
Doctors, but I see no reason for such a presumption.

3. Th^^ does presuppose, that something may be which is of Apos^licall
auth^^ity, which neither directly nor consequently is included in the wo^^d
written. For when there are some customs which have been general, which yet
cannot be grounded in the word written, it is necessary by this proposition,
that some things may be in the Church having authority Apostolical, as being
delivered by word unwritten. For they cannot have warrant from the Apostles but
by word written or unwritten. To the proof we answer: That of Tertullian
makes not to the purpose, for he speaks of that which was in Churches
Apostolical, as they were now planted by them, which the sentence at large set
down w^ll make clear. Si cor stat id bonum quod p^ius, and id prius quod
esta^ initio, ab initio quod ab Apostolis, pariterutique constabil id ^sse ab
Apostolis traditum quod apud Ecclesias Apostolorum funit sacrosanctum. Touching
Austins rule we would a^ke what is the meaning of these words, Non nisi
Apostolica authoritate traditum rectissime cre^itur. If they say his meaning
is, that such a thing cannot but in their writings be delivered, they do
pervert his meaning, as is apparent by that, Cont. Don. lib. 2.27.
Confuetudinem ex Apostolo^em traditions ven^entem, si^ut multa non inveniuntur
in literis little, and tamen quia custodiunt^ per universam Ecclesiam, non nisi
ab ipsit tradita and commendata creduntur. And we wish them to show from
Scripture what ^hey say is contained in it. If they yield, he does mean as he
does of nowritten tradition, we hope they will not justify him in this; we
will take that liberty in him, which himself does in all others, and gives us
good leave to use in his own writings. Now count him in th^s to favor
Traditions, as some of the Papists do not causel^sly make this rule the
measuring cord* which does take in the l^titude of all traditions: yet we
appeal to Austines judgment otherwhere, who though by this rule he makes a
universal practice not begun by Counsels, an argument of Divine and
Apostolical authority, yet dealing against Donatists, Lib. 1. Don. cap. 7. he
says, he will not use this argument, because it was but humane and uncertain,
ne vide^r humanis argumentis illud probare, ex Evangelio profero certu
document^.

We answer to the assumption two things: First, it cannot be proved, that
un^vers^lly there were such Diocesan bishops as ours. For in the Apostles times
it cannot be proved, that Churches which they planted were divided into a
mother Church, and some Parochial Churches. Now while they governed together
in common with Presbyters, and that but one congregation, they could not be
like our Diocesan bishops. And though there be doubtful relations, that Rome
was divided under Evaristus, yet this was not common through the Church. For
Tripa^tit^ story test^fieth, that till the time of Sozomeh, they did in some
parts continue together. Trip. hist. lib. 5. cap. 19. Secondly, those Bishops
which had no more but one Deacon ^o help them in their ministry toward their
Churches, they could not be D^ocesan Bishops. But such in many parts the
Apostles planted, as Epiphanius does testify. Ergo. Thirdly, such Countries as
did use to have bishops in villages and little towns, could not have Diocesan
bishops. But such there were after the Apostles times in Cyprus and Arabia, as
S^zom. in his 7. book, cap. 10. testifies. Ergo. Diocesan bishops were never
so universally received. Secondly, bishops came to be common by a Council,
says Ambrose, Prospiciente Concilio. Amb. in 4. ad Ephesians. or by a D^cree p^ssing
through the world: toto orb decretum est, says Ierom ad Evag. which is to be
considered not of one Oecumeniall Council, but distributively, in that
singular Churches did in their Presbyteries decree, and that so, that one for
the most part followed another in it. This interpretative, though not
formaliter, is a general decree. But to think this was a decree of Paul's, is
too too absurd. For besides that the Scripture would not have omitted a decree
of such importance, as tended to the alteration of and consummation of the
frame of Churches begun through all the world. How could Ierom (if this decree
were the Apostles) conclude that bishops were above Presbyters magii
consuetudine Ecclesia, then Dominicae dispositionis veritate. If the Doct. do
except, that custom is here put for Apostolical institution; let him put in
one for the other, and see how well it will become the sense. Let Bishops know
they are greater the^ Priests rather by the Decree of the Apostle, then by the
truth of Christ's disposition. Is it not fine, that the Apostles should be
brought in as opposites, facing Christ their Lord? And this conclusion of Ierom
does make me th^nke that decretum est imported no more, then that it was took
up in time for custom through the world. Which is elegantly said to be a
decree, because custom grows in time to obtain vim legis, the force of a
decree. But Amb^ose his place is plain, Prospiciente Concilio, he means not a
council held by Apostles. For he makes this provision by council to have
come in when now in Egypt and Alexandria, Presbyters according to the custom
of that Church, were not found fit to succeed each other, but they chose out of
their presbyteries men of best desert. Now to Heraclas and Donysius, there were
a succession of Presbyters in the Church of Alexandria, as Eusebius and Ierom
both affirm. Wherefore briefly, seeing no such universal custom can be
proved, all the godly ^athers never conspired to abolish Christ's institution.
Secondly, could a custom have prevailed with all of them, whom we have to
Constantines time, yet it might enter and steal upon them through humane
frailty, as these errors in doctrine did upon many otherwise godly and
fa^thfull Martyrs: the rather because the alteration was so little at the first
and Aristocraticall government was still continued. Thirdly, say, they had
wittingly and wittingly done it through the world, they had not conspired,
because they might have deemed such power in the Church, and themselves to do
nothing but what they might with Christ's good liking for the edification of it.
How many of the chief Patrons of this cause, are at this day of this
judgment, that if it were but an Apostolical institution, as Apostolical is
contradistinguished to divine, they might change it. But if the Apostles did
enact this order, as Legates and Ambassadors of Christ, then is it not theirs,
but Christ's own institution. What an Ambassador speaks as an Ambassador,
it is principally from him that sent him: but if they who were Legates, d^d
not, bearing the person of Legates, but of ordinary Ecclesiastical governors,
decree this; then it is certain, Church governors may alter it without
treasonable conspiring against Christ.

As for those proofs, that Bishops have been throughout all Ch^rches from the
beginning they are weak. For first, the Council of Nice uses (...), not
simpliciter, but secundum quid, in order h^pply to that time wherein the
custom began, which was better known to them then to us: the phrase is so
used, Act. 15.8. in respect of some things which had not continued many years.
They cannot mean the Apostles times, for then Metropolitans should have
actually been from the Apostles time. Secondly, the phrase of the Council of
Ephesus, is likewise aequivocall; for they have reference to the fathers of
Nice, or at least the decrees of the fathers, who went before the Council of
Nice. For those words being added, definitiones Nicenae fidei, seem to
explain the former, Canones Apostolorum. It is plain the decree of the
Council does asc^ibe this thing only to ancient custom, no less th^n that
of Nice, Constantinople and Chalcedon; and therefore cannot rise to the
au^ho^ity of sacred Scriptures. Let him show in all antiquity where sacred
Scriptures are called Canons of the Apostles. Finally, if this phrase note
rules given by the Apostles, then the Apostles themselves did set out the
bounds of Cyprus and Antioch. As for the auth^rity of Cyprian, he does testify
what was Communiter in his time, Bishops odained in cities; not univers^liter,
as if th^re were no city but had some. Second^y, he speaks of Bish^ps who
had their Chu^ches included in Cities, not more then might meet together in
one, to any common del^berations. They had no D^ocesan Churches, n^r were
bishops who had majority of rule over their Presbyters, nor sole power of
ordination. As for the Catalogue of succession, it is pompae ap^ior quam
pugnae; R^me can recite their successors. But because it has h^d bishops.
Er^o, Oecumenicall bishops is no consequence. All who are named bishops in the
Catalogue, were not of one cut, and in that sense we con^rovert.

Touching that which does improve their being constituted by any Council, it
is very we^ke. For though we read of no general Council, yet there might be,
and the report not come to us. Second^y, we have showed, that the Council of
Nice does not prove this that bishops were every where from the beginning; the
phrase of from the beginning, being there respectively, not absolutely used.
Neither does Ierom ever contrary this: for he does not use those words in
propire^y, but by way of allusion; otherwise if he did think the Apostle had
published this decree, when the first to the Corinths was written, how can he
cite testimonies long after written, to prove that Bishops were not instituted
in the Apostles time, but that they were ordained by the Church jure
Ecclesiastico, when the time served for it.

The sixth Argument.
Such as even at this day are in the reformed Churches, such Ministers are of
Christ's institution. But Ministers having singularity of pre-eminence and
power above others, are amongst them, as the Superintendents in Germany, Ergo.
Answ. The assumption is utterly denied. For Superintendents in Germany are
nothing like our Bishops: they are of the same degree with other Ministers,
they are only Presi^ents while the Synod lasts; when it is diss^lved, their
prerogative cease^h: they have no prerogative over their fellow Ministers; they
are subject to the Presbyteries, Zepp. lib. 2 cap. 10. page 324. The Synod
ended, they return to the care of their particular Churches.

The seventh Argument.
If it were necessary that while the Apostles lived, there should be such
Ministers as had pre-eminence and majority of power above others, much more
after their departure. But they thought it necessity, and therefore appointed
Timothy and Titus, and other Apostoli^ke men furnished with such power. Ergo,
much more after their departure. Answ. The assumption is denied, and formerly
disproved: for they appointed no such Apostolic men with Episcopal power, in
which they should be succeeded.

The eighth Argument.
Such Ministers as were in the Apostles times not contradicted by them, were
lawful. For they would not have held their peace, had they known unlawful
Ministers to have crept into the Churches.

But there were before John's death in many Churches a succession of Diocesan
Bishops, as in Rome, Linus, Clemens, at J^rusalem James Simeon, at A^tioch,
Evodius, at Alexandria, S. Ma^k, Anianus, Abilius. Ergo, Diocesan Bishops be
lawful.

Answer. The assumption is denied: for these Bishops were but Presbyters,
Pastors of one congregation ordinarily meeting, governing with common consent
of their Presbyteries. If they were affecting our bishops majority, they were
in Diotrophes sufficiently contradicted.

The ninth Argument.
Those who have been ever held of a higher order then Presbyters, they are
before Presbyters in pre-eminence, and majority of rule. But bishops have been
held in a higher order by all antiquity. Ergo. The assumption is manifest: In
the Council of Nice, Ancyra, Sardica, Antioch, Ministers are distinguished
into three orders. Ignatius, Clemens in his Epistle to James, Dionys. Arcop^g.
de Coolest. Hierom. cap. 5. Tertull. de fug^ in persecutione, and de Baptismo.
Ignatius does often testify it. No wonder, when the Scripture it self does
call one of these a step to another, 1 Timoth. 3.13. Cyprian. Lib. 4. Ep. 2.
Counc. Ephesians. Cap. 1.2.6. Yea the Council of Chalcedon counts it sacrilege,
to reduce a Bishop to the degree of a Presbyter. This Hierome himself
confirms, saying: That from Mark to Heracl^s and Dionysius, the Presbyters
did see a bishop over them in higher degree.

Answer.
The Proposition is not true in regard of majority of rule. For no Apostle had
such power over the meanest Deacon in any of the Churches. But to the
Assumption we answer by distinction.

An order is reputed higher, either because intrinsecally it has a higher
virtue, or because it has a higher degree of dignity and honor. Now we deny
that ever antiquity did take the bishop above his Presbyters to be in a higher
order then a Presbyter, further then a higher order does signify an order of
higher dignity and honor, (...) or (...), as the Council of Sardica speaks.
Which is further proved: because the fathers did not hold a bishop to differ
from a Presbyter, as Presbyter from a Deacon. For these differ genere proximo;
Noverint Diaconi se ad ministerium non ad sacerdotum voca^i. But a bishop
differs from a Presbyter, as from one who has the power of Priesthood no
less then himself, and therefore the difference betwixt th^se, must be
circumstantially, not so essential as betwixt the other. Thus bishops and
Archbishops are diverse ord^rs of bishops, not that one exceeds the other, as
a power of higher virtue, but of higher dignity then then the other. More
plainly; There may be a fourefold difference in gradu. 1. in potestate graaus.
2. in Exercito. 3. in Dignitate. 4. in amplitudi^e Iurisdictionis. The first
difference is not between a bishop and a Presbyter, according to the common
tenent of antiquity, or the School, but only is maintained by such as hold the
Character of a Priest and Bishop inwardly, diverse one from the other. For as a
bishop differs not in power and degree from an Archbishop, because nothing an
Archbishop can do, as confirming, consecrating Bishops, etc. but a bishop can
do also. So neither does a Presbyter from a bishop. Object. But the Priest
cannot ordain a Presbyter, and confirm as the bishop does, and therefore
differs Potestate gradus. To this I answer, that these authors mean not
th^s difference in power ( de fundamentali and rem ta potestate, sed ampliata,
immediata, and jam actu hor um effictuam productiva) as if Presbyters had not a
remote and fundamental power to do those things: but that they have not,
before they be ordained bishops, their power so enlarged, as to produce th^se
effects actually. As a boy has a generative faculty wh^le he is a child, which
he has when he is a man, but yet it is not in a child free from all
impediment, that it can actually beget the like. But this is too much to grant.
For the power sacramental in the Priest, is an actual power which he is able
to perform and execute, nothing defective in regard of them, further then they
be withheld from the exercise of it. For that cause which stands in complete
actuality to greater and more noble effects, has an inferior and lesser of the
same kind under it also, unless the application of the matter be intercepted.
Thus a Presbyter he has a sacramental power standing in full actuality to
higher sacramental actions, and therefore cannot but have these inferior of
confirmation and orders in h^s power, further then they are excepted and kept
from being applied to him. And therefore power sacramental cannot be in a
Presbyter, as the generative faculty is in a child, for this is inchoate only,
and imperfect, such as cannot produce that effect. The power of the Priest is
complete. Secondly, I say, these are no sacramental actions. Thirdly, were
they, yet as much may be said to prove an Archbishop a distinct order from a
bishop, as to prove a Presbyter and bishop differing in order. For it is proper
to him out of power to generate a bishop, other bishops laying on hands, no
otherwise then Presbyters are said to do, where they join with their bishops.
If that rule stand not major ad minori, nor yet equalie ab equal, I marvel how
bishops can beget bishops equal, yea superior to them, as in consecrating the
Lord Archbishop, and yet a Presbyter may not ordain a Presbyter. It does not
stand with their Episcopal majority, that the rule ( every one may give that
which he has) should hold here in the exercise of their power. Those who are
in one order may differ jure divino or humans. Aaron differed from the Priests
not in power sacramental, for they might all offer incense, and make
intercession. But the solemn intercession in the holy of holies God did except
and appropriate to the high Priest the type of Christ. Priests would have
reached to this power of intercession in the holy place, or any act of like
kind: but that God did not permit that this should come under them, or they
intermeddle in it. Thus by humane law the bishop is greater in exercise then
the Priest. For though God has not excepted any thing from the one free to the
other, yet commonly confi^mation, ordination, absolution by imposi^g hands in
receiving Penitents, consecrating Churches and Virines, have been referred to
the bishop for the honor of Priesthood, rather then any necessity of law, as
Ierom speaks. Finally, in dignity, those may differ many ways, who in degree
are equal, which is granted by our adversaries in this cause. Yea, they say in
amplitude of jurisdiction, as in which it is apparent an Archbishop exceeds
another. But were it manifest that God did give bishops Pastoral power through
their Diocese, and an Archbishop through his Province, though but when he
visits, this would make one differ in order from the other; as in this regard
Evangelists deffered from ordinary Pastors. But that jurisdiction is in one
more then another, is not established, nor has apparency in any Scripture.

To the proofs thereof I answer briefly: the one may be a step to the other,
while they differ in degrees of dignities, though essentially they are but one
and the same order. In this regard it may be sacrilege to reduce one, from the
greater to the lesser, if he have not deserved it. As for that of Ierom it is
most plain, he did mean no further order, but only in respect of some
dignities wherewith they invested their bishop, or first Prebyter, as that they
did mount him up in a higher seat, the rest sitting lower about him, and gave
him this pre-eminence to sit first as a Consul in the Senate, and moderate the
carriage of things amongst them: this Celfiori gradu, being nothing but his
honorable (...), not importing sole authority. For by a Canon of Council of
Laodicea, we find that the bishop h^d this privilege to sit first, though
Presbyters did together with him enter, and sit as Judges of equal commission.
For though Deacons stood, Presbyters did always sit incircuitu Episcopi.

10. Argument.
If bishops be that which Aaron, and the Apostles were, and Presbyters, be that
which the Priests, and the 72. Disciples were, then the one are above the other
in pre-eminence and power. But they are so. See Ierom to Nepotian. Ergo.

Answer.
If bishops, etc. and P^esbyters, be that which the sons of Aaron and the 72.
were, then there are different orders, etc. To these may be added a third. That
which Moses and the 70. Seniors were, that are the bishops and Presbyters.
First, for the proposition it is not true, for first of Aaron and his sons,
they were not orders different essenally in their power, but only in degree of
dignity, wherein the high Priest was above others. For every Priests power
would have reached to that act which was reserved to the high Priest one^y.
Besides, when the high Priest was deceased or removed, the other Priests did
consecrate the successor, as Sadock. Finally, the one had for substance the
same consecration that the other, neither had the high Priest any majority of
directive or corrective power over others. So the Apostles, and 72. will not be
found different in order; and therefore those who resemble these cannot be
concluded to be of diverse orders. For the Apostles and 72. differ no more then
ordinary messengers who are impolyed in a set course, and extraordinary sent by
occasion only: They were both messengers, the Apostles babitu and abidingly,
the other in act only, and after a transitory manner.

Again, had Aaron and his sons been diverse orders, differing essentially in
the inward power of them, ye^ is not the proposition true, but with addition in
this wife. Those who are indentically and formally that which Aaron and the
Apostles were, and that which his sons, and the 72. were, they differ in
degree essentially, not those who were this analogically by reason of some
imperfect resemblance. For things may be said to be those things wherewith they
have but imperfect similitude. In this sense only the proposition is true.

Now to come to the assumption. First, touching Aaron, we deny any bishop is
as Aaron by divine institution, or by perfect similitude answering to him. But
because Aaron was the first and high Priest, others inferior: so it has
pleased the Church to imitate this policy, and make the bishop, as it were
Primum Presbyterum or Antistuem in primo ordine, Presbyters in secundo. Whence
Bishops may be said to be that which Aaron was through the Churches ordination,
which she framed, looking to this pattern of government which God himself had
set out in the old Testament. The fathers call them Aaron and his sons only
for some conmon analogy, which through the ordinance of the Church arose
betwixt the bishops and Presbyters, and them; and conceive them to be so by
humane accommodation, not by divine institution. But that they were so properly
succeeding them as orders of Ministry typified by them by Gods own
appointment, this the fathers never tho^ght. Christ's priesthood, no man's, was
properly typified in Aaron.

So touching the other part of the assumption, That Bishops and Presbyters are
what Apostles, and the 72 were. The fathers many of them insist in this
proportion, that as the Apostles and 72 were teachers, the one in a higher, the
other in an inferior order, so bishops and Presbyters, were by the Churches
ordinance. This is the fathers phrase, to call them Apostles, who in any manner
resemble the Apostles to call them, as Ambrose. Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors,
Doctors, who resemble these, and come in some common analogy nearest them,
Moses and the 70 Seniors, who in any sort resembled them. Now the assumption
granted in this sense makes not against us. For they might be said these, if
there were but diverse degrees of dignity amongst them, though for power of
order by Gods institution they were all one. But some strain it further, and
take it, that Christ instituting those two orders, did in so doing, institute
Bishops and Presbyters, the one whereof succeeded the Apostles, the other the
72. and that thus the Fathers take it. To which I answer, First, in general,
this analogy of Apostles and 72: is not generally affected by them all.
Ignatius ad Smyrnenses dicit Apostolis Presbyteros successisse, Diaconos 72.
discipulis. Clem. lib. 2. Constable. cap. 30. says, That Bishops answer to God the
Father, Presbyters to Christ, Deacons to the Apostles. Ierom does manifestly
make Presbyters (whom he also calls by name of Bishops in that Epistle,
where he maintains the Presbyters dignity) successors to the Apostles. The
like has Cyprian, Apostolus id est Episcopos and preposiros, that is, ordinis
ratione prepositos minorum Ecclesiarum, as Austin speaks, else it should be
all one with the former; when he makes the Presby^er as well as the Bishop to
be ordained in the Apostles. Finally, these Fathers who take the 72. to have
been Apostles, as well as the other, could not imagine this porportion of
diverse orders let up in them. Secondly, if Christ in these instituted those
other, it must be one of these ways. First, he did make these not only
Apostles, but Bishops, and so the 72. not only his messengers for the time,
but Presbyters also. Or, secondly, else he did ordain these as he did rain
Nanna, noting and prefiguring as by a type, a further thing which he would
work: viz. that he would institute Bishops and Presbyters for Teachers
ordinary in his Church: but both these are gratis spoken without any foundation
or reason. For the first, we have showed that the Apostles could not be
Bishops ordinarily; nor yet the calling of these seventy two (which was to go
through all Cities Evangelizing) stand with Presbyters, Presbyters being given
to Churches (...), and there fixed. Neither can the latter be true for then
Christ should have given a Sacrament, when he ordained his Apostles, and sent
forth his 72. Secondly, the type or the shadow i^ less then the thing
^ypified, the substance of it. But the giving Apostles was a greater thing then
giving ordinary Pastors. Ergo. Thir^ly, I say, that Christ did never ordain
that any should succeed the Apostles, or the 72 in regard of their order. There
is a double succession, in g^adum, or in Capat, as the j^rists distinguish. In
gradum tundem, as when one brother dying, another brother does succeed him in
the inheritance. In Caput, as when one not of the same degree and line does
come after another, as when a brother dying another does inherit after him, not
a brother, but a cousin to him. Thus the Apostles have no successors succeeding
them in gradum, but such only as follow them, being of other degrees, and in
another line, as it were, in which sort every Pastor does succeed them. But
then they are said to succeed them, because they follow them, and after a sort
resemble them, not because they hold the places which the Apostles did
properly. Apostolo in quantum est Apostolus non succeditur, Legato quitenus est
Legatus non succeditur. Fourthly, that the Presbyters do as persons of a
diverse order succeed the Apostles n^ less^ fully then any other. First, they
must needs succeed the^ who are spoken to in them, whose duties are laid down
in that which the Apostles received in commandment, But the Presbyters were
spoken to both in the Keys, in the Supper, in the commandment of teaching and
baptiz^ng. Ergo, Presbyte^s must needs succeed the Apostles. Secondly, those
whom the Apostles did institute in the Chu^ches, which they had planted for
the^r fu^ther building them up, they were their next successors. But the
Apostles did commend the Churches to the care of Presbyters who might build
them up, whom they had now converted. Ergo, t^^se were their successors most
proper and immediate. Thirdly, t^ese to whom now t^king their farewells they
resigned the Churches, these were their succ^ssours. But this they did to
Presbyters, Paul now never to s^e Ephesus more, Act. 20. Peter near death, 1
Pet. 5.2. Er^o. Fourthly, if one Pastor or Minister do more prop^rly resemble
an Apostle then another, it is because he has same power Apostolic more
fully conveyed to him then to another. But this was not done. Ergo. The
assumption is manifest: for first, their power of teach^^g and ministering the
Sacraments does ^s fully and prop^rly belong to the Presbyter as to any,
unless we count P^eaching not nec^issarily c^nnex^d to a Presbyters office,
but a bishop^; or at least that a more iudgmentall preaching belongs (...)
Presbyter, the more full and exact teaching being appropriate to the Bishop,
which are both too absurd. Secondly, for government, the Apostles did no more
give the power of government to one then to another. Object. This is denied,
for the Apostles are said to have kept the power of ordination, and the
coercive power in their own hands, and to have committed these in the end
only to Apostolic men, as Timothy, Titus, who were their successors,
succeeding them in it. Answ. A notable fiction: for it is most plain by
Scripture; that ordination, power of deciding controversies, excommunication,
were given to Presbyters, and not kept up from them; they should otherwise have
provided ill for the Churches which they left to their care. Secondly, if the
Apostles did commit some ordinary power of government to some men above others,
in which regard they should be their successors, then the Apostles did not
only enjoy as Legates power over the Churches, but as ordinary Ministers. For
what power they enjoyed as Legates, this they could not aliis Legar^. Power as
ordinary Pastors in any Nations or Churches they never reserved, and therefore
did never substitute others to themselves in that which they never exercised
nor enjoyed. And it is to be noted, that this opinion of Episcopal succession
from the Apostles is grounded on this, that the Apostles were not only
Apostles, but Bishops in Provinces and particular Churches. For the Papists
themselves urged with this, that the Apostles have none succeeding them, they
do consider a double respect in the Apostles, the one of Legates, so Peter,
nor any other could have a successor. The other of bishops, Oecumenicall in
Peter, of Bishops National or Diocesan, as in some other. Thus only
considered, they grant them to have other Bishops succeeding them: For the
Apostolic power precisely considered, was Privilegium personale simul cum
persona extinctum. Now we have proved that this ground is false, and therefore
that succeeding the Apostles, more appropriate to Bishops then other Ministers
grounded upon it, is false also.

Lastly, the Presbyters cannot be said successors of the seventy two. For
first, in all that is spoken to the seventy two, the full duty and office of a
Presbyter is not laid down. Secondly, it does not appear that they had any
ordinary power of preaching or baptizing and ministering the other Sacrament.
For they are sent to Evangelize, to preach the Gospel: but whether from power
of ordinary office, or from commission and delegation only for this present
occasion it is doubtful. Thirdly, it is not read that they ever baptized, or
had the power of administering the Supper given to them: Yea, that they had
neither ministry of Word or Sacraments ex officio ordinario, seems hence
plain; That the Apostles did choose them to the Deacons care, which was so
cumbersome that themselves could not tend the ministry of the Word with it,
much less then could these not having such extraordinary gifts as the Apostles
had. Fourthly, if they were set Ministers, then were they Evangelists in
destination. For the act enjoined them, is from City to City, without
limitation to Evangel^ze; and after we read of some, as Philip, that he was an
Evangelist; the same is in ecclesiastical story testified of some others. Thus
w^ Presbyters should succeed Evangelists those Apostolic men, whom the
Apostles constituted Bishops, and by consequence be the true successors of the
Apostles. These Evangelists succeeded them by all grant, we succeed these.
Finally, Armathanus does take these 72. to have been ordinary disciples, in his
7. Book Armenic^r^m quaest. cap. 7.

11 Argument.
Those who receive a new ordination are in a higher degree in a new
administration, and a new order. But Bishops do so. Ergo.

Answer.
The proposition is denied: for it is sufficient to a new ordination that they
are called to exercise the Pastoral function in a new Church, where before
they had nothing to do. Secondly, I answer by distinction, a new order, by
reason of new degrees of dignity, this may be granted: but that therefore it is
a new order, that is, having further ministerial power in regard of the
Sacraments and jurisdiction given it of God, is not true. Has not an
Archbishop a distinct ordination or consecration from a Bishop? yet is he not
of any order, essentially differing. The truth is, ordination, if it be looked
into, is but a canonical solemnity which does not collate that power
Episcopal to the now chosen, but only more solemnly and orderly promotes him
to the exercise of it.

12 Argument.
Those Ministers where of there may be but one only during life in a Church,
they are in singularity of pre-eminence above others. But there may be but one
Bishop, though there may be many other Presbyters, one Timothy, one Titus, one
Archippus, one E^aphroditus. Ergo. For proof of the assumption. See Cornelius,
as Eusebius relates his sentence, lib. 6. cap. 43. Con^. Nice. cap 8. Conc.
Calud. cap 4. P^ssidonius in vita Augustine. Ierem^ Phil. 1. ver. 1. Chrysostom.
Amb. T^eo^ Orc^umen. And such was Bishops pre-eminence, that Presbyters,
Deacons, and other Clerks, are said to be the Bishops Clerks.

Answer.
I answer to the Assumption. That there may be said to be but one Bishop in
order to other Coadjutors and Associates within the same Church. It may be
said, there must be but one Bishop in order to all the other Churches of the
Cities. Secondly, this may be affirmed as standing by Canon, or as div^n^
institution. Now the assumpt^on is true, only by Law Ecclesiastical. For the
Scripture is said to have placed Presbyters who did Superintendere, Act^ 20.
and that there were Bishops at Philippi. True it is, the Scripture does not
distinguish how many of the one sort, nor how many of the other, because no
doubt for the number of the Congregations, a single Presbyter laboring in the
Word, or two, the one coadjutor to the other might be placed. Secondly, it is
testified by Epiphanius, that ordinar^ly all Cities but Alexandria had two.
Thirdly, Ierom on 1 Timothy 3. does say, that now indeed there may be but one
Bishop, meaning Canonically, making a difference twixt the present time and
time Apostolic. Fourthly, Austin did not know it was unlawful* Yea, he did
only in regard of the decree of Nice, account it so. Ep. 110. neither did
Church or people ever except against the contra^y, but as a point against
Canon, which might in some cases be dispensed with, as the story of Narcissus,
and Alexander, and Liberius, and Foelix did more then manifest. For though the
people of Rome cried out, one God, one Christ, one Bishop, yet they yielded at
their Emperors suite, whereas had it been a thing they had all thought to
have been against Christ's institution, they would not have done. Vide S^z. lib.
4. cap. 14. Fifthly, Ieroms peerless power, is nothing but Consul-like
presidence above others; for this he pleaded for, writing against Iovinian,
lib. 1. amongst the Apostles themselves, that schism might be avoided.
Wherefore we yield the conclusion in this sense, that the Bishop jure humano,
has a singularity of pre-eminence before others, as by Ecclesiastical law
there might be but one only Archbishop.

13 Argument.
Those who had peerless power above others in ordination and jurisdiction,
they were such as had pre-eminence and majority of rule over others. But the
former is due to Bishops. Unless this singularity of power were yielded, there
would be as many schisms as Priests. Ergo. The assumption proved. Those who
have a peculiar power of o^dination above others, they are in pre-eminence and
power before others. But Bishops have, Ergo, they are in, etc. The assumption
proved. That which was not in the Presbyters of Ephesus and Crete before
Timothy and Titus were sent, but in the Apostles, and after in Timothy and
Titus and their successors, that is a peculiar of Bishops. But ordination was
not in the Presbyters, etc. Ergo. The assumption proved. That which these were
sent to do^, Presbyters had not power to do. It was therefore in them, and
such as succeeded them, the Bishops of Ephesus and Crete* Again, the
Scriptures, Councels, Fathers, speak of the orde^ nor as one. Ergo, it was the
peculiar right of the Bishop, and the Bishop only. He only by Canon was
punishable for irregularity in ordination. And Epiphanius makes this the
proper power of a Bishop to beget f^thers by ordination, a^ the Presbyters does
sons by baptism. And Ierom does except ordination as the bishops peculiar,
wherein he is most unequal to them.

Answer.
I answer the proposition of the first syllog^sme by distinction. Those who
have peerless power in regard of the simple right to ordeine: viz. in regard
of exercising the act, and sole performing the rite of it, those who have a
right to these things originally from Christ and his Apostles, which no others
have, they are above others in degree. Again, peerless power in a bish^p
over Presbyters may be said in comparison to them distributively or
collectively considered. He that has peerless power given him, which no one
of the other has, is not presently of a greater degree, nor has not majority
of rule amongst others, as a Consul in the Senate: but if he have a peerel^^^e
power, such as they all collectively considered, cannot control, then the
Proposition is true; but the Assumption will then be found to halt.

To the proof of the assumption. The Proposition is true of power in order to
the thing it self, not to ministering the rite, and executing the act, which
may be reserved for honor sake to one, by those who otherwise have equal
power with him. Tha^ bishops have this power in order, the thing it self
agreeing to them, Vt proprii offuii, not by commission from others, we deny.
The assumption is wholly denied. As for the proof of it. First, we that deny
that Evangelists h^d not power to ordeine, as well as Apostles. Secondly, that
Presbyters had not this power in a Church planted as well as they. Every one as
fellow servants might conspire in the same ordination. The Ev^ngelists power
did not derogate from the Apostles, the Pre^byters from neither of them. But
power of imposing hands solitarily, whereas (...) Churches were not
constituted, this may happily be appropriated to the Apostles and Evangelists,
whose office it was to labor in erecting the frame of Churches. Secondly, the
assumption is false; in denying that it was in the power of Presbyters to lay
on hands, contrary to that in Timothy; The grace given thee by ^aying (...) of
the hands of the Presbytery. Thirdly, it is false, in presupposing others then
Presbyters to have been Timothy and Titus their successors. To the proof of
this assumption. The proposition is not true: For it might be convenient that
the same thing should be done by Evangelists, and by ordinary Pastors, each
concurring in their several orders to the same service of Christ the Lord.
Secondly, I answer to the assumption. That Presbyters were to be placed in
Churches framed where there were Presbyters, or where there were as yet none.
In the first Churcher' they are bid ordain, if any need further, but salv^
j^re Ecclesiae, not without the concurrence of others. In the latter Churches
which were to be constituted, they may be conceived as Evangelists, with sole
power of setting Presbyters forth by this rite of imposition of hands. We hold
Apostles might do it, Evangelists might, and the Presbyteries also. Yea,
Presbyters in Alexandria when now their first Presbyter was d^ceased, did
ordain the following: For the Canon of three bishops, and Metropolitans, added
by the Ni^ene Council, was not known yet. Nevertheless it grew timely to be
restrained to bishops, the performing I mean of the outward rite and sign;
but only by Canon, as Consignation was also, for which there is as ancient
testimonies as this, that it was appropriate to the B^sh. We grant therefore
that antiquity does sometime speak of the ordainer as one. In the Churches of
Africa one did not lay on hands, yet in some other Churches the rite was by
one administered. And it is to be noted by the way, that (...) in some Canons is
not opposed to the Coordaining of Presbyters, but to the number of Three, or
many bishops required in the ordination of a bishop. They might therefore by
their Canons be punishable, because regularly and canonically the executing of
it was committed to them. This is all that Epiphanius or Jerome excepta
ordinatione can prove. But these two conclusions we would see proved out of
scriptures and Fathers. First, that ordination is an action of power, of order,
a power sacramental, which a Presbyter has not. Secondly, that by virtue of
this power, the bishop does ordain, and not by Ecclesiastical right or
commission from the Church. Certainly, the act of promoting a minister of the
Church, is rather an act of jurisdiction then order. As it belongs to policy
and government, to call new Magistrates, where they are wanting. Object. But a
new spiritual officer may be instituted by a sacrament. Answ. If God would so
have collated the grace of spiritual callings; but he has appointed no such
thing. The Apostles and 72. were not instituted by a sacrament or imposition of
Christ's hands. Now the greater the grace was which was given, the more need of
a sacrament whereby it should be given. Object. They were extraordinary. Answ.
They might have had some ambulatory sacrament for the time. Again, imposition
of hands was used in g^ving extraordinary graces, Acts 8. Secondly, were it a
sacrament, it should confer the grace of office, as well as grace sanctifying
the person to use it hol^ly. But we see that this it could not do As for Paul
and Barn^bas the Church did separate them at the command of God, and lay hands
on them, and pray for them, but they were already before this, immediately
chosen by God to the grace of their office. It could be nothing then but a
gesture accompanied with prayer, seeking grace in their behalf. For the
sacramental collating of grace sanctifying all callings, we have in these two
sacraments of Christ's institution. Thirdly, there are many kinds of imposition
of hands in the old and new Testament, yet cannot it be proved, that it is any
where a proper sacrament. It is then a rite, a gesture, a ceremony, signifying
a thing or person separate, presented to God, prayed for to God. Thus Antiquity
did think of it, as a gesture of one, by prayer to God, seeking a blessing on
every one chosen to this or that place of ministry. So Ecclesiastically it was
used in baptising, in consecrating, in reconciling penitents, as well as
ordaining: but never granted as a sacrament in those other cases by grant of
all. It is then a rite or gesture of one, praying. Tertul. de ^^pt. shows
this saying, Manus imponitur per benedictionem advocans and invitans spiritum
sanctum. Ierom also contra Luciferanos, Non ab^no, hanc esse Ecclesiae
consuetudinem ut Episcopus manum impositutus excurrat ad invecationem spiritus
sancti. Ambr. de d^gait. sacerdot. ^^^^dos imponit suppicem dexiram. August.
Quid aliua est manus impositio quam oration? etc. The Greek Churches have ever
given Orders by a form of prayer conceived, with imposition of hands. Hence it
is, that they imposed hands even on Deaconesses, where it could not be
otherwise considered then a deprecative gesture. Neither is it like the African
Fathers ever thought it a sacrament, which no other had virtue and power to
minister, but the Bishop. For then they would never have admitted Presbyters to
use the same rite with them. For so they had suffered them to profane a
sacrament, wherein they had no power to intermeddle. Object. If one say they
did lay on hands with them, but the Bishops imposition was properly
Consecrative and sacramental, th^i^ Dep^^rative only. Answer. Besides that
this is spoken without foundation, how absurd is it, that the very selfsame
sacramental r^te should be a sacrament in one ministers hand, and no sacrament
performed by another: Yea, when the Bishop does it to a Presbyter, or Deacon,
then a sacrament; when to a Subdeacon, and other inferior officers, then none,
let any judge. Austin did account no other of imposition of hands, then a
prayer over a man, accompanied with that gesture. Secondly, they do not think
that the Bishop ordains by divine right, it being excepted to him as a
minister of higher sacramental power: but that he only does ordain quoad
signum and ritu^^ extrinsecum, by the Churches commission, though the right of
ordaining be in all the Presbytery also. As in a College the society have
right to choose a fellow, and to ordain him also, though the master does alone
lay on hands, and give admission. Thus Ierom speaks of confirmation, that it
was reserved to the Bishop for honor sake, rather then any necessity of Gods
law. Whence by analogy and proportion, it follows they think not
ordination, or those other Episcopal royalties to have been reserved to him
by divine right. Beside, there are more ancient proofs for C^nonicall
appropriating confirmation, then for this imposition of hands. Corn^^tus
speaks thus of Novatus, he wanted th^se things which he should have had after
Baptism, according to the Canon, the sealing of our Lord from a Bishop, Eusebius.
Lib. 6. cap. 25. So Cyprian to ^ul. Nevertheless, Ier^m judges this also to
have been yielded them for honor sake. And we know that in the Bishops
absence, Presbyters through the East did Consignare, through Grecia, through
Armenia. Neither would Gregory the great have allowed Presbyters in the Greek
Churches to have confirmed, had he judged it otherwise then Canonically to
belong to the bishops. T^^t therefore which is not properly a sacramental
action, and that which is not appropriate to a bishop further then Presbyters
h^ve committed it to him, that cannot make him in higher degree of ministry
then Presbyters are.

Thirdly, in reconciling penitents; the Presbyters did it in case of the
bishops absence: as is to be gathered from the third Council of Cartiage, 32.
And who thinks blessing so appropriate to a bishop, that Presbyters may not
solemnly bless in the name of the Lord, though antiquity reserved this to him.
These therefore were kept to him, not as acts exceeding the Presbyters power of
order, but for the supposed honor of him and the Church. For as Am^rosa says,
Vt omnes ea^em possunt irrational^, and vulgaris res. vilisque vider^^^r; It
pleases antiquity therefore to set up one who should quo^d ex^^^tiam do many
things alone, not because that Presbyters could not, but it seemed in their
eyes more to the honor of the Church, that some one should be interes^ed in
them.

Fourthly, Amalarius in a certain book of sacred orders, does confu^e the
doctrine of an uncertain author, who taught that one bishop only was to lay
hands on a Deacon: because he was consecrated not to Priesthood, but to
ministry and service. Nunquid scriptor libell. ^^ctio^ and sanctior Apostolis
quiposuerunt plures manus super Diaconos quando consecr^bantur, and prop^^^ea
solus Episcopus manus ponat super Di^conum, ^c si solus possit precari virtutem
gratiarum quam plures Apostoli precabantur. Op imum est b^nos duces sequi, qui
certaverunt usque ad plenam victori^^* Whence it is plain, he did know no
further thing in imposition then prayer, which the more imposed, is the more
for^ible.

The fourteenth Argument.
Those who had jurisdiction over Presbyters assisting them, and Presbyters
affixed to Cures, they had a superiority of power over other ministers. But
bishops had so, Ergo, etc.

The Assumption is manifest. Ignatius describes the Bishop from this, that he
should be the governor of the Presbytery and whole Church (...). And Ierom and
Austin on the 44. Psalm, call them the Pr^nces of the Church, by whom she is
governed. The assumption is proved particularly. Those who had directive power
above others, and corrective, they had majority of rule. But Bishops had. Ergo.
The assumption proved. First, for directive power, the Presbyters were to do
nothing without them. Ig^a ad Mag. ad Smyr. They might not minister the
sacrament of the supper but under the Bishop, Clem. Epist. 1. ad Jacob. Tert.
lib. de ^^pt. Can. Apost. 38, Can. Carth^g. 4.38. Con. C^r. 2. Con. 9. Con.
Can. 16. Conc. Ant. Can. 5.

Secondly, that they had corrective power, it is proved, Ap^c. 2 and 3. The
Angel of Ephesus did not suffer false Apostles, and is commended for it, the
Angel of Thiatira is reproved for suffering the like. Therefore they had power
over other ministers. Cypr. lib. 3. Epist. 9. tells Rega^ian he had power to
have censured his Deacon. Ierom. adversus Vigilantium, marvelleth that the
Bishop where Vigilanti^s was, did not break the unprofitable vessel.
Epiphaniu^ says Bishops, governed the Presbyters themselves, they the people.
The Presbyters affixed to places and Churches, were subject to the Bishops, for
when they were vacant, the bishop did supply them. Again, the Presbyters had
their power from him, and therefore were under him, and they were subject to
the censure of the bishop. Those of his Clergy were under him; for he might
promote them, they might not go from one Diocese to another without him, nor
travel to the city, but by his leave. The bishop was their judge, and might
excommunicate them, Cypr^li. 1. Epist 3. Council. Carth. 4. ^ap. 59. Conc. Chal.
cap. 9. conc. Nice. cap. 4. conc. Ant. cap. 4. ibid. cap. 6. cap. 12. Cart. 2.
cap. 7. conc. Afric. cap. 29. conc. Ephesians. cap. 5. conc. Chal. cap. 23. The
examples of Alexander and Chrysostom prove this. All Presbyters were counted
acepheli, headless, that lived not in subjection to a bishop. The Pastors of
parishes were either subject to bishops, or they had associates in Parishes
joined with them, or they ruled alone. But they had not associates, neither did
they rule alone. Ergo, they were subject to the authority and jurisdiction of
the bishop.

Answer.
The proposition of the first Syllogism it must be thus framed. Those who had
power of jurisdiction in themselves, without the concurrence of other
Presbyters, as fellow judges, they were greater in majority of rule. Thus
bishops had not jurisdiction. True it is, they were called governors and
Princes of their Churches, because they were more eminent ministers, though
they had not Monarchiall power in Churches, but Consull-like authority: and
therefore when they affected this Monarchy, what said Jerome, Noverint se
saterdotes esse non dominos, noverint se non ad Princip^tum vocatos, ad
servitium totius Eccl^siae. Sic Origin in Esa. hom. 7.

To the proof of the Assumption. We deny that they had this directive power
over all Presbyters. Secondly, that they had it over any by humane constitution
infallible. Presbyters were in great difference. Those who are called propry
sacerdotes, Rectores, Seniores. Minor^m Ecclesiarum praepositi, the Bishop had
not, not challenged not that directive power over them, which he did ever
those who were numbered amongst his Cleri^kes, who were helps to him in the
Liturgy, in Chapells and parish^s which did depend on him as their proper
teacher, though they could not so ordinarily go out to him. The first had
power within their Churches, to teach, administer, excommunicate, were counted
brethren to the bishops, and called Episcopi, or Coepiscopi, even of the
Ancient: But the Presbyters which were part of their Clergy, they had ^his
directive power over them, the Canons Ecclesiastical allowing the same. But I
take these latter to have been but a corruption of governing Presbyters, who
came to be made a humane ministry. 1. by having singular acts permitted. 2.
by being consecrate to this, and so doing ex officio, what they were employed
in by the bishop. But sure these are but helps to liturgy, according to the
Canons. Preaching did not agree to them further then it could be delegated or
permitted. Finally, we read, that by law it was permitted them: that it was
taken away from them again by the bishops: that it was stinted and limited
sometimes as to the opening of the Lords Prayer, the Creed and ten
Commandments: as it is plain to him that is any thing conversant in the
ancient. Secondly, let us account them as Ministers of the word given by God to
h^s Church: then I say, they could not have any direction, but such as the
Apostles had amongst Evangelists: and this power is g^ven to the bishops only
by canon swerving from the first ordinance of Christ: for it makes a Minister
of the word become as a cipher, without power of his consecration, as Ierom
speaks, being so interpreted by Pilson himself. These decrees were as
justifi^ble as that which forbids any to baptize* who has not gotten
chrisme from the bishop Con. Carth. 4. cap. 36. unless the phrases do note
only a precedence of order in the bishop above Presbyters, requiring presence
and assent, as of a fellow and chief member, not otherwise.

To the proof of the second part of the former assumption, 1. we deny this
majority of corrective power to have been in the Apostles themselves: they had
only a ministry executive inflicting that which Christ's corrective power
imposed. Secondly, we deny that this ministerial power of censuring was
singularly exercised by any Apostle or Evangelist, where Churches were
constituted. Neither is the writing to one above others, an argument that he
had the power to do all alone without concurrence of others. To that of
Cyprian against R^gatian; we deny that Cyprian means he would have done it
alone, or that he and his Presbytery could have done it without the consent of
Bishops neighboring: but that he might in regular manner have been bold to
have done it, because he might be sure, quod no^ co^legae tui ^mnesid ratum
haberemus. Cyprian was of judgment, that he h^mselfe might do nothing without
the consent of his Presbyters, unless he should violate his duty, by running a
course which stood not with the honor of his brethren. It was not modesty in
him; but due observancy, such as he did owe unto his brethren. Neither did
Cyprian ever ordinarily any thing alone. He received some, the people and the
brethren contradicting, lib. 1. epist. 3. but not till he had persuaded them,
and brought them to be willing. Thou see (says he) what pains I have to
persuade the brethren to patience* So again, I hardly persuade the people, yea
even wring it from them, that such should be received. Neither did he take upon
him to ordain Presbyters alone: but propounded, made request for them,
confessing, that further then God did extraordinarily prevent both him and
them, they had the right of suffrage, no less then himself, as by these
epistles may ^ppeare, lib. 1. ^pist. 20. lib. 2. epist. 5. lib. 4. epist. 10.
Ierom (though grandil^ quen^ sometimes) did never think a Bishop could
lawfully without his Presbyteries concurrence, excommunicate. If he were as
Moses, yet he would have these as the seventy. Again, Ierom does write
expressly of all in general, Et nos sen^cum habemus, coetum Presbytero^^m, sine
quorum consilio nihil agi a quaquam licet, ^ ut Romani habuerunt sen^tum cujus
confilio cuncta gerebantur. Epiphanius s^ith. Bishops governed Presbyters: but
it does not follow, that therefore they did it alone without concurrence of
their com Presbyters. As for the fixed Presbyters, the proofs are more
uns^fficient. The Bishop supplied them, therefore they were under him. For
Colleges supply Churches, yet have they no jurisdiction over them. Secondly,
the canons did provide ne plebi invitae Presbyter obtruderetur. Thirdly, we
^iStinguish majority of rule from some jurisdiction. We grant the Bishop had
such a jurisdiction as concer^ing the Church, so far as it was in society
with others, such as an Archbishop has over a Province: but this did stand
with the Rectors power of jurisdiction within his own Church. Fourthly, though
they had power by his ministerial interposition, yet this does not prove them
dependant on him. For bishops have their power from others ordaining them, to
whom notwithstanding they are not subject in their Churches. In case of
delinquency they were subject to the bishop with the Presbytery, yet so that
they could not be proceeded against till consent of many other bishops did
ratify the sentence. Thus in Cyprians judgment; bishops themselves
delinquent, turning wolves, as Samosatenus, Liberius, etc. are subject to their
churches and Presbyteries, to be deposed and relinquished by them. As for those
that were part of his clerks, it is true, they were in greater measure subject
to him, absolutely in a manner for their direction: but for his corrective
power he could not without consent of his Presbyters and fellow bishops, do any
thing. The bishop indeed is only named many times: but it is a common
Synecdoche, familiar to the Fathers, who put the primary member of the church
for the representative church, as Austine says, Petrum propter Apostolatus
simplicitatem figuram Eccl^siae g^ssisse. See council. Sardicen. cap. 17. conc.
Carth 4. cap. 2.3. Tol. 4 cap. 4. Socr. lib. 1.3. Soz. lib. 1. cap 14. As for
such examples as Alexanders, it is strange that any will bring it, when he did
it not without a Synod of many bishops, yea without his Clergy, as sitting in
judgment with him. Ch^ysostomes fact is not to be justified: for it was
altogether irregular, savouring of the impetuous nature to which he was
inclined, though in regard of his end, and unworthiness of his Presbyters, it
may be excused, yet it is not to be imitated. As for those headless Clerks,
it m^ke^h nothing for the Bishops majority of rule over all Churches and
Presbyters in them. For first, it seems to be spoken of those that lived
under the conduct of the Bishop, a colleg^at life together, Eode refectorio and
dormitori utehantur, and Canonice viventes ab Episcopo instru^bontur. Now when
all such Clerks did live then as members of a College under a master, it is
no wonder if they be called headless, who did belong to no Bishop. Secondly,
say it were alike of all Presbyters, which will never be proved (for all
Presby^ers in the Diocese were not belonging to the Bishops Cl^rkes) say it
were, yet will it not follow, that those who were under some, were subject to
his authority of rule. For there is a head in regard of presidency of order, as
well as of power. Bishops were to find out by Canon the chief bishop of their
Province, and to associate themselves with him. So bishops do now live ranged
under their Archbish^ps as heads. Priests therefore as well as Clerks, di^
l^ve under some jurisdiction of the bishops; but such as did permit them
coer^ive power in their own Churches, such as made the bishop a head in regard
of dignity, and not of any power, whereby he might sw^y all at his pleasure.
Thirdly, if the bishops degenerate to challenge Monarchy or tyranny, it is
better to be without such heads then to have them: as we are more happy in
being withdrawn from the headship of the bishop of Rome, then if he still were
head over us. To the last insinuation proving that bishops had the government
of those Churches which Presbyters had, because neitheir Presbyters alone had
it, nor with assistents. I answer, they had as well the power of government, as
of teaching: and though they had not such assistants as are the presbyters of a
cathedral church, yet they might have some, as a deacon, or other person
sufficient in such small Churches. When the Apostles planted a bishop and
Deacon only, how did this bishop excommunicate? When the fathers of Africa did
give a bishop unto those now multiplied, who had enjoyed but a Presbyter, what
assistants did they give him? what assistants had the Chorepiscopi, who yet had
government of their Churches?

The fifteenth Argument.
That which the orthodoxe churches ever condemned as heresy, the contrary of
that is truth. But in Aerius they have condemned the denial of superiority in
one Minister above others. Ergo, the contrary is truth.

Answer.
To the proposition, we deny that it must needs be presently true, the contrary
whereof is generally condemned for heresy. As the representative catholic
Church may propound an error, so she may condemn a particular truth, and yet
remain a catholic church. To the assumption we deny that the Church
condemned in Aerius every denial of superiority, but that only which Aerius
run into. Now his opinion I take to have been this. 1. He did with Ierom deny
superiority of any kind as due by Christ's ordinance: for this opinion was
never counted heresy, it was Ieroms plainly. 2. He did not deny the fact,
that bishops were superior in their actual admistration; h^ could not be so
mad. If he had all that a bishop had actually, how could he have affected to be
a bishop, as a further honor* Denial of superiority, such as consists in a
further power of ord^r then a P^e^byter has, and in a kingly monarchical
majority of rule, this denial is not here condemned: for all the fathers may
be ^rought as witnesses against this superiorty of the Church. What then was
condemned in him? A denial of all superiority in one minister before another,
though it were but of honor and dignity: and secondly, the de^ying of this in
schismatic manner, so as to fors^k^ communion with the Church wherein it is.
For in these words, (...), it seems (...) should be read (...), that there
ought to be none. Howso^ver he is to be conceived as apposing practically the
difference of honor and dignity which was in the Church by Ecclesiastical
institut^on. What is this to us? Denial of superiority in regard of honor and
dignity, joined with schism, was condemned: Ergo, denial of superiority in
power of order and kingly majority of rule, keeping the bond of love was
condemned.

The assumption therefore if it assume not of this last denial, then can it
not conclude against us. Ergo, it is a truth that some Ministers may be above
othersome, in order, honor, and dignity. But ^h^y understand not by order such
an order only as is distinct, because some degree of dignity is appropriate to
it, which is not to other. Though th^s argument therefore touch us not, yet to
speak a little further about it, this opinion of Aerius is not to be handled
too severely: neither our authors, D. Whitakerus, D. Reynolds, Danaeus, to be
blamed, who do in some sort excuse him. For bishops were grown such that many
good persons were offended at them, as the Audiani. Yea, it was so ordinary,
that Ierom distinguishes schism from heresy, because the one contained
assertions against the faith, the other served from the Church by reason of
dissenting from Bishops. See him on Tit. 3.10. Neither is it plain that he was
an Arrian. Epiphanius reports it, but no other, though writing of this
subject and story of these times. Sure it is, Eustathius was a strong Arian,
whom Aerius did oppose. Neither is it strange to bishops to fasten on those
which dissent from them in this point of their freehold, any thing whereof
there is but ungrounded suspicion. Are not we traduced as Donatists,
Anabaptists, Puritanes? As for this opinion* they thought it rather
schismatic, then heretical: and therefore happily called it heresy, because
it included error in their understanding, which with schismatic pertinacy
was made heresy. Neither is it like that Epiphanius does otherwise count it
heresy, nor Austin following him. For thou^h Austine was aged, yet he was so
humble, that he says, Augustinus senex a puero nondum anniculo paratus sum
edoceri. Neither was it prejudice to h^s worth for to follow men more ancient
then himself, who in likelihood should know this matter also better. As for
his calling it heresy, it is certain he would not have this in rigor
streined. F^r he does protest (in his preface unto that book of heresy) that
none to his thought, can in a regular definition comprehend what that is which
makes this or that to be heresy. Though therefore he doubted not of this,
that A^rius was in error, such as Catholics should decline: yet it does not
argue that he thought this error in rigor and former propriety, to have
been heresy. Thus much for this last Argument.

On the contrary side I propound these Arguments following to be serio^sly
considered.

Argument. 1.
Those whom the Apostles placed as ^hiefe, in their first constituting of
Churches, and left as their successors in their last farewels which they gave
to the Churches, they had none s^periour to them in the Ch^rches. But they
first placed Pres^y^e^s, fee^ing with the Word and governing: and to those in
their last departings they commended the Churches. Ergo. The assumption is
denied: they did not place them, as the chief ordinary Pastors in those
churches, but placed them to teach and govern, in fore interno; with a
reference of subordination to a more eminent Pastor, which when now they were
grown to a just multitude should be given to them. The Apostles had all power
of order and jurisdiction: they give to Presbyters power of order, power to
teach, minister sacraments, and so gather together a great number of those who
were yet to be converted; but kept the coercive power in their own hands,
meaning, when now by the Presbyters labor, the churches were grown to a
greater multitude, meaning (I say) then to set over them some more eminent
Pastors, Apostolical men, to whom they would commit the power of government,
that so they might rule over both the Presbyters and their Churches; and to
these with their successors, not to the Presbyters, were the churches
recommended. All which is an audacious fiction, without any warrant of
Scripture, or show of good reason. For it is confessed that Presbyters were
placed at the first constitution, as the Pastors and teachers of the Churches.
Now if the Apostles had done this with reference to a further and more eminent
Pastor and Governor, they would have intimated somewhere this their intention:
but this they do not; yea, the contrary purpose is by them declared. For Peter
so bids his Presbyters feed their flocks, as that he does insinuate them
subject to no other but Christ, the Arch shepherd of them all. Again, the
Apostles could not make the Presbyters Pastors without power of government.
There may be governors without pastoral power; but not a Pastor without power
of governing. For the power of the Pedum, or shepherds staff, does
intrinsecally follow the Pastoral office. What likelihood is there, that those
who were set as parents to beget children, should not be trusted with power of
the rod wherewith ch^ldren now begotten are to be nurt^red and kep^ i^ awe
beseeming them? If it be said, every one sit for the office of a Teacher, was
not sit for a Governor: I answer, he that is fit to be a Pastor ^eaching and
gov^rning in foro interno, is much more fit to be a Governor externally: he
who is fit for the greater, is fit for the lesser. It was a greater and more
Apostolical work to labor conversion, and bring the churches a handful in
the planti^g (as some think) to become numbersome in people, then it is to
govern them being converted. And it is absurd to think that those who were
fit to gather a church, and bring it to fullness from small beginnings, should
not be fit to govern it, but stand in need to have some one sent, who ^ight
rule them and the churches they had collected. Secondly, these Presbyters were
(as themselves confess) qualified with the extraordinary gifts of the holy
Ghost, and chosen by special designation: so that to impute insufficiency unto
them, is harsh, and injurious to God, as well as to man. Finally, by the twenty
of the Acts, and the first Epistle of Peter, cha. 5. it is plain, they do in
their last farewels, commit the Churches unto the Presbyters, not suggesting
any thing of a further Pastor to be sent, who would supply their rooms; which
yet they would not have forgotten, being a thing of so great consolation, had
it been intended by them.

Argument 2.
Those who have the name and office of Bishopscommon to them, they have no
superior Pastors over them: but the Presbyters Pastoral have that name and
office attributed to them. For first they are said to govern in general.
Secondly, there is nothing found belonging to the power of the keys in foro
externo, but the Scripture does ascribe it to them, power of suffrage in
council. Acts 15. power of excommunication, which is manifest to have been in
the churches of Corinth when it had no bishop; power of ordination, 1 Timothy 4.
If any say, that this their power was but by commission in them, and that they
were subordinate to the Apostles in exercise of it, being to retain it only
until such time as more eminent Pastors should be given: I answer; all this is
spoken gratis, without any foundation, and therefore no more easily vouched
then rejected. The Presbyters so had this power, that they did commit it to the
bishops, as we shall show after: and therefore it must have been in them, not
by extraordinary commission, but by ordinary office. Secondly, they were
subject in exercise to none but Christ and the holy Ghost, who only had out of
authority trusted them with it. If the Apostles and they did concur in doing
one and the same thing, they did it as inferior to the Apostles, and servants
of a lower order, not with any subjection to them, as heads of derivation,
serving Christ their only Lord, no less immediately then the Apostles
themselves.

Argument 3.
That which is found in all other orders of Ministers instituted by Christ, may
be presumed likewise in the order of Pastors and Doctors: but in all other
orders, there were none that had singularity of pre-eminence and majority of
power above other: No Apostle, Prophet, Evangelist had this rule one over
another: If the proposition be denied, upon supposall of a different reason,
because that though parity in a few extraordinary Ministers might be admitted
without disorder, yet in a multitude of ordinary Ministers, it could not but
breed schism and confusion, and therefore as the order of Priesthood was
divided into a high Priest, and other secondary ones, so is it fit that the
Presbyters of the new Testament should be divided, some being in the first, and
some in the second rank. To this I answer, the parity is the more dangerous,
by how much the places are supereminent. Secondly, though Pastors should be
equal, yet this would not bring parity into the Ministers of the Church, some
whereof should be in degree inferior to other, the governing Elders to the
Pastors, and the Deacons to them. Thirdly, if every Church being an
Ecclesiastical body, should have governors every way equal, there were no
fear of confusion, seeing Aristocracy, especially where God ordains it, is a
form of government sufficient to preserve order. But every Church might then
do what ever it would within it self. Not so neither; for it is subject to
the censure of other Churches synodically assembled, and to the civil
Magistrate, who in case of delinquency, has directive and corrective power
over it. Parity does not so much endanger the Church by schism, as imparity
does by tyranny subject it. As for the distinction of Priests, we grant it;
but as man could not have made that distiction, had not God ordained it in time
of the old Testament, no more can we under the new. Howbeit, that distinction
of Priests did bring in no such difference in order and majority of rule, as
our Bishops now challenge.

Argument 4.
If some be inferior unto othersome in degree of power, it must be in regard
of their power to teach, or their power to govern, or in the application of
this power to their persons, or in regard of the people whom they teach and
govern, or finally in regard the exercise of their power is at the direction
of another. But no Pastor or Teacher depends on an other but Christ for any
of these. Ergo. The proposition stands on a sufficient enumeration: the
assumption may be proved in the several parts of it. The former branch is thus
cleared. First, the power we have, is the same essentially with theirs; yea,
every way the same. Secondly, we have it as imediately from Christ as they. I
show them both thus: The power of order is the power which inableth us to
preach and deliver the whole counsel of God, and to minister all Sacraments
sealing Gods covenant. Now unless we will with the Papists, say that preaching
is no necessary annexum to the Presbyters office, or that his power is a
rudimentall limited power, as to open the creed, Lords prayer, and
commandments only, or that he has not the full power sacra^entall, there
being other sacraments of ordination and ^onfirmation which we may not
minister, all which are gro^^e, we^ must yield their power of order to be the
same. Yea, were these sacraments properly, they are both grounded in the power
a Presbyter has: Ordination in do^ this in remembrance of me: confirmation in
power to baptize. The power being the same, it is happily in one immediately,
and in the other by derivation from him. Nothing less. All grant that Christ
does immediately give it, even as the inward grace of every Sacrament comes
principally from him. The Church, did she give this power, might make the
sacrament and preaching which one does in order, no sacrament, no preaching.
The Pope does not (if we follow the common tenent) challenge so much as to give
the power of order to any bishop or priest whatsoever. If you say, the
Presbyter is ordained by the bishop, that is nothing: so is the bishop by other
bishops, from whom notwithstanding he receives not this power. We will take
this as granted of all: though the truth is, all do not maintain it from
right grounds. But it will be said the Presbyter is inferior in jurisdiction,
and can have none but what is derived to him from the bishop, who has the
fullness of it within his Diocesan Church. But this is false, and grounded on
many false presumptions. As first, that Ministers of the Word are not properly
and fully Pastors; for to make a Pastor, and give him no help against the
Wolf, is to furni^h him forth imperfectly. Secondly, it presupposes the power
of jurisdiction to be given originally and fontally to one person of the
Church, and so to others, whereas Christ has committed it originaliter and
exercitative to the representative Church, that they might Aristocratically
administer it. Thirdly, this presupposes the plenitude of regiment to be in
the bishop, and from him to be derived to other: which makes him a head of
virtuall influence, that in his Church, which the Pope does challenge in regard
of all bishops. For his headship and spiritual sovereignty stands according
to Bellarmine in this, that the government of all in for^ externo, is committed
to him. Not to mention, how bishops, while they were bishops, gloried of their
chair and teaching, as the flower of their garland, preferring it far before
government, but when they were fallen from their spiritual felicity, and
infected with secular smoke, then they recommended the labor of teaching to
the Presbyters, then their jurisdiction and consistory did carry all the
credit, every office in the Church being counted a dignity, as it had more or
less jurisdiction annexed; as those are more or less honorable in the
Commonwealth, which have civil authority in less or greater measure
conjoined. The truth is, it cannot be showed that God ever made Pastor without
this jurisdiction; for whether it do agree to men as they are Pastors, or as
they are Prelates in the Church, it cannot be avoided but that the Pastor should
have it, because though every Praesul or Pralatus, be not a Pastor, yet every
Pastor is Pralatus, in order to that Church where he is the proper and ordinary
Pastor. Yea, when censure is the most sharp spiritual medicine, it were ill
with every Church, if he who is resident always among them as their spiritual
Physician, should not have power in administering it. Thirdly, I say, no
Minister has majority of power in applying the power of order or jurisdiction
to this or that person. In the application there is a ministry of the Church
interposed: but so that Christ only is the cause with power, not only why
Presbyters are in the Church, but why Thomas or John is chosen to and bestowed
on this or that place. A Master only does out of power take every servant into
his house: so God in his. God did choose Aarons sons with the Levites, and
Christ the 70. not mediately leaving it to the arbitrament of any to set out
those that should stand before him. God does ever only in regard of authority,
apply all power Ecclesiastical to every particular person, his sole authority
does it, though sometime as in ordinary callings, the ministry of others does
concur. The Church is in setting out, or ordaining this or that man, as the
College is in choosing, when she takes the man whom the statute of her
founder does most manifestly describe, or where the Kings mandate does strictly
injoyne, it would otherwise bring an imperial power into the Church. For
though many Kings cannot hinder but that there shall be such and such officers,
and places of government as are in their Kingdom, yet while they are free at
their pleasure to depute this or that man to the places vacant, they have a
Kingly jurisdiction in them. Briefly, God does ever apply the power
Ecclesiastical unto the person: sometime alone by himself, as in the
Apostles, and then he does it (...) imm^dia^i^^ suppositi qu^m virtutis:
sometime the ministry of man concurring extraordinarily, as when God
extraordinarily directs a person to go and call one to this or that place,
as he did Sa^^el to anoint Saul. Or else ordinarily, when God does by his Writ
and Spirit, guide men to take any to this or that place in his Church, which he
does partly by his written statutes, and partly by his Spirit: and thus he does
make the application only immediatione virtutis, not suppositi.

Object. But yet Bishops have the Churches, and the care of them wholly
committed to them; though therefore Ministers have equal power to them, yet
they cannot without their leave have any place within their Chur^hes, and
therefore are inferior, in as much as the people with whom they exercise their
power of order and jurisdiction, are assigned to them by the Bishop the proper
Pastor of them. This is an error likewise: For God does make no Minister to
whom he does not assign a flock which he may at^end. God calls Ministers,
not to a faculty of honor, which does qualify them with power to ministerial
actions, if any give them persons among whom they may exercise their power
received, as the Emperors did make Chartul^rios judices, who had a power to
judge causes if any would subject himself to them. Or as the Count Palatine
has ordinary Judges, who are habitu tantum judices, having none under them,
amongst whom they may exercise jurisdiction. Or as the University gives the
degree of a Doctor in Physic, without any patients among whom he may
practice. But Gods Ministry is the calling of a man to an actual
administration, Go teach: and the power of order if nothing by the way, but a
relative respect, founded in this, that I am called to such an actual
administration. Now there cannot be an act commanded, without the subject about
which it is occupied: otherwise, God should give them a faculty of feeding, and
leave them depending on others for sheep to feed; God should make them but
remote potentiall Ministers, and the Bishop actual, Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is
said to have set the Presbyters over their flock. A man taking a steward, or
other servant into his house, does give him a power of doing something to his
family; and never thinks of taking servants, further then the necessity of
his household does require: so is it with God in his Church, which is his house:
fore the exegency of his people so require, he does not call any to the
function of Ministry. Again, this is enough to ground the authority which
Antichrist assumeth: For some make his sovereignty to stand only in this, not
that he gives order or power of jurisdiction, but that he gives to all
Pastors and Bishops the moity of sheep, on whom this their power is exercised,
Christ having given him the care of all his sheep, feed my sheep: so Vasquez.
Thus if a Bishop challenge all the sheep in a Diocesan flock to be his, and
that he has power to assign the several flocks under him, he does usurp an
Antichristian authority. Finally, if the Churches be the Bishops through the
Diocese, Ministers then are under them in their Churches, but as a Curate is,
whom a Parson gives leave to help within his Church. Yea, they should loose
their right in their Churches, when the Bishop dies, as a Curate does when the
Parson of this or that Church, whom he assisted, is once departed. To conclude,
they are not dependant (one Minister I mean on another) in the exercise and
use of their calling. A servant that has any place, does know from his Master
what belongs to it. The Priests and Levites had set down what belonged to
their places, as well as the high Priest what belonged to his. Again, God has
described the Presbyters office, as amply as any other. A Legate depends on
none for instructions, but on him that sends him; now every Minister is an
Ambassador of Christ. By their reason a Minister should be accountant to man
for what he did in his Ministry, if his exercising of it did depend on man.
Then also should minister^mediately only serve God, in as much as they have
done this or that, to which the bishop did direct them. Moreover, should the
bishop bid him not preach at al, preach rarely, teach only such and such
things, or come and live from his charge, he should not sin in obeying him.
But man cannot limit that power of ministry which he cannot give. It is not
with Gods servants in his Church, as with civil servants in the Commonwealth:
for here some servants are above others whom they command as they will such as
are called Fervi ^rdinarli or praepofiti, some are under others to do this or
that commanded by them, commonly called servi vicarii: but in the Church all
servants serve their Master Christ, neither having any that they can command,
nor being under any but Christ so as to be commanded by them. But it may be
objected, that God has ordained some to be helps and assistants to othersome.
It is said that God has ordained powers, helps, governors, 1 Cor. 12.8. and
were not the Evangelists assistants to the Apostles, doing that to which they
directed them* To this I answer, that the helps God has put in his Church
respect the calling of Deacons, and such as ministered to the infirm ones: As
for Evangelists, they were companions and assistan^s to the Apostles, but it
was in order to the work of God in their hands, which they were to serve, not
in order to their persons, as if they had been subjected to them in any servile
inferiority. Observe how Paul speaks of them, 2 Cor. 8.23. Vitu^ was his
companion and helper toward them, Phil. 2.25. Epaphroditus was his brother and
helper in his work, and fellow soldier, 1 Thessalonians. 3.2. Timothy was his
coadjutor in the Gospel of Christ, 2 Timothy 4.11. Mark was helpefull in the
Ministry. The truth is, this was servitus (...) porf^^^lis (...) re^lis, the
Evangelists did serve the work the Apostles had in hand, with out being
servants to their persons. When brick-layers work, some mix line, and make
mortar, some bear up tile and mortar, some sit on the house and there lay that
which is b^ought them. These are all fellow servants, yet the one does serve to
set forward the work of the other. But were they not left to the direction of
the Apostles, wholly in exercise of their calling? I answer, as Christ gave
some to be Evangelists, so he made them know from himself what belonged to
their office, and what was the administration to which he called them. He did
not therefore wholly leave them to the direction of any. There is a double
direction, one p^tes^atiue, which is made from majority of rule (...), the
other socialis, such as one servant, having fit knowledge of his masters will,
and ripe experience, may give to another. The latter kind of direction it was,
not the former, by which the Evangelists were directed. Which though commonly
Paul used, yet not so universally but that they went sometime of their own
accords hither and thither, as may be gathered, 2 Cor. 8.16, 17. and 2.7.14, 15.

The fifth Argument.
That which the Apostles had not over Prophets, Evangelists, Presbyters, nor
Deacons themselves that power which the Church has not over any member, the
bishop has not over other ministers. But they had not over any inferior
officers any majority of directive or corrective power: neither has the Church
it self any such power. Ergo. The assumption is proved: for majority of
directive and corrective power is a Lord-like and Regal power: now there is no
such power in the Church, or in the Apostles, or in any but only in that one
Lord: all other power being but a declarative and executive ministry to
signify and execute what Christ out of majority of power would have signified
and put in execution.

The sixth Argument.
That which does breed an Antichristian usurpation, never was of Christ's
institution. But bishops majority of power in regard of order and jurisdiction,
does so: Ergo. That which makes the bishop a head as does in s^uere derive the
power of external government to other his assistants that does breed an
Antichristian usurpation. But to claim the whole power of jurisdiction through
a Diocesan Church, does so: for he must needs substitute helpers to him,
because it is more then by himself he can perform. But this is it which
makes Antichrist, he does take upon him to be head of the whole Church, from
whom is derived this power of external government: and the bishop does no
less in his Diocesan Church, that which he usurpeth differing in degree only
and extension, not in kind from that which the Pope arrogateth. If it be said
that his power is Antichristian, because it is universal: it is not so. For
were the power lawful, the universality could not make it Antichristian. The
Apostles had an universality of authority, yet no Antichrists, because it did
not make them heads, deriving to others from their fullness: it was not
prince-like majority of power, but steward like and ministerial only. If one
do usurp a kingly power in Kent only, he were an Anti-king to our
Sovereign, no less for kind, then if he proclaimed himself King of England,
S^otland, and Ireland. There is but one Lord, and many ministrations. Neither
does this make the Popes power papal, because it is not under a Synod: for the
best of the Papists hold, and it is the most common tenent, that he is subject
to an Oecumenicall Council. Secondly, though he be subject, yet that does not
hinder but he may usurp a kingly government: for a King may have a kingly
power, and yet confess himself accountable to all his people collectively
considered: neither does this make the Bishops lawful in one Church, because
one may manage it, and the Popes unlawful, because none is sufficient to sway
such a power through the whole Church: for then all the power the Pope does
challenge, is not per se, but per accidens, unlawful, by reason of man's
unsufficiency, who cannot we^ld so great a matter.

The seventh Argument.
Those Ministers who are made by one patent in the same words, have equal
authority: but all Ministers of the Word are made by the same patent, in the
same words, Receive the holy Ghost, whose sta^ ye forgive. etc. Ergo. The
proposition is denied: because the sense of the words is to be understood
according as the persons give leave to whom they are spoken. These words spoken
to Apostles, they gave them larger power then to a Bishop: and so spoken to a
Presbyter they give him less power then to a Bishop. Answ: If the Scripture
had distinguished of Presbyters Pastoral feeding with the Word, and made them
diverse degrees, as it has made Apostles and Evangelists, then we would grant
the excep^ion: but the Scripture does not know this division of Pastors and
Doctors into chief and assistent: but speaks of them as of Apostles and
Evangelists, who were among themselves equal in degree. Wherefore as no
Apostle received by these words greater power then another: so no Pastor or
Teacher, but must receive the same power, as who are among th^mselves of the
same degree. Secondly, were they different degrees, yet it should give the
Presbyter for kind, though not of so ample extent as the Bishop ha^h, as it
gives the Bishop the same power for kind, which the Apostles had, though not
so universal, but contracted to particular Churches.

Now to some unto some conclusions or assertions which may le^d light unto the
deciding of this question.

Conclus. 1. Let this be the first. No Minister of the Word has any power but
ministerial in the Church. Power is natural or moral. Moral is Civil or
Ecclesiastical. Civil is either Lord-like and ruling, or ministerial and
servile. So Ecclesiastical, taken largely for all power subjectively in, or
objectively about the Church, is either Lord-like and Regal, such as is in
Christ, or it is ministerial and servile, such as is in the Church and the
principal members of it. The power therefore of the Apostles themselves and
Evangelists, is called (...), Act. 20. 1. Tim. 4. yea such a service, as does
make the ministers having it, so servants, that they are no way Lords. Many
ministers, one Lord: we preach Christ, our selves your servants for Jesus sake.
S. Paul makes his power steward-like, not regal. Now as that is regal power
which does any thing from the authority one has in himself, or from ones
pleasure: so that is ministerial power which does nothing but eying the will
and power of him that is pri^cipall: a power which signifies or executes this
or that ix mer^ al^erium obsequi^.

Conclus. 2. This ministerial power is no supernatural virtue or quality
inherent in the soul: but a relative respect founded on this, that I am called
by God to this or that actual administration in his Church. For it is not a
power simply, whereby a man is made able to do some supernatural act, which he
could not before in any manner perform: but it is respectively said a power,
in as much as it does enable him to do those acts in the Church of God
lawfully, and ex officio, with which before he might not intermeddle. The power
of a Deacon, Pastor, Evangelist, Apostle, belong to one predicament in regard
of that which is the genus or common nature of them: the power of the Church
cannot be other. Natural and civil power does* with virtue and efficacy reach
those effects and ends to which they are designed: because they are
proportioned to them, and exceed not their activity: but Ecclesiastical power
cannot thus concur to the end and effects for which it is ordained: because
they are such as the omnipotenty of God only can produce, asthe converting or
creating grace in the heart of a sinner, to which no supernatural virtue in
man can by any real, though instrumentary efficacy, conduce any thing.

Conclus. 3. God has not given ministerial power to any, which himself is
not personally to discharge, nor in further plenitude then that by himself it
may be performed. The reason is, because God cannot give one the charge of
doing more then a man's proper industry can atchieve, but he must withal put it
in a man's power to take others, and to impart with them power of teaching and
governing, so far as may supply that defect which is in his strength to
perform it alone. He that will have the end, will have that without which the
end cannot be attained. If God would have any one an universal pastor to all
the Churches of the world, he must needs allow him power to substitute Pastors
here and there, deriving unto them power both to teach and govern, so far as
may supply his absence in the Pastoral cure. If I will have one keep my
flocks which go in twenty sheepe-gates, if I commit them to one, I must needs
together give him leave to assume unto himself such as may be under shepherds
to him. Thus if God give a Bishop the plenitude of Pastoral care and
government over all the Parishionall Churches through a Diocese, he must needs
together allow him this power, of being a head of internal influence, even a
head virtually communicating with others part of pastoral power, whether
teaching or government. Thus should none but Bishop^ be ex officio servants in
Pastoral cure to God: all others should be immediately and formally servants
to the bishop, and do every thing in the name of the bishop, being immediately
only and in a remote sense the servants of God: as in the former comparison of
one servant receiving from his master the care of all the ^tockes, he is the
masters servant to whom the master commits the trust, from whom he only
looks to see it performed: but those whom this shepherd takes to himself
for his aid, they come under his dominion, and are servants to him. If it be
said, that God does not thus make the bishop Pastor, but that he will likewise
that there be parish Pastors under him, and helps of government. To this I
answer, If God will have them, then either after his own de^ignement, or else
leaving it to the bishops arbitrament: if he leave it to the bishops
arbitrament, then the objection before is in force, God will look for the cure
from him only, he shall take according to his judgment, such as may help him.
If God will have them after his own designment, then he gives the bishop no
more Pastoral power then he can discharge himself, others having their right
in all the bishop cannot execute, as well as the bishop, and as immediately from
Christ. Some write, as if the Apostles had the plenitude of all Pastoral
power, that from them it might be derived to the Church, it being seen through
nature, that inferior things receive influence from the superior. But they
misconceive the matter; they had only a power to serve the Church with the
personal service of their Apo^tleship. The Pastoral power of Evangelists, or
of ordinary Pa^tours and teachers, they never had. For as Christ gave the one
order, so the two other also, for the gathering of the Saints, and exaedifying
of the body of Christ: and no person in any rank had any power to do this or
that in the Church further then himself might perform in person. The steward
in a house has full power of a steward, but not the power of all other
officers, as Clark of the kitchen, B^tler, Chamberlain, etc. So in these
diverse orders of servants in Gods house, his Church. If the Apostles had had
the fullness of Pastoral c^re, they should then have ordained others
Evangelists, and Pastors not only by ministerial mediation of their persons
calling them, but also by mediation of virtue.

Conclus. 4. One ministerial power may be in degree of dignity above another.
For the power of one may be about more noble acts then the power of another, or
in the same kind, the power of one may be more extended, and the power of
another more contracted. Thus the Deacons had for the object of their power and
care, not so excellent a thing as that of Pastors, Evangelist^, and Apostles.
Thus the power of ordinary Pastors was not so univer^all as the Apostles, even
as in the orders of servants domestical, some are implied about lesser, some
about greater and more honorable subjects.

Co^cl. 5. No order of Ministers or servants can have majority of ^^^^ctive and
corrective power over those who are in inferior order o^ Ministry and service.
The reason is, because this exceeds the ^ounds of ministerial power, and is
a participation of that despoticall power which is appropriate to the master of
the family.

Concl. 6. Servants in one degree may have power to signify their masters
direction, and to execute ministerially what their master out of his corrective
power inflicteth on their fellow servants in other degrees. Thus Pastors
signify Gods will to governing Presbyters and Deacons, what he would have them
to do in their places. Thus the Apostles might inform all orders under them.

Concl. 7. This power ministerial tending to execute the pleasure of Christ's
corrective power, was committed to some in extraordinary degrees, personally
and singularly, and might be so in some cases exercised by them. I mean
singularity without concurrence of any others. This without doubt was in the
Apostles and Evangelists: and it was needful it should be so: first, because
it might be behovefull there to excommunicate whereas yet Churches were not
risen to their perfect frame: secondly, because there might be some persons not
settled as fixed dwellers in any Church, whom yet to be cast forth was very
behovefull. Again, some Evangelists might incur censure, as Demas, in such
sort as no ordinary Churches power could reach to them.

Concl. 8. That ordinarily this power is not given to any one singularly by
himself to exercise the same, but with the company of others constituting a
representative Church: which is the point next to be showed. Yea where
Churches were constituted, the Apostles did not offer to exercise their power,
without the minsteriall concurrence of the Churches, as in the story of the
Corinthians is manifest.

THE THIRD QVESTION Whether Christ did immediately commit ordinary power
Ecclesiastical, and the exercise of it, to any singular person, or to united
multitude or Presbyters.
THough this question is so coincident with the former, that the grounds has
in a sort been discussed* yet for some new considerations which may be
super-added, we will briefly handle it in the Method premised.

First, it is argued for the affirmative.
Argum. 1. Tha^ which is committed to the Church, is committed to the principal
member of the Church* But exercise of jurisdiction was committed to the Church,
Mat^. 18.17. Ergo. Either to the whole Church, or to a Church in the Church, or
to ^ome one eminent member in the Church. But it was not committed to be
exercised by the whole Church, or to any Church in the Church. Ergo, to one who
is in effect as the church, having all the authority of it. Secondly, if one
person may be representatively a Church, when jurisdiction i^ promised; then
one person may be representatively a Church when jurisdiction and power of
exercising is committed. But one singular person, Peter signified the Church,
when the promise of jurisdiction is made. Ergo. Cyprian to Iubaia says, that
the bishop is in the Church, and the Church so in the bishop, ^ that they
cannot be severed. Finally, as the kingdom of England may be put for the King
in whom is all the power of the Kingdom: So the Church for the chief
governor in whom is the power of it.

The second Argument.
That which the Churches had not given them when they were constituted, that
was not promised to them as their immediate right. But they had not coercive
power given them when they were constituted, Ergo, Christ did not commit it to
the Churches or Presbyters. For then the Apostles would not have withhold it
from these. But they did. For the Apostles kept it with themselves. As in the
incestuous Corinthian is manifest, whom Paul by his judge^ent was feign to
excommunicate. And the Thessalonians are bid to note the inordinate, And
signify them, as not having power within themselves to censure them. And so
Paul alone excommunica^ed Hymen^us and Alexander.

The third Argument.
That which Paul committed to some prime men in Churches, and their
successors, that was not committed to Presbyteries, but singular persons. But
in power of ordination and jurisdiction, he did so. For to Timothy in Ephesus,
and to Titu^ in Crete, he commended the power and exercise of it. Ergo.

The fourth Argument.
That order which was most fit for exercising power of jurisdiction, that
Christ did ordain. But the order of one chief governor is sitter for
execution, then the order of a united multitude. Ergo.

The fifth Argument.
If all authority and power of exercise be in the Church originally, then the
Pastors derive their power from the Church. But this is not true. Ergo, it was
not committed to the Church. That authority which the Church never had, she
cannot convey. But the Pastoral authority of word and Sacraments never was in
the Church essentially taken. Ergo, it cannot be derived from her. Again
Pastors should discharge their office in the name of the Church, did they
receive their power from the Church.

The sixth Argument.
If the power of jurisdiction and execution be committed from Christ to the
Church, then has the Church supreme power. Then may a particular Church
depose her bishop, the sheep censure the shepherd, children their fathers,
which is absurd.

On the other side it is argued,
Argum. 1. That which Christ does presuppose as being in many, and to be
exercised by many, that never was committed by Christ to one, and the execution
of a^y one. But Mat. 18. Christ does manifestly suppose the power of
jurisdiction to be in many* and that exercitative, so as by them being many, it
is to be exercised. Ergo. Now this is plain in the place. Where first m^rke,
that Christ does presuppose the authority of every particul^r Church taken in
distinctly. For it is such a Church as any brother offended may presently
complain to. Therefore no univers^ll, or provincial, or Diocesan Church
g^thered in a C^uncell. Secondly, it is not any particular Church that he does
send ^ll Christi^ns to, for ^h^^ all Christ^ans in the world should come to one
particular at Church, were it possible. He does therefore presuppose
indistinctly the very particular Church where the brother offending and
offended are members. And if they be not both of one church, the plaintiff must
make his denunt^ation to the Church where the defendant is, quia forum sequitur
reum. Thirdly, as Christ does speak it of any ordinary particular Church
indistinctly, so he does by the name of Church not understand essentially all
the congregation. For then Christ should give not some, but all the members of
the Church to be governors of it. Fourthly, Christ* speaks it of such a
Church to whom we may ordinarily and orderly complain: now this we cannot to
the whole multitude. Fifthly, this Church he speaks of, he does presuppose it
as the ordinary executioner of all discipline and censure. But the multitude
have not this execution ordinary, as all but Morelius, and such Democritall
spirits do affirm. And the reason ratifying the sentence of the Church, does
show that often the number of it is but small: For where two or three are
gathered together in my name. Whereas the Church or congregations essentially
taken for teachers and people, are incomparably great. Neither does Christ
mean by Church the chief Pastor, who is virtually as the whole Church* For
first, the word Church does ever signify a company, and never is found to note
out one person. Secondly, the Bishop may be the person offending or offended,
and the Church to which he must bring the matter, must be other then himself.
Thirdly, the gradation does show it. First, by thy self, Then show a witness or
two. Then to the Church, as the sin increases, the number of those by whom
it is to be rebuked and censured, increases also. If one say, though the
Church signify one governor, yet the gradation holds, for to tell it to ^he
governor in open Court, is more then to tell it to twenty. We grant that this
is true, and were the word Church taken here to note some eminent governor, it
might be brought in as a further degree, though one only were enforced. But
how can Peter be complainaint, if Peter the Praesul only be the judge to whom
the thing must be denounced. Fourthly, the church in the Corinthians which Paul
stirs up to censure the incestuous person, was not any one but many. Their
rebuke upon which it is like he repented, was a rebuke of many, 2 Cor. 2.6.
Fifthly, if the church had been one, he would not have subjoyned: for what ye
shall ^ind on earth, shall be bound in heaven. Sixthly, if the church did not
note an assembly, how could he assure them from hence, that God would do what
they agreed on, because he was with the least assemblies gathered in his name.
Unless the Church meant were an assembly, this argument could not be so
correspondent. Where two or two or three are assembled in Gods name, God is in
the midst of them to do that they agree on. But where the Church is binding or
loosing, there are some assembled in the name of Christ. Ergo. Lastly, the
church in the old Testament never notes the high Priest virtually, but an
assembly of Priests sitting together, as Judges in the causes of God. Wherefore
as Christ does indistinctly presuppose every particular Church: So he does here
only presuppose the joint authori^y, and joint execution of a representative
Church, a Presbytery of Elders who were Pastors and Governors.

Argum. 4. We argue from the practice of the Churches. That power which is not
in one, nor to be exercised by one, but in many, and to be exercised by many
in the Church of the Corin^hians, that power with the exercise of it, was
committed by Christ to many, not to one. But the power of Ecclesiastical
censure was in many, and to be performed by many assembled. Ergo. The
proposition is plain. For Paul would not have called for, nor have liked any
constitution or exercise of power Ecclesiastical, other then Christ had
ordained. The assertion is denied by some: but ^t is a plain truth by many
invincible argumen^s. For first, Paul does rebuke them that they had not set
themselves to cast them forth. Now (as Ambrose says on the place. Si au^em
quis potestalem non h^b^^, quim scit reum abjicere, aut probare non valet;
immunis est. Secondly, Paul does wish them assembled together, with himself in
the name and virtue of Christ, that they might deliver him up to Satan. For
he does not call on them to restrain him as already excommunicated, but to
purge him out as an infectuous leaven yet amongst them. Thirdly, Paul does tell
them that they had power to judge those within, those who were called brethren,
and lived otherwise. Fourthly, Paul does tell them that they did a rebuke or
mu^ct o^ many, writing to them that they would not proceed, 2 Cor. 2 6. Lastly,
Paul does attrib^te power to them to forgive him, and to rece^ve him to the
peace of the church. Which would not have been in them, had they not had the
power to excommunicate. Such as h^ve no power to bind, have no power to loose.
So it might be proved by the Church of the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. If any
man wa^k in^rdinatly, note him, that others may refrain him Noting, being not
a signification by letter, which does wrest the word against all copies, and
the current of all Greek interpreters: but judicially to note him, that all may
avoid him; that is, excommunicate him. Finally, the churches of Asia, as it is
plain, had power of government within themselves.

Argum. 5. That power which the Apostles did not exercise in the churches, nor
Evangelists, but with concurrence of the churches and Presbyteries, that power
is much less to be exercised by any ordinary Pastor, but by many. But they
did not ordain, nor lay on hands alone, they did not determine questions by
the power of the keys alone, but with concurrence of the Presbyters of the
church. Ergo, much less may any ordinary Minister do it alone. Timothy
received grace by the (...) of the Presbytery. For that Persons must be
understood here is apparent by the like place; when it is said, by the laying
on of my hands, (...) notes a person, and so here a Presbytery. Secondly,
(...) take (...) to signify the order of Priesthood, is against all Lexicons,
and the nature of the Greek termination. Thirdly, Timothy never received that
order of a Presbyter, as before we have proved. Fourthly, it cannot signify as
Greek Expositers ^ake it, a company of bishops. For neither was that Canon of
3. bishops and the Metropolitan, or all the bishops in a Province, in the
Apostles time, neither were the^e who are now called bishops, then called
Presbyters, as they say, but Apostles, men that had received Apostolic grace,
Angels, etc. Finally, it is very absurd to think of companies of other
Presbyters in Churches then Paul planted; but he placed Presbyteries of such
Presbyters as are now distinguished from bishops, which is the grant of our
adversaries. Not to mention how Armachanus does censure the other as an
interpretation from ones private sense, besides testimony of Scripture.

Thus the Apostles did not offer alone to determine the question Act. 15. but
had the joint suffrages of the Presbytery with them. Not because they could not
alone have infallibly answered, but because it was a thing to be determined by
many; all who had received power of these keys, doing it ex offici^, and
others from discretion and duty of confession the truth. Yea the bishops called
Primi Presbyteri, had no ordination at the first which the Prebytery did not
give them. Whence have bishops of other Churches power to minister the
sacrament to the bishop of this Church? But Timothy and Titus are said to have
ordained Ministers. As Consuls and D^ctators are said to have created Consuls,
because they called Senates, propounded and together with others did it. No
otherwise do Jesuits themselves understand it. Salmeron on the first of Titus,
etc. And it is manifest by Ecclesiastical writings of all sorts, that
Presbyters h^d right of su^^rage, not only in their own Presbyteries, but in
Provincial Synods, and therefore in O^cumenicall Synods, which does arise from
a combination of the other, to which their minds went in the instructi^n of
bishops received from their Churches. And A^hanasius yet a Deacon, is read to
have been at the Counsel of Nice, and to have had right of suffrage in it.
Finally, the Presbyteries did a long time execute jointly all actions of Church
government, as is before declared. Other arguments we shall touch in answer of
the^e which have been objected. Now to come to the conclusio^s, let this be
first.

Conclus. 1. Extraordinary power was committed to some singular persons, so
that in some case they might singularly exercise it without concurrence of
other. This I speak in regard of Apostles and Evangelists, whose power in many
things could not have concurrance of particular Churches, which in the former
question is sufficiently declared.

Conclus. 2. That ordinary power, and the execution thereof was not committed to
any singular governors, whereof there was to be one only in each Church. This
is against the Jesuits, who make account (the most of them) that as all civil
power of government is given to Kings to be executed by them within their
commonwealth, so Ecclesiastical power (say they) is given to the Pope and to
bishops in their particular Churches to be executed by them, and derived from
them to the whole Church.

Conclus. 3. Ordinary power with the execution thereof, was not given to the
community of the church, or to the whole multitude of the faithful, so that
they were the immediate and first receptacle, receiving it from Christ, and
virtually deriving it to others. This I set down against the Divines of
Constance; our prime Divines, as Luther and Melan^thon, and the Sorbonists, who
do maintain it at this day. Yea, this seems to have been Tertullians
error; for in his book^: de p^dicitia, he makes Christ to have left all
Christians with like power, but the church for her honor, did dispose it as we
see. The proposition of a pollitick body, and natural deceived them, while
they will apply all that is in these to Christ's mystical body, not remembering
that analogon is not in omnisimile, for then should it be the same with the
^n^loga^um. True it is, all civil power is in the body politic, the
collections of subjects, then in a King from them: And all the power of
hearing, seeing, they are in the whole man, which does produce them
effectually, though formally and instrumentally they are in the ear and eye.
But the reason of this is, because these powers are natural, and what ever is
natural, does first agree to the community or totum, and afterward to a
particular person and part, but all that is in this body, cannnot hold in
Christ's mystical body. In a politic body power is first in the community, in
the King from them, but all Ecclesiastical power is first in our King before
any in the church from him. But to whom should he first commit this power, but
to his Queen. Answ. Considering this power is not any Lordly power, but a
power of doing service to the church for Christ his sake. Therefore it is fit
it should be committed to some persons, and not to the whole community which
are the Queen of Christ. For it is not fit a King should commit power to his
Queen to serve herself properly: but to have persons who in regard of his
relation should stand distinguished from her. Secondly, in natu^^ll bodies, the
power of seeing is first immediately in the man, from the man in the eye and
particular members: In the mystical body, the faith of a believer is not first
immediately in all, then in the believer, but first of all and immediately in the
person all believer, for whose good it serv^th more properly th^n for the
whole, every man being to live by his own faith. The power of Priesthood was
not first in the Church of Israel, so deri^ed to the Priest^s but immedia^ly
from Christ feared in Aaron and his sons. O^ject. Yea they were given the
church intuitu ejusdem tanquam finis and totius. Answ. I but this is not
enough, that power may be said to be immediately received by the church as the
first receptacle of it, and from it derived to others, as the power of seeing
is not only given int^itu homin^ as the end of it, and the totum to whom it
agrees, but is in homine as the first subject from whom it comes to the eye.
But the power even of ordinary Ministers is not in the church. For as all are
said not to have been Apstoles, so not to h^ve been Doctors. But if the power
of ordinary teachi^g had been given to every believer, all should have been
made Doctors, though not to continue so in exercising the power. Secondly, were
the power in the church, the church should not only call them, but make them
out of virtue and power received into her self: then should the church have a
true Lordlike power in regard of her Ministers. Besides, there are many in the
community of Christians incapable of this power regularly, as women and
children. This conclusion in my judgment Victoria, Soto and others deny with
greater strength of reason then the contrary is maintained.

Conclus. ^. Fourthly, ordinary power of ministerial government is committed
with the execution of it, to the Senate or Presbytery of the church. If any f^^e
in any office, the church has not power of supplying that, but a ministry of
calling one whom Christ has described, that from Christ he may have power of
office given him in the place vacant.

Conclus. 5. Lastly, though the community have not power given her, yet such
estate by Christ her husband is put on her, that all power is to be executed
in such manner, as stands with respect to her excellency Hence it is, that
the governors are in many things of greater moment to take the consent of the
people with them. Not that they have joint power of the keys with them, but
because they sustain the person of the spouse of Christ, and therefore cannot
be otherwise: dealt wi^h without open dishonor in such things, which belong
in common to the whole congregation.

Now to answer the arguments first propounded.

The Proposition of the first Syllogism is denied. That what was committed to
the Church (...) committed to some principal member. And are deny the second
part of the next. Syllogism, proving this part denied. For the power and
execution was committed to a Church in a Church. Which is so far from
absurdity, that he is absurd who does not see it in Civil and Sacr^d. Do we
not see in Parliament a representative Commonwealth within our Commonwealth,
having the greatest authority? Not to mention that a Church within a Church
should not be strange to them who imagine many Parishionall churches within one
Diocesan church. To the proofs which prevent as it were an objection, showing
that the church, Mat. 18.17. may be put for one chief Governor.

The proposition is denied. If that Peter one Governor, may be in type and
figure the Church to wh^m the jurisdiction is premised, then the Church
receiving and execucing it may be one. A most false Proposition whose contrary
is true. The reason is, because the church typified by Peter is properly and
really a church, not figuratively and improperly: for then Peter should have
been a figure or type, of a type or figurative church. The figure therefore
and type being of the church which is properly taken, and the church properly
and really taken, being a company assembled, hence it is that ( Matthew. 18.17.)
the church cannot signify one; for one is but figuratively and improperly a
church. There is not the same reason of the figure and the thing that is
figured. Nay hence an Argument may be retorted, proving that by that church
whereof Peter was a figure, is not meant one chief Governor. Peter as one man
or Governor was properly and really a virtuall church and chief Governor.
But Peter as one man and Governor was in figure only the church. Matthew. 18.
Ergo, that church Matthew. 18. is not a virtuall church, noting forth one chief
Governor only. As for Cyprians speech, it does nothing but show the
conjunction of Pastor and people by mutual love, which is so straight that
the one cannot be schismatically left out, but the other is forsaken also.
Otherwise I think it cannot be showed to the time of Innocent the third, that
the Bishop was counted the church; or this dream of a virtuall church once
imagined. The Clerks of the church of Placentia did in their oath of
canonical obedience swear thus: That they would obey the Church of Placentia,
and the Lord their Bishop. Where the Chapter does carry the name of the church
from the Bishop. Yea, even in those times preposed, or set before him, when the
Pope was lifted up above general councels, then it is like was the first
nativity of these virtuall churches. As for a Kingdom I doubt not, but it may
be put for a King figuratively: but the church typified by Peter, must needs be
a church properly. And it will never be proved that any one Governor was set
up in a church proportionable to a King in a Commonwealth, in whom is all
civil power whereby the whole Kingdom is administered.

To the second Argument from the Apostles fact in the Church of Cori^th, who
judicially, (absent) sentenced his excommunication, I have (...) or j^dged,
leaving nothing to the Church, but ou^ of their obedience to decline him, as in
the 2. Epist. 2. he says, For this (...) I have writt^^ to you, that I may
prove whether you will in all things (...) obedient. What Argument^ are these?
He that judges one to be excommunicated, he leaves no place for the
Presbyters and Church of Corinth judicially to excommunicate. Thus I might
reason, Act. 15.17. from James, (...) He who does judicially sentence a thing
he leaves no place to other Apostles and Presbyters to give sentence. The
truth is, the Apostle might have judged him to be excommunicate; and an
Evangelist, if present, might have judged him also to be excommunicate, and yet
place left for the Churches judgment also. These are subordinate one to the
other. Here it may be objected, that if place be left for the Churches
judgment after the Apostles sentence; then the Church is free not to
excommunicate where the Apostles have, and the same man should be
excommunicate and not excommunicate. Ans. Suppose the Apostles could
excommunicate Clave errante, Without cause, it is true. But the Apostles
sentence being just, she is not free, in as much as she cannot lawfully but
do that which lies on her; when now it is especially showed her, and by
example she is provoked. Yes, where she should see just cause of
excommunicating she is not (though none call on her) free not to excommunicate.
Nevertheless, though she is not free, so as she can lawfully not
excommunicate, yet she is free, speaking of freedom absolutely and simply, and
if she should not excommunicate him, he should remain not excommunicable but
excommunicate, by chief judgment, yet it should not be executed, by the
sinister favor of a particular Church. As, say Saul's sentence had been just,
and the peoples favor had been unjust, Jonathan had been under condemnation,
but execution had been prevented by the peoples he^dstrong affection toward
him. Ob. So they who obeyed Paul they did not judicially excommunicate. Ans. As
though one may not exercise power of government by manner of obedience to the
exhortation of a superior. Touching the place in the Thessaloni^ns, those that
read, Note him by an Epistle, do go against the consent of all Greek
Interpreters* And the context does show, that it is a judiciary noting one,
such as caused him to be avoided by others, and tended to breed shame in him.
As for Paul's excommunicating (...) and Alexander, It will not follow. That
which he did alone an ordinary Pastor may do alone. Secondly, it is not like
he did it alone: but a^ he cast out the Corinthian, though the whole proceeding
be not noted. Though Paul says, I delivered them* So he says, grace was given
Timothy by imposition of his (...) ^ Tim. 1.6. when yet the Presbytery joined,
1 Timothy 4.14 Thirdly, it may be they were no fixed members in any constituted
Church.

The third argument of Timothy and Titus has been sufficiently discussed.

To the fourth, That one is fitter for execution then many. To which we may
add, that though the Bishops be but as Consuls in a Senate, or Vice-chancellors
in a University, having when they sit with others, no more power then the rest.
Yet these have execution of many things committed to them. The assertion. viz.
That many are less fit for execution, we deny. That order is fittest which God
instituted. But he does commit the keys to the Church, to many, that they
might exercise the authority of them; when that mean is most fit, which God
will most bless, and his blessing does follow his own order, this is the
fittest. Secondly, in the Apostles times, and in the times after, almost four
hundred years expired, Presbyters did continue with Bishops in governing and
executing what ever was decreed. Thirdly, this deprivation from the first
order, one to execute for a Diocesan, one for a Provincial, the decrees of a
Diocesan and Provincial, drew on a necessityof one to execute the decrees of
the Oecumenicall Church or Pope. Fourthly, Let them show where God divided the
power of making laws for government of any Church from the power to execute
them. Regularly they who have the greater committed, have the lesser also.
Fifthly, we see even in civil governments many parts by joint Council and
action are as happily governed as others are by a singular governor. Truly,
that the Affrican Fathers write to Celestive is true: It is unlikely that God
will be present, with one, inspiring him with his spirit, and not be present
with many who are in his name, and with his warrant assembled. As for those
comparisons they hold not in all: they hold in that which the Consul does in
calling the assembly, propounding things, etc. Yet the Consuls never took the
power to censure their fellows without the concurrence of their fellow
Senators, nor to withdraw themselves from being subject to the censure of the
rest of the Senate.

To the fifth argument, to the proposition by distinction: if they have all
power both of ministerial application, and instituting others out of virtue
and authority, then Pastors derive. But this is denied. She has no power but
of Ministry, and no plenitude but so far as they in their own persons can
discharge. It presupposes therefore we affirm in our question what we do
not. But to let the proposition pass, because of some derivation, it is true.
If she have but all power of Ministerial application, then Bishops (...) from
(...) But ^hey do not. We say they do. And where^^ it i^ (...) th^^ which the
Church never had she cannot conve^ (...), which the Church never had, she
cannot virtually convey it* but she may a^ ministering to him who has the
power and virtue of deriving i^. Nothing can give that which it has not,
either formally or virtually, unless it give it as an instrument to one who
has it. A man not having a penny of his own, may give a^ hundred pounds if
the King make him his Almoner. A Steward may give all offices in his masters
house, as ministerially ex^cuting his masters pleasure. Thus the Church
deriveth, as taking the person whom Christ describes, and out of power will
have placed in this or that office in his Church. This answers to the last
suggestion. For if the Church did virtually, and out of power make an officer,
it is true, as we see with those whom the King makes in the commonwealth. But
if she do it in Steward-like manner, ministering to the sole Lord and master of
his house, then is not he so taken in to do in his name, but in his masters
name. As a Butler taken in by a servant, does execute his office not in master
Stewards name, but in his masters, who only out of power did confer it on him.

The last objection I answer. That the particular Church may depose their
Bishop. What member soever in the Church is the offending person, may be
complained of to the Church. The Church of Philippi, if it had power to see
that Archippus do his duty, then it had power to reprove and censure him not
doing it. If the Church have power by election to choose one their Bishop, and
so power of instituting him, then of destituting also. Instituere and
destituere ejusdem es^ ^otestates. But he is given the only judge in Christ's
room, and though they elect him, yet as you have said, and truly, they have
not the power of that authority in them to which he is elected. No more then
the Electors of the Emperor have in them power of the Imperial dignity.
Answer. We say therefore, that as the Church has only ministerial power of
application, that is, as they cannot out of power call a Pastor, but only
call one whom Christ points out, and to whom Christ out of power gi^eth the
place of Pastor. So she cannot censure or depose, but only ministerially
executing the censure of Christ, who will have such a one turned ou^, or
otherwise censured. But the Bishop never was sole judge, though (...) he may be
said so. Christ instituted ^ Presbytery, in which all had equal power of
judgment. Cyprian Ep. 68. in the case of Bes^^^des and Martialis, does show
that the Church had power as of choosing worthy, so of refusing unworthy. He
speaks of an ordinary power, as by choosing is manifest, not extraordinary
and in case of necessity. And Mr. Field maintains, that L^^erius was
lawfully deposed by the Church of Rome. Surely I marvel men of learning will
deny it, when no reason evinceth the Pope though a general Pastor subject to
the censure of a Church Oecumenicall, but the same proves a Diocesan Bishop
subject to the censure of the particular Church. Unless they will say with
some Schoolmen, Sot^, viz. That the Pope is but the vicar of Christ in the
general Church: but the Bishop is both the vicar of Christ, and also
represents the general Church in his Diocese, whence he cannot be proceeded
against by the Church that is a particular. As if to be a vicar of Christ were
a lesser matter then to represent the general Church, with whom in his calling
the Church Oecumenicall has nothing to do.

To that which is objected touching Fathers, Pastors; the similitudes hold not
in all things. Natural parents are no ways children, nor in state of
subjection to their children: but spiritual fathers are so fathers, that in
some respect they are children to the whole Church. So shepherds are no way
sheep, but ministers are in regard of the whole Church. Secondly, Parents and
Shepherds are absolutely parents and shepherds, be they good or evil: but
spiritual Parents and Pastors are no longer so then they do accordingly
behave themselves. Besides, are not civil Kings Parents and Pastors of their
people? yet if they be not absolute Monarchs, it was never esteemed as absurd,
to say that their people had power in some cases to depose them. If their own
Churches have no power over them, it will be hard to show wherein others have
such power of jurisdiction over persons who belong not to their own churches.
But Lord Bishops must take state on them, and not subject themselves unto any
trial, but by their Peers only, which is by a Council of Bishop^.

FINIS.

