Mrs. Behn.
portrait

THE Unfortunate Bride: OR, The Blind Lady a Beauty.

A NOVEL.

By Mrs. A. BEHN.

LONDON, Printed for S. B. and sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster. 1700.

TO Richard Norton, OF Southwick in Hantshire, Esquire.
Honored SIR,
EMinent Wit, Sir, no more than Eminent Beauty, can escape the Trouble and
Presumption of Addresses; and that which can strike every body with Wonder, can
never avoid the Praise which naturally flows from that Wonder: And Heaven is
forced to hear the Addresses as well as Praises of the Poor as Rich, of the
Ignorant as Learned, and takes, nay rewards, the officious, though perhaps
impertinent Zeal of its least qualified Devotees. Wherefore, Sir, though your
Merits meet with the Applause of the Learned and Witty, yet your Generosity
will judge favorably of the untaught Zeal of an humbler Admirer, since what I
do your eminent Virtues compel. The Beautiful will permit the most despicable
of their Admirers to love them, though they never intend to make him happy, as
unworthy their Care, but they will not be angry at the fatal Effect of their
own Eyes.

But what I want in my self, Sir, to merit your Regard, I hope my Authoress
will in some measure supply, so far at least to lessen my Presumption in
prefixing your Name to a Posthumous Piece of hers, whom all the Men of Wit,
that were her Contemporaries, looked on as the Wonder of her Sex; and in none
of her Performances has she showed so great a Mastery as in her Novels, where
Nature always prevails; and if they are not true, they are so like it, that
they do the business every jot as well.

This I hope, Sir, will induce you to pardon my Presumption in dedicating this
Novel to you, and declaring my self,

Sir, Your most obedient and most humble Servant, S. BRISCOE.
Place this Epistle Dedicatory next after the Title of the Blind Lady.

THE Unfortunate Bride: OR, The Blind Lady a Beauty.

A NOVEL^

By Mrs. A. BEHN.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Briscoe, in Charles-Street, Covent Garden, School.

THE Unfortunate Bride: OR, THE The Blind Lady a Beauty.
FRankwit and Wildvill were two young Gentlemen of very considerable Fortunes,
both born in Staffordshire, and during their minority, both educated together,
by which opportunity they contracted a very inviolable Friendship, a Friendship
which grew up with them; and though it was remarkably known to every body else,
they knew it not themselves; they never made profession of it in words, but
actions; so true a warmth their fires could boast, as needed not the effusion
of their breath to make it live. Wildvill was of the richest Family, but
Frankwit of the noblest; Wildvil was admired for outward qualifications, as
strength, and manly proportions, Frankwit for a much softer beauty, for his
inward endowments, pleasing in his conversation, of a free, and moving air,
humble in his behavior, and if he had any pride, it was but just enough to
show that he did not affect humility, his mind bowed with a motion as
unconstrained as his body, nor did he force this virtue in the least, but he
allowed it only; so aimable he was, that every Virgin that had Eyes, knew too
she had a Heart, and knew as surely she should lose it. His Cupid could not be
reputed blind, he never shot for him, but he was sure to wound. As every other
Nymph admired him, so he was dear to all the Tuneful Sisters, the Muses were
fired with him as much as their own radiant God Apollo; not their loved Springs
and Fountains were so grateful to their eyes as he, him they esteemed their
Helicon and Parnassus too; in short, when ever he pleased, he could enjoy them
all. Thus he enamored the whole Female Sex, but amongst all the sighing
captives of his Eyes, Belvira only boasted charms to move him, her parents
lived near his, and even from their Childhood they felt mutual Love, as if
their Eyes at their first meeting had struck out such glances as had kindled
into amorous flame. And now Belvira in her fourteenth year, (when the fresh
spring of young virginity began to cast more lively bloomings in her Cheeks,
and softer longings in her Eyes) by her indulgent Father's care was sent to
London to a Friend, her Mother being lately dead: When, as if fortune ordered
it so, Frankwit's Father took a journey to the other World, to let his Son the
better enjoy the pleasures and delights of this: the young Lover now with all
imaginable haste interred his Father, nor did he shed so many Tears for his
loss as might in the least quench the Fires, which he received from his
Belvira's Eyes, but (master of seventeen hundred pounds a year, which his
Father left him) with all the Wings of Love he flys to London, and sollicits
Belvira with such fervency, that it might be thought he meant Deaths Torch
should kindle Hymen's; and now as soon as he arrives at his Journeys end, he
goes to pay a visit to the fair Mistress of his Soul, and assures her, that tho
he was absent from her, yet she was still with him; and that all the Road he
Traveled her beauteous Image danced before him, and like the ravished Prophet,
he saw his Deity in every Bush; in short, he paid her constant visits, the Sun
never rose, or set, but still he saw it in her company, and every minute of the
day he counted by his sighs so incessantly he importuned her that she could no
longer hold out, and was pleased in the surrender of her heart, since it was he
was Conqueror, and therefore felt a triumph in her yielding; their Flames now
joined, grew more and more, glowed in their Cheeks, and lightened in their
glances; eager they looked, as there were pulses beating in their Eyes; and all
endearing, at last she vowed, that Frankwit living she would never be any other
man's; thus they past on some time, while every day rolled over fair, Heaven
showed an aspect all serene, and the Sun seemed to smile at what was done; he
still caressed his charmer with an innocence becoming his sincerity, he lived
upon her tender breath, and basked in the bright luster of her Eyes, with
pride, and secret joy.

He saw his Rivals languish for that bliss, those charms, those rapturous and
extatick transports which he engrossed alone. But now some eighteen months
(some ages in a lovers Calendar) winged with delights, and fair Belvira now
grown fit for riper joys, knows hardly how she can deny her pressing lover and
herself to crown their vows, and join their hands as well as hearts. All this
while the young Gallant washed himself clean of that shining dirt, his Gold; he
fancied little of Heaven dwelt in his yellow Angels, but let them fly away as
it were on their own Golden wings, he only valued the smiling Babies in
Belvira's Eyes. His generosity was boundless as his Love, for no man ever truly
loved that was not generous. He thought his Estate like his passion, was a sort
of a Pontick Ocean, it could never know an Ebb: but now he found it could be
fathomed, and that the Tide was turning, therefore he sollicits with more
impatience, the consummation of their joy^ that both might go like Martyrs from
the ^^ames immediately to Heaven; and now at last it was agreed between them
that they should both be one, but not without some reluctance on the female
side, for it is the humor of our Sex, to deny most eagerly those grants to
Lovers, for which most tenderly we sigh: so contradictory are we to our selves,
as if the Deity had made us with a seeming reluctance to his own designs,
placing as much discords in our minds, as there is harmony in our faces. We are
a sort of aerie Clouds, whose Lightning flash out one way, and the Thunder
another. Our words and thoughts can never agree. So, this young charming Lady
thought her desires could live in their own longings, like Misers
wealth-devouring Eyes; and e're she consented to her Lover, prepared him first
with speaking looks, and then with a fore-running sigh, applied to the dear
charmer thus: Frankwit, I am afraid to venture the Matrimonal bondage, it may
make you think your self too much confined, in being only free to one. Ah! my
dear Belvira, he replied, that one, like Manna, has the taste of all, why
should I be displeased to be confined to Paradise, when it was the curse of our
forefathers to be set at large, tho they had the whole World to roam in: You
have, my Love, ubiquitary charms, and you are all in all, in every part. Ay
but, replied Belviria, we are all like perfumes, and too continual smelling
makes us seem to have lost our Sweets, I^ll be judged by my Cousin Celesia
here, if it he not better to live still in mutual love, without the last
Enjoyment. (I had forgot to tell my Reader that Celesia was an heiress, the
only child of a rich Turkey Merchant, who when he dyed left her fifty thousand
pound in Money, and some Estate in Land; but, poor creature, she was blind to
all these riches, having been born without the use of sight, though in all
other respects charming to a wonder.) Indeed, says Celesia, (for she saw
clearly in her mind) I admire you should ask my judgment in such a case, where
I have never had the least experience; but I believe it is but a sickly soul
which cannot nourish its Offspring of desires without preying upon the body.
Believe me, replied Frankwit, I bewail your want of sight, and I could almost
wish you my own eyes for a moment, to view your charming Cousin, where you
would see such Beauties as are too dazzling to be long beheld; and if too
daringly you gazed, you would feel the misfortune of the loss of sight, much
greater than the want on it; and you would acknowledge, that in too
presumptuously seeing, you would be blinder then, than now unhappily you are.

Ah! I must confess, replied Belvira, my poor dear Cousin is blind, for I fancy
she bears too great an esteem for Frankwit, and only longs for sight to look on
him. Indeed, replied Celesia, I would be glad to see Frankwit, for I fancy he is
as dazzling as he but now described his Mistress, and if I fancy I see him,
sure I do see him, for sight is fancy, is it not? or do you feel my Cousin with
your Eyes? This is indeed, a charming blindness, replied Frankwit, and the
fancy of your sight excels the certainty of ours; strange! that there should be
such glances even in blindness? You, fair Maid, require not Eyes to conquer, if
your night has such Stars, what Sunshine would your day of sight have, if ever
you should see? I fear those Stars you talk of, said Belvira, have some
influence on you, and by the compass you sail by now, I guess you are steering
to my Cousin. She is indeed charming enough to have been another Offspring of
bright Venus, blind like her Brother Cupid. That Cupid, replied Celesia, I am
afraid has shot me, for methinks I would not have you marry Frankwit, but
rather live as you do without the least Enjoyment, for methinks if he were
married, he would be more out of my sight than he already is. Ah! Madam,
returned Frankwit, love is no Camelion, it cannot feed on Air alone. No but,
rejoined Celesia, you Lovers that are not blind like love itself, have amorous
looks to feed on. Ah! believe it, said Belvira, it is better Frankwit, not to
lose Paradise by too much knowledge; Marriage-enjoyment does but wake you from
your sweet golden Dreams: Pleasure is but a Dream, dear Frankwit, but a Dream,
and to be wakened. Ah! Dearest, but unkind Belvira, answered Frankwit, sure
there is no waking from delight, in being lull^d on those soft Breasts of thine.
Alas! (replied the Bride to be) it is that very lulling wakes you; Women
enjoyed, are like Romances read, or Raree-shows once seen, mere tricks of the
slight of hand, which, when found out, you only wonder at your selves for
wondering so before at them. It Is expectation endears the blessing; heaven
would not be heaven, could we tell what it is. When the Plot's out you have done
with the Play, and when the last Act's done, you see the Curtain drawn with
great indifferency. O my Belvira, answered Frankwit, that expectation were
indeed a Monster which enjoyment could not satisfy; I should take no pleasure
he rejoined, running from hill to hill, like Children chasing that Sun which I
could never catch. O thou shall have it then, that Sun of Love, replied
Belvira, fired by this complaint, and gently rushed into his arms, (rejoyning,)
so Phoebus rushes radiant, and unfullied into a gilded Cloud. Well then, my
dear Belvira, answered Frankwit, be assured I shall be ever yours, as you are
mine; fear not you shall never draw Bills of love upon me so fast as I shall
wait in readiness to pay them; but now I talk of Bills, I must retire into
Cambridgeshire, where I have a small concern as yet unmortgaged, I will return
thence with a brace of thousand pounds within a week at farthest, with which
our Nuptials by their celebration shall be worthy of our love. And then, my
Life, my Soul, we shall be joyn^d, never to part again. This tender expression
moved Belvira to shed some few tears, and poor Celesia thought herself most
unhappy that she had not eyes to weep with too; but if she had, such was the
greatness of her grief, that sure she would have soon grown blind with weeping.
In short, after a great many soft vows, and promises of an inviolable faith,
they parted with a pompous sort of pleasing woe; their concern was of such a
mixture of joy and sadness, as the weather seems, when it both rains and
shines. And now the last, the very last of last adieu's was over, for the
farewels of Lovers hardly ever end, and Frankwit (the time being Summer)
reached Cambridge that night, about nine a clock; (strange! that he should have
make such haste to fly from what so much he loved!) and now, tired with the
fatigue of his Journey, he thought fit to refresh himself by writing some few
lines to his beloved Belvira; for a little Verse after the dull prose company
of his servant, was as great an ease to him, (from whom it flowed as naturally
and unartificially, as his love or his breath) as a pace or hand-gallop, after
a hard, uncouth, and rugged trot. He therefore, finding his Pegasus was no way
tired with his land travel, takes a short journey through the air, and writes as
follows.

My dearest dear Belvira,
YOu knew my soul, you knew it yours before,
I told it all, and now can tell no more;
Your presence never wants fresh charms to move,
But now more strange, and unknown power you prove,
For now your very absence it is I love.
Something there is which strikes my wandering view,
And still before my eyes I fancy you.
Charming you seem, all charming, heavenly fair,
Bright as a Goddess does my love appear,
You seem, Belvira, what indeed you are.
Like the Angelick offspring of the skies,
With beatifick glories in your eyes.
Sparkling with radiant luster all Divine,
Angels, and Gods! oh heavens! how bright they shine!
Are you Belvira? can I think you mine!
Beyond even thought, I do thy beauties see,
Can such a heaven of heavens be kept for me!
O be assured, I shall be ever true,
I must --
For if I would, I cannot be false to you.
Oh! how I wish I might no longer stay,
Tho I resolve I will no time delay,
One tedious week, and then I Will fleet away.
Tho love be blind, he shall conduct my road,
Winged with almighty love to your abode,
I Will fly, and grow immortal as a God.
Short is my stay, yet my impatience strong,
Short tho it is, alas! I think it long.
I Will come, my life, new blessings to pursue,
Love then shall fly a flight, he never flew,
I Will stretch his balmy wings; I Am yours, --
Adieu. Frankwit.


This Letter Belvira received with unspeakable joy, and laid it up safely in
her bosom, laid it, where the dear Author of it lay before, and wonderfully
pleased with his humor of writing in Verse, resolved not to be at all
behind-hand with him, and so writ as follows.

My dear Charmer,
YOu knew before what power your love could boast,
But now your constant faith confirms me most.
Absent sincerity the best assures,
Love may do much, but faith much more allures,
For now your constancy has bound me yours.
I find, methinks, in Verse some pleasure too,
I cannot want a Muse, who write to you.
Ah! soon return, return, my charming dear,
Heaven knows how much we mourn your absence here:
My poor Celesia now would charm your soul,
Her eyes, once blind, do now divinely roll.
An aged Matron has by charms unknown,
Given her clear sight as perfect as thy own.
And yet, beyond her eyes, she values thee,
It Is for thy sake alone she is glad to see.
She begged me, pray remember her to you,
That is a task which now I gladly do.
Gladly, since so I only recommend
A dear relation, and a dearer friend,
Never shall my love -- but here my note must end.
Your ever true Belvira.


When this Letter was written, it was strait shown to Celesia, who looked upon
any thing that belonged to Frankwit with rejoicing glances; so eagerly she
perused it, that her tender eyes beginning to water, she cried out, (fancying
she saw the words dance before her view) Ah! Cousin, Cousin, your Letter is
running away, sure it cannot go itself to Frankwit? A great deal of other
pleasing innocent things she said, but still her eyes flowed more bright with
lustrous beams, as if they were to shine out; now all that glancing radiancy
which had been so long kept secret, and as if, as soon as the cloud of
blindness once was broke, nothing but lightnings were to flash for ever after.
Thus in mutual discourse they spent their hours, while Frankwit was now
ravished with the receipt of this charming answer of Belvira's, and blessed his
own eyes which discovered to him the much welcome news of fair Celesia's. Often
he reads the Letter over and over, but there his fate lay hid, for 'twas that
very fondness proved his ruin. He lodged at a Cousin's House of his, and there,
(it being a private family) lodged likewise a Blackamoor Lady, then a Widow; a
whimsical Knight had taken a fancy to enjoy her; enjoy her did I say? enjoy the
Devil in the flesh at once? I know not how it was, but he would fain have been
a bed with her, but she not consenting on unlawful terms, (but sure all terms
are with her unlawful) the Knight soon married her, as if there were not hell
enough in Matrimony, but he must wed the Devil too. The Knight a little after
died, and left this Lady of his (whom I shall call Moorea) an Estate of six
thousand pounds per Ann. Now this Moorea observed the joyous Frankwit with an
eager look, her Eyes seemed like Stars of the first magnitude glaring in the
night; she greatly importuned him to discover the occasion of his transport,
but he denying it, (as it is the humor of our Sex) made her the more
inquisitive; and being jealous that it was from a Mistress, employed her Maid
to steal it, and if she found it such to bring it her; accordingly it
succeeded, for Frankwit having drank hard with some of the Gentlemen of that
Shire, found himself indisposed, and soon went to Bed, having put the Letter in
his pocket: The Maid therefore to Moorea contrived that all the other Servants
should be out of the way, that she might plausibly officiate in the warming the
bed of the indisposed Lover, but likely, had it not been so, she had warmed it
by his entreaties in a more natural manner; he being in bed in an inner Room,
she slips out the Letter from his pocket, carries it to her Mistress to read,
and so restores it whence she had it; in the morning the poor Lover wakened in
a violent Fever, burning with a fire more hot than that of Love. In short, he
continued sick a considerable while, all which time the Lady Moorea constantly
visited him, and he as unwillingly saw her (poor Gentleman) as he would have
seen a Parson; for as the latter would have persuaded, so the former scared him
to Repentance. In the mean while, during his sickness, several Letters were
sent to him by his Dear Belvira, and Celesia too, (then learning to write) had
made a shift to give him a line or two in Postscript with her Cousin, but all
was intercepted by the jealousy of the Black Moorea, black in her mind, and
dark, as well as in her body. Frankwit too writ several Letters as he was able,
complaining of her unkindness, those likewise were all stopped by the same
Blackmoor Devil. At last, it happened that Wildvill, (who I told my Reader was
Frankwit's friend) came to London, his Father likewise dead, and now Master of
a very plentiful fortune, he resolves to marry, and paying a visit to Belvira,
enquires of her, concerning Frankwit, she all in mourning for the loss, told
him his friend was dead. Ah! Wildvill, he is dead, said she, and died not mine,
a Blackmoor Lady had bewitched him from me; I received a Letter lately which
informed me all* there was no name subscribed to it, but it intimated, that it
was written at the request of dying Frankwit. Oh! I am sorry at my soul, said
Wildvill, for I loved him with the best, the dearest friendship; no doubt then,
rejoyned he, it is Witchcraft indeed that could make him false to you; what
delight could he take in a Blackmoor Lady, tho she had received him at once
with a soul as open as her longing arms, and with her Petticoat put off her
modesty. Gods! How could he change a whole Field argent into downright Sables.
'Twas done, returned Celesia, with no small blot, I fancy to the Female
Scutcheon. In short, after some more discourse, but very sorrowful, Wildvill
takes his leave, extremely taken with the fair Belvira, more beauteous in her
cloud of woe; he paid her afterward frequent visits, and found her wonder for
the odd inconstancy of Frankwit, greater than her sorrow, since he died so
unworthy of her. Wildvill attacked her with all the force of vigorous love, and
she (as she thought) fully convinced of Frankwit's death, urged by the fury and
impatience of her new ardent Lover, soon surrendered, and the day of their
Nuptials now arrived, their hands were joined. In the mean time Frankwit, (for
he still lived) knew nothing of the injury the base Moorea practiced, knew not
that 'twas through her private order, that the forementioned account of his
falsehood and his death was sent; but impatient to see his Dear Bolvira, tho yet
extremely weak, rid post to London, and that very day arrived there,
immediately after the Nuptials of his Mistress and his Friend were celebrated.
I was at this time in Cambridge, and having some small acquaintance with this
Blackamoor Lady, and sitting in her Room that evening, after Frankwit's
departure thence, in Moorea's absence, saw inadvertently a bundle of Papers,
which she had gathered up, as I suppose, to burn, since now they grew but
useless, she having no further hopes of him; I fancied I knew the hand, and
thence my curiosity only led me to see the name, and finding Belvira
subscribed, I began to guess there was some foul play in hand, Belvira being my
particularly intimate acquaintance: I read one of them, and finding the
contents, conveyed them all secretly out with me, as I thought, in point of
justice I was bound, and sent them to Belvira by that night's Post; so that
they came to her hands soon after the minute of her Marriage, with an account
how, and by what means I came to light on them. No doubt but they exceedingly
surpised her: but Oh! Much more she grew amazed immediately after, to see the
poor, and now unhappy Frankwit* who privately had inquired for her below, being
received as a stranger, who said he had some urgent business with her in a back
Chamber below stairs. What Tongue, what Pen can express the mournful sorrow of
this Scene: At first they both stood dumb, and almost senseless; she took him
for the Ghost of Frankwit; he looked so pale, new risen from his sickness, he
(for he had heard at his entrance in the House, that his Belvira married
Wildvil) stood in a maze, and like a Ghost indeed, wanted the power to speak,
till spoken to the first. At last, he draws his Sword, designing there to fall
upon it in her presence; she then imagining it his Ghost too sure, and come to
kill her, shrieks out and swoons; he ran immediately to her, and caught her in
his arms, and while he strove to revive and bring her to herself, tho that he
thought could never now be done, since she was married, Wildvill missing his
Bride, and hearing the loud shriek, came running down, and entering the Room,
sees his Bride lie claspt in Frankwit's arms, Ha! Traitor! He cries out, drawing
his Sword with an impatient fury, have you kept that Strumpet all this while,
cursed Frankwit, and now think fit to put your damned cast Mistress upon me;
could not you forbear her neither even on my wedding day? Abominable Wretch!
Thus saying, he made awful pass at Frankwit, and run him through the left arm,
and quite through the Body of the poor Belvira; that thrust immediately made her
start, tho Frankwit's endeavors all before were useless. Strange! that her
death revived her! for ah! she felt that now she only lived to dye! striving
through wild amazement to run from such a Scene of horror, as her
apprehensions-shew'd her; down she dropped, and Frankwit seeing her fall, (all
friendship disannulled by such a chain of injuries) draws, fights with, and
stabs his own loved Wildvill. Ah! who can express the horror and distraction of
this fatal misunderstanding! the House was alarmed, and in came poor Celesia,
running in confusion just as Frankwit was offering to kill himself, to dye with
a false friend, and perjured Mistress, for he supposed them such. Poor Celesia
now bemoaned her unhappiness of sight, and wished she again were blind.
Wildvill died immediately, and Belvira only survived him long enough to unfold
all their most unhappy fate, desiring Frankwit with her dying breath, if ever
he loved her, (and now she said that she deserved his love, since she had
convinced him that she was not false) to marry her poor dear Celesia, and love
her tenderly for her Belvira's sake; leaving her, being her nearest Relation,
all her fortune, and he, much dearer than it all, to be added to her own; so
joining his and Celesia's Hands, she poured her last breath upon his Lips, and
said, Dear Frankwit, Frankwit, I dye yours. With tears and wondrous sorrow he
promised to obey her Will, and in some months after her interrment, he
performed his promise.

FINIS.

