A SERMON At the Funeral of the Right Reverend Father in GOD, JOHN Late Lord
Bishop, and Count Palatine of Durham.

THE EPITAPH OF THE DECEASED, Prescribed by himself in his WILL, was this;

Rev. xiv. 13. Beati Mortui, qui moriuntur in Domino, requiescunt enim a
Laboribus suis. The dead Man's real Speech. A FUNERAL SERMON Preached on Hebr.
xi. 4. Upon the 29th day of April, 1672 TOGETHER WITH A brief of the Life,
Dignities, Benefactions, Principal Actions, and Sufferings; and of the death of
the said late Lord Bishop of DVRHAM.

Published (upon earnest Request) By Isaac Basire D. D. CHAPLAIN in ORDINARY to
his MAJESTY, and ARCHDEACON of NORTHUMBERLAND.

LONDON, Printed by E. T. and R. H. for James Collins; at the Kings Arms in
Ludgate Street, 1673.

TO THE Christian Reader.
THis untimely Conception might have proved an Abortive, or if born, Genesis 35.
18.
a Benoni, to the Parent then in sore Travel, through sickness, both in the
Preparation deproperated, as also in the present Production; being at the
earnest entreaty of the Noble Relations of our Lord Bishop deceased, now
pressed unto the Press. When this was delivered, viva voce, out of a due Regard
to the Solemn Confluence of so many Worthy Persons, (for some of them came from
far) as also out of a respect to the day, then far spent, I did purposely
contract my Meditations, and express them then, under the Ancient Canonical
measure of an (...). S. Basil. Homil. xxiii. (...) -- (...) -- Idem S. Basil
Homil* 2. in Psalm. xiv. Non adhaerendum rebus secularibus (**) Conctonator non
ultra Horam, ne fastidium pariat auditoribus; Canon Hungaricus, etc.
Hour: Esteeming it a point of Commendable Prudence, and also of plausible
Thrift to boot, on such Solemn Occasions, to shorten the double pains both of
the Speaker, and of the Hearers.

But since the delivery, being desired, as by sundry Worthy Relations of the
deceased, so at the request of my Friend, the Honest and Industrious
Bookseller, I have been persuaded to enlarge the Sermon, with the Addition of
a Brief of the Life of the deceased Prelate; and so my Brook is become a
River, Eccles. 24. 31.
I wish it may not prove a Sea, to deterr the Reader from launching out into
it: For the matter of Right done to the dead in General, I refer my self to
Gods Word: For the matter of Fact in particular concerning the Person of the
deceased, I Report my self to their Report, whose Information I have
diligently, and severally desired, and faithfully delivered here, relying upon
their verity, confirmed by the Authority of our late Lord Bishops Last Will in
English, which should be Sacred. My honest Request to the Christian Reader is
only for the same Candor in the Reading, as was intended by me in the Writing.

All which commending to God for a Blessing, I take leave, Praying in K. David's
words; That God would spare me a little, Psalm. 39. 15.
that I may recover my strength before I go hence and be no more seen.

AMEN.
Imprimatur,

Tho. Tomkins R. R.mo in Christo Patri ac Domino Dno Gilberto Divina
Providentia Archi-Episc. Cant. a Sacris Domesticis.
Ex Aedibus Lambethanis Feb. 10. 1672.
ERRATA.
Page 6. lin. 1. deest but before upon. and l. 2. an bef. uniform. and 1. 14.
in comparison of eternity, after span long. and l. ult. and felicity, after
innocence. p. 8. l. 12. for how read which way. p. 9. l. 5. dele comma after
Statute. p. 24. l. 25. r. the Holy -- p. 37. l. 4. phrase it in -- p. 42. Marg.
for Covarrus r. Covarruvius. p. 43. l. 4. r. Calligraphy. p. 50. l. 11. r.
domestical. p. 54. Marg. ad lin. 11. r. Constantinopol. p. 57. l. 2. add he
before much. p. 59. l. 29. after teaching add them. p. 70. l. 12. after thrive
add the. p. 71. l. 16. r. Proprietary. p. 85. l. 15. after Character add
Conscience. p. 92. l. 13. r. Br^n^. p. 93. l. 22. for with r. of. p. 97. Marg.
r. Switzerland. p. 110. l. ult. for still r. yet. p. 118. after the Latin Will
dele Vid. J. Will. etc. p. 119. before Our help, insert, The Translation of the
Latin Will. p. 121. l. 13. for shading r. shadowing.

THE Dead Man's REAL SPEECH.
Hebr. 11. 4. -- By it, he, being dead, yet speaks.
KNow you not that a great man is fallen in Israel? 2 Samuel 3. 38.
This was David's noble Epitaph over Abner, though his Rebel: and how much more
may this be our Just Preface to this solemn Funeral (to be sure) over a better
Man than was Abner? Therefore in King David's words I may truly say again, Know
you not that a great Man is now fallen in our Israel? A great Man indeed, as
shall appear before we take our Final Leave of him: We may be sure greater than
Abner, not only in his State, but, which is the crown of all true greatness, in
his Graces and Beneficence; in this indeed, and in truth, greater than Abner:
yet Abner was a great man, for he was a General in the Field; (but on the wrong
side, the Rebels side:) Our great man a General not only in the Field The Lord
Bishop of Durham is Lieutenant General of this County, as ab Antiquo ex
Officio, so, ex abundanti per Mandatum, by the Kings gracious Commission,
cumulative and so still under the King, who is always the Sovereign of all
Estates in his Realms.
, but, which is much more, a General in this Church, I mean, his Diocese (a
great one) and in both these great Capacities constantly Loyal, ad Exemplum:
And yet, as high as this great man was so lately, behold how low he is laid
down now, who yet must be laid down lower, as you shall see by and by. Such
Spectacles of Mortality ought to be to us Survivours tot Specula, so many true
Looking-glasses, wherein whatever our Artificial Looking-glasses may flatter
us, with what our living faces seem to be now, this Natural Lookingglass tells
us plainly, to our faces, what all our dead faces shall be, must be then (God
knows how soon:) He being Dead, yet speaks out Mortality to us all; so many
Funerals, so many Warning-pieces to us all to prepare for our last and greatest
Issue. This, Eccles. 70. 2.
in the Judgment of the wise man, is the best use we can make of our Access to
the House of Mourning, such as this house is at present; therefore the Living
should lay it to his Heart, which that we may all do:

Let us pray with the Spirit, and in the words of King David:

Psalm. 90. 12.
O teach us to number our days that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. Can.
55.
Ye shall further pray for Christ's Holy Catholic Church, etc. Hebr. 11. 4. THe
Scope of this Text (which must be the Aim of the Sermon) is this, to stir up
all the faithful living to imitate the faithful that are dead; Hebr. 11.
whereof this Chapter is the sacred Roll upon the Divine Records, down from
Abel unto the Patriarchs, the Judges, the Kings, the Prophets, Hebr. 6. 12.
etc. that is, that we should endeavor to become the followers of them who
through faith and patience inherit the promises.

The Text is short, but the Lesson is long (that is) to live so now, as we may
die well at last, and, by our good works, speak when we are dead.

The Parts are two, which do express two States of Man.

1. The state of Death, [He being dead] which is the privation of the life of
nature common to all men, (on which frail life most men dote so much, because
they have no care for, nor hope of a better life.)

2. The state of a Life after Death, that is, the Life of Glory, implied in
these words [He speaketh] for Speech is the evidence of a living man: Ergo Abel
though dead in the Body, yet is still alive in the Spirit.

The first is a Corrosive to the state of Nature, but the

Second comes in as a Cordial to all those who are in the state of Grace.

This Text appears much like the Israelites Guide in the Wilderness; 'twas a
Cloud, Exodus 14. 20. with Hebr. 12. E.
and that no ordinary Cloud, but such a Cloud as was Dark on the one side, and
Light on the other side, dark toward the Egyptians, but Light toward the
Israelites: Even so is Death, dark and sad to the Unbelievers and Impenitent,
but lightsome and welcome to all true Penitents and Believers.

1. To begin with the first, The state of Death; Man in the state of Innocence
was created capable of three Lives; the Life Corporal, Life Spiritual, and Life
Eternal.

The first is the Life of Nature, a Transitory Life.

The second is the Life of Grace, a Life permanent upon condition of
perseverance in uniform obedience to God.

The third is Life Eternal, the Life of Glory, the Life of the Saints
Triumphant, of the Elect Angels, yea the Life of God himself, Ephesians. 4. 18.
and therefore a Life immutable, interminable:

2. Two of these three Lives [the Life natural and spiritual] man had then in
present possession, and the third in a sure reversion after the expiration of
but one Life, and that a short one too, but a span long; this present life is
no more, by King David's just measure: Psalm. 39. 5.
Behold thou have made my days, as it were a span long.

3. Man by his Apostasy from God, through the first original sin of willful
incogitancy, and through pride, did soon deprive himself of all these three
Lives at once, and so according to the just sentence of God, pronounced upon
man aforehand (for a fair warning) Morte morieris, Genesis 2. 17.
Thou shall die the Death, man was justly precipitated from that high state of
Innocence into the base and damnable state of sin and misery, whereby every
man, none excepted, (but the God and man Christ Jesus) is now by original sin
become subject to a threefold Death, First, Corporal, Secondly, Spiritual, and
thirdly (without Repentance) Eternal.

The first is Death Corporal, which is a total (but not final) separation of
the Soul from the Body [the sad Real Text before our Eyes.]

The second is Death Spiritual, a far worse kind of death, a state of sin,
which is a separation of the soul from the Grace and Favor of God which is
life it self, Psalm. 30. 5.
without which we are all by nature, Ephesians. 2. 1.
dead in trespasses and sins, Children of wrath, no better.

The third and worst of all, is Death Eternal, and therefore called in Holy
Scripture, Revel. 20. 6.
The great Death, the second Death; because it is a final, total and eternal
separation of both Soul and Body, from the Glorious Presence, Beatifical
Vision, and admirable and unspeakable Fruition of God himself; whom as to serve
here on Earth is the Life of Grace, so to enjoy in Heaven is the Life of Glory,
which is life everlasting.

4. The first of these three [Death Temporal] none of us can avoid; die we
must, die we shall, God prepare us all for it: But as the thing, Death, is
certain for the matter, so for the manner, how we shall die, in, or out of our
wits, as in Frenzies, etc. where we shall die, amongst Friends or amongst Foes;
when we shall die, whether in youth or in old Age; how we shall die, whether by
a sudden, violent, or painful Death (which God in mercy avert from us all)
none of us all knows: and therefore our best course is, while we may (by a
lively faith, timely repentance, and real amendment of life) to prepare for
Death; St. Aug.
and then come Death in what shape it will, de Discipl.
and welcome, we shall not die unprepared. cap. 2. non potest male mori qui
been vixerit, Audeo dicere, non potest male mori qui been vixerit.
Yet it concerns us all frequently and seriously to think of these great
Quatuor novissima [Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell.] It Is Moses his passionate
wish; O that they were wise, that they understood this, Deuteronomy. 32. 29.
that they would consider their latter end: Hebr. 9. 27.
Since it is appointed for all men once to die, and after that comes Judgment.
The Vulgar Translation renders it statutum est, Death is an universal Statute,
Law to all mankind; and so it is both for authority of coaction, and certainty
of execution, for it is grounded upon two of the greatest Attributes of God,
which are,

First, God's infallible Truth; for the Commination was directed unto man, and
that also in mercy, to forwarn him that he might not sin.

Secondly, God's exact Justice, which requires the execution of the Divine
Sentence, to be done upon the same nature that had sinned. Man did sin,
therefore man must suffer, that is, man must die; and because the first man
Adam was the Original Root, and General Representative of all mankind (Adam's
offspring) therefore all men must die (pray God we all may die well) or if they
live to the end of the world, yet they must suffer a Change at the least, 1
Cor. 15. 51.
at the last, which Change whatever ever it be, (for it is a Mystery) will be
equivalent to a Death, so that there lies an universal necessity to undergo a
Death, some kind of Death. Genesis 5. 5.
In the Ancient Register of the Macrobii, those long lived Patriarchs, Adam
lived 930 years, and he died; Methuselah, the longest liver of all Mankind,
lived 969 years, and he died, etc. that is the burden song of them all:
Neither Methuselah the antientest, nor Sampson the strongest, nor Solomon the
wisest of men, could exempt themselves from the fatal necessity of Death.
Seneca himself, though but a Heathen Philosopher, being ignorant of the
original cause of Death; yet observing the generality of the event of Death,
drew his Topic of Consolation to his Friend Polybius, sad for the Death of his
Brother, from this necessity of Death: But God be thanked, we Christians have
better Topics of Comfort for the Death of our Christian Friends, past, or our
own Death a coming, by opposing, through Faith, against the terror of our
Dissolution by Death, the consideration of our admirable and comfortable
conjunction with Christ our Head after Death. This glorious state is by St.
Romans 8. 19.
Paul styled the manifestation of the Sons of God, for which, by a natural
instinct, the whole Creation groaneth with an earnest expectation of the
accomplishment: The word in the Original is very significant [(...)] which
betokens the looking for some Person or thing with lifting up of the Head, or
stretching out their Necks with earnest intention and observation to see when
the person or thing looked for shall appear; as a poor Prisoner condemned looks
out at the Grates for a gracious Pardon: And if the Creatures inanimate, etc.
do so earnestly pant for the Final Redemption of the Sons of God, how much more
we being the Parties principally concerned? This made St. Paul as it were with
hoised-up sails of Hope and Desire (the Affections of his Soul) to long to be
dissolved and to be with Christ. Phil. 1. 21. (...)
The Original imports to loosen, or to launch forth, as a Ship from a Foreign
Port for a happy voyage toward her wished for Haven at home.

5. I have so much Christian charity for the surviving noble Relations of the
Great man deceased, as to believe that, if they could, with their wishes and
tears, waft him over back from Heaven to labor again on Earth, they would not
do it, if they loved him indeed, and not rather themselves. It Is an excellent
observation of Isidore Pelusiota (he lived above 1200. years ago) who
commenting on these words of our Savior's compassion for Lazarus expressed by
his tears, that it was not at the Death of Lazarus, John 11. 35.
but that it was at his Resurrection that Jesus wept, a real demonstration of
his Humanity both natural and moral: This Father's note upon that difference is
this, That our Savior Christ's Love toward Lazarus was a Rational Love, yea,
a Divine Love, not as Ours toward our dead Friends too too often, too carnal or
natural, or at the best a humane love, if not a self-love, we wish them alive
for our own ends. True it is, that it is very lawful, and also very fit to pay
our deceased Friends their due Tribute of Grief, and to let Nature have her
course, Romans 1. 31.
lest we should seem or appear without natural affection; (...)
but provided always that the Current of Nature do not overflow the Banks of
Reason, much more the Banks of Religion settled by St. Paul, who would not have
Christians to be sorry for their deceased Friends, as others who have no hope:
1 These. 4. 13.
For there is a lively hope of a joyful meeting again in the state of Glory, if
we in the state of Grace do follow the Saints deceased. Upon this consideration
is worth the observing the different manner of mourning of Joseph for his
Father Jacob, his dear and near Relation, for Joseph mourned seven days only,
Genes. 50. 3. 10.
and of the Egyptians mourning seventy days for the same Jacob, a stranger to
them. The reason of the difference is, because the Egyptians were unbelievers,
but Joseph was a Believer of the Resurrection, and of a glorious meeting once
again with his deceased Father, from thenceforth never to be separated. This
Posie of sacred Meditations I do now present to the Noble Relations of the
deceased; desiring them to accept this offer, and to use it as a Spiritual
Handkercheif, to wipe off, if not drain the Spring of Tears for this their
deceased support.

6. Meanwhile our main care must be not to forfeit that glorious meeting by a
course of life contrary to the good example of the Saints departed, but
instantly to resolve, earnestly to study, constantly to endeavor to live well,
that is to say, To make the Will of God the Rule of our Life, and the Honor of
God the End of our Life: Romans 14. 7, 8.
This is to live unto the Lord, that is, in Subjection unto him; and then we
may be sure to die in the Lord, that is, under his Protection, both of Body and
Soul for evermore.

7. You may be pleased to remember that our Text was two faced, and therefore
we compared it to the Israelites Guide through the Wilderness, a Cloud: we are
now past the dark side of it, Death, [He being Dead] we must now face about and
cheerfully behold the bright side of the cloud, wherein the Dead speaks; and
here we have 1. The Speaker, He 2. The Speech implied, He speaks 3. The time
expressed, Yet, that is, after Death: [He being Dead yet speaketh]


8. First, the Speaker is Abel (...)
, whose name bears mankinds universal Motto in the Holy Tongue, Eccles. 1. ^.
that is, Vanity: for when all is done, Vanity of Vanities, Eccles. 12. 7.
all is Vanity: until the Spirit of man return to God who gave it: till then,
whatever Pride may prompt vain man, Psalm. 39. 7.
verily every man living, in his best estate, is altogether vanity, Selah!

Secondly, For his Trade, he was an Heardsman, for he offered to God the best
of his Flock, in due Homage, and as a Figure of that Lamb of God, which was to
come to take away the sins of the World: John 1. 29.
no doubt he was well instructed by his Parents Adam and Eve, of whose
Conversion and Salvation to doubt, (since the promise of the Blessed Seed
preached unto them by Almighty God himself after their fall, Genesis 3 15.
and which we must in reason suppose was apprehended and applied by them to
themselves through Faith, lest God's preaching should prove vain: such a
suspicion, or doubt of their eternal state) were in us their Posterity an
odious want of charity, Iren. Epiph. Chrysostom. Augustine. etc.
and against the Current of the Ancient Fathers, who give for it this probable
reason, That God did expressly curse the Serpent and the Earth, but God did not
at all curse either Adam or Eve; but contrariwise God in mercy did bestow upon
Adam and Eve the original and fundamental blessing of the Promised Seed, the
Messiah which is Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior, in whom all Adam and Eve's
Posterity should be blessed; and therefore they are not to be concluded within
the number of the damned crew, upon whom shall be pronounced that dreadful
final sentence of Ite maledicti: Mat. 25. 41.
Go ye cursed. As a clear evidence of Adam and Eve's Faith, we produce their
Works, namely the Godly Education of their Children, Cain and Abel, in God's
true Religion, to offer corporal sacrifices, etc. with a spiritual reference,
and therefore with faith in the only expiatory and satisfactory sacrifice to be
performed in the fullness of time by the person of the Messiah, Galat. 4. 4.
the second Adam, for the saving of mankind, as the first Adam was in the
damning of mankind; both the Adams being public Representatives of all
mankind, as the first in the Fall, so the second in the Resurrection.

9. This just Apology for our first Parents, Adam and Eve, I thought it my
filial duty to offer unto all mankind, Adam's offspring, once for all to stop
the mouths of censorious Children unmindful of their original duty, and of the
Rule Parentum Mores non sunt Arguendi: Genes. 9. 22, 23.
Shem and Japhet were blessed for turning away their faces from their Father's
nakedness, but wicked Cham was, for outfacing it, cursed with a grievous curse
This Curse sticks to this day (above 4000 years) as a foul brand upon Cham in
his cursed Posterity, for the Egyptians and Ethiopians or Blackamoors are the
Descendants of cursed Cham [Lexic. Geographic. Ferrarii ad vocem Aethiopiam.
Sam. Bochart. geographia saera part 1. lib. 4. cap. 1.] A People of all
Nations most inconvertible, even to a Prophets Proverb [Jerem. 13. 23.] Can the
Ethiopian change his skin etc. A standing dreadful Monument, and a thundering
Warning piece to all such young Chams, as dare to disgrace their Parents
privately, or rebel against them publicly.
.

10. It Is very observable that God had respect unto Abel first, and then to his
sacrifice, to intimate that God first accepts the Person, and then his service,
Verse. 4.
for Abel offered by Faith, but Cain without Faith, for want of which God
rejected the person of Cain (though the Elder Brother) and consequently his
sacrifice.

Hence observe, that two men may come and worship God with the same kind of
outward worship; and yet differ much in the inward manner, and success of their
service to God: Witness Cain and Abel in the Old Testament, Luke 18.
and the Publican and the Pharisee in the New. For the true Religion is chiefly
inward for the substance, and not only outward for the circumstance and
ceremony; the Religion of too many, I had almost said, of most formal
Professors now a days; an Artificial Religion, as being moved chiefly, if not
only, by outward Respects and Objects, without any inward Life, the want of
which did make a wide difference betwixt Cain and Abel, the Speaker here, from
whom to pass unto his Speech, we shall interpret it by a three fold Exposition.

1. Grammatical. 2. Doctrinal. 3. Moral.
11. As to the Grammatical Exposition, I am not ignorant that the word [(...)]
in the Original may be verbum medium, and so may be translated either in the
passive sense [he is spoken of] as some few Interpreters have rendered it, or in
the active sense, to which I am rather carried by the clear and strong current
of almost all Interpreters. Syriack, Vulgar, Aethiopick, Arabic, French,
English, Germain, Italian.
, and the Harmony of eight Translations both Ancient and Modern, who all render
it actively, He speaks. This Translation is confirmed by a clear Parallel
(Hebr. 12. 24.) where comparison being made betwixt the precious blood of Jesus
Christ and that of Abel, Clem. Alex. Chrysest. Vatablus, Zege^us, Grotiu^, Tena.
it is expressed in the active sense [(...)] Not in the passive, that the blood
of sprinkling is better spoken of, but in the active that it speaks better
things than that of Abel. Ergo, Abel being dead, yet speaks, quod erat
demonstrandum: Enough of the Grammatical Exposition.

12. We pass now to the Doctrinal Exposition. The Doctrine is this, That for
the godly there is a life after this life, for Abel being dead yet speaks,
but we know that dead men are speechless, and that speech is both a sign and an
action of life, Abel is not absolutely dead, though dead in part, he still
lives. We enlarge the instance from righteous Abel unto all the faithful; the
total sum is this, That though good men die, yet their good deeds die not; but
they survive, and that in both Worlds.

First, Prove. 31. 31.
In this world to their due praise (for their own good works praise them in the
gates.)

Secondly, They live in the next world by their Reward and Coronation, Revel.
14. 13.
for their works do follow them: So many good works, so many living Tongues of
good men after Death; who are therefore styled in the Holy Gospel, Luke 20. 38.
The Children of the Resurrection: and again, Abel still lives unto men, in the
memory of all good men, for to such the memory of the just shall be blessed,
Prove. 10. 7.
and the memory of their virtues calls for both our Commemoration and Imitation
of them, which leads me to the third point propounded, which was the Moral
Exposition.

13. For I suppose none that hear this, are so gross of understanding, as to
imagine a Vocal Speech of the Dead, which would be a miracle, but a Speech
Analogical, by such a Figure as the Heavens speak when they declare the Glory
of God. Psalm. 19. 1.
The parallel of St. Chrysostom upon the Speech of Abel, our speaker in the
Text: the Father, after his wonted Rhetoric, amplifies it thus; If Abel had a
thousand voices when he was alive, he has many more, now he is dead, speaking
to our admiration and imitation. But though the Dead Man's Speech be no vocal
speech, yet it is and will be a real speech for our conversion or condemnation
to the end of the world: for Abel being dead, yet speaks.

First, He speaks by his Repentance implied in his sacrifice, not only for
Homage, due by all rational creatures, whether Angels or men, unto God their
Creator, but also as a tacit confession of sin to be expiated by the
All-sufficient sacrifice of the promised blessed seed, the Messiah to come, and
so Abel being dead, yet speaks, and was by his typical sacrifice the first
Prophet of the Old Testament. The good examples of holy men are standing real
Sermons: For there are two wavs of preaching, by word, or deed: The first is
good, the latter is better, but both are best.

Secondly, Abel being dead, yet speaks by his faith expressed here in the
Text, which faith is a neverdying Preacher to all Ages of the Church, because
it assures all the faithful (such as was Abel) of both God's regard and reward
of all his true Servants, Hebr. 11. 6.
who follow Abel's faith.

Thirdly, Abel being dead yet speaks by his works of Righteousness, James 11.
18.
the necessary and best evidences of a lively faith, Hebr. 11. 4.
for which Abel stands canonized by God's own approbation and acceptance, First
of his person, that he was righteous, and then of his performance, his
sacrifice: Therefore Abel is enrolled with Enoch (verse. 5.) for his Communion
of Faith, Godliness, and Happiness, by which both Enoch and Abel pleased God.
Theodotian. Theophyl. and Alii.
The Jewish Rabbis, and sundry Christian Interpreters offer as a tradition
this sign of God's acceptance of the sacrifice of Abel, Lev. 9. 24. 2 Chronicles. 7.
1.
to wit, Kings 8., 8.
by sending Fire from Heaven (as upon Aaron's and upon Solomon's and upon
Eliah's sacrifice) which kindled the sacrifice of Abel the younger Brother, and
not that of Cain, who was the elder Brother. Cornel. B^rtram.
Some Interpreters think that this acceptance of Abel's sacrifice was a
designation of Abel, the younger Brother, to the Priesthood before Cain the
elder Brother, and that these were the occasion of Cain's envy, and his envy
the cause of Abel's murder. By the way, it is worthy our observation that all
that come to worship God are either Abels or Cains, that is, they come with
faith or without faith, and they speed accordingly.

Fourthly and lastly, Abel being dead yet speaks, as in his Life by his
Actions, so at his Death by his patience and passion; for as St. Stephen was
the Proto-Martyr of the New Testament, so was Abel the Proto-Martyr of the Old
Testament, for he died for righteousness sake: Hence some Interpreters derive
his name from (...), which in Holy Tongue signifies to mourn, because he was
the first man that did taste of Death, for which, and for whom his (and our
first) Parents Adam and Eve did begin to mourn.

As it is certain that sin, though but a beast, has a voice, and which is more
strange in a beast, sin has an articulate voice, and by a counter-passion,
which is lex talionis, sin does not only indite the sinner, but also indorseth
upon the sinners bill the parallel punishment for time or place, person or
action, so that many times the punishment becomes the Anagram of the sin: This
even natural men do confess, Judges 1. 7.
witness Adonibezeck, As I have done, so God has requited me: which was also
King David's case, 2 Samuel 12. 10.
Blood for Blood; such was the voice of sin, and of their own Consciences. Sin
has a voice indeed, and that a loud voice, for it reaches as high as Heaven,
to God's ear, and from thence rebounds with an echo upon a man's own
conscience. Genesis 18. 20.
We read of the cry of Sodom, James 5. 4.
and of the cry of the hireling's wages, kept from him, and here Abel's blood
has a voice that cries aloud for Justice in God's ears, and as it were,
prefers a Bill of Indictment, upon which God, the just Judge, immediately
arraigneth Cain, passes Judgment and does Execution upon Cain the Fratricide,
stamping a curse both upon his person and estate, saying, What have thou done?
Genesis 4. 10, 11.
the voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the Ground, and now art
thou cursed from the earth, which has opened her mouth to receive thy brothers
blood from thine hand: When thou tillest the Ground, it shall not henceforth
yield unto thee her strength. A fugitive and a vagabond shall thou be in the
earth. Now, as sin has a voice so grace has a voice also, calling upon us as
for our Imitation of the virtues of the Saints departed, Revel. 14. 13.
so calling upon God for a gracious compensation of their works which follow
them after death: not at all by way of merit, but of God's free mercy; for what
proportion betwixt man's works which are but temporary and therefore finite
(all our best works are no more, Romans 8. 18.
and besides imperfect all) and God's high reward which is Infinite both for
weight and for duration to all eternity? Some Interpreters add a fifth way, by
which Abel being dead, yet speaks, to wit, as a Type, by his blood shed by
Cain his Brother, prefiguring the blood of Christ shed by his brethren the
Jews. And thus many ways, Abel being dead, yet speaks; And so all good men,
though dead, yet speak by their good works of Faith and Patience: In which
blessed number, this dead man before our eyes was through God's grace listed,
and so speaks by his good deeds to his Generation, and seems by his example
to preach unto us all St. Paul's Apostolical Admonition, Galat. 6. 9.
Not to be weary of well doing, for in due season we shall reap [a reward] if
we faint not, as our Christian hope is, the deceased Prelate finds it now to
his everlasting comfort.

O how gladly would I make an end here, and so come down! Sorry I am that I
must now pass and descend from the Literal Text to this our Real Text lying
before us; But it is a Rule of Christian practice, that when God has been
pleased to reveal his will by the event, our humble resignation of our selves
and friends, and all, with submission of our will to God's will is our duty,
and the best remedy to allay all our sorrows, and to say in the words, and with
the spirit of Holy Job, Job 1. 21.
The Lord has given and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the
Lord, (which is part of our office for burial) in all this Job sinned not, no
more should we if we would be followers of Job's faith and patience, which God
grant us all, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father, and the
Holy Ghost, be ascribed from Angels, from us, and from all men, all praise,
power, Majesty and Dominion, now and for ever. Amen.

A BRIEF OF THE Life and Dignities, OF THE BENEFACTIONS AND Principal Actions,
etc. OF The Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN Lord Bishop and Count Palatine
of Durham, etc.

LONDON, Printed for James Collins, at the Sign of the Kings-Arms in
Ludgate Street. 1673.

THE Dead Man's REAL SPEECH.
BUt before we enter into this due Office of Commemoration, (for to preach or
pray over the dead, is Justa persolvere) we must by way of prevention enter
this solemn Protestation against this our censorious Age, That we do abjure all
manner of flattery, passive, or active, being, God be thanked, settled above
all slavish fear or base hope from the living, much more from the dead. Was
King David a Flatterer for composing and publishing those goodly Epitaphs upon
Saul and Abner, 2 Samuel 1. 3.
who yet were no very good men? Acts 9. 39.
or were the godly widows, flatterers for showing the Coats and Garments which
Dorcas made whilst she was alive? In the ensuing rehearsal our intention is,
and our endeavor shall be to publish nothing but vera and utilia. As for the
verity, as I am confident of the Ingenuity of my Instructors (Persons of
Quality and of good credit;) so (as I said before) I am convinced and confirmed
of the verity of the matter, by the last will (a sacred thing in Law) of our
late Lord Bishop. And as for the utility of this due office of Commemoration,
we commit our Meditations to Gods direction; and commend them to your
attention. If there be any Adder that dare hiss against this dead Prelate, or
the liveing for giving the dead his due, or shall object, Was this man one in
quo Adam non peccavit? Was he a man all made of Virtues? Had he no faults? Our
answer is that Proverb of Charity; De mortuis nil nisi been it is an honest old
say; as (...), to gnaw on dead men's bones, is an inhumane, brutish, unnatural
humor: Such Cannibals as do delight to feed on dead man's flesh, by tearing of
their Fame, do take the Devils Office out of his hand: Yet, the Devil, if one
may say so, was more a Gentleman, more civil to Job, for the Devil slandered
him indeed, but 'twas when he was alive, and so might and did answer for
himself. Job 1. and seq.
Far be it from me to usurp the Office of a Coroner, over the state of the
Dead; the Rule of Charity, and practice of our Church, in the Office for the
dead have taught me better Divinity. I know by experience, that an evil eye
looking upon the Dead, through the wrong end of the perspective, I mean Envy,
will not only spear out, but also espy, and that with aggravation the
infirmities or faults of the dead; I wish all such seriously to consider
themselves, and well to weigh St. James James 5. 17.
his Observation; Was not Elias a man subject to the like passions as we are?
and yet by the Pens of the Prophets and Apostles dipped in Charity we read
nothing but commendations of Elias; nor of Job, James 5. 11.
Ye have heard of the patience of Job: not a word of his impatience, Job 42. 3,
5, 6.
though confessed by himself (whom some think to be the Author of the most part
of that Book.)

When I have done with the due praises of this Great Man, Ecclus. 44. 1.
some Shimei with his Serpents tongue may still hiss at, Let us now praise
famous men, and our Fathers that begat us.
though he can never hurt, this dead man: To stop all such foul mouths I wish
them to reflect upon themselves, and let them know that there must be faults as
long as there are men; and with a serious reflection upon themselves, let them
foreknow that after him who lies here before us, we must all, every one of us,
be weighed in the balance at last; and for my own part I must confess I am
perpetually afraid to have my share in that Article against Belshazzar; I dread
his Tekel, Dan. 5. 27.
that final doom, Thou art weighed in the balance and found wanting. The best
of us all at Doomsday would be glad to have their grains of allowance, and why
should we grudge them to our betters? Therefore now to draw the curtain over
all humane infirmities and imperfections, which may God cover in mercy, and
clear us all by his free pardon through Jesus Christ our Lord.

And so to proceed:

It is certain that no man is born a Saint; but it is as certain that every good
man that dies in the exercise of Repentance, Faith and Charity dies a Saint;
such as our Hope is, this our Brother died.

First, his Name.
His Name was John, which in the Holy Tongue signifies the Grace of God. Here,
by the way, Parents and Godfathers may take out this good Lesson, not to put
upon their Children fantastical, much less profane and superstitious Names, but
prudently to choose such Names as may be continual Memorials of some good duties
to the parties so named, as often as they shall hear, read or write their own
Names, that they may endeavor by their lives to become as good as their names.

Secondly, His Surname.
His Surname was Cousin, in Latin Cognatus, quasi a Con and Natus, which (as
the famous Civilian Modestinus expounds it) signifies a Cousin in primo gradu
in his own Family. This Surname of Cousin is become famous by diverse learned
men of that Name. I saw once in our Prelates hand Cognati Opera; and we have in
our hands that excellent Apology for the Ecclesiastical Laws by Dr. Richard
Cousin that Renowned Civilian; and now our Church enjoys that solid work
Entitled,

A Scholastical History of the Canon of the Holy Scripture; brought forth in
his banishment, by this our deceased Lord. Thirdly, His Birth.
His Temporal Birth was on St. Andrews day, 1594. His birth to Glory, (I mean
the day of his death) was Jan. 15. 1671-72. his Age 78. current, Psalm. 90. 10.
greater by so much than King David's first measure 70. So that, to phrase in
Jobs words, Job 5. 26.
He came to his grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn comes in, in his
season. Length of days is by Gods favor annexed to the fifth Commandment
[Honour thy Father, etc.] which the Apostle makes the first Commandment with
promise; Ephesians. 6. 1, 2.
and it is a Glory: For the hoary head is a Crown of Glory, Prove. 16. 31.
if it be found in the way of Righteousness: A good evidence of Gods acceptance
upon his obedience to his Superiors, Spiritual, Political and Natural Parents,
for want of which due obedience to Parents, God many times shortens the days
of the Sons of Belial, Rebellious Children.

Fourthly, His Person.
God and Nature did frame his earthly Tabernacle of a goodly structure, for he
was both tall and erect; a fit presage aforehand of the stature of his future
preferments and dignities; (...), Eurip.
he had a Prelatical presence, which he over-topped with his liberal
beneficence. This I am sure of, he was no Dwarf, neither in Stature, Dignity
nor Bounty, as will appear by the ensuing discourse.

Fifthly, His Family.
1. Paternal, his Fathers Name was Giles Cousin of Fox-hearth; Acts 21. 39.
a Citizen of no mean City (to use St. Paul's phrase, who did glory in Tarsus
his birthplace.)

His City was Norwich, of which more anon, when we come to his Country. He was
a good Citizen, a man of substance, witness his liberal education of this his
great Son.

2. By his Maternal descent, he was Son to Mrs. Elizabeth Remington, of
Remington-Castle, an ancient Family, and which is worth all the rest, both his
Parents were of the Household of faith, Gal. 6. 10.
both born and bred in the true, ancient, Apostolic and Catholic Religion of
the Church of England, which this their Son did so early imbibe, that he lived
and died a constant Professor, and Patron of the same: Thus was his Family in
Linea recta.

As for his Collateral Line, he took a Wife out of an ancient Noble Family in
this Country, Frances, the Daughter of Mr. Marmaduke Blakiston (a Dignitary
both in the Metropolitical Church of York, and in this of Durham) Marmaduke was
Son to John Blak^ston of Blakiston Esquire; whose other Son was Sir William
Blakiston Father to Sir Thomas. His Wife was a prudent Wife, and therefore from
the Lord: To my knowledge a true yoke fellow, Prove. 19. 14.
not only in Prosperis, (as too many worldly-minded Wives) but chiefly in
Adversis, which is the trial of a good Wife, and of a true friend indeed; and
these are blessings! For to have the Burden of a Wife, and not the blessing of
a good wife is a great cross, if not a curse.

And here I stop from attending the rest of his Family any further; perhaps I
have gone too far already in presuming to blazon a Pedigree, being no Herald.

Sixthly, His Country.
To pass from his Family to his Country, he was born a Britain and an English
Man. A Nation so famous for situation, (...) Cambd. Brit. etc. Vegetius above
1200 ago witnesses that the climate of Britain is of that temperature, out of
which it is fittest to choose valiant Soldiers.
plenty and victories. If Plato did thank the Gods that he was born a Grecian
and bred a Philosopher, but still a Heathen: how much more ought every true
Englishman to be thankful unto God for his birth under a Christian Monarchy?
Christian indeed, if, as the current of Historians do report, it received the
Christian Religion from one of the Apostles, or one of their Apostolical
Disciples; some say Simon Zelotes, others Joseph of Arimathea: and if England
(as they say) was the first Kingdom in all the world that first received the
Gospel, with the countenance of Supreme Authority under King Lucius a Britain
(whom Historians do place Anno Christi 170, and it is no small addition of
honor for this Kingdom, that the first Christian Emperor, even Constantine
Sabellicus R. Archiep. usher Praefat. ad Britan.
the Great was born in England. Thus our deceased Prelate was blessed in the
place of his birth, Eccles.
but much more blessed for the state of his New Birth in such a Christian
Church, the most Apostolical and the purest of all Christian Churches; Primond.
ex Eusebius. Theodoret.
Expertus loquor, for in 15 years Ecclesiastical Pilgrimage (during my
voluntary banishment for my Religion and Loyalty) I have surveyed with an
impartial eye of observation most Christian Churches both Eastern and Western;
and I dare pronounce of the Church of England, what David said of Goliahs
Sword, There is none like it, 1 Samuel 21. 9.
both for Primitive Doctrine, Casaub.
Worship, Epist. ad Salmasium.
Discipline and Government, Episcopal Hierarchy, the most moderate and regular:
For it was a singular providence of God to inspire the first Reformers of the
Church of England with the Spirit of wisdom, to conjoyn the zeal for verity
with due reverence to Antiquity: for by Cardinal Baronius his own Confession,
Baron. ad an. Christi 35. and ad an. Tib. Imp. 10. where he affirms that
Britain was converted by Joseph of Arimathea. The like is affirmed by Gildas
Covarrus and others.
the Church of England is for her Christendom acknowledged antienter than Rome
it self by nine years; and it is strange in reason, and more strange in nature,
that the pretended Mother should be younger than the Daughter, but that any
thing which is rational is rejected by such as only rely upon a Magisterial
pretense of Ipsa dixit, which false principle smells rank of wilful schism,
and also wrongful in causa propria. And here without suspicion of ingratitude,
I cannot but bless God, that by his providence he was pleased to ingraft me
into this Holy Church, wherein I have had the honor to bear the office of an
unworthy Priest, above 43 years. To pass on from England, the general Country
of the deceased, to his particular Country; He was born in Norwich, Cambd.
an Ancient, Great, Brit.
Famous and Opulent City, and the more opulent now by his late liberal Gifts
and Legacies to that City, expressed in his English Will.

Seventhly, His Education.
To pass from his Country to his Education: He was planted in the Free School
of Norwich, watered by that famous Fountain of this Land, the University of
Cambridge; 1 Cor. 3. 5.
and God gave the increase both of solid Piety and sound Learning, first in
Caius College, whereof he was Fellow, and afterward he had the honor to be
brought up at the feet of that great Gamaliel Dr. John Overall, an Apostolical
Bishop first of Litchfield, after of Norwich, whose Secretary he was for his
Learning and Coeligraphy; Psalm. 45. 2.
for he had the Pen of a ready Writer in a singular way, and so might deserve
the praise of the Tribe of Zabulon; Judge. 5. 14.
so well could he handle the Pen of the Writer. Bishop Overal (who sent him
from time to time to the University to keep his Acts) advised him to direct his
studies in order to Divinity. His Elias being taken from his head, he was
preferred to be Domestical Chaplain to that great Patron of the Church, Dr.
Richard Neile, who having passed through five Bishoprics, ascended at last to
the Archiepiscopal Throne of York; and this gives me a fair hint to pass from
his Education to

Eighthly, His Dignities.
Our great Prelate did not, as some more ambitious than worthy, ascend to the
Episcopal Throne per Saltum, but by the Canonical Degrees: As first, he was
lawfully Ordained Priest, and afterward was installed Prebendary of this
Church of Duresme, wherein he was not slack to search, and study the Rights and
Antiquities of the same, and among others to promote one of the Honors of it
by his constant Residences, both Ordinary and Extraordinary with laudable
Hospitality, according to the Statutes (Salvis Canonibus) sealed with a Sacred
Oath, and therefore to be observed; for he was so far from pressing upon his
Majesty for (importunate) Dispensations, (which are always the Sovereigns most
just Prerogative, in cases of real and legal necessity) that upon search of our
Churches Register, I find not one dispensation for him in all the time he
continued Prebend, which was about 36 Years. And I knew a man, who in two cases
of invincible necessity, had the Royal favor of two dispensations (the one
unsought for by him) who yet preferring the public good and honor of the
Church, to his own private interest, did voluntarily wave both. The first for
the Peace of the Church, then but newly restored; the other for the honor of
the Church, then for sundry months destitute of Residentiaries, which also
proved an effectual Precedent to restrain some from troubling the King for
Dispensations intended otherwise. After he became Bishop of the same Church, he
was so careful to preserve this honor of Hospitable residence, that at his
last personal visitation of the Dean and Chapter, An. 1668. among other
Injunctions this was one; That such Prebends as do not keep due Residences,
according to the Statutes, shall be deprived of their Quotidians and Dividends,
grounding also this his injunction upon right reason, viz. Qui enim Emolumentum
alicujus loci percipiunt, Injunct.
onera etiam ejusdem loci sentire, Quint.
and far debent; which practice is conformable to good Conscience and Equity,
and worthy the imitation of his Colleagues, whether Incumbents or Successors;
for it is a Rule in Law, Beneficium propter Officium, and therefore for
causeless habitual Non-Residents, chiefly in Cathedrals or Mother Churches,
(which admit not such Deputies or Coadjutors in their Chapters, as by the Laws
are allowed in particular cures) for Non-residents (without real necessity) to
claim or to enjoy equal profits with the Residents, who do bear the burdens
both real and personal, seems to be against the Rule of Proportion, which
forbids, Dare aequalia inaequalibus; Lev. 19. 15.
and comes near also to a kind of (...), Prove. 18. 5.
a partial respect of persons, Romans 11. 11.
which God so frequently forbids (I would I could say, Gal. 11. 5. etc.
God forbid; and also that I may prove a false Prophet, for unless things be
amended I fear partiality and non-residence may prove the ruin of the Church.)
But there is another Rule in Equity, That though some Dispensations, in case of
manifest necessity, may pass as lawful in foro soli; yet (if without that
necessity) they may prove unlawful ad hominem, in foro poli, where he may
appear in the shape of the austere man in the Gospel, Luke 19. 21.
if he reap there where he does not sow in proportion; for in every Society
every good man should bear his own burden. Gal. 6. 5.
And it may further be offered to common prudence, nay, as a case of
Conscience; whether such Dispensees who presume upon the Grace of the Royal
Dispensor (only upon pretense, or chiefly out of covetousness) ought not to
make restitution to the extent of their Power; Bishop Bramhals Vindication, etc.
for what sentence is justly left upon Record by a grave Prelate against the
old Sequestrators, may, sub modo, be applied also to the case of the new wilful
Non-residents: An. 1672. page 16.
His Sentence is this, That of all the Commandments the eighth is most
dangerous; for the breach of other Commandments obliges to Repentance, but the
breach of the eighth Commandment obliges both to Repentance and Restitution;
according to St. Austins Rule of good Conscience, Non remittetur peccatum, nisi
restituatur ablatum. And certainly there is appointed a great day of account
for both, at which day Lord have mercy upon us all, and pardon our sins of
Omission, from which in this particular our Bishop was clear.

2. He was Archdeacon of the East Riding in the Diocese of York.

3. He was Master of Peter-house.

4. He was Vice Chancellor of that University Anno 1640. when he had the
honor to send the public Plate to the King, then in his Recess, to supply in
part his Princes necessity for the present; and then also I had the honor to
be admitted Doctor of Divinity between his hands, and with his Benediction.

5. He came to be Dean of Peterborough, from whence he had the honor to be
preferred to the Order of Confessors, that is, for his Religion and Allegiance,
to become a Sequestered Man for near upon 20 years. Here by the way, I may
insert an Observation (it may be called a Prediction) that as I am informed,
Doctor Easedale in the year 1636. gave him some small thing upon condition he
should pay a greater sum when he were made a Bishop: Such was the expectation
men of understanding had then of his future greatness. For,

6. Upon the Kings wonderful Restoration, He was by His Majesty first designed
Dean of Durham; but upon the Kings Gracious Reflection on his constant
Attendance and Services beyond the Seas, he was declared by the King, of a Dean
intended, to be the Actual Bishop of Durham. His immediate Predecessor was
that great Luminary of our Church, Blessed Thomas Morton, famous for his Holy
Life, solid Learning, and bountiful works of Charity and Hospitality; and for
his manifold learned Works against the Adversaries of the Church of England on
the right hand and on the left; as for the Doctrine against Heretics, so for
the Discipline, against the Schismatics of his time, beyond any satisfactory
Answer to any of his Works unto this day: To whose Memory I should be
unthankful, if I should not acknowledge (for which I do still bless God's
Providence) that I had for above an Apprenticeship the happiness to be brought
up as Domestic Chaplain at the feet of such an Eminent Gamaliel.

To be Bishop of Durham is no ordinary State, but an high Dignity; for besides
the Spiritual Dignity of a Bishop it includes the Temporal Power of Count
Palatine of Durham and Sadberge; a singular Synastria, as I may say, or
Constellation, is this concurrence of two great Dignities, the Spiritual with
the Temporal: For, whatever Envy may object to the contrary, yet these two are
not in reason incompatible. Such was the State under the Patriarchs, etc. the
Eldest Son being both Prince and Priest. Neither in practice unusual in this
noble Kingdom, but that the same person may be both a good Minister and also a
good Magistrate: Provided always, that the Clergyman do not affect it out of
Ambition. Wise men see no cause why he may not lawfully accept the Commission
in due submission to Supreme Authority, under which the same person may be,
without offense, both a Bishop and Count Palatine; for which respect, of two
Archbishops, and twenty four Bishops in England and Wales, 31 H. 8. c. 10.
the Bishop of Durham is by Act of Parliament ranked in the fourth place, next
to the Bishop of London. And here it is worth the observing, that God, the
immense Geometer of all the World, Plato.
was pleased by his providence to proportion the height of this great Prelate's
Exaltation to the depth of his Humiliation for Loyalty, 'O (...),
etc. under Sequestration and Banishment, in that he was by the Royal Bounty
promoted from the Order of a Priest, immediately to be a Bishop, and that,
Bishop of Durham. Luke 14. 11.
To fulfill the Rule in the Gospel, Whosoever exalts himself shall be abased,
and he that humbles himself shall be exalted.

He was the 68 Bishop of this Diocese from Aidanus the first Bishop of
Lindisfarne, Anno 637. (St. Cuthbert's renowned Cathedral in the Holy Island)
the Mother of this Church of Durham, of Great Antiquity; for from the first
foundation of this Church Anno 637. unto this present year 1672. the succession
of this Church has out-lasted above 1000 years, and so still may it last unto
the Worlds end. But now to consider a Bishop in general.

A Bishop.
A Bishop is the most eminent office in the Order of the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, for though the Lords Archbishops be Superiors to the Bishops in
their Degree, yet in respect of Order, the Bishops, quatenus Bishops, are
equal, de Jure, and therefore need, de facto, no new Consecration when they are
made Archbishops.

A Bishop is by the judgment of Antiquity, and by the major part of sound and
sober Modern Divines, deemed an Apostolical Office, because derived from the
Apostles themselves, who after they had planted Christian Churches, as
Ecumenical Ministers of Christ, were settled in particular Diocesses, where
they were to exercise both the Episcopal Powers of Ordination and Jurisdiction;
(this none but Aerian Heretics will or can deny;) for it is clear both from
Holy Scripture, the Epistles of St. 1 Timothy 5. 22.
Paul to Timothy and Titus, Titus 1. 5.
and the strong current of Ecclesiastical History. Eusebius.
A high Office again in respect of Christ, every Priest under Christ, the
Supreme Everlasting Priest, bears a part in Christ his Priesthood; so every
Bishop being a Successor lawfully descended from the Apostles of Christ, bears
a part of Christ's Apostleship, for Christ is styled an Apostle, Heb. 3. 1.
and therefore the Glorious Martyr (...). S. Ignatius, Epist. ad T^allianos,
princ. The Father grounds his Injunction upon the Apostles Canon, Heb. 13. 17.
St. Ignatius, who was St. John the Apostle's Disciple, gives this Rule to the
Christian Churches of his time; Ignat. Ep.
That we ought to be subject to the Bishop as unto the Lord. However this high
Office, by furious Fanatics has been, by a prodigious pride of late, in these
Rebellious Times, much slander-beaten, disgraced, yea degraded; which Crime,
Coucil.
General Councils have made the stigma or brand of downright Heretics in a
larger sense. Constant.


And here, God be thanked, that of all the Reformed Churches, Hooker Eccles.
Polit.
the Bishops of the Church of England can clearly derive their Succession from
the Apostles themselves, Mason de Minist.
as has been made good abundantly by the worthy Champions of our Church.
Anglic. Dr. Bramhall, etc.


And now upon the consideration of the Antiquity, Eminency and Utility of a
Bishop in this Diocese, which is now in the state of an Ecclesiastical
Widow-hood, or to phrase it with St. Greg. Naz. (...), Shepheardless; since the
King's heart is in the hand of the Lord, Prove. 21. 1.
as the rivers of water, and he turns it whithersoever he will; We pray, and
hope that it may please God to incline the heart of the King in his Royal
wisdom, to bless us in due season with a Successor, worthy of his
Predecessors; a Godly, Learned, laborious and vigilant Bishop, the more
necessary both for Spiritual and Temporal Government in these Northern parts,
being so far remote from the Sun of Justice and Honor, the King, and too near
to some ill affected neighbors only blinded by prejudice or ignorance; and so
much the rather, because of the conjunction of this Bishopric, the Spiritual
Dignity with the Temporal Power of the County Palatine perpetual.

County Palatine.
1. For Antiquity, as old at least as William the Conqueror, Cambden. Seldom,
Titles of Honor, part. 2. cap. 5. who observes that the Bishop of Durhams
style, in his Patents, etc. runs thus, Dei Gratia Episcopus Dunelm. etc. And I
have observed for this forty years, that at the General Assizes and Sessions,
the Public Crier concludes in this usual form, God save the King and my Lord
of Durham.
as we are informed by our Learned Antiquaries; and that, not by Creation, or
by Act of Parliament (as other Counties Palatine) but by long Prescription, 11
H. 6. and Pasch.
confirmed afterward by several Acts of Parliament, 21 Eliz. 1.
and by the Protection of our Gracious Kings from time to time.

2. For Authority, the Bishops of Durham freely enjoying (always under the
King as Supreme) Jura Regalia, within this County, insomuch that it is a maxim
in Law, that, Quicquid Rex potest extra Episcopatum, potest Episcopus intra:
Salvo semper Domino Regi supremo jure vitae and necis, etc. In regard whereof,
by way of compensation for the Court of Wards belonging of old to this County
Palatine, but for the exigence of the bad Times, taken away of late by Act of
Parliament, His present Majesty our Gracious King Charles II. (whom God long
preserve) out of his wonted Royal Equity, was graciously pleased to Grant unto
our late Lord Bishop an Exemption from the Annuity of eight hundred eighty
pound per Ann. belonging to the late Queen Mother, in Reversion after her death
unto this our Bishop and his Successors (much elder than the Queen Mother, and
so in the course of nature not likely to enjoy it in his own time, but in his
intention to procure it for the good of his Successors.) A special Royal
Bounty, for which no doubt God will reward the King and his Royal Successors.

Ninthly, His Actions.
They are so intermixed with his Passions or Sufferings, that in our Discourse
we can hardly sever them, but must sometimes coincide; for instance, when he
was in Exile in France, he did with much magnanimity, do aforehand some of the
Offices of a Bishop, one part whereof is to stop the mouths of the gainsayers
to sound doctrine, Tit. 1. 9, 10, 11.
and that in a time of great necessity, when both the Church and the King of
England were dispersed, and the members dissipated; Rev. 13. 10.
here is the patience and faith of the Saints. One signal instance of his
constancy and courage for the Liturgy of the Church of England, may not be
omitted, that is, Anno 1645. He did, with the consent of the Ministers of the
Reformed Church of Charenton near Paris, solemnly in his Priestly Habit, with
his Surplice, and with the Office of Burial, used in the Church of England,
Interr there the body of Sir William Carnaby, a Noble and Loyal Knight; not
without the troublesome contradiction and contention of the Romish Curate there.

At that time, many that were poreblind, and not able to see the then less
visible face of the Church of England then in the wain; a Church in the
wilderness, because under persecution, when sundry were wavering from the true
Religion; Our Bishop did then confirm some Eminent Persons against many
Imminent and Importunate Seducers; This truth is confessed by some body,
(otherwise a good man) who yet seems no great friend to our Bishop, but being
convinced by the reality of these his Actions, especially abroad, has these
words: This must be reported to the due commendation of Dr. Cousin, that when he
was in France, he neither joined with the Church of French Protestants at
Charenton nigh Paris, [False] nor kept any Communion with the Papists therein;
but confined himself to the Church of Old English Protestants therein, where,
by his pious living, and constant praying and preaching, he reduced some
Recusants to, and confirmed more doubters in the Protestant Religion. Many were
his Incounters with Jesuits and Priests, defeating the suspicions of his Foes,
and exceeding the expectation of his friends in the success of such Disputes.
Church History by Mr. Tho. Fuller, Cent. 17. Book 11. Sect. 38. page 173. His
many mistakes about Mr. Peter Smart his Prosecutions (or rather Persecutions)
of our Bishop are confuted by the Bishops own express Letter to Mr. Waring and
Dr. Reves, April 6. 1658. in which Letter also our Bishop censures at large Mr.
Fullers Calumny, wherein he affirms, that Dr. Cousin did not join with the
French Protestants at Charenton, against which Assertion the Dr. declares to
all the world, that he never refused to join with the Prot^stants there, or any
where else, in all things wherein they joined with the Church of England. And
that our Dr. was constant in this his judgment, may further appear by a former
full Letter of his from Paris, Feb. 7. 1650. written to one Mr. Cordel then at
Bloys, who seemed shy to communicate with the Protestants there upon this very
scruple of their inorderly Ordination, etc. as Dr. Cousin styled it, who there
and then determined the Question in the Affirmative for our Communion with
them; Salvo semper jure Ecclesiae Anglicana.
(another Episcopal Office) which is in such ambiguous times especially, Tit.
1. 11.
to confirm the Souls of the Disciples, exhorting them to continue in the
Faith; Acts 14. 22.
teaching, That we must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God.

One notable instance of this our Bishops Constancy and Zeal in this kind we
may not omit which was a solemn conference (...) by word and writing betwixt
him and the Prior of the English Benedictines at Paris, supposed to be
Robinson. The Argument was concerning the validity of the Ordination of our
Priests, etc. in the Church of England. The Issue was, our Doctor had the
better so far, that he could never get from the Prior any Reply to his last
Answer. This Conference was undertaken to fix a person of Honor, then wavering
about that point: The sum of which Conference (as I am imformed) was written
by Doctor Cousin to Doctor Morley, the now Right Reverend Lord Bishop of
Winchester, in two Letters bearing date June 11. July 11.
1645.

His Noble contempt of great preferment on the right hand and on the left, if
he would comply with, or but connive at the erroneous positions and practices
of the Seducers; to all whom his real and resolute answer was that of St. Peter
to Simon Magus, Act. 8. 20.
Thy money perish with thee [(...).] So far was this Great Spirit from
tottering, much more from turning aside from the right way.

Great was his Communion of Charity toward all Christian Churches, if agreeing
in the fundamental Articles of Salvation, though different in form of
Discipline and outward Ceremonies; which demonstrateth that he wore in his
breast Animum Catholieum, that is, ready to communicate with all Christians,
Salva veritate: if Dissenters would not do so reciprocally, for want of
Charity, he by his Christian moderation would leave the Schism at their doors;
so far was he from the unseasonable, that I say not, unreasonable severity of
some that presume to Non-Church whole Churches for such circumstantial
differences, as long as they hold the substance of Christian Doctrine and
Worship: And in this he did follow happily the wise Example of that Great
Prelate Bishop Andrews, Nec tamen si nostra [Politeia] divini juris sit, inde
sequitur, vel quod sieve ea salus non sit, vel quod stare non possit Ecclesia.
Caecus sit, qui non videat stantes fine ea Ecclesias. Ferreus sit, qui salutem
eis neget. Nos non sumus illi Ferrei: latum inter ista discrimen ponimus.
Potest abesse aliquid, quod Divini Juris sit (in exteriore quidem Regimine) ut
tamen substet salus.
so eminent for Primitive Piety, Item Epist. tertia. Quaeris tum peccentue in
Jus Divinum Ecclesiae vestrae, non dixi. Id tantum dixi, abesse ab Ecclesiis
vestris, aliquid quod de Jure Divino sit, Culpa autem vestra non abesse, sed
Injuria Temporum. Non enim tam propitios habuisse Reges Galliam vestram in
Ecclesia reformanda, quam habuit Britannia nostra. Interim, ut dabit meliora
Deus, and hoc quoque quod jam abest, per Del Gratiam suppletum iri. Opuscula
posthuma D. Ep. Andrews, in Epist. secunda ad V. L. D. Peter Molin. See more at
large the Reasons of this our Christian Moderation toward those foreign
Churches, in the learned Bishop Bramhal's vindication of the Episcopal Clergy,
etc. against Mr. Baxter, Printed Anno 1672. p. 30, 31, etc.
Christian Prudence, and Universal Learning: For wise men do not think it safe
to multiply Adversaries (of whom we have enough already (God knows;) we must be
very wary to avoid the mischief of an unnecessary Schism, which may harden the
worse Adversaries in Heresy.

This his Christian condescension toward the Reformed It is an express Article
in our Bishops last Will (we might call it his Spiritual Will) written in
Latin, which because of the Excellency of it, both for matter and form, has
been thought fit by his Executors to be annexed to this Brief of his Life,
which contains a full Confession of his Faith and Religion, the first occasion
and chief matter, as of the Patriarch's, Genesis 49. so of the Primitive
Christians Testaments. In this also a worthy imitator of his Predecessor
learned Bishop Morton, who has left the like free full Confession in his Last
Will.
Churches was afterward requited by a singular respect from the Chief Doctors
of those Reformed Churches, Amyrald.
whom to ccondemn rashly is to storm whole Churches against Charity. For our
moderate connivance at their inordinate Ordination, does not at all legitimate
it, but only declares our Christian Charity, to pity them for want of
Episcopal Ordination, because they cannot help themselves: So long as they have
Episcopatum in voto See Dr. Durel' s learned and laborious Work. Entitled, Of
the Government, etc. in the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, p. 13. See Dr.
Steward at Paris, Anno 1647. when this was put to the Question.
(their words and writings testify this ingenuously) though to their grief
they cannot have Episcopatum in Facto through Political necessity, which rather
deserves our compassion, as blessed Bishop Morton did often bewail their
infelicity for the want of Bishops, they being Subjects living under a Great
Monarch of a different Religion, who for Reasons of State, will not suffer in
his Kingdom two several Bishops of two several Religions in one Diocese, to
preserve public Peace, and to prevent Dr. Deodat Epist. ad Convent. Eccl. etc.
Contention, and clashing of Jurisdictions, to the disquiet of his Loyal
Subjects; much less would such a King suffer his Native Subjects of the
Reformed Religion to go out of his Kingdom to a foreign Kingdom, there to
receive Episcopal Ordination from Protestant Bishops, depending upon a foreign
Prince, to whom every person that is to be Ordained a Deacon, Priest or Bishop,
must by the Statute Laws and Canons of that Land and Church, and by the form of
Ordination, before he be Ordained swear Allegiance. This that King or Prince
will not permit, neither in point of prudence to prevent defection, or the
falling away of his Subjects to a foreign Power.

His Works.
We pass now from our late Lord Bishops Actions transient, to his Works more
permanent; his Scholastical Works, whereof some are Printed, and some yet
unprinted: for he observed the golden maxim, of that modest and wise man of
Greece, Pythagoras, who gave this very mystical but wise advice unto his
Scholars, [(...)] By no means to eat their own brains; intending thereby (as
it is conceived) that they should not keep their Reason and Learning (of which
the brains are an immediate instrument) unto themselves, but still employ them
for the advantage of others, for whose benefit this our Learned Prelate did
publish these following Tracts, viz.

Printed,
1. Many years ago he did publish a Book Entitled, A Collection of Private
Devotions, extracted out of the public Liturgies of the Churches both Ancient
and Modern; very useful for good Christians well disposed, and which may teach
them how to offer unto God a reasonable Service every way. Romans 12. 1.
That work at first was looked upon with an evil eye, and hissed at by some
serpentine Tongues and Pens to suppress it; (they were none but Schismatics)
but yet to this present time it has had the blessing to outlive a fifth
public Edition.

2. During his Sequestration and Banishment, when through the iniquity of the
Times he was not suffered to preach in England, he did in France compose an
excellent Book, Entitled, A Scholastical History of the Canon of the Holy
Scripture, drawn out from the Judaical Church to the Sixteenth Century of
years. A fundamental work, which proves him to have been a perfect Herald of
the true Pedigree of the Holy Scripture. This Work was first Printed, 1657.
when still Sequestered and in Exile, and since reprinted Anno 1672. but to this
day unanswered, for the space of fifteen years and more; we may suppose the
reason is, because the Evidences therein are unanswerable.

3. By the same method he did compose a Book against Transubstantiation, part
whereof is already printed.

Unprinted.
1. The other part is unprinted, but ready for the Press, written twenty four
years ago; Entitled, Historia Transubstantiationis Papalis.

2. An Answer to a Popish Pamphlet, pretending that St. Cyprian was a Papist.

3. An Answer to a Paper delivered by a Popish Bishop to the Lord Inchequin.

4. An Answer to four Queries of a Roman Catholic about Protestant Religion.

5. Annals Eccl. Opus Imperfect.

6. Dr. Cosin's Answer to Father Robinson's Papers concerning the validity of
the Ordinations in the Church of England.

7. Summarium Doctrinae Ecclesiae Anglicanae.

8. The differences and agreement of the Church of England from and with the
Church of Rome.

9. Historia Conciliorum, opus imperfect.

10. Against the forsakers of the Church of England, and their Seducers, in
this time of her Trial.

11. Chronologia sacra, opus imperfectum.

12. A Treatise concerning the abuse of Auricular Confession against the Church
of Rome. For though the Church of England both by grave Exhortation and Godly
practice in her Holy Offices, does allow of private Confession to the Priest as
Gods Deputy by express Commission [whosoever's sins you remit they are
remitted] in the cases of a troubled conscience: St. John 20. 21, 22, 23.
And that her Children may come to the Holy Communion with full trust in God's
Mercy: See in the Book of Common Prayer, the first Exhortation before the
Communion.
Our Church does admonish them that such a Confession may then be very
Medicinal: Yet, our Church guided by the Word of God, and by good Antiquity,
justly denies Auricular Confession to be absolutely necessary to the Remission
of sins, provided the party be truly penitent. With much more reason does our
Church deny private Confession to God's Priest to be Sacramental, as the Church
of Rome does affirm without any solid ground of Verity, or from Antiquity.
These remains are earnestly recommended to his Pious Executor's care for
publication; for by these Fruits of his, we may charitably conclude, He
obtained the character of the blessed Man, Psalm. 1. 4.
whose leaf shall not wither: and by these his excellent Works our dead
Prelate, being dead, yet speaks.

His Benefactions.
To pass now from his foreign Actions abroad to his Countrey-Benefactions at
home. That great Prelate had this blessing from God to enjoy a large heart, 1
Kings 4. 29.
that is, an heart capable, not only to know, but also to do great things (for
his time) both to his Chruch and Country. He was endowed with an Active Spirit
to design, and with an able Body to perform his designs; as God gave him
Wealth, so he gave him Artem fruendi; for it is one thing to have wealth, and
another thing to enjoy and use it well, by maintaining good works for necessary
uses, Tit. 3. 14.
chiefly Public and Pious Works, for he was mindful of the Apostles precept;
Heb. 13. 16.
To do good and to communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well
pleased; and therefore he was both more careful of, and also cheerful in the
distribution of his Munificence for these pious uses; and his Posterity may
from thence raise up their hope to thrive better for it; for after God in the
Poor, and God's Church, out of the Chruches Patrimony is well served, a little
well gotten, and left by an honest Clergyman, may stretch much further, and
stick much longer in his Godly Posterity, than a Church Estate ill-gotten by
some Lay-Nimrod, who seldom out-lives, much less transmits his Sacrilegious
Estate to the third Generation, which commonly and visibly verifies the old
Proverb, De male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius Haeres:

And here I must crave leave for a very material digression concerning the
Clergy's Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Estates; for although, as I hope, I have
elsewhere See my Book of sacrilege, page 45. 49. etc.
sufficiently proved, that by the Law of God and Man, the Clergy of England
have as good and as legal (that I say not a better) Title to their Benefices
and Dignities pro tempore, as any Lay-Subject of England to their temporal
Inheritances, and so may justly call their Estates their own, in foro externo;
yet indeed and in truth (and by sad experience to Clergy-mens Widows and
Children, not so well provided for here, as beyond the Seas) we Clergymen are
but Vsufructuaries, God is the great Proprietor Paramount of all that
Clergymen enjoy, which gives them an high Title to what they enjoy under God,
to whom at last they all must one day give a strict account, when they must
hear of a Red Rationem, Luke 16. 2.
(God knows how soon!) and then we must be no longer Stewards here; for it is
evident by the forms of the ancient Donations, to, and Dotations of the Church,
that God himself is the Chief Treasurer of the Churches Estate: The ancient
forms run thus, Concedimus Deo, and Ecclesiae, etc. V. Capitula Caroli M. item
Miraeum de Donat. Belgi^.
So that God himself is Entitled the Chief Lord and Proprietary to all
Clergy-men's Estates, to whom all their Church Lands under God are granted.

1. To provide for God's Moral Houses.

2. God's Material Houses.

1. Mat. 25.
Gods Moral Houses are chiefly the Poor, to bestow upon the truly poor and
impotent through Age, or made so by Providence, through fire or other
involun^ary mischances, or to such who though they labor by their industry, to
maintain their own Families, yet being over-burthened by their Wives and many
Children, are not able to relieve them all; these are the best poor, and
therefore most worthy to be relieved V. Speed's Chron. p.
in the eye of prudent Charity. As for Vagrants or common wandering Beggars,
whereof this Kingdom swarms, to the contempt of so many good Laws, and to the
great scandal of our Christian Religion; Correction is the best Charity for
such.

Wise men say that two things, general Experience and Memory, make up a wise
man: Modesty will not suffer me to pretend to that wisdom, but if I may declare
my observation, I have lived some years in Holland and never saw a Beggar
there; I have lived some other years in Turkey and never saw a Beggar there.

The reason is plain, because to the Authority of their good Laws, they add the
severity of due Execution: We have as good and as wise Laws in England as any
Nation under Heaven; but Execution is the life of the Law, which is but a dead
Letter, yea deadly, if some do make a conscience of observing the good Laws and
others neglect it. The lawful remedy of this too public mischief is wholly and
humbly represented and submitted to God, and to the King under God.

2. Clergymen are obliged to bestow part of their Ecclesiastical estates upon
Gods Material Houses, Churches and Chancels, and Ecclesiastical Houses to
repair or preserve them from ruin, which would defraud their Successors, and
oppress their miserable Relicts and Relations upon the account of just
dilapidations.

3. The Premises being well provided for (which is left to the Chancery in his
breast, that is, to the Clergy-mans conscience and prudence) out of the just
remainder of his Ecclesiastical Estate, the honest Clergyman may lawfully
provide for himself and Family; for by the Apostle's Canon, 1 Timothy 5. 8.
he is worse than an infidel that provideth not for his own, especially those
of his own house. Herein our Savior's Rule is the best guide; Mat. 23. 23.
these things you ought to have done, and not to leave the other undone.

But if contrary to the pious intentions of the Religious Founders and Donors
Clergymen do intervert the spiritual estate of the Chruch, chiefly or only to
raise up or enrich their private temporal Families, with the neglect of the
public God's Houses, whether moral or material: They may (as too many) leave
their Children beggars, besides (which I am afraid of) a strict Audit at the
great day of account, that they may clear themselves from Ecclesiastical
Sacrilege, from which now, and at Doomsday* good Lord deliver us all. For my
part I do here profess, and protest with thankfulness to God, that out of my
signal experience of God's eminent providence over me (though unworthy) this
has been my honest intention and constant endeavor in this world to make
friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness in hope of God's word, Luke 16. 9.
That when we fail they may receive us and ours into everlasting habitations;
and I am confident, that neither I nor mine shall fare the worse for it; what
ever Carnal Relations may murmur against this just and honest course, objecting
the worlds false maxim, (contrary to God's true maxim, Phip. 11. 4.
look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of
others,) That every man must make much of his own Time, to which this may be a
full reply, That we all must make much more of Eternity.

By these Godly methods, our late Lord Bishop did proceed in providing, as for
the Poor (Gods moral Houses) so for Gods material Houses; in both which regards
we may truly say our Bishop held his See ad Aedificationem, yet not neglecting
those of his own Household; and for a reward of those his Pious Works, God gave
him leave to live so long, as not to leave his Relations unprovided for, God be
thanked.

And now should I launch out into the deep of his great Benefactions, I fear
the particulars will overflow both your attention and my expression; you may
see them at large in his Temporal Will written in English, where you may read
so many Items, so many good Works.

1. To the Quire of Durham.

2. To the Preacher at his Funeral.

3. Tokens to the Dean and Prebends for memorials of their mortality.

4. To the vicar of St. Andrews Auckland, an addition of sixteen pound per
annum.

5. To his Almes-men of Durham and Auckland.

6. After his Burial to the Countrey-Poor.

7. For the magnificent repairing of the Episcopal Chapels of Durham and
Auckland, and for Furniture, Plate, Books, and other Ornaments, etc. in the
said Chapels, freely left to the Bishops his Successors. And in this he was a
good imitator of his great Patron Bishop Neile, who in less than ten years did
bestow upon the same (as I am informed) about seven thousand pound, for indeed
he was Vir Architectonicus.

8. He did erect a goodly Chapel in the Castle of Auckland, consecrated by
himself on St. Peter's day, 1665. Two goodly Chapels formerly erected there (in
which I have also officiated for some years of peace) being blown up by Sir
Arthu Hasterig in the Gunpowder-plot of the late Rebellion. Luke 7. 5.
Now if the Centurion, who built only a Synagogue, wherein Christ was never
worshipped, deserved praise, how much more he who built such a house of God,
wherein Christ is constantly worshipped Si Centurio commendatur Domino qui
aedificavit Synagogam, quanto est commendatior qui aedificavit Ecclesiam? and
si is* meretur gratiam qui Iimpietati Receptaculum praestitit* quanto majorem
meretur Gratiam qui Religioni Domicilium praeparavit? Et si ille Coelesti
misericordia visitatur, qui construxit locum ubi Christus semper negatur,
quanto magis visitandus est, qui fabricari fecit Tabernaculum ubi Christus
quotidie praedicatur? St. Ambro. Sermon. 89. de Dedic. Basilic.
?

9. For several other Public Works, as the repairing the boisterous Banks of
Howden-shire belonging to this Bishopric.

10. To two Schools at Durham.

11. For five Scholars places in St. Peter's College in Cambridge, ten pound a
piece per annum.

For Three Scholars in Gonvile and Caius College twenty Nobles a piece per
annum.

Eight pounds yearly for the Common Chest of those Colleges respectively.

But for the particulars of his Benefactions and Legacies, I have referred my
self to the Bishops Will it self, written in English; in which the Bishop
modestly declares, that He mentions these as works of Duty, and not for
Ostentation.

12. The next is, for the Redemption of Christian Captives.

13. For the Relief of the distressed Loyal Party.

14. For a great Public Library in Durham.

15. To the poor Prisoners of all places where he had relation by birth or
preferment.

16. To the poor the like.

17. For the re-building of St. Paul's Church London, etc.

And what shall I say more, Heb. 11. 32.
for the time will fail me to tell of his manifold Legacies to his Friends dead
and living (as monuments of his gratitude) to his Domestical Relations, Kindred
and Servants, all which particulars (as I am still informed) do amount to above
twenty five thousand pound.

It Is to be observed that his Lordship was Consecrated, Anno 1660. and was
translated from Earth to Heaven Anno 1671. so that he enjoyed his Bishopric
but Eleven years, and so computing his premised Benefactions, he spent above
two thousand pound a year in these pious uses. A worthy Example of Episcopal
Magnificence and Christian Charity. Upon a serious search of the whole Line of
the Bishops of Durham from the first of Lindisfarm to this our late Bishop,
sixty eight in number, there are found upon the Ecclesiastical Records but
Those Bishops Benefactors in the Sea of Durham were eight. [Isaackson's
Chronology,]
eight Bishops (in 1034. years) that may seem to have equalled, but not
exceeded this our Bishop in the noble virtues of Magnificence and Beneficence;
and it is worthy the consideration of our Age, that the valuation of workmen,
and materials, etc. was far less in those ancient times than in ours, now much
dearer every way. Aldwinus -- Godwin Fol. -- 99 Egelrius -- 101 Ranulphus
Flambard -- 112 Hugo Pudsey -- 113 Anthonius Beak -- 125 Walterius Skirlaw --
134 Tho. Hatfield -- 133 Cuthbertus Tunstal -- 138
Cardinal Tho. Langley may be the ninth to make up the number of the Muses, but
we crave pardon, that some are of Opinion, upon the survey of his works, that
he came short of this our Bishop.


We have been the longer in setting forth this notable Example of Episcopal
bounty in the Church of England, that it may burst with envy such of the Church
of Rome; Master Knox the Jesuit.
(for all amongst them are not alike, some being more ingenuous) till they
vomit out their false, foul and rotten say, That Pater Noster built Churches,
but Our Father pulls them down. (The Devils Proverb! none of Solomon's
Proverbs to be sure.) This great Man here lying before us may be a standing
Monument for a real confutation, and may rise up in judgment against all such
base slanderers of our Church and Religion.

Behold! how great and goodly works one single English Prelate has done in so
short a time, and that after twenty years long Sequestration, and voluntary
Banishment, only for his Religion and Allegiance.

Neither does this our Bishop want his Peers even in this present age, our
great Archbishops Dr. Laud that glorious Martyr, Dr. Juxon, Dr. Shelden,
Bishop Warner, those constant Confessors, and how many more whose eminent
magnificence may on the other hand choke the mouth of that English Bell and the
Dragon, and of all such Rabshakehs, who out of their Bulimia or the greedy
worm, do eat much, but as it is observed thrive little, are still gaping after
the sweet morsel of Sacrilege, though in the digestion it will prove first or
last a bitter Pill in the maw of their conscience. They, I say, looking upon
the Bishops and Clergy with the squint eyes of envy and malice, shoot out their
venomous tongues against these good men, and their whole order, inhancing by a
false rule of hyperbolical multiplication, the Bishops revenues in Fines, etc.
never talking the ingenuous pains to balance in the account their Incomes with
their just deductions in their vast public and pious expenses, but through a
diabolical detraction and malignant subtraction, they do wilfully suppress the
great Out-lets of these great Revenues. This Example may restrain a third sort
of censorious men, who being more jealous than zealous of good works, object
the suspicion of vain Glory in the case, wresting to their own damnation that
passage of our Lord, Mat. 6. 3.
Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does; though this Caution be
expressly restrained by our Lord to secret Alms; far different from the case of
public works of Charity, concerning which our Lord gives an express command to
the contrary; else what mean these words; Mat. 5. 16.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven -- That they may see your good works;
not as though the sight of them should be intentio operantis, but conditio
operandi, thereby to provoke others to a Godly imitation, to the Glory of God,
1 Cor. 10. 31.
which must be the ultimate end of all our actions: for whilst we praise the
Instruments, such worthy men as in life and death have endeavonred to be
beneficial unto their Generations; We must not forget the Principal, which is
God the Father of lights, Jam. 1. 17.
from whom comes down every good giving, and every perfect gift.

Enough, once for all, to gagg those evil men, who being out of charity with
Charity it self, want that Christian Charity which thinks no evil. 1 Cor. 13.
5.


His Passions or Sufferings.
For, Multa fecit tulitque --

1. Public, and that first at home Annis 1640, and 1641. when he was both
Sequestered and Angariated before a Sacrilegious and Rebellious Assembly of
Laymen, which the seduced Crew did nickname A grand Committee for Religion,
his Magnanimity and Constancy in maintaining the truly Apostolic and Catholic
Doctrine and Religion of our Holy Mother the Church of England was such, that
he came off clear from all calumnies laid to his charge in base Articles and
Pamphlets, to the notorious amazement, disappointment and shame, at last, of
his malicious, false and furious Adversaries: And this I can the better depose,
for that I had the honor then and there to be a fellow-sufferer, not only by
Sympathy with him and for him, but also by my own Idiopathy, yet God delivered
him and my self out of all these troubles.

2. His sufferings abroad; as in France where he underwent another Trial, only
for upholding (under the King then in the French Court) the Public Liturgy or
Common Prayer Book of the Church of England; for wherever he was, he retained
still, and exerted a public spirit: And his Constancy (the Character of
sincerity) was so much the greater, that for all those his Trials, both at home
and abroad, he was never moved, much less removed from his steadfast Belief, and
Uniform Practice of the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England; when
at home swarms of unstable men were carried away with the terrible torrent of
the Times, both from the True Religion, and their due Allegiance: For this
great Man was resolved and resolute to be one of those (not too many) who would
never defile his Holy Garment, Rev. 3. 4.
neither his Surplice when a Priest, nor his Rochet (if he could then have been
a Bishop) with any Sacrilegious Covenant or Rebellious Engagement; and I thank
God so was I; whereby he saved himself the labor of a sad Repentance, and
requisite Recantation before God and Men, for those great sins of Perjury,
Rebellion and Sacrilege; and so he did wisely prevent that scruple, or
singultum cordis, the hiccough of Conscience (for so some do translate it)
which they of the Clergy, who against their multiplied Oaths to God, the Church
and the King have committed, may be put upon here or hereafter, 1 Samuel 25. ^1.
which is the best way to clear themselves from shame and reproach.

3. His Personal Sufferings, which were by his frequent Sicknesses.

1. By Nature, acute, as the Stone It is observed of that Civil Lawyer Mathaeus
W^sembecius, that for his sharp Diseases, in his latter Age* he did change his
Surname, and would be called Mathaeus de Afflictis.
, etc. which usually he called his roaring Pains, whereby he was at last
overcome, together with a Pectoral Dropsy.

2. The length of his Disease; for two years before his death he was much
crazed by many furious fits, and so he did bend his chief care to prepare for
his latter end, fore-feeled in himself, and foretold by himself to his private
Friends, and forespoken in his Last Will.

It Is the Observation both of Divines and Philosophers, That when the Soul of
Man is near its final (though not total) separation from the Body, it withdraws
it self, and so becomes receptible of a kind of Prophetical or Prognostic
Inspiration concerning its departure. It was his blessing from God to give him
such forewarnings, and so to hear his prayer in the Letany, to deliver him from
sudden death, which though to a Godly Man it may prove sudden, in respect of
expectation, for the manner or circumstance concerning time and place; Eccles.
9. 11.
(for all things come alike to all) yet in point of preparation, for the matter
and substance it is never sudden: This foresight of his departure at hand,
made him often in his sicknesses to ingeminate in the Royal Prophets words;
Psalm 55. 6.
O that I had wings like a Dove, for then would I fly away, and be at rest!

His Death.
And thereat his last Actions, as,

1. His Benedictions to his Children, and at their desires, his blessing also
upon the Divines then present, and upon God's Church chiefly for Purity and
Peace.

2. His Solemn Invitation to God's Priest for his last Viaticum; and then the
Priest about him asking him whether (by reason of his weakness) he would have
the Bread only dipped, he answered No; but he would receive it in both kinds,
according to Christ's Institution; and being through weakness lifted up into
his Chair, and having a violent pain in his head, for the ease whereof it was
fast bound, he would needs have it all undone and sit bare-headed, and so he
received it, an hour and a half before his death, from the hands of Mr. William
Flower his Lordships Domestical Chaplain.

3. And when being so near unto death he could not kneel, he then devoutly
repeated often that part of the penitent Prayer of King Manasses, Lord,
Manasses Prayer.
I bow the knee of my heart.

4. Having often reiterated his Invitation of Christ in the words of the
Spirit, and of the Church, Lord Jesus come quickly. His last act was the
Elevation of his hand, with this his last Ejaculation, Lord! wherewith he
expired without pain, according to his frequent prayer to God, That he might
not dye of a sudden, or painful death; such was his (...) (Augustus his wish)
and I pray God for every one of us, that from heart and mouth our last breath
may prove like that of our late Bishop, Amen.

His Burial.
The Ecclesiastical Office was solemnly Celebrated by the Right Reverend Father
in God Guy Lord Bishop of Bristol: The Political Offices were performed
decently and in order, which was in all public actions the method of our late
Lord Bishop when living, and the same he enjoyed at and after his death: the
particular Narration of which I do civilly recommend to those Dunmviri the
worthy Heralds (for the Funeral pomp was very solemn) who did constantly attend
his late Lordship's state at London, and all the way to Durham, and there, and
at Auckland, the place of his Rest, where requiescat in pace, and from thence
God send him a joyful Resurrection: at which prayer none but ignorant or
malicious men will take offense; for the meaning is no more, but that the dead
may enjoy a happy Reunion of the Soul with the body at the general
Resurrection, and a final and full consummation of both in bliss; (and after
the utter abolition of sin by death) a blessed conjunction of us that survive
with them that are dead, which is the Orthodox sense of our Office at Burials
(the ancient sense of the Primitive Church) when we pray over the dead, whose
Souls in Christian Charity we hope are past the necessity of our Prayers for
their Relief or Release from any imaginary (first Pagan, Virg.
after Popish) Purgatory.

The Sum of all.
The Text and Sermon is a dead man's real speech: Heb. 8. 1.
To hear a dead man speak now were such a Prodigy as would certainly both stir
up attention, and strike amazement into us, and all the hearers; yet that Great
Chancellor of Paris, John Gerson, relates a strange History which happened
about the year 1060. at the Funeral of a Grave Doctor there, a man otherwise
reputed for the strictness of his life; at the interring of whom, when the
Priest came to the then used form R^sponde mihi, or answer me, the Corpse sat
upright in the Biere, and to the amazement of all there present, the first day
cried out, Justo Dei judicio accusatus sum, At the Just Tribunal of God I am
accused, and so laid immediately down in its first posture; the astonished
Company deferring the burial till the next day, when the dead man with a
hideous noise cried out again, Justo Dei judicio judicatus sum, By the just
judgment of God I am judged; whereupon the burial was deferred a day longer,
and the dead man rose up the third time and cried out his last, Justo Dci
judicio condemnatus sum, By the Just judgment of God I am condemned; whereat,
as the whole company was sadly affrighted, so Brimo, then an Eminent Doctor in
the same University being effectually affected calling his Scholars together,
retired from the world, and as the manner of those Times was then, became the
Founder of the Order of the Carthusians. A strange Prodigy! and a loud
warning-piece to us all living, to admonish us not to confide, much less
presume upon our outward Righteousness; for I dare not deny Historical Credit
to this premised Relation from John Gerson.

But blessed be God, dead Abel in the Text, and the dead Bishop on this Hearse
speak better things. This Hearse is now our Bishop's Throne or his Pulpit, and
so our Bier must be the last Pulpit of us all of the Clergy; high and low all
must come to this, God knows how soon; (I may be the next:) God send us all an
happy Nunc dimittis, of which we may live and dye assured if we imitate them,
for they being dead yet speak, and as you have heard at large do preach unto us
all Faith, Hope and Charity (the only strait way to Heaven) all evidenced by
their works of Piety, which if not imitated by us, Mat. 12. 42.
may justly rise up in judgment against us.

To Recapitulate and sum up our Bishops Virtues under three Heads, I will
remind you with, 1. His Intellectual, 2. His Moral, 3. His Theological
Virtues.

1. As to his Intellectual Virtues, his Natural understanding, he was endowed
with a sound understanding, which he enjoyed to the last; a great blessing*
Eccl. 9. 2.
for though for the outward manner of death all things come alike to all, and
there may be one event to good and bad, both may lose their understanding at
their latter end, through the malignity or vehemence of some acute sicknesses
(which should teach us all in health to make good use of our understandings;)
yet for a man to dye, sana mente, or in his right wits, is a great comfort both
to the dying party, and to the surviving friends.

2. His acquired learning, witness his writings forementioned, and his
diligent researches into the magazine of the best Antiquity. I may truly say,
Here lies now dead before us one of our Chief Ritualists.

3. He was punctual in his Methods, for to my knowledge he loved Order in his
Studies and Functions, and he often repeated, and generally observed the
Apostles Canon, 1 Cor. 14. 40.
Let all things be done decently and in order. He was so exact in putting in
practice the Discipline of our Church, that he strictly enjoined, according to
the Rubric, the daily Public Offices of Morning and Evening Prayer within the
Churches of his Diocese, which since the decay of the Primitive Devotion of
daily Communions in the old Christianity, is instead of the Juge Sacrificium of
the Jews, the daily sacrifice of a Lamb Morning and Evening: Exodus 29. 39.
And it is both our sin and shame, that since God is graciously pleased (under
the Gospel) to spare our lambs, we Christians should in requital grudge our
good God (except in case of real necessity) the Calves of our lips; Hos. 14. 2.
to praise him daily in the public Congregations. Without vanity. I have
(through Gods providence) traveled and taken an impartial survey of both the
Eastern and Western Churches, and can assert upon mine own experience, that in
the Eastern Churches, the Greeks and Armenians, etc. constantly observe their
daily public Service of God; and in the Western Churches, I passing through
Germany (to take the like survey) did with comfort behold the same daily
public Offices with full Congregations in those they call the Lutherans and
Calvinists, (I do hate, but through the iniquity of the times, I cannot avoid
those Schismatical names expressed only for distinctions sake) nay to give Rome
her due, they in their way (though erroneous) observe the same daily practice
strictly. And truly when the Laity does daily plow, sow, work and provide for
the Clergy, it is but Christian Equity that the Clergy should daily offer
public Prayers and Praises for the Laborious Laity.

Item, Our late Bishop did much reform and regulate the good Behavior, and
Canonical Habit of the Clergy under his Government. He did also regulate their
Office in bidding prayer before their Sermons, according to the common sense of
our Churches Canon LV. and confined their conceived prayers too much abused and
groundless in our Liturgy, and also contrary to the ancient practice of our
Church, Bishop Latimer, Bishop Hooper, (both Martyrs) Bishop Jewel, Bishop
Andrews, etc. used no other: Our Liturgy being so Comprehensive there needs no
other. See this at large made good, both for Antiquity and Conformity in the
practice of the form of Bidding Prayer, in that excellent work in Latin of the
Learned and Laborious Dr. Durel, Entitled, S. Eccles. Anglic. Vindic. Cap. 9.
p. 66. where he proves clearly that the practice of the Reformed Churches in
Poland, Lithuania, and Zurick in Switherland, is the same with ours in England.
Nay the same Author further affirms, that Calvin himself did use such a form;
See Calvin's Sermons upon Job* translated into English, Printed at London Anno
1580* where^^ the latter end you have a plain form of Bidding of ^^ayer by way
of Allocution of the people, and not of d^rect Invocation of God, saying, Let
us pray; and always concluding with the Lords Prayer as we do. See further, The
Alliance of Divine Offices, etc. by Hamon L' Estrange Esquire; chap. 6. p. 180.
and other Reformed Churches; and I who have lived in this Diocese of Durham
forty years, and have been an unworthy Archdeacon of Northumberland, as also a
Prebend of this Church for the space of thirty years, never saw it more
Regular, (since the sad twenty years of Schism and War, and so of Confusion)
whereby his Successor, whoever he be, may enjoy the comfort of a Regular
Diocese.

2. His Moral Virtues.
1. And first His liberal Hospitality at his Table, according to the
Apostolical Canon, 1 Timothy 3. 2.
That a Bishop must be given to Hospitality, which to maintain honestly, he
must in all reason and equity be allowed proportionable Revenues, according to
that Proverb, Ne sit Promus fortior Condo. This once again may strangle Bell and
the Dragon.

2. We have already mentioned his Princely Magnificence in his buildings.

3. His Christian Magnanimity in his undertakings and sufferings, we purposely
omit some of them, whereby he did prevent Innovations within his County
Palatine, because we would prevent malice and envy at the recital of them: But
we must needs express again the Royal Favor procured by him, to exempt this
See from the great burden of eight hundred and eighty pounds per An. paid for
many years by the Bishops of Durham to the Queens of England.

3. His Theological Virtues.
Which were his Faith, Hope and Charity:

1. His Faith, evidenced by his faithful constancy in the True Religion, and by
his full Confession of that Holy Faith in his Last Will (the ancient way of the
Holy Fathers in their Testaments.)

2. His Hope, expressed by his Patience under his sufferings, knowing that
Tribulation works Patience, and Patience experience, Romans ^. 3, 4, 5.
and experience Hope, and Hope makes not ashamed. His sore fits of sickness,
especially for the two last years of his life, often did break his crazed body,
but never did break his Christian patience.

3. His Charity apparent by his pious Dedications to God, and bountiful
Donations to men, so that I wish, that in his Epitaph that character of Gods
Servant might be stamped, Psalm. 112. 9.
He has dispersed abroad, he has given to the Poor, 2 Cor. 9. 9.
his Righteousness remains for ever, his born shall be exalted with honor; a
consequent blessing upon such Benefactors; for this Godly Seed is a Metaphor,
taken from a Husbandman, who by scattering of his Seed into the ground in due
season, reapeth a plentiful increase in due time. And now here lies before us
the remains of a great man indeed.

1. Great by his Dignities lawfully obtained. He was,

1. A Fellow of Caius College in Cambridge.

2. A Priest in God's Church.

3. Master of Peter-house in Cambridge.

4. A Prebendary here.

5. Archdeacon.

6. Deane.

7. At last, by these orderly degrees he was, through the providence of God,
and under God by the Royal Favor of our most Gracious King, in Reward of his
Constant and Loyal Services and Sufferings at Home and Abroad, exalted to the
Throne of a Bishop, and such a Bishop as was a Count Palatine in England, and
so as I may say a petty King, as having the Royalties in this County belonging
to him, but still with due Subordination to a Great King Transcendent above
him, and all Subjects within this Kingdom; but still a (...) in our
Translation, a Noble Man; in the vulgar Latin, John 4. 46.
a Regulus; in St. Hierome, Palatinus; Hier. in Isa. 65. Princ. By the Sages of
the Law, he is styled Dominus Regalis, who has thus long enjoyed the Jura
Regalia. See Rotul. Parl. and Pasch. 21 Eliz. Rotul. quint. which the Lord Cook
calls a notable Record of the Liberties of the Bishop of Durham, and is
therefore allowed for such in the Kings Courts.
a parallel Title to that part of our Bishops Dignity.

But now he is dead, and who knows but that God took him away from the evil to
come? Isa. 57. 1.
And as great as he was you may see now, that a small plat of ground must
contain and confine him, Omnia mors aequat.
Sic transit gloria mundi. He can carry none of all those Dignities to his
grave, Claudian.
only his Faith and good Works do attend him to his grave, and beyond his
grave, Rev. 14. 13.
for his Works do follow him, and that as high as Heaven where he now rests
from his labors; but without Faith and good works, when a man is dead, vanity
of vanities all is vanity. Eccl. 1. 2.


2. This great man was Greater yet by his Actions and great Benefactions,
concerning which, when in the prosecution of his Great Buildings, he was
interpelled by some, with the mention of his Children, his usual answer was,
The Church is my firstborn; a Noble Speech, yea, a Divine Sentence, worthy of a
King, who may envy it out of a Bishops mouth. Indeed the Church is the Kings
firstborn, and the best of his Titles is to be the Defender of it. I am
confident that his Noble Relations will Erect unto him a more lasting Monument
than this our transient Speech or withering pen, or failing Press can fully
express. Indeed for his time he did great things, and he lived and died also
with good intentions of doing greater things; for he was pregnant of generous
designs.

3. He was greatest of all by his constant sufferings; in which sense St. Luke
1. 15.
John Baptist is styled, magnus coram Domino: not so much for his doings
(though they were great) for John did no Miracles, John 10. 41.
as for his sufferings, in which Sense our late Bishop was greatest, for he was
a constant Confessor for Christ and his True Religion, and so but one degree
removed from the Noble Army of Martyrs, Heb. 12. 22. to 24.
into whose blessed Society our hope is that he is now gathered: to which
blessed state of Glory he bring us all at last, who has both by his precious
blood purchased, and by his Free Grace prepared it for us, even Jesus Christ
the Righteous. To whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit, three Persons and
one God, be ascribed again from Angels, from us, and from all men; all Praise,
Power, Majesty, Dominion and Glory for ever and ever, Amen.

AN APPENDIX Of the late Lord Bishop OF DVRESME's PROFESSION and PRACTICE; And
of his Last Will concerning RELIGION.

The State of us that adhere to the Church of England.
The Roman Catholics
1. SAy and believe (as by the Articles of their new Creed they are bound to
believe) that we are all damned, and accursed persons.

2. They call us Heretics.

3. They excommunicate us, and abhor to join with us in any Sacred action,
either of Prayer or Sacraments.

4. Not long since they burnt us (both alive and dead) at their stakes; and
where the Edicts of Princes restrain them not, they do so still, as by their
own Laws they have obliged themselves to do; which Laws (if civil respects
suspend them not for the time) they can put in execution at an hours warning
when they please.

5. They will allow us no other burial of our dead, than the burial of a dog;
accounting their Churches, and their Churchyards to be polluted if any of our
people be there put into a Grave; and whoever it is among them (be it a Son
that shall bury his Father, or a Wife her Husband that dye in our Religion) if
they venture to make a Grave there, and put the dead Corpse either of a Father,
or a Husband, or other the like into it, they are bound to scrape up that Corpse
again with their own fingers, and carry it away to be buried in a ditch or a
dunghill, or where else they can find room for it: Prince or Peasant are
hereni alike, if they be not Roman Catholics, they shall be used no better.

The reformed Churches
1. SAy and believe (as we do) that we profess and believe whatsoever is
necessary to salvation; and that it is an accursed belief which the Roman
Catholics have of us.

2. These acknowledge us to be true Catholics.

3. They do most willingly receive us into their Churches, and frequently
repair to ours, joining with us both in Prayers and Sacraments.

4. These men (whose Predecessors were burnt up and martyred as ours have been)
being in such times of persecution received, and harbored in our Churches,
gave us the like Relief in theirs, both in Germany and France, where when at
any time we come, they have obtained freedom for us from this kind of
persecution, under which we might otherwise suffer and be in continual danger
to lose our lives.

5. They allow us, not only to bury our dead among theirs, in the Churchyards
which they have purchased, and peculiarly set apart for that purpose; but they
give us leave also to use our own Office, and Order of Burial, (at least they
hinder us not to do it, if the Roman Catholics permit it) and to set up our
Monuments and Inscriptions over the Graves, hereby professing Unity with us
both alive and dead.

In all which Regards we ought no less to acknowledge them, and to make no
Schism between our Churches and theirs; however we approve not some defects
that may be seen among them.

This remains written by the Bishop's own hand when he was in France.

Adjutorium nostrum in Nomine Domini, qui fecit Caelum and Terram.
In Nomine and Honor ejusdem Domini Dei nostri, Patris, and Filii and Spiritus
Sancti, Summae ac individuae Trinitatis.
QVoniam Statutum est omnibus semel mori, and Corpus uniuseujusque dissolutum
iri, tempus vero dissolutionis meae cum incertum sit, de qua tamen quasi in
propinquo esset, assidua animi meditatione sollicitus, and frequenti Corporis
infirmitate pulsatus, subinde cogito; Ego Johannes Cosinus, humilis Ecclesiae
Dei Administer, and modo permissione altissimi Episcopus Dunelm. non ponens
spem meam in praesenti hac vita, sed ad alteram (quae futura est) in Caelis
aeternam, ex divina tandem misericordia, adipiscendam semper anhelans, and
humiliter orans pro salute animae meae, ut per merita Jesu Christi Filii Dei
vivi, and Redemptoris ac Mediatoris nostri unici, omnia mea mihi remittantur
delicta; hoc Testamentum, continens ultimam voluntatem meam, sana mente and
puro cord condo, ordino, and facio, in hac forma quae sequitur.

Ante omnia, Domino nostro Deo Omnipotenti gratias ago quas possum maximas,
quod me ex Fidelibus, and bonis Parentibus in hanc vitam nasci, atque in
Ecclesia sua, per Sanctum Baptismi Lavacrum ab ipso institutum, ad vitam
aeternam renasci voluerit, meque a juventute mea in doctrina sana erudiverit
and sanctorum suorum participem effecerit, fidemque non fictam vel mortuam, sed
veram and vivam in animo meo impresserit, una cum adjunct a spe firma fore
posthac ut perducar ad vitam sempiternam. Quae quidem fides in co consistit ut
adoremus and veneremur deum, in eumque credamus, and, in quem misit, filium
ejus dilectissimum, verbum aeternum ante secula genitum, Jesum Christum Dominum
nostrum, qui propter nos nostramque salutem, ex beatissima Virgin Maria,
superveniente in eam spiritu sancto, carnem in saeculo sumpsit and homo factus
est; deinde natus, passus, crucifixus, mortuus ac sepultus, and postquam ad
inferos descendisset, ex sepulchro suo resurrexit, and captivam ducens
captivitatem, adscendit in Coelos, ubi ad dexteram Dei Patris sedet, and regnat
in aeternum; inde vero, spiritum sanctum (in quem pariter nobis credendum est)
misit, a Patre Filioque procedentem, per quem largissime dona distribuit
hominibus, and Ecclesiam suam Catholicam in communione sanctorum, in Divinis
Sacramentis, in vera fide, in doctrina sana, ac moribus Christianis instituit;
una cum remissione peccatorum piis omnibus, and dignos in eadem Ecclesia
paenitentiae fructus proferentibus, impertienda; quibus etiam quum in supremo
saeculi die de Coelis rediturus ut mortuos resuscitet, and omnes judicet,
collaturus est aeternam beatitudinem; reliquis vero infidelibus, aut qui
secundum carnem vixerint, and converti, sive paenitentiam agere nolentibus
aeternum supplicium irrogaturus. In hac Fide, quae totius sacrae Scriptur ae
summa est, and absolutissimum compendium, sanctis (Judae verse. 3.) semel
tradita, and ab Apostolis, eorumque successoribus propagata, atque ad nos usque
derivata vivere me profiteor, and ut in ea ad* ultimum vitae spiritum
constanter ac sine haesitatione perseverem and moriar, assiduis quantum possum
precibus a Deo contendo; unitaetem interea colens and servans vinculum pacis ac
charitatis cum omnibus ubique Christianis, qui inter tanta Ecclesiae mala,
distractiones and calamitates (quibus equidem non possum non illachrymari) hanc
fidem integre admittunt, nullamque ejus partem in dubium vocant. Spero etiam,
quae est Dei Christique (...), Servatoris nostri benignitas omnes eos, qui haec
a Deo revelante tradita simpliciter nobiscum crediderint and pie vixerint, in
magno illo die Domini salvos fore, etiamsi singulorum rationem reddere, vel
modum exponere, vel quaestiones circa ea exortas solvere, vel dum forte
satagunt Hallucinationes aliquot effugere, and penitus ab errore immunes esse
nequiverint.

Sed quascunque olim Haereses and quaecunque etiam Schismata, quibuscunque
tandem nominibus appellentur, prisca and universalis sive Catholica Christi
Ecclesia, unanimi consensu rejecit and condemnavit, ego pariter condemno and
rejicio; una cum omnibus earundem Haeresium fautoribus hodiernis, Sectariis and
Fanaticis, qui spiritu malo acti mentiuntur sese spiritu Dei afflari. Horum
omnium, inquam, Haereses and Schismata, Ego quoque Ecclesiae nostrae
Anglicanae, imo Catholicae, Symbolis, Synodis and Confessionibus addictissimus
pariter improbo constanterque rejicio, atque repudio. In quorum numero pono non
tantum segreges Anabaptistas and eorum sequaces (proh dolor!) nimium multos,
sed etiam novos nostrates Independentes and Presbyterianos, genus hominum
malitiae, inobedientiae and seditionis spiritu abreptum, qui inaudita a seculis
audacia and perfidia, tanta nuper perpetrarunt facinora, in contemptum and
opprobrium omnis Religionis and Fidei Christianae, quanta quidem non sine
horrore dici aut commemorari queant: Quinetiam a corruptelis and ineptis
nuperque natis sive Papisticis (quas vocant) superstitionibus, doctrinis, and
assumentis novis in Avitam ac Primaevam laudatissimae olim tam Orthodoxae and
Catholicae Ecclesiae Religionem ac fidem jamdudum contra sacram Scripturam,
veterumque Patrum Regulas ac mores introductis, me prorsus jam alienum esse,
atque adeo a Juventute mea semper fuisse, sancte, and animitus adsevero.

Vbicunque vero Terrarum Ecclesiae, Christiano nomine censae veram, Priscam and
Catholicam Religionem Fidemque profitentur, ut Deum Patrem, Filium and spiritum
sanctum uno ore and mente invocant ac colunt, eis, si me uspiam actu jam nunc
jungi prohibet vel distantia Regionum, vel dissidia hominum, vel aliud
quodcunque obstaculum, semper tamen animo, mente and affectu conjungor ac
coalesco; id quod de Protestantibus praesertim, and been reformatis Ecclesiis
intelligi volo: Fundamentis enim salvis, diversitatem, ut opinionum, ita quoque
rituum circa res juxta adnatas, and minus necessarias, nec universali veteris
Ecclesiae praxi repugnantes in aliis Ecclesiis (quibus nobis praesidendum non
est) amice, placide and pacifice far possumus, atque adeo perferre debemus.
Eis vero omnibus qui male consulti quoquo modo me iniquis calumniis insectati
sunt, vel adhuc insectari non desinunt, ego quidem ignosco, and deum serio
precor, ut ipse quoque ignoscere, and meliorem eis mentem inspirare velit.
Operam interim and mihi, and aliis omnibus fratribus, praesertim Episcopis, and
Ministris Ecclesiae Dei, quantum ex illius gratia possumus, dandam and
conferendam esse existimo, ut tandem sopiantur, vel saltem minuantur,
Religionis dissidia, atque ut pacem sectemur, cum omnibus, and sanctimoniam.
Quod ut fiat quam ocyssime, faxit Deus Pacis Author and Amator concordiae. Cujus
immensam misericordiam oro and obtestor, ut me in peccatis and iniquitatibus
conceptum ab omni humanae infirmitatis labe and corruptela repurget, dignumque
ex indigno per magnam clementiam suam faciat, mihique passionem and immensa
merita dilectissimi sui filii Domini nostri Jesu. Christi, ad delictorum meorum
omnium expiationem applicet: ut quum novissima vitae hora non improvisa
venerit, ab Angelis suis in sinum Abrahae raptus, and in societate sanctorum
and electorum suorum collocatus, aeterna foelicitate perfruar.

Haec praefatus quae ad Religionem and Animae meae statum ac salutem spectant,
quaeque Latino Sermon a me dictata atque exarata sunt, reliqua, quae ad
sepulturam corporis, and bonorum meorum temporalium dispositionem attinent,
sermon patrio perscribi faciam, ac perorabo.

Vid. J. Will. etc.

Our help is in the Name of the Lord who made Heaven and Earth.
In the Name and Honor of the same Lord our God, the Father, and the Son, and
the Holy Ghost the most High and undivided Trinity.
FOrasmuch as it is appointed for all men once to die, and that every man's body
shall be dissolved, but the time of my dissolution is uncertain; of which
notwithstanding, as if it were nigh at hand, being mindful in my daily
Meditations, and shaken with the frequent infirmities of my body I ever and
anon think thereof.

I John Cousin, an humble Minister in the Church of God, and by the permission
of the most High now Bishop of Durham, not putting my hope in this present
life, but ever aspiring to that other (which is to come) eternal in the
Heavens, and which by the mercy of God ere long I hope to obtain, and humbly
praying for the salvation of my own Soul, that through the merits of Jesus
Christ, the Son of the living God, our only Redeemer and Mediator, all mine
offenses be forgiven me; being of a sound mind, out of a sincere heart, do
make, ordain and constitute this Testament, containing my Last Will, in this
form as follows.

First of all, I heartily thank our Lord God Almighty, that he has vouchsafed
me to be born in this life of faithful and virtuous Parents; and that it has
pleased him that I should be Regenerate (and born a new in his Church) unto
Life Eternal by the holy Laver of Baptism, which he has instituted; and that
he has instructed me from my Youth in sound doctrine, and has made me
partaker of his Saints, that he has imprinted in my mind a Faith not feigned
nor dead, but true and living, together with a firm confidence, that hereafter
I shall be brought unto eternal life; which Faith doubtless consists in this,
That we adore and worship one God, and believe in him, and in him whom he has
sent, his most beloved Son the Eternal Word, begotten before all Ages, Jesus
Christ our Lord; who for us and for our Salvation took flesh of the most
blessed Virgin Mary (the Holy Ghost over-shading her) in this life, and was
made man, afterward was born, suffered, was crucified, dead and buried, and
after he had descended into Hell, rose again from his Grave, and leading
captivity captive, ascended into Heaven, where sitting at the right hand of
God, he reigns for ever; but sent from thence the Holy Ghost (in whom we
ought equally to believe) proceeding from the Father and the Son, by whom he
most bountifully gave gifts unto men, and founded his Catholic Church in the
Communion of Saints, in the Divine Sacraments, in true Faith, sound Doctrine,
and Christian Manners; together with the remission of Sins, to be conferred on
all the Godly, and that in the same Church bring forth fruits meet for
Repentance; to whom also when in the last day of the world he shall come from
Heaven to raise the dead and judge all, he will give eternal happiness; but to
the rest that are Infidels, or that have lived according to the flesh, and
would not repent or be converted, he will inflict eternal punishment. In this
Faith, which is the summary and most absolute Abridgement of all the Holy
Scripture (Jude verse. 3.) once delivered to the Saints, and which the Apostles
and their Successors have spread abroad and derived down even to us, I profess
my self to live, and that I may persevere in it constantly without doubting
unto my last breath is my daily prayer; in the mean time seeking after Unity by
preserving the bond of Peace and Love with all Christians every where, who
among the great Evils, Distractions and Calamities of the Church (which truly I
cannot but heartily bewail) entirely receive this Faith, and call no one part
of it in question. I hope also through the goodness of God and Christ, God and
Man our Savior, that all they that have together with us sincerely believed
these things that are revealed and delivered from God, and have lived a Godly
life, shall be saved in the great day of the Lord: who although they are not
able to give an account, or explain the manner of every of them, nor resolve
the questions raised about them, and though perhaps when they endeavor it they
cannot avoid some mistakes, and be altogether free from error.

But whatsoever Heresies or Schisms heretofore, by what names soever they be
called, the ancient Catholic and Universal Church of Christ with an unanimous
consent has rejected and condemned, I do in like manner condemn and reject;
together with all the modern Fautors of the same Heresies, Sectaries and
Phanaticks, who being carried on with an evil Spirit do falsely give out they
are inspired of God: The Heresies and Schisms, I say of all these, I also as
most addicted to the Symbols, Synods and Confessions of the Church of England,
or rather the Catholic Church, do constantly renounce, condemn and reject.
Among whom I rank not only the Separatists, the Anabaptists and their
Followers, (Alas) too too many, but also the New Independents and Presbyterians
of our Country, a kind of men hurried away with the spirit of Malice,
Disobedience and Sedition, who by a disloyal attempt (the like whereof was
never heard since the world began) have of late committed so many great and
execrable Crimes, to the contempt and despite of Religion, and the Christian
Faith, which how great they were without horror cannot be spoken or mentioned.

Moreover I do profess, with holy asseveration and from my very heart, that I
am now, and have ever been from my youth altogether free and averse from the
corruptions and impertinent newfangled or papistical (so commonly called)
superstitions and doctrines, and new superadditions to the Ancient and
Primitive Religion, and Faith of the most commended, so Orthodox and Catholic
Church, long since introduced, contrary to the Holy Scripture, and the Rules
and Customs of the ancient Fathers.

But in what part of the World soever any Churches are extant, bearing the name
of Christ, and professing the true Catholic Faith and Religion, worshipping
and calling upon God the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost with one heart and
voice, if any where I be now hindered actually to be joined with them, either by
distance of Countries, or variance amongst men, or by any other let whatsoever;
yet always in my mind and affection I join and unite with them; which I desire
to be chiefly understood of Protestants, and the best Reformed Churches; for
where the foundations are safe, we may allow, and therefore most friendly,
quietly and peaceably suffer, in those Churches where we have not Authority, a
diversity as of Opinion so of Ceremonies about things which do but adhere to
the Foundations, and are neither necessary or repugnant to the practice of the
Universal Church. As for all them who through Evil Counsel have any way
inveighed against, or calumniated me, and even yet do not forbear their
invectives, I freely pardon them, and earnestly pray to God, that he also would
be pleased to forgive them, and inspire them with a better mind. In the mean
while, I take it to be my duty, and of all my Brethren, especially the Bishops
and Ministers of the Church of God, to do our utmost endeavors, according to
the measure of Grace which is given to every one of us, that at last an end may
be put to the differences of Religion, or at least that they may be lessened,
and that we may follow Peace with all men and Holiness; which that it may be
accomplished very speedily, God the Author of Peace and Concord grant, whose
infinite Mercy I humbly beseech, that he would cleanse me, who was conceived in
Sin and Iniquity, from every spot and corruption of humane frailty; and that
through his great clemency he would make me who am unworthy to become worthy,
and that he would apply to me the Passion and infinite Merits of his most
beloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord, to the expiating of all mine Offenses; that
at the last hour of my Life, which I daily look for, I may be carried by his
Holy Angels into Abraham's bosom, and being placed in the fellowship of his
Saints and Elect, may fully enjoy Eternal Felicity.

Having now declared what belongs to my Religion, and the State and Salvation
of my Soul, which I have now delivered here in Latin: The rest that belongs to
my Burial, and the disposal of my Temporal Estate, I shall cause to be written
in my Native Language, and so conclude.

Durham Jan. 18. 1672. Vera Copia Examinata per me William Stagg Not. Publicum.

FINIS.

