AN ESSAY OF A KING, WITH An explanation what manner of persons those should be
that are to execute the power or ordinance of the KINGS Prerogative. WRITTEN By
the Right Honorable Francis, Lord Verulam Viscount Saint Alban.

December. 2. LONDON, Printed for Richard Best, 1642.

An Essay of a King written by Sir Francis Bacon.
A King is a mortal God on Earth, unto whom the living God has lent his own
name as a great honor: But withal told him he should die like a man, lest he
should be proud and flatter himself, that God has with his name imparted unto
him his nature also.

2 Of all kinds of men, God is least beholding unto them, for he does most for
them, and they do ordinarily least for him.

3 A King that would not feel his Crown too heavy for him, must wear it every
day, but if he think it too light, he knows not of what metal it is made of.

4 He must make Religion the Rule of government, and not the Scale; for he that
casts in Religion only to make the scales even, his own weight is contained
in these Characters Tekel uphrasin, he is found too light, his Kingdom shall be
taken from him.

5 And that King that holds not Religion the best reason of state, is void of
all piety and justice, the Supporters of a King.

6 He must be able to give Counsel himself, but not to rely thereupon: for
though happy events justify their Councels, yet it is better that the evil
event of good advice be rather imputed to a Subject then a Sovereigne.

7 He is the Fountain of Honor, which should not run with a wast pipe, lest
the Courtiers ^ell the waters, and then (as Papists say of their holy Wels) to
lose the virtue.

8 He is the life of the Law, not only as he is lex loquens himself, but
because he animateth the dead letter, making it active toward all his Subjects
praemio and poena.

9 A wise King must do less in altering his Laws, then he may; for new
government is ever dangerous, it being true in the body politic, as in the
corporal, that omnis subita mutatio est periculosa, and though it be for the
better, yet it is not without a fearful apprehension; For he that changes the
fundamental Laws of a Kingdom, thinks that there is no good title to a
Crown but by conquest.

10 A King that sets to sale Seats of Justice, oppresses the People, for he
teaches his Judges to fell Justice, and praecio parata, praecio vincitur
Justicia.

Bounty and Magnificence are virtues, verae Regiae, but a prodigal King is
nearer a Tyrant, then a parcimonious: for store at home draws his
contemplations abroad, but want supplyeth it self of what is next, and many
times the next way, and herein he must be wise and know, wh^t he may justly do.

12 That King which is not feared, is not loved, and he that is well seen in
his craft, must as well study to be feared as loved, yet not loved for fear,
but feared for love.

13 Therefore as he must always resemble him whose great name he bears, and
that in manifesting the sweet influence of his mercy over the severe stroke of
his Justice sometimes, so in this not to suffer a man of death to live, for
besides that the Land does mou^n, the restraint of Justice toward sin does
more retard the affection of love, then the extent of mercy does inflame it,
and sure where love is bestowed, fear is quite lost.

14 His greatest Enemies are his Flatterers, for though they ever speak on his
side, yet their words still make against them.

15 The love which a King owes to the weal-publike, should not be restrained
to any one particular, yet that his more special favor do reflect upon some
worthy ones, is somewhat necessary, because there are so few of that capacity.

He must have a special care of five things, if he would not have his Crown
to be put upon him.

First, that simulata sanctitas, be not in the Church, for that is duplex
iniquitas.

Secondly, that inutilis aequitas, sit not in the Chancecery, for that is
inepta misericordia.

Thirdly, that utilis iniquitas, keep not the Exchequer, for it is crudele
latrocinium.

Fourthly, that fidelis temeritas be not his General, for that will bring but
seram poenitentiam.

Fifthly, that infidelis prudentia, be not his Secretary, for that he is Anguis
sub viridi herba.

To conclude, as he is of the greatest power, so he is subject to the greatest
cares, made the servant of his people, or else he were without a calling at all.

He then that honors him not, is next an Atheist wanting the fear of God in
his heart.

An explanation what manner of persons those should be, that are to execute the
power or Ordinance of the Kings Prerogative, written by the said Sir Francis
Bacon late Lord Chancellor, and Lord St. Albans.
THat absolute Prerogative according to the Kings pleasure revealed by his
Laws, may be exercised and executed by any Subject, to whom power may be given
by the King, in any place of Judgment or Commission, which the King by his Law
has ordained, in which the Judge subordinate cannot wrong the people, the Law
laying down a measure by which every Judge should govern or execute; Against
which Law if any Judge proceed, he is by the Law questionable and punishable
for his transgression.

In this nature are all the Judges and Commissioners of the Land no otherwise
then in their Courts, in which the King in person is supposed to sit who cannot
work that trespass, Felony or treason which the Law has not made so to be,
neither can punish the guilty by other punishment then the Law has appointed.

This Prerogative or power as it is over all the Subjects so being known by
the Subjects, they are without excuse if they offend; and suffer no wrong, if
they be punished. And by this prerogative the King governs all sorts of
people according unto known will.

The absolute prerogative which is in Kings according to their private will and
judgment cannot be executed by any Subject, neither is it possible to give
such power by Commission, or fit to subject the people to the same. For the
King in that he is the substitute of God immediately the Father of his people,
and head of the Common wealth by participation with God and his subjects,
Discretion, Judgment, and feeling love toward those over whom he reigns
only proper to himself, or to his places and person, who seeing he cannot in
any others diffuse his wisdom, power, or gifts, which God in respect of his
place and charge has enabled him withal, can neither subordinate any other
Judge to govern by that knowledge, which the King can no otherwise then by his
known will participate unto him. And if any subordinate Judge shall obtain
Commission according, of such Judge to govern the people, that Judge is bound
to think that to be his sound discretion, in which the law in which the Kings
known will shows unto him to be that Justice which he ought to administer:
otherwise he might seem to esteem himself above the Kings law, who will not
govern by him, or to have a power derived from other then from the King, which
in the Kingdom will administer Justice contrary to the justice of the Land.
Neither can such a Judge or Commissioner under the name of his high Authority
shrowde his own high affection, seeing the Conscience and discretion of every
man is particular and private to himself; As the discretion of the Judge
cannot be properly or possibly the discretion of the King, or conscience of the
King; And if not his discretion, neither the Judgment that is ruled by another
m^ns only. Therefore it may seem they rather desire to be Kings then to rule
the people under the King, which will not administer Justice by law, but by
their own wills.

This Administration in a subject is derogative to the Kings Prerogative, for
he administreth Justice out of a private direction, being not capable of a
general direction, how to use the Kings pleasure in Causes of particular
respect, which if another then the King himself can do, how can it be so,
that any man should desire that which is unfit and impossible, but that it must
p^oceed out of some exorbitant affection, the rather seeing such places to be
full of trouble, and being altogether unnecessary, no man will seek to thrust
himself into it, but for hope of gain. Then is not any prerogative oppugned
but maintained, though it be desired that every subordinate Magistrate may not
be made supreme, whereby he may seal up the hearts of the people, take from
the King the respect due unto him only, or to judge the people otherwise then
the King does himself.

And although the Prince be not bound to render any account to the Law, which
in person administreth it self. Yet every subordinate Judge must render an
account to the King by his laws how he has administered Justice in his place
where he is set. But if he has power to rule by private direction, for which
there is no law, how can he be questioned by a law, if in his private censure
he offends.

Therefore it seems that in giving such authority the King ordains not
subordinate Magistrates, but absolute Kings; And what does the King leave to
himself, who gives so much to others as he has himself? neither is there a
greater bond to tie the subject to his Prince in particular then when he shall
have recourse unto him in his person or in his power for releif of the wrongs
which from private men be offered, or for reformation of the oppressions which
any subordinate Magistrate shall impose upon the people: there can be no
offense in the Judge, who has power to execute according to his discretion,
when the discretion of any Judge shall be thought fit to be unlimited; And
therefore there can be therein no reformation, whereby the King in this uses
no prerogative to gain his Subjects right. Then the subject is bound to suffer
helpless wrong, and the discontent of the people is cast upon the King, the
laws being neglected, which with their equity in all other Causes and
Judgments, saving this, interpose themselves and yield remedy.

And to conclude, 1. Custom. 2. Wisdom. 3. Justice. 4. Rule against it.
Custom cannot confirm that which is any ways unreasonable of it self;
Wisdom will not allow that which is many ways dangerous, and no ways
profitable; Justice will not approve that government where it cannot be, but
wrong must be committed. Neither can there be any rule by which to try it, nor
means for reformation of it.

Therefore whosoever desires Government, must seek such as he is capable of,
not such as seems to himself most easy to execute; For it appears that it
is easy to him that knows not law nor justice to rule as he lists, his
will never wanting a power to it self: but it is safe and blameless both for
the Judge and People, and honor to the King, that Judges be appointed who
know the Law, and that they be limited to govern according to the Law.

FINIS.

