THE ABOLISHING OF THE BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER, By Reason of above fifty gross
CORRVPTIONS in it, As also for that it commands the use of such Ceremonies in
the WORSHIP OF GOD (namely Surplice, Cross, and Kneeling) which man has
devised, and which are notoriously known to have been of old, and still to be
abused to Superstition and Idolatry, and are of no necessary use in the CHVRCH.

Being the Substance of a Book which the Ministers of Lincoln Diocese
delivered to King JAMES, the First of December, 1605.

Well worthy of the serious consideration of the High COURT of PARLIAMENT.



Reprinted, and are to be sold by SAMVEL SATTERTHVVAITE in Warwick Lane, 1641.

THE ABOLISHING OF THE BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER.
WITH Exceptions against Subscribing to it.
EXCEPTION I.
FIRST, IN that by the Order it appoints for the reading of the holy
Scriptures, the greatest part of Canonical Scripture is never to be read to
the Congregation.

Contrary to the practice of the Church of the Jews before Christ, and of the
Primitive Church in the Age next succeeding after Christ, and his Apostles, and
of all the best Reformed Churches at this day; in none of all which, any part
of the Canonical Scripture was ever commanded to be left out in public
Reading.

And contrary to the Opinion of Bishop Jewel, who affirms Reply art. 15.
Divis. 16. page 543.
that to limit and diet the people what they ought to read, and what they
ought to leave, was sometimes the Superstitious discretion of the Rabbis;
herein, says he, we may say, as Hilary says, the Son of God has revealed
to us no such thing.

2. And that by the Order it appoints many of the first Lessons are to be taken
out of the Apocryphal Books and that under the name of the holy Scripture of
the old Testament, without any note of difference from the Canonical, and
Commands the Story of Susanna to be read under the name of Dan. 13. In which
Story the Jews in Babylon are said to have had Judges of their own, and power
to put offenders to death, and Daniel is said to have been a young child when
he executed judgment upon the two false witnrsses; and this is said to have
been done immediately before the reign of Cyrus, and to have bin the means
whereby Daniel grew famous: all which do evidently show this Story to be
fabulous and untrue, as is observed by Iuntus Lubbertus, Dr. Fulke, Dr.
Whitakers, Dr. Willet, and others.

In like manner also sundry of the other Apocryphal Chapters that are thus
appointed to be read, do contain manifest errors and corruptions, as are
observed by the foresaid Authors.

3. In that the Book of Common Prayer appoints such a Translation of the
Psalms to be read in the Churches as leaves out of the Text sundry words and
sentences which were given by Divine inspiration for the profit of the whole
Church, as the titles of the Psalms, and these words Higaton, and Selah, and
Praise; yet the Lord is omitted at least seventeene times, which is contrary to
the Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Rev. 22. 19.
word of God, who has expressly forbidden to take ought from his Word, and,
said he, will take their part out of the Book of Life that shall presume to
do it.

4. In that the Book of Common Prayer misapplyeth sundry places of Scripture,
and that to the countenancing of some points of unsound Doctrine; as for
example, to instance in one for many, that in Rev. 14. 15. is applied to those
children whom Herod murdered, which is also made more plain by the Collect
which calls them the witnesses of God, which confessed and showed forth his
praise.

EXCEPTION II.
In that the Book of Common Prayer commands the use of such Ceremonies in the
worship of God, as man has devised, and which are notoriously known to have
been of old, and still to be abused to Idolatry and Superstition, and as are
of no necessary use in the Church.

And as this might be made manifest by Arguments drawn from holy Scriptures,
so also is it confirmed by the judgment of the godly learned of all Churches
and ages, to wit, that Christians are bound to cast off the Ceremonies and
Religious Customs of Pagans, Jews, Idolators, and Heretics, and are
carefully to shun all conformity with them therein; as we might instance in
the testimonies of ancient Fathers, and Counsels; but we will only produce
the judgments of modern Writers.

1. It was the judgment of the Church of Scotland, as appears in a Letter
written from a general Assembly held at Edenbrough 1566. unto the Bishops of
England, in which, besides many other sentences to this purpose, thus he writ;
If Surplice, Corner-cap, and Tippet have been badges of Idolaters, in the very
act of Idolatry, what have the prayers of Christian liberty, and the open
rebukers of Superstition to do with the dregs of the Romish beast, and more
plainly in the general confession of their faith, whereunto King James, with
other of the chief States of that Printed at London by Thomas Man, 1603.
Kingdom, did solemnly swear and subscribe, where we find these words, We
detest all the Ceremontes and false Doctrine of the Roman Antichrist, added to
the Ministration of the true Sacraments, we detest all his vain Allegories,
Rites, Signs, and Traditions brought into the Church without the Word of God.

Occolampadius writing to a Minister of the Church of Scaphusium, 1. Lib.
Epist. page 129.
requires him utterly to cast off all the Ceremonies of the Papists in the
celebration of the Lords Supper, which cannot (says he) be continued, but they
will nourish the Superstition and impiety whereunto they served of old.

Calvin in one of his Epistles having spoken of some moderation that is to be
used in reforming and remedying abuses in the Epist. 87. page 167.
Church, yet, says he, I do no less constantly affirm that great heed is to
be taken, lest under this pretense any thing be tolerated, in the Church which
came either from Satan or from Antichrist.

Musculus writes thus, It is not fit that those things, which are rather
Laricom. p. 421.
Superstitious than Religious, or have so much as a show of Superstition,
should be received in the Church, God forbid that I should maintain any
Tradition Rites or Worships which are Popish, which either of their own
nature, or by abuse do serve unto Popish impiety.

Peter Martyr says, that Order ought to be kept in Administration of the
Sacraments, which is most sincere, and differs most In an Epist. to the
Ministers of Poland.
from the toys and Ceremonies of the Papists, and comes nearest unto that
purity, wherein Christ and his Apostles did first adminster it.

Of the same judgment was Beza, Bucer, and many other besides of the most
famous Divines of other Nations, which for brevity sake I will not so much as
name.

Our late Queens injunctions, require that all Monuments of Injunc. 23.
Idolatry and Superstition, be so utterly extinguished and destroyed, that
there may remain no memory of them, either in our Churches or houses.

Bishop Jewel speaking to the Papists of their Ceremonies, says, Confuta. of
the man of Chester.
You have so misused these things, or rather so defiled and bewrayed them with
your Superstitions, that we can no longer continue them without clogge of
conscience.

Bishop Pilkinton misliked that we were so like the Papists in marriage and
many other things.

Dr. Humphry professes plainly, both his desire and hope of the utter
abolishing of the Ceremonies, and of all Monuments of Popish In Epist. Dedica.
vit. Jewel.
Superstition that yet remain in our Church.

We abhor, says Dr. Fulke, whatsoever has but a show of Popery, we might
also produce the judgments of Dr. Andrews, Mr. Greenham, and others of our
English Modern Divines for the proof of this point in general. But it will
better appear if we shall consider these three Ceremonies in question
severally.

1. The Surplice is notoriously known to be by the Papists abused Missal. Romans
3. part. 1. page 100.
to Superstition and Idolatry, for the Bishop when he halloweth any of them,
he uses to pray thus, that the Priest wearing this holy Vesture, may deserve
to be shielded and defended, from all assaults and temptations of wicked
spirits.

And this garment is enjoined to all that are admitted to the very lowest
degree of their Clergy, which they call primam tonsuram, and this was it which
first brought in that custom into the Universities, that every Student should
at certain times wear the Surplice in Divine Service, because they did in
their matriculation receive this Primam tonsuram, and first entrance into the
Clergy.

Neither is the Surplice, only a badge and ornament of their Priesthood, but
the use of it is also enjoined in their Idolatrous Mass. For all Priests that
are at Mass must needs have their Surplice on, and indeed some Priests cannot
say Mass without it, yea they glory in it, as a garment peculiar to their
Religion. And therefore have the most learned and Judicious of our Divines
judged the Surplice to be a Popish Massing garment, and by this Reason they
have condemned the use of it in those Churches that profess the Gospel, as
namely Peter Martyr, Bullenger, Brentius, Beza Gualther, Zanchius, Bishop
Hooper, Bishop Farrer, Mr. Rogers, Bishop Jewel, Bishop Pilkinton, Dr.
Humphry, Dr. Reynoilds, and others.

The Sign of the Cross also is notoriously known to be abused to
Superstition and Idolatry by the Papists; for both Stapleton, and Bellarmine,
do make it the special badge of their Idolatrous Religion, and profess that
it is one of the Images to which they give Religious Adoration, yea, they
teach, that it is to be worshipped but they do no where more abuse it to
Idolatry, than in the Sacrament, for in Baptism they hold that the water has
no spiritual virtue till it be sanctified by it, they mark the child with it
as a means to drive away the devil, they hold that none can be rightly
Baptized, nor have his perfect Christendom without it; and this has caused
many of our chief Divines to condemn the use of it in Baptism, as Beza,
Zanchius, Polanus, Napier, Dr. Pulke, Dr. Reynolds, Thomas Rogers, and others.

The gesture also of kneeling in the very act of receiving the Bread and Wine
in the Lords Supper is notoriously known to have been of old, and still to be
abused unto Idolatry by the Papists; for it grew first from the persuasion of
the Real presence.

And for this cause also have our Learned Divines, condemned that gesture, as
namely, Calvin, Peter Martyr, Bishop Hooper, Mr. Beza, and others.

And besides this, that these Ceremonies have been abused to Idolatry, the
evil of them is manifest in that they are neither needful nor profitable in
the Church, neither unto edification, nor unto the more comely and orderly
performance of the duties of Gods Service, and this may appear, both by the
experience of many years, whereby it is found, as Mr. Bucer also observed in
his time, that there has been far less growth of Knowledge and piety in
those Congregations; where they have been most precisely observed, yea though
they enjoyed a Ministry of greater learning and gifts, then in those where they
have been wholely left, and especially by this, that neither Christ nor his
Apostles, who doubtless did perform every thing in their Ministry in that
manner that was most decent and fit for edification, did use them.

And it cannot but grieve many of the godly to see these things brought into
the Service of Christ, which have been so defiled by Antichrist: and of this
judgment, is both Calvin and Bucer, yea many of our own Bishops, and that of
late days as Dr. Whitegift late Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr Chaderton Bishop
of Lincoln, and Dr. Vaughan Bishop of London, and others in Ecclesiastical
dignity, do profess that the Church might well be without them, and that they
could wish they were taken away, and have spoken very basely of them, and in
their own Congregations have been accustomed often times to omit the use of
them; by all which they have evidently declared, that they do not in their
conscience think them fit or profitable to edify the Church by the more
decent or orderly performance of the Service of God. Furthermore, besides the
commanding the use of these Ceremonies which you see are so neddlesse and
offensive, the Book of Common Prayer contains in it sundry things that are
contrary to the Word of God.

The Book of Common Prayer contains in it, sundry things (besides those
handled in the Abridgement) that are contrary to the Word of God. For,

1. It appoints a Leiturgie, which in the whole matter and form thereof, is
too like unto the Masse-booke.

2. It appoints a Leiturgie which by the length thereof, does in many
Congregations often times necessarily shut out Preaching, viz. When Baptism, the
Communion, Marrying, Churching, and Burial concur all together (as often times
they do) in great Congregations.

3. It approves of a Ministry as lawful, which wants ability to Preach.

4. It contains in it sundry Popish errors of such things (at least) as tend
strongly to the maintenance of Popish Superstition. As, 1. The Minister of the
Gospel is throughout the Book called Priest. The name Priest.


2. It commands the observation of many Holidayes, and requires the Minister
to bid them, and prefers them (in some Holidayes.
sort) before the Lords day, For the ordinary Lessons appointed in the Calendar
for the Lords Day, must give place to the proper Lessons of that Holy Day that
falls on the Lords Day, and Athanasius Creed is appointed to be read only upon
certain Holi-dayes.

3. It appoints Saints Eves to be kept as Fasting-dayes, and commands the
Minister to bid them so.

4. It appoints the time of Lent to be kept as a Religious Fast, and
perverteth both the Example of Christ's Fast, and sundry other Lent.
places of Scripture to the justifying thereof. It prescribes a special
service for the first day of Lent and appoints the Commination, and other
special Prayers and Exhortations tending to Repentance, to be read upon that
day only, and it affirms that It was a godly Discipline in the Primative
Church, (the restoring whereof is much to be wished) that notorious sinners at
the beginning of Lent were put to open Penance.

5. The week before Easter, only of all weeks in the year, has prescript
Service appointed with Epistles and Gospels for every Week before Easter.
day, as solemn as the Holy Days are wont to have.

6. The Friday before Easter is called Good Friday, and has Good Friday.
three special Collects appointed for it, as has no one day of the year
besides.

7. It commands that every Parishioner shall receive the Communion at Easter.
Receiving the Communion at Easter.


8. It appoints the Congregation to pray that God would give them that, which
their prayers dare not presume to ask.

9. The Catechism (in delivering the number of the Sacraments) Diffidence in
Prayer. Number of the Sacraments. Necessity of baptism.
says, there are two only, as generally necessary to salvation.

10. The Minister (as if Baptism were of absolute necessity) is allowed not
only to Baptize in private, but to use the words of Institution, and the
element, though he have not so much time as to say the Lords Prayer.

11. The Minister is allowed and directed to administer the Private communion.
Communion to one sick of the Plague, though there be not one more to
communicate with him.

12. Interrogatories in Baptism are ministered unto Infants (as Interrogatories
in Baptism.
if repentance and Faith were requisite in them, before they may be Baptized)
and it is said in the Catechism. That infants perform faith and repentance by
their Sureties, who promise and vow them in their names.

13. Every child baptized (as if outward Baptism did confer Baptism
conferring of grace to all that receive it.
grace to all that receive it) is said to be regenerate; and in the Catechism,
it is said, that we are by Baptism made the children of grace, and (in the
Rubricke immediately before Catechism) that it is certain by Gods Word, that
children being baptized have all things necessary for their salvation, and be
undoubtedly saved.

14. The Minister is appointed to command that children be brought to the
Bishop to be confirmed, yea none may be admitted Confirmation.
to the Communion till he have been confirmed. In confirmation children are
said to be certified (by the sign of the imposition of the Bishops hands) of
Gods favor and gracious goodness toward them. And confirmation is said to be
ministered to them that are baptized, that by imposition of hands and Prayer,
they may receive strength and defense against all tentations to sin, and the
assaults of the world and the devil. Yea, confirmation is dignified above
Christ's Sacraments, in that none may administer it but a Bishop. And it is said
to be administered after the example of the holy Apostles, and warrant thereby.

15. It says that Matrimony, does signify unto us the Mystical union betwixt
Christ and his Church, and that God did consecrate Matrimony.
the state of Matrimony to such an excellent mystery, that in it is signified
and represented the spiritual marriage and unity between Christ and his
Church. And the Ring in Matrimony is appointed to be laid on the Book, and
the Priest to take it, and deliver it to the man, and to teach him to say thus,
With this Ring [thee wed, etc. And the Priest is appointed in his Prayer unto
God to say, that the Ring is a token and a pledge of the Covenant and vow made
in marriage.

16. The Priest is appointed to absolve every sick person (that Absolution.
finds his conscience troubled with any weighty sin, and makes special
confession of it) in this form, by Christ's authority committed to me, I
absolve thee from all thy sins, in the name of the Father, etc

And in another place the people are appointed to come to the Minister, to
receive the benefit of Absolution.

17. Burial is made a ministerial duty, and a prescript Leiturgie Burial.
is appointed for it to be said at the grave, and we are appointed to pray thus
that God would hasten his Kingdom, that we with this our brother, and all
other departed in the true faith of thy holy name, may have our perfect
consummation and bliss, both in body and soul.

18. Churching of Women is commanded and made a Ministerial duty, and a
prescript Leiturgy appointed for it, and the woman Churching of women.
is appointed to kneel near to the place where the Table stands, and the
Priest to stand by her, when he Churcheth her, and that he must offer her
accustomed offerings.

19. Both in that place and elsewhere in the book, offering Offering days and
Offertory.
days and an Offertory are allowed.

20. In the Catechism it is said, that the Son of God has redeemed all
mankind, taking that phrase in a larger sense than for all Universal grace.
the elect, as is evident by the words immediately going before, and following
after.

21. It appoints sundry things that tend directly to the profanation of the
holy Sacraments, either by prostituting them to unworthy persons, or
administering them unreverently. For, Profanation of the Sacraments.


1. All Priests and Deacons in Collegiat Churches, are commanded to receive the
Communion, every Sunday at least. 2 Every communicant may choose whether he will
give notice of his purpose to receive, till after the beginning of morning
Prayer on the same day that he is to communicate. 3. All new married persons
must receive the Communion the Manifest untruths.
same day they are married. 4. Private Baptism in some cases is allowed to be
administered without any Prayer, Doctrine, or Exhortation. 5 It avoucheth
sundry, manifest, and apparent untruths. Manifest untruths.

As 1. That in the Calendar (so much as may be) the reading of the Scripture is
so set forth, that all things might be done in order without breaking one piece
from another.

2. That nothing (by this Book) is ordained to be read, but the very pure Word
of God the holy Scripture, or that which is evidently grounded upon the same.

3. That this book is so plain and perfect, as that the Curates shall need no
other books for their public service, but this book and the Bible, and yet
it injoynes him to read Homilies.

4. That all our Ceremonies pertain to edification, and are apt to stir up
the dull mind of man, to the remembrance of his duty to God, by some notable
and special signification.

5. It calls certain Chapters of Esaias, Jeremy, Joel, and the Acts, Epistles.

6. It appoints us to say every, day from Christmas day, to Newyeares day in a
Collect, that Christ was borne this day, and upon whitsunday, Monday and
Tuesday, God which on this day have taught, etc.

7. It affirms that Michael (mentioned, Rev. 12.) is a created Angel.

8. It peremptorily affirms sundry things that (if they be not Doubtful
matters.
manifestly false) are doubtful.

1. That the Infants whom Herod murdered, were Innocents, and Gods witnesses;
and that they confessed his praise by dying. 2. That there are Archangells. 3.
That every one that is buried is a brother, That God has taken to himself his
soul, that we commit his body to the ground, in sure and certain hope of
Resurrection to eternal life. 4. It appoints sundry things that bring great
disorder and Disorder and confusion.
confusion unto the worship of God. As
1. That the people should say after the Minister, whole sentences of prayer
and Scripture; yea the Minister one part of the prayer, and the people another.
And in sundry parts of the Letany, the people make the prayer, and the Minister
only directs them what to pray for.

2. That the Minister is appointed to say some prayers kneeling, some standing;
some in one part of the Church, some in another.

3. That one of the people is allowed, to make the general confession of
sins at the Communion in the name of the whole Congregation.

4. That at some one meeting of the Assembly the Lords Prayer is to be repeated
eight several times, and Gloria Patri twelve times.

5 That the holy Scriptures are so mangled into shreds and pieces, in the
Epistles and Gospels.

6. That the words of the Institution are to be pronounced and repeated to
every several Communicant.

7. That the Churchwardens are appointed to go about on Communion-dayes
togather the Devotion of the people in the midst of Divine Service.

8. It contains sundry things that are ridiculous and absurd, Absurdities.
and such as no reasonable sense can be made of; for

1. It commands the reading of such Homilies as shall hereafter be set forth by
public authority. 2. It commands every parishioner to communicate at Easter,
and also to receive the Sacraments and other Rites. 3. It ministers
Interrogatories to Infants, which their Godfathers answer unto, and says, that
Infants perform faith and repentance by their Godfathers. 4. It appoints (in
some cases) Baptism to be administered conditionally in this form, If thou be
not Baptized already, I Baptize thee, in the name of the Father, etc. 5. It
requires that every husband be taught by the Priest to say to his wife, (in
the solemnization of wedlock) With my body I thee worship.
10. It contains in it sundry evident contradictions. for

1. In the second Article of the Rubricke after the Communion, Contradictions
the Minister is forbidden to celebrate the Communion, except there be a great
number to communicate with him; and in the third Article of the same Rubricke,
he is allowed to celebrate it, if there be but three to communicate with him.

2. In one place it is said, that it is thought good to follow the custom of
the old Church (in ministering Baptism, but twice a year) so near as
conveniently may be, and yet elsewhere, it allows Baptism to be administered
not only every day of the year in public but also every hour, either of day
or night in private.

3. In the Catechism, it is said there are but two Sacraments, and in another
place, the book gives to confirmation whatsoever (by the definition of a
Sacrament set down in the Catechism) belongs to the nature and essence of a
Sacrament.

4. In one place it is said that children should be brought to the Bishop to be
confirmed, so soon as they can say the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and the ten
Commandments. In another it says, that our custom is agreeable to the usage
of the Church in times part. whereby it was ordained, that Confirmation should
be ministered to them that are of perfect age.

The 35. Article of Religion touching the two Tomes of Homilies, is not to be
allowed, nor acknowledged to be agreeable to the word of God. For,

1. By it the reading of Homilies in the Congregation, is approved Reading of
Nemilies.
to be a Ministerial duty, and so an unpreaching Ministry allowed of.

2. The Books of Homilies contain sundry things that are evidently false and
untrue. As Manifest untruths. Tom. 2. page 305.


1. That the Apociyphal Books are every where called holy Scripture. And (two
only places being alleged, both which are taken out of Toby and
Ecclesiasticus, that tend dangerously to the justifying of the merit of
Almsdeeds) it is said, the Holy Ghost speaks so in the Scriptures.

2. That the place of the Psalmist, Psalm. 51. 5. is thus alleged, Tom. 1.
page 18.
wherefore he says, Mark and behold, I was conceived in sins: he says not
sin, but in the plural number sins.

3. That it is said, our Savior did Swear so often as he said verily, Tome 1.
page 51. and 87.
verily.

4. Where it is said, that plurality of Wives was by a special Tome 2. pa. p.
303.
Prerogative suffered to the Fathers of the old Testament, that they might have
many Children, because every one of them hoped, and begged oftentimes of God in
their prayers, the blessed seed might come and be borne of his stock and
kindred.

5. In them are affirmed (and that as by way of Doctrine publicly Doubtful
points and of dangerous construction.
taught in the Church) sundry things that are doubtful, and of dangerous
construction; As,

1. When it is said, That though manslaughter was committed Tome 1. pa. 22.
before, yet was not the world destroyed for that: but for whordome all the
world (few only excepted) was overflowed with water.

2. When the fact of Ambrose in Excommunicating Theodosius is Tome 2. page 22.
justfied.

3. When it is said, by keeping your Churches in good repair, Tom. 2. p. 160.
ye shall not only please God, and deserve his manifold blessings: but also
deserve the good report of all godly people.

4. When it is said, that all Adams posterity by his fall were become Tome 2.
pa, 365.
plain reprobates and cast-awayes, being perpetually damned, to the everlasting
pains of hell fire.

5. When it is said, that it is not to be born with, but a great Tome 2. pp.
483.
shame for an honest man to beat his Maidservant, though she be a bond servant.

The 36 Article of Religion. Touching the Book of Consecration of Archbishops
and Bishops, and of ordering Priests and Deacons, it is not to be allowed, nor
acknowledged, to be agreeable to the Word of God, For

1. Not one Minister of forty, does know what that book contains, nor how to
come to the sight of it. Few have seen the Book Defects.


2. It does not (whereas that Article says it does) contain all things that
are necessary, but omitteth sundry things which (by the Ordinance of God) ought
to be observed in the Ordination of Ministers. For

1. The examination of the life and learning of the Deacon and Priest, is
committed only to the Archdeacon. 2 The voices and consent of the people,
over whom the Minister is to be set, is not (by this Book) required to his
election and calling. 3. The Ordination of the Deacon by imposition of hands,
is permitted to one man, viz. the Bishop. 4. The Priest receives in his
Ordination no authority to govern the flock and exercise the Discipline of
Christ, but only to Preach the Word, and administer the Sacraments. 5. Some
manifest untruths are avouched in it, (whereas the Article says, it has in it
nothing that is of it self ungodly.) As
1. When it is said, that it is evident to all men diligently reading Manifest
untruths.
the holy Scriptures, and ancient Writers, that from the Apostles times, there
have been these Orders of Ministers in Christ's Church, viz. Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons.

2 Where it is said, that this Realm has received the Discipline of Christ,
as the Lord has commanded; whereas God has commanded there should be
governing Elders to exercise the discipline of Christ in each Congregation,
which our Realm has not as yet received.

3. Where it is said, that God did inspire the holy Apostles to choose S.
Steven into the Order of Deacons which is mentioned in this Book, and that the
Deacons, then to be ordered, are called to the like Office and administration
that Steven was called unto.

4. Some places of holy Scripture are perverted in it. As Scripture perverted.


1. When Acts 6. 17. is applied to warrant the Ordination of our Deacons.

2. When the Bishop is appointed, in the ordering of a Priest, and the
Archbishop in the Consecrating of a Bishop, to use these words, Receive the
holy Ghost, as our Savior did at the sending forth of his Apostles.

3. It contains sundry Popish errors and Superstitions, (whereas Popish
errors and Superstitions.
the Article says, it has in it nothing, that of it self is Superstitious. As

1. That it allows and establishes the Offices of Archdeacons and
Archbishops.

2. That Deacons, Priests, Bishops, and Archbyshops are made several Orders,
and degrees of Ministry.

3. That the Minister of the Gospel is usually called Priest.

4. That it ordains an Office of Deaconship with charge to read Homilies,
preach the Word, and administer Baptism.

5. That the Lords Supper is dignified above Baptism, and confirmation above
both, when the Deacon is permitted to baptize, and not to administer the Lords
Supper, the Priest to Minister both Baptism and the Lords Supper, the Bishop
only to confirm.

6. That private and secret prayer is preferred before public, and that in a
public place and action. For the Congregation is desired (even in the midst
of the solemn action in Ordination of a Priest) secretly in their prayers to
make humble Supplications to God for the foresaid things. For the which Prayers
there shall be a certain space kept in silence: that done, the Bishop is
appointed to pray again.

7. Sundry things in it are absurdly spoken and directly against Absurdities.
that which is done and practiced (and to speak so specially in so holy and
solemn an action is a wicked thing.) As

1. When in the Ordination of a Deacon, it is said, Take thou authority to
preach, if thou shall be called thereunto.

2. When both in the Ordination of the Deacon and of the Priest, the B.
requires the Congregation to deliver whether they can say ought against the
party to be ordained, whereas it is well known, that the Bishop uses seldom or
never to give orders in a public Congregation; and if he does at any time, it
is in such an one, where the people is altogether unacquainted with the
conversation of them that are to be ordained.

3. When the Priest is asked whether he will give his faithful diligence
always to minister the Doctrine and Sacraments, and Discipline of Christ, as
the Lord has commanded, whereas it is well known that no Minister is allowed
to exercise the discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded.

And these faults there are in that Book of Ordination which is of the last
Edition and most reformed. In the former Edition (which seems by the words of
the 36. Article to be, that we are required to subscribe unto, and which it may
be, some of the Bishops do still use) there are other corruptions, As

1. That the Cope, Albe, Surplice, Tunicle, and Pastoral Staff are appointed
to be used in Ordination and consecration.

2. That the Oath of Supremacy is thus concluded. So help me God and all
Saines, and the holy Evangelists.

Soli Deo gloria.
FINIS.

