A WORTHY SPEECH, BY Mr. Tho. Abernethie.

WHEREIN IS DISCOVERED THE Villainy and hellish plots (which himself has been
an eye and ear witness of) wrought in the Popes Courts against these our
three KINGDOMS.

And now disclosed this 29. July, 1641.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. 1641.

Right Honorable,
I Will briefly let you understand how the Papists lie in wait to deceive you:
and that it may be seen that I am not partial, (I speak to all the three
Kingdoms) minding to show you all that Papists lie in wait to deceive you by
two means, Seminaries and Pensions; yet it is first to be remarked, that the
ground of both is the council in Rome, called, Congregatio de propaganda (or
rather) extirpanda fide, a congregation of propagating (or rather) extirpating
of faith.

This Congregation has a most sumptuous Palace in Rome, and extreme rich;
the members of it, are the Pope as head of the Church, his nephew Cardinal
Francis Barbarine as his Lieutenant, diverse other Cardinals, the generals of
several orders, the great Master of the Inquisition and some Doctors, all as
Judges, they convene every Friday, or ofter as they please; the end of their
meeting, is to find out means to bring all people and Nations under the Popes
dominion, for this end they have sundry means, such as the Seminaries of
diverse Nations and pensions: The Seminaries are furnished with youths out of
their several Countries, by Jesuits, who have the care of them: These youths
are of two sorts, the one called Convictors, because they pay for their
entertainment, and these are noble Barons and Gentlemen's sons, sent thither
by their Popish parents, to be brought up for diverse ends: The other are called
Seminarists, and these have their food, raiment, studies, books, etc. all the
time of their studies out of the Colleges, with condition that after they have
stayed three months in one of the Colleges, they must make a vow to take
Priesthood upon them, and to return to their several Countries, when they
shall be found fit by the Jesuits their Masters, to the end they may seduce
others, as they were seduced themselves; and therefore after their studies,
they are sent into their own Country, furnished with all things necessary, as
apparel, moneys, masse-graith, and the like, as they are thought of, and have
money at Court of their Semiries: there be five of our Nation out of the
Country; at Rome, Paris, Madrid, Doway and Brounsberg, and one promised by the
Emperor in Osnabruck, which the Sweds keept for them, of Irish some, and many
and great of English.

These Seminaries, Jesuits and other Priests, send their relation every year,
of all what pass in the Country, spiritual or temporal, to the foresaid
congregation, wherein all treasons, massacres and other bloody mischiefs are
hatched.

This presupposed as an assured truth, I speak first to thee my dear Country,
thou that wroughtest thy self mightily to suffer schisms and divisions in
thee, which are now with great pity to be seen and shame to be heard; one
says I am a Covenanter, another I am not, what meanest thou, not covenanter?
will thou not subscribe the contract which thy parents, Godfathers and
Godmothers, as thy spiritual tutors, seeing it is for God and truth only? God
is partly contracted, the Angels were witnesses, and hell fire the penalty,
take heed, and fight not against God, for as he is Alseeing, so he is Almighty,
and as merciful to have spared thee so long, so is he just, to punish thy
inexcusable wilfulness. But some will say, that there begreat Doctors not
Covenanters, and wherefore may not we likewise stand out as well as these
learned men? I answer first, that they are but few, and to my judgment (for I
have discoursed with some of them) not the learned of the Kingdom, brought
up in a Town which was never yet cleansed from Popery, and where I have seen
an hundred at mass at one time within these few years: Secondly, these
Doctors, suppose they were learned (as I know some of them are) they shall not
answer for thee in that great day, wherein there shall be had no respect of
persons. Thirdly, what if these Doctors would maintain Popery and hinder a
reformation, as their predecessors have done, would thou follow? God forbid.

My counsel now to you that are Covenanters is, that qui stat, videat ne
cadit, let him that thinks he stands take heed lest he fall, for the Crown of
glory is only for him that overcommeth, Qui perseveraverit usque in finem hic
salvus erit, he that shall endure to the end the same shall be saved: yield
not a word, a syll^ble, a jot, lest thou scandalize thy weak brother, and give
occasion to Rome, to stand and expect thy return, she not so much as beginning
a motion toward thee: for they seeing your novations of Bishops, Deanes,
Doctors, kneeling at Sacrament, cross in Baptism, and the rest of these
articles, were in assured confidence, that ye were turning to them again, and
used commonly to say, (see so feign as they are to creep into us again) which
did confirm all our people, and made sundry of yours to follow us: If these
points which sometime by the most part were thought allowable, did so much
harm to Gods Church, what their English mass, canonical inquisition, and the
rest of that almost banished trash had done, if they had not been prevented by
the alseeing God, judge ye. And finally, grant thou nothing that Rome desires
of thee, for it has no warrant from God, and thou know no conformity to be
admitted between God and Dagon, hold fast that which thou have, lost another
take thy Crown from thee.

And to you not Covenanters, I say, that of your Bishops I never saw any but
one, neither would I mourn, albeit I never saw more of them in this land, and
I am their friend or enemy, as they are Christ's; yea, more I say, if ye knew as
well as they and I know, even the draughts that are drawn against you, the
strength and policy of your enemies without, and within, against this poor
Church of God, I am certainly persuaded that you would all subscribe that
worthy covenant, before that ye went out of this Church, or else I would hold
you as internal Papists; I perceive you all curious to demand me a question,
if modesty would permit you to speak it; to wit, what is that I know more then
other men? let us (say ye) understand it, and we will yield to reason.

To this lawful question, I answer, that I know more then any Protestant in
this land, of this business; for I was employed in it in the year of God,
1632. and gave in (amongst other points of my commission) a petition to the
foresaid congregation at Rome, and elsewhere, desiring them to advise upon the
means, for the reducing of this Kingdom to Rome; diverse were proponed by
these politic heads, who study only to destroy Kings, and pervert Kingdoms,
of many, these few were most considerable.

First, that they should all employ their wits for the pervertion of his
Majesty, our sovereign Lord, and contribute for the levying of an Army, under
pretext of giving assistance to some confederate Prince, and therewith to force
liberty of conscience: this opinion was rejected as dangerous, till all things
were surer, and their faction stronger.

S^condly, that if they could not attain to their purpose with his Majesty,
they should endeavor to get two Jesuits in our Princes service, for his Graces
instruction, and education, in Popery.

Thirdly, that pensions should be given by mediate ways, through the
universities, and other parts where they might work their ends.

Fourthly, yet this was all thought little of by some of our country men, who
advised them to set their whole minds for the pervertion of England, which
being nearer to them in points of doctrine then Scotland, as also in form of
Service, worships, and Ecclesiastical government, they might work surer and
with greater hope of prevailing, then with Scotland, whom he assured to be of a
stubborn nature, dangerous to be dealt with, and great Puritans, directly
opposite to the Church of Rome, and therefore nothing more should be desired of
Scotland, but conformity in matters of religion with England, which the English
Church would gladly wish, as if she were a Mother Church, whereof others did
flow; neither could his country men deny it in respect of his Majesty's
supremacy, and of the union of the two Crowns, and Kingdoms; that they both
might have but one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, and one King. For the
execution of his council, he proponed mutual intellegence to be procured
betwixt England, and Rome, which shortly after was begun by an Italian Priest,
a great politician, well versed in the french tongue Il signior Gregory, who
stayed above a year and a half in London for that effect, and with whom I
conferred in his own lodging, in the Covent Garden at London, and with two
great men of our own nation, and now continues there himself, with great
grudge to both the Kingdoms, seeing this mutual intelligence was never heard
of betwixt Rome, and us, since the Cardinals Woolsy and Polus days, neither
is it necessary, as states men may see.

Now non-covenanter, is thy curiosity satisfied: This I know, and more, look
then to it in time, and be not one of those, who for vanity or other ends,
will be thought singular against Gods cause, and thy own promise in baptism.
I will end this discourse, that my enemies say not that I mind to put
dissension betwixt Protestants and Conformists, letting these three Kingdoms
see some of the dangers wherein they stand of the Roman Antichrist, and his
Congregation de extirpanda fide: first ye stand in these dangers, especially
that mutual intelligence between Rome and England: secondly, of your
Countrimens affection to Rome, if they be Papists, for alleged rights of the
Popes upon each of you, viz. Peter's penny and Peter's patrimony: thirdly your
extreme great number of Jesuits, and Priests, extending in England to five or
six thousands, so that they are striving among themselves, and writing books
against others for Bishoprics in your Church; as for Ireland it has 15.
Papists Bishops alone, this is great danger: fourthly, your populous multitudes
of Papists in you extending many thousands, so that I am of that mind, that in
England the people (if not already) may shortly desire a general assembly for
liberty of conscience: Fifthly, the education of your Nobility in foreign
Countries, who having drunk in the doctrine of iniquity from their tenderage,
are both more perverse in themselves, and more dangerous bringing in their
friends and neighbors by their Priests to p^rdition with them: Sixthly, that
which is to be lamented of all, that you have good Laws against Papists, and
every good reason to execute them, but alas! money breaks them, gr^nting to all
P^pists a pecuniall liberty of conscience, and present banishment to all these
poor reformed Christians who will not conform with you; and that which is to
be laughed at or r^ther weeped at, that vee would blind pe^ples eyes with your
searchers going on the one side to apprehend Priests and punish Papists; and on
the other side, to have your customs to receive moneys, and give discharge for
liberty of Papistry. O God! who does not evidently perceive these monstrous
dangers? and not oppose himself with all his power against them, if there
remain any spark of true Christianity? truly, who does it not, I must of
necessity think him an internal Papist.

The last danger of all the 3. Kingdoms is Pensions, whereof we may consider
four things: First, the giver: Secondly, the persons to whom they are given:
Thirdly, the quantity of the sums: Fourthly, the end wherefore they are
given. There is certain pensions given in the Country, for Priests and
intelligencers, and out of the Country for Seminaries and correspondents of
these intelligencers, but to come to the particulars. First, the givers are the
house of Austria, and the foresaid congregation, de extirpando fide. Secondly,
the persons to whom it is given, to my knowledge, are the Priests, the man that
goes for it and the keeper, whereof I was one, and know the names, and
residence of the rest, which I have declared by writ already: and if there be
given pensions to any others as to these, the superior with his counselors,
and the treasurer know it, for me I know not, but this I am sure of, that there
was more sent into the Country then was bestowed on them. Thirdly, the
quantity, in cumulo* is best known to them, I being none of the superiors
counselors, in respect of my travells for the mission; the quantity that we
who were Priests got, was a 100. Crowns in the year from Rome, and eighteen
pence every day from Spain, besides our purchase by our mass, confessions and
pardons, which was more or less, conform to our imploiment, and the persons
with whom we dealt. Fourthly and lastly, in a word, the end of these gifts is
pretended zeal and pity, but which may appear by the deposition of Master
George Ker, and the Jesuits Abercrumby, Chrighton and Gordon, with three
Noblemens letters intercepted with him, and registrate by his pensions given to
us, and his pretended rights were our native Countries, truly intended
Hierarchy of Rome, and Monarchy of Spain; If this then be not an evident
danger to suffer so many foreign Princes pensioners in your bosom, God see
to it in his own time, and give me grace that I may follow my Christ in fear
and hearty resolution.

FINIS.

