ENGLANDS OLD RELIGION Faithfully gathered out of the HISTORY OF THE CHVRCH of
ENGLAND.

As it was written by Venerable BEDE, almost a Thousand years ago, (that is)
in the year 698. after the Passion of our SAVIOR.

BID says he ended this History in the year 731. after the Incarnation.

We have not altered any part of this Fathers own words in any Point concerning
Faith; only here and there is omitted what belongs not to that purpose.

By H. B.

It was needful for me to exhort you, that you should earnestly contend for the
Faith which was once delivered. Jude, v. 5. At Antwerp, With Permission. 1658.

THE PREFACE TO HIS Dear COUNTRYMEN.
THat the faith first delivered was the true faith no man can deny, but he that
will accuse Christ, and his Apostles of falsehood. All the difficulty is how
assuredly to know this faith. To come to know it by force of argument and
disputation surpasses the capacity of most, wearieth many, brings many to
despair lulling them at last into a total neglect of that whereof they ought to
be most diligent. It would doubtless be a very ready and easy way even to the
most unlearned to find this faith out most assuredly (if it were possible) with
small expenses and little labor, by traveling into some country where all
men confess this true faith to be still uncorruptedly practiced. For there
without any noise of disputation, we shall stand veiwing with our own eyes, what
is practiced in that happy country, so that though a thousand crafty sophysters
and subtle disputants should go about by words to persuade me who am unlearned
that the practices of that country, were not the same that my own eyes most
att^ntively and frequently see again and again, it will not be possible for me
prudently to give the least credit to these captious disputants: but I would
ever credit more my own eyes then their arguments.

Now then all the difficulty is how to make us witnesses of what is practiced
in such a country as undoubtedly holds and practiced the true faith, and to
do this with small expense amd little labor. I hope (dearest country man) thou
can not say that the price of this little hook can either put thee to any
considerable expense, or the labor of some three or at the most four hours
required for the reading thereof put thee to much labor. Yet if this be done
by thee thou will be as good as an eye witness of the faith practiced in our
country in that age wherein it is very easy to prove the true faith to have
undoubtedly flourisht in this our country. First because this faith was
confirmed by the Preachers thereof with a number of miracles related in this
short book written by as worthy a man as ever was known to have handled Pen in
England, in a book which no man ever judgd corrupted or written by any other
pen then Venerable Bedes a person not to be paralel'd by any other of our
nation. Secondly This faith here described as practiced in England immediately
upon her conversion under Pope Gregory was not found one jot differring from
that faith which the Scotts before us had received by Palladius their Apostle
sent by Pope Celestine Anno. 423. as we show here out of Bid li. 1. c. 13.
Only the Scotts fell to celebrate Easter at a wrong time not using likewise the
same manner of shaving their crowns in their clergy either Religious or
Secular. They differed not about any one of these points in which Protestants
differ from Roman Catholics as we note l. 4. c. 4. whence being at last
brought viz. to keep Easter, and to use the same manner of shaving the crowns
of their Priests and Monks, which the English did, they disagreed from them in
nothing at all, as is clear out of the three last chapters of Bid. The Faith
therefore which thou here see practiced in England, is the very same which
was held forth and practiced in Scotland from the first conversion thereof,
which was not four hundred years after Christ's passion, it being but four
hundred and twenty three years after his Incarnation as has been said; yea
this Faith thus practiced in England, is the very self same which was taught
the old Britans a little more then a hundred years after Christ's Passion. For
it was in the hundred fifty sixth year after his Incarnation that holy pope
Eluetherius sent those Apostolic preachers, who baptized King Lucius and his
people as you shall see l. 1. c. 4. The old Britans being by the English (who
subdued this land being as yet heathens) driven into Wales still kept the faith
they received, and at the time that the English were converted they were not
found to differ, from what S. Austin taught the English, in any one point, in
which the Protestants or any of our other Religions differ from Roman
Catholics, in so much that as Bede relates l. 2. c. 2. they were ready to
join with Austine if he had but risen up unto them when their seven Bishops
entered the synod where he was, and in this synod all their controversy then
was about keeping Easter at a several time, and about some difference in
Baptism: neither was there any point hindering Austine to hold communion with
them but these two. They remaining obstinate in defending these against the
Roman and universal Church became Schismatics, were confuted by miracle, and
their ruin miraculously foretold to be at hand for this their division, and
schism, God presently fulfilling the prophes^e. The faith then, which thou in
this History behouldest practiced in our English Church in all points now in
contr^versie, is the very same with that says, which the old Britans received
a very little more then a hundred years after Christ's passion, in which Age all
agree the true faith of Christ to have been uncorruptedly delivered; it being
not a full hundred years after the finishing of the Scripture.

Behold then according to the reach of thy capacity without carrying thee out
of thy own country or parish I have brought thee into one in which all men
must needs confess the true faith to ^e most uncorruptedly practiced as well
at that time in which this History was written, as at the fo^rth Age when this
faith was practiced in Scotland, as also at the entrance of the second Age in
which this faith was practiced by our old Britans. Begin then to travel through
this country as it was in that Age by the benefit of this book, which is no
new one but written in the very words in which I give it thee (For as much as
concerns all points of faith therein delivered) almost a thousand years ago
and when these things were but just done and even upon the place, in which they
were done, that so thou might (...) be assured that neither distance of time,
or place, hindered our most learned and holy Historian from telling the very
truth; spend but a few hours I pray thee in traveling over this book, and it
will make thee though thou best unlearned as good as an eye witness of the
faith which was first delivered by Christ and his Apostles and their immediate
successors, so that I hope in God a thousand crafty sophisters shall not be
able to make thee deny that thou have seen, what thine own eyes most assuredly
testify to have attentively beheld, viz. that is, the true Old Religion as it
was in her best age.

And because travelers desire to have Card or Map, of all the countries and
Towns which they are to see in their Travels. I will also, as in a short Map
give thee a brief sum of all that thou art to see practiced in this Old Church
of England when she was in her greatest purity, that is when she was agreeing
wholly with the faith practiced in the beginning of the second age after Christ.
Come then along with me where thou shall see First among the old Britans,
before ever Austen entr^d England such swarms of Monks that even that one
Abbey or Monastery of Bangor contained above one and twenty hundred Monks.
Scotland also which received her Faith in the fourth Age after Christ's Passion,
sends forth her Monks to join with those Apostles sent us by St. Gregory and
his Successors. But now in this our new English Church to be a Monk is to be a
Traitor: then they were our Apostles.

Secondly, These Apostles of ours did Miracles so frequently, that the Pope
thought it necessary to write to them to be mindful of humility, sor fear the
multitude of Miracles they wrought might by pride endanger them.

Thirdly, our English, both high and low, eagerly then embraced Monastical
Vows. This course of life was accounted the most ready way to Heaven. Our Kings
left their Thrones, and shaving the crowns of their heads, put on the habit of
poor Monks. Everywhere in your travels you shall meet with Abbyes and Abbots,
and Abbesses, with Monasteries and Monks, with Nuns, and Nunneries.

Fourthly, These Monks and Nuns, shine frequently with extraordinary sanctity
of life, are endowed with the gift of Prophecy, very often made partakers of
Heavenly Visions and Apparitions, and graced with many Miracles.

Fifthly, The Vowed Virginity of these Nuns is approved from Heaven; and by
reason of these Vows they are called Virgins consecrated to Christ, Spouses of
Christ, true Queens espoused to the Heavenly Bridegroom.

Sixthly, In the very Desert thou shall meet with Hermits, with Anchorets, with
men leading a perfect solitary life, using extraordinary austerity in fasting,
watching, and other penal rigours, and these men graced from Heaven with
Miracles.

If thou had rather look upon the Layity, thou shall find

Seventhly, That among them it is a point of great sanctity to join perpetual
Virginity with Wedlock, and God approves also this by Miracle.

Eighthly, Thou shall find good works done by all for hope of reward, and these
good works held to be the golden cords lifting them up to Heaven: Moreover,
they are judged according to their Works, and not accounted justified by faith
only.

Ninthly, Sins believed to be redeemed by good Works, and satisfaction to be
made by our patient sufferings.

Tenthly, They confess to Priests the secret sins of their heart most openly
and plainly, doing the pennances enjoyn^d them for satisfaction.

11. They rigorously fast all Fridays and the 40. days in Lent, and the
transgressors are punished by Law.

12. They go on Pilgrimage even as far as Rome, both King and people practice
this as a thing of great virtue.

13. They everywhere worship Relics, God confirming it by many Miracles:
Hence Relics were esteemed presents for Kings.

14. They use Invocation of Saints, holding their unworthiness to be supplied
by their Merits, and therefore desiring to have them for Patrons in Heaven: And
God approves this their devotion by a world of Miraculous Graces given at the
devout Invocation of these Saints.

15. They daily pray for the Dead, and it was a common Proverb then to say, God
have mercy on their souls, as Oswald said when he died himself.

16. Hence that party found credit among the most understanding and most
Virtuous of those Times, who reported bimself in a miraculous Vision to have
been an eyewitness of Purgatory-paines, and to have been told by an Angel that
very thing which the Papists in these days say, that many souls are delivered
from Purgatory before the day of Judgment,

17. That this deliverance is effected by Alms and other good deeds done for
them, especially by offering the Sacrifice of the Mass, both which last poin^s
as well the Greeks as the Latins defined in the Council of Florence in these
words: These souls who are purged as abovesaid (that is, by the Prayers, Alms,
and other pious works, and by the Sacrifice of the Mass) are forthwith received
into Heaven, and behold God clearly; In coelum mox recipi and intueri clare
Deum.

18. Hence also he fin^s the like Credit, who recounted of himself, that, when
in a Battle it was reported he was slain (whereas he was not slain but only
kept prisoner in fetters) his Brother, who was a Priest and tho^ght so, saying
often Moss for his souls release, his fetters always fell off on their own
accord, God testifying what should have befaln his soul, had he been prisoner
in Purgatory.

19. Hence also they make Vows of practicing extraordinary Austerities to
satisfy in this world for their sins; which Vows are here approved from Heaven.

But because I know thou longest most to view attentively their Churches, their
Church Service and their Clergy, and the manner of the Government instituted by
Christ shining in the Primitive practice of his Church for. The 20. Point, That
thou shall everywhere see their Churches dedicated to the Virgin-Queen of
Heaven, to the Apostles and Holy Martyr^.

21. In this de^ication Holy Water is used, as also ^oly oy^: b^ both which
Miracles at several occasions ar^ wrought.

22. Their Altars also of Stone are consecrated; so also their Chalices, which
are sometimes ma^e of pure gold; they have rich Church-stuf^e, Altar-clothes:
They have man^ Altars of s^one in one Church: these they also dedicate to
Saints.

23. The Sacrifice of the Mass is offered upon these Altars. And because in
journeys among Heathens, Altars of stone cannot be found, they carry with them
portable Altars.

24. By these Altars the bodies of Saints are richly enshrined, and upon the
Altars are placed Relics brought from other places even as far as Rome.

25. A number of lights both day and night burn in these holy places.

26. They use Pictures of our Savior, and of our Lady, and place in their
Churches Crosses of gold and silver.

27. Their Priests who are ordained for the Ministry of the Altar, and to
offer Satrifices are commanded to live a single life.

28. These Priests wear shaven crowns in honor of our Saviou^s Crown of
Thorns, whose ignominy they glory to carry in the highest part of their body,
and profess that by it they are tending to a crown of glory.

29. These Priests hear Confessions, and either presently give absolution, or
defer it for a time, as they see cause.

30. They reserve the Sacrament, which consequently they often administer in
that one kind in which it is reserved.

31. They use Exorcisms against the Devils, who are cast out at their command
many times.

32. The people flock to them to crave their blessing.

33. They give this Blessing with their hand [making the sign of the Cross] God
sometimes miraculously curing the sick by the blessing of holy Priests and
Bishops.

34. The Bishops who ordain and govern these Priests, are themselves governd by
their Metropolitans and Primats. These Primats are placed in this Authority by
the Pope, and always invested hy him, giving them their Pall to use only at
solemn Mass.

35. The Primacie of the Bishop of Canterbury is not instituted by any King,
but by the Pope, giving that Bishop full power over all English Bishops, though
living then under several Kings.

36. These Bishops, when they suffer any grievances from their Metropolitans,
or Primats in England, do make their Appeal immediately unto the Pope, as to
their highest Superior on Earth: their Accusers prosecute their Accusation not
in England, but in the Popes Court at Rome: they being there cast, obey humbly
in their own Kingdom, and by the sentence of the Pope, English Bishops deposed,
are acknowledged to be legally restored, and this even in a public Synod of
the English Church. And this Appeal used hy their most holy Bishops.

37. The most holy also and most Apostolic Bishops, ask the Popes license and
blessing to preach to Heathens.

38. They have evermore recourse to the Pope in the most important
Ecclesiastical causes.

39. They admit the use of such privileges as the Pope grants to any in
England.

40. They admit of more Councels then the four General Councels.

41. The Pope, in these Ages, is styled Bishop of the whole World. He is said
to exercise this his Supremacy in place of S. Peter, who is called the first
Pastor of the Church; and Prince of the Apostles is the ordinary name by which
then at every word they called S. Peter. S. Peter also owneth the deeds of his
Successors, who also give the blessing of S. Peter to Kings as to inferiors:
for without all contradiction the less is blessed by the better, as S. Paul
says, Heb. 7. v. 7. Hence also as a father he calls Kings his sons.

42. He sends Apostolic Preachers over the world.

43. Those who divide from Prelates commissioned by him, are accounted
Schismatics, and God brings ruin upon them, as is miraculously by such
Prelates prophesied unto them. They also by manifest Miracle are convicted to
follow falsity.

44. The Tradition of the Church is to be held, and that of the Church of Rome
is preferred before all other.

45. The Church of Rome held at this time Catholic and Apostolic.

46. The yearly Feasts kept by us after the custom of the Roman Church.

47. Conformity to be held with that Church which is spread over the face of
the Earth.

48. Decrees of Councels to be observed, and that it is a damnable sin to hold
against the Church, when we are fully certified that she teaches such or such
a point contrary unto us.

49. All these things were believed and practiced by the English Church at that
Age, in which she in all things followed the Catholic Rule. As here Bid
testifies.

Behold (dear Countrymen) near half a hundred things, all to be seen by thee in
that old English Church, of which not any one can be seen in the present
English Church. This thou beholding attentively with thy own eyes, without any
noise of disputation, or intanglement of captious arguments, wilt be able
manifestly to conclude, that all these half hundred points so opposed and
scoffed at by all Protestants, show those ancient English not to have been
Protestants. And to see this thou can not but have learning enough, if thou
can but read. It is also here as clearly to be seen, that no one of those
Religions with which England does now so abound, was the Religion of those
days. And that all that you most scoff at in the Religion which you call
Popery, was then most in use. Now lest thou should not observe these thing,
as thou read this little book I have everywhere in the Margent noted down
for thee all the places where every one of these half hundred points may be
beheld by thee in the short passage through this Book.

In less then a quarter of an hour thou (by casting an eye upon these Marginal
notes) may take a sufficient proof of any point here mentioned, and see if
what I say be not as clearly to be seen in the practice of this old pure
Church, as it is here set down by me in this Summary of such things as are in
this Book to be viewed. Whence the Reader cannot but see either the gross
ignorance or over-lashing boldness of Dr. Henry Fern, who durst lately say,
that the faith which England cast off in Hen. the 8. his days (or rather in
the days of Q. Fliz.) was not the same faith which was brought into England at
our conversion under S. Gregory; and thac if we had kept that faith, the
English Church could not justly have in this Age divided from the former
English Church: And yet neither he, nor any though never so learned a
Protestant Dr. is able to show the time when, or the place where, or the
persons who, or the means ^y which, or any one single point in which all
England changed the faith received under S. Gregory. That faith (as we proved
in the beginning of this Preface) was the same which the Scots had received in
the fourth Age, and which the old Britans received even in the beginning of the
2d. Age after Christ's Passion, not full 100. years after the Scripture was
finished. At that t^me then undoubtedly the faith of England was incorrupt: You
have east off the faith agreeing in all points now in controversy with that
faith; therefore you have (...) off the true faith. And this very faith is the
only faith which England cannot now endure, but forces us point by point to
abjure in her new coined oath of Abjuration: so unlike is this present English
Church to the Old English Church. If this short Work makes thee not to see this
with thy eyes, I desire no kind of credit with thee; but if with thy own eyes
thou see all this, then I beseech thee as thou love thy own soul, not to
let those find credit with thee, who would persuade thee that to be false,
which thy eyes tell thee to be most true.

I know there is no way to answer this so palpable a conviction, but by finding
some shift to detract from this History: what shift this will be I cannot
devise. First, Thou can not say that the History says not what we make it
say: For we speak in this most Ancient Authors own Words, tmost faithfuly
translated, as often as we come to touch upon any Point of Faith. Secondly,
Thou can not say that the Words of this Author deserve not all credit: For
this were both to discredit our whole Nation, which never yet from the
beginning of the World is kno^n to have brought forth an Historian of greater
credit. (For I beseech thee tell me, if thou can, who that Historian was.)
And this also were to gainsay all Antiquity, which even when Bid lived did
read his Works in the Church by the Title of Venerable: For they could not call
him Saint, ^e being yet living. And hence this Title still remains, though
Antiquity after death ever held him for a Saint. Whence Polidore Virgil
alleging Bid, says. Bid an Englishman, then whom, none more chaste, none
more true. And your own Cambden treating of the Bishopric of Durham, says.
Here our Bid was bo^n, the singular Glory and Ornament of England, who for his
Piety and Learning got the surname of Venerable. He bestowed all his diligence
(as himself says) in Meditation of the Scripture, and amidst the surging
waves of Barbarism wrote many most Learned Volumes: So He. And indeed Bid was
the St. Austin of our Nation. The time he lived in, made him a most near
borderer unto the very things which he wrote, and he lived upon the very place
where they were done: In which place, at that time no man of any Conscience or
Credit wo^ld so much as venture to write things then notoriously known to be
contrary to truth by all intelligent persons, especially very often citing
eyewitnesses still living, as he does. There was then no Jesuit at his elbow
to prompt him how to set forth his History to the advantage of such Papists as
should be in their days, that is, some eight or nine hundred years after.
Thirdly, Thou can^t not say that the Faith of this Age was corrupted in any
point, in which Roman Catholics differ from Protestants, or from any of our
many Religions in England. For I have already showed (N. i.) that the Faith of
this Age in all those points agreed with the Faith not only of the Fourth Age,
in which the Scots received this very Faith, but also with the Faith which was
not a hundred years after the finishing of the Scripture: at which time our
old Britans received this very self-same Faith. That Faith was not corrupted:
This was that very Faith, this therefore was not corrupted. Fourthly, That all
we have taken out of Bid his Latin or English Copies, is wholly conformable
to the Saxon Translation of Bid, made so long ago by King Alfride, and lately
set forth by Abraham Welock a prime Protestant Doctor. For it was in all these
places diligently conferred with that Translation. Lastly, If thou say this
History is incredible, because it relates so many (to thee) incredible
Histories: I must tell thee, that either all ancient Historians and Fathers,
who wrote any part of Ecclesiastical History, did notoriously lie, or else the
like things happened also in all other Countries at the times, and near to the
times of their first conversion. St. Gregory did write a great while after the
conversion of Italy, and yet his Dialogues speak of great wonders. Read also
St. Austins most undoubted and most ^minent Work of the City of God, in which
l. 22. c. 28. he recounts above twenty Miracles done by the intercession of
Saints; and adds, that many Books would not contain their number. Read St.
Hierome, St. Ambrose, St. Greg. Nazian. St. Athanasius. Read Eusebius, or the
Tripartite History of Socrates, Sozomen, and Theodoret: Read Euagrius,
Palladius, or Nicephorus, and they all both in East and West tell as incredbile
Histories and Miracles as any be in Bid. And though possibly some of these
things should be false (for to many he adds such proofs as make them
undeniable) yet we are hence assured what kind of Stories were then held forth
as probable, and never rejected by any as containing a confirmation of any
doctrine different from the present Faith of that Age. And I would have my
Reader know that I relate them so plentifully for this end: and that it may
appear what kind of Stories such men as Bede (that is, such as England cannot
match) believed to be true in that pure Age, and related to have them believed
by Posterity, which Bid and the chiefest of the Fathers would not have done,
were they not conformable to the Faith of that Age. And against this Argument,
thus taken from these Histories, no Protestant can give so much as any thing
like an Answer, for it strikes them dumb. I will no further detain thee (Dear
Countreym^n) from making that short Journey through this book which may be of
so great benefit unto thee, a Journey of a very few hours which may bring thee
to the knowledge of or ^ering thy ways so that by Gods grace (which I desire
thee in the beginning most earnestly to implore) thou may be conducted
safely to the never ending Jo^es of the Heavenly Country.

Dear Reader, the benefit of this Preface will chiefly be found if thou read
it again after thou have read the Book it self

Book. 1. Chap. 1, 2, 3, 4.
ENGLANDS old Religion.
FAITHFULLY Set forth by Venerable Bede, in his History of the Church of
England: Omitting only such things as make not to this purpose.
The first Book.
Chap. 1, 2, 3. In these Chapters there is nothing to our present purpose: They
only contain the State of Civil affairs in Britany.

Chap. 4.
IN the year of our Lords Incarnation 156. Lucius King The old Britans receive
their Faith from the Pope 156.
of the Britans, wrote to Eleutherius a holy man, then Pope of the Church of
Rome, desiring, that by his appointment he might be made a Christian. Which
request being granted him, the Britains received the Faith and kept it sound
and undefiled until Dioclesians time.

In the 5. Chapter, nothing to our purpose: It describes only the Wall made
between England and Scotland.

Chap. 6.
Dioclesian and Maximian raising the Tenth Persecution against the Christians,
caused the Churches to be spoiled, the Christians to be tormented and killed:
For ten years it continued burning of Churches, banishing Innocents, murdering
of Martyrs: Among other places Britany was at this time honored with the glory
of many holy Martyrs, who constantly dyed in Confession of their Faith.

Chap. 7.
Among others suffered, St. Alban, of whom Fortunatus Priest in his Book of the
Praise of Virgins, reckoning up the Martyrs which from all coasts came unto
God, says,

The fertile Land of Britany brings forth,
Her Proto-Martyr Alban of great worth.
This Alban being yet a Pagan, when the cruel Edicts of the Englands first
Martyr for entertaining a Priest in his house.
wicked Princes were set forth against the Christians, received into his house
one of the Clergy, who had fled from the Persecutours, and observing him night
and day, to continue in Prayer and Watching, suddenly touched with the grace of
God, he began to follow the example of his Faith and virtue, and instructed by
his wholesome Exhortations, forsaking Idolatry, became a Christian. It came to
the ears of the Prince, that this holy Confessor of Christ (whose Amph^bal
this holy Priests Name.
time was not come that God had assigned for him to suffer) lay hid in Alban's
house: Whereupon Soldiers were sent to apprehend him, but St. Alban
apparrelled in his guests and Masters garments, presented himself unto them.
When they brought Alban, it happened that the Judge was doing sacrifice unto the
Devils, who beholding him, and incensed with anger for that he feared not to
offer himself unto death for his guest; he commanded him to be brought before
the Idols. For as much (quoth he) as thou had rather convey away the Rebel
and Traitor Christian Priesthood treason under Dioclesian.
to our gods, than to deliver him up to deserved punishment, what pains he
should have suffered, if he had been taken, the same shall thou undergo, if
thou refusest to practice the rites of our Religion. But St. Alban, who had
voluntarily declared himself a Christian, little heeded the menaces of the
Prince, but being thoroughly guarded with the spiritual armor of Grace, plainly
told him, he would not obey his command. I am a Christian (says he) and I
apply my self to Christian duties and exercises. I honor and worship the true
and living God. These sacrifices which thou offerest to the Devils help not the
offerer, but purchase them eternal pains. The Judge hereupon commanded the holy
Confessor of God, to be beaten by the Tormentors, but Alban in his sufferings
was patient and courageous. Then the Judge sentenced him to be beheaded. As he
was led to execution, he came to a flood which swiftly ran betwixt him and the
place where he was to suffer. The company was great, and the bridge narrow, so
that it was likely to be Evening before they could all pass; Alban desirous of
death, coming to the river side, made his Prayer, and saw forth with A Miracle.
the bottom dry, the water giving place to him, and to the people to pass over:
Which the Executioner seeing (not without the holy inspiration of God) fell
down at his feet, and casting from him his sword ready drawn, desired rather to
suffer himself than do the Execution. Then came they to a very pleasant hill,
worthy to be dedicated by the blood of the blessed Martyr. At the top whereof,
Alban begged of God to give him water, and strait there arose a Spring at his
Feet, whereby all A Miracle.
perceived that as the River before in obedience to him was dried up, so water
was now given at his entreaty. Here this most valiant Martyr being beheaded,
received the Crown of life, which God promises to those that love him. But he
who did the Execution had short joy: for his eyes fell upon the ground with the
Head of the holy Martyr. A Miracle.
There also was beheaded the Soldier, who being called of God, refused to
strike the holy Confessor, of whom it is manifest, though he was not Christened in
the Font, yet was he baptized in his own blood; and so made worthy to enter
heaven. The Judge seeing so many strange and heavenly miracles wrought by this
holy martyr, commanded the persecution should cease, beginning to honor in the
Saints of God their constant and patient suffering death, whereby he thought at
first to draw them from the devotion of their Faith. St. Alban suffered
Martyrdom the 20th. day of June near the City Verulam (now called St. Albans
in Hartfordshire) where (after the Christian Church was calmed) a Church was
built of exceeding rich work, and worthy of such a Martyrdom: In which Daily
Miracles at St. Albans about the middle of the third Age until the seventh Age.
place eve^ to this day are sick persons cured, and many Miracles wrought: Many
more suffered in sundry places, who by perfect victory yielded their Souls to
Heaven.

CHAP. 8.
After the storm of this persecution was blown over, the Christians, who in
time of danger lay hid in dens and deserts, came forth and showed themselves
abroad, renewed Churches which were overthrown: founded, built, and dressed up
new in honor of the holy Martyrs, celebrated holy Churches erected to Martyrs
about the year, 400.
days, consecrated the divine Mysteries, and every where displayed their
Ensigns in sign of Victory. This peace Holy Days in their Honor.
continued in the Church of Christ in Britany until the Arian Heresy, running
through the world, corrupted also with venomous Errors this Island. When by
this means Heresy had found an open vent to press over the Ocean into the said
Island, soon after all manner of Heresies flowed, in and were received England
prone to novelties.
by the Inhabitants, they being men delighting ever to hear novelties, and
steadfastly retaining nothing as certain. This Heresy of the Arians being
discovered and condemned in the Council of Nice, did nevertheless infect not
only other parts of the world, but even the very Churches of the Islands with
poisonous Infidelity.

In the 9. Chap. nothing but civil Affairs.

CHAP. 10. The year of our Lord, 394. This Heretic had the great St. Augustine
his adversary whilst he lived.
Arcadius reigning, Pelagius a Britan, dispersed the Venom of his faithless
Doctrine; holding that a man might live well without the help of Gods grace.

In the 11. and 12. Chapters nothing but civil Affairs.

Chap. 13.
In the year 423. the 8th. of the Emperor Theodosius the The Apostle of
Scotland sent by the Pope of Rome, an. 423.
younger, Palladius was sent by Celestine Bishop of the Roman Church to the
Scots (who had received the Faith of Christ) to be their Bishop.

In the 14. Chapter nothing.

Chap. 15.
The English (then Heathens) sent for out of Germany over run Britany. The
Priests are every where slain at the Altars. The Bishops with Altars, an. 429
their flock were murdered with fire and sword, without regard unto their
dignity.

In the 16. Chapter, nothing but civil affairs.

Chap. 17.
A few years before the arrival of the Saxons and English, the Pelagian Heresy
brought in by Agricola, greatly corrupted the Faith of the Britans. But they
being unwilling to receive this lewd doctrine (blasphemous against the grace of
God) and yet unable to resist the crafty and wicked persuasions of their
Adversaries, took this wholesome Counsel to seek for aid from the Bishops of
France. A Council being called, the French consulted among themselves whom they
should send. By the judgment of all the Apostolical Bishops Germanus and Lupus
were chosen to pass over into Britany: Germanus Bishop of Auxerre Lupus was
first a Monk in the Abbey os Lirine, and thence made Bishop of Troyes.
Who with great alacrity, receiving the Orders and Commands of the holy Church,
put to Sea. Whilst they were under sail, the Devil envying such men should go
to the recovery of that People, raised a dangerous tempest. Germanus Bishop,
feeble of body, through weariness fell a sleep, then Lupus and the rest called
upon him. Germanus more constant in the greatness of the danger, invoketh
Christ, and taking in the name of the holy Trinity a The miraculous use of Holy
water, about 430.
few sprinkles of water, casts i^ into the Sea: Forth with the rage of the
storm breaks; God being called upon defered not his help; the enemy is chased
away, and they set on land where they desited. A multitude of People assembling
received the Priests of God; of whose coming the wicked spirits gave notice,
and afterward being expelled out of the obsess't bodies, at the command of
Priests, they declared Devils cast out at the command of Priests about 430.
both the manner of the tempest they raised, and the danger like to have
ensued, confessing they were overcome by their merits and command. Upon their
arrival, they filled the Island with their good name, preaching and virtues,
and the word of God was taught by them as well in Churches, as in the open
streets, and in the Country; so that in all places, the found and Faithful
Catholics were confirmed, and they that before swarved from truth were
reduced. Thus in short time, through their authority, virtue and learning, the
whole Country was brought under obedience to their Doctrine. The Authors of
Heretical error lay lurking all this while, and like the wicked spirits were
vexed to see the people daily fall from them. At length they undertook to try
the matter by open disputation, which being consented to, they come forth
richly and sumptuously apparelled, attended by a number of flatterers, choosing
rather to commit their cause to open contest, than seem to the People, whom
they had subverted, to have nothing to say in defense thereof. Thither flockt a
great number of people with their wives and children. The blessed Priests
German and Lupus gave their Adversaries leave to speak first, who vainly
entertained the people with naked words. Then the reverend Bishops poured forth
their Eloquence, confirmed with sacred Texts from the Gospel and Apostles. Thus
vanity was convinced, falsehood confuted, and in effect at every objection,
their Adversaries were forced to confess their error, not being able to
answer. The people could hardly hold their hands from them, yet showed they
their judgment by their acclamations.

Chap. 18.
This done, a certain Colonel comes forth, offering them his daughter of ten
years old to be cured, who was blind. They bad him carry her to their
Adversaries: but they (their own conscience frighting them from such an
enterprise) join with the girls Parents, desiring the Priests to do the cure;
who seeing their Adversaries dismayed, made their Prayer. Then Germanus full of
the holy Ghost, Custom of wearing holy Relics.
calling upon the blessed Trinity, loses from his neck a little bag full of
Relics of the holy Saints, and in the sight of them all, applied it to the
eyes of the Maid: VVhereupon she strait received These Relics work miracles.
her sight, to the great joy of her parents, and the amazement of the people at
the Miracle. From that day, the said errors were so rooted out, that with most
earnest desire, they all embraced the doctrine of the Bishops. Thus damned
falsehood being suppressed, the Authors confuted, and all men's minds instructed in
purity of Faith, they went to St. Albans, to give God praise and thanks by him.
Where Germanus having Relics of the Pilgrimages to Saints bodies Ann. 430.
Apostles and diverse Martyrs, making his prayer, commanded the Tomb to be
opened, with intent there to deposite those precious treasures, thinking it
good, that the In shrining of Rolicks.
members of the Saints gotten in diverse Countries might be shrin'd together in
one Tomb, who like in Merits rejoiced with God in Heaven. Which being done with
much honor, Veneration of Relics.
he took some of the dust of the place, where the holy Martyrs blood was shed,
and carried it away with him, and a great number were that day converted.

Chap. 19.
As they were returning back, it happened (by the Devils procurement) that
Saint German by a fall brake his leg, that so by the affliction of the body,
the merits of the holy man might be more increased, VVhilest by reason of his
weakness he was fain to tarry still in one place, the next house to his lodging
was by A Miracle.
chance set on fire, which having consumed all near it, drew nigh where this
good man lay. But that the power of God might appear, the fire spoiled
whatsoever the people sought to save, except what the sick man lying in his bed
preserved: for in the midst of the raging flames the house, which this weak man
kept, remained untouched, all wondering at the Miracle. Before the Cottage of
this poor Prelate lay a multitude of people, without number, some Multitude of
Miracles.
to be cured of the maladies of their souls, others of their bodies. It cannot
be expressed what Miracles Christ wrought by his Servant, and what cures this
sick man did. In the mean time, suffering no remedy to be applied unto himself,
one night he saw a beautiful young man all in White at his bed side, who
stretching forth his hand seemed to lift him up and bid him stand, and from
that hour his pains were asswag'd, and he restored to health.

Chap. 20.
About this time the Saxons and picts waged war against the Britans, who
fearing they should not be able to match them, implored the help of the holy
Bishops, who coming to the Camp, filled their hearts with such confidence, as
if a mighty Army had been come to aid them. This happened about the holy time of
Lent, which was more devoutly observed, through the presence Lent religiously
observed at the beginning of the fourth Age.
of the Priest^: In so much as being instructed by continual preaching, many of
the Country were daily Christened, and the greatest part of the Army required
Baptism. On Easterday, they made in the Camp, the form of a Church, adorning
it with boughs, where they were solemnly Baptized; by virtue whereof, they
became fervent in Faith, and bold in hope of Gods strength. The Enemy having
intelligence of their sober demeanor and order of their Camp, thinking to
surprise them (being unarmed) and obtain the victory, marched in great speed
toward them. Now the holidays of Easter being past, the Army goes fresh from
Baptism A miraeulous Victory.
to their weapons. S. German making himself their Captain, picked forth a choice
Troup of soldiers, placing them covertly in a Valley, where it was thought the
enemy would pass, giving them all warning, that as they heard him say, they
should all answer the same: Thus suddenly breaking out of Ambush where they
lay, the enemy being not aware of them, the Priest of God cried aloud, thrice
together Alleluja, all the Troop repeating, answered the same. The echo from
the hills resounded, as though they had been thrice as many: whereat the Enemy
was so amazed, as though heaven had fought against them: Whereupon with all
speed they fled, casting away their weapons, thinking it enough if they could
escape with life. The British soldiers gathered up the spoils, and with great
joy acknowledged God only to be the giver of that overthrow. The Island being
thus set in good order, the Bishops returned home, to whom God gave a
prosperous passage both for their own virtues sake, as also at the Intercession
of the blessed Martyr Alban. Intercession of Saints.


CHAP. 21.
Not long after word was brought out of the same Island that the Pelagian
Heresy was revived. Again therefore are directed to the Bishop, the entreaty
of all the Priests, that he would go through with the Cause of God, which he
had taken in hand. So he returned again (into Britany) with Severus, who was
disciple of the most blessed Father Lupus, ordained Bishop of Trevers,
preaching first unto that part of Germany the word of God. In the mean while,
the wicked spirits flying about the Island, foretold every where (forced
thereunto) that St. German was returning: in so much as Elafius one of the
chief among A Miracle.
them, without report of any messenger, hastened to meet the holy men at their
arrival, having with him his son, who in the flower of his youth had lost the
use of his leg, which was so shrunk, that he could not set his foot upon the
ground. The whole Country flockt thither to meet them, Bishops and Priests give
their blessing.
where their blessing and divine Doctrine was bestowed upon the people. They
found them as for their Faith as they had left them, only they found the fault
to remain in Bishops punish Heretics
some few, those they sought after, and finding them, condemned them. This done
Elafius fell down at the feet of the Bishops, offering them his son, whose sad
case needed no prayers to crave relief. Forthwith St. German taking the young
man to him, felt his knee, and with his blessed hand searched through all the
affected place, and at his touch each part received health, and the sinews
returned to their natural course, so that in sight of them all he was restored
to his Father. The people were all astonished at the strangeness of Catholic
Faith confirmed by miracle.
the miracle, and the Catholic Faith thereby confirmed. After this, he preached
to the people to exterminate the said Heresy, and all assenting, the Authors
were expelled the Island, and delivered unto the Priests to be carried thence,
that by this punishment the Country might be rid of them and their Heresies.
Hence it came to pass, that in those places, the Faith for a long time remained
sound. Not long after Germanus deceased at Ravenna; his corpse was conveyed to
his own Church with an honorable train, not without Miracles at St. Germans
body see this holy Bishops life in Surius July 30.
miracles wrought by the way.

In the 22. Chapter nothing but civil affairs.

Chap. 23.
In the year of our Lord, 582 the 10. of the Emperor Maurice; The English
receive the Faith from Monks sent from the Pope An. 582.
Gregory, a man most renowned for deeds and learning, was made Bishop of the
Roman and Apostolic see, which he governed 13. years seven months and ten
days. The Year 150. after the coming of the English into Britany, this Pope
being moved by divine inspiration thereunto, sent the servant of God Augustine
with many other Monks, fearing God, to preach to the English Nation. But being
on the way, and terrified with the apprehension of the journey, they sent
Augustine back to the Pope (whom he had there appointed Bishop, if they were
received) humbly entreating him that they might not proceed: but he exhorted
them by letters, that putting their trust in God, they would go on in their
good purpose.

Gregory, the servant of the servants of God, etc. Let not the hardship of the
journey daunt you, etc. Assuring your selves, Good works for hope of reward.
that after your great labor, eternal reward shall follow. Be in all points
obedient unto Augustine, whom I have sent back unto you, and appointed to be
your Abbot, Abbots
knowing it shall much profit your souls, what you do in obedience to him. God
defend you with his grace, and grant me to see the fruit of your labors in
Heaven; as also that since I cannot work my self with you, I may enjoy part of
your reward, for the good will I have to labor, God keep you in health my
dearly beloved children.

In the 24. Chapter, nothing but a letter of the Popes recommending Augustine
to the Bishop of Arles in his going for Britany.

Chap. 25.
Augustine being thus encouraged by St. Gregory, returned to preach the word of
God with the servants of Christ, which were with him, and arrived in Britany.
He and his company in number about forty, landing in the Isle of Thanet in
Kent, sent word to King Ethelbert, that they came from Rome, and brought him
very good news, viz. that such as followed and obeyed their Doctrine, should
enjoy an everlasting kingdom in Heaven. The King hearing this, gave command
they should abide there, and have all things necessary afforded them, until
they heard further from him. Now the knowledge of Christian Religion was come
before unto him, he having married a Christian Lady out of France, called
Bertha; upon condition that it should be lawful for her and the Bishop that
came to assist her to keep their Faith and Religion. A few days after, the
King came into the Island, and seating himself without in the open air, sent
for Augustine and his companions: He would not suffer them to come unto him in
any house, least if he or his were skillful in Sorcery, they might prevail
against him. But they came to him not with weapons of the Devil, but endowed
with the strength of God, carrying before them in lieu of a Banner, a Cross of
silver, and the Image of our Savior painted in a Table: and singing of
Lytanies, they Crosses, images enter with our Faith and destroy Idolatry.
prayed both for themselves and those for whose sake they came. And sitting
down (as the King commanded them) they preached unto him and his attendants the
word of life. The King replied. Your words and promises are fair, yet because
strange and unknown to me, I cannot assent unto them, leaving the Religion
wherein both I and my people have been so long bred up; but seeing you are come
so far to impart unto us such knowledge as you hold to be good and true, we
will receive you, and minister to you all such things as be necessary for to
maintain you: and we are consenting, that you gain by your Preaching as many as
you can to your Profession. Then he allowed them a place in the City of
Canterbury, the head City of his Dominions, providing them what was needful,
and freely permitting them to Preach. It is said as they drew nigh the City,
having the Cross and Image of our Savior, carried (as the The manner of
Processions.
manner was) they sung all in one tune, this Prayer following. We beseech thee,
O Lord, for thy great mercy, that thy fury and anger may be taken from this
City, and from thy holy house, because we have sinned, The ancient custom of
Allelujah in the Church.
Allelujah.

CHAP. 26.
Being entered, they began to hold forth the very Apostolic order of living, as
in the Primitive Church, serving God in continual Prayer, Watching and
Fasting, Preaching the Word of Life, despising the allurements of this world,
as things none of theirs, taking Our Apostles addicted to watching, fasting,
voluntary poverty.
of them whom they instructed so much only as might supply their wants, living
according as they taught, and being ready to suffer death in the defense of the
Truth they published. Hence it came to pass, that many believed, and were
baptized, marveling much at the simplicity of their innocent life, and
sweetness of heavenly Doctrine. There was at the East end of the City a Church
built in honor of St. Martin, made whilst the Romans were in Britany, in A
Church dedicated to St. Martin, where they say Mass.
which the Queen, a Christian, used to pray: Thither they went to Church, and
began there first to sing Service, say Mass, Pray, Teach and Christen, till the
King being converted to the Faith, they received ample license to Preach where
they would, and either to build new or repair old Churches. And it was not long
before the King himself much delighted with their purity of life, and example
of godly conversation, and by their sweet promises, which they proved to be
true by working many Miracles, believed Our Apostles workers of many Miracles
in proof of their doctrine.
and were baptized. Then the People daily more and more resorted to their
Sermons, and renouncing Heathenish Rites, joined themselves to the unity S.
Gregory in a letter to the Bishop of Alexandria, writes how above ten thousand
were there Christened on Christmass-day.
of the Holy Church. The King also appointed them a place and Seat befitting
their Calling, in his head City of Canterbury, giving them necessary
possessions for their maintenance.

Chap. 27.
After this, the man of God Augustine, came to Arles, where by Etherius
Archbishop of that City, he was ordained Archbishop of the English, according
as St. Gregory had commanded, and returning into Britany, he sent Laurence,
Priest, and Peter, Monk, to Rome, to make relation to St. Gregory, that the
English had received the Faith, and he made their Bishop; he also required his
Answer to certain Queries. Pope Gregory's answer to Augustines first demand.
For as much as you being brought up Our Apostle a Monk.
under Monastical rule, must not live apart from your Clergy, in the Church of
the English, which is but newly entered upon the Faith of Christ; you must
follow the prescript and form of life which was used in the Primitive Church
among the Fathers, for there was none among them that First Christian Clergy
Regular.
said, that to be his own which he possessed, but all was in common. And if
there be any of the Clergy, who having not yet received holy Orders, cannot
Chastity of them that took orders.
live chaste; they may take Wives and have their stipend allowed* them apart
from the rest. Augustines second Demand: Whereas there is but one Faith, why be
there so many sundry customs of the Churches; and one custom of Masses
observed in the Mass in chief parts of Christendom.
holy Roman Church, and another in France. Gregory's Answer: You knew the
custom of the Church of Rome, wherein you were brought up; but if you have
found any thing, be it in the Church of Rome, France, or elsewhere, that may
please God more, I am content that you choose it, planting in the English
Church (which is but lately come to the Faith) the best orders you can gather
from them all. Augustines nineth question concerns illusions in Dreams, whither
such things happening, a Layman may receive the body of Christ, or a Priest say
Mass. Another of his questions is Mass
whether and when Children are to be Baptized. Gregory's Answer is, that in
necessity they are presently to be Baptized. Baptizing Infants.


Chapter 28.
nothing but a Letter from the Pope to the Archbishop of Arles to assist
Augustine.

Chap. 29.
The same Pope (for as much as Augustine had advertized him that there was a
great harvest and but few laborers) sent him more Preachers, of which the
chiefest were Mellitus, Rufinianus, Justus, Paulinus. By these he sent such
things as were necessary for the Purniture and Ministry of the Church, as holy
Vessels, Altar-Cloths, (...)
Church stuff, apparel for Priests and Clergy, with Relics of the holy
Apostles and Martyrs, and Books. He sent him a Pall, and by letters instructed
him The use of the Pall.
what order to hold in making Bishops throughout Britany. Gregory's Letter. To
his most Reverend and holy Brother, Augustine, the servant of the servants of
God. Since by the goodness of God, and your industry, the new Church of the
English is brought unto the Faith of Christ, we grant unto you, the use of the
Pall, to wear when you say Mass, Saying of Mass
and we give way, that you ordain Twelve Bishops under your jurisdiction, but
so, that the Bishop of London be henceforth consecrated by his own Synod, and
receive his Pal^ from this holy and How our Bishops depended on Rome in their
investiture.
Apostolic See; wherein I by the Authority of God do now serve. Also our will
is, that you send a Bishop to York, to whom we intend to give a Pall: To you
shall be subject, not only the Bishops you make, or he of York, The Primacie
of Canterbury in England instituted by the Pope, and not by the King. Ann. 600.
but all the Priests of Britany, to the end that by your manner of life, they
may receive a pattern both to believe and live well.

Note, that the Pall (wherewith the Pope invests Metropolitans) is a
shoulder-piece imbroidred with Crosses made not of fine linen, a^ the
Highpriests was, Exodus 28. but of fine sheeps wool, to mind them of Christ's
carrying the lost sheep on his Shoulders. It was first laid on St. Peter's
shrine, and given to them thence.

Chap. 30.
The holy Father, Gregory, sent letters to Mellitus, showing how earnestly he
thirsted the good of our Country. Unto his dearly beloved Son, Mellitus,
Abbot. Gregory, the Abbots
servant of the servants of God. When God shall bring you to our Brother,
Augustine, tell him with serious deliberation, I thought fit, that not the
Temples, but the Idols in them be broken, that holy Water be Holy Water,
Altars, Relics Birth-dayes of Martyrs.
made and sprinkled about the said Temples, Altars erected, Relics placed. It
may be allowed, that in Dedications or Birth-dayes of Martyrs, whose Relics
are there reserved, the people make them bowers, Feasting together after a good
religious sort.

Chap. 31.
About this time, Gregory, Our Apostle endowed with the grace of Miracles.
wrote to Augustine concerning such Miracles as he knew done by him, wishing
him not to run hazard of vain glory, by the great number of them. I know (says
he) dear brother, it has pleased God to show by thee great Miracles among the
people, whom by thee he has called to the Faith. Thou have cause to joy that
by the means thereof, the English men's souls are won to the Faith: but thou
ought to fear, least by the said Miracles, thou by outward praise be puffed
up, etc.

Chap. 32.
Contains the Letter of Pope The Pope imparts the blessing of S. Peter
Gregory to King Ethelbert, with Presents, and the blessing of St. Peter.

Chap. 33.
Augustine being now Bishop, Christ-church in Canterbury
obtained an old Church, anciently of the Romans, and Dedicated it to the Name
of our Savior, making it a perpetual Monasteries and Churches in honor of
Saints.
Seat for him and his Successors. Not far Eastward of the City, he built a
Monastery, to the which King Ethelbert (through his advice) new built a Church
to the honor of the Churches consecrated.
Sts. Peter and Paul, enriching it with sundry gifts. Laurence his Successor
consecrated it. The first Abbot thereof, was one Peter a Priest, who being cast
away at Sea, and by the Inhabitants buried after a homely manner: Our Lord
intending The first Abbot shines with Miracles.
to have it known, how worthy a man he was, caused to appear every night a
light from Heaven over the place where he was buried: The Inhabitants gathering
hereby that he was some holy man, removed his body thence, burying it
honorably in the town of Bullen in France.

In the 34. Chapter, nothing but civil affairs.

The Second Book.
Chap. 1.
IN the year 605. holy Pope Gregory having governed An. 605.
most gloriously the Sea of the Roman and Apostolic Church, departed this
life, to an everlasting seat in Heaven. He converted our English Nation from
the power of Satan, to the Faith of Christ; whom we may well, and also must
call our Apostle. For as soon as he was High Bishop over the whole The Pope
styled Bishop of the whole world.
world, and appointed Governor of the Churches newly converted; he made our
Nation the Church of Christ, This Pop^ ou^ Apostle.
which till then had been the bondslave of Idols: so that we may truly make
good the saying of the Apostle, that although he were not an Apostle to others,
yet to us he was, for 2 Cor. v. 2.
the seal of his Apostleship we are in the Lord. Laying aside his worldly
Nobility by special grace from God, he turned it First a Monk of Eminent
Sanctity.
to the purchasing of eternal glory in Heaven. Putting off his secular habit,
he betook himself unto a Monastery, where he lived in that perfection, that (as
he was wont to witness with tears) all transitory things became subject to
him, undervaluing the world, and thinking on nothing but heavenly things; and
though immured in an earthly body, by contemplation, he surpast the natural
bounds of flesh, loving death as an entrance unto life. All this he tells of
himself, not boasting of his increase in virtue, but rather lamenting the want
and decay thereof. He swarv'd not from Monastical perfection, by any occasion
or trouble of his Ecclesiastical charge. His House was like a well ordered
Monastery; for although he was taken thence, and made Bishop, and ordained to
the Ministry of the Altar, and sent Legate from the Sea Apostolic to
Constantinople; yet he never intermitted his wonted course Then made Priest and
the Popes Legate at Constantinople.
of life, but had with him Religious of the Monastery, for the better keeping
regular observance, that by their example, he might be fastened as with a strong
Anchor to the pleasant port of prayer, strengthening his soul by daily reading
and conferring with them. Whereas other Bishops took pains in building Churches
and beautifying the same with gold and silver, he altogether was employed in
gaining souls. What money he had he carefully distributed among the poor: He
made our Nation by Preachers sent hither, partakers of eternal liberty. This
holy Pope, ordained that in the Chapel of the blessed Masses at the bodies of
Saints
Apostles Peter and Paul, Masses should be said at their Bodies. The least
addition of the Mass, observed by Antiquity, but the first use of the Mass it
self is too ancient to be observed, as begun by the Apostles.
To the Canon of the Mass, he added these words (which still appear in our
Mass) dispose our days in peace; free us from eternal damnation, and number us
in the stock of thine Elect. He was buried in S. Peter's Church before the
Vestrie. It Is reported that seeing, British children sold at Rome, he inquired
what was the name of that nation, they told him, they were called Angels or
English, with good reason (quoth he) for they have an Angels face, and it is
fitting they should be inheritors with the Angels in Heaven. Then he ask't the
Name of the Province, the Merchants said, they were called Deires, they may so
(quoth he) for they shall be delivered from the Ire (or anger) of God, and
called to the mercy of Jesus Christ. Then he asked the Kings Name; they
answered, his Name was All, St. Gregory alluding to his Name said, Alleluja
must be sung in that Princes Dominions. Hereupon he besought the Bishop of the
Roman Apostolic See (for S. Gregory his zeal for our conversion.
he was not then Bishop thereof) to send into Britany Ministers of the Word for
their conversion, offering himself ready for that work, if so it had pleased
the Apostolic Pope: but the Citizens of Rome, would not let him go so far
from them. Afterward being Pope, he accomplished this good work, so long
desired, sending thither diverse Preachers, he himself helping at home by Prayer
and wholesome instructions.

Chap. 2.
About this time Augustine called together the Bishops and Doctors of the
greatest Province, This Synod was held in Worcestershire, at a place called
Augustines Oak.
which was of the Britans, persuading them (as a Brother) to Catholic unity,
and to hold communion with him: For as yet they kept not Easter Sunday in due
time, but from the 14. to the 20. Moon. They used also many other things
contrary to the Unity of the Church: which being showed unto them, and that
neither for entreaty, nor rebukes of Augustine, they would assent, preferring
their own traditions before all other Churches, which through the whole world
agreed with The Roman Tradition confirmed by miracle.
them: This Father said unto them; let us pray to God that he will vouchsafe to
signify unto us by some heavenly sign, which tradition is to be followed: Let
some sick body be brought, and by whose prayers he shall be healed, let his
Faith be believed. His Adversaries granting unto it, there was brought forth a
blind man, who first presented to the British Priests, when by them he was not
cured, Saint Augustine on his knees besought our Lord to restore sight unto
him, that so his grace might be enkindled in the hearts of many; and forthwith
the blind-man saw, and Augustine was held of the people as the true Teacher.
For all this, they assembled a second, and greater Synod, to which (it is said)
seven British or Welsh Bishops carne with many learned men, especially from the
chiefest Monastery of Bangor, whereof Dinoch was Abbot. All these openly
refusing Abbots
subjection to Augustine, he said to them. Although (dear brethren) in many
points you do contrary to us, or rather contrary to the custom of the
Universal Church; yet if you will in these things agree with us, viz. To
celebrate Easter in due time, to administer baptism according to the manner of
the holy Roman and Apostolic Church, preaching with us the word of the Lord,
to this English Nation: All your other Ceremonies, Rites, Observances and
Customs, though contrary to ours, we will willingly bear with. But they
replied, they would do none of these things, nor hold him for their
Archbishop: Whereupon the Division from the Church of Rome.
man of God, Augustine, threatningly prophesied, that since they waved peace
with their brethren, they should have war from their enemies; and since they
refused The ruin of the Authors thereof prophesied.
to preach the word of Life to the English Nation, by their hands they should
suffer death. Which in all points came to pass (as he had foretold). For
Edilfrid, that valiant King of the English, raising a mighty Army, made a great
slaughter The prophecy made good from heaven.
of this wicked people: For being about to give battle, perceiving their
Priests met together, to pray for their Soldiers: he asked, who they were, and
to what end they met there. Most of them were Multitude of Monks among the
Britans, though converted 156.
of the Monastery of Bangor (in Wales) where such a number of Monks are said to
have been, that their Monastery divided into seven parts with their Prelates; no
one of them had fewer than 300. Most of these having fasted three days, met at
the Camp to pray. King Edilfrid understanding the After Schism, their Faith and
Prayers availed not.
cause of their convening, If (quoth he) they invoke their God against us, they
fight against us, though they bear no Arms. Whereupon he commanded the charge
to be made upon them, and in the end, though with loss, he quite ruined the
other Troops of this wicked Army. They say there perished in that battle about
1200 of those that were assembled to pray; and so was accomplished the Prophecy
of Augustine, the holy Bishop.

Note, That these Welsh Bishops, living in the Faith, received from Pope
Eleutherius, An. 156. (as was said B. 1. c. 4.) did not pretend any cause of
division from Augustines Doctrine, about Mass, use of the Cross, and Images;
worship of Saints and Relics, or any other point wherein we and Protestants
differ. A demonstrative argument, that none of these things brought in by
Augustine were contrary to what was delivered to the Britans, not a full
hundred years after the Apostles time: So that as long as Augustines Religion
was kept in England, the Apostles Religion was kept.

Chap. 3.
Augustine ordained two Bishops, Mellitus and Justus; Mellitus An. 904
he sent to preach to the Province of the East Saxons, whose chief City is
London: As soon as the Province by Mellitus preaching had received the word of
Truth, King Ethelbert The Antiquity of St. Paul's in London.
built St. Paul's Church in London, where Mellitus and his successors ever after
were to hold their Bishops Seat. Justus was ordained by him Bishop of Rochester
in Kent, where Ethelbert built St. Andrew the Apostles Church. After this, the
dearly beloved Father in God, Also of St. Andrews at Rochester.
Augustine dyed, and his body was laid by the Church of the Apostles, Peter and
Paul in Canterbury, which (after it was finished) was brought in and honorably
buried in the Northpart thereof, where also were interred the bodies of all the
Archbishops following, as long as there was room. This Church has an Altar in
it, dedicated to the honor of St. Gregory Pope, at which Altar, Dedication of
Altars to Saints
every Saturday the Commemoration of these departed Bishops is celebrated by
the Priest of the place.

Upon St. Augustines Tomb Commemoration of the dead at the Altar.
is written,

Here rests Augustine the first Archbishop of Canterbury, who being sent
hither, by blessed Gregory, Bishop; and by working of Miracles, supported by
Our Apostles gift of miracles, witnessed in his very Epitaph.
God, brought King Ethelbert and his People from Idolatry to the Faith of
Christ: He dyed the 26. of May.

CHAP. 4.
Laurence succeeded him in the Bishopric, whom Augustine, yet living,
ordained, least after his death the State of the Church rude as yet, and newly
converted, might have wavered and fallen, if it had lackt a Pastor and guide
never so little. Wherein he followed the example of the first Pastor of the
Church, the most blessed Prince of the Apostles, Peter; who having laid at
Rome, the St. Peter first Pastor of the Church and Prince of the Apostles.
foundation of Christ's Church, consecrated Clement his Coadjutor and Successor.
Laurence seeing the groundwork of his Church to enlarge, which was well and
thoroughly laid, endeavored to raise the same to a perfect height, by frequent
exhortations and continual example of pious works: He earnestly labored as a
true Shepherd, not only for the modern Church of the English, but also for
the Church of the old Inhabitants of Britany and Scots in Ireland, whose
profession as soon as h^ knew to be less Ecclesiastical, and not well ordered
in many points, especially about Easter, they not celebrating it in due time:
He wrote unto them, beseeching them to receive and keep the society of
Catholic observance with the Church of Christ, spread over Conformity to be
held with that Church which is spread over the whole world.
the whole world.

To our dearest brethren the Bishops and Abbots in Scotland Laurence, Mellitus,
etc. When the Sea Apostolic (according to the usual manner of sending to all
parts of the world) directed Apostles sent all the world over by the Pope.
us hither to preach the word of God. We, etc. About this time Mellitus Bishop
of London went to Rome for advice of the Apostolic Pope Boniface, and for
necessary causes of the English Church. This Pope called a Council of Bishops
to appoint some order concerning the life of Monks. Mellitus sat among
Recourse to the Pope in Ecclesiastical affairs.
them, to the end, that what there was legally decreed, he confirming, might
bring with him to the English Our English Authors say Mellitus his going was to
obtain privileges for Westminster Abbey then built.
Church, as precepts and rules to be observed. He brought also letters from the
Pope to Laurence Archbishop, to the Clergy and the King. This Pope cleansed the
Temple Pantheon, converting it into a Decrees of Councels to be followed as
sure rules. A Church dedicated to our Lady, and all Martyrs, which yet is to be
seen at Rome, and whether were brought (says Spondan) the Relics of many
Martyrs, from places without the City.
Church in honor of our Lady and the Martyrs.

Chap. 5.
In the year 613. Ethelbert, King of Kent, after he had reigned six and fifty
years, entered into eternal bliss, the one and twentieth year, after he had
received the Faith, and was interred in St. Martins Porch, within the Church of
the blessed Apostles Peter and Persecutors of this Faith punished.
Paul. Edbald his son much harmed the tender sprigs of the Church: but Gods
scourge was not wanting, for both an unclean spirit, and a fr^nzie possessed him:
Moreover the death of Sabereth, King of the East Saxons and Nephew to Ethelbert
much increased the persecution of the Church, who going hence, to the
everlasting kingdom left three sons, who all fell to Idolatry. These Princes
seeing the Bishop in the Church, after he Saying of Mass
had said Mass, giving to the people the Sacrament, said unto him: Why do
thou not give us also of that white bread? To whom he answered. If you
Communion under one kind.
will be washed in that wholesome Font wherein your Father was, you may also eat
of this blessed bread, but if you contemn the laver of life, you may not tast^
the bread of life. Hereupon the King commanded Mellitus and all his company to
depart the Realm: so he and Justus went over into France.

Chap. 6.
Laurence the Archbishop being now ready to forsake Britany, and follow
Mellitus and Justus, commanded the night before he was to go, that his bed
should be laid in the Saints Peter and Paul^ Church, where after many prayers
and tears powered out to God for the State of the Church, the blessed Prince of
the Apostles S. Peter prince of the Apostles. He owns his Successors (the
Popes) deeds.
appearing in his sleep unto him, scourged him a good while; and with
Apostolical Authority, asked him, Why he meant to forsake the flock which he
himself had committed unto him? and to what Shepherd running now away, he
would leave the sheep of Christ beset with ravening Wolves? By these stripes
and the words of St. Peter, Laurence, the servant of God, imboldned, came and
presented himself to the King, and throwing open his garment, showed him how
pitifully he had been beaten. When the King (all amazed) demanded, who durst
inflict such stripes upon a man of his dignity; when he understood it was for
his salvation, and that by the Apostle of Christ, he became afraid, and
abandoning The miraculous effect of St. Peter's apparition.
the worship of Idols, and his unlawful wedlock, embraced the Faith of Christ,
and was baptized, promoting the good of the Church to the utmost of his power.
He called home Mellitus and Justus, commanding them to return to their
Churches, and instruct their flock. Thus the King with all his Subjects from
that day that he was converted, submitted himself to the Precepts A Church in
honor of our Lady.
of God. He built a Church in honor of our Lady the blessed Mother of God,
within the Abbey of St. Peter St. Peter Prince of the Apostles.
Prince of the Apostles, which Mellitus hollowed.

Chap. 7.
Relates, How the holy Archbishop Laurence departing hence to heaven, his body
was buried in the Abbey-Church of St. Peter, the Apostle. Mellitus (of London)
succeeded in the Sea of Canterbury, the third after Augustine, who by birth was
noble, but nobler by his singular virtue. It chanced that the City of
Canterbury was set on fire, and great part consumed, and the raging flames drew
nigh to the house, where Mellitus lay sick of the Gout; but putting his
confidence in God, he commanded them to carry him out to meet Our Primats of
England still work miracles.
the flames. Now where it most raged was at the crowned martyrs; The sick man
being brought thither, represt with his prayers those flames, which A place (it
seems) dedicated to the crowned Martyrs.
no power of man could quench: Having governed the Church five years, he past
to Heaven.

Chap. 8.
Justus succeeded Mellitus in Authority of (...) Bishops from the Pope.
the Bishopric; who having received authority from Pope Bonifacius to ordain
Bishops, consecrated Romanus Bishop.

The Popes Letter to Justus.
To our dearest beloved brother, Justus: How piously and earnestly you have
labored for the Gospel of Christ, the perfection No^e, Mr. Ba^ter, how unlike
the Pope then seemed to An^ichrist.
and end of your actings fully declare, etc. We understand you have brought the
King to the belief, and instructed him in the undoubted Faith. We have sent you
a Pall, which we give you leave to use only in celebrating Our Primats
invested with the Pall by the Pope.
the holy mysteries granting you the ordaining of Bishops, as occasion shall
require, that so the Gospel of Christ may by the preaching of many be dilated,
etc. Having regard to the Authority received from the Sea Apostolic, use this
our reward toward the gaining of souls.


Chap. 9.
About this time, the King and People of Northumberland received the Faith, by
the preaching of Paulinus. The occasion was this. King Edwin desirous to marry
Edilburge the King of Kents Daughter, sent his Ambassadors to effect it: but
they made answer, that it was not lawful for a Christian to be married to a
Pagan, least the Faith and Sacrament of the King of Heaven might become
profaned. Hereupon the King entered covenant, to do nothing contrary to the
Christian Faith this Virgin professed; but gave way that she and all the Priests
and servants with her, should keep and observe after the Christian manner their
Faith and Religion. Paulinus Bishop came along with her, to confirm her and her
attendants, whom, that they might not be polluted by conversing with Pagans, he
daily strengthened by exhortations, and administering the blessed Sacrament unto
them, laboring earnestly to keep them that came with him from falling, and
endeavoring by preaching to reconcile others. In the same Chapter is mentioned
how Paulinus obtained by his Prayers that the Queen was safely delivered, The
N^^thumbers miraculously converted.
and that the King might obtain a victory against the West Saxons: Whereupon
renouncing Idols, he granted that Bishop Paulin should Christen his Daughter,
who born at Faster was Christened at Whitsontide with twelve others of the Kings
Court: yet for himself Baptizing Intants.
the King took longer time to deliberate.

Chap. 10.
Relates, How Edwin received letters from Bonifacins Bishop Note, Mr. Ba^ter
how unlike the Pope then seemed to Antichri^t.
of the Sea Apostolic, exhorting him to the Faith: wherein are these words; We
have thought good to extend our Priestly care and duty in proposing unto you
the rich magazin of our Christian belief, etc. We exhort you in all affection,
to abandon The Pope an enemy to Idol worship.
Idols, and to detest the worship of them, etc. Knowing how great an offense
they commit that worship them, etc. It behooves you to receive the sign of that
Cross, by which mankind St. Peter styled Prince of the Apostles and our
Protector. His blessing sent from the Pope.
was redeemed. I send you the blessing of St. Peter, your Protector, Prince of
the Apostles.

Chap. 11.
The holy and Apostolic Pope, Bonifacius, sent letters from Rome to Queen
Edilburge wife to King Edwin. The Pope still sollicitous to further our
conversion*


To Queen Edilburge his dear daughter, etc. My heart rejoices for the benefit
of the Lord unto you, having vouchsafed to enkindle in you the right Religion,
etc. We understand you shine forth in good works. Wherefore as it becomes a
Father, we send unto you as our Daughter in Christ, exhorting you not to delay
calling upon your Husband, till he also be conjoined with you in the number of
Christians: And our Fatherly love requires that you declare unto us, what the
power of God shall work in his and his subjects conversion, that so we may
render St. Peter styled chiefest and Prince of the Apostles, and our Protector.
due thanks to God, and to St. Peter, chiefest of the Apostles. We send you the
blessing of St. Peter your Protector, and prince of the Apostles.

Chap. 12.
The sum of this Chapter briefly is, That by a vision from Heaven King Edwin
is forced to receive the Faith: for being put to flight by King Edilfrid, after
a world of shifts, he finds entertainment with King Redwall, who
notwithstanding at the threats of Edelfrid resolved to deliver him up to his
enemies. Edwin, having secret intelligence thereof, and being greatly perplexed
in mind, in the depth of the night, saw an unknown man come to him, telling
him, that he knew well the cause of his grief; and that he would ease him of
it, and make him King and Conqueror of his Enemies, and that in power he
should surpass all his Progenitors, The Faith then taught commended from
Heaven.
and all the Kings of the English. Lastly, He told him, that he would give him
more profitable Counsel for his souls health, than any of his Predecessors
ever had, so that he would promise to hearken thereunto. All which he joyfully
promised. Then this stranger laid his right hand upon Edwins head, saying: When
these things shall happen remember this our discourse, and perform your
promise; so he vanished that Edwin perceived it was no man. In the morning he
understood that King Redwall had changed his mind of betraying him into a
purpose of giving him an Army to restore him, whereby he conquered King
Edilfrid. In this battle King Redwals son was slain, and so besides the
recovery of his own Kingdom, he was made Heir apparent to King Redwall. For
all this, he still remained slack to embrace our Faith, though Paulin earnestly
preached the word of God unto him. Yet he used to retire himself, to think what
I would those of our Country would imitate this Prince.
Religion was best: Once as he was in this retirement, Paulin entering the
Palace, and (as if he had known in spirit what vision the King in his
banishment had received) coming to him, he laid his right hand upon his Head,
asking him, Whether he remembered that sign or no? The King trembling for
Paul^^ knows what is in the Kings br^ast.
fear, would have fallen down at Paulins feet; but he lifting him up, said: You
have escape the hands of your Enemies, you have obtaind the height of
sovereignty, be now mindful of the last thing you promised, and defer it no
longer.

Chap. 13.
The King hearing these words, answered, he was bound to receive the Faith,
which Paulin Preached: But yet he desired to confer thereof with the Nobility
and Peers of his Realm: whereunto Paulin assenting: the Assembly is called, the
abandoning of Idolatry resolved upon; Coify, Chief Priest of the false gods
offers himself to be the first to demolish them: so clad in Armor, and mounted
on the Kings horse, he casts a spear at the Idol, commanding the Idolatrous
Altars to be fired; which was performed.

Chap. 14.
King Edwin with all the Nobility and most of the Commons received the Faith,
and were Baptized on Easterday, An. 627, in Saint Peter's Church at York, which
he had set up of wood, whilst he was Catechized. Here the King assigned a
Bishops See for Paulin, at whose request he built a large Cathedral, enclosing
that of Wood, where he had been Baptized. Paulin henceforth preached the word of
God continually, and they believed him, and were Christ'ned: And the fervor of
Faith, and desire of holy Baptism was so great, that he was staid at Court 36.
days, busied in catechizing, and instructing the people in the Faith of
Christ. In the Country of the Deiri, he baptized in the flood Swale, for as
yet, there could not be built Oratories, Fonts, or Baptisteries: Yet was there
built a great Church in the planes called Downs, which the Pagans that slew
King Edwin Altars of stone.
burnt; but the Altar escaped the fire, being of stone, and is kept in the
Monastery of the reverend Abbot Trumvulse. Monasteries, Abbots.


Chap. 15.
King Edwins zeal and devotion was so great toward the Christian Faith, that
he persuaded Carpwell, King of the East English, to leave the vain superstition
of Idols, and with his whole Realm to embrace the true Faith, and receive the
Sacrament of Christ's Church. King Redwalls Carpwels Father was Christened before
in Kent, but he was quickly seduced again by his Wife. He seemed to serve both
Christ and his false Gods; for in one Temple, he erected an Altar for the
Sacrifice of Christ, and another for his Idols. Felix Bishop, and a holy
Preacher, being sent by Altars, sacrifice
Honorius Archbishop, to preach the Word of God to the East-English, found
plenty of fruit, and increase of Believers; for he brought the whole Province
unto the Faith.

Chap. 16.
Relates, How Paulin the Bishop preaching the word of God in the Province of
Lindesi, bulit a Church in the chief City, where every year some miraculous
Cures were Miracles wrought at certain places*
wrought.

Chap. 17.
Relates, How Honorius (Bonifacius his Successor) was Bishop of Rome, and sat
in the Sea Apostolic: who understanding that A Pall sent by the Pope, who
still investeth our Archbishops.
the King of Northumberland and all his Subjects were converted to the Faith by
Paulinus his preaching, sent him a Pall and Letters also to King Edwin,
exhorting him to go forward in the true Faith.

To the most Puissant and his most virtuous Son in our Lord, The Pope a true
Father even to Kings.
Edwin King: Honorius servant of the servants of God. What are we better able
to offer to God than by persisting in good works, to worship and render him
deserved praises. We exhort you (dearly beloved Son) with Fatherly affection,
etc. (A little after he writes) Read St. Gregorie's your Apostles works, and
set his doctrine ever before your Efficacy of Saints Prayers.
eyes, that his prayers may advance your kingdom and people, and represent you
irreprehensible unto the Almighty. We have provided those things, which you
wished might be ordained for your Priests. We have two Palls for the Primats,
Honorius and Paulinus, commanding The Pope exercises his Supremacy in England.
that when one of them is called out of this life, the surviver substitute by
this our Authority another in his place*

Chap. 18.
About this time died Justus, Archbishop, and Honorius succeeding was
consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury by Pauline: He was the Fifth after St.
Augustine, to whom Pope Honorius sent a Pall, ordaining that when either the
Bishop of Canterbury or York died, the surviver should have power to
Consecrate another in the place of the deceased, that so they should not need
to travel and toil by Sea and Land to Rome, as often as an Archbishop was to
be ordained.

The Copy of the Popes letter to Honorius.
Labor in preaching the Gospel, and follow the rule and steps of your Head and
Master, blessed Gregory, etc. As for the privileges of your Churches, we have
not delayed to grant you such The Pope does this in the place of St. Peter
Prince of the Apostles.
things as We thought fit. And now We in the place of St. Peter, Prince of the
Apostles, grant unto you Authority, etc. Here follows the grant specified in
the beginning of this Chapter, Dated, An. 633.


Chap. 19.
Pope Honorius sent letters to the Scots (whom he understood to err in the
observation Decrees of the Church to be followed.
of Easter) exhorting them that they would not esteem their small number wiser
than the Churches of Christ, either ancient or newly converted, in celebrating
any other Easter than after the common account, and according to the Uniform
Decrees of all the Bishops of the world assembled in Council.

Chap. 20.
Relates, How King Edwin was slain, his Army defeated, his Kingdoms overrun
by Penda the Idolater, and Carduella; so that there was no safety but in
flight. Then Bishop Paulin returned to Kent, bringing with him a fair golden
Golden crosses and Chalices consecrated to the use of the Altar, yet to be seen.
Cross and Chalice consecrated to the use of the Altar, which are to be seen in
the Cathedral of Canterbury. There he governed the Sea of Rochester, and left
his Pall, which he had received from the Pope of Rome. James the Deacon left by
Paulin at York; set up a School for Church Music, according to Our Church
music from Rome.
the fashion of Rome, and Diocese of Canterbury.

The Third Book.
Chap. 1.
RElates, how the Kings Osrich and Eandfrid, fell to Yet Idolatry highly hated.
Idolatry, whereupon they deserved not to be accounted to our Kings, but their
years are numbered to holy King Oswald next following.

Chap. 2.
The place is showed until An. 642. Veneration of holy places and crosses.
this day, and had in great veneration, where Oswald who slew Carduella, before
the battle, set up the sign of the holy Cross, beseeching God humbly on his
knees to succor Miracles hence ensuing.
them in their distress: Having with his own hands set up the Cross, he said
to the Army: Let us all kne^l down and pray the Almighty to help us. In the
place where he made his prayer, many miraculous Cures are known to be done, in
token of The very chips of that Cross, work miracles until this day.
his Faith. Until this day, many do usually cut chips from the wood of that
holy Cross, which casting into water, and giving the sick thereof, both men and
beasts to drink, or sprinkling them therewith, they are restored to health. The
place is called Heavenfield, signifying, that in that place, a heavenly
memorial should be set up, and heavenly miracles be wrought even till our
days. The Religious of Hagulsden Church for a long time have used to come
every year, upon Prayers and sacrifice for the Dead.
the Eve and Day that King Oswald was slain, to keep Dirges for his soul; and
in the morning after Psalms, solemnly to offer for him the Sacrifice of the
holy Oblation: By continuance of this custom, the place is become more holy,
and is now honored by all, for the Church dedicated in the same place. We shall
relate one of many miracles, wrought at this Cross. One of the Religious of
Hagulsden, by name Bothelmus (who lives yet) when by chance, going on the Ice,
by a fall broke his Arm, in so much that he could not lift it to his mouth,
prayed one of the brethren to bring him a piece of that blessed wood, saying,
that by Gods grace he might find help thereby. He did so, giving the party
some of the Moss wherewith The Moss of the Cross works miracles upon one as yet
living.
the wood was covered, which putting into his bosom in the night, he found
himself (soon after) whole and sound.

Chap. 3.
Relates, how Aidan the Bishop being sent from the Scots to King Oswald, the
King himself became interpreter to his Nobles, whilst the Bishop preached to
them. Possessions were given by the King toward the founding of Religious
Houses. The little Children and Ancienter sort, were by the Scots trained up in
observance of Regular Discipline, for they were for the most part Monks as
Aidan was, whose House was for no small time, the head of all the Monasteries
Monks, Monasteries.
of the Northern parts, and of the Abbeyes of the Redshanks, which was bestowed
upon the Monks in consideration of their Sermons and preaching.

Chap. 4.
In the year 565. A Priest and Abbot, venerable both in Habit and Religious
life called Religious different in habit.
Columban came from Ireland into Britany to preach the word of God, in the
North. The Southern Redshanks had long before received the Faith, the word of
God being preached Purity of doctrine from Rome.
unto them by the reverend and blessed Bishop Ninia, who was at Rome, perfectly
taught Martin, the Faith; whose See the English hold to this day famous for the
name and Church of St. Martin, where his and many Churches dedicated to Saints.
other Saints bodies are. An Island was given Columban by the King toward
erecting of a Monastery. Moreover he had a renowned Monastery in Ireland, out
of both which, very Monasteries.
many Monasteries were after founded by means of his Scholars. These in
observing the high Feast of Easter, trusted to uncertain computes, and no
marvel, since none sent them the Decrees made in general Councels, for the
keeping thereof: yet they diligently observed all such works of devotion, and
chaste demeanor, as they could learn in the Prophets, Strict followers of
only scripture err, for many years together.
Gospels, and the Apostles writings. This erroneous observance of Easter,
lasted 150 years. At last the reverend Father and Priest Ecbert reformed them,
causing them to keep the same in due time.

Chap. 5.
From this Convent of Monks founded by St. Columban, Aidan was sent, and
consecrated Bishop, to instruct England in the Faith. His life Shaving of Monks.
so far surmounted the lukewarmnesse of our times; that all his companions, as
well shaven Monks, as Laics, gave themselves to continual Meditation. Every
devout person (except between Easter and Strict Fast on Wednesday and Friday
among the Laity.
Whitsontide) took up a custom to continue Fasting every Wednesday and Friday,
until three of the clock in the afternoon. See many excellent things of Aidan
in Bid.

Chap. 6.
Relates, Oswalds rare Piety, for which God gave him all the Dominions of four
several languages, the Britans, Picts, Scots and English. It is also related,
how King Oswald bestowed a Silver dish with dainties on the poor, who begged at
dinner time. The Bishop delighted with such a work of mercy, took him by the
right hand, saying; I pray God this hand may never be consumed. Which came to
pass, for being slain, and his hands cut off, that hand to this day remains
Miraculous reward of Alms:
incorrupt, and is reserved in a silver Shrine in St. Peter's Veneration of
Relics miraculously incorrupt to this day.
Church, where with due honor it is worshipped by all.

Chap. 7.
Relates, How the West Saxons with their King, received The Apostle of the
West Saxons, sent from the Pope.
the Faith, by Bishop Birinus his preaching, who came into Britany by Pope
Honorius his appointment, promising to sow the seeds of the holy Faith in the
remotest parts of England. By the same Popes command, the Bishop of Genua
consecrated him.

Chap. 8.
In the year 640. Erconbert was King of Kent, and the first of the Kings of
England, who by Princely Authority commanded the Idols throughout Transgressors
of the Fast of forty days punished.
his Realm should be destroyed, and that the Fast of forty days should be
kept, appointing due punishment for the transgressors thereof. Eartongarth,
this Kings daughter was a Virgin of rare virtue, serving God in a Monastery in
France all the days of her life. For in those days, when many Monasteries were
not yet built in England, diverse for the love to Religious life were wont to go
to the Religious Houses of France, sending also their daughters thither to be
Vowed Nuns espoused to the heavenly bridegroom.
brought up, and espoused to the heavenly Bridegroom. The Inhabitants
thereabout, even at this day, relate many virtuous deeds and miraculous signs
wrought by this Such Nuns graced with the gift of Miracl^^.
Virgin dedicated to God. The time of her departure being at hand, she began to
visit the Cel^ of the sick in the Monastery, unto whose Prayers commending
herself, she signified her approaching hour, as she had understood it by
revelation. The Habitation of men separated from Women.
Many brethren of the Monastery in the other house, reported, how at the same
time they heard the melody of Angels singing, and a noise as it were of a great
multitude coming into the Monastery: and going forth, they beheld an exceeding
bright light sent down from Heaven. Which conducted her soul to the joys of
Heaven They report other miracles showed by the Hand of God in the same
Monastery. The honorable body of Christ's Virgin and Spouse was buried in the
Church of St. Stephen. Three days after, they removed it, rearing the
gravestone higher: at the doing whereof, so sweet a smell came from the Vowed
(...) dear (...)
Earth, that to all the Brethren and Sisters, there seemed to be opened Cellars
of natural balm. ^delburge also Aunt to (...) by (...).
Eartongath, preserved the glory of perpetual Virginity (which is so dear to
God) in great chastity of body. How great her virtue was, appeared more fully
after death: for seven years after, her body was found as incorrupt, as it had
been free from stain of carnal concupiscence, and was translated into the
Church of St. Stephen.

Chap. 9.
Relates, How Oswald the most Christian King was slain, Ou^ Historyes say he
was slain at Oswistry in Sh^opshire.
at a place called Maserfield. How great the Faith of this King was, and how
servent his devotion appeared after his death, by sundry Miracles: for to this
day Cures both of men and beasts are daily wrought The very ^ligh test (...)
wo^k (...)
in the place where he was slain. Many carried away the dust where his body
fell, and casting it into water, cured thereby many infirmities. This was so
often done, that (by taking away the Earth) so deep a pit is now made, that a
man may stand upright in it. And no marvel that sick persons are recovered in
the place where he died, who all his life time bestowed his time in giving
Alms, and comforting the Needy. Very many miracles are reported to be done by
the dust of that place. The Horse of a passenger, hard by this place falling
down, became so ill that he gave him for lost. The horse tumbling himself
about, at last, lighted on the the place where Oswald fell, and suddenly
starting up was whole. The Passenger quickly understood what it meant, and
marking the place, came to his Inn, where he found a young maid who had been a
long time molested with the Palsy. He told them what had happened, whereupon
they carried her in a Cart to the place, where being laid down, she slept
awhile, and soon after Strange Miracles by R^liks.
waking, she found her self cured, and returned on foot home with those that
had brought her thither.

Chap. 10.
Relates, How a little linen bag full of the earth where King Oswald fell
dead, being casually hung upon a post in a Miracles by Reliks.
house, that was quite burnt down: this only post remained untoucht by the
fire, upon which occasion, many resorting to that place where King Oswald shed
his blood, were there cured.

Chap. 11.
Among other miracles I cannot omit to relate, what Translation of Reliks.
happened when King Oswalds bones were translated to the Church where they now
are. When toward Evening the Chariot was come, wherein the bones were, they
of the Monastery of Beandaman were unwilling to receive them: for although they
had known him for a blessed man, yet by reason he was a Forreigner born, and
had subdued them by Conquest, they hated his memory. So it fell out that the
Relics remained abroad all night: yet was there a great Pavilion extended
over the Chariot, where the Relics were. But a Miracle from heaven declared
with how (...) to be held in (...) v^neration by all faithfu^l.
great reverence those Bones were to be received of all faithful people: for
all night long a pillar of light stood reaching from the Chariot (wherein they
were) unto Heaven, clearly beheld almost in all places of the Province: which
made the Brethren of the Monastery now earnestly desire, that those holy
Relics might be laid up in their House. They were therefore enclosed in a
shrine, and placed with honor in the Church. The water wherewith his bones
were washed being poured out in a corner of the Vestry, from that This confirmed
from Heaven, as is testi^ied by witnesses yet living.
day forward, the earth which received it, had a special virtue in driving
Devils out of possessed bodies. An Abbess (who is yet alive) desired some of the
Earth to be given her, upon which this water was poured out, and with it
returned Abbesses.
home. It happened that a stranger came to her Monastery, who was wont to be vexed
with an unclean Spirit, and at night began to foame, gnash his teeth, and rage,
no body being able to hold him. The Abbess repaires to that quarter The
^odgings of men apart from the Nunnery.
where the Men lodged, and calling the Priest, went with him to the Patient:
Where the Priest began to say the exorcisme; That not sufficing, the Abbess
commanded her Maid to go bring her the little cabbinet, wherein that Earth
Exorcisms.
(we spoke of) was reserved. As soon as the Maid was come with it (from the
Nunns quarter) into the Court of that House where the possessed Person was, he
grew silent and began to rest, and as it were, sleep; and soon after rising up,
he said; I feel my self whole. They asked him how this came to pass: And he
answered: As soon as this Virgin with the Cabinet which she brought, approch't
the Court of the House, all the wicked Spirits that molested me departed. Then
the Abbess gave him of that dust, and the Priest saying some Prayers, he
Relik^chase away the Devil
past over the night most quietly, and was perfectly freed.

Chap. 12.
In the same Monastry, a little Boy had been long sick of Miracles at Saints
Tombs.
an ague, and was expecting his fit, when one of the Brethern coming in said:
My Son I Will tell thee how thou may be cured: rise and go sit thee down at the
Tomb of Oswald and be sure thou stirrest not thence till the hour be over, in
which thy fit uses to leave thee: then I will come and bring thee forth. The
Boy did so, and his Ague durst The person yet alive (says Bid) on whom the
Miracle was d^^e.
not presume to seize upon him at the Tomb of the Saint. That this happened
thus, a Brother, who came from thence, told me, adding how at that very hour
the youth was living in that Monastery, who was thus cured by Miracle. It is
not to be wondered that the Prayers of that King now in Heaven, may obtain Power
of Saints Prayers.
much of God, who having a Temporal Kingdom accustomed himself to continual
Prayer, and even died praying; for as he was slain, he prayed to God for the
Souls of his Soldiers; whereupon arose that old Proverb: God have That
speech, God have mercy on their souls, of what Antiquity.
mercy on their souls, quoth Oswald, when he dyed himself.

Chap. 13.
The Reverend Bishop Acca, used to tell how he heard Willebrord that holy
Bishop of Frizeland report what, had been done abroad by the wondrous Relics
of this Virtuous King. A certain Scholar careless in his life, being at the
point of death, with great remorse of his sins, made a purpose if he recovered
to amend, saying; If God of his mercy grant me to escape death, I resolve to
mend my life, yet I know I have deserved no truce, except by the help of such
as have faithfully served God, he of his mercy will pardon me. We have heard
there has been a King of wonderful holiness called Oswald, Our unworthiness
supplied by intercession of Saints.
the Excellency of whose Faith and Virtue, even after his death was well known
by working frequent Miracles. I beseech you (speaking to the standers by) if
you have any of his Relics, bring me them: It may be God will have mercy on
me through his Merits; to whom I made answer, (says Willebrord) I have of the
tree, whereupon his head was stuck after he was slain, and if thou will believe
assuredly; God by the Merits Cures wrought by Relikes
of so worthy a Person may grant thee longer life: Who answering he did
believe; I blessed (says Willebrord) some water, Water hallowed.
casting into it a shiver of the said Oak, giving it the sick man to drink,
and forthwith he recovered, and reformed his life, and living long after,
declared to all men the favor of our Maker, and the glory of his servant.

Chap. 14.
Relates how Oswin was slain by Osway, where afterward in An. 644. Good works
Satisfactory. Daily prayers for the dead.
satisfaction for the sin, there was a Monastery built, wherein daily Prayers
were offered up to God for Redemption of both the Kings souls, the Murderer and
murdered. It Relates also the admirable Virtue of King Oswin how Aidan the
Bishop foretold his death and twelve days after died himself.

Chap. 15.
Relates, How God by many Miracles declared to the world how worthy a Man Aidan
the Bishop was, and how Vtta a Priest being sent into Kent to fetch Eansled,
King Edwins Daughter, the Bishop at his setting forth blessing him, gave him
hallowed oil, saying, I know that at your taking ship you will have a Tempest:
Hallowed Oil does Miracles
But remember to cast into the sea this oil that I give you. All which happening
as Aidan had foretold: the Priest taking the oil, cast of it into the sea and
immediately there ensued a Calm. This I had (says Bid) from the faithful
relation of Cinimond Priest How authentical this is.
of our Church, who said, he had it from Vtta himself to whom this happened.

Chap. 16.
Relates, How by the Prayers of Aidan Bishop, the fire, A Miracle.
which the Enemy had defigned to burn a Town besieged, returned upon
themselves, making them quit the siege.

Chap. 17.
Relates, How the Virtuous Bishop Aidan departed this life the 17th, year of
his Bishopric. Not long after a Church being dedicated to the honor of the
most blessed Prince of the Apostles, his bones were translated thither, and
placced on the right side of the Altar, with much honor as he deserved. When
King Penda set Translation of Reliks, Altars, Churches dedicated in the honor
of the Prince of the Apostles, Thus then they called St. Peter.
fire on the Church, that Post only, whereunto this holy Bishop leaned at his
death, could by no force of fire be consumed. The Miracle being known and
spread abroad, the Church was again built: but the like happened the second time:
Whereupon at the reedifying of the Church Miracles:
the third time in memory of the Miracle, the Post was laid as a thrashold for
people to kneel on, and make their prayers to God. And it is well known that,
diverse in that place have been cured of diseases, and by the water where in
Chipps cut from the Post have been dipped, many have had their health restored By
Relikes.
them.

Chap. 18.
Relates, How King Sigibert was so enflamed with the love of God, that leaving
his Realm he entered into a Monastery, where being shaven he addicted Our Kings
became Monks.
himself to a heavenly warfare.

Chap. 19.
Relates, How Furseus encouraged by a Vision, built the Monastery, the King had
Monks graced with Visions.
given him, planting therein Regular discipline. Also how from his childehood
he gave himself to the reading of holy Scripture, and Monastical observance,
building another Monastery, wherein he might wholly attend to watching and
praying, where being sick he was rapt in spirit, and saw the blessed company of
Heaven and great conflicts he had with the wicked spirits, who prevaild not,
the holy Angels guarding and defending him. Moreover in a number of stra^g
visions he saw the evil spirits tormenting men in fire, and they did fling one
of them at him, whom the Angel flung back, which nevertheless did so burn
Furseus, that when he was restored again to his body How authentical this is.
the tokens of the scorching remained visible to all in his shoulder and cheek
all the days of his life after. His Altars
body being removed to the High Altar, was found incorrupt. And the year
following the same happened, being to be Miracles at Saints Tombs.
translated to the east side of the Altar. In which place it is well known that
his Merits have been much renowned by many Miracles wrought by the Power of God.

Chap. 20.
Tells the death of Honorius, Archbishop of Canterbury and how Deus-dedit
succeeded.

Chap. 21.
Relates, How the Middle-English with Penda their King (Son to Penda the
^erfecutor) and his Nobles were converted by Finan first a Monk and after
Bishop of Lindesferne.

Chap. 22.
Relates, How the East Saxons, after their apostacy were converted. Sigibert
their King having one in his Court that lived in unlawful wedlock, A prophecy
of the ruin of such as converse with those who are excommunicated.
and being excommunicated and all that kept him company by the Bishop, the King
neglecting this sentence, for the evil example, and because he would not
refrain from going to the house of that wicked man, was told by him, that in
that house he should die. And the event proved true, for he was there slain by
Penda King of the Mercians. Yet it is to be presumed that the cause of his
death (which was for observing Christ's command) did not only wipe away this
fault but increase his his merit. Swidhelm succeeded Sigibert, who was baptized
by Cedde. Edilwald King of the East-English, being his Godfather. Ant^quity of
Godfathers.


Chap. 23.
Edilwald, Son to King Oswald, perceiving Cedde to be a wise and virtuous man,
granted him a plat of ground, for the building a Monastery, where he and his
people might pray and hear the word of God: For he believed he should be much
furthered by the prayers of those that served God there. Cedde's brother Kings
confide in the Prayers of religious men.
preached and ministered the Sacraments to him and all his Court. The holy
Bishop chose out a place for a Monastery and desiring by prayer and fasting to
cleanse it, remaind there all the forty days of Lent fasting and praying. All
these days (excepting Sundays) Lents forty days fast.
he fasted until Evening: for he said the custom of them, from whom he learnt
Monastical life, was that in erecting of any new Monastery the place should be
first consecrated The laudable custom of fasting.
to God by fasting and prayer. He ordained in the Monastery of Lesting, the
same Rules and constitutions of Religion, which the Monks of the Holy Island
had. As he Monks, Monasteries, Religious rules,
visited the Monastery in the time of the Plague he dyed Churches in honor of
our Lady.
thereof. A Church being after built in honor of our Lady, his body was taken
up and Altars.
placed on the right side of the Altar. A while after thirty Brethren of the
Monastry of the East Saxons came to the place where he died, desiring either to
live by the body of their Father, or (if it so pleased God to die there) Who
being received, by the Brethren in time of the Plague, were all taken
Intercession of Saints.
out of this life, except one youth who (as it is well known) was saved by the
prayers (...) this holy Father. For afterward we understood that he had not
bin christened, whence it was believed that he was without doubt preserved by
the intercession of the Father, whose Corpse he so piously visited.

Chap. 24.
Relates, How virtuous King Oswin of Northumberland, called Vows made to God.
for the help of God against Penda, who threatened to destroy little and great
in his Kingdom. He tried to appease him by gifts, that not succeeding, he
said, Since this Infidel regards not my Presents, let us offer presents to
our Lord, who will receive them; so he vowed that if he vanquished Nuns,
Monasteries, perpetual Virginity.
him, his daughter should be consecrated to God in perpetual Virginity, and
that twelve Farms with Lands should be converted. to the founding of
Monasteries. Thus God approves this coutse of life.
with a very small Army, he offered him battle, though the Enemy was reported to
have thirty times as many men. The victory being by Gods help miraculously
obtained, Oswin instantly performed his Vow, giving his daughter Elfled, not
yet a year old, to be brought up, and consecrated to perpetual virginity, as
also the twelve Possessions toward the founding of Monasteries; where, instead
of worldly Tillage, Prayers of religious men in what esteem.
Religious Monks by continual devotion might labor to purchase eternal rest
for him and his Country. She entered first the Monastery of Horstherland (now
Hartsey) to be brought up under Hilda Abbess in Religion, and perpetual
Virginity. But afterward she built a Monastery, called Stranshalt, in which
she was first a Scholar, but after a Teacher of Monastical life, until at
the age of threescore, she past to the blessed marriage of her Heavenly Spouse,
being buried in the Church of Daily prayer for the dead.
St. Peter, the Apostle. Eanfled required of Osway (who killed Oswin) in part
of satisfaction to erect a Monastery, called Ingelith, whereof Trumher was
Abbot, to the intent, that there might be daily prayer made for the salvation
both of him that was slain, and him that slew him.

Chap. 25.
About this time arose a great Controversy touching the observation of Easter.
By this variance it happened often, that in one year two Easters were kept, the
King ending his Fast, and solemnizing the Feast The Fast of Lent.
of Easter, the Queen with her company, continuing in fasting kept Palm Sunday,
yet this diversity as long as Aidan lived was by all tolerated, for though in
observing Easter, he followed the custom of those, with whom he was brought up,
yet he believed as all others did, and kept unity with all. Alfred the Kings
son, being instructed by the learned Wilfrid, preferred his judgment before
Bishop Wilfrid instructed at Rome.
all the traditions of the Scots. This Wilfrid for better instruction, had
traveled to Rome, and lived long with Delphinus Archbishop of Lions, under
whom he shaved his crown, according to the custom of the Clergy. Alfred gave
him a Clergy men wear shaven Crowns.
Monastery in a place which is called Humpud, one for learning and virtue
worthy thereof. A Synod is called in the Monastery of Strensalt, for the
deciding of this question. Wilfrid, commanded by the King and Bishop, spoke
thus in answer to the Scots, and to Colman their chief Bishop. The Easter This
Synod was at Whitby in Yorkshire.
by us observed, we have seen so observed at Rome, where the blessed Apostles
Peter and Paul St. Peter and Paul lived, preached, and suffered at Rome.
lived, preached, suffered and are buried. This manner we have seen in all Italy
and France. This we know to be observed, in Afrike, Asia, Egypt and The strong
plea of Tradition.
Greece, and throughout all Nations, and tongues of the world, where the Church
of Christ takes place, except these few, and others of like obstinacy, the
Picts and Britans, with whom these men do fondly contend against the whole
world. God forbid, said Wilfrid that we should charge St. John, For he, in his
observation kept the decrees of Moses law literally, according as the whole
Church followed yet in many things after the Jewish manner. For the Apostles
were not able upon the sudden to blot out all customs, and rites of the law,
instituted by God himself. This they were forced to bear for a time, least the
Jews that lived among the Gentiles might be offended: Upon this consideration,
St. Paul did circumcise Timothy. Now the light of the Gospel shining through
the world, it is not lawful for any Christian to be circumcised. Peter
preaching his Gospel at Rome, remembering that our Lord rose the first day after
the Sabath, understood the observation of Easter in such sort, that he looked
for the rising of the Moon at Evening in the 14th. day of her Age, in the first
month; at the rising whereof at Evening, if the morrow after were Sunday, he
began in that very Evening to observe the Feast of Easter, as all we do to this
day: but if Sunday were not the next morrow after the 14day of the Change of
the Moon, but the 16, 17, or any other until the 21. he tarried for the
Sunday, and that Saturday before he began the holy solemnity of Easter. And it
was by the Nicene Council not newly decreed, but confirmed, that this is the
true observation of Easter, and so of all Christians to be celebrated. As for
your Father and his followers; I do not think it was much prejudicial against
them, as long as they had yet received no instruction to the contrary; but I
rather Error then damnable when the Authority of the Church is rejected.
suppose (seeing they willingly followed such commands as they knew) they would
also have conformed themselves to the Catholic judgment, if they had been so
informed. But you and your companions, if hearing the decrees of the Sea
Apostolic, or rather of the Universal Church, and that also confirmed in holy
Writ, follow not the same, you offend and sin undoubtedly. For though your
Fathers were holy men, could these few prejudice the whole Church of Christ
spread through the World; and if your Father Columban were holy and mighty in
miracles, yet may he not be preferred before the most blessed Prince of the
Apostles, to whom our Lord said, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock By the
Prince of the Apostles Peter still understood Mat. 16. 18.
I will build my Church, and Hell gates shall not prevail against her; And to
thee I will give the Keys of the kingdom of Heaven. The King hearing this,
said, Agree ye both in this, that these words were principally spoken unto
Peter, and that unto him the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven were given? When
both answered yes, the King concluded, saying; I tell you I will not gainsay,
such a Porter as this is, but as far as I know, and am able I will endeavor in
all points to obey his Ordinances, least perhaps when I come to the doors of
Heaven; I find none to open them to me, having his displeasure, who is so
clearly The Roman Tradition preferred.
proved to bear the Keys thereof. Thus they all embraced the more perfect
observance.

Chap. 26.
Colman the Scottish Bishop, seeing his Doctrine disproved, The Clergy wear
shaven Crowns.
departed for Scotland, taking with him, such as refused to accept of the
Catholic observation of Easter, and of the carrying of a round shaven Crown.
Cedda embraced the Catholic Tradition, and Tuda was made Bishop of the
Northern men, wearing after the manner of that Country a shaven Crown, and
observing Easter after the Catholic manner. In holy Island Eata a reverend
Father, once Abbot of Mailrose, was made Abbot over the Monks. Colman departing
Abbo^^, Monasteri^^
took with him some of the bones of Bishop Aidan, part also he left in the
Church, where he was Bishop, laying them up in the Vestry.

The same Chapter, further Relates of the Monks of this Monastery, how greatly
they abstained from all pleasure; if they took any money of rich men, they
presently gave it to the poor, and the eminent and wealthy never came but to
pray and hear the Word of God: and those that came contented themselves with
the religious men's simple fare, looking for nothing above the ordinary. The
Rulers of the Church sought not to pamper The distinct Habit of R^ligious and
Clergy men.
the body, but to save the soul; whence it came to pass, that even the Habit
of Religious men was had in great Veneration: so that when any of the Clergy or
Religious came forth, he was joyfully received of all, as the Servant of God.
And if any were going a journey, the people ran to them, and with great
reverence, desired to have their blessing either by hand or mouth. And when
they made any Exhortation, as they past by, every man gladly hearkened unto
them. Upon Sundaies I'heir blessings craved, given by hand, that is by the sign
of the Cross.
ordinarily the people went to Church or Cloisters, not to eat and drink, but
to hear the Word of God, and if any Priest came abroad into the Villages, the
Inhabitants would flock about him, desiring of him some lesson or instruction.
The Clergy in those days seldom went abroad, but to Preach, to Christen, to
visit the sick, or for the cure of Souls: Neither would they in those days
take territories or possessiosn toward building of Monasteries, but through
earnest suit, and almost forced thereto.

Note here, upon the departure of Colman, that the Scots converted by
Palladius, An. 422. as was said, B. 1. C. 13. did not disagree in Faith from
those sent by St. Gregory, and later Popes into England in any one of those
points, in which the Protestants now differ from the Roman Faith. They
disagreed not about the Mass, about Prayer for the dead, Prayer to Saints,
about the real Presence, or any such point. All the disagreement was about the
time of keeping Easter, and the manner of Tonsure. Whence it is evident that
Rome, in the points now in Controversy, taught the very same this year 664
which it had taught the Scots by Palladius, An. 423. And what it taught then,
it taught the Britans, An. 156. as I noted above B. 2. C. 2. see that place:
see also the Preface. Number 1.

Chap. 27.
Relates, how diverse English young men undertook a stricter course of Religious
observance in Ireland, and how Egbert lying sick, vowed never Works of
Superogation vowed.
to return home to his Country, but to live as a Pilgrim all his life. Besides
the ordinary Canonical Hours.
service of Canonical hours, he vowed to say every day the whole Psalter, and
fast once every week one whole day. His request upon his Vow was heard, as by
revelation Edelthun his companion told him; for recovering of his sickness,
Vows of Austerity, approved from heaven.
he was made Priest, and lived worthy of that Vocation. Besides his Vows
mentioned, he made and kept others, as that of Fasting the whole Lent: never
eating but once a day, Lent.
and then nothing but bread and thin milk, and that sparingly. This kind of
Fast, he kept forty days together before The antiquity of the holy Feast of
Christmas.
Christmas, and as long after Whitsontide all his life.

Chap. 28.
Relates, Wilfrids being consecrated Bishop, how returning into England, he
instructed much the Church of England, and reduced it to Catholic unity,
touching external rites, and observances: whereby it came to pass, that
Catholic Ordinances taking place, and being daily more and more embraced; the
Scots either yielded or returned whence they came. Ceadda also is made Bishop
of the West Saxons, renowned for Chastity, Humility and abstinence.

Chap. 29.
The most renowned Kings of England, Oswin of Northumberland, and Ecbert of
Kent, deliberated about the peacable government of the Church. For Oswin though
bred among The Church of Rome, the Catholic and Apostolic Church.
the Scots, now understood that the Church of Rome was the Catholic and
Apostolical Church. They both by choice and consent of the Clergy sent
Wigheard a Priest of great virtue to Rome, to be consecrated Still recourse
unto Rome, concerning (...) Prima^^.
Archbishop, to the end he might consecrate other Bishops, for the Catholic
Church of the English thorowout Britany. But before his Consecration, he
departed this life, which gave occasion of Pope Vitalians letter to Oswi, as
follows.

To our most Honorable Son, The Pope Father even to Kings.
Oswi, King.
We perceive your Excellencies pious devotion, hoping assuredly, that, as you
now reign over your people, so in the life to come, you shall reign with
Christ, etc. It behooves you, being Peter twice here understood by the Prin^^
of the Apostles.
now a part of Christ, to follow in all things the rule of the Prince of the
Apostles, as well in observing Easter, as in all other things delivered by the
Apostles Peter and Paul. As touching one endowed with learning and other
qualities, fit to be your Bishop, we cannot so suddenly have one ready, as soon
as we shall find one worthy of that vocation we shall direct him to you. The
presents your Higness sent to the blessed Prince of the Apostles, for his
perpetual memory, we have received; beseeching with all our Clergy, the
goodness of God for (...) Kings.
you. We have sent you the favors, that is the Relics of the blessed
Apostles Peter and Paul, and of the holy Martyrs, Laurence, Crosses, Relics.
John and Paul, of Gregory and Pancratius, all to be delivered to your
Excellency. To your Lady our spiritual daughter, An Indulgence granted
thereunto as to Medals say our Divines.
we have sent a Cross, having in it a golden Key, made out of the holy Chains
of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul.


Chap. 30.
Relates, How the East Saxons, in time of the Plague, fell to worship Idols,
but were soon reclaimed,

The Fourth Book.
Chap. 1.
RElates, how upon Wighards death before mentioned, the Pope enquired whom he
might send for Archbishop to the Church of England: In the Monastery of
Niridan, not far from Naples there was an Abbot called Adrian, Abbot^
well learned in the Scriptures, thoroughly instructed in Monastical government,
and very skillful in the Greek and Latin tongue. This man was commanded by the
Pope, to take upon him the Bishopric; but he answered, that he was not fit for
so high a Degree, yet promising to produce one worthy of that Vocation; he
offered to the Pope a certain Monk, called Andrew belonging to a Nunnery, but
he being sickly could not perform it. There was at Monks, Nuns.
that time in Rome a Monk named Theodore, very learned; him Adrian presented to
the Pope, to be consecrated Bishop by him; yet Adrian was to accompany him into
England, to have a diligent eye, that Theodore being a Grecian, introduced not
after the manner of the Greeks, any doctrine contrary to the Faith received.
The Pope still invests our Primates.
This man being made Subdeacon, staid a while in Rome, till his hair was grown,
to take the round Ecclesiastical tonsure, which before he had taken, Shaving of
Clergy men.
according to the East Church, after the manner of St. Paul. The King sends
Ridfrid his Lieutenant into France to conduct Shaving of Clergy men.
him. At his arrival Theodore gave Adrian the Monastery of St. Peter the
Apostle where he was Abbot thirty nine years.

Chap. 2.
Relates, How Theodore accompained by Adrian, visited all the Country; and how
all men did most gladly receive and hear him. He taught the right way of good
life, with the canonical rites and orders of Easter; for he was the first
Archbishop unto whom all the whole Church of the English did consent unto; from
their entrance into Britany, never was known happier times.

Chap. 3.
Relates, How the most blessed Bishop Chad, who of a Monk of Lesting, was made
Bishop, was used to go preach Our Bishops Monks and of great sanctity.
the gospel more on foot than on horseback. He governed after the example of
the ancient Fathers in great perfection of life. King Wulpher gave him land to
build the Monastery of Etbere, where until this day the steps of Monastical
life, which he began, still remain. The Cathedral at Lei^chfield now dedicated
to St. Chad.
His chief residence was at Lichfield, where he died, and was buried; and where
his fear continues to this day. He made himself a private Mansion, whether as
often as he was at leisure from the Ministry of the Gospel, he was wont to
repair to pray and read with seven or eight of the brethren. It happened, when
his hour was come to pass out of this world, he was in the said Closet with
one brother only, whose name was Owen; all the rest being returned to Church,
as the hour required: This Owen was a Monk of great perfection, Good works
done out of hope of reward done with pure intention.
and had forsaken the world, with a pure intention and hope of reward in
heaven, a man worthy to whom God should reveal his secrets; and of credit in
what he says: For being Governor of Queen Edildreds Court, he despoiled
himself of all, and came clothed A prophetical vision.
in poor apparel to the Monastery of the said Father. One day, as he was
employed abroad, the rest being gone to Church, the Bishop being alone in the
Oratory of the House, Owen heard suddenly (as he after told) a most sweet
consort of voices singing and rejoicing, coming down from heaven to earth,
drawing nearer until it came to the roof of the Oratory where the Bishop was,
where entering it filled it, and compast it round about. An hour after, he
heard the same joyful song ascend from the same Oratory to heaven. He being
astonished, the Bishop opened the Oratory window, beckening with his hand,
whereupon Owen came to him; to whom the Bishop said, Go quickly to the Church,
and call those seven br^thren hither. Being come, he admonisht them to keep
among themselves, and toward all Charity, to follow the rule^ and orders of
Monastical discipline, which they had either learnt of him, or of their
forefathers. Then he told them that his departure was nigh, For the most lovely
guest (quoth he) that was wont to visit our brethren (many had died Good works
a preparation to death.
of the Plague out of the Monastery) has vouchsafed this day to come to me,
and call me out of this world. Go ye to Church again, and speak to the
brethren, That with their Prayers, they both commend unto our Lord my
departure, and remember with watching, prayers, and The blessing of men.
good works to prepare also for their own. When the Brethren had taken his
blessing and were gone; Owen casting himself on the ground, said, I pray you
good Father what song was that I heard of that I heard of that joyful company
descending from heaven upon this Oratory, and again returning. He answered if
you heard the singing, and understood the coming of the heavenly Companies; I
charge you to tell no man thereof before my death. They were indeed Angels who
came to call me to the heavenly rewards, which I always loved and longed for,
and after seven days, they promised they would return and take me with them.
The seventh day (as it was promised) after he had received the body and blood
of our Lord, his holy Soul was carried (as we may well believe) by Angels to
everlasting joy. Among his manifold merits, he was renowned for Chastity,
Abstinence, Preaching, Prayer, voluntary Poverty. Agreeable to this Revelation
is that which I now add. Ecbert a Monk in Ireland, whom Higball Abbot went to
see, said, He knew one yet alive, who when Chad past out of this world beheld a
company of Angels descend, and carry up his soul with them. St. Chad was buried
first near St. Mary's Church, but afterward St. Peter still ^alled Prince of
the Apostles
his bones were removed to the Church of the most blessed St. Peter Prince of
the Apostles, in both which places, in token of his virtue, frequent miracles
in healing of Translation of Relics.
the sick are wont to be wrought. One yt had a Frenzy, lying by his tomb all
night, the next morning came out Miracles by them.
well, and in his perfect senses, declaring to the great joy of all, that there
he had by Gods goodness got his health. The place is covered over with a
wooden tomb like a house, having a little hole on the side, wherein they that
come thither for devotion, are wont to put in their hand, and take of the dust,
which putting into water, they give to sick beasts, or men to drink; whereby
they forthwith become whole.

Chap. 4.
Relates, How the Bishop Colman leaving England, took with him some thirty
English Monks, and afterward founded a Monastery for them in Monks*
Ireland, after the example of the Venerable Fathers, living under rule, and
under a regular Abbot in great continency, getting their living with the labor
of their hands.

Chap. 5.
The year 670. 2. King Oswi of Northumberland died, he bore such affection to
the Sea Apostolic of Rome, that, had he lived, he purposed to have Pilgrimages
to Rome.
gone thither for to end his life in those holy places, having for that purpose
entreated Bishop Wilfrid to be his guide. This Chapter further relates, how
Theodore called a Synod of Bishops at Hertford.

The result of this Synod was, that they maintained the Ancient Canons of the
Church: Theodore at the beginning thereof, said; I The Sea Apostolic appoints
out Primats
Theodore, though unworthy, appointed by the sea Apostolic Archbishop of
Canterbury, etc.

Chap. 6.
Theodore the Archbishop being offended with Winfrid Bishop of the Mercians,
for a crime of disobedience, deposed him, appointing in his place Sexwolph, who
was founder Our Bishops still Monks.
and Abbot of the Monastery of Medshamsted, now called Peterborough: Winfrid
returning to his Monastery, Artbear, there piously ended his life: Theodore
also appointed Erconwald Bishop of London, whose life and conversation was
counted most holy, as to this Erconwald was first Abb^^ of Chertsey in Surrey.
day his heavenly virtues and miracles do well declare: for his Horse-litter
wherein he was wont to be carried, when he was sick, being yet kept by his
disciples, does daily cure such as have Agues, or are otherwise diseased. The
very Miracles.
chips also, that are cut off from it, and brought to the sick, are wont to
give them speedy remedy. He built two goodly Relics.
Monasteries for himself and his Sister Edilburge, furnishing them with good
Rules: that for his Sister at Berring (in Nuns.
Essex) where she was Mother of the Nuns; behaving her self in all virtuous
conversation, as was showed by Miracles They do Miracles.
from Heaven.

Chap. 7.
In this Monastery many wonderful signs and Miracles were showed, which for
the benefit of posterity are written by many who knew them: when the Plague
raging through the Island came to this Monastery, and had entered upon that part
where the men lived, so that daily one or other was taken out of the Their
habitation seemed from men.
world; This good Mother being careful of her company (at such a time as the
visitation of God, touched that part of the Monastery, in the which the
Handmaids of God dwelt by themselves apart from the men) asked the Sisters In
what place of the Monastery they would have their bodies buried when God should
visit them? When she could get no certain answer from them; she and all the
rest received a most certain one and from God. For one night as these Handmaids
of Christ went forth of the Chapel after Mattins, to the graves of the
Brethren that were dead, singing accustomed prayers to our Lord; behold
suddenly a light sent down from Heaven in manner of a Sheet came over them,
which struck them with such fear, that they ceast from singing; which
brightness (whereunto the midday seemed night) being again lifted up went to
the south part of the Monastery, and there staying awhile, withdrew to heaven;
so that none of them doubted, but that the very light which should receive
their souls into heaven, did also show a place for their bodies to rest in.

Chap. 8.
There was a child about three years old, brought up in this House of Virgins,
dedicated to God, to be employed in Meditation among them. This Child being
stricken with the plague, coming to the Virgins consecrared to Christ.
pangs of death, spoke to one of those consecrated Virgins of Christ, calling
her by her name Fadgit. This Virgin being suddenly taken with the sickness
departed this life, following the voice that called her. Another of the
Handmaids of God, taken with the same disease, and brought to the last, told
them that a certain holy man appeared to her, A prophetical Vision.
who died the same year, bringing her word, that when the morning drew near,
she should depart to everlasting light. The Truth was proved by the death of
the Maid.

Chap. 9.
When Ediburge the pious Mother of this devout congregation was to depart this
world, a wonderful vision was seen by one of the Sisters, whose name was
Thorithgid, who had lived long in that Monastery, and was always diligently
employed in serving of God in great humility; she had been tried in sickness by
the sweet hand of God, for the space of nine years, to the end that the spot of
sin by ignorance By patience we satisfy for our sins.
or negligence contracted might be purged by the fire of tribulation. This
woman toward break of day saw plainly as it were a Corpse brighter than the
Sun, carried up in a winding sheet from the Dormitory, where the Sister lay,
and diligently observing what it was, that drew up the Good works, the golden
cords which life usup to heaven.
glorious body, she saw, as it were, certain cords, brighter than gold, which
drew it so high, till it vanished away. By this she understood that some of them
should shortly die, whose soul should be lifted up to heaven by good works, as
by golden cords, which happened so; for not long after, the Mother of the Covent
was delivered out of the prison of Holy Nuns.
this flesh, whose life was such, that no man can doubt, but that the entrance
to heaven lay open to her. There was in the Monastery a holy Nun, noble by
birth, noble for the love she had of the world to come, who for many years was
so bereft of all use of her limbs that she was wholly unable to move her self.
This Nun when she knew that the body of the reverend Abbess was brought to the
Church to be buried, desired she might be carried thither, and laid down in the
posture of one praying. Which We pray to Saints as to these who hear us.
done, she spoke to the Abbess, as if she had been alive, desiring her to
obtain (of God) that she might be loosed from her torments: The Petition was
soon granted, for twelve days after, she received everlasting reward, in lieu
of those temporal afflictions. Thorithgid the handmaid of Christ, lived three
years after the Abbess, worn out with sickness. The time of her departing
being come, she was speechless three days and nights; but having her speech
restored in Visions
a Vision, and being demanded of them, that were about her, to whom she spoke;
To my most dear Mother Edilburge (quoth she.) By these words, they understood
that the holy Abbess came to bring her word, that the time of her departure
was at hand, for soon after she died.

Chap. 10.
Hildehid a devoute handmaid of God succeeded Abbess, who many years governed
the Monastery very carefully Abbesses.
in regular discipline and order. She caused the bones of Edilburge, the holy
servant of Christ to be taken up and removed to the Church of the blessed
Mother of God, in which place, how often the brightness of heavenly light
Miracles.
appeared, how often fragrant odours of mervelous sweetness were felt, with
other Miracles appears in that book; whence we have taken these things. By no
means, I think fit to over-passe one miracle which happened there. An Earls wife
had a darkness suddenly came over her eyes, which in the end made her stark
blind: Nuns.
It came into her mind, that if she were but brought to the Monastery of the
Virgin-Nuns, and there prayed at the Relics of the Saints, she Efficacy of
prayers to Saints at their Relics.
might be cured. Being led by her maid to the Monastery, as she prayed there,
her Petition was heard. For rising from her prayers, she received her sight, so
that it seemed she had lost the light of this world, only to this end; that she
might show by her recovery what, and how great the light is, that Christ's
Saints have in Heaven, and what their power and virtue is.

Chap. 11.
At that time Sebby a most devout and holy man, reigned over the East Saxons:
He was Monastical life preferred before Kingdoms.
much addicted to the exercise of Religion and Virtue, to Prayer and Charity,
esteeming a solitary and Monastical life above the riches and honor of a
Kingdom: Which life he would long before (leaving his Kingdom) have embraced,
but that his wife would not consent. After thirty years being molested with a
very great infirmity; he counseled his wife that now at least they should
betake themselves Religious habit different from Sceular.
to God: which she assenting to. He by the Bishop of London Waldhers hand and
blessing received the Habit of Religion. He bestowed much money on the poor,
reserving nothing for himself; choosing This King became a Monk in the Monastery
of St. Peter and St Paul in London.
rather to remain poor in spirit for the Kingdom of Heaven. When he perceived
death at hand, he sent for the Bishop, desiring that at his passing out of this
world, he and two of his Chaplines only should be present. Then falling
asleep, he was comforted by a Vision, which showing him his end, took from him
all fear. He saw (as is reported) three men A prophetike Vision.
coming to him clad in bright garments, and one of them sitting by his
bedside, told him his soul, in great light and salvation, should depart
without pain; and that he should die the third day after. All which came to
pass. It Is further related, how the body being longer than the stone Coffin by a
hand-breadth, the said A Miracle very public.
Coffin by a miracle (wrought in the presence of a multitude of people) was so
enlarged, that at the head they could put a pillow, and at the feet was space
longer by four fingers breadth than the Corpse.

Chap. 12.
Ceadwal, having been King Our Kings turn Pilgrims.
of the West Saxons two years, for the love of Heaven, left his Kingdom; and
went to Rome, where he ended his days. Two Bishops are appointed in Wilfrids
place over Northumberland, both taken out of the Our Bishops Monks.
Cloisters of Monks.

Chap. 13.
Wilfrid the Bishop forced to leave his Diocese, through the displeasure of the
King; yet could not be kept from preaching the Gospel; for he ministered to the
South Saxons the Faith and Baptism. King Edilwach was Christened not Godfathers.
long before, King Wulpher being his Godfather at the Font. He Christened also
the principal Lords of the Country, the Queen with the rest soon after
following. The whole Province had never before heard of God, nor of the Faith:
yet was there in the Country one Dicull a Monk, who lived in the Monastery of
Bosanhun, with five or six brethren, serving Monks
God in an humble and pure life; but the people would not follow them nor hear
them. In the end Wilfrid by preaching the Gospel to them, not only delivered
them from eternal damnation, but also from temporal death: For in three years
before his Our Faith confirmed from heaven.
coming, it had not reigned one drop in all those quarters, whereby a very sore
famine ensued, which pitifully wasted them. But on the very self same day that
the people received their Baptism, and Faith, there fell a most plentiful
shower, wherewith the Earth flourisht again, and brought in a most fruitful
year. The King gave Wilfrid and his companions a place called Scoleycen. There
he founded an Abbey, which he Monks.
bound to monastical discipline, placing Monks there whose successors hold it
to this day.

Chap. 14.
At the same time in this Monastery, were showed diverse gifts of Heavenly
grace. When first this Province received the name of Christ a sore Plague
reigned in many places of England, which coming in to this Monastery, (which
the virtuous Priest Eappa governed,) where many daily dyed, it seemed good to
the Brethren, to appoint a fast of three days, humbly to implore Gods mercy.
There was in the house at that time a little Boy, lately converted; who was
taken with the sickness: When the second day of Fasting and Prayer was come, it
happened that in the morning, there appeared unto him, the two most blessed and
chief Apostles, A prophetical Vision.
St. Peter and Paul; (for the boy was innocent, and endowed with the Sacrament
of Faith:) The Apostles saluted him, saying, Son fear not death, for we will
this day bring thee to Heaven: but thou shall stay till the Masses be said, and
after thou Masses.
have received the Viaticum or journey-earnest, of the body and blood of our
Lord, thou shall be conveyed to everlasting joys: Call Eappa the Priest, and
tell him thus; Our Lord has heard your prayers, and looked mercifully upon
your fasting, there shall not one more dye of the plague in this Monastery; and
they that are sick shall recover. But thou alone (said they) shall be set free,
and go unto the Lord, whom thou haft served. Tell them it has pleased God to
do thus for them, through the intercession of the dear servant of God King
Oswald: For on this day Intercession of Saints approved from heaven.
was he Martyred by the Infidels, and taken up to Heaven. Let them look their
Book, wherein are registered the departed, and they shall find it so: Let them
therefore say Masses through all the Oratories of the Monastery, giving thanks,
as well that their prayer is heard, as also in the memory Masses commanded by
the Apostles.
of the said King, who formerly was their King, and therefore earnestly prayed
for them, as for those of his Nation. And when all the brethren are come
together to Church, let them be partakers of the heavenly sacrifice
Intercession of Saints avouched by the Apostles.
and so end their fast. All this being related by the boy, the Priest enquired
after what manner they appeared: He answered, They were comely and resplendent
in habit, and countenance above any he had ever seen, St. Peter's
Ecclesiastical Tonsure.
the one with the celestial Tonsure, the other with a long Beard, and they
said, they were Peter and Paul, servants of Christ, sent for the defense of the
Monastery. The Priest believing the words by the Boy, seeking in the Records,
found that Oswald was slain that day: calling therefore together the brethren,
he commanded Masses to be said, and that all should communicate after the
accustomed manner, and also caused a particle of the same sacrifice of the
Lords Oblation Sacrifice. Communion under one kind.
to be brought to the sick Boy, which done, he died the same day; confirming by
his death the truth of the Apostles words; for no more but he dyed out of the
Monastery. By this Vision many were stirred up to pray, and call for mercy in
adversity, as also to use the wholesome help and medicine of fasting. And from
that time, as well in the Monasteries, as in very many other places, the
Birthday of the said King, began yearly to be Masses Yearly Feasts of Martyrs.
kept holy with celebration of Masses.

The 15. Chapter nothing but Civil Affairs.

Chap. 16.
Relates, How King Cedwall, The Isle of Wight last converted.
though not yet Christened, bound himself by Vow, that if he took the Isle of
Wight, he would give unto God the fourth part thereof, which he performed. He
gave it Wilfrid Wilfrid their Apostle.
for the service of our Lord. Thus this Island after all the Provinces of
Britany was converted.

Chap. 17.
At this time, Theodore, the Archbishop, hearing that the Faith was much
opposed at Constantinople, by the Heresy of Eutichus, and desiring that the
English Church, which he governed might continue free from any such spot;
gathered an Assembly of many Reverend Priests and Doctors, where he found an
uniform consent of them in the Catholic Faith. Theodore, By the grace of God,
Archbishop of the Isle of Britany, and with him sitting the other Bishops at
Hetfield, etc. After debate and conference, We have set forth the The faith of
all the Bishops and Doctors of England.
true Catholic Faith in such sort as our Lord delivered it, etc. We have
received the five holy and The Ancient English blessed Church received more
than the first four Counsels.
general Synods of the blessed and beloved Fathers of God, viz. of 318.
assembled at Nice against the wicked Arius and his opinions: and of 150. at
Constantinople against the fond Sect of Macedonins, and that at Ephesus the
first time of 200. against wicked Nestorius, and that of Calcedon of a 130.
against Eutichus; and at Constantinople the second time, where was assembled
the fifth Council against Theodore and others. Also we receive the Synod held
at Rome, in the time of the most holy Pope Martin: We worship and glorify our
Lord as those men have done, neither adding nor diminishing; and we
excommunicate with heart and mouth, those whom they excommunicate; and whom
they have received, we receive.

Chap. 18.
At this Synod was present, Abbots and Monks.
and confirmed the Catholic Faith, a Reverend man, named John, the chief
Chantour of St. Peter's, and Abbot of the Monastery of St. Martins, who was come
from Rome, by command of Pope Agatho, having for his guide the Reverend Abbot
By prince of the Apostles still St. Peter understood.
Benedict. For having built a Monastery in England, in honor of the Prince of
the Apostles, he came to Rome (as often before) with Ceolfrid his companion in
the same work (after Abbot) and was received most honorably by the Pope, of
whom he obtained Letters of Privileges of Popes admitted in England.
Privilege by Apostolic Authority, as he knew King Egfrids will was by whose
liberal Abbi^s.
gift he had erected it. He brought this John with him into England, to teach
the Abbeyes the yearly course and order of singing, as it was taught at St.
Peter's in Rome, which he did, teaching the Chantours How ancient our Church
Music is above that of the Protestants
and Choristers of the Abbey, the order and form of singing and reading;
committing to writing thosethings which appertained to the celebration of the
Celebration of Feasts according to the practice of Rome.
high Feasts and Holy Days through the year: which have been hither kept in
the same Abbey, and are now in all places copied out. They came to hear him
from all the Monasteries of the Province, and many invited him to come unto
them: He had in charge from the Apostolic Pope, diligently to observe what
Faith the Church of England professed, and bring him word thereof to Rome: So the
Copy of the foresaid Synod was given to him to carry to Rome, wherein the
Catholic Faith was found sound and incorrupt; but in his return he died: His
body for the love he bore to St. Martine (whose Monastery he governed) was
honorably buried at Towers. Nevertheless, the Copy of the Catholic Faith was
brought to Rome, and joyfully received by the Sea Apostolic.

Chap. 19.
King Egfrid took to wife Ediltrude daughter of the King of the East Saxons;
yet she remained twelve years a Virgin, as Bishop Wilfrid a man of holy memory
did inform me, enquiring purposely thereof, because some doubted it* And that
such things may be done in our time, as formerly, (as Histories P^rpetuall
Virginity in Wedlock.
witness) we may not question. This also was a sign of the divine Wonder, that
the body of the same Virgin, being buried, remained incorrupt, which shows she
ever lived This approved by Miracles.
untoucht. And it is well known, she long besought the King, that she might
forsake the cares of the world, and go into a Monastery to serve Nuns.
Christ: Which having obtained, she chose the Monastery of Abbess Ebba; Bishop
Wilfrid, giving her the Veil and Nuns Habit.
clothing of a Nun. A year after, she was made Abbess in the Isle of Ely;
where was built a Monastery of Virgins dedicated to God, to whom she proved a
good mother, living a Virgin in example and heavenly life. It Is said, that Their
Holy life.
from the time she entered, she never wore linen, but woollen only; very
seldom, but on high feasts, or for necessity, did she eat more than once a
day. From the time of her first settling to prayer until day light, she
continued in the Church. They say, she prophesied, she should die of the
plague, and declared the number that should die out of the Monastery. Sexburge
her sister succeeded Abbess, who placed her Sisters bones in the Church, the
Grave being opened, and the body of the holy Virgin and spouse of Christ, taken
up, it was found as free from corruption (though buried sixteen years) as if
she had died Approved by Mirades.
the same day, as Bishop Wilfrid and others witness; and the clothes wherein
her body was wrapped, appeared whole, and so new, that they seemed but then to be
put on: It is further related, How being molested in her life time, with a
swelling and pain of her cheek and neck; she rejoiced and was wont to say; I
know I deservedly undergo this pain, for when I was a girl, I wore the
superfluous burden of precious Pearls and necklaces, and I believe God does
therefore send this pain in my ne^k, that he may so absolve me from the guilt
of vaenity, whilst in lein of Gold and precious stones the fiery heat annoieth
me. It happened also that by the touching of the said clothes wherein the Corpse
lay Miracles by Relikes.
Spirits were expelled out of possessed bodies and diseases healed. And it is said
that the Tomb in which she was first laid, cured those that had sore We
commonly call ihis Virgin St. Audry.
eyes, who making their prayyer, and applying their head to the Coffin,
forthwith were freed. The body of the Virgin is kept to this day, and had in
great veneration: The Tomb ready made, was not without miracle found fit for
the Virgins body

Chap. 20.
I add (says Bid) a Hymn of this Queen and Spouse of Nuns Spouses of Christ
and therefore Queens.
Christ, and therefore truly Queen because Christ's Spouse. then follows the
Hymn.

Chap. 21.
Nothing but a battle, in which King Elbuine was slain; peace ensued.

Chap. 22.
In the foresaid battle, a thing famous and well known to many happened, which
we may not omit, both for the profit of the Reader and glory of God. Among the
soldiers A story profitable to the Reader and glorious to God.
that were slain, a young man called Imma was left for dead, who at last
reviving and binding up his wounds, was taken, and brought before the
Commander, he fearing to confess he was a soldier, said he was a Farmer of
the Country, and had brought victuals to the Camp. The Commander (for all
that) at night, commanded he should be kept in Irons; yet none would hold him:
for as soon as they were gone that bound him, his Fetters fell off. For he had
a Brother, whose name was Tunna a Priest, and Abbot of a Monastery in the City,
called this day Tunnacester, who hearing his Brother was slain, came to seek
his body, where finding one like him, he brought him Mass proved by Miracle to
be propitiatory for the living and dead Ano. 679.
to the Abbey and buried him; and after caused Masses to be said, to obtain
Absolution for his soul; by the saying of which Masses it came to pass, that
nothing could bind him, but that he was instantly loosed. The Earl that kept
him wondered thereat, and inquired of him the cause I have (quoth he) a brother
that is a Priest, I know he thinks that I am slain, and therefore does often
say Mass for me. And if I now were in another world, my soul should be loosed
from pains, through his Intercession and Prayers, as my body is hear from
fetters. Being recovered, the Earl sent him to London, and sold him to a
Merchant of Frizeland, but neither he, nor any else could bind him by any
means. The Merchant seeing this, took a ransom for him: For about the third
hour in the morning, when Masses began to be said, very often were his Fetters
loosed. Imma returning to his Country, declared to his brother all that
happened, and he knew by what his brother told him, that his bonds were loosed at
those times chiefly, in which Masses were said for him. He understood also,
that the other great helps that befell him, came from Heaven, through his
Brothers Intercession and offering of the saving Host and Sacrifice. Many that
heard this, were devoutly inflamed in faith, imployjng themselves in Prayer,
Alms and Charitable deeds, offering to our Lord Hosts of Sacred Oblations, and
Sacrifices for the delivery of their friends, that were departed this world.
For they understood thereby, Note how sure this story is.
and knew that the saving sacrifice was effectual to the everlasting
Redemption of body and soul. This story was told me by them that heard it from
the man on whom it was done: and therefore knowing it to be undoubtedly true, I
insert it here.

Chap. 23.
The year following, the devout and Religious servant Holy Nuns.
of Christ Hilda Abbess of Streanshal, after many heavenly deeds, past out of
this world to the rewards of heaven: Religious life the more ready way to
heaven.
Three and thirty years she lived in a secular life, and as many did she
dedicate more nobly to our Lord in Monastical life, she was Daughter to the
Nephew of King Edwin. Yet she quitted her secular habit, desiring to go into
France, and there in a Monastery, to lead a Pilgrims life, that so more easily
she might enjoy an everlasting Country* There lived in that Monastery at the
same time Herewid her sister, Mother to Aldulf, King of the East-English; under
the rule and discipline of Religion, and after the example of her sister she
lived as a stranger out of her own Country: A year after Hilda being called
home by Aidan the Bishop, had a Lordship given her, where she lived a
Monastical life with her company. Then was she made Abbess of a Monastery,
called He^rthew which was built by the devout Handmaid of Christ Heiu who is
said to have been the first in Northumberland, that took upon her the state and
habit of a Nun, being consecrated by Aidan. This handmaid of Christ goveining
this Monastery, ordered the (...) excellently in regular life and discipline:
Having ruled, there for some years in great observance and strictness of
Regular life, she took upon her the building of Streanshal, which she furnished
with the same Rules and Orders. She admirably taught Monasteries.
the works of Righteousness, Devotion, and Chastity, after the example of the
Primitive Church. There was none rich none poor, all was in common, nothing
peculiar, or singular, in any one; she made the Religious men that lived under
her, bestow their time in reading of holy Scripture, and practice of virtue,
that thence might be found men worthy Altars. Our Bishops Monks of singular
sanctity.
to serve the Altar, whereof five were Bishops of eminent sanctity. One of them
called Ostfor, when he had in both Monasteries diligently followed the reading
of Scripture, desirous of further perfection came into Kent, to Archbishop
Pilgrimage to Rome a thing of great virtue An 680.
Theodore: he went also to Rome, which at that time was counted a thing of
great virtue: As for Hilda, after seven years extraordinary patience in
sickness, she died. Her death was revealed by a manifest vision in another
Monastery. There was a certain Nun called Nuns graced With heavenly visions.
^egu, who had served our Lord in Monastical conversation and virginity thirty
years and more. This Nun taking her rest in the dormitary, heard suddenly the
bell ring, which was wont to call them up to prayers, when any of them departed
this world; and opening her eyes she saw the roof, and all above full of
lights, and the soul of the said handmaid of God in that light carried into
heaven, accompanied by Angels. Hereupon she rose and went to the Virgin that
was governesse of the Monastery and told her that the Mother of them all, Hilda
was departed, and with a great company of Angels ascended to Heaven; then she
made the Sisters rise and go to Church, willing then to say prayers and Psalms
for the soul of their Mother. At break of day came the Brethren to bring word
of her departure, but they showed they knew it before. It is reported that in
the same Monastery where the Handmaid of Christ died, one of these vowed
Virgins had her departing showed her in a vision, beholding her Years of
noviship or probation of Religious.
sonl going with the Angels to heaven, whilst she was at that time with other
handmaids of Christ in the remote places of the Monastery, were such as were
newly come to Religion were wont to be tried in a place a part the time of
their probation, till instructed in the rule and order, they were admitted to
the fellowship of the rest.

Chap. 24.
Contains the virtues of one Holy Monks.
Cednom, and relates how he became a Monk, and how the night before he died, he
desired him who served the sick, to Reservation of the Sacrament
prepare him a lodging in that place where those, who lay a dying, used to be
lodged, (commonly called the infirmary) who wondering thereat he not seeming
near death, did notwithstanding what he desired. About midnight he enquired,
Communion under one kind.

The Custom of singing Mattins and Lauds in the night.

The sign of the Cross.


whether they had the Eucharist within? And receiveing it, he asked, How nigh
the hour was that the brethren should rise to perform their nightly Lauds?
they answered not far off. Then quoth he, let us expect. that hour, being come,
signing himself with the sign of the holy Cross sleeping a while he dyed,
becoming a Prophet of his own death.

Chap. 25.
Relates, How the Monastery of Virgins in Colloden (now called Coldingham in
the marches Strange Austerity of the ancient Monks.
of Scotland) was burnt, How also in the same Monastery, one named Adaman led a
very devout life in chastity, abstinence, and prayer, so that he did neither
eat nor drink except on Sunday and Thursday, and often times past over whole
nights in Watching and prayer. Having in his youth committed a Confession.
Absolution for a time deferred.
grievous sin, it often occurring to him, he resorted unto a Priest, confessed
his sin unto him, and desired his counsel, how to escape the wrath of God. The
Priest when he heard his offense, said, A great wound requires a greater cure,
give thy Satisfaction.
self to Fasting and Prayer, to the end thou may find God merciful to thee.
But he out of excessive grief, desiring forth with to be absolved from his
sins, said, I am young and strong, therefore whatsoever you impose, I will
perform to be saved, although it be to pass the whole night in Prayer, and the
whole week in abstinence. It Is too much said the Priest; it suffices you to
fast two or three days at once; do this a while then returning unto me, I will
declare unto thee, how thou may persist in doing Penance. Some unexpected
cause calling this Priest into Ireland, he departed this life. But Adaman ever
after kept this manner of fasting. The latter part of this Chapter, recounts
the vision of one who appearing Sins redeemed by good works.
to Adaman, said, Thou and many others have need to redeem your sins by good
works: foretelling him the ruin was to befall that Monastery for neglect of
due observance which after happened. This Giles a most Reverend Priest told me,
who How assured all this is.
then lived in that Monastery.

Chap. 26.
Relates, chiefly the Revolution of civil affairs, and some few other passages
little to our purpose.

Chap. 27.
Relates, How Cuthbert, a Holy man being consecrated Bishop of Lindis-ferne,
lived a solitary life many years in great continency, and how first Solitary
life. Our chief holy Bishops Monks.
in the Monastery of Mailrose he was an humble scholar to Boisel a man of
great virtue and of a Prophetic Spirit. He learned of him the Scriptures and
example of good works His Master dying Cuthbert was made Head of the
Monastery, and brought many to a regular life. He often went out into the
villages to preach the They shine with the gift of prophesy.
way of truth to them that went astray. For it was the custom of England at
that time, that when any Clergyman or Priest came forth, they all flock about
him to hear the Word, diligently hearkening, and more willingly following in
works what they heard. None hid the secrets of his heart from him, but all
plainly declared in Confession what they had done, because they imagined, these
things were not concealed from him and as Confession, Satisfaction.
he commanded, so did they blot out their sins Confessed with worthy fruits of
Penance. He was removed from the Monastery of Mailrose (after he had many
years excelled there in great signs of virtue) to Lindisfern, to teach the
Brethren the observance of regular discipline. Aidan first Bishop of that place
was a Monk, and did there place and begin Monastical life and conversation,
joining it with his Episcopal Function, even as the blessed Father Augustine
had done in Kent.

Chap. 28.
After this Cuthbert increasing in merits past further, and Anchorets graced
with Mi^acles.
led an Anachorets life: The place he made choice of being hanted with spirits,
and destitute of Water, Corn and Trees; he, by his prayers, chasing them away,
made habitable. He commanded the brethren to dig, where the earth was hardest
and stoniest, and by his prayers obtained such plenty of water, that it
suffic^th all to this very day. He commanded also Barley to be sown in a season
most improper; and yet he reaped a plentiful crop. It Is related further, How at
the Synod of Atwiford he was compelled to take the Office of a Bishop, and that
which forced him, was that the servant of God Boisell (who with a prophetic
spirit foretold many things) had prophesied, that he should be Sacrifice.
Bishop. He was famous for abstinence and strictnes of life. When he offered
the wholesome Sacrifice to God, it was Gift of Pr^phesie,
with tears from the bottom of his heart. Having spent two years in his
Episcopal Function, he returned to his Monastery, admonisht from God of the day
of his death, which he declared to some in obscure words, though afterward
plainly understood: To others he openly manifested the same.

Chap. 29.
Relates How Herebert a Priest of great perfection and friend to Cuthbert, led
a solitary life, to whom Cuthbert revealing his Solitary life.
own death, he fell down at his feet, requesting him to obtain that he might
pass to Heaven with him. Cuthbert having A proph^si^.
made his prayer, told him his request was granted. The event confirmed the
Prophecy, for they died both upon one day.

Chap. 30.
God being pleased to manifest in how great glory Cuthbert lived after his
death, Miracles.
whose godly life cxcelled in many Miracles, inspired the Relics*
Brethren, a eleven years after to remove his bones. Opening the Tomb, they
found the body all whole, as if it were alive, A Miracle.
the (...), joints, sinues pliable, the garments also seemed fresh, and
resplendent. They went to the Bishop, who was then in a solitary place
incompast with the sea. For there was he wont always to Lents forty days fast.
keep ^he time of Lent, and forty days also before Christmas, in devotion,
abstinence and tears: They brought him part of the Clothes that were about the
Holy body, which he received as an acceptable present, and kissing them with
great affection rejoices to hear of such Miracles. His successor of great
virtue Eadbert was laid in Cuthberts grave, in which place Miracles done in
restoring the sick, do witness the virtuous lives of them both.

Chap. 31.
Relates, How one was cured Miraculous Relics.
of a Palsy at Cuthberts Tomb. The Clothes also wherewith the Holy body was
clad, either in his life or after his death, did not want the gifts of healing
the sick.

Chap. 32.
Relates, How another was cured at St. Cuthberts relics Miraculous Relics.
of a great sore in his eye. The Monks had taken some of Cuthburts hair of his
head for relics to show and give: And as soon as part thereof was applied to
thesore, the party was healed.

The Fifth Book.
Chap. 1.
Relate^, How Edilwald, Cuthberts successor in a solitary Solitary life.
life, alaid, by prayer, a great tempest at Sea, wherein some of his Brethren
were in danger. Gutfrid (says Bid) a faithful servant of Christ who was one
of the Company, and after Abbot of Lindesferne declared Monks of miraculous
sanctity.
it to me. When we had (said Gutfrid) talked with him much to our comfort,
having asked blessing, we hastened home. Soon after a great tempest arose:
Edilwald falling on his knees prayed to God to deliver us, and suddenly the
storm ceast, and we came safe to land. As soon as we were ashore, the Tempest
and storm began again, and lasted all that day, to give us to understand that
the calm was given us by God, at the prayers of the Holy man. After his
decease, he was buried in St. Peter the Apostles Church.

Chap. 2.
John, Famous for integrity, and purity of life was made Bishop of Hagulstad,
of whom his familiar acquaintance were wont to report many strange Miracles how
authentical.
Miracles wrought at several times, chiefly Berethun (who is now Abbot) a man
most Reverend and faithful in his relations, of which I thought fit to record
some. There is a private abode near a Churchyard of St. Michael the
Arch-Angell, hither this holy man was wont to retire himself to pray especially
in time of Lent. The time being now at hand, he gave command to seek out some
beggar, toward whom he might exercise his charity. They brought him one who
was dumb: One week of Lent being past, he called the dumb Lents fast of 40.
days.
beggar to him, and bidding him put out his tongue made the sign of the Cross
upon it, and then bad him speak, Miracles by the sign of the Cross.
whereupon he spoke after the Bishop all that he suggested, and so perfectly
recovered his speech.

Note that this John is he who was called John of Beverlay, How assured this
and the Miracles in the next five chapters be*
whence Godwin says Bid was much to blame if these things be not true. For he
knew him, and took holy Orders of him, and lived in his Diocese.

Chap. 3.
Relates, How the said Bishop, coming to a Monastery in a Town called Vetade,
where Nuns.
Hereburge was Abbess, she told him that one of the Nuns of the Convent was
very sick, and lay pining, and languishing away: And she besought the Bishop to
go in and bless her, which he did, saying prayers over her, and departing
blessed her: As we were taking our leave, (says Abbot A Miracle by the blessing
of the Bishop testified by an eyewitness.
Berecht) the swelling went away, and the Maid was delivered from danger:

Chap. 4.
Relates, How an Earl sent his sick Lady some of the water A Miracle by Holy
Water related by an eyewitness.
which the said Bishop had hollowed, in the dedication of a Church, willing her
to drink of it, and wash the Churches dedicated therewith.
greived part, which done, says Abbot Berecht, she rose so whole and sound,
that she served us at the table.

Chap. 5.
Another time when the holy Bishop had dedicated a Dedication of Church^s.
Church, an Earl called Addi entreated him to come to his House, where one of
his family lay so desperately sick, that his Coffin was already prepared, hoping
that if he had but laid his hands upon him and blessed him, he should be
better. The Bishop enters, A Miracle of the Holy Bishops blessing.
makes his prayer, blesses him, saying, God send you whole, son; Then sitting
down at Table, the party sent for a Cup of wine, which the Bishop blessed and
sent him. As soon as he drank it, he arose a sound man, put on his apparel,
came to the Table, saying, that he desired to eat and drink with them, he sat
down, eat, drank, and was as merry as any at the Table, and lived many years
after a sound man. This Miracle the Abbot Berecht said, he had How sure this is.
from those who were present.

Chap. 6.
Herebald, A faithful servant of Christ now Abbot of a monastery A Miracle
related by him on whom it was done.
was heard to say as touching John the Bishops worth: I have had experience in
many others, but especially in my self, as whom he in a manner forced from
death to life by his prayer and benediction: for having been sore bruised with
a fall, I was healed by the Bishops intercession. When for age the Bishop could
not preach, he consecrated his Chaplin Wilfrid Archbishop of York; and
himself retiring into a Monastery there ended his days.

Chap. 7.
Cedwell King of the West Saxons Good works for hope of reward.
(after he had reigned two years) for hope of an eternal kingdom forsook his
own, and went to Rome. He thought it a singular glory to be regenerated at the
holy Apostles Our Kings Pilgrims to Rome.
Tombs by the Sacrament of Baptism, hoping soon after to pass to eternal
life; which happened as he desired. He was baptized on Easter eve, An. 689, and
wearing yet the robes of Innocence fell fick, and died. Whom the Pope at his
Baptism named Peter, that he might bear the By Prince of the Apostles Peter
understood.
holy name of the Prince of the Apostles, whose Tomb he came to see with great
devotion many hundred miles: Hun succeeded him, who having been King seven and
thirty years, leaving his Kingdom, Our Kings Pilgrims to Rome.
went to the Tombs of the Apostles in Rome, having an earnest desire to live a
Pilgrim on Earth for a time near those Holy places, that so he might Good
works for hope of reward.
deserve the better to be received of the Saints in heaven; Which practice in
those days many English, both of Nobles and Commons, Spiritual and temporal,
Men and Women, Pilgrimages t^ Rome most frequent. An. 639
were wont to perform with exceeding emulation.

Chap. 8.
Relates, How Theodore, Archbishop of Canterbury, departed this life very
aged, and how the number of years he lived, were signified unto him by
revelation. He was buried in St. Peter's Church. A man worthy of perpetual
remembrance, How worthy men the Pope sent still to England.
for his singular virtues, of whom with his companions it may be said: That
their names shall live in glory from generation to generation. Then the Church
of England Eccle. c. 44. v 14.
received such comfort and increase in spiritual matters, that it never
received the like before nor after.

Chap. 9.
Berechwald, succeeds Theodore in Canterbury, who was Monks made Prima^s.
Abbot of. Rashwulfe, now called Reculver in Kent, a man well knowing in the
holy Scripture, skillful in Ecclesiastical and Monastical orders and
discipline. He consecrated Toby Bishop of Rochester, one expert in the Latin
and Greek Tongue.

Chap. 10.
Relates, How Egbert, a Reverend Priest and servant of God, to obtain Heaven,
led a Pilgrims life in Ireland. He Good Works in hope of reward.
took upon him the office of an Apostle, desirous to preach the word of God to
the German provinces, which had not yet received it, or if this could not be,
to travel to Rome, to Visiting and worshipping Saints bodie^*
see and worship the Tombs of the blessed Apostles and Martyrs. But by
revelation from Heaven neither of these was effected. For Boisell once Abbot of
Mailrose, appearing after Mattins to a Religious Man, bad him go tell Egbert,
that he must not perform that Journey; but that it was Gods will that he should
go and instruct Columbe's Monastery. This Columbe was the first Preacher of the
Faith to the Picts, and the first Founder of a Monastery in the Isle of Hu,
which was had in great estimation. Egbert neglecting for awhile to go to the
Monastery, as he was commanded Heavenly Apparitions.
of God, Boisell appeared again to that Religious man, telling him that he
should say to Egbert, that whether he would or no he should go to Columb's
Monastery. Which so fell out; For by tempest he was drive thither: yet one of
his companions, Wigbert by Anchorets of great perfection.
name, excelling in contempt of the world, and profound knowledge, for he had
led an Anacorrites life in great perfection many years arrived in Frizland, but
without success. So he returned to his former solitary life.

Chap. 11.
Egbert, By Revelation from God, not being suffered to preach in Germany, he
sent other holy and virtuous men, of whom that notable and excellent man
Willibrord Priest was chief: They converted Frizeland from Idolatry to the
Faith of Christ, two other English Priests, who had voluntarily lived in
banishment in Ireland, for hope of eternal life, whose names were Henwald, Good
works for hope of r^ward.
came into Saxony to win souls to Christ. The barbarous observing them to be of
another Religion (for they sung Hymns, Psalms and devoute Prayers, and daily
offered Sacrifice upon a portable Altar.
the sacrifice of the holy Host, having with them holy Vessels, a little Table
hollowed, instead of an Altar) suspecting they came to withdraw their Land from
worshipping Miracles at Saints bodies.
their gods, murdered them; and to witness their Martyrdom, there appeared
Miracles from Heaven. For their bodies being cast into the river of Rhene, were
carried almost forty mile against the main stream to their companions, and a
great bright beam of light, reaching up to heaven, shined every night over the
place where their bodies were. One of them appeared in the night, to a
companion of his, named Tilmon, (who of a Soldier was become a Monk) telling
him, that he should find their bodies where he should see a light shine from
heaven: which happened accordingly: Feasts of Martyrs.
The day of their Martyrdom or Invention is in those places celebrated with
due veneration. King Pipin with great glory entombed them at Collen. It Is
reported, that in the place in which they were killed, a Spring bubbled up,
which to this day affords plenty of water*

Chap. 12.
Willebrord with these Holy men his companions, having license of the Prince to
preach in Frizland, went first to Rome, where Sergius sat in the Sea
Apostolic, that by his approbation and benediction he might settle to the
Apostolic Apostolical Preachers resort to the Pope for his license and
benediction.
office of preaching to the Heathens, hoping withal to receive of him some
Relics of Christ's holy Apostles and Martyrs, that when casting out Idols he
erected Churches, he might have in readiness some They premote the worship of
Relics.
holy Saints Relics to bring in their place, and to dedicate them in their
honor, whose Relics he had received. All things succeeding to his desire
Swibert is chosen their Bishop, and consecrated in England by Wilfred, and
returning, converteth a great number. At last The Apostolical men, Monks.
building a Monastery, in an Isle of the Rhene, leading there a very austere
and continent life he died. His successors possess the same to this day. Pepin
sent that virtuous and worthy Prelate Wilbrord to Rome, by consent of all, that
he might be made Archbishop of Frizland, upon Saint Cicilyes day Anno 690. and
in her Church he was consecrated A^ Archbishop appointed in Frezland by the
Pope.
and named Clement by the Pope and sent to his Bishopri^k of Vtreckt in
Holland. He erected many Churches and Monasteries through the Country. This
Willebrord otherwise Clement lives yet a Reverend Father

Chap. 13.
At the same time was wrought in Britany, a Miracle worthy of perpetual
rememberance, and not unlike to the ancient Miracles of An. 696. A miraculous
vision and conversion thence enswing.
times past. A certain man in Northumberland, dead for a time, rose again to
life, and told many things worthy the relating, of which we touch some few. I
am, says he, truly risen again from the death, but henceforth my conversation
must be far unlike my former life. Rising up, he went to Church, and continued
there Shaving of Monks.
in prayer until day. Then he divided all his goods into three parts, one he
gave to his wife, another to his children, the third he gave in alms to the
poor. Then he entered into the Monastery of Maitrose, and being shaven he made
his abode in a secret habitation, assigned him by the Abbot, where he lived,
until his dying day in such austerity of body, that, though his tongue had
said nothing, Note the best kind of vvitness.
yet his life spoke that he had seen many terrible things. He related what he
has seen in this manner. The Countenance and apparel of my guide was full of
light, we came to one great broad valley of infinite length, all full of
terrible fire, there was also another valley intolerable with hail and snow.
Both places were full of souls tossed, as with a whirlewind, out of one into
the other. I began to think, that this was Hell, but my guide said, Think not
so: Then having mentioned all the rest of the visions, he relates, how his
guide told him, That this valley, so full of horrible flames, and so bitterly
cold, was the place where their Confession. An eye witness of Purgatory.
souls remain to be tried, who deferring the Confession of their sins and
amendment, had recourse to Penance at the point of death: yet because they
made humble confession of their sins and repented, they shall all come Souls
s^t ^r^e before the day of Judgment, and by what means See this as a point of
says de^in^d in the beginning of the (...).
to Heaven at the day of Judgment. Many (quoth he) shall come to Heaven before
the day of judgment, for the good Prayers, Alms, and Fasting of the living,
and especially by the holy Sacrifice of the Mass. Only they which are perfect
in all their thoughts, words and deeds, are carried straight to Heaven. The
effect of this vision was the change of his life into strange Austerity. When
any one said unto him, brother Dirthelm, (for that was his name) It is a (...)
a Sacrifice (...) for the ^^ad.
wonder you can endure so much cold? He would answer, I have seen more cold
endured than this: And when they said, It Is a wonder you can endure Change of
li^e into great austerity for fear of to^ment^.
such austerity? He answered, I have seen more rigorous sufferings than this.
This Chapter intermingleth in this Relation, how that hard by this man's Cell,
there lived a (...).
Monk called Genigids, who was living at the very time that Bid did write
this, leading a solitary life in Ireland, sustaining his aged body with brown
bread and cold water, who often entering into the How ^ssured Authority this
(...) has.
foresaid Monks Cell, heard him many times repeat this whole relation; and from
him I came to the knowledge of it, says Bid.

Chap. 14.
There was a Layman in great favor with King Coenred, but negligent
concerning the state of his soul: The King warned him often to confess and
forsake his former life, whilst it was time. But he slighting the Kings
admonition, said, He would do Penance hereafter. It chanced he fell sick, the
King coming to him, exhorted him, that now Confession.
at least he would do Penance, nay, (quoth he) I will not now confess my
sins, but when I am recovered I will: least my companions think I did it for
fear of death. The King after a while, returning again, this Courtier told him,
now it was too late, and that he had seen all that ever he had committed
written in two Books, and that he should strait ways die and be carried into
Hell. The first book (said We are judged according to our works and not only
faith.
he) showed me by an Angel contained all the good works, which ever I had done,
but the book was very little. Then the wicked spirits brought before me, a book
of a mighty bigness, in which I read all the sins I had committed in thought,
word and deed. Then he related, how he heard his Condemnation. Thus in despair
he died. This I thought fit to relate, as I received it from the reverend
Bishop Pechtelm.

Chap. 15.
I my self knew a Brother (whom I would I had not known,) who being admonisht
by his Brethern to amend his life, brought unto desperation by a vision he had
of his place in Hell, said, There is no time for me to amend my former life.
Thus he died without receiving the Sacrament: None of all the Convent durst say
Mass, sing psalms, say the least Prayer for Masses and prayers used so^ the
dead.
his soul. This stirred up many to do Penance for their sins, which effect God
grant, it may work in those who shall read this.

Chap. 16.
About this time, many of the Scots in Ireland, as also of the Britans,
admitted of the manner of celebrating Easter, taught by the Catholic Church.
For Adamon, a virtuous Priest, Abbot of the Monks, and Religious in the Isle of
Hue, seeing the canonical Rites and Ceremonies of England; and admonisht by
the learned, not to live contrary to the Universal Church, neither in Easter,
nor any other decrees, changed his mind, and preferred what he saw, in the We
must not live contrary to the un^versall Church.
English before his own. He wrote a ^ook of holy places, as he had been informed
by Arculfe Bishop, who (...) traveled to see them. Some ^ede relates in the
next Chapter.

Chap. 17.
Relates, Out of the foresaid book of holy ^laces, how over Ch^^ches to our
La^y in the East, Relikes honored there as well as in the West.
the place where Christ was born, there is built a Church of the blessed
Virgin; and how the in ward grot in which our Savior was born, is covered with
precious marble. C^nstantine built a Church, where the Cross of Christ was
found by Helena. A Church also was The^e also Croses lights.
built in Golgotha, where the rock is seen, which bore Christ's Cross and his
blessed body. Now in that place, there is a mighty Cross of silver with a
brazen wheel over it, full of Lamps. An Altar is cut out where the Cross
stood, where There Altars also, and sacrifice*upon them for the dead.
Sacrifice is wont to be offered for honorable men that die. There is also a
round Chapel of Christ's Resurrection, which There many Altars in one Church.
has three Altars. In the middle of this Chapel, is the Tomb of our Savior,
where There also lights burnt by day light.
day and night twelve Lamps burn. The top of the Chapel is guilt, bearing a
great golden Cross upon it. Part of Christ's Crosses.
Gravestone stands at the door of the Sepulcher Altarwise: Altars of stone.
the other part also makes another Altar*

Chap. 18.
The same Author relates, how in the place of our Saviors Altars.
Ascension on the top of Mount Olive; there stands A perpetual Miracle*
a great round Church. The inner Chapel having an Altar toward the East,
could not be vaulted, nor covered over, by reason that it was the place by
which Christ's body passed to Heaven. In the middle of which Church the last
print of Christ's feet are to be seen, and although the earth be fetched away
daily by the Christians, yet* it remains and keeps the print of his holy
feet. A great Lamp burns there day and Relics. Lights burning day and
night at holy places.
night. In the West Side be eight windows, and as many Lamps, shining through
the glass to Jerusalem, and their lights stir up the Hearts of all that behold
them: Upon Christ's Ascension-day every year, when Mass is done, there comes
from Heaven a gale of wind, which makes all in the Church prostrate
themselves.

Chap. 19.
In the year of our Lord, This Hedda was Bishop of Winchester in Hampshire.
705. Hedda Bishop of the West Saxons dyed, of whom the Reverend Prelate
Pechthelm (then a Monk) was wont to tell us, that in the place, where be dyed,
many great Miracles and cures were done, and that they used commonly to carry
away dust from thence, and mingle it with water, for such to drink as were
sick, and that the Miracles Relikes.
sprinkling and drinking thereof, did cure many sick: so that a great pit was
made by the often carrying away the dust.

Chap. 20.
Coenred, King of the Our Kings become Pilgrims and shaven Monks.
Mercians, having Reigned most Nobly, at last forsook his Kingdom and went to
Rome, where at the Tomb of the Apostles, receiving the Tonsure, he became a
Monk, continuing in Prayer, Fasting and Alms, until his death. There went
with him Offa, the Son of Sigher King of the East Saxons, a most gallant youth,
whose whole Kingdom much desired that he would sway the Scepter, but he moved
with like devotion, forsook Wife, Good works for hope of reward.
Lands, Kindred, and Country, that he might receive a hundred fold in this
world, Habit of Monks distinct.
and life everlasting in the next: coming to the Holy places at Rome, he took
the Tonsure and Habit of a Monk, the same year Wilfrid, that excellent and
worthy Prelate dyed and was buried in St. Peter's Church at Rippon in Yorkshire:
He being but fourteen years old, he esteemed more a Monastical and Solitary
life, than all worldly wealth* After some years spent in a Monastery, he made a
Voyage to Rome, to see what rights and ceremonies were observed there, as well
of Seculars as Religious. He told the Queen the desire he had to visit the
Monuments of the Holy Apostles which she approved: At Rome he became acquainted
with a Holy and learned Archdeacon called Boniface, one of the Apostolic
Popes Counselors, by whose instructions he learnt the four Books of the
Gospel and Easter, and many other things concerning the discipline of the
Church, which he could not attain to in his Country. Returning into England,
he was favored by King Alfrid, who had learned to follow in all things the
Catholic Rules of the Church. This King finding Wilfrid Catholic, gave him
Stamford and Rippon (which the Scots had before) to build Abbeies. He was made
Priest, and followed the the Kings Court as Preacher, and not long after, was
made Bishop by Agilbert Bishop of Paris. In King Egfrids reign he was deprived
of his Bishopric of York, and another ordained in his place. Wilfrid going to
Rome to plead his cause before the Apostolic Pope, was driven into Frizland,
where he preached unto them Christ. And where many thousands being co^verted and
baptized: by him, he was the first began this Evangelicall work, which the most
Reverend Bishop, Willebrord afterward finished. Wilfrid Holy Wi^f^id appealeth
from England to the Pope.
having past the VVinter with his new Converts, reassumed his journey to Rome,
where his cause was debated in presence of Pope Agatho and many Bishops. He was
found by all their judgments to be without any fault, and worthy of the
Bishopric. The Pope gathered His appeal admitted to the Pope.
a Sinod at Rome of 125, Bishops against those who held but one will and
operation in Christ. Wilfrid sat among them where he was to declare his Faith,
and the Faith of his Country, which was found to be Catholic. This was thus
registered in the Acts. Wilfrid the virtuous Bishop of York appealing to the Sea Apostolic His appeal and Absolution ratified in a Council.
for his cause, and by that Authority absolved and placed in Judgment Seat in
the synod together with 125. other Bishops has declared for all the Northern
parts of Britany, the true and Catholic Faith confirming the same with
subscription. This semence is obeyed in England.
Wilfrid at his return converted the South Saxons, and in the second year of
King Aldefrid was restored to his Bishopric. After five He appeals again and
his accusers plead before the Pope as their lawful Judge.
years being again turned out, he followed his appeal at Rome, and his
accusers being present, he again was acquitted. Returning through France, he
fell sick to death, and told Acca how in that sickness one appeared to him in
a white habit, telling him that he was St Michael, who said to him; I am sent
by God A prophetical vision.
to recall thee from death: For our Lord has given thee life by the
intercession of our Lady, Mother of God, but remain prepared, for after four
years I will The intercession of the Mother of God most effectual.
come again to visit thee. Thou shall be restored to the greatest part of thy
possessions, and end thy life in peace. Recovering he came into England, where
King Aldefrid refusing to restore him, shortly dies. Then a Synod is called,
and by the votes The senten^^ given by the Pope obeyed in an English Synod.
of all he is reestablisht. After four years of Peace he died in a Monastery of
Abbot Cudbalds, but entered in his own Altars.
Monastery at Rippon in the Blessed Apostle St. Peter's Church by the Altar.

These Verses are in his Epitaph. Wilfrid, that worthy Prelate
Lies buried in this grave,
Who moved with Godly Zeal,
To Christ this Temple gave.
And of the Apostle Peter's name,
St. Peter's Church did call* Christ gave,
To whom the Keys of Heaven
Chief Governor of all.
He gilded it with finest gold, The Power of the Keys given to St. Peter

With Scarlet hung it round
And set up there a Crucifix,
Of Gold, even from the ground. Crosses of Gold



Chap. 21.
Acca succeeded Wilfrid in Churches dedicated to Saints
the Bishopric of York, a man for his courage and gallant deeds, gracious in
the sight of God and Man. He enlarged the Church dedicated to St. Andrew, and
adorned it with many exquisite works. He did both then, and does at this very
day, endeavor to gather together the Holy Apostles and Martyrs Relics, that
Altars, Relics.
he may in their honor build Altars. He provided Holy Vessels, lights and other
necessaries appertaining to the better adorning the Church of God

Chap. 22.
Naitan, King of the Picts, abandoning the Errors which he and his. Country
had long kept, touching Easter, brought them all to the Catholic observation,
The customs of Rome pref^rred.
which that he might effect, he required aid of the English, whom he knew to
have framed their Religion according to the Church of Rome and See Apostolic.
He sent Ambassadors to that end to Reverend Abbot Ceolfrid of the Monastery of
St. Peter and Paul. He requested further to be instructed what manner The
custom of the Clergy on shaving their Crown^*
of Tonsure the Clergy then should use. He desired to have some cunning workmen
sent him to build a Church after the manner of Rome, promising to dedicate it
in the honor of St. Peter Prince of the Apostles, and to follow ever Peter
still understood by the Prince of the Apostles.
more the order and faith of the Church of Rome and See Apostolic.

In Ceolfrids letter to the King, be these words.

We exhort you most humbly to take care that your The sha^ing of the Crown
used by the Clergy in honor of the Crown of Thorns.
Clergy may bear the same Tonsure which the Church does receive. For as all
congregations of the faithful are accustomed to carry the sign of the Cross
in the forehead, that by the power thereof they may be defended from the
assaults of the Devil; and by often remembrance of it be instructed; so it
behooves them who being made by vow Monks, or by profession of the Clergy,
bind themselves The sign of the Cross.
more strictly with the bridle of continency, to bear on the Head, by
shaving, the shape of a Crown as our Savior did, Vowed Monks
a Crown of Thorns, at his Passion, as well to express their ready mind to
suffer mockeries for Christ, as strengthen their hope for a Crown of glory. In
the same letter he Relates what, concerning this point, he said to the Scottish
Abbot Adaman, I said (quoth he) Brother if you seek the fellowship of St.
Peter, why do you follow the manner of shaving which he used, whom St. Peter
did excommunicate, and why rather show you not that you desire with your heart
his character, with whom you desire to live in bliss: If you desire to follow
his steps and counsel whom you took to have as a Patron with God the Father,
then he commands thus. It beseems Patronage of St Peter.
you, most puissant Prince to observe all that agrees with the unity of
Christ's Catholic and Apostolic Church. So it will come to pass that Prince
of the Apostles still signifies St. Peter.
the Prince of the Apostles will open to you and yours the gates of Heaven. By
this advise in short time, this Prince with all his dominions, was brought to
the true observation of Easter, all the Ministers of the Altar and Monks had
their heads shaven round in form of a Crown, and the whole Nation being
reformed did rejoice to see themselves disciples of the most blessed Again
styled Prince of the Apostles.
Prince of the Apostles Peter, and committed to his protection and patronage


Chap 23.
Relates, How the rest of the Scots admitted the Apostolic manner of keeping
Faster, and shaving their Crowns by the means of Egbert a worthy Bid.
Priest. Only the Britanes (says Bid) remain still hardened in blindness,
whereas all Englishmen are in all points thoroughly instructed in the Rule of
the Catholic Faith. Egbert on Easter day after he England in all points
Catholic An. 716.
had said solemn Mass in remembrance of our Lords Resurrection, departed this
life: Saying of solemn Mass
The Brethern rejoicing to see their Master pass to God to be their Patron and
Intercessor.

Chap. 24.
Relates, Who were the Bishops at this time through all Saints our patrons and
Intercessors.
England; and how, all things now being brought to unity, many, as well Noble,
as Private, laying aside their Arms, earnestly strove to get both themselves
and their Children to be shaven, and tied with Monastical Vows, rather than
to exercise themselves in warlike In what esteem Religious life was at the
writing of these.
affairs. This is at the present the state of Britany this year of our Lord,
731.

The end of the History of the Church of England.
The words of venerable Bede in the 3 Tome of his works.
THus much touching the Ecclesiastical History of the Britans, especially of
the English nation, as I could learn by the writings of my Ancestors, by
tradition of my elders, or my own knowledge I Bid, the servant of God, and
Priest of the Monastery of the BB. Apostles Peter and Paul at Wyre-mouth, have
brought to an end. When I was seven years old I was delivered by the hands of
my friends to be brought up of the Rd. Abbot Benedic^, and afterward to
C^^lfrid. In which Monastery spending all the days of my life I applied my
whole study to the meditation of holy Scripture, observeing regular discipline,
and daily singing service in the Church. In the 19 year of my age I was made
Deacon, and at 30 Priest; which orders I received by the hands of the Rd.
Bishop Of this John see B. 5. c. 2.
John of Beverley.

DEar Reader I doubt not but in perusing of this book many thoughts will arise
in thy mind touching the author thereof, the authority of the copy, and the
sincerity of our true dealing therein; now then is the proper time to read again
the preface where I am confident thou will find full satisfaction in all.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
IN the Preface, page 1. line ult. dele s in disputants. Leaf 3 l. 1. dele it 1

Page 26. line 13. for legs read leg. page 36. l. 15. for were r. was. p. 5^.
l. 3. for Angels r. Angles p. 53. l. 13. for them r. him p. 58. l. 17. in the
margent for 904 r. 604. p. 81. l. 2 for redwals r. redwal. p. 81. l. 20. for
buli r. built. p, 116. l. 10. for plat r. plot p. 132. in the margent
superogation r. supererogation p 135. l. 2. for pecaple r. peaceable p, 136.
read Relics gift for Kings p. 150. l. 12. for berring r. Berking p. 151. in
the margent r. habitation separate from men. p. 153. in the margent r.
consecrated p. 154, l. 5. for ediburge r. edilburge. p. 155. l. 5. for sister
r. sisters. P. 161. l. 3 for salvation r. splendour. p. 167. l. 12. for
celestial r. clerical p. 167. l. 18. for by the boy r. of the Boy. Entichus r.
Eutichus. p. 137. l. r. hitherto p 192. l. 9. dele punctum at prophetic p.
193. l. 1 for flock r. flockt. p. p. 197. l. 20. for rejoice r. rejoiced p.
123. l. 12. r. lies for dies. the marginal note p. 240. saints our patrons
and intercessours must be placed at the end of the cap. 23. p. 239.


