Theosophick Letters or Epistles Of the Man, From God Enlightened, in Grace:
Jacob Behme OF Old Seidenburg Wherein Every where are Divine blessed
Exhortations to True Repentance and Amendment. As also Plain Instructions
concerning the highly worthy and Precious Knowledge Of the Divine and Natural
VVISDOME Together with a right Touchstone or Trial of These Times for an
Introduction to the Authors other writings published in English, For the good
of the sincere Lovers of true Christianity. By JOHN SPARROW.

LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Giles Calvert, at the Sign of the Black Spread
Eagle, at the West End of St. Paul's. 1661.

An Abstract out of Herre Abraham von Frankenbergs Letter of 7 September, 26
August, 1651. concerning the Explanation of the Copper Title of Jacob Behm's
Theosophick Epistles.
1. In the Title page of the Epistles, at the Right hand above is a Dove with
an Olive Branch: at the Left hand the City Alexandria; or Leiden; with the
Dove, which carries a Letter or Epistle sealed up, as Histories mention.

2. These are Two Doves in the Midst of which, is The holy Spirit in the form
of a Dove, with the Gospel of Peace.

3. Thus there are THREE Doves, signifying the Threefold Spirit: the 1. of
God, the 2. of Nature, the 3. of Art.

The Preface of Abraham Von Franckenberg the Publisher of Jacob Behm's LXII.
Letters called Theosophick Epistles.
Whereof 21. not being yet in English are here translated and published; with a
Letter, concerning the Author here also Englished.
The Preface
To the Reader who loves God and the Truth.
1. IF thou art minded fruitfully to know the true simplicity of The blessed
saving Faith; and the clear immaculate innocence of the holy Life of God in
CHRIST JESU, together with the secret Mystery of the Divine and Natural
wisdom, from or out of the Light of Grace and of Nature, in a very Childlike
and fundamental way, to Thy Temporal and Eternal welfare, blessedness or
Happiness and Salvation: Then thou will assuredly, in these hitherto unknown to
the world, yet very Christian and divinely blessed Epistles; find a distinct
plain Glimps and Relish thereof to thy satisfaction and content.

2. Which, we in that regard, among other causes, not without extraordinary
pains and Cost, have brought to light and published, whereby the searcher of
the divine and Natural WONDERS and secret Mysteries, might have a true
Exemplar or Pattern, and that not taken out of Books of humane Art, but such
instruction as is received and brought forth, out of the Divinely revealed and
Living EXPERIENCE; every one according to his own Measure; and might thereby
honorably and edifyingly, build up and refresh or quicken himself in a
Christian brotherly Union and Communion.

3. As, the right manner of understanding and use of these writings, especially
with repentant and Operating fruit, in all blessedness and ways of Salvation,
will clearly and further Manifest.

4. Concerning the Author JACOB BOEME called the Theutonick of Old-Seidenburg;
in his other herein mentioned and signified, Wonder-writings, More will be
mentioned and declared concerning his Person and Gift; where the desirous
seeker may find it; and with these truly Christian Epistles he may be prepared
in the future the more fitly to peruse the Great work of his other writings.

5. Which we also with the assistance of God, for the higher knowledge of the
present More scornful and perverted, then divinely Learned world, in divine
and Natural wisdom: not sparing either diligent Labor or Cost; for the
honor and benefit of the Germane or High Dutch Nation, here attempted the work
of publishing them in Print under the Title following.

THEOSOPHIA THEUTONICA Oder OFFERBAHRVNG Gottlicher und Naturlicher WEISHEIT.
THEOSOPHIA TEUTONICA OR The Revelation of Divine and Natural WISDOM
Subscribed. Abraham von Frankenberg.
M. L. H. H. B. A. V. F.


The Ninth Epistle To C. B. Of the 12. September 1620.
Light, Salvation and Eternal Power, out of the wel-spring or fountain of the
Heart of JESUS CHRIST, be our refreshing or Quickening, and Enlivening.
1. Honorable and Esteemed Sir: and in Christ, loving Brother, the Letter you
sent me, with the enclosed Rix-Doller, I received, and return you thanks for
it, God will, according to his word, richly repay it.

2. Although Acts 8. 18.
the Gifts of God are not sold for Money of any of this worlds Good, yet I find
in you, according to your Letter, an Earnest diligence, in that you are
desirous to study the divine wisdom, and that you have a Zeal, your self to
write out a Copy, of that which is given me from God out of Grace; and I
acknowledge it to be done out of Thankfulness and obedience toward God; and in
that regard, I also willingly accept it.

3. And exhort you brotherly in Christ, that you proceed according to the
Course you have begun, to strive as a Constant Soldier, against own-self
outward Reason in Flesh and Blood; also against the Devil and the
Hypocritical flattering Evil world; with firm trust and Confidence in God,
with a zealous Spirit and Mind, in a still quiet Life: whereby you may obtain
the Noble Crown or Garland of Victory; which indeed assisteth a young
fellow-companion fearing God and is very acceptible, in the presence of God and
his Angels: which if it be once set upon you, you will well discern NOTE.
What God IS and CAN do.

4. And then you will not much need to learn of others when the right Teacher
is IN your self; who Teaches ALL Men. and confirms that to Gods Children
which he teaches from or out of Man; for Luke 17. 21.
the Kingdom of God is IN Man; if he be borne again in Christ.

5. As you will find it sufficiently described in my writings, which are not
proceeded or sprung from conceit or Opinion, but in such a way, as themselves
signify and Express: viz. concerning the Soldierly Combat, and what I have
attained thereby, and HOW I have overcome.

6. I have written this for my own Remembrance and Meditation, also for their
sakes, whom God will visit or stir up thereby, and also Crown with THIS
Garland, as indeed is given me to know, for which things sake, I have written
according to the High Gifts in the Light of God, and suppressed the outward
Reason as folly or a foolish Virgin, and not advanced my outward Life and
honor thereby, because much scorn and persecution has become my wages,
besides, what further may attend me at hand.

7. But I account it enough for me, if I may but bring my Garland along with me
out of this world into my true native Fathers Country, then have I honor
enough and riches enough; Gen: 3. 15.
The Serpent must still in this life always bruise or sting the woman's Seed
in the Heel.

8. In the Cross affliction and tribulation, Joh. 3. 7.
we must be borne anew, for, 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12.
If we would live with Christ, we must also be persecuted with him, and dye
with him, and be buried in him, also rise again in Him, and Eternally live in
him; become wholly Phil. 3. 10. 11. Romans 8. 29.
conformable to his Image, and come to him only under his Purple Mantle, he
only must cover us, else we are in the Devils and Antichrists Nett, and stand
with the Babylonish Whore quite Naked; and ashamed before the Countenance of
God.

9. But seeing God has already opened your Heart, so that you see with other
Eyes; therefore it is highly necessary to proceed on, and to remain Constant;
for he that will crown you is already upon the way, but you must James 1. 12.
endure the Affliction and hold out, and not give way or room to the fleshly
Reason, for the Devil vehemently sets upon the Grain of Mustardseede, which
becomes sown by the Holy Spirit, he would continually destroy it.

10. It goes with a Newborn Child of Christ, as with a young tender Tree,
which is easily destroyed, but when it grows and becomes strong, then it can
stand; and though likely many times a Branch is torn off by a storm of wind,
yet the Stock or Body stands; and brings forth other Branches.

11. But it must be earnestness that will fight with the Devil and overcome
the Anger of God; Own Reason must drown and kill IT self, and give it self up
into God, that God might live in the understanding of Man; that he might be his
willing and doing, else there is no finding in the divine wisdom; the Spirit
of God must only find it self in Man, that the true Image may be his work and
wonder.

12. For, all whatsoever is taught and spoken concerning God, without the
Spirit of God, is but Babell, let it play the hypocrite and flatter how it
will, Gods spirit must speak from or out of US, if our speech be acceptible
before God.

13. For, he himself presents us before God; for, and in, himself, he
brings our will-spirit with, and in, himself, into God, and confirms us to
be his children in Christ; it is HE that finds us, WE cannot find him, but
his Will stands presented to us, HE has IN Christ, spread abroad both his
Arms on the Cross; to receive or embrace us; we should only cast our selves
into or upon him, and go forth out of Reason and Malice.

14. If we do that, then we fall to him into Christ's Arms, and there he
seeks and finds us in him, and, there we become his own and his dwelling
house; and there he follows after our will-spirit, and 1 Cor. 14. 32.
is subject to us, and all whatsoever we then perform or do, THAT is
acceptable to him, and Rev. 14. 13.
all those works follow us, and are our Eternal boasting, and become put on to
us, as a garment, to Gods honor and deeds of wonder; NOTE.
for which things sake, God has moved himself to the Creation of Man, and for
which things sake God became Man, that he might deliver us from Evil.

15. Therefore seeing you have my writings in your hands, I give you to
understand, that you should only Childelike and simply consider them; and so
you may find the Pearl therein; for sharp or accute Searching only, does not
find the Pearl.
searching alone does it not; but to will and do WELL; for the Pearl lies
not in the LETTER, but as above mentioned.

16. In the Book that is sent with this, which also is borne out of this
School, you will find further ground concerning this Author.

17. But if any thing shall be too hard in the Understanding I would, if you
signify it unto me, clear and illustrate it, though I hope once to speak with
your self herein, if an Opportunity afford.

18. As for the Two other little books, viz: the New Testament, and Third part
of (...).
Gnothi Seaut^n; have a little patience, for they are not yet in my hands, till
the Leipsick Mart, Leipsick. but I am confident, then they shall be sent you.
And I commend you into the brotherly Love in Christ.

Dated as above. The NAME of the LORD is a strong Fortress; the righteous
runs into it and is Exalted. Jacob Behme.

The Thirteenth Epistle To C. B. 8. Junii, 1612.
The open Fountain in the Heart of Jesus Christ be our Quickening or
refreshings!
1. Honorable and Esteemed Sir: high friend in the Love of Christ; after
wishing you all health and welfare, I acquaint you friendly, that this The
Aurora.
writing accompanying this Letter, is sought and read by many learned and Noble
Persons; with delight and Longing desire; and are so very much spread abroad,
that I very much wonder at it, and it is done wholly without my knowledge.

2. Men very much, in all Silesia.
Silesia as also in many places in the Mark, Meissen, Saxony.
Mark, Meissen and Saxony, as letters daily come to my hand that are sent,
signifying the desire of them; also eminent people; Entreat they may be put in
Print; which to me at present, while Babell Burns, is not acceptible or
convenient, but will have its Time: for the NOTE The Golden Age will begin in
the Midst of the Fire in Babell.
Aureum seculum or Golden Age, will begin to spring in the Midst of the Fire in
Babell.

3. This I mention faithfully from a true heart, for you to Consider, and to
stir you up, in the desire, in our IMMANUELL, as one of the first Fruits,
comprehended under Rev. 10. 7.
the Sound of the Seventh Trumpet.

4. Math. 7. 7.
Seek, says Christ, and you shall find; the Noble PEARL, reveals or
Manifests it self in those, which at present seek it; for it is an
acceptible Time, BOTH in Heaven and Hell; both Doors stand at present open with
their desire: It is a time to seek ones self; let none take it otherwise then
in Earnest; else he falls home into the fierce wrathful Anger of God, and
will be comprehended in the Vengeance of the fierce wrath.

5. Only be humble a little while under the Cross; May will well bring forth
NOTE,
ITS Roses, and the Lilly branch, its fruit.

6. It is well for him that has it in his heart, it will serve to his highest
honor, for this worlds honor is but Dung to the Divine.

7. This I mention to you as to my beloved in the LORD Christ; from a true
Heart, to put you in Mind and encourage you in the LORD.

8. And I commend you to the Love of JESUS CHRIST.

Dated at Gerlitz.
Gerlitz as above. Your willing Servant, Jacob Behme.

The fourteenth Epistle Of the 21. Junij 1661. To C. B.
The Open wellspring or fountain in the heart of Jesus Christ, be our
quickening or refreshing.
1. MY Dear Herr Christianus, and high friend. Your welfare and happiness is
always dear to me. I send you herewith, De tribus Principiis, the Book of the
Three Principles; to write it out fully, if you please, and I exhort you in the
Love of Christ, as one member should do to the other; to be diligent in study
and prayer to God; that our Faith and knowledge, may grow and take place one
among another; and that we at length, might reap the fruit thereof, and enjoy
it.

2. Be only watchful in Christ, to fight against the Reason and the world, and
the will of the FLESH; and fight like a valiant Soldier; your victory is in
the Lord; who will set it upon Thee, when it pleases him.

3. The Crown is deposited and laid by for you, for which you Fight, it will
not repent you; but the Wound-Marks of Christ you must bear in this world, and
Phil: 3. 10, 11. Rom: 8. 29.
be conformable to his Image: else you attain NOT the Crown: this I acquaint
you with, in a brotherly Manner.

4. Prepare your self diligently, for there is a Great Storm at hand; that you
may be preserved to the praise of God, and to the year of the Lilly which
springs: committing you to the Love of Jesus Christ.

I pray you after you have written it out; to send it again, for it is desired;
Scholars are found to whom it is to be lent.

The Nineteenth Epistle of the 3. July 1622. to Herr Christianus.
C. B.
Gods Grace, Salvation and Eternal Light, be our quickening or refreshing.
1. TRuly honorable, and esteemed Sir: my very loving good friend; Let my
willing and diligent service at all times be presented, together with the
Desire of all welfare and happiness to you.

2. Your Letter sent to me in the Advent, I have received, and understand your
very industrious and Christian Mind and desire; and though I am a stranger to
you, yet I have out of Herr Walters Letter sufficient information concerning
your Wesen.
Conversation and Person.

3. And moreover, he gives me to know, your very longing and industrious
desire, in your Letter you sent me, and therein I am not only willing, to
receive you into my skill and friendship, but I rejoice most highly, that such
a Mind as yours is born of God; and I exhort you Christianly to remain steadfast
therein: and then you will attain all whatsoever your honorable Mind wishes
or desires; and you will in a while experience, in your self; what manner of
writings they are, which you as I perceive, have lately received from Herr
Walter, though I suppose you have very little perused them.

4. But there shall very shortly, if you be desirous of it, a very excellent
clear work, be sent to you, which will highly rejoice you, for as I perceive
from Mr. Walter and also from your self, the Author of them is unknown to
you, he may well come to be known to you, if you have a longing after the Noble
or precious Stone, Lapis Philosophorum, the Philosophers-Stone, spiritually.

5. Then in that, when you attain it, you will have the Highest Joy; you will
love and esteem it above Gold and all the world, for it is fairer or brighter
then the SUN, and more costly or precious then the Heaven, and whosoever
finds it, is Richer then any Prince on Earth; he has the Art and
understanding of the whole world, and in him lies hidden ALL the POWERS of
Heaen and Earth.

6. Luke 10. 42.
You have with Mary elected or chosen the best part, in that you set your youth
not on worldly pomp state or Pride, but do offer it up to God; and though you
thereby Sit a little while in dark obscurity, yet you will therefrom attain
Eternal Light, this I commend to you friendly and intend it faithfully.

7. And it will well hereafter be discovered to you, who is the Author of the
writing; and it shall faithfully be imparted to you, for there is but a small
part of them come to your hands: but there has been a hinderance that I could
not now send them with this, you shall shortly have them if you have a mind to
them.

8. You will see very precious Noble rare and excellent things, which for the
most part have been hidden from the beginning of the world hitherto: about
which all the Learned have danced and sought after them, and some have supposed
they had the Noble Stone: but the Time was not yet come: which God vouchsafes
to the last world. Herewith I commend you to the divine protection and Grace.

Dated as above. Your always willing Servant, Jacob Behme.

The One and Twentieth Epistle of the 8. July 1621. An Herrn C. B.
I Intimately hint to you, that you prepare; for the vehement Tribulation, will
exceedingly, seize upon some of our Country.

2. But do you seek diligently, to include or enclose your self in THAT Peace,
which Christ has brought again to us, and to defend your self with it, as with
a Wall or Fortress.

3. For BABEL must drink up an earnest severe draught, and even that which she
has procured with Abomination, all Chains and Bands will fly asunder and not
hold, and all will fly in pieces; but when it stands clearly so; NOTE 1 Thessalonians:
5. 3.
THEN comes suddenly the destruction.

4. The Highness or lostinesse of the world, is it self blind at present, and
will not see what it does to it self, but will shortly become Seeing, NOTE 1 Thessalonians: 5. 3.
when the MISERY will pass upon, or seize upon, Body and Soul. And I commend
you into the Meek or Gentle Love of Jesus Christ.

Dated as above. Your willing Servant, Jacob Behme.

The Three and Twentieth Epistle of the 29. October 1621. An Herr C. B.
Emanuel!
1. Honorable, much beloved High friend in Christ. I wish to you only and
solely, what my Soul wishes continually and desires from God; viz: the right
true knowledge of God, in the Love of JESUS CHRIST; that the Rev: 22. 16.
bright Morning Star, might continually arise to you and shine in you,
through this vale of Misery, to your Eternal Joy.

2. And I exhort you in the Love of Christ: out of my hearty good intentions
toward you, that you go on and remain constant in the way you have begun in
CHRIST'S Warfare, that the little Paradisicall Tree or Plant may spring and take
root, you will afterward well see your Noble or precious fruit, and Eternally
enjoy it, and sufficiently refresh your self therewith, though indeed it be
covered a long while with the Earthly Field or Soil, yet the Noble GOLD
springs or grows without any Ceasing at all.

3. How it goes with your brother at Beuten.
Beuten, to whom you have lent those writings, and what Judgment he makes of
them, were very acceptable to me to know, for there are more people at Beuten
besides, who also have some of them, and exceedingly desire the other; and you
would show a service to your loving brother and others, if you would lend them
what they shall desire more, of them: I will send you somewhat more shortly,
which yet you want.

4. Herr Caspar Lindner, Customer at Beuten and one of the Council, is also a
Lover of them, if he shall desire any of them, you should do well; to lend them
to him, he uses not to keep them Long.

5. These writings are spread abroad far and wide in many Countries; among
high and Low, and partly has sounded and been known to highly Learned people:
God guide it to his honor and Glory.

6. I send you with directions Three Sacks for the Corn which Herr Rodolf will
send, pray take so much pains for me as to receive it: when Specht or the other
from Rausche.
Rausche will come over, if you see him tell him of it, and bid him take it up,
I will seek about for him and tell him as much, he will bring it to me very
well, I will requite it again friendly. And I commend you into the Love of
JESUS CHRIST.

Dated as above. Your willingly serviceable Friend and Brother, Jacob Behme.

The Six and Twentieth Epistle of the 28. of April, 1622. An Herrn C. B.
The Open fountain in the Heart of Jesus Christ, be our quickening or
refreshing, and constant Light.
1. Honorable and esteemed, in Christ Loving Sir and friend, let my faithful
wishes for you, of the Love and Grace of our Savior Christ, and all temporal
welfare, be presented to you.

2. When I perceived from the forementioned People, how much Sir, you are a
Lover of God and of the study of wisdom; I could not forbear, faithfully from
a true heart; although in a manner, I am unknown to you; to seek you with this
Letter out of a Christian Mind, and to procure acquaintance with you.

3. For it joyeth me at the Heart, when I perceive, how Gods Love works in
his Children, and I rejoice with and in them, in the Lifes-Tree Jesus Christ,
in and out of which, we become begotten and new born, and are branches or
little sprouts in him.

4. Therefore has my mind stirred me up, to seek and to refresh my self with
you Sir as with my fellow Member, in the Spirit and Love of Christ; 1 Cor: 5.
3. Col: 2. 5.
though absent, yet in the will- spirit present, especially in this troublesome
time, wherein we are surrounded with Enemies on all sides, and that our Tree,
is very weak and withered in many Branches.

5. But seeing the Grace- Sun, JESUS CHRIST, at present shines with a bright
aspect on us, and opens his Door, of Love and high knowledge, in many
several Gifts, so that we know the great wonders of his unsuperable wisdom;
therefore we should do well to Heb: 3. 13.
exhort one another in Love as Brethren, Rev: 18. 4.
and go out from BABEL which is kindled or inflamed in the Anger-Fire of God,
for it is really a time of great earnestness or severity, wherein we should
seek with great earnestness to know our selves, and see where we are.

6. And yet it is so, that men see at present many glorious fair sprouts, as
it were with wonder, in the Tree of CHRIST, also in the Midst in the fire of
God, at which I highly rejoice, that the Grace- Sun, shines forth again in
bright cleernesse, and that God still keeps his faithful promise.

7. In that he says in Isaiah, Isai: 49. 16.
He has signed or imprinted us in his hands, which in some Men at present
shows it self in Power, how the Fountain of JESUS CHRIST works powerfully
in them; which in NOTE
short time will be done yet more strongly, as he has promised us in his
Prophets, Isa: 44. 3. Joel 2. 28. Acts 2. 17, 18.
That in the Last time, he will pour out his Spirit upon all Flesh, Math: 24.
14. Mark 13. 10.
and the Gospel of God shall be preached in all the world, for a witness to
all Nations; And also now more and more the time draws near at hand, that the
Beast together with the whore in the Apocalips or Revelations, shall be
destroyed, Therefore we may well Luke. 21. 18.
Lift up our heads to the Mountains of God, and rejoice, therefore, that our
Redemption draws near.

8. Seeing then God has entrusted me with a little Talent, of his Noble
Bounty, out of his wellspring or Fountain of Christ, to know BOTH the Heavenly
and also the outward Natural wisdom.

9. I have therefore the more refreshing in the Children of the wisdom of
Christ; and though I may be unknown to you Sir, yet you should not account me
in your Mind a stranger, who is bound thereto, as a Member in the Love of
Christ, and I entreat, if you please, that you would take me into your
friendship and acquaintance.

10. Till our Noble Pearl Tree of Christ, shall be become manifested IN Us, 2
Pet. 1. 14.
AFTER the Vale of this Tabernacle, and that we shall dwell together in a
brotherly Communion, and THEN we will indeed recreate our selves in, that which
we have begun here in a brotherly union, and in that regard, though absent as
to the body, we will in the Spirit and fore-taste thereof, exhort and comfort
one another, and I pray you friendly to observe it.

11. By Herrn D. G. You May Sir see somewhat of my Gifts, if you have a Mind,
to behold your self in the divine Exorcise in high or sublime divine things,
which are indeed high, and yet are described in the meanest and lowest
simplicity.

12. But since it is entrusted to me, as Gods Bounty, therefore I impart it
very willingly and faithfully to the hungry Hearts.

13. And I will commend you Sir, and yours into the Meek Love of Jesus Christ,
and entreat you in my behalf to salute Herr J. B. as a Lover, as also Herr J.
G. B. friendly:

Dated at Gerlitz
Gerlitz as above. Sir, Your willing Servant, Jacob Behme.

The Seven and Twentieth Epistle of the 21. Junij 1622. An Herrn C. B.
The Open Fountain of Jesus Christ be our quickening or refreshing and Constant
Light.
1. MY very worthy and Loving friend, I wish you and yours, and to all the
Children of Christ, in the Kingdom of our Angelical Fraternity, Gods Love and
Blessing, that the fountain of Christ in us, may spring up, grow and bear much
Fruit, in which sprouting, our true Regeneration consists, and I hope
assuredly in God, as indeed is showed to me, that the time is NEAR at hand,
wherein it will clearly sprout, which I rejoice at.

2. And though at present I see the fire burn in Babell, yet out of the FIRE
will exist a clear shining Light, which will drive away the dark night, but
through a great anxious Birth, will THAT be generated.

3. I exhort my loving brethren, that they would give up themselves into that
anxious birth or Geniture, that they may also sprout forth in the Life of God,
in the Light; and not be comprehended in the Turba; which abominably, at
present spreads abroad with its Properties; viz: with Covetousness, Envy,
Anger, and Pride, and the Fruits that grow out from thence, powerfully draws
its fire to it, in which they clearly burn in many places.

4. I have upon desire and entreaty, made a little Book of Repentance; together
with a form of Prayer; which is all very Earnestly, and a right beginning and
Entrance into the Theosophick School, Weicha.
which upon desire I herewith send to Herr R. B. G. at Weicha, and entreat you,
to send it to him, and you may please to open it, and if you please also to
write a Copy of it speedily, only let the writing to Herr R. remain sealed.

5. And that you will not, if it may be, keep it above three or four days by
you, seeing it is small, it may be soon Copied out, and be sent to Herr R.

6. Also your Brother is not to be forgotten; for without doubt it will be
acceptable to him, and be a true KEY, whom I according to my salutations desire
as much good for, as to my own Life.

7. If you would enter into the Practice of this Book, then you would soon
experience, its profit, for it is generated out of an anxious Twig, through
Fire, and it was and is my own very process or way, whereby I have attained the
PEARL of the divine knowledge.

8. And though indeed, I must live in weakness or infirmity as other Men, yet
the Pearl is more dear to me then all the worlds Good, for the sake of which I
willingly suffer and bear all, that I may but retain or keep that.

9. Sagan
Yet I herewith acquaint you, that Herr D. A. B. M. at Sagan, has written to
me now the Third Time, and desired friendship with me, and earnestly entreated
me to lend him some of these writings.

10. But though I have almost none of mine at home, yet I would serve him with
somewhat to Copy out; and see whether it might turn to Gods honor; but if you
observe, that it is to find fault with them, or pry censoriously into them,
which yet I hope to be otherwise, then you will know further what to do.

11. Build and get increase, as you have gotten increase, from the Divine
Grace, you will well Gal. 6. 7.
reap what you have sown.

12. But as soon as you can, send him this Letter, written to him, together
with a Treatise of your writing, and signify to him, that he should not keep
it long as some do.

13. He is truly esteemed by me, yet Men should see what God will do; with the
book of Repentance herewith sent, when you have copied it out, you may well get
increase, for, it has a great Harvest, and None is much against it, if he be
but a Man and Not a Beast. Thus I commend you to the meek Love of JESUS CHRIST!

Dated as above. Your willing Servant and Brother, Jacob Behme.

The One and Thirtieth Epistle of the 12. November 1622. To Herr C. B.
V. H. I. L. I. C. Our Salvation is in the Life of Jesus Christ.
1. MY very loving Sir and worthy friend, I wish you much Joy in the Power of
the Divine Vision, Inventibility and Perceptibility; together with bodily
welfare; and I rejoice at your steadfastness in the divine Exercise, which to
me is a Mark of the Eternal Fraternity, in the Divine Essence, and I exhort
you in Love therein to remain, in earnest steadfastness; and to wait for the
Eternal Wages, only not to turn to worldly scorn and Apish-Mimick works, or
Imitation.

2. For a true Christian, must not only be a Mouth or Verbal Christian, but
walk in Christ, in his way or Process, and Rom: 13. 14. Gal: 3. 27.
put on Christ: which I hope is clearly done by you, only do not put on the
Devils flattering or Hypocritical worldly Vizard: for this Time is short upon
which the Eternal wages follows; and pray salute in my behalf your brethren
and fellow-brethren in the Lord.

3. I send you here Two Sacks, and pray you to take the pains to fill them with
Corn, and take notice and seal it a little, in the Sack there is a packet to
Herr Rudolphen von Gerdorf, and to Herr Frederick von Kregwitz: which should
only be sent to Herr Gersdorffen, he will send Herr Kregwitz's part well
enough: but pray take the pains to convey it to Herr Gersdorffen, if you cannot
light upon a Messenger to your Mind, then send it by a Messenger on purpose, he
will be well paid by Gersdorffen, else I will pay him my self if he do not.

4. Pray make up the pack again, for I have left it unsealed for you, there is
with each Letter a Treatise annexed, which are useful for you, you should do
well to copy them out with the soonest convenience, and then speedily without
further delay, send it to the forementioned place.

5. But pray pack each Treatise to its proper peculiar Letter, and seal that by
it self, that each Treatise may not want its own Letter.

6. By Herr Kregwitz Letter you should only write out the bound or stitched
Treatise, the other two sheets that are loose, or unsewed, you may have of Herr
Gersdorffen: Kregwitz, has the beginning, fair.

7. Beuten. The Apology to Esaiah Stiefel, and Ezekiel Meths, their followers
called Perfectists.
Concerning the List of Books from Herr Lindenern at Beuten, I answer, that
those Mentioned Books are all mine, which were all made half a year ago, and
part of them this Summer. That which you have now received of Gersdorffen, is
one against the Methists, and here in Kregwitz writing you may find also one of
true Resignation, the other are partly great ones, especially the Book de
signatura Rerum, the signature or impresse of things, concerning the Original
of the Creation and of its Form or Impression, a very high work of forty one
sheets which is copied out once and again.

8. Brucks Troppen
Doctor Brux has also one, and Doctor Gyller of Troppen, has one, when I have
gotten them into my hands, I will send you still one after another; do but
signify to me when you have leisure to write, if you will write out those
which you have now gotten from Gersdorffen, you may do it, only first write out
the Two which I now send with this, and send them away, and send over to me
with the Corn, Herr Gersdorff's writing.

9. Leuten-meritz Boehmia Lip
Concerning the Cosacks; I acquaint you, that they lie in Leuten-meritz in
Boehmia, even to Lip, and very much wast the Country, it is said they are to
draw by us, and go toward Poland.

10. Lusatia
But we have nothing certain; but I suppose they will remain in Boehmia or
Lusatia, and not see Poland, for we shall shortly have new Times, the Present
Peace is not firm, for the sickness is to Death, and was never greater, as
time will manifest.

11. But how else it is with you, and what your Condition is, I would fain
know, if you had written me what to pay, I would have sent it to you, I know
Sir, well enough that you will have opportunity to write it out: and I commend
you to the Love of JESUS CHRIST.

Jacob Behme.

The Four and Thirtieth Epistle of the 13. December, 1622. To Herrn C. B.
Our Salvation is in the Life of Jesus Christ.
1. MY very Loving and worthy Sir, and good friend: I wish unto you, Gods rich
Grace, in the Temporal and Eternal Salvation! And acquaint you, that I have
safely received your Letter.

2. Also I rejoice, at your constant divine Mind, which I hope in God, does
still more and more grow and increase in divine knowledge, wherein Sir you are
bound up therewith, in the band of the Living God, and may be defended in This
great Tribulation, which at present is begun.

3. It is time earnestly, at present to shelter our selves in the fountain of
Life, JESUS CHRIST: for the Sword of Gods Anger will mightily Cut, and be set
against Body and Soul.

4. Therefore we should do well to bannish the Antichrist, the Beast and the
whore out of the HEART; for they shall and must fall, but in whomsoever they
shall still be found, those will the Turba take away with them.

5. Next Spring, I have a purpose if God permit and afford us so much peace and
quiet, to see you Personally, and a little supply, what is necessary, as also
with other good friends and brethren in Christ, and I exhort you faithfully to
prepare for Tribulation, for it cannot otherwise be, it is near and goes on
mightily in Turba Magna, in the Great Turba.

6. This dear time of scarcity, will be greater, and be brought into great
Necessity; and every one should apply himself to earnest Sincerity, Great
Wars Uproars and Insurrections Calamity and Death, will mightily fall in, in
a short time.

This Sir, I acquaint you with, in my knowledge, for your brotherly
consideration.

7. But if you have any desire to read my writings, you may procure them from
Herr Doctor Gersdorffe: I have written to him about you, he will be very well
contented therewith, and thus I commit you to the Meek gentle Love of Jesus
Christ!

Dated in haste as above. Your willing Servant, Jacob Behme.

The Fortieth Epistle To Herr C. B. of the 13. October 1623.
V. H. I. L. I. C. I. V. Vnser. Heil. Im. Leben. Jesus. Christi. In. Vns! Our.
Salvation, is in. the Life. of Jesus. Christ. In. Us!
1. VEry loving Sir, Brother Christianus, I wish you the operative power of
God, that the fountain in the Life of JESUS CHRIST may flow up in you Col: 3.
16.
richly, and that your Soul may continually be satisfied and refreshed,
therein; and may drink of this holy water, and therein grow and sprout, and
bear much good fruit: as also bodily welfare!

2. And I rejoice at your happy condition, and that God has restored your
house or family to health again, praised be God; that you are yet in health,
and know it operatively in my Talent; for God has more and more opened to me
his Grace-Dore, and not alone to ME, but also to many OTHERS, who get to read
these writings, whose heart God has touched; so that they are entered into
repentance and Conversion or amendment; and are in themselves come to the
Inward divine vision, and desire to cast away the Garment of Sins and
Impurity, and to follow CHRIST in Life and Will.

3. As indeed a few days ago, such a Motion of Two Persons were presented to
me, who indeed are high in the world, and loved the world before; In whom I saw
the New Birth in Great power, and in triumph of Divine Knowledge, in such
humility and deep expression; that I never saw the like from my very
childhood, except what God has wrought in my self poor Man, which had not
been possible for me to believe, if I had not found it by Experience, and had
the like.

4. One of which did despise himself as to his Earthly worlds matters, and
disesteemed his former conversation; who did also, so deeply sink down into
Resignation and into Repentance, that he accounted himself TOO unworthy, to
pour out his Prayers before God, but esteemed himself as dead and altogether
unworthy, and fell into Gods Mercy, let him do through and with him what he
would, and that he would pray and Repent through him.

5. Upon which instantly the divine SUN shone in him, and through his Mouth for
THREE hours spoke nothing Else but these words NOTE. GOT.
GOD, KOHT. To GOD I am but DUNG, or filthy Rottenness.
Dung, GOD, Dung; And accounted HIMSELF as Dung in the presence of GOD; in
which Expression, the divine Sun of the joyfullness and Great Knowledge arose;
and wholly carried about and renewed his Heart and Mind.

6. Upon which, he to either with another Man in the like condition came to me;
after I had seen that Motion in him, and did highly rejoice with me in that
through my Book of Repentance, THEY were brought to IT.

7. As indeed in a little time many MORE also were seen in the Like condition,
so that thus I did with great wonder perceive; how the Door of Grace so
mightily moved it self, and in those who are earnest, opens it self: as has
a long time before been showed to me: in which dear Sir and brother, I in
certain truth, and in the presence of God, do relate and show to you, seeing
you are one of the First Fruits of those to whose hands this Talent is come
through the divine appointment.

8. Which you have also received with Joy, and have taken great pains
therewith, and though you do not long after such a thing as above mentioned,
concerning the TWO Persons, nor labor for it, that you might receive it from
God; which if you did, would be a great Joy to me in my spirit; yet indeed a
Man should not purpose to receive from God, according to his own will, but
only sink down into Gods will; as the forementioned Persons; that God might
with him, do, know, will, and enlighten, and lead him, how HE will.

9. But I would inform you of this in Love, for I well know, that your Soul
will together with them and me rejoice thereat also.

10. Further I acquaint you, that God has brought some Pharisees, which were
such before, and reproached me, to the Light, and Converted them, so that they
desire to have and read these writings; and now teach the New Birth and
Renovation in the Spirit of CHRIST, and do esteem and teach, that all
Disputation is Dung, and an unprofitable frivolous thing, but direct men to the
LIFE of Christ, as indeed they are newly desired and written for, by high
Potentates or Great men, so that it is hoped the Daybreak is near at hand.

11. For it is found moreover, at present, that our LEARNED Men love them very
much, with whom I have much conversation, this I mention for your
consideration, because it is well known to me, that with you also the Wolf
stands behind the Lamb; and would devour all.

12. NOTE.
Yet be of good Comfort, and help to pray and work, for our wages will be given
to us in PARADISE, we should not desire wages HERE; for Joh. 15. 5.
we are Christ's Branches on his vine, and should bear good fruit unto him;
which he himself works or brings forth through US.

13. God will fill our Bellies well enough; let us only be contented with a
little, 1 Pet. 5. 7.
he will take care for us: though it may be he often permits Tribulation,
yet it will come to a good End or Issue, and though it may be we must suffer
disgrace and Misery for his knowledge sake, also if we should altogether loose
the outward Life for it; Romans 8. 28.
yet must all serve for the Best, to the Children of God; for it continues
here but for a Moment, upon which our Harvest follows, Gal. 6. 7.
of that which we have sewen.

14. I pray Sir from me salute your brother the Conrector.
Conrector, with the Salutation of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, as also all those who
know me in Love, and Love me in the Truth; with whom you are acquainted and
have to do; and so I commit you together with them, to the Meek Love of Jesus
Christ!

Dated as above. Your willing Servant in the Love of Christ. Jacob Behme.

The Three and Fortieth Epistle To Herr C, B. Of the 27. of December, 1623.
Our Salvation is in the Life of Jesus Christ in us.
1. Dearly beloved Sir Christianus; after wishing you the Divine Love-working!
I would feign know, your condition how it is with you, whether you are still
assaulted with the Pharisaicall venom or Poison; whose Fire is near, wherein
it shall be Transmuted or changed, under which we wait in divine Patience; for
I perceive, that very poison with you in Babell, will burn very much against
me and you.

2. But I have seen also on the contrary to that, the Great Love-Fire to be
kindled in some, so that I know certainly that the time of the divine
visitation is NEAR and clearly at hand: you together with me, and other
Children of CHRIST, should take it in Patience till the Anger of God overthrow
the Evil Beast, together with the Whore.

3. We ought as Children of Christ, to suffer with Christ, and in suffering to
be made conformable to his Image; only let it not seem strange to you, if the
world hate you and be fiercely enraged with you; it must be so, the worlds
Enmity is our Exaltation in CHRIST, for we are strange Guests in the world, and
wander in the Pilgrims Path into our Fathers or Native Country againe^: And
Commit you to the Love of JESUS CHRIST!

Dated as above. Yours in the Love of Jesus Christ well known, Jacob Behme.

The Five and Fortieth Epistle To Herr C. B. Of the 4. of April. 1624.
Our Salvation is in the Life of Jesus Christ In US.
1. MY very loving Sir, Christianus, after the Working Love of our LORD Jesus
Christ, in Soul and Body, desired for you; I acquaint you: I have safely
received both your Letters together with your packet of both the Books.

2. But I have been come home these Few days after I had Journeyed eight days
and almost nights, and have not been at home these Six weeks, else I would
have answered you long ago: also as soon as I came home, I sent a little
Letter, Zitta.
to Zitta for your Books; and informed the Herr who formerly did bid five
Rixdollers for them, that they were with me, but he was not at home; Dresden.
but Journeyed to Dresden, and I have yet no answer from him, till he come
home, If I could find him any where Else, I would willingly do it.

3. And I further acquaint you; that Satan in our Chief Priest, is enraged
against the The way to Christ.
printed little Book, and as it were raving and Mad, with Cursing and
reproaching, lying and Murdering, so that I powerfully see; that this Book is
totally against the Devil, and he would feign murder me for it, and I must at
present because of his horrible persecution stand under the Cross of CHRIST,
and bear the Marks of his wounds for the Devil vomits out now his Last Poison.

4. How it is with your Father and Brother, together with the Conrector, whom I
desire you to salute from me, I would feign know; and what Men with YOU, Judge
of the printed Book, and whether it be reproached: With US, many hungry Hearts
rejoice at it. But the Chief Evil Man or Superintendent, relisheth it NOT;
seeing it teaches Repentance and Prayer. And so I commend you to the Love of
our LORD Jesus Christ:

Gerlitz.
Dated in Gerlitz: as above. Your always in the Love of Christ true faithful
friend, Jacob Behme.

The Six and Fortieth Epistle Of the 6. of April. 1624. To Herr. J. S.
Our Salvation is in the Life of Jesus Christ in US.
1. MY Dear and Worthy friend, Sir John Sigismund, after my hearty wishing of
the Continual Enduring Love working, of our Lord Jesus Christ, in Soul and
Spirit, that the Sun of the Divine, Love may Eternally shine, in, your heavenly
Talent given you of God, that I might Eternally rejoice my self with you.

2. At present I acquaint you, that Satan is so very Angry against us, as if we
had destroyed his Total Hell, whereas it is but only begun in some Few Men,
that his Den of Robbery is stormed and assaulted.

3. But seeing we will not afford him any Lodging further in Our selves
therefore he is become so raving against us, that he supposes he shall cast us
out of the world, that thereby No more such little Herbs or Lillies may grow
in his supposed Garden, which he would have planted with sin in Adam; which
we will submit to our Lord God, and leave it to him, what he will use.J B. Gods
new Planted Rosebud.
US his new planted Rosebud for, and stand still with Patience in Hope, under
the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Psalm. 85. 8.
hear what the Lord will say, what he will do with his Instrument.

4. As I came from you home, I found Satan's prepared Bed, wherein he would have
laid me; If God had not hindered it through some honest hearts, to whom our way
is more known.

5. For the Superindent, or Chief Pharisee, viz. the Primarius.
Primate, has so vehemently raged against the Printed Book, as if his son
had been murdered, and all his Goods burnt; and has vomited out such a heap
of Lies against me, together with such reproachful taking away my reputation,
as in his herewith sent public Gregory Rickter's, Book to which J. B. has
written his Apology.
Pasquill Pamphlet or Libell, is to be read.

6. Such shameful lying and scandal, he has not only broached in the Pulpit,
but also has written about it to Lignitz. Gerlitz. Weichbild Lignitz.
Lignitz to the Pastor called Frisius, and desires him not only to proclaim
it in the Pulpit as he also has done, but cause it to be printed; and
admoninisheth him to complain against it to the Councill-Court at Gerlitz, and
present it in such Names, as if it were the Complaint of ALL the Priests in
Weichbild Lignitz against my writings Especially against the printed Little
Book.

7. This has Frisius done, and represented me to a Councillor at Gerlitz: upon
the Desire of our Primate, so, with a Lying Letter.

8. Upon this, our Primate, has often run to the Chiefest Lords of our City,
and so vehemently raged against me with Lies, and exclaimed against me, and
desired, that as soon as I should come home, they might put me into Prison, and
then banish me out of the City, also he put in such a Lying complaint to the
Council, and Even fired Hell against me and prepared the Lake.

9. But seeing Most of the Lords of the Council, had read my little printed
Book, and found Nothing unchristian-like therein, but was very much liked and
loved by some of them, also by many of the Burgers, therefore many of them
accounted such proposal and desire of the Primate to be unequal, and that
there was no just cause for such persecution of me, and spoke against it and
said, that THIS Religion was NOT New; but it was even the GROUND of the Ancient
holy Fathers, wherein men might find many More such like books.

10. But some, especial whom the Primate had instigated, have thought it good
to summon me and compel me to come before a Council, I should see whether the
Emperor or Prince Elector would not be stirred up by the Priests, to suffer
them to lay hold on me, as it is just so come to pass, when I came before the
Council, it was said thus to me; they ordered me to go aside a little that
they might not be troubled or disquieted with me.

11. Upon this I had framed my Answer to Gregory Rickter.
Answer in writing and would have delivered it up to them; But the Primate
hindered, so that they should not receive any Answer from me in writing, for he
feared HE must be constrained, to Answer for his Lies.

12. And so it was not received by the Council, but I was only warned to go
aside out of the way, or a while, to live with some people that would
entertain me; and so submit to them, that they might be at Quiet, but No
command was laid upon me.

13. Upon this I answered, that seeing Men would not hear my Answer, that I
might declare my Innocence, and could be admitted to no Defense against the
Primate complaints and unjust Slanders; I must commit it to God; and see
whether God would bring me somewhere to honest good people, and so shelter me
at length that I might once get out of the Primates sight.

14. Which was acceptible to them, but they gave NO command that I should and
must be gone, but only admonished me.

15. Whereupon I went home from the Council, where, at the Council Door in
the outward Porch, some spiteful scorners of the Primates retinue, and perhaps
sent by him stood and desired me, and one of them a wicked Buffoone did
anotomize me from the Crown of the Head to the Soale of the Foot; concerning
my Clothes and Gifts, and did so vehemently Fall upon the Holy Spirit and
Scorned IT, at last he also said. That at length the Holy Spirit would be as
Common as Pieces of Leather at the Skinners.

16. Thus this took an End; and the Primate upon this caused this Pasquill or
Libell to be printed; and now I must instantly stand under the Cross of
CHRIST; let God order it according to his Council!

17. I entreat you Sir: that you would let me know your pleasure herein, and
to signify it to me; I suffer it all with patience but my Children will
thereby be shamefully discredited, which yet must be, that the Measure may be
full, and the punishment come.

18. I entreat you to salute, Herr, Doctor Koschwitzen and then also, Herr
Abraham von Franckenberg, together with your Lady Mother, and all the dear
children of Christ, that are with you; the Messenger is in have expecting the
Letter else I would have written more.

19. And I commend you together to the Love of JESUS CHRIST, I will shortly see
you again; all our acquaintance salute you.

Dated as above. Your, in the Love of Jesus Christ, willing servant Jacob Behme.

The Nine and Fortieth Epistle To Herr C. B* Of the 5. of May, 1624.
Our Salvation is in Christ.
1. MY beloved Sir, Christianus, after, desiring all blessed welfare to your
peace and Quiet Rest, I wish you the defense and protection of God, that he
will Guard you with his loving Angels, and bring you to honest Christian
Hearts: and preserve you with Health, and that he will perfect through you, his
own will.

2. Leipzig
I have now written to Herr Baltasar walter, at Leipzig- Mess. 42. Sheets. 16.
Sheets. 27. Sheets. 6. Sheets. 3. Copies of the way to Christ.
Mart, and sent him with it the Book of the Election of Grace or Predestination
of Forty-two sheets, as also of Christ's Testaments, of Sixteen Sheets also,
Twenty-seaven sheets upon Genesis, together with a Clavis of these writings of
Six sheets; and then Three Copies of my little printed Book.

3. Also, I have Answered to both the Herrs of Lubeck.
Lubeck, who have written to me, and sent each of them a Copy of the little
printed book, who are well known to Herr Walter.

4. Salute your Brother the Herr Conrector, and I take it with great
thankfulness, that he will accept my Letters, and I will often send him
somewhat.

5. Next friday, I take my Journey to Dresden.
Dresden, where I am called to the Prince Electors Council, to speak with them
as also with Herr H. Verwaltern of the Laberatory in Schlosse.
Schlosse.

6. God afford his Grace and favor in it! so I commend you to the Love of
Jesus Christ.

Dated as above. Your, in the Love of Christ, willing servant, Jacob Behme.

The Two and Fiftieth Epistle Of the 15. of May, 1624. To Herr T. K. Immanuel.
1. MY very loving and worthy Sir and Brother; in the Life and in the power of
our LORD Jesus Christ; after wishing you the divine Love, and Patience under
the* Cross of Christ, I acquaint you, that I have safely received your letter,
and therein discern your Christian brotherly Love, as indeed it was well known
to me before, and I first rejoice at your, and My, health; I am also praised be
God, in Good condition, together with Herr Melchior Bernt, gotten hither to
Herr Benedict H. where all Christian love and friendship is afforded me, and
they are likewise in good conversation one with another, also my coming, is
Related by Herr H. almost to all the Prince Electors Council, who most of them
read and Love my little printed Book: and acknowledge it for a divine Gift,
and make use of it daily, and have often times desired their salutation and
ready good will, to be remembered to me, by Herr H. who must daily come to them,
seeing he practices there, and they themselves use him; and desire I would
stay here, they will so contrive and order it, that they might come into some
Conversation with me, as they have come to receive more of my writings: and are
daily acquainted with them.

2. As Herr John von Loss, a very wise Person, Imperial and Electorate
Councellor, who is one of the Chief has caused to be signified to me: that he
has so appointed his business, that he will go at the End of the Holy days
to his Schlosse or Castle, a mile from Dresden, where he will receive me and
Herr H. and entertain us some days, for good conference and discourse.

3. In like manner also, the Marshall of the Princes House and Chief Master of
the Horse; have sent to me, and I hope these will, not only look upon me
favorably, but also somewhat countenance my writings: which I account to be
all of it a divine providence, and shall hardly come home again these 3.
weeks, because I must stay here, and Expect how God will order it, also the
fire of Satan's Anger and Rage burns at Home, but I have good friends in this
place and hear nothing of such Tumults and Uproares.

4. But I exhort you in Love, that you would have patience, and expect what God
will do, I have no trouble or perplexity of mind, but am very cheerely at it,
that I see the devil is enraged with anger against me, and does so belie me;
It is the Badg of CHRIST'S ensign, the Devils Lies will well appear, so that
our Enemies must be ashamed; let us only pray, and Isai. 49. 4.
leave the judgment to God; he does so even to Christ and his Children, his
Excuse which yet is false; will not avail; I wish, he did so Pray, as to bring
the HOLY Spirit into the Desk or Pulpit, then he would not bring the Angry
slanders of the Devil into it; It concerns now the Whore in Babell, and
therefore is the Devil so veryenraged, with Anger.

5. I desire you to treat with my wife, and tell her, that she should get
Patience and give her self to Quiet, and not be so fearful and dismayed, at
it, as I perceive she is; for it is very well with me, and I am preserved with
honor and Love, and I will not leave Her; if we have not leave to be in one
place, God will lead us into another.

6. For I see now what the Lords way is, which he will take, she should not
count it any disgrace, because we are persecuted for the divine Knowledge and
Gift, for the sake of Christ our Redeemer; Math. 5. 12.
Christ bids us rejoice, when it is so with us; for our Reward in Heaven is
great; I intend God willing, to take care of Her and my Children, let her but
give her self up to Patience and Peace, and let none put into her head, but
that I will have a care of my self, she need not take care about me; Also there
is a time coming, wherein it will not be dishonorable to her; None know how to
speak any disgraceful thing of us; but only ONE wicked Man, who belyeth us,
and persecuteth us for Christ's sake, it is mere Joy to me, to suffer disgrace
for Christ's sake and his Gift, also our Enemy must help to promote our Good.

7. The Threats of our Enemy is only his evil malicious will, who knows but
a Hook may be put into his Nostrills? I will not let it be unknown to the
Prince Electours Council, and indeed they clearly know it, and do not speak
well of it, in him, also I hope I shall come personally before the Illustrious
Prince Electour himself, and do hope all will be well, he need not lift up
himself so alost and rest on Lies and upon Man, his Christian Heart will be
manifest well enough, even his present friends may well speak against him.

8. But since he supposes it not to be right, that my book is gone forth under
No Name; therefore I hope suddenly it will go forth under a Name, he shall not
hinder it, I have good opportunity: also there are this present Leipsig-Mart,
come forth many such like books in print; Leipsig Mart
he may hinder them, if he think he is the Man that can do it, I hope ere a
year be come about, HIS hinderance will be commonly called Babell.

9. Concerning my Son Jacob, that he is come home, I rejoice, and desire that
he would stay at Gerlitz till my coming, and not entertain dispute or make
contention with any, because of scornful people, that Gods Gifts be not
scandalized, and least the Enemy might say, that we would take up the NOTE.
Sword, and raise uproares, but to have a little Patience, that our good things
may be planted with profit and benefit to others, and we be known to be the
children of CHRIST;

10. For the Age that is Coming, will not be in contention or disputing biting
and devouring, but in Love and Patience, Peace and Joy in the knowledge of the
divine Gift.

11. But seeing God has together chosen us to be first fruits, therefore we
should begin aright, and stand as a Rose among the Thorns; for our Native
Country is in Heaven and not upon Earth, therefore let us labor for THAT.

12, I entreat you to Salute my wife, and all our good brethren in Christ,
with our Love, especially, signify my Condition to Herr Hans Roten that he may
write it to his brother Horr Carel Endern and his brother Michael Endern, that
it might come to the knowledge of Herr Hans Sigmund, how it is with me at
present, and that you would write to them with the soonest, for I cannot now
do it because of hinderance; but Comfort my wife, that she may let go her
fruitless care, there is no danger about me, I am at present as well and better
then at Gerlitz; Gerlitz.
but let her stay at home and be at Rest, and let Babell Burn, our Enemy
stands in the Fire, and therefore he is so angry and wrathful! And I commend
you to the Love of CHRIST.

Dated at Dresden, Dresden.
as above. Your, in the Love of Christ, willing Servant, Jacob Behme.

The Three and Fiftieth Epistle Of the 19. May, 1623. To Herr T. K.
V. H. I. L. I. C. I. V. Vnser. Heil. Im. Leben. Jesus. Christi. In. Vns. Our.
Salvation. In the. Life. of Jesus. Christ. In. Us.
1. MY very loving Sir, and Christian Brother; after my faithful hearty
memberlike, desire of the Continual enduring Love-power, that our Soul may
always draw and drink of the Fountain of Christ.

2. If it go well with you and yours, and our dear friends, as also with my
wife, it will be acceptible to me, as for me, I thank God, who has wonderfully
conducted me according to his good pleasure, I gat in the Middle of the week,
before Christ's Ascension; together with Herr Melchior Bernten to Dresden in
good health, Dresden
to Herr Benedict H. where all Christian Love and friendship is afforded me;
and I am well entertained, and there we have much good Converse.

3 And there are found also amongst the Prince Electors Council, and indeed
the Chiefest of them, very Christian Loving Gentlemen to whom this Theosophick
Ground is very acceptible, and also do read and love my writings; for my
printed Book is already come into the Hands of very Many Officers and other
Learned Men, all which I account to be Good, and a Gift from God, and they
Labor and Contrive, how such good writings as lead Men to the Imitation or
Math. 10. 38. and 6 24. Mark. 8. 34. Luke 9. 33.
following of Christ, may be published, and will help to promote them and Not
suppress them; As in my Country is done out of Hatred to the Person, which God
pity and help.

4. And the Herr Primates slanderous Libell is very wonderfully looked upon by
the Counsel and Learned; and some suppose, that the Malicious Evil Spiteful
Spirit has dictated it to him, and he is despised by the Priests, who say,
that he transgresses and goes aside out of his Office. For Herr Henckel has
shown it to the Counsel and to the Learned, who wonder at the Man's folly, that
he dare vomit out his Evil affections in public against a Christian Book, at
which many honest hearts are troubled, and account it a Judgment from God,
that those who should teach others are so blind, and that themselves do
resist the Truth.

5. Also some of the chiefest Councillors, have caused their Good Will to be
made known to me, and signified that the soonest day they have opportunity,
they will cause me to be invited to them, for a Christian converse and
conference with me, which I look for, and expect what may be done then: But I
hope that it will be all well, for I am assured of this, that they love my
writings, as also the Superintendent here reads and loves my printed little
Book; and I hope also they will here be licensed and Printed, as is signified
to me, and then the strife has an issue, and I expect daily how God will
effect it.

6. I entreat you Sir, to signify to my wife, that she should not perplex her
self by reason of me, but diligently pray, that God would order it for the
best, and if she want any thing she knows very well where she may have it,
she should only keep WITHIN, and a little submit her self; this stormy Tempest
will soon pass over, and the Sun shine upon it: I shall upon the entreaty of
Herr Henckelman, stay with him a Month longer yet, or what time it happens to
be, here at Dresden, for I have promised it to him, seeing he gives me my
charges and other Conveniences and is a very Christian Gentleman, who can do
much for me, yet let it be according to Gods will; I rely upon no Man, but
upon the living God, and am therewith very cheerly and full of Comfort, who
knows how the Current may run?

7. My writings are here copied out, Time will open and discover all; I will
write to you again with the first; so soon as I have opportunity, and inform
you of my condition, I am yet but New and a stranger, but I hope to be well
acquainted and known, e're a Month pass. And thus I commend you to the Love of
Jesus Christ!

Dated at Dresden as above. Your, in the Love of Jesus Christ, willing Servant,
Jacob Behme.

The Four and Fiftieth Epistle To Herr T. K. Of the 23. May 1624.
Vnser. Heil. In. Christo. Jesus. In. Vns! Our. Salvation. in. Christ. Jesus.
In. Us!
1. MY very Dear Sir and Christian Brother, after wishing you the divine Love,
Patience and Hope of deliverance or Redemption from the Driver or Persecutor,
also the constant working in the power of Christ, that your little Pearle-Tree,
may continually grow greater; if it go well with you it is exceeding Joy to me;
as for me I praise God, for my Cause it has hitherto stood in a good Condition
here, God help it further!

2. At the Day of the Holy Penticost, past Noon, the Prince Electours Officers,
viz: the THREE Lords from Swalbach and the Marshall of the House Those very
Noble Potent Chief Rulers under the Prince Electour, Swalbach
viz. the Marshall of his house, the Master of his Horse and the Chief
Chamberlain, and a Counselor, were invited to my Lodging, and came thither
for my sake, to be acquainted with me, which also in Love, favor and kindness
was accepted BY THEM, and they heard me very willingly, and my cause was
acceptible to them, they also promised me favor and assistance in IT, and they
desired and appointed to confer further with me, which I daily expect, also
they read my The Book of Repentance.
printed Book with love and liking.

3. On Thursday in Pentecost, The Most Noble Potent Herr Joachim von Loss,
Privy Counselor to His Imperial Majesty, and to the Prince Elector, and
Officer of the Empire, at his Castle a Mile from Dresden
Dresden, caused me and the Person where I lodged, Herr Henckelme, and a Doctor
of Physic, to be fetched in his Coach, to be acquainted with Me; which Lord
highly loved my Cause and Gifts, who also promised me favor and assistance,
also signified, that he would see to assist my Person with the Prince Elector,
that I might get some liberty and rest, to propagate my Talent.

4. This Herr is a very Learned Man of High understanding, who also has been
very serviceable to our Country, as also to Silesia, since the Fall of Prince
Elector Palatine and King of Boehmia.
Frederick, our King that was, and all high Matters pass through his Counsel,
who desired I would be oftener with him, He will be my Patron and favorable
Assistant, and I expect hourly, when the Illustrious Prince Elector will send
for me, for which, by the forementioned Counselors intimation and assistance,
I am ready: also there are Many other Lords and Councillors, by whom my little
book is loved and liked, as also by the Superintendent; And I hope it will all
be well, after this suffered hurt and persecution.

5. Now if the Primate of Gerlitz have any thing to complain against me, he
might now here present it to the Prince Electours Counsel, and let his
venomous slanders before the honorable Counsill, my Lords at Gaerlitz be tried
and examined, here I would stand directly before him, and set his Lies before
his Face, which he has in a venomous spiteful Manner vomited out before the
Church and in his Libell against me.

6. His Christian heart will be exceedingly praised if he did partly know, how
men look upon his Libell for so very Christian and just a piece.

7. He does the City of Gaerlitz disgrace and dishonor, therewith, in that
they have such a Slanderer and Reproacher for their High Priest, who causes so
infamous a Libell and defamation, to be printed against his Parish-Children;
and cannot instruct them better.

8. He has got him an excellent Name therewith, so that Men account him an
unchristian Man, he had need to have his Mouth altogether stopped, and be
bidden to have a care of his Office, and to imitate or follow Christ and the
Apostles, unless He dare appear, if Men would sift and complain against his
infamous words in the Libell, and in the Pulpit.

9. I hope I should well find Richters or Judges who would Judge this Richteren
Gregory Richter
Richter or Judge, and though I can have no hearing at Gaerlitz, which yet
seems wonderful to these Lords, that a Burger will not receive and take notice
of a Cause, yet I will not make any complaint ^f my Lords at Gaerlitz, without
further Cause.

10. But that it troubles the Primate that I have answered in writing, and
thereupon will fly alost, and reproach much more; to that I say, if he have
not enough of the written Answer, I will commit it to the Press, as it seems
Good to many Learned Persons so to do: I know also a good cause for it; It were
good for him to keep his mouth from slandering, else he must see and hear, that
which will not please him.

11. Though indeed I have no pleasure in THAT, for I perceive very well, that
the Devil would fain Sully and defile my Talent with Contention and
DISPUTATION; but I hope to stand under the Divine Protection and Defense, for I
find now powerfully, how God leads and protecteth his Children, Therefore HE
is to be praised.

12. And it will not so be, that the Primate, will be able to hunt all those
people from Gaerlitz; who read my little Book, for then must he also come to
Dresden, and into many other places, and hunt away the Prince Electours
Council and Priests; but let him have a care, that Gods Anger do not hunt him
into the Hellish Fire fire it were good to Repent.

13. But if he will begin a Reformation, then will the Prince Electour also
look into it, what Manner of Reformation he has in his Country, you need not
be afraid of him, it is but a Pharisaicall zeal without Ground.

14. I hope yet, the Time of the Great Reformation will suddenly come, wherein
Men will be commanded to Reform, and to Teach Christ, and Not Shoemakers Pitch
and Blacking, and to reproach the Children of Christ: Let him come but to
Dresden into the Booksellers Shops, he will see the New Reformation well
enough; which looks like my Ground as to what concerns the Theological
Ground: I hear in this place none reproach it, for it is read with Joy; as even
the Superintendent himself, and Doctor Hoe do now teach the New Birth and the
Inward Man; The Primate of Gaerlitz may forbid it to them, And many OTHERS in
Meissen Saxony Thuringen See-Stadten.
Meissen, Saxony, Thuringen, and See-Stadten, write and teach thereof very
right, if our Primate will hinder THAT, he had need of Time to prescribe a
Council, and take upon him the Reformation, else they will be ALL Enthusiasts,
as he calls, it.

15. I still entreat you, to salute my Wife and Son, and let them read this,
and exhort them to Patience and Prayer, I hope all will be well, they should
have patience yet a little, who knows how the Current may run? This
persecution may well Romans 8. 28.
serve for the best; I will within Three Weeks, if it may be, certainly come
home, though perhaps I must make a Journey hither again, pray write to me in
the mean time, how it goes further with you Sir: and exhort my Son Jacob to
wait, and that he would go often to Hans Bergern Schoolmaster to Elias Behme.
Hans Bergern and see what Elias Learneth; and that he behave himself with his
Schoolmaster in Love, to whom he shall present my Salutation, and not conceal
my purpose, that he may not look upon it, as if there were any CAUSE, to flee
away from the Primate, and for that cause Elias might be abused and Evilly
entreated by his Schoolmaster, therefore my present good condition should do
well to be signified to him.

16. I pray you to salute these Herrs and Christian brethren, viz: Herr Hans
R^hten, Herr Friederick Rhenisch, Herr Martin Mollern, and Herr Michael Hurtzen
that wrote Jacob Behme's life after his decease.
Michael Kurtzen, together with all the Children of Christ, that are near you,
and discover my Condition to them, also that they should as Children of Christ,
Matthew 28.
Labor in the Vineyard of Christ, and let Satan Roar; the Time of Redemption
Comes clearly in ITS Season.

17. Also signify my Salutation especially to the Doctors Wife, and mention to
my Wife and Sons, that they be quiet and Patient, and not be zealous, that
the Evil Enemy may not spy any little hole against us, and that at length
every one may see, that we are pecsecuted for the sake of the knowledge of
Christ and of his Truth; And thus I commend you to the Meek Love of Jesus
Christ!

Dated at Dresden
Dresden, as above. Your, In the Love of Christ, willing Servant, Jacob Behme.

The One and Sixtieth Epistle To Herr C. B. without Date.
Emanuel!
1. MOst Honorable highly esteemed Sir: and faithful friend, your Salvation
and welfare is very acceptable to me, I would long ago have visited you with a
Letter, for I long also to understand your condition; seeing you give your self
to the Study of WISDOM, which is more dear to me then the whole world, and do
wish that I might once confer with you therein as it is necessary: as I hope
shortly to make a Journey toward you, then will I speak with you.

2. Hitherto I have been hindered by Gods permission, for I have been these Six
Weeks, cast down into the Sickness of the Evil raised Soldiers, and scarce
come to health again.

3. Also how it is with our Dr. Waltern, or where he is if you know any thing
of him, signify it to me; also how you go on in your study, whether the Grace
Door be more opened to you, to apprehend the high Divine Mystery, it would be
very acceptable to me to know; for I hope if you order your life therein, and
did bring the Practice into Exercise, that Door would be opened to you, so that
you would see, with right or true Magical Eyes in Magiam Divinam into the
Divine Magia.

4. For so soon as the Sprout of the New Man springs, it has its Seeing or
Sight; for as the outward Man sees this outward world, so also the New Man,
sees the divine world, wherein it dwells; for it is written; 1 Cor. 2. 10.
The Spirit of Man in the Spirit of Christ, searches all things, even the
depths of the Deity.

5. And although, it lies not in the Searching and flying aloft, if men will
search in Reason, but in a humble lowly submitting to enter into it, that the
Soul desire Nothing but Gods Love; now when it attaineth THAT, then it suddenly
brings the richly joyful Spirit of God, the Souls Image or the similitude of
God, into the Heavenly Divine School of the Noble and precious knowledge; where
then it is taught more then in the School of this world; for it studyeth in the
School of the Divine Wisdom; The Holy Spirit is its Schoolmaster, also its
knowing and understanding.

6. It is no knowing of God, that a CREATURE knows or feels God, but THAT
knowledge only which is IN God: The Twig draws into it, the Sap of the Tree;
if a Man be not with his will-spirit entered into God, but into the outward
Reason, then he is BLIND to God.

7. But if he with earnestness desires God, then he becomes in his Desire
impregnate with Gods Substance, and Gods Substance becomes given to him for
his OWN propriety, wherein the Spirit of God rules; and he becomes Gods
Child, viz: a Twig on the Tree.

8. Seeing then I perceive from Herr Walter, that you lead your Life in Prove.
16* 6.
The Fear of God; and he shows me also your writings, that you have a desire
after the Divine Wisdom; and after the wellspring or fountain of Christ;
therefore I am the more encouraged to write unto you, and to inform you of the
WAY thereof, for it affords me mere Joy, when I discern any of Gods Children.

9. Just as one Twig of a Tree, enjoys it self with the other in the Tree,
with an amiable or Lovely Essence, so also do the Children of Christ; but if
any thing in my writings should be misunderstood; do but signify it to me, and
it shall be brought into an easier understanding for you; or if it were too
deep for your Mind or Thoughts, I would set it down more simply and Childlike,
whereby the Pearl might be sought and found with delight; for it is not given
in vain.

10. But seeing you are one of the First, whom God will favor with it;
therefore I exhort you, in true Christian Love, that you would diligently seek
the Noble Jewel; you will certainly attain it, for though it seems as if it
would not; let not THAT discourage you, and do not shrink back, but stand
still; If any will be a Soldier he must fight; where God is nearest of all he
will not discover it, his Children must be proved or Tried.

11. We must enter into Combat against the Old Adam, and kill him, if a New be
to grow out of him; if the fair Crown or Garland be once set upon you; then it
would afterward need no more searching after; you will have one that will
search well enough; who will seek and find himself IN you; that you shall see
God and the Kingdom of Heaven, according to that Glimps or discovery; This I
would needs friendly intimate to you.

12. A very Hard Time is coming, for that year, and the year following; will be
years of great Tribulation, for the sickness and Rev. 18. 8.
death of the Where is Coming, but she will not observe it, she says still, I
am a Virgin, her wounds are uncurable.

13. Dear friend Christianus, let us indeed open our Eyes aright, that we learn
to know Her, and Rev. 18. 4.
fly from her, else we may receive her plagues and Punishments; there is no
je^^ing, it will cost Body and Soul; The highest Good.

Thus I commend you to the Love of JESUS CHRIST. Jacob Behme.

Prove. 18. 10.
The Name of the LORD is a strong City; the Righteous, runs unto it and is
exalted.
The two and sixtieth Epistle C. B. without Date.
Immanuel.
1. DEar faithful friend and brother in the Love of Christ, I wish constantly
in my desire, that you may continue steadfast in the way you have begun, that
your hunger and thirst after Christ's wellspring or fountain may constantly
endure, for it is the assured John 6, 44.
drawing of the Father in the Spirit of Christ to him.

2. The Earthly Adam is a Cover before it, that Christ in this Earthly
Tabernacle cannot be totally manifested, for Holy Psalm. 126. 5.
David, the Man of God, says; They go away sewing in Tears, but they reap in
Joy.

3. I exhort you very brotherly, that you be not discouraged, though the SUN of
the rich Joyfullnesse do not shine in the Old Adam, it is Gods will it should
be so; for with its richly Joyful Glance or Lustrous Beams, it belongs not
to the Earthly Man; But it gives it self many times to the Dead Mystery,
which disappeared or faded in Adam, and at the Last Judgment Day shall 1 Cor.
15. 43.
arise in Power, such a friendly Aspect Glimps or Countenance; for the Comfort
of the poor Soul; and to the strengthening of the New Sprout: But here it must
be generated or born in mere longing and anxious desire: The Sun oftentimes
hides it self; but so it seeks only into the Root, that it may generate a
Twig out of the Tree.

4. Wrestle cheerfully, the Crown or Garland is assuredly deposited in you, it
will assuredly be set upon you; according to the Measure which pleases God;
for according to what he will use any for in this world, according to that
measure also he manifests himself in him in the outward Man: but the true
Lilly-Twig or Branch; stands not in the outward world; It is exceeding Joy to
me, when I perceive, that you long anxiously after the Lilly, and think you
have it not; but I see much better then you, WHAT you have; which often
delights me thus with my exhortation to awaken and stir it up; that the Tree
may grow and become Great; for I would fain also NOW partake of its Fruits: for
which things sake, I labor toward YOU and Many OTHERS, accordingly as I am
driven.

5. I send you the The Philosophic Globe see in the 40. Questions of the Soul.
Magic Globe, with the Explanation thereof, you will have therein a fine
delightful walk for recreation: but send me it back again as soon as you can,
I will shortly send you somewhat else.

6. The Little Jacob Behmes little Book of the Two Testaments, of Baptism and
the Supper.
Testaments, I cannot get at present; but am promised to have it copyed out.

7. I pray, if you see any acquaintance of Zolnig.
Zolnig, send this enclosed Letter to Herr M. W. if not, then leave it at his
House, then it will come at him.

8. I thank you also for sending the Corn: I will in Love, Pay you for it; I
have justly received it, and perceive your diligence: If Herr M. W. would send
me my Sack again, I should rest contented, but I perceive very well how his
heart is, I have discovered to him the Babylonish WHORE: and still friendly
write to him; to try if he will become seeing, and fall away from the vierg^ of
Antichrist, though it seems to me they are but Glistering Specious words, as
they almost all of them do give.

9. For, I have in this Generation found very Few of them, wherein there is
true earnestness; but they have only Math. 13. 20. Mark 4. 16. Luke 8, 13.
received the History, with Joy; and suppose it sticks in the knowledge, viz:
in the Letter; they make ostentation therewith: yet I know some wherein there
is sincere earnestness, where I have seen the Spirit in Power, God be praised!

10. Pray signify my Salutation and willing Service in Love, to your Brother
the Herr Conrector; to commend one another into the Love of Jesus Christ.

Your Loving Friend and Brother in CHRIST, Jacob Behme.

FINIS.
J.B's hand writing, or Manuscript Epist: in High Dutch I.S's in English
I Have in Jacob Behme's own hand writing, a Letter of his in the High Dutch
which was sent me by Michael L^ Blon, Resident for the Queen of Sweden in
Holland, with the States there: of the 10/20 April, 1650. the Letter of J. B's
he received from Abraham von Frankenberg, who was then at Mr. Beyerlands in
Amsterdam, to whom Jacob Behme wrote in his life time, and conversed much with
him, he was a Learned Man, much acquainted with the Divine Mysteries of the
Hoiy Scriptures and other the profoundest Literature; this I also translate
into English, and here insert.

J. B. used to put on the Back of his Letters this Mark, as in the Letter I
have, appears, viz: OOO

Which signifies the THREE Eternal Worlds one in another as ONE; or the THREE
Principles; or the THREE Persons in the TRINITY; whose impresse is to be seen
in All things whatsoever, both in THIS World and in ETERNITY.

The Letter follows thus in High Dutch, in J. B.'s. own hand writing.

OOO
Licht Heil und Ewige Krafft auss them Brunquel des Hertzens Jesus Christi sei
unser erquickung.
Erenvester wolbenampter Herr euch seind meine willige dienste Iederzeitbevorn,
ich fuge euch zu wissen Das ich in den verheischenen schrifften bin etwas
verhindert worden, welche ich euch chicken wolt nach Zu schreiben, den Sie
seind bey einem liebhaber derselben auch nach geshriben worden, weil aber H.
Pa^tzer W. ^^t wider zu Land ankomen, hat er dieselben Ietz selber unter der
feder, so euch aber I ge^ipte etwas darum Zu haben und nach ^u schreiben, So
sol euch etwas, so balde es muglich is it, gefolget werden und thue euch
Gotlichen schutze Empfhelen.

Datum Gerlitz. Jacob Behme.


Translated into English written in J. S's. own hand writing.

OOO
Light, Salvation, and Eternal Power out of the Fountain of the heart of Jesus
Christ, be our Refreshing.
Honorable worthy Sir* let my willing service be always presented to you I
must acquaint you, that I have been somewhat hindered in the writings I
promised you, which I was to send you to Copy out; for they have been by a
lover of them now lately Copied out, but seeing H. Baltzer Walter, is come into
this Country again, he has them now himself in hand, under his Pen, but if you
have a Mind to have any of them and to copy them out, as soon as is possible
some of them shall be sent, so I commend you to the Divine Protection

Dated at Gerlitz Jacob Behme.


That in High Dutch was the hand writing of Jacob Behme; that in English of
John Sparrow: Thus the very Character of All Manuscripts may be communicated
and perpetuated.

This I have caused to be expressed from both the Hand-writings exactly in a
Copper-plate by Edward C^cker and here printed off, annexed: Tuesday 3.
December 16^^.

John Sparrow.

Because I found after the printing of this Sheet 5. Epistles not Eng^ished, I
here insert them.

The Third Epistle. 24. of October, Anno. 1619. 1.
I present you my Salutation through and from God, wishing you the Light of the
divine Kingdom of Joy in our Emanuel.

2. The Letter you sent me, together with my writings I have directly safe
received of Zeigern, and as soon as I had sealed those writings up, I sent them
to H. N. by N. N. who at that present was with me, I would needs send him this
Letter, seeing it was already sealed, and supplied with my writings enclosed in
it. But now I understand in my Mind, seeing it happens as it does: that you
have sent for them, that it may be a providence of God, therefore I send them
to you herewith, pray consider them, there is a very Noble Jewel therein, which
God has bestowed since your departure; and I acquaint you, that a very lovely
Gate is sprung open, into which, if God will, as it highly appears he will, we
will enter; concerning which yet I can say Nothing, for it is not belonging to
my outward Man, but as all Vegatives or Plants of the Earth, rejoice when the
Sun arises, and shines upon them with its power and virtue; so also my Soul
in the fair Wonder-Blossom, wherein the Lord is so sweet and friendly, I hope
I shall well refresh my self with it, which you will perceive in this last Part
of this The Three Principles.
Book, if God open the Gates to you in HIS Spirit.

3. I cannot write IT to you, for it is wonderful, I hope God will open your
Heart, that you also may taste and relish somewhat thereof: you desire to know,
whether I had any converse with the Herr you know of, I must acquaint you, that
I could not come to him, for I have had much to do in another Country, where
indeed with my outward Man, I was not at home, and am hitherto hindered with a
Journey to Prague, for Seven Days, and then what God will shall be done,
although at present a Deep Gat^ stands open to me, and therein I shall do
what GOD will.

4. I send you the finishing of this Book sealed, and if you have an
opportunity, either send it to H. N. or to me again with the other writings,
for they were on the way to H. N. but when the Messenger came from you, I held
it fit to send all thus packed up, and I desire you to mind it highly and
exactly, that there is The Threefold Life.
another very excellent high work, apprehended in the Spirit, and do hope God
will vouchsafe it to us, you may search further after it, in short time it
shall be sent you. And so I commend you into the divine Kingdom of the Joy of
the Eternal welspring or Fountain.

Jacob Behme.

The One and Fiftieth Epistle. To Herr F. K. M. D. Of the 9. May, 1624.
V. H. I. L. I. C. I. V. Vnser. Heil. Im. Leben. Jesu. Christi. In. Vns. Our.
Salvation. Is in. the Life. of Jesus. Christ. In. Us.
1. MY very dear Sir and Christian faithful friend, I Heartily wish you the
divine Love, that the Sun of Righteousness in Soul and Spirit may Eternally
shine to you! If it still go well with you, it would be great Joy to me, to
know; God be praised I am at this time in Good bodily Health: But very much
outwardly bespattered with Satan's Dirt, by the Pharisaicall spirit; for how
very enraged Satan is at me and my printed little Book of Repentance, I can
scarce write to you, and only from the Chief Pharisee and those that are like
him; For they fear least their Authority and Respect might fall, if unlearned
people should bring forth the highest Ground, and that people might require of
them the Imitation or following of Christ and his Apostles, in Life and
Doctrine, then must their Belly-God fall, and their Mind be somewhat more
lowly, all which, does not relish.

2. But it must come to pass, the Time is generated or Borne, and no
Reproaching will help; for by their Reproaching they cause the People to ask
after these Writings, and so they further them, more then hinder them, as is
done among us at present; that almost every one would feign see them, and find
the Great wonder, and what kind of wild Beast is therein, and when they come
to read them, they are amazed at their Blindness, and enter into themselves,
and consider their Lives according to it, whereby very Many of them have
Converted, and have entered into Repentance, and have desired friendship with
me, and those which before had been reproachers are become afterward the
Sheep of Christ. So very wonderfully the Lord manageth his way, and all things
must serve for the Best to Gods children.

3. The Primate with us has caused to be printed a venomous lying Pamphlet or
Libell of one Sheet in the Latin Tongue in Carmenweise. In Meeter.
Verse, against me, wherein Men may wonderfully see his Spirit, and Satan,
with his Claws; against which I have written an Answer, which together with
the Libell you may get of Herr Michael Endern, he will willingly lend it you,
there you will see wonderful strange things, which I cannot here write to you.

4. Mit Zeigern
I send you also by Zeigern, one of the Printed little Books, I hope you will
well practice it, seeing without that you are a Lover of the true Ground, and I
would feign have sent you somewhat of the writings, but I have lent them all
abroad.

5. This day, being the 9. of May, I travail to Dresden, whither I am Invited
by the chief Eminent Persons of the Prince Electours Court, for a Conference
with me, which also read and Love my writings, God give Grace and Power for
it, what may there come to pass, I shall inform you at another Time.

6. And I entreat you, to send the Packet to Herre Martin Mosern by some safe
opportunity, wherein you will do him and me a service of Love, and yet you may
have acquaintance with Herr Michael Endern if that were not done, where you may
Get All my writings, for he has them ALL, and is a very great Practicer of
them, and a loving Man, also very Secret and Faithful, you will have a good
friend of him; And I commend you to the Love of Our LORD JESUS CHRIST!

Dated as above. Jacob Behme.

The Seven and Fiftieth Epistle To N. N.
1. MY dear Sir, next the wishing you the Love of our LORD Jesus Christ, in
Soul and Spirit; I acquaint you Sir, That in my Absence this Journey; when I
was abroad at Herr Hans Sigismund^, the Pharisaicall Spirit, has raged, as if
he would storm Heaven and break Hell in pieces, and all because of the The
Way to Christ.
printed little Book, which yet is very highly loved by many; And I do not
know yet how it will go with me, in regard of this Pharisaicall Spirit, but I
put my hope and whole Confidence, in the Love of Jesus Christ, and do Praise
God that I shall be made conformable to the Image of Jesus Christ, and suffer
reproach for HIS sake, and will bear all with Patience under the
Cross of Christ; for Satan stormeth or warreth against Christ, and Christ
against Satan, and it goes as it did with Christ, one part say, Joh. 9 17.
31. Chapter 8. 48.
He is an honest Good man, and a Prophet, the other say Joh. 10. 19. 20.
He has a Devil. How it will conclude I shall let you know further Sir; and I
commend you to the Love of Jesus Christ!

Sir Your willing servant Jacob Behme.

The Nine and Fiftieth Epistle
V. H. I. L. I. C. I. V. Vnser. Heil. Im. Leben. Jesu. Christi. In. Vns. Our.
Salvation. Is in. the Life. of Jesus. Christ. In. Us.
1. MY Dear Sir Augustinus, and Christian Brother, I heartily, wish you the
Divine Light, in the working Power of the Holy Ens in Christ! That you somewhat
conceive my Gift and love it, and that you read and write it out, is NOT of
me; also I am NOT he that gives you the understanding and apprehension, much
less, the desire to do so, but the Spirit of God IN your self, gives it, for
if that could be done by me, and if I had the ability, I would have it so, that
All men should understand it, within them; and that which is vouchsafed to me
poor unworthy Man, out of or from the Divine Gift.

2. Also, it does not become me to arrogate it as my proper own, much less to
receive the worlds Honor or Gifts for it, unless what might be done by the
^ich of their Overpluss for the sustenance of Life, and for the further
expectation from this Talent; therefore I desire nothing of any Body.

3. Your sincere and rightly Zealous and Christian Mind, is very well known to
me: and I love it more then Money or Riches, or any worldly Goods: for I know
that I can have a Christian brother, for an Eternal Enjoyment, and rejoice my
self in and with him, as one Member with and in another; concerning which I am
well satisfied, and CHRIST will be my Rich abundant Wages, if I through my
diligence have helped to work and gain any thing in the vineyard of Christ: I
would in no way desire any Temporal thing for it. And I commit you to the Love
of JESUS CHRIST.

Jacob Behme.

The Sixtieth Epistle. To Herr A C.
Immanuel.
1. IN Christ much beloved Sir and friend, I wish you the divine Love and
blessed Knowledge, and all Temporal welfare! In your well intended Beginning,
you might indeed be somewhat hindered, but a True right Christian Zealous Heart,
has its School in it self, even in the midst of all Businesses and
Employments; for if we follow or or Imitate Christ, and attain Him in US, then
he is in all Things our Beginning and End and our Teaching-Master or
Schoolmaster, in us.

2. It may indeed be very advantageous to our Conversation, since you may have
so fair an Opportunity, as to have these writings in your Hands, have a care
do not give it over or neglect it, but apply and fit your self therein, you
will find a very excellent understanding in the Brief Summary; which at
present I have in Hand to write; of which Herr Tobias has written out a part
already.

3. For there is a very clear Morning Sta^^^ arisen, at which, if your Spirit
might be unlocked, you would Wonder what the most High at present favors us
with all, wherein men may clearly see, how the Bright day breaks forth in the
midst of the Dark Night, at which, many hungry. Hearts will rejoice, and
thereby be freed from ALL Error.

4. I exhort you as my dear brother, that you would Lay-hold on this fair
Season and opportunity and Not slip the Rose-Time, but Bud-forth, together with
others, as Good Sprouts in our Fair Garden of Delight.

5. For, the End with Babell, is at Hand, and the Turba has a Great Harvest to
Reap, for it will be Earnest and severe, but let every One seek or search
himself in the Time of Grace, and go forth out of the Fleshly Babell, that he
be not also taken IN it, it is high Time, and is no fiction forged by Us, it is
become highly apprehended and known.

6. And I also exhort Herr Tobias brotherly, that he would make good use of his
present fit and acceptible Time, and seek or search himself, I intend it
faithfully; thus I commend you to the meek Love of Jesus Christ!

Yours in Love, Jacob Behme.

A Table of Behme's LXII. Epistles.
Epistles, printed in High Dutch cont' verses. In English printed Epistles
cont' verses. 1. To. C. v. E. 1618. 18. January, 12. 25. Co: 28. 2. To C. v. E.
1619. 22. October. 10. 27. 18. 3. -- 1619. 24. October. 4. Here printed. 3. 4.
4. -- 1619. 15. November. 48. 15. 48. 5. To C. v. E. 1619. 1. December. 10. To
Carel. von Endern. 26. 18. 6. To C. v. E. 1620. 4. May. -- 28. 7. 7. To Dr. B.
W. 1620. 7. June. 11. Before the supersensuall Life. -- 14. 8. To Paul Keym.
1620. 14. August. -- 1. of 1000. years Sabbath. 4. 118. 9. To C. B. 1620. 12.
September. -- Here printed. 9. 18. 10. To H. A. v. S. 1620. 12. September. --
Concerning the Aurora. 3. 40. 11. To Paul Keym. 1620. 18. November. -- 2. of
1000. years Sabbath. 5. 88. 12. To H. C. L 1621. 10. May. 80. To Casper
Lindnern. 2. 80. 13. To C. B. 1612. 8 June. -- Here printed. 13. 8. 14. To C.
B. 1621. 21. June. -- Here printed. 14. 4. 15. To Dr. J. D. K. 1621. 3. July.
-- 22. 20. 16. To Her. C. D. S. 1621. 3. July. 14. 17. 12. 17. -- 1622. 3.
July. 11. To Christianus Berntern, 2. July 18. 13. 18. To Her. S. v. S. 1622.
3. July. -- 1621. 3. July. 16. 12. 19. To Her. C. B. 1622. 3. July. -- Here
printed. 19. 8. 20. To H. J. D. K. 1621. 3. July. 15. 2. Apol. to B. Tylcken.
-- 25. 21. To H. C. B. 1621. 8. July. -- Here printed. 21. 4. 22. -- 1621. 17.
October. 37. 9. 38. 23. To H. C. B. 1621. 29. October. -- Here printed. 23. 6.
24. To H. v. S. 1622. 1. January. -- Question about A Statue. 24. 14. 25. To C.
v. E. 1622. 22. February. 29. 5. 26. To C. B. 1622. 28. April. -- Here
printed. 26. 13. 27. To C. B. 1622. 21. June. -- Here printed. 27. 13. 28 To
Her. H. v. T. 1622. 6. July. -- To Chr. Steinberger Medicus. 23. 18. 29. To F.
K. M. D. 1622. 17. July. 10. To Fred. Krausen. 14. 10. 30. To N. N. 1622. 1.
November. 27. Of Killing of Antichrist in Us. 10. 27. 31. To Herr. C. B. 1622.
12. November. -- Here printed. 31. 11. 32. To Herr. N. N. 1622. 10. December.
24. 31. 12. 33. To Her. J. B. 1622. 30. December. -- To John Budorfsky. 12. 10.
34. To Her. C. B. 1622. 13. December. -- Here printed. 34. 7. 35. To Hr. N. N.
1623. 19. February. 14. 7. 25. 36. To Hr. F. K. 1622. 19. February. 16. To
Fred. Kraussen Dr. Med. 21. 17. 37. To Hr. A. v. S. 1623. 20. February. 13. Of
Predestination. 20. 22. 38. To Hr. G. F. v. F. M.D.Z.G. 1623. 27. February. --
Of Predestination. 19. 42. 39. To Hr. N. N. 1623. 30. March. 21. Of Temptation.
13. 21. 40. To Hr. C. B. 1623. 13. October. -- Here printed. 40. 14. 41. To Hr.
N. N. 1623. -- 76. Of a true Christian. 1. 76. 42. To Hr. G. F. and J. H. 1623.
12. November. 36. Of the True and False Light. 6. 82. 43. To Hr. C. B. 1623.
27. December. -- Here printed. 43. 8. 44. To Hr. M. M. 1624. 19. March. -- To
M. Mausern, of G. Rickter. 33. 27. 45. To Hr. C. B. 1624. 4. April. -- Here
printed. 45. 4. 46. To Hr. J. S. 1624. 6. April. 19. Here printed. 46. 19. 47.
To N. N. 1624. 20. April. -- 32. 17. 48. To Hr. N. N. 1624. 25. April. 16. 11.
30. 49. To Hr. C. B. 1624. 5. May. -- Here printed. 49. 6. 50. To Hr. N. N.
1624. 8. May. -- 34. 30. 51. To Hr. F. K. M. D. 1624. 9. May. 6. Here printed.
51. 6. 52. To Hr. T. K. 1624. 15. May. 12. Here printed. 52. 12. 53. To Hr. T.
K. 1624. 19. May. 7. Here printed. 53. 7. 54. To Hr. T. K. 1624. 23. May 17.
Here printed. 54. 17. 55. To Hr. T. K. 1624. 13 June. 21. To Dr. Tobias Kobern.
35. 23. 56. To Hr. N. N. -- Without Date. 33. Upon A Drs. 4. Questions. 8. 32.
57. To Hr. N. N. -- Without Date. Here printed. 57. 1. 58. To Hr. N. N. --
Without Date. 6. 30. 5. 59. To Hr. A. C. -- Without Date. 3. Aug: Coppen. Here
printed. 59. 3. 60. To Hr. A. C. -- Without Date. 6. Here printed. 60. 6. 61.
To Hr. A. C. -- Without Date. -- Here printed. 61. 13. 62. To Hr. A. C. --
Without Date. -- Here printed. 62. 10. J. B's Manusc. Ep. OOO. Without Date. --
Here printed. -- -- Dr. C. Weisners Ep. 1651. 21: February. -- Next following.
-- 37.

Doctor C. Weisner's Epistle Narrative. Being, A True Relation from Herr C.
Weisner Doctor Medicinae, a Dr. of Physic, out of which the Reader that loves
God, will have information concerning the Blessed Jacob Behme his Meekness
which he exercised and held forth; 1. In his Conference with the forementioned
Doctor. 2. With the Spiritual Lords or Clergy at Gerlitz. Gerlitz. Dresden.
3. In his Examination at Dresden, in the Presence of the Illustrious Prince
Elector, and eight of the chiefest Professors of Divinity, etc.
Now as concerning the Course of his Life, J. B's. Life at Large with the Book
of the way to Christ printed at Amsterdam, Anno. 1658.
it shall be related at Large, in the Book of the Way to Christ, that was in
the Press at Amsterdam, in the Year 1658.
The Grace of God, together with brotherly Love and Faithfulness, I desire to
commend to you.
1. TO give you information and Testimony concerning the Blessed Jacob Behme
Teutonicus, I am in the presence of God willing and inclined to do it, but know
little of him by my own Experience; yet so much as is known to me, I write to
your Honor, with a hearty good will, and acknowledge my self obliged to do
much more then that to serve you.

2. My acquaintance with the forementioned blessed Jacob Behme The Teutonick,
was made about July in the year 1618. at Lauben.
Lauben in my Native Country, by a Handicrafts-man a Taylour (now deceased,
called Libertus Schneller) who together with his Wives Brother a young
Preacher; by name Solomon Schroter; which were both Jacob Behm's and my good
friends, and were his beloved faithful scholars, who were very diligent in
his writings, and had through Prayer attained an excellent knowledge therein
from GOD.

3. But I was Praeceptor or Turour to a Noble Man's Children at Schweinitz
called Balthazar Tilken. Schweintz.
Balthazar Tilken, and there seeing he was an Opposer of Jacob Behme; I gat
Adeo Contrariam Mentem contra illum, so opposite a mind against him, God
forgive me in it, that I also became altogether averse to him, and yet
supposed, that he stuck in or adhered to the Opinion of the Calvinists.
Reformed, concerning Predestination, or the Election of God in his Son, etc.

4. Whereupon the two forementioned friends when at a time the blessed Man came
to them at Lauben, entreated ME to come thither, and gave me occasion and
opportunity of a Christian Conference with him, which, praised be our Dear God
for it, did so happily come about; that we become friends and laid aside all
animosity and misunderstanding, and were united together in Christian brotherly
Love.

5. Where the blessed Man did bear in very wonderful great friendliness with
my Academicall Turbulency and discoursed in such Love, that for the sake of the
fear of God, I could no longer resist or oppose him, but must yield and give
up my self, to the Truth and Friendliness of the Spirit of JESUS CHRIST in him;
since which time I never spoke with him or saw him any More.

6. But De Actu Gerlicensi concerning the proceedings at Gerlitz, which I
lately gave you an account of at N. I have received true information of it from
the forementioned faithful friends: thus; Antagonista Gerlicensis ille qui
ibidem Pastor Gewesen, His Antagonist at Gerlitz, who was Pastor there, did
lend to one of Jacob Behmes Nephews, a young Baker who had lately married a
Niece of Jacob Behmes. One The value 4. 6.
Doller for his necessity, to buy wheat to bake white Bread at Christmas, for
which he presented him in Thankfulness, a good big White-Loafe; and then soon
after the Holy Days, he brought the Doller of Money and paid it him again; in
hope the Preacher would for the Interest of the Doller, accept of his former
Present, in full satisfaction being he used it but for a Fortnight.

7. But the Preacher unsatisfied, pronounced against him Gods Anger and
terrible Curse, and so vehemently terrifyed the young Baker therewith, that he
fell into very deep perplexity Melancholy and despair of his Salvation, in
that he had enraged the Priest, and had such a curse or Anathema from him; so
that for the space of several days he spoke to No Body; nor would say what
hurt him, but went up and down sighing and speaking to himself with Great
perplexity; till at last upon the hearty entreaty and desire of his, WIFE her
uncle Jacob Behme took the matter upon him: and so friendly discoursed with the
perplexed young Man, till he found what lay upon him, and after he perceived
it, he comforted him and spoke peace to him.

8. And without discouragement he cheerfully went to the enraged Preacher, and
courteously entreated him, no longer to be an gry with the young Man, but that
he would be favorable to the young Man, he would himself, for the young Man's
sake, satisfy him, the enraged Preacher; what he desired further for the
Interest of the Doller he lent him, and would willingly bring it to him, if he
did but know how much the Primate desired: yet thought that the poor young
Man, according to his ability, had paid enough for it, yet if he pleased to
have any more, he would supply what he was wanting in it.

9. Whereupon the Preacher with impatience brake forth; saying what had that
Rascal (J. B.) to do with him, to disquiet Molest and disturb him? What was
that to him? he should meddle with his own business and be gone.

10. But he continued his importunity, and entreated his favor promising to
make satisfaction, and give him content: But the Primate, ashamed of his
injustice and wrong, would not acknowledge it, Nor say, what he desired, but
still continually bad this supplicant or interposer to get him gone, and showed
him the outward Door out of which he was to get him gone.

11. But the Primate sat upon his chair and had his Slippers on, and when the
Honest interposer humbly and meekly sighing to God, very lovingly, for his
unsuccessfull business went away; as he was going out of the Door, gave the
Angry Primate a Christian valediction, saying, GOD preserve your worship, the
Primate was angry at it, and because off his blessing him was much worse then
before; and took of his Slipper, and threw it out at the honest Man, saying,
what have you to do, thou wicked Rogue, to bid me or wish me a good Night?
what care I for thy Blessing? etc.

12. But the Dear Man calmely took up the Slipper and carried it and laid it
at his Feet again, and said: Sir! be not angry I do you no wrong, I commend
you to God: So at this time he departed from him.

13. Till on Sunday following the Preacher in the Pulpit, vehemently inveyed
against the blessed Dear Man of God, and thundered abominably and horribly
against him by Name particularly threatening the destruction of the whole City;
exclaiming against him for a maker of uproares a seditious vain fellow, and a
Heretic.

14. And admonished them the Magistrate in the presence of the Congregation, to
be avenged against such Tumultuous opposers of the Holy Offi^e or Function of
Preaching, who disturbed the Preacher, and molested him in his own House: and
writes Heretical Books, least God be angry with them, and in his Anger, cause
the City to sink and be swallowed up; as was done at the Insurrection of Corah
Dathan and Abiram, who withstood Moses, and they and theirs with them must be
swallowed up into the Earth and go into the Abyss of Hell.

15. Upon which the Innocent, and falsely accused Man, who fate just at a Pillar
right over against the Preaching Pulpit; where he had his Seat, and heard it
all with patience himself; held his peace, till all the People were gone out of
the Church, he staying all that while in his Seat; till the Preacher with his
Chaplain or fellow Officer, went out of the Vestrey home through the Church.

16. Then he followed them; and without in the Churchyard spoke to the
Preacher friendly and Courteously and asked him, what hurt he had done him; he
could not conceive with himself, that he had given him one Evil word, prayed
him in the presence of this worshipful Chaplain who was there and went along
with him; to put him in Mind of his fault, and Express it particularly, that
be might renounce it and repent, which he would feign do, if he did but know
wherein he bad transgressed.

17. Whereupon the Preacher would answer nothing but looked upon him as if he
would kill him with his Looks; and in a rage and Fury burst out beginning to
Curse and wrong him horribly saying: Get the out from me Satan, tumble them
into the Abyss of Hell with thy disturbance; can thou not let me alone? must
thou here rail at me and molest me? do thou not see that I am a Spiritual
Clergyman? pointing at his habit or Black Priests Gown, and go on in my
Office.

18. But the troubled and highly wronged Man, gave him this Answer Yes
worshipful Sir, I see well that you are a spiritual, or Clergy man, and have
heard attentively in the Church; and have seen that you have stood there in
your Office, and do justly esteem you without all further contradiction, for a
spiritual or Clergyman; and I come therefore, and entreat you, AS a
spiritual or Clergyman; that you will tell me, what hurt I have done you.

19. And turning himself to the Other spiritual or Clergyman the Chaplain,
entreated him saying worshipful dear Sir, help me I pray upon my earnest
entreaty to the Preacher, that he would tell me in your presence, what I have
spoken or done against him; for which he was so vehement against me in the
Pulpit, and has spoke to the Magistrate to aveng it.

20. Upon which, the Preacher was st^ll more enraged; that he would needs have
sent that servant he had behind him, for a Sergeant or City Officer or Bailey,
to Take him away and put him in Prison which the Chaplain spoke against, and
prevented it, so that it was not done; and excused the Man, and bid him go
home to his House.

21. The Monday Morning following, when the Magistrates were met at the
Council house; and sent for the false-accused before them; they examined him,
perceived no Evil in him, they sound no anger or dislike neither in words or
deeds or behavior, to proceed from him; nor did they observe any thing that
was blameable; they asked him what hurt he had done to the Preacher? He
answered, he knew not, neither could he know from the Preacher himself; and
therefore entreated most submissively and earnestly; that they in their
wisdoms would send for the Complainant or Preacher, and cause him to say what
he had done to him!

22. Upon which the whole Council Concluded, that it was just, that the
Preacher should be friendly entreated to come to them, and required him
particularly to signify the Gravamina or Grevances, and thereupon sent Two Men
of the Council, Honorably to the Preacher, and entreat him to come to them to
the Councell-house, or particularly to relate those Grievances to the Members
sent to HIM.

23. Whereupon he was enraged, and sent them word* what had he to do with
their Judgement-house or Councill-house; what he has to say; that he shall
speak in the place of God: from the Pulpit, there is his Councill-Throne and
Seat of his Profession; what he has there said; they should follow that, and
banish the vain, wicked, reprobate Heretic from the City, that he may no more
oppose the Holy office of Preaching; and bring the punishment of Corah Dathan
and Abiram upon the whole City.

24. Accordingly the Lords consulted, and could not find how they should
justly help the Master; scaring the vehemence of their, Preacher in his Pulpit;
and concluded to banish the Innocent Jacob Behme out of the City, in which
conclusion some Men of the Council would NOT consent, but rose and went their
way, but the Rest execute, and by the Executioners or City officers, cause the
uncondemned faithful Citizen, to be instantly banished out of the Gates.

25. Which the patient blessed Man disliked NOT; but answered, in the Name of
God, my Lords, I will do as you command and depart the City, but may I not go
to my house first, and take mine along with me, or at least tell them my
necessity? but they forbad it and denied him, saying they could not alter the
Sentence, which the whole Council had concluded, in which he instantly was to
be led from the Councill-house out of the City, with derision and scorn; then
he said: Dear Sirs, let it be done seeing it cannot be otherwise; I am
contented; so he was banished and gone away all Night- long.

26. But the Morning following, when the Council were met together again, and
had reconciled their disagreement, they made another conclusion, to hunt after
the persecuted Innocent Man, and sent up and down about the Country to seek
him, and at length found him, and brought him solemnly with honor into the
City again, which was a wonder from God, in the Midst of those Acts and
Decrees of the Devil.

27. Thus much is what I am certainly informed, that it was so done.

28. Concerning the Acts or proceedings at Dresden. Dresden
I know also and can certainly affirm, authoritate aliorum, side Dignorum, and
exceptione majorum; upon the authority of others worthy of belief, and without
exceptions; that the Blessed Man of God as a Hind hunted out and In, was Cited
to Dresden:

29. And was examined in the Presence of the Illustrious Prince Elector, by the
Chief Doctors assembled together, whose names were as follows; Dr. Hoe, Dr.
Meisner, Dr. Baldwine, Dr. Gerrard, Dr. Leisern, and one Doctor more, which I
cannot name at present, and Two Professors of the Mathematics, and appointed
to discourse about his writings; also in several ways, set upon him with all
sorts of Theological Philosophical and Mathematical Questions, but not
overcome by any of them nor confounded by any of them, but so readily aptly and
distinctly answered those Examiners, that they said not one ill word to him.

30. But the Illustrious Prince Electour HIGHLY Wondered at it, and desired to
know the Conclusion of their Censure; but they the Doctors and Examinours,
excused themselves and entreated the Illustrious Prince Electour, that he would
have Patience; til the Spirit of the Man should be more plainly Cleared to
them; they could not understand him; but hoped he would hereafter more clearly
be apprehended by them, and then they might and would give their Judgment but
as yet they could not.

31, And THEN the deeply Grounded divinely blessed Man asked them again
several Questions, which they were to Answer him in, with plain distinction,
not unwillingly, nor very Earnestly, but Occasionally as it were, because they
had heard such Great Things from such a simple Lay Man, beyond THEIR
Apprehension and not able to understand him; but did not upbraid him, but
unexpectedly the simple Man held forth to the Theologists, the Truth plainly,
and distinguished from the Fictions, he Honored them with Great Respect, and
discoursed friendly with them, touched all their Errors, and showed them as
with a Finger the Originalls of them.

32. But to the Astrologers he said Expressly, Dear Sirs, observe, thus far
is the skill of your Mathematics right, exact, and grounded upon the Mysteries
of Nature; but whatsoever is beyond that, viz. this and this, are Heathenish
additions, the Ignorance and blindness of the Heathens, which we Christians are
not to follow.

33. So they left him quietly, and dismissed him in peace; also the Illustrious
Prince Electour, had great satisfaction in his Answers; He required him to
come to him apart by HIMSELF, and spoke with him about all Sorts of secret
Mysteries, and admitted him to him in all Favor, and Gave him liberty to go
to his house at Gerlitz.

34. I cannot remember that I have heard certainly more thereof, but I lately
heard the Two Drs, Dr. Meisner, and Dr. Gerhard, Wittenberg.
at Wittenberg, speak of Jacob Behme, that they wondered at the Continuation or
Connection and Harmony or agreement of the writings of THAT Man.

35. Dr. Gerhard said, Indeed I would not for the whole world condemn the Man;
the Other Dr. Meisner answered him, nor I neither, my brother, who knows what
may lie hidden within it, how can we censure what we have not apprehended, nor
can apprehend; whether it be right, black or white, God convert the Man if he
be in an Error; and keep us to his divine Truth, and give us to understand
that further and better, also a Mind and apprehension to express it, and
propagate it to our ability; besides this somewhat was said, but I went away.

36, Another time, I heard the Reverend Dr. Meisner at Wittenberg say; when
Jacob Behme was spoken of; and being asked what Judgment he would give of him,
he answered, he desired neither to Judge, nor procure that the Man should be
condemned or suppressed, or silenced, he is a Man endued with wonderful high
Gifts of the Spirit, which a Man can yet neither condemn nor approve.

37. God keep us all in Grace, by his blessed knowledge of JESUS CHRIST in US!

The 21. February, A. 1651. C. W. M. D. Charles Weisner Medicinae Doctor.

A CATALOGUE of ALL The Books that are known to be Extant written BY JACOB
BEHME And now Printed in English this:: 3:: 1661-2
(1) Anno. 1612. THe First Book, called the Aurora; Dated Tuesday in Pentecost
week: the 37. year of his Age: 2. June. printed in a Large Letter in 40. with
some Notes edded with his own hand, in 1620. 2. 1619. The Second Book. Of the
Three Principles of the One only Divine Substance, with an Appendix to it,
concerning the Threefold Life of Man. in a small letter in 4o. 3. 1620. The
Third Book. Of the Threesold Life of Man. in the same Letter. in 4o. 4. 1620.
The Fourth Book. Being an Answer to Forty Questions concerning the Soul, in a
Letter to Doctor Balthazar Walter; in the Midst of the Answer to The First
Question; is the Scheame, or Figure of the Philosophic Globe; or Turned Eye,
the Eye of the wonders of Eternity; or Looking Glass of Wisdom; with an
Exposition of it, and of the Three-Worlds signified by it: with an Appendi^^,
concerning the Soul, The Image of the Soul, and the Turbao^ Destroyeresse of
the Image. in 4o. 5. 1620. The Fifth Book Dated in May: divided into Three
Parts. The First, of the Incarnation of Jesus Christ. The Second: Of the
Suffering, Dying, Death, and Resurrection, of Christ. The Third: of the Tree of
Faith. in 4o.
6. 1620. The Sixth Book. The Great Six Points. Also a Small Book. of other Six
Points. in 4o. 7. 1620. A little Book. Dated the 8. May. Of the Heavenly and
Earthly Mystery. printed with the 6, Points. in 4o. 8. 1620. A Little Book of
the Last Times. To P. K. being Two Epistles: the First To Paulus Keym, Dated
14. August, and the Second To Paulus Keym, Dated 23. November. Both concerning
the 1000. years Sabbath, and of the End of the World. Being the 4th. and 5th.
of the 35. Epistles. printed formerly in 4o. 9. 1621. A Book. De Signatura
Rerum: Of the Signatures or Marks of the shapes and figures of all things. in
4o. 10. 1621. A Little Book. Dated in March. of Consolation, to the Tempted
Soul, Concerning the Power Complexions. here printed in 4o. 11. 1621. The
First Apology, in Answer to Balthazar Tylcken, concerning the Aurora. Also,
The Second Apology Dated 3. July, To Balthazar Tylcken. The First Part
concerning Predestination. The Second Part concerning the Person of Christ, and
the Virgin Mary, written of, in the Book of the Incarnation, here printed in 4o.
12. 1621. A Little Book. Of Considerations, upon Esaias Stiesels Book. Dated
8. April. Concerning the Threesold State of Man, and the New Birth, of the Last
Sion or New Jerusalem, etc. here printed in 4o. 13. 1622. A Large Book of the
Errors of the Sects of Ezekiel Meths, or an Apology to Esaias Stiesel.
concerning Perfection; Dated 6. April. here printed in. 4o. 14. 1622. A Little
Book of True Repentance. 15. 1622. A Little Book of True Resignation. 16. 1622.
A Little Book of Regeneration. Dated. 24. June. These Three make the Book
called The Way to Christ. Printed in 12o. 17. 1623. A Book of Predestination,
and the Election of God: Dated 8. February. At the End of it is the following
Treatise. in 4o. 18. 1623. A Short Compendium of Repentance, Dated 9. February.
in 4. and with the way to Christ. in 12o. 19. 1623. Mysterium Magnum. The Great
Mystery. Dated 11. September. being an Exposition of the whole Book of Gene^^s.
Printed in a large Letter in Fo. 20. 1623. A Table of the Divine Manifestation
or an Exposition of the Threefold World. in a Letter of The True and False
Light to G. F. and J. H. with an Exposition of it. Dated 11. November. Printed
at the End of the Mysterium. in Fo. and at the End of the Predestination. in
4o. and Part of it belongs to the Epistle Of the True and False Light.
printed with the 6. Points. in 4o. 21. 1624. A Little Book of the Supersensual
Life. Printed at the End of the Way to Christ. in 12o. (22) 1624. A Little Book
of Divine Contemplation or Vision. to the 6. verse of the 4. Chapter and no
further: Printed with the 6. Points. in 4o. 23. 1624. A Book. Dated 7 May. Of
the Two Testaments of Christ; viz. The: First Of Baptism. The: Second Of the
Supper of the Lord. these 2. in 4o. 24. 1624. A Little Dialogue between the
Enlightened and the Unenlightened Soul. in 8o. formerly printed with The Two
Theosophick Epistles. and with the Way to Christ. in 12o. 25. 1624. An Apology
for the Book of True Repentance. Dated 10. April. directed against a Pasquil
published in Latin verse, by the Primate of Gerlitz, Gregory Rickter. here
printed. in 4o. (26) 1624. A Book of 177. ^heosophick Questions, with Answers
to 13. of them, printed with the 6. Points. in 4o. 27. 1624. An Epitome of the
Mysterium Magnum, called an Abstract thereof. Printed at the End of that Book.
in Fo. (28) 1624. A Prayer Book for Every Day of the week. called also the
Holy week. With Prayers as far as the End of Tuesday, printed with the 6.
Points. in 4o. 29. 1624. A Table of the Three Principles or a Key of his
writings. Dated in February, to J. S. V. S. and A. v. S. Printed at the End of
the Mysterium. In Fo. with an Exposition of it. also with the 6. Points in 4o.
30. 1624. A Book of the Last Judgment. said to be Consumed, at the Burning of
Great Gloga^ in Silesia, in Germany; and no other Copy of it yet found. 31.
1624. The Clavis or Key of his Writings, written in March and April. printed at
the End of the Forty Questions. in 4o Also LXII. Theosophick Epistles written
at several tim^s from 1619. to 1624. 35. of them were printed formerly. in 4o.
2. whereof viz. The First, concerning what a True Christian is, and The Second
or 10th. of the Killing of Antichrist in our selves. printed in 8o. The 6th.
being the Epistle of the True and False Light, is printed with the 6. Points,
in 4o. The 7th. of the 62. is the Preface to the Supersensual Life. in 120. the
20th of the 62. is the Preface to the 2. Apology to Tylcken: and 25. more are
here printed in 4o.

The Books which the Author finished not are thus marked ()

The Life of Jacob Behme. written by Mr. Durant Hotham. is printed at the End
of the Mysterium Magnum. in Fo,

All are to be Sold, and most of them, by Giles Calvert, at the
Black-Spread-Eagle, at the West End of St. Paul's, London.

The Errata belonging to the Apologies.
Englishers Preface. p. 2. l. 17. r. self same. p. 8. l. 9. r. women.

1. Apology to Tylcken. Errata.
1. Title. l. 3. f. the r. this. v: 17. l. 4. and 5. dele they may v: 27. l. 1.
r. Faith, before; v. 31. l. 3. r. others; v: 46. l. 2. r. conceived in. v. 60.
l. 2. dele the. v: 72. l. 2. Marg: r. 1. Tim. v: 85. l. 5. r. only shines, v:
125. l. 3. f. himself, r. his own. v: 208. l. 2. r. or Angelical. v: 210. l.
7. f. shall. r. wilt. v: 221. l. 3. r, the * and in the Margin * 1 Cor. v: 233.
f. has, r. had. v: 235. l. 4. * r. in the Margin * Gen: 3. 15. v: 240. l. 2.
Margin f. 10. r. 18 v. 242. * Margin f. 3. 11. r. 311. v: 256. l. 3. r. a Lord.
v. 270. l. 5. r. and is become. v: 286. l. 2. r. was the Soul. v. 322. l. 3.
f. Fire. r. Fires. v. 252. l. 4. f. Make. 4. made. v. 378. l. 6. r. the Margin
or sternest: v: 389. f. came r. come. v: 412. l. 4. f. as ^. also. v: 443, l.
5. Marg: f. 16. r. 10. v: 450. r. And he the. v: 463. l. 4. r. would. v: 508.
l. 3. r. souls of Men. v: 540. l. 2. r. it upon. v: 547. l. 5. dele it. v: 561.
l. 3 r. the Divine: 575. l. 3. 4. Ruler in, or manifester of, v. 629. f. 69. r.
629.

2. Apology to Tylcken. Predestination and Incarnation.
V. 6. l. 3. r. of the. v: 108. l. 7. f. became r. become. v: 128. r: this.
world-Kingdome. v: 155. l. 2. Margin f. 54 r. 5. 4. v: 167. l. 5. r. soon
come. l. 6. f. * r. v: 169. l. 7. r. God then. v: 178. l. 6. r. * Margin f.
vix, r. viz. v. 198. l. 2. f. to r. with. v. 208. l. 3, f. Man, r. Men, v: 210.
l. 1. r. any Man's. v: 262. l. 1. Margin, r. 17, 18. v. 279. l. 5. r. what. v:
325. l. 2. r. we contend. p. 59. l. 2. r. of Three-page 69. l. 1. for
concerning. r. containing. for 15. r. 25.

The Four Complexions.
V: 8. l. 8. r. and Careless. v: 9. l. 2. r. Dark, sad, v: 11. l. 7. r. for
their. v: 14. l. 3. r. Complexions. v: 24. l. 1. r. or quality. v: 25. l. 3. r.
or Constitution. v: 32. l. 3. Marg. f. * r. v: 34. l. 4. r. though * Margin he
perish in his Anger. v: 35. l. 2. f. Bond, r Band. v: 40. l. 3. r. it is
fubtile and will. v: 46. l. 1. f. drawn into, r. aware of. v. 49. l. 4. and
some what. v: 57. l. 2. r. in that. v: 59. l. 5. f. hear, r. here. v: 63. l.
8. * Margin Schwartz Hans. v: 72. l. 3. r. Devil. v: 74. l. 3. f. at r. of. v:
81. l. 7. r. fellow servants. v: 84. l. 4. f. Lost r. Last. v: 85. l. 1. f. *
r. v: 86. l. 3. r. of it v: 114. l. 8. r. of David, * If the Morning. v: 146.
l. 2. f. is r. it. v: 149. l. 10. f. for, r. far. v: 150. l. 6, and 7. f.
seated r. feared. v: 164. l. 6. f. any, r. an.

Considerations upon Esaiah Stiefel.
V. 15. l. 5. r. or Power. v: 21. l. 18 r. until in. v: 25. l. 5. Marg: r. *
v: 27. l. 1. r: showed. l. 2. First according. v: 27. l. 16 f. beometh r.
becomes v: 28. l. 2 f, also, r. of it therein where, by the. v: 49. l. 4. r.
impregnate v: 56. l. 4. f. all. r. also. v: 59. l. 1. r. into the. v: 62. l. 6
Marg. Psalm. 143, 2. v. 72. l. 7. r. will, tear v. 80. r. Mensch, from the
Limus. v: 91. l. 3. Marg. 2 Kings. v: 127. l. 7. f. borne, r. boarn. v: 134. l.
3. r. world; the Paradise must.

Apology concerning Perfection.
1. Text, verse, E. S. v: 2. l. 13. f. or, r. and. I. B. v: 1. l. 2. r. Total.
v: 4. l. 3. Marg. r. * Isa: l. 4. Marg: r. Deuteronomy v. 8 l. 2. f come. r came. v;
9. l. 2 f. Men, r. Man. l. 5. r without. v: 21 l 2. Marg r. 32, 33. v: 24. l.
1. r. he is the. v. 62. l. 3. r. be as an. v: 69 l. 1 r. which, it also, r.
world, in l. 3. r. one to. v. 95. l. 6. f. of r. in, v: 11^ l. 3. r.
conclusion. concerning the Creation of Man. v: 135. l. 1. r. He said. v: 162.
l. 2 r. Job's words. v: 164. l, 2. Marg. f. 11. r. 1 v: 179. l. 1. r. Therefore
say 1, v. 181. l 3. r God, whereas: v: 182 l. 6. Marg. f. 13 r. 3 v, 187. l 2,
f. out. r. not. l 3 r. Humanity after the Fall: From. v. 190. ^ 3. r. Mother of
the Love. v: 203. l. 1. r. voice, as. v. 221. l. 3. r. that he was. v: 228. l
5. f. rests r. rested. v: 229 l. 4. and 6. and 7. r. awaked, v: 244. l. 2 r.
Man, not. v. 245. l 4. f. my. r. the.

II. Text, E. S. v: 3 l. 7 Marg. f. 17. r. 27. v: 4 l. 6 f. come, r. came. I B
v, 3 l 10. r. had * Marg * see verse. 221. v: 28. l. 4. r. himself, out of and
in this, v: 46 Marg f. 28. r 38.

III. Text. E. S v: 30. l 3. f. true, r. truly. I. B. v: 4 l 2. and 3. r. one,
contrary. v: 12. l 2, and 3. r. Man, especially, being. v: 19. l. 1. Marg f 3
r. 5. v 26 l 2 r. in-standing, l. 4 r. in-generating. v: 34. l. 2. r. * the.
and Marg. * Isai. 54. 5. v. 40. l. 1. f. Free Will. r. Fire-will. v: ^2. l. 2.
r.. inward Man.

IV. Text. 1. Point. E. S. IV. l. 3. r. Eternity or Unity. verse 9 l. 1 r
People; that v. 10. Marg. f. 18. r. 8. v; 78. l 5. r. own will: In Christ.

II. Point. I B. v: 63. l. 4. r. the vanity. v. 74. l 2, r when I look. v. 78
l. 4. r. substantiality, in, v: 102. l. 1. r. Mother or Finder, v: 108. 24. f *
r. and in the Marg f. * r. v: 109 l. 1. Marg. r. 5. Math. 12 4. v: 122 l 10. r
seed, whence sin.

III Point. v: 22. l. 2. f. became, r. become, v: 30. l. 2. f. them, r. the. v:
37. l. 2. r. Marg. Mensch. v: 45 l 1. Marg. r: 26. 4. v. 68. l 6. r. Serpent,
and the Devil, v: 72 l 2 r. 10 a BEAST. v. 74. l. 3. childish, That they.

IV. Point. E S. v. 15 l. 8 r. * Sulamith: Canticles. v. 25. l. 9. r. A. *
Marg. Marriage. I B. v: 29. l. 2. r. would dwell. v: 45. l 1. r. world, viz. to
the. v 60. l. 1. f. This, r. Thus. v: 68. l. 2. HE Marg E. S v: 72. l. 4 r.
Transmutation or alteration of. v: 78. l 5. r. to the Flesh. v: 97 l 1. f.
conceuning, r. concerning, v. 122 l. 7. put out shall. v. 125 l. 1. f. * r. v:
143. l 1. r. Sweat Bloody.

I. V. Apology, to Gregory Rickter.
v: 8. l. 3. r. Spirit, v. 11 l. 6 r. Say.. Marg. Math. 25. 40. v. 57. l. 7 r.
forsook. v 75. l 2. r and the Life. v 78 l 1 and 2 f. Man, r. Men. v 94 l. 3 r.
with Christ. l. 4. r. killed them. v 101. l. 2 f Separation, r. Seduction, v.
116 l. 1. for This, r. Thus, l. 4 r believe, then I do, v. 120. l 1. r. not a
Mere. v. 131. l. 2. r. him up. v. 138. l. 2 r. his heart v. 140 l. 11. f.
began r. begun. v. 156 l 2 r. whence he is. v. 178 l 5. r had long ago torn.
v. 179. l 3. f. so, r. to, v. 181 l. 6. r. But he rejoices. v. 194. l. 1 r a
Man. v. 199. l. 5. r. honest: here.

L. L

Preface to the Epistles, at the End. for M. H. r. M. B.
The Epistles 14 l: 1, f. 1661. 1. r. 1621. Ep v. 7 l. 10 Marg f, 18 r 28. Ep.
40. v: 6. l. 1. r. he together. Ep. 43. v: 3. l. 7. r. And I Commit. Ep. 46. v:
10. l. 1. r. especially whom. v: 15. l. 3. f. desired. r. derided. Ep. 49. v:
5. l. 3. r. Laboratory. Ep. 53. v: 3. l. 1. r. Electors Council. l. 8. Marg. l.
4. r. Luke 9. 23. v: 7. l. 5. f. to. r. into. Ep. 54. v: 16. l. 3. Marg. f.
Kurtzen. r. Kurtz. l. 5. Marg. r. Math. 20. 8. Ep. Dutch. l. 5. r. bey einem.
before: Ep. 3. l. 1. r. foregoing sheet. Ep. 3. v: 2. l. 15. r. vegetives. Ep.
9. l. 1. r. my very. In the Table of Epistles November. 17. r. Bernten. l. 37. r.
Hr. A.

C. Weisners Ep. v. 4. l. 5. r. we became. v. 7. l. 9. r. his WIFE, v. 14. l.
1. r. Magistrates. v: 17. l. 4. for them. r. thou. v. 24. l. 2. f. Master r.
Matter.


