Cheap Side Cross censured and condemned BY A LETTER SENT From the
Vicechancellour and other Learned Men of the famous University of Oxford, in
answer to a question propounded by the Citizens of London, concerning the said
CROSS, in the year 1600, in which year it was beautified, As also a
remarkable passage to the same purpose, in a Sermon preached to an eminent and
very great Auditory in this City of London: by a very reverend, holy, and
learned Divine, a while after the Cross was last repaired, which was Anno 1606.

2 CHRONICLES. 31. 1. All Israel that were present, went out to the Cities of Judah
and brake the Images in pieces, etc, until they had ut, terly destroyed them
all.

LONDON, Printed by A. N. for I. R. and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's
Churchyard, 1641.

Resolved on this question (being propounded by the Citizens of London, January
23. 1600) viz.
Quest. Whether the Cross in Cheapside should stand or be demolished.

Ans. By George Abbot, Vicechancellour of Oxford, for the year abovesaid, as
follows.

COncerning the question of setting up again the Cross or other Crucifix in
Cheapside, I am of opinion, First, that the godly and discreet zeal of the
worthy City is much to be commended, who, on just and apparent grounds making a
conscience of that which may be scandalous to many good Christians, have not
rashly nor tumultuously proceeded therein, but are desirous to be informed by
Divines of the Universities (which are under the protection of Almighty God,
and her most Sacred Majesty, Schools of the Prophets) what they may, and ought
to do, both unto the honor of Gods Name, and to the settling of such their
brethren as be in doubt.

Secondly, I am fully persuaded, that the everlasting God in his wisdom has
offered unto this reverend City this occasion, to make trial of their piety
and devotion, whether they do love the entire service of himself withal
their hearts, and souls, or no, for which matter, howsoever it seem prima
facie to contain nothing of much moment in it, yet now, since the expectation
of the whole Realm, and Church of England is, what will become thereof, it
cannot be supposed of less consequence, then that either our Religion which is
established according unto the Canon of the Scripture, or else that Papistry
should receive a wound, and blow thereby.

Being then orderly and fairly demanded my judgment therein, I do purpose
according to the several circumstances in their several places, to touch
diverse things,

Praying that God would guide my Meditations and pen aright, to the glory of
his Name, and good of their souls who desire in this matter to be resolved.

First, in these Crucifixes are resembled God the Father by an old man, the
Holy Ghost by a Dove, which are both of them unlawful in true Divinity,
because God is a Spirit, and he himself forbids any similitude or shape of
himself, when he gave the law, intending that he fills Heaven and Earth.

Confirmed by Origin, who says, we do describe with no shape God who is
without body invisible. Ambrose says, God is infinite, unmeasurable, etc.

The Heathens, and Numa in Plutarchs Lives, did forbid his people to shape out
any of their Gods with the form of a man.

And this testimony Clemens Alexandrinus authoriseth. Nay, Thomas Aquinas part.
3. q. 25. a. 3. But unto God who is without any body, no bodily I-mages could
be set up, because as Damascen says, it is a point of the highest folly or
impiety to figure that which is divine, but because God in the new Testament is
made man, he may be adored with the bodily Image of himself, this Aquinas
says.

So Christ (the Friar thinks) in his humanity may be pictured, and not God.

Long since, some of the choicest learned Sorbonists directly say, they desire
therefore that Images of the Trinity should be removed from all public and
private places, because they are forbidden by the Scriptures by Councils, by
many men of excellent worth and holiness.

This shortly I speak, but who lists to see more, the refutation of
Bellarmines Cavils speaking for those Superstitions, as also the judgment of
the Fathers, let him read Doctor Reynolds, de Idolatria.

Being then that the Image of the Dove for the Holy Ghost was upon the Cross
in Cheapside, and the retayning thereof is unlawful, yea, one of the highest
points of Popery, whereof many learned men of their side are ashamed, I hold it
a matter questionless in a reformed Church, that the Cross is in no sort to
be set up again, as it is was before with the Dove, lest we should seem to
persist in that palpable darkness of Egypt.

And in this point I being undoubtedly and irrefragably resolv^d, in that same
burdensome office of a Christian Magistrate, which now under my Lord I do
bear, did upon sound and mature advice this last Summer burn and consume with
fire in the Market place of Oxford, amongst others, a Picture wherein was the
Image of God the Father over a Crucifix ready to receive the soul of Christ.

The next considerable matter is for the Crucifix it self, what is to be
judged of the Image, and whether it may be retained at all.

I do not certainly find when the first use in that kind was taken up
amongst men, although Constantine did cause somewhat to be made, which
represented the two first Letters of Christ's Name, as they are written in
Greek, and that which he had made was to be used only in Standards, but in
this sort, and to that use, as now commonly is framed, if it had never been
began, I think I may boldly say, that the Church had been freed of a great deal
of Superstition, which afterward grew to little less then blasphemy.

It is very likely that they that first used it had this to say for it, that
there might be an Historical use to put us in mind of him that died for us,
and in as much as sensible and visible things do much affect us, this memorial
might stir our devotion to remember him, by whose stripes we are healed.

Now as this may be the only use thereof, much may be disputed, and held not to
be simpliciter malus, absolutely evil: So in my opinion, there are far more
repugnant, and direct reasons which may make against it altogether, as

First, the wisdom of God, which directed us to all things fit for our
salvation, has given not the least touch nor semblance, directly or by
consequence, of any such matter, which might serve to direct us unto Piety: but
has only appointed the Word to be the measure thereof, and the Sacraments
which are visibly (but not so grossly as the Crucifix) presented unto us as
resemblances of Christ's passion.

Secondly, it implies great weakness of faith when we cannot think of our
Savior, either by Meditation, or Prayer, or reading, or hearing the word, or
by receiving of the Sacraments, but we must fly unto such means, as for the
use whereof we have no warrant, but on the other side there is much danger,
lest inconveniences should grow thereby.

It was a true observation of Philo Judaeus, that the minds of women are the
weaker, and they can preserve nothing but that which is sensible, speaking of
Images which they desire, but note he ascribes it unto weakness in them.

Thirdly, it was a very ready way unto Superstition, which from a small
beginning creeps on, neither has it any way more increase then in Images, as
the Church by lamentable experience has too too much proved. Images (says
Cyprian) at first were made in honor of them that were dead, but afterward
they became sacred to their posterity, and were at first taken only for
comforts, this was true among the Heathen, and so it was among the Christians,
who at first made them, but offered not to bring them into Churches, yet within
a while that also was attempted, but to the great grief and indignation of the
godly.

Epiphanius coming into a Church, and seeing a veil or hanging that had one
of the Pictures of Christ or some Saint, tore it, as being in the Church
contrary unto the Scriptures, and after in steed thereof of he sent a new veil
thither, but that which was then so resisted by Epiphanius, did in process of
time (as the purity of the Professors of the Gospel decayed) grow stronger, so
that by the time of Gregory the Great, Images grew to be ordinary in Churches,
yet notwithstanding he that was so earnest for the having them, could not like
that they should be worshipped, but even then there were that repugned the
opinion of receiving of them into Churches, and so defaced the Images
themselves.

Gregory disliked the worshipping of them, but those that came after him they
mayntained the Adoration and worship given unto them, appears by the second
Council of Nice, among many, no doubt, this of Christ hanging upon the Cross
was one of the principal, whereby Superstition went so far, as that it was and
is mayntained that the reverence and adoration due unto God himself (called
Latria) is to be given to the resemblance of Christ on the Cross, which is
directly laid down by Thomas Aquinas, yea, and practiced in their Missall.

The perpetual use of their adoration, may be gathered by their Roods in
Churches, Crucifix^s in windows, the same also in their Service Books, and on
the backsides of them, where Mary and John stand by Christ, by the like in
Rings now grown a fashion, besides in stones and metals, before which many of
them do say a large part of their devotions, yea, the most superstitious
Papists are ready to give veneration thereunto, wheresoever they see it
solemnly set up.

I remember in that College where I first lived, a young man was taken praying
and beating his breast before a Crucifix in a window, which caused the Masters
and Fellows to pull it down, and set up other glass. Which example makes me
nothing doubt but that the Cross in Cheapside has many in the twilight and
morning early which do reverence before it.

Besides Campian, whose act is famous, or rather infamous for it, and I am
informed, that so much has been signified by the neighbors, or inquest making
presentiments, concerning the circumstances of this cause. By all which I do
conclude, that it is a Monument of their Superstition, a great inducement, and
may be a ready way unto Idolatry, and that there can be no tolerable use of
this matter, which may be able for to countervail the dangers and obloquie
arising upon the reteyning of it, and so much the rather, because it is
perceived, that many evil affected men do make their advantage from hence to
insinuate into the minds of their credulous hearers, that it is a token of the
return of their faith again into into this Land, since their Monuments are
not extinguished in the chiefest street of our greatest City.

Upon which considerations I make no doubt but the religious Magistrates are
sufficiently warranted by the Word of God to remove it away, for the Scriptures
have laid before our eyes what ought to be done to remaynders of Idolatry, Yea
shall overthrow their Altars, Pillars, graven Images, etc.

But the deeds of Hezekiah being well looked into does put it out of all
controversy, for when he saw the foul abuse of the brazen Serpent, he
caused it to be defaced, and yet it has other manner of warrant for it then
this, it being commanded by God, erected by Moses, a figure of Christ, in
diverse of which most material circumstances this Crucifix is most defective.
Diverse learned Ministers then living do report. Though the judgment of both
Universities was consulted with about the Cross, and both desired it might be
taken down, yet they could not prevail with B. Bancroft, but he would have it
re-edified, only with much ado they overswayed the Bishop to leave off the
picture of Christ on the Cross, that was set on the top of it.


And here I pray the Reader to observe, that I say the Magistrates are to
redress such enormities, for I do not permit inferior men to run headlong
about such means, and to rend, break, and tear as well within as without the
Churches, which was that that Luther reprehended, but the advice and consent of
Superior powers is to be had herein, that all things may be done decently and
in order. In which respect I hold it necessary that the Bishop of Canterbury,
and the Bishop of London be sought unto, who doubtless upon the sober
intention of the Governors of that City will be pleased religiously and
gravely, according unto their manifold wisdom which God has given unto them,
to look into the matter, and give instructions what is fittest to be done.

HEre Master Vicechancellour at large proves that it was but omission in our
first Reformers, and that our further reformation would not condemn or check
them, Take notice of the blind zeal of the Prelate in this business.
but commend, the present due occasion being offered, that it would be as the
fact of Theodosius and Josias, that the further they went the more they did
still raze remnauts of Idolatry, and established Gods true service, then he
says, Man has not sought for this opportunity, but God has rather put it
upon the City, in as much as the Crucifix being worn out with time was ready
to fall, there was a necessity imposed for taking it down.

Now it is a greater matter to re-edifie a scandalous thing then to continue
it, in as much as the one implies a winking connivance or permission only, but
the other intends an allowance and ratification, which gives greater
advantage unto the adversary.

This he confirmed by Marcus Bishop of Arethuse in Constantines time the Great,
and Julianus persecuted him after that he refused contribution to the
rebuilding of overthrown Idols Temples, Saying, that it was ungodly to afford
one halfpenny to a wicked maker thereof.

And out of that Author he cites one more example of Nudas a Persian Bishop,
pulling down a Pyren or Temple dedicated to the fire the Persians god, and
refusing to build it again at Isdigerdes the Kings command.

Theodorets saying of him, I do admire him, and think him worthy of a
garland, for in my opinion it is equal impiety to adore the fire, and to build
a Temple to it.

My advice therefore and judgment in the name of God is, that the Crcifix
should not be erected there, but that upon this opportunity advantage should
be taken to give superstition a further blow, which will be very joyous to all
that are already sincerely affected, and if there be any who truly love the
Gospel, and are not yet so fully persuaded in this point, they also will in
mildness yield to reason, if the Superior power shall be pleased to give
countenance to this deed of the City.

But if it should be misliked of hollow-hearted Papists, or maligned by
professed Recusants, it must be expected and not wondered at.

Now if it shall be demanded what should be set up instead of the other
Monument. I think best to be some Pyramid or matter of mere beauty, and not
any Angel or such like whatsoever, for although in truth that deserves no
reprehension, yet by avoiding of that the mouths of the Adversaries may be
stopped, who would otherwise storm and say, that the Creator is taken down,
and such a Creature is set up in the place where he stood; and whereas it is
said, that evermore it will be called the Cross in Cheap Side, yet it may be
possible that time may wear out the appellation, or if it do not, the name
shall hurt no more then the name of Christmas or Candlemas does, from which a
godly man may make that use as to praise the Lord, that the matter of these
Superstitions are removed, and the name only remaynes as a memorial of Gods
goodness, who has done so great good things for us. And by reason of the
sickness and weakness of him who more learnedly and judiciously might have
resolved this point, have I not after that hot and hasty humor of some men who
are moved rather by fancy then reason, but after Christian and settled looking
into the cause, and satisfying of my own conscience, fully therein set down my
judgment upon the demand proposed unto me, supposing that this shall also give
access unto the honor of God, her Majesty, the Church of England, and that
noble City, if it be so set up again as a matter of mere beauty or Pyramide.

But referring the di^ection, execution, and completing of all to those
honorable personages unto whom under our sacred Sovereigne the Lord has
committed the ordering of such affairs. God Almighty bless us, that we may
still go forward in true Religion, and his holy Spirit direct our thoughts,
words and actions, to the honor of his holy Name. AMEN.

George Abbot, Vicechancellour,
An. 1600.
The approbation of Master Vicechancellor's Letter, by five other learned men,
then heads of the University.
WE do approve as sound and true, the rather because he follows that which
was done wiht the brazen Serpent after that it was superstitiously worshipped
by the people, and wish that the material Cross, now it has been
superstiously adored, and is mayntained by Mart. in a Book dedicated unto her
Majesty, and by all the Jesuits and Seminary Priests and all their Scholars
this day in England, to be worshipped and adored, be not tumultuously taken
away, but in the same manner the brazen Serpent was by consent and authority of
our gracious Hezekiahs, and them whom causes Ecclesiastical have authorized
under her Highness.

This only we add, that as example of Hezekiah be notably and sufficient to
encourage her Majesty and such as be in authority under her zealously to remove
such occasions of Idolatry, and to remove them out of the peoples way, for the
examples of Gideon is terrible if they be let alone, and continued still.

He erected an Ephod in Ophra after his victory over the Madianites, both to
testify his thankfulness unto the true God of Israel, for his victory
obtained, and also to show the Midianites, that the God whose service in an
Ephod without Idol or Image they did refuse had given unto them the overthrow,
and thus far Gideon is not reproved, but when he grew old and knew that the
people did worship before the Ephod, because he would not pull it down, nor
take it away, his posterity was grievously punished after him, and the people
became enthralled unto their enemies.

In like manner, the fact of Constantine, after his victory over Maxentius, in
erecting the sign of the Cross in Rome, was commendable, because he testified
his thankfulness to Christ crucified for the victory achieved, and also it
openly showed unto the Heathen and Gentiles, who fought against him, that he
whom they so much despised because he was crucified gave him victory. But now
this outward and material sign of the Cross has been, and is abused to
Idolatry and Superstition, therefore if the chief Magistrates erect such things
now, when they be well taken away, and if they pull them not down, when with
peace and quietness they may be removed, they leave unto the godly a fearful
expectation, as of that which came to pass In Israel, after the days of
faithful Gideon, for so we call him notwithstanding his grievous fault, for so
he is nanamed. But the danger of such negligence is most carefully to be
avoided.

From the University of Oxenford, January the 23. 1600.

This Letter is in the hand of a Merchant of good credit in this City thus
subscribed.

Thomas Thornton. John Reinolds. Leonard Tailor. Henry Ayray. R. Kettley.
You have heard learnedly proved from Antiquity the unlawfulness of this
Cross.

Here follow some arguments from Scripture against Cheap Side Cross, as they
were preached in Lombard Street.

THis worthy Minister preaching on Esaias 10. Verse. 5, 6. Shows diverse signs of
Gods wrath against a Nation, among others he shows this to be one Plague token.

When God gives over a Land to heinous sins, when he suffers a Land that has
been delivered from Idolatry, again to be given up unto Idols. This is a
certain sign of Gods wrath aginst a Land.

For this is a standing rule, that when any Idol is suffered to be in a Land,
though it be not worshipped, yet it is a remarkable sign, that they are a
people of his wrath. See what the Lord says, Psalm. 81. 8, 9. Hear, o my
people, and I will testify unto thee, o Israel, if thou will hearken unto me,
there shall no strange god be in thee, neither shall thou worship any strange
god. (Mark) he does not only say thou shall worship no strange god, but there
shall be no strange god in thee, as the Lord commands them, Exodus 34. 12.
saying, Take heed to thy self, that thou make no covenant with the inhabitants
of the Land, whether thou go, lest they be cause of ruin among you: but ye
shall overthrow their Altars, and break their Images in pieces, and cut down
their groves, for thou shall bow down to no other god, because the Lord whose
name is Jehovah is a jealous God. For when ever Idols go before, then
certainly war will follow after, and therefore to suffer an Idol to be in a
Land, although unworshipped is no small sin, as the Lord says, Hos. 6. 10. I
have seen villainy in the house of Israel, there is whoredom in Ephraim, Israel
is joined to Idols, let her alone, etc.

Thus we see how greatly we provoke God to anger, when we suffer an Idol to be
among us.

And though the Lord had formerly freed this Land from Idolatry. Are not the
Images of Baal again re-edified among us? this never went before, but a Plague
came after it. For by this, if by any thing, a Land breaks covenant, nay, goes
about to break their Marriage bond with God. Therefore may I say to this Land,
nay, to you of this City, (to go no further into other places,) where the
Word of God is most powerfully preached among you, that you are in an
especially manner guilty of this lewd crying sin. Witness the Cross in
Cheap Side, that is lately beautified by you. I am troubled to think how God
expressly has been provoked, and wrath I fear will be poured out upon you for
this same golden Cross. For whereas the Lord says, Isaiah 30 22, 23. Ye shall
defile the coverings of your graven Images of silver, and the ornaments of your
molten Images of gold, and cast them away as a menstruous cloth: and then shall
he give you a great blessing. You on the other side, have adorned the covering
of your Images: now, all men know that the Cross is that which the Papists
make an Idol of: and yet you have not stained the covering thereof but have
beautified and adorned it. So that as a blessing came on them that stained the
covering of their Images; so a curse will most certainly follow the beautifying
of the covering of those Images of that Cross. For it is that which does
become a snare unto the ignorant people: As Gideon made an Ephod of gold, and
put it in his City, Judges 8 27. and all Israel went thither, a whoring after
it, which thing became a snare unto Gideon, and to his house: And seeing
Papists will worship a Cross at Rome, surely they will then worship it also in
England, and your selves know also what respect has been showed to this
Cross, by Popishly affected amongst us. Besides the beautifying of this
Cross, was a lauishing of your gold. And though you lavished it not on it, as
on an Idol, but as an ornament, yet it being an Idol, your gold was lavished
on it, as on an Idol. O, this Cross, is one of the Jewels of the Whore of
Rome, and its left and kept here as a Love-token, And gives them hope, one day,
that they shall enjoy it; and us again. Therefore this is one of the special
plague tokens of Gods anger, and it shows this Land in general, nay, this City
in particular, to be a people God is angry with.

What this Reverend man feared then, and was much troubled at in his own
spirit, (as his often expressions yet, in the memory of his familiar friends
testified) namely, that the wrath and judgments of God shortly would fall down
upon this Kingdom and City, we have found, and with sad hearts have cause to
acknowledge, having felt the smart of it not only in this the great decay of
trade which has occasioned the sinking of many chief Citizens amongst us, but
that which is more then either our trades or lives, the great decay of the
Gospel, the faithful Preachers thereof being hunted out from amongst us, And
this religious pious man, a lessed light, was enforced in the midst of his
days to breath his last in a strange Land.

If more Arguments in this kind are desired, you may read at large a new
Treatise of Master Gurney against Images, extracted out of the Homilies.

There is not such a superstitious Monument in Spain, France, no not in Rome,
nor in any part of the Christian World as this Cross is, as Travelers report:
and that we should gild it, and Papists adore it on their knees, (as many
witnesses testify) is abominable, we doubt not but our Worthies in the
Honorable Houses of Parliament will take away the memory of it.

FINIS.

