PROPOSALS For the Printing of GVILLIM's HERALDRY.
GUillim's Display of Heraldry, manifesting a more easy access to the Knowledge
thereof than has been published by any, through the benefit of Method, being
interlaced with variety of History suitable to the several Subjects; which said
Book, for its excellency has past the Press Four times, and is speedily to be
Reprinted, with variety of useful Additions. To which shall be added a
Treatise of the Nobility and Gentry, as to their Privileges, Dignities, etc.
with Chapters of each Degree, viz. Of his Majesty, the Fountain of Honor, of
Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, Viscounts, Bishops, Barons, Knights of the Garter,
Judges, Soldiers of Eminency, Knights Banerets, Baronets, Knights of the Bath,
Knights Batchelors, Esquires and Gentlemen; with apt and proper Figures to
represent each particular Degree: and for the further completing of the said
work, shall be added a Chapter of the Cities, and chief Towns Corporate in
England, treating of their Immunities, Customs, Privileges, and Government;
the several Incorporated Companies and how Governed, with the Arms appertaining
as well to the said Companies, as to the Cities, and Towns Corporate; with
other things of remark fit to be taken notice of.

And that none should be omitted in so useful a Work, through want of knowledge
thereof, these Proposals are made by the Proprietor of the Copy, Richard Blome,
lodging at Mr. Kids at the Corner of Lincolns Inn-fields, near Clare-Market,
where every Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday, from 2 to 5 of the Clock in the
Afternoon he will attend to receive Subscriptions according to these Proposals,
so as they are brought or sent in some reasonable time; for the said Volume
being in so fair a forwardness it is hoped the finishing thereof will not exceed
Easter Term 1675.

1. THose that will be pleased to subscribe and pay unto the said Richard
Blome, the Sum of 26 s. shall have one of the said Books bound, in which they
shall have their Paternal Coat Armor (so as allowed of by the Heralds)
Registered in the proper Section of the said Book, with some Honorable remarks
of their Family, to remain to posterity: 10 s. to be paid down upon the
delivery of a Receipt, under the Hand and Seal of the said Richard Blome, and
16 s. upon the delivery of one of the said Books bound, with the said Receipt.

2. Those that will pay unto the said Richard Blome, the sum of 46 s. shall
have one of the said Books with their Paternal Coat of Arms inserted, as
aforesaid, together with their Achievements, viz. Mantle, Helmet, Crest,
Motto, Quarterings (and Supporters, if Noble men) engraven in Copper Plates,
and inserted in the Treatise of the Nobility and Gentry, in the proper Chapter
relating unto that degree or dignity of which they are One: 26 s. to be paid
according to the first Proposal, and the other 20 s. when their Atchievment, as
aforesaid is Engraven.

3. Such as are curious in their Books, paying the charges thereof, may have
them of Fine Paper, with the Coats of Arms, and Sculptures illustrated in
proper Colors, which renders them not only ornamental but useful.

4. Those Persons of Quality that in memory of their great Offices born by
them, or for their remarkable Actions done either in Peace or War, are desirous
to preserve to posterity some Honorable remarks of the same; may have their
Effigies aptly delineated and Engraven to represent the same, together with
their Titles and Remarks of Honor due unto them: for which the necessary
charges will only be expected.

And there being in the said Treatise a particular Chapter of Honorable
Ladies, especially of Heiresses and Widows; it is proposed that paying the
Charges thereof according to the said Proposals they may have their Coats of
Arms, or Effigies engraven with some remarks of Honor due unto them; that, so
a Memorial may be kept of their Names and Families to remain to Posterity.

Those that for the advancement of the said Work, will Subscribe, or procure
Subscriptions for Six of the said Books, shall for their encouragement (upon
the performance thereof) have one of the said Books presented them Gratis.

It is my desire to have one of the said Books according to the (...)
Proposition, and to have my Coat of Arms, etc. inserted in the said Book,
according to the (...) Proposition.


