NEVVES FROM ROME. OR A Relation of the Pope and his Patentees Pilgrimage into
Hell, with their entertainment, and the Popes return back again to ROME.

With an Elegiacall Confabulation between DEATH and HONOR.

A Lecture which may be read to the greatest Monarch in the world.

Estote proditoros Betraye Your Country
woodcut, depicting the Pope astride a hydra

Printed in the Year 1641.

NEVVES FROM ROME. OR A Relation of the Pope and his Patentees Pilgrimage into
Hell, with their entertainment, and the Popes return back again to ROME.
THe Stigian King for honor to his Court
Now sits in state, delighting in the sport
His Furies make him, but they had not long
Practiced their hellish Gambolls, when a throng
Of unknown guests were seen, Pluto 'gan frown,
Their Leader did not veil his triple crown;
Then with a contract brow he thus bespake,
Cannot our frown make this same vassal quake.
Then fell the Pope upon his bended knee,
And cries, how fares your gracious Majesty.
At length looking about he does there see,
Stern Rhadamanthus, with the Furies three;
Three-headed Cerberus, then he does spy
Jxions wheel, and Theseus misery.
All standing round about him, as to hear
Some unknown matter, his speech was stopped by fear.
At l^st forgetting fear, he loud does call
Unto his God for justice, that the Hall
Did ring with Echo, making his complaint
Against the English, till he grew quite saint.
At length he thus proceeded, and did say
They scorn my servants, and me disobay.
But some there are who to me faithful were,
But they are gone, they are fled I know not where.
My Goldfinch, Windebanke, my ^uckling young,
Who could so well pray in our Roman tongue;
Are gone for fear of chiding, O they would
Have elevated me, if that they could.
My chiefest Prelate there they keep in thrall,
Who stands in fear to smell the Judgment hall.
My Iush King is dead, he would be so,
But O my ^^^nes do fall, even by my foe.
Now having fi^^sh^, he aloud does call
Unto his patent friends, that they should fall
Each on his knee, presenting each his gift,
Thinking to gain great favor was his drift.
The first Tobacco in a pipe well stuffed
Presents to Pluto (after i^ was puffed)
Which when the black Tartarian god did smell,
He fretted, fumed, and said, Is not Hell
Stored enough with base sulphurious smoke,
But you must thus conspire me here to choke;
Is not our person stored with fumes enough,
That you must here present us such a snuff;
Base Varlet, with Heathenish Indian weed,
I present, I abhor, and for this deed,
I do exile thee, never to come near
Our Court again, without continual fear;
Lordaine to that fair Elizians field,
Nor joy nor comfort to thee ere shall yield;
But thou with Tantalus shall stand, and thirst,
For thou from henceforth ever art accursed.
Tobacco gone, no longer it must stay
But like a chimney smoke vanish away.
Then down falls Soap, thinking clean out to wash
Tobacco's stain, but stern Megaeraes lash
Does force him up, the Pope does weep to see,
Soap larders out of Plntoes company:
Then Bacchus friend upon his knee does fall
Presenting that which bitter was as Gall,
The price of Wine I mean, but Pluto he
Foreknowing of his plots his sign would see;
Then of his pocket paper out he drew,
Wherein pourtrayed was in lively hue
The form of couzenage, about her standing
Seven penny pint pots as new landing
On English shore: In her face did he see,
The true effigies of a Patentee:
At length the Wine he did entend to taste,
Which stunke of Horseflesh, then was Pluto past
The bounds of patience, and to all did swear,
The first Inventer on it should loose an ear.
He was incenst so far that he did vow
That he hereafter never would allow
Such wicked doings, he wished these knaves
Had long ago been buried in their graves.
If he meant Abell now I cannot tell,
I will enquire the next Post comes from Hell;
Yet Abels sacrifice was first accepted
When wicked Cains his brothers disrespected.
Then did all other Patents kneel together,
But chiefest notice taken was of Leather,
Which to a Coach transformed was not shoes,
Wherefore for him the Furies made a noose,
And hung him out a tanning, but the Pope
Being tormented, was quite out of hope
In Hell to gain redress for's miseries,
Wherefore with speed to cursed Rome he flies,
Without his Patents, Charon would not row
Such damned friends, to all the world a foe:
They are in Hell, and there let them still lie,
Who were the causers of much misery:
Jesuits are angry because thus I write,
So let them be, these lines I do endite
Only to them, and each close shaved Friar,
Whom Hell much wants to kindle Plutoes fire:
My Muse is weary of so black a theme,
Wherefore she is flowne unto her sisters stream,
To cleanse her self, I me sure anon again
She will return, then I Will write better strain.
An Elegiacall Confabulation BETWEEN DEATH and HONOR.
A Lecture which may be read to the greatest Monarch in the world.
H: WHat horrid Monster 'ist which I do see,

D: One that is come to make a coarse of thee?
Nay, frown not Honor, thou must me obey;

H: What art thou slave, which dare to me thus say!

D: My name is death,

Hon: Death thy self enlarge,
Tell me thy nature, office, and thy charge.

D: For to declare to thee such things are vain,
I am triumphant, and demands disdain
Of greatest Monarchs, Death stands not in fear;
Than know proud Honor, Death will never spare.

H: Base Fiend, what art thou which to me do talk?
Tell me, what art thou? or else quickly walk.

D: Alas poor elfe, do think to conjure Death,
Thou can not, therefore come yield up thy breath.

H: Honor yield breath, pray tell me unto whom,

D: To Death, therefore with speed prepare thy Tomb.
Honor is vain, it is mortal, quickly gone,
This my keen dart shall force the proudest groan.
Then Honor shake off pride, and avoid lust,
Highest of honors must humbled be 'ith dust.

H: How Honor humbled? an example show
Then of thy power sufficient I shall know

D: I am content thy pleasure to fulfill,
Example I will show, then know my skill.
Had not Lord Wentworth honors? yes it is true,
Who dare deny it, by valor he it drew,
His wisdom unto after ages shall
Renowned be, and live perpetual.

D: What is true valor,

Hon: to overcome 'ith field,

D: But Death does force greatest Commanders yield.

H: Since Guns and Rapiers first invented were
Faint-hearted mortals, of Death stood in fear.

D: Never before did Honor yield to me,

H: Never true Honor always escaped scot-free.

D: Honor thou list, I am sure ever yet,
Death ruld the roast, man only turned the spit.
But yet I Will real be, Coelick Honor
Is fearlesse still, though Death display his Banner.
But as for such it descends from above,
In man infusd it is by heavenly Jove.
But yet they die which real Honor have,
And yet their fame survives, they being in grave.
Those which for terrene honors gape and call,
By soaring high oft-times do catch a fall.
Now answer Honor, tell to me thy mind,
Where like to Death another can thou find:
What silent Honor, dare thou not reply?
Answer me quick, this Dart must make thee die.
Hector that worthy Prince of famous Troy
I overcame, and with him Priams joy.
These greatest honors had, they Worthies were,
And yet to strike them did not I Death fear.
Then say no more, that I am too too cruel,
The Fates command that we should fight a duel.

H: O hold, hold Death, to thee does Honor yield,
Conquered I am, to thee belongs the field:
Thus world adue, farewell ye mortals all,
Shrubs may stand fast, when tallest Cedars fall.

T. B.

FINIS.

