TWO PETITIONS FROM THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND: HVMBLY PRESENTED TO THE
Honorable, the House of Commons now assembled in PARLIAMENT.

C R


LONDON. Printed for I. Reynor, 1641.

TO THE HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS, CITISENS, and Burgesses, now assembled in
PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of Henry Beecher, Gent. and Richard white: Merchants,
Inhabitants of Baltamore in Ireland, in the behalf of themselves and diverse
others; whose sad and deplorable Condition, they are desired to represent unto
this Honorable Assembly*
Humbly shows, As by the Certificate annexed may appear, do humbly crave
leave to declare, that all the South and Soutwest parts of that County is
subjected to the force and tyranny of those cruel Rebels (except the Castles
situate in the Ports of Baltamore, Castle-haven, and Crook-haven) wherein
there are a thousand English. But h^ve no Commission or force whereby to defend
themselves from the power and force of their Enemies whereby not only their
persons, but also the said Castles are exposed to extreme danger; and unless
very speedy succors be sent unto them, must miserably perish by those bloody
hands Which Forts being sustiate on the Sea Coast in the South Southwest parts
of Ireland, are of great consequence, being well manned and supplied with
Victual and Ammunition for the security of those parts from any foreign
Invasion: but being lost, will be very advantageous to the Rebels, and a great
help to a foreign Enemy.

The Consideration whereof, your Petitioners are confident, cannot but move
this Honorable House to pity and Commiseration* And therefore they humbly
implore that for the p^eservation of the lives of those who are yet left, the
security and safeguard of those Castles, and Posts, the regain of what is there
already lost, a Regiment of 500. men for the present: together with sufficient
Arms and Victuals may be speedily sent: Either of which being done, by Gods
blessing may be an effectual means to preserve the lives of the said
Inhabitants, and the said Castles and Ports.

But the delay thereof will be inevitably and produce ruin and distraction to
them. All which they humbly leave to the grave wisdom of this Honorable
Assembly. And your Petitioners, together with many more who escaped to
Bristoll, but want means; so that they can come no further: together with that
remnant of English, which yet are left in those parts of Ireland, shall pray
for the good success of it.

TO THE HONORABLE, THE HOUSE OF COMMONS In this present Parliament.
The humble Petition of Richard White, Gent. who has formerly Petitioned this
Honorable House, in the behalf of the Inhabitants of Baltamore, Crook-haven,
and Castle-haven, in Ireland.
THat your Petitioner being an Inhabitant in the Parish of Alphadown a mile
from Baltamore, was surrounded with those fierce and bloody Rebels in the
County of Cork in Ireland, who threatened distraction unto your Petitioner, and
all the English there. Whereupon your Petitioner was forced to to leave his
habitation, and to provide for the security of himself his wife and Children,
leaving two Sons within the Castle of Baltamore: together with victuals, to the
value of 100. l. ster. and some Ammunition, without which Victuals the said
Castle could not have subsisted; and so with his wife, and his other Children
repaired into England, As by the Certificate from Bristoll may appear.

Your Petitioner being thus deprived of all stay of maintenance for himself and
family humbly desires this Honorable House, that his said two Sons, left in the
said Castle, may be employed in his Majesty's service in those parts, the one
as a Lieutenant, and the other as an Ensign, having bin both bred soldiers:
and that your Petition may have likewise some impl^yed in that service, for the
keeping of the store and provisions of the said Castle and Army: or otherwise,
as to this Honorable Assembly shall seem meet.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc.


