THE GRAND DEBATE BETWEEN The most Reverend the BISHOPS, AND The PRESBYTERIAN
Divines, Appointed by His Sacred MAJESTY, AS COMMISSIONERS FOR The Review and
Alteration OF THE BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER, etc.

BEING An Exact Account of their whole Proceedings.

The most perfect Copy.

London, Printed 1661.

A Copy of His Majesty's Commission.
CHARLES the second by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To our Trusty and wel-beloved, the most
Reverend Father in God, Accepted Archbishop of York, The right reverend
Fathers in God, Gilbert Bishop of London, John Bishop of Durham, John Bishop of
Rochester, Humphrey Bishop of Sarum, George Bishop of Worcester, Robert Bishop
of Lincoln, Benjamin Bishop of Peterborough, Brian Bishop of Chester, Richard
Bishop of Carlisle, John Bishop of Exeter, Edward Bishop of Norwich, and to our
trusty and wel-beloved, the Reverend Anthony Tuckney D. D. John Conant D. D.
William Spurstow D. D. John Wallis D. D. Thomas Manton, D. D. Edmund Calamy B.
D. Richard Baxter Clerk, Arthur Juckson, Tho. Case, Samuel Clarke, Matthew
Newcomen, Clerks; and to our trusty and wel-beloved Dr. Earl Dean of
Westminster, Peter Heylin, D. D. Joh. Hacket, D. D. Joh. Berwick D. D. Peter
Gunning D. D. John Pearson D. D. Tho. Pierce D. D. Anthony Sparrow, Herbert
Thorndike D. D. Thomas Horton D. D. Thomas Jacomb, D. D. William Bate, John
Rawlinson, William Cooper, Clerks, D. John Light- foot, D. John Collings, D.
Benjamin Woodbridg; and William Drake Clerk, Greeting. Whereas by our
Declaration of the 25 of October last concerning Ecclesiastical affairs, we
did (amongst other things) express our esteem of the Liturgy of the Church of
England, contained in the Book of Common prayer; and yet since we find
exceptions made against several things therein, we did by our said Declaration
declare we would appoint an equal number of learned Divines, of both
persuasions, to review the same: we therefore in accomplishment of our said will
and intent, and of our continued and constant care and study for the peace and
unity of the Churches within our dominions, and for removal of all exceptions
and differences, and the occasions of such differences, and exceptions from
among our good subjects, for or concerning the said Book of Common prayer, or
any thing therein contained, do by these our Letters patents require,
authorize, constitute, and appoint you the said, etc. to advise upon and review
the said Book of Common prayer, comparing the same with the most ancient
Liturgies which have been used in the Church in the primitive and purest times.
And to that end to assemble and meet together, from time to time, and at such
time within the space of four Calendar months now next ensuing, in the
Masters lodging in the Savoy in the Strand in the County of Middlesex, or in
such other place or places as to you shall be thought fit and convenient, to
take into your serious and grave considerations the several directions and
rules, forms of prayer, and things in the said Book of Common prayer contained,
and to advise, consult upon, and about the same, and the several objections and
exceptions, which shall now be raised against the same, and (if occasion be) to
make such reasonable and necessary alterations, corrections and amendments
therein as by and between you the said Archbishop, Bishops, Doctors, and
Persons hereby required and authorized to meet and advise as aforesaid, shall
be agreed upon to be needful and expedient, for the giving satisfaction to
tender consciences, and the restoring and continuance of peace and unity in the
Churches under our protection and Government; but avoiding (as much as may be)
all unnecessary abreviations of the Forms and Liturgy wherewith the people are
altogether acquainted, and have so long received in the Church of England. And
our will and pleasure is, that when you the said Archbishop, Bishops,
Doctors, and persons authorized and appointed by these our Letters patents to
meet, advise, and consult upon and about the premises, as aforesaid, shall have
drawn your consultations to any resolution and determination which you shall
agree upon as needful or expedient to be done for the altering, diminishing,
or enlarging, the said Book of Common prayer, or any part thereof, that then
forthwith you certify and present to us in writing under your several hands
the matters and things whereupon you shall so determine, for our approbation,
and to the end the same or so much thereof as shall be approved by us, may be
established, and for as much as the said Archbishop and Bishops have several
great Charges to attend, which we would not dispense with, or that the same
should be neglected upon any great occasion whatsoever, and some of them being
of great age and infirmities, may not be able constantly to attend the
execution of the service and authority hereby given and required by us, in the
meeting and consultation aforesaid; We will therefore and hereby require you
the said Dr. Earls, etc. to supply the place and places of such of the
Archbishop and Bishops (other then the said Edward Bishop of Norwich) as shall
by age, sickness, infirmity, or other occasion be hindered from attending the
said meeting or consultation (that is to say) that one of you the said Dr.
Earls, etc. shall from time to time supply the place of each one of them, the
said Archbishop and Bishops (other then the said Edward Bishop of Norwich)
which shall happen to be hindered or to be absent from the said meetings, or
consultations, and shall and may advise, consult and determine, and also
certify and execute all and singular the powers and authorities before
mentioned in and about the premises, as fully and absolutely as such
Archbishop and Bishops which shall so happen to be absent should or might do
by virtue of these our Letters patents, or any thing herein contained, in case
he or they were personally present. And whereas in regard of the distance of
some, the infirmity of others, the multitude of constant employment, and other
incidental impediments, some of you the said Edward Bishop of Norwich, etc. may
be hindered from the constant attendance in the execution of the service
aforesaid, We therefore will and do hereby require and authorize you the said
Thomas Horton, etc. to supply the place or places of such the Commissioners
last before mentioned, as shall by the means aforesaid or any other occasion be
hindered from the said meeting and consultations that one of you, the said
Thomas Horton, etc. shall from time to time supply the places of each one of the
said Commissioners last mentioned, which shall happen to be hindered or absent
from the said meeting and consultations: and shall and may advise consult and
determine, and also certify and execute all and singular the powers and
authorities before mentioned in and about the premises as fully and absolutely
as such of the said last mentioned Commissioners, which shall so happen to be
absent, should or might do by virtue of these our Letters patents or any thing
therein contained, in case he or they were personally present. In witness
whereof we have caused these our Letters to be made patents, witness our self
at Westminster the 25 day of March in the thirteenth year of our Reign.

Per ipsum Regem. Barker.

THE EXCEPTIONS OF THE PRESBYTERIAN - Brethren, Against some passages in the
present LITURGY.
ACknowledging, with all humility and thankfulness, His Majesty's most Princely
condescension and indulgence to very many of his Loyal subjects, as well in
his Majesty's most gracious Declaration, as particularly in this present
Commission issued forth in pursuance thereof; we doubt not but the Right
Reverend Bishops, and all the rest of His Majesty's Commissioners entrusted in
this work, will in imitation of His Majesty's most prudent and Christian
Moderation and Clemency, judge it their duty (that we find to be the Apostles
own practice) in a special manner to be tender to the Churches peace, to bear
with the infirmities of the weak, and not to please themselves, nor to measure
the Consciences of other men by the light and latitude of their own, but
seriously and readily to consider, and advise of such Expedients as may most
conduce to the healing of our breaches, and uniting those that differ.

And albeit we have an high and honorable esteem of those Godly and Learned
Bishops, and others, who were the first Compilers of the public Liturgy, and
do look upon it as an excellent and worthy Work, for that time, when the
Church of England made her first step out of such a mist of Popish Ignorance
and Superstition, wherein it formerly was involved; yet considering, that all
humane Works do gradually arrive at their maturity and perfection, and this in
particular being a Work of that nature, has already admitted several
emendations since the first compiling thereof, It cannot be thought any
disparagement, or derogation either to the Work it self, or to the Compilers of
it, or to those who have hitherto used it, if after more than one hundred years
since its first composure such further emendations be now made therein, as may
be judged necessary for satisfying the scruples of a multitude of sober
persons, who cannot at all (or very hardly) comply with the use of it as now it
is, and may best suit with the present times, after so long an enjoyment of the
glorious light of the Gospel, and so happy a Reformations especially
considering that many godly and learned men, have from the beginning all along
desired the alteration of many things therein, and very many of his Majesty's
pious peaceable and loyal Subjects, after so long a discontinuance of it, are
more averse from it than heretofore; the satisfying of whom (as far as may be)
will very much conduce to that Peace and Unity which is so much desired by all
good men, and so much endeavored by His most Excellent Majesty.

And therefore in pursuance of this His Majesty's most gracious Commission for
the satisfying of tender Consciences, and the procuring of Peace and Unity
amongst our selves, we judge meet to propose,

I. That all the Prayers, and other Materials of the Liturgy, may consist of
nothing doubtful or questioned amongst Pious, Learned and Orthodox Persons,
inasmuch as the professed end of composing them is, for the declaring of Unity
and consent of all who join in the Public Worship, it being too evident, that
the limiting Church Communion to things of doubtful disputation, has been in
all Ages the ground of Schism and separation, according to the saying of a
Learned Man.

To load our Public Forms with the private Fancies upon which we differ, is
the most Sovereign way to perpetuate Schism to the Worlds end. Prayer,
Confession, Thanksgiving, reading of the Scriptures, and administration of the
Sacraments in the plainest and simplest manner were matter enough to furnish
out a sufficient Liturgy, though nothing either of private Opinion, or of
Church pomp, of Garments, or prescribed Gestures, of Imagery, of Music, of
matter concerning the dead, of many superfluities which creep into the Church
under the name of Order and Decency did interpose it self. To charge Churches
or Litnrgies with things unnecessary was the first beginning of all
Superstition; and when scruple of Conscience began to be made, or pretended,
then Schism began to break in. If the special Guides and Fathers of the
Church would be a little sparing of incumbring Churches with Superfluities, or
not over-rigid, either in reviving obsolete Customs, or imposing new, there
would be far less cause of Schism, or Superstition, and all the Inconvenience
likely to ensue would be but this; they should in so doing yield a little to
the imbecility of their Inferiors, a thing which S. Paul would never have
rrefused to do, mean while, wheresoever false or suspected Opinions are made a
piece of Church-Liturgy, he that separates is not the Schismatic; for, it is
alike unlawful to make profession of known or suspected falsehood, as to put in
practice unlawful or suspected actions.

II. Further, we humbly desire, that it may be seriously considered, that as
our first Reformers out of their great wisdom did at that time so compose the
Liturgy as to win upon the Papists, and to draw them into their
Church Communion, by varying as little as well they could from the Romish forms
before in use; so whether in the present constitution and state of things
amongst us we should not according to the same rule of Prudence and Charity
have our Liturgy so composed, as to gain upon the judgment and affections of
all those who in the substantials of the Protestant Religion are of the same
persuasions with our selves. In as much as a more firm union and consent of all
such, as well in Woship as in Doctrine, would greatly strengthen the Protestant
Interest against all those dangers and temptations which our intestine
Divisions and Animosities do expose us unto from the common Adversary.

III. That the Repetitions and Responsals of the Clerk and People, and the
alternate Reading of the Psalms and Hymns with a confused murmr in the
Congregation, whereby what is read is less intelligible, and therefore
unedifying, may be omitted, the Minister being appointed for the People in all
Public Services appertaining unto God, and the holy Scriptures both of the old
and new Testament, intimating the peoples part in public Prayer, to be only
with silence and reverence, to attend thereunto, and to declare their consent
in the close, by saying, Amon.

IV. That in regard the Letany (though otherwise containing in it many holy
Petitions) is so framed, that the Petitions, for a great part, are uttered
only by the People, which we think not to be so consonant to Scripture, which
makes the Minister the Mouth of the People to God in Prayer, the particulars
thereof may be composed into one solemn Prayer to be offered by the Minister
unto God for the People.

V. That there may be nothing in the Liturgy which may seem to countenance the
observation of Lent, as a Religious Fast, the Example of Christ's fasting forty
days and nights being no more imitable, nor intended for the imitation of
Christians, than any other of his miraculous works were, or than Moses his
forty days Fast was for the Jews, and the Act of Parliament 5 Eliz.
forbidding abstinence from flesh to be observed upon any other than a politic
Consideration, and punishing all those who by Preaching, Teaching, Writing, or
open Speech shall notify, that the forbearing of flesh is of any necessity for
the saving of the soul, or that it is the service of God otherwise than as
other politic Laws are.

VI. That the Religious observation of Saints days appointed to be kept as
holy days and the Vigils thereof, without any foundations (as we conceive) in
Scripture, may be omitted, that if any be retained they may be called Festival,
and not Holy days, nor made equal with the Lords day, nor have any peculiar
Service appointed for them, nor that the People be upon such days enforced
wholly to abstain from work; and that the names of all others not inserted in
the Callendar, which are not in the first and second Books of Edward the Sixth,
may be left out.

VII. That the gift of Prayer being one special qualification for the Work of
the Ministry bestowed by Christ in order to the edification of his Church, and
to be exercised for the profit and benefit thereof according to its various and
emergent necessities.

It is desired that there may be no such Imposition of the Liturgy, as that the
exercise of that gift be thereby totally excluded in any part of public
worship; and further, that considering the great age of some Ministers, and the
infirmities of others, and the variety of several services often time occurring
upon the same day, whereby it may be inexpedient to require every Minister at
all times to read the whole; it may be left to the discretion of the Minister
to omit it, as occasion shall require, which liberty we find to be allowed even
in the first Common Prayer Book of Edward the Sixth.

VIII. That in regard of the many defects which have been observed in that
Version of the Scriptures which is used throughout the Liturgy, (many fold
instances whereof may be produced) as in the Epistle for the first Sunday after
Epiphany, taken out of Romans 12. 1. Be you changed in your shape. And the
Epistle for the Sunday next before Easter, taken out of Phil. 2. 5. Found in
his apparel as a man; As also the Epistle for the first Sunday in Lent, taken
out of the fourth of the Galatians, Mount Sinai is Agar in Arabia, and
bordereth upon the City which is now called Jerusalem. The Epistle for Saint
Matthews day being taken out of the second Epistle of the Corinthians and the
fourth, We go not out of kind. The Gospel for the second Sunday after Epiphany,
taken out of the second of John, When men be drunk. The Gospel for the third
Sunday in Lent, taken out of the eleventh of Luke, One house does fall upon
another. The Gospel for the Annunciation, taken out of the first of Luke, This
is the sixth month which is called Barren, and many other places; we therefore
desire instead thereof the Translation allowed of by Authority may alone be
used.

IX. That in as much as the Holy Scriptures are able to make us wise unto
salvation to furnish us thoroughly unto all good works, and contain in them all
things necessary either in Doctrine to be believed, or in Duty to be practiced;
whereas diverse Chapters of the Apocryphal Books appointed to be read, are
charged to be in both respects of dubious and uncertain credit: It is therefore
desired that nothing be read in the Church for Lessons, but the Holy Scriptures
in the Old and New Testament.

X. That the Minister be not required to rehearse any part of the Liturgy at
the Communion Table, save only those parts which properly belong to the Lords
Supper, and that at such time only when the Holy Supper is administrated.

XI. That the word (Minister) and not (Priest) or (Curate) is used in the
absolution, and in diverse other places; It may thoroughout the whole Book be
used instead of those two words, and that instead of the word (Sunday) the word
(Lords day) may be every where used.

XII. Because singing of Psalms is a considerable part of Public Worship, we
desire that the Version set forth and allowed to be sung in Churches may be
amended, or that we may have leave to make use of a purer Version.

XIII. That all obsolete words in the Common Prayer, and such whose use is
changed from their first significancy (as read who smote thee) used in the
Gospels for the Monday and Wednesday before Easter (Then opened be their wits)
used in the Gospel for Easter Tuesday, etc. may be altered into other words
generally received, and better understood.

XIV. That no portions of the Old Testament, or the Acts of the Apostles be
called Epistles; or read as such.

XV. That whereas throughout the several offices the Phrase is such as
presumes all persons (within the Communion of the Church) to be regenerated,
converted, and in an actual state of grace, which had Ecclesiastical
Discipline been truly and vigorously executed in the exclusion of scandalous
and obstinate sinners might be better supposed; But that there having been, and
still being a confessed want of that (as in the Liturgy is acknowledged) it
cannot rationally be admitted in the utmost latitude of Charity: we desire that
this may be reformed.

XVI. That whereas orderly connection of Prayers and of particular Petitions and
expressions, together with a competent length of the forms used, are tending
much to edification, and to gain the reverence of people to them: There appears
to us too great neglect of this Order, and of other Just Laws of method
particularly.

1. The Collects are generally short, many of them consisting but of one or two
Sentences of petition, and those generally usherd in with a repeated mention of
the Name and Attributes of God, and presently concluding with the Name and
Merits of Christ whence are caused many unnecessary intercessions and
abruptions, which when many Petitions are to be offered at the same time, are
neither agreeable to scripturall example, nor suited to the gravity and
seriousness of that Holy Duty.

2. The Prefaces of many Collects have not any clear and special respect to
the following Petitions; and particular petitions are put together, which have
not any due order or evident connection one with another, nor suitable with the
occasions upon which they are used, but seem to have fallen in rather casually,
than from any orderly codtinuance.

It is desired that instead of these various Collects, there may be one
Methodicall and entire form of Prayer composed out of many of them.

XVII. That whereas the Puplick Liturgy of a Church should in reason comprehend
the sum of all such sins as are ordinarily in Prayer by the Church to be
confessed, and of such Petitions and Thanksgiving as are ordinarily by the
Church to be put up to God, and that Puplick Catechismes or Systemes of
Doctrine should summarily comprehend all such Doctrines as are necessarily to
be believed, and these explicitly set down. The present Liturgy, as to all
these seems very defective particularly:

1. There is no preparatory Prayer in your addresses to God for assistance or
acceptance; yet many Collects in the midst of the Worship have little or
nothing else.

2. The Confession is very defective, not clearly expressing Original sin, nor
sufficiently enumerating Actual sins with their aggrivations, but consisting
only of generals, whereas Confession being the exercise of repentance ought to
be more particular.

3. There is also great defect, as to such Forms of public prayers and
thanksgivings as are suitable to Gospel Worship.

4. The whole body of the Common Prayer also consists very much of mere
generals, as to have our prayers heard, to be kept from all evil, and from all
enemies and all adversities, that we may do Gods will without any mention of
the particulars wherein these generals exist.

5. The Catechism is defective as to many necessary Doctrines of our religion,
some even of the Essentials of Christianity not mentioned, except in the Creed,
and there not so explicit as ought to be in the Catechism.

XVIII. Because this Liturgy contains the imposition of diverse Ceremonies,
which from the first Reformation have by sundry Learned and pious men been
judged unwarrantable: as,

1. That public Worship may not be celebrated by any Minister that dares not
wear a Surplice.

2. That none may Baptize, or be Baptized without the transient Image of the
Cross, which has at least the semblance of a Sacrament of humane institution,
being used as an engaging sign in our first and solemn Covenanting with Christ,
and the Duties whereunto we are really obliged by Baptism, being more expressly
affixed to that Aerie fign than to the holy Sacrament.

3. That none may receive the Lords Supper that dares not kneel in the act of
receiving, but the Minister must exclude all such from the Communion, although
such kneeling not only differs from the practice of Christ and of his Apostles;
but (at least on the Lords days) is contrry to the practice of the Catholic
Church for many hundred years after, and forbid by the most venerable Councila
that ever were in the Christian world. All which Impositions are made yet more
grievous by that subscription to their lawfulness, which the Cannon exacts, and
by the heavy punishments, upon the non observance of them, which the Act for
uniformity inflicts.

And it being doubtful, whether God has given power unto men to institute in
his worship such mystical teaching signs, which not being necessary in genere,
fall not under the rule of doing all things decently, orderly, and to
edification, and which once granted, will upon the same reason open a door to
the arbitrary Imposition of numerous Ceremonies of which St. Aug. complained in
his days, and the things in Controversy being in the Judgment of the
Imposers confessed indifferent, who dare not so much as pretend any real
goodness in themselves, otherwise than what is derived from their being
imposed, and consesequently the Imposition ceasing, that will cease also, and
the Worship of God not become indecent without them; whereas on the other hand
in the Judgment of the Opposers, they are by some held sinful and unlawful in
themselves, by others very inconvenient and unsuitable to the simplicity of
Gospel Worship, and by all of them very grievous and burdensome, and therefore
not at all fit to put in balance with the peace of the Church, which is more
likely to be promoted by their removal than continuance, considering also how
tender our Lord and Savior himself is of weak Brethren, declaring it to be
much better for a man to have a Millstone to be hanged about his neck, and to be
cast into the depth of the Sea, than to offend one of his little ones, and how
the Apostle Paul (who had as great a Legislative power in the Church as any
under Christ) held himself obliged by that common rule of Charity, not to lay a
stumbling block, or an occasion of offense before a weak Brother, choosing
rather not to cat flesh while the world stands (though in it self a thing
lawful) than offend his Brother, for whom Christ dyed; we cannot but desire
that these Ceremonies may not be imposed on them who judge such impositions a
violation of the Royalty of Christ, and an Impeachment of his Laws as
insufficient, and are under the holy Law of that which is written, Deuteronomy. 12.
32. What thing soever I command you, observe to do it, thou shall not add
thereto, nor diminish from it; but that there may be either a total abolishion
of them, or at least such a liberty, that those who are unsatisfied concerning
their lawfulness, or expedency, may not be compolled to the practice of them or
subscription to them; but may be permitted to enjoy their Ministerial Functions
and Communion with the Church without them.

The rather because these Ceremonies have for above an hundred years been the
fountain of manifold evils in this Church and Nation, occasioning sad Divisions
between Ministers and Ministers, and also between Ministers and people,
exposing many orthodox, pious, and peaceable Ministers to the displeasure of
their Rulers, casting them upon the edge of the penal Statutes, to the loss not
only of their Livings and liberties, but also of their opportunities for the
service of Christ and his Church, and forcing people either to worship God in
such a manner as their own consciences condemn, or doubt of, or else to forsake
our Assemblies, as thousands have done, and no better fruits than these can be
looked for from the retaining and imposing these Ceremonies. unless we could
presume that all his Majesty's Subjects should have the same subtilty of
Judgment to discern even to a Ceremony how far the Power extends in the
things of God. which is not to be expected, or should yield obedience to all
the Impositions of men concerning them, without enquiring into the will of God,
which is not to be desired.

We do therefore most earnestly entreat the Right Reverend Fathers and
Brethren, to whom these Papers are delivered, as they tender the Glory of God,
the Honor of Religion, the Peace of the Church, the Service of His Majesty in
the accomplishment of that happy Union which his Majesty has so abundantly
testified his desires of, to join with us in importuning His most Excellent
Majesty that His most gracious Indulgence, as to these Ceremonies granted in
His Royal Declaration, may be comfirmed and continued to us, and our
posterities, and extended to such as do not yet enjoy the benefit thereof.

XIX. As to that Passage in His Majesty's Commission, wherein we are authorized
and required to compare the Present Liturgy with the most ancient Liturgy,
which have been used in the Church in the purest and most Primitive Times; we
have in obedience to His Majesty's Commission made Inquiry, but cannot find any
Records of known Credit concerning any entire Forms of Liturgies within the
first 300 years, which are confessed to be as the most Primitive, so the purest
Ages of the Church; nor any Imposition of Liturgies upon any National Church;
for some hundred years after we find indeed Liturgical Forms fathered upon St.
Basil, St. Chrysostom, and St. Ambrose; but we have not seen any Copies of
them, but such as give us sufficient evidence to conclude them either wholly
spurious, or so interpolated, that we cannot make a Judgment what in them has
any Primitive Authority.

Having thus in general expressed our desire, we come to particulars, which we
find numerous, and of a various nature; some we grant are of an inferior
consideration, verbal rather than material, which were they not in she Public
Liturgy of so Famous a Church, we should not have mentioned; others dubions and
disputable, as not having a clear foundation in Scripture for their warrant;
but some there be that seem to be corrupt, and to carry in them a repugnancy to
the rule of the Gospel, and therefore have administered just matter of exception
and offense to many truly religious and peaceable, not of a private station
only, but Learned and Judicious Divines, as well of other Reformed Churches, as
of the Church of England, ever since the Reformation.

We know much has been spoken and written by way of Apology in answer to many
things that have been objected, but yet the doubts and scuples of tender
consciences still continue, or rather are increased: We do therefore humbly
conceive it therefore a Work worthy of those Wonders of Salvation which God
has wrought for his Majesty, now on the Throne, and for the whole Kingdom,
and exceedingly becoming the Ministers of the Gospel of Peace, with all holy
moderation and tenderness to endeavor the removal of every thing out of the
Worship of God, which may justly offend or grieve the spirits of sober and
godly people; the things themselves that we desire to be removed, not being of
the foundation of Religion, nor the Essentials of Public Worship, nor the
removal of them any way tending to the prejudice of the Church or State;
therefore their continuance and rigorous Imposition can no ways be able to
countervail the laying aside of so many pious and able Ministers, and the
unconceivable grief that will arise to multitudes of His Majesty's most Loyal
and peaceable Subjects, who upon all accasions are ready to serve him with
their Prayers, Estates, and Lives: For the preventing of which evils, we humbly
desire that these particulars following may be taken into serious and tender
consideration.

Concerning Morning and Evening Prayer.
1. Rub. That Morning and Evening Prayer shall be used in the accustomed place
of the Church, Chancel, or Chapel, except it shall be otherwise determined by
the Ordinary of the Place, and the Chancel shall remain as in times past.

We desire that the words of the first Rub. may be expressed, as in the Book
established by Authority of Parliament 5 and 6 Edwardi 6. thus; The Morning and
Evening Prayer shall be used in such place of the Church, Chapel, or Chancel,
and the Minister shall so turn himself, as the people may best hear; and if
there be any controversies therein, the matter shall be referred to the
Ordinary.

2. Rub. And here it is to be noted, that the Minister at the time of the
Cimmunion, and at other times in his ministration, shall use such Ornaments in
the Church as were in use by Authority of Parliament, in the second year of the
Reign of Edward the Sixth, according to the Act of Parliament, etc.

For as much as the Rubric seems to bring back the Cope, Albe, and other
vestments, forbidden in the Common Prayer Book, 5. 6. of Edw. 6. And for the
reasons alleged against Ceremonies under our 18. general Exception, we desire
it may be wholly left out.

The Lords Prayer after the Absolution ends thus: Deliver us from evil.

We desire that these Words, For thine is the Kingdom, the Power and the
Glory, for ever and ever, Amen, may be always added unto the Lords Prayer, and
that this Prayer may not be enjoined to be so often used in the Morning and
Evening Service.

And at the end of every Psalm throughout the year, and likewise in the end of
the Benedictus. Benedicite magnificat, etc. Nunc Dimittis, shall be repeated,
Glory be to the Father, etc.

By this Rubric, and other places in the Common Prayer Book the Gloria Patri
is appointed to be said six times ordinarily in every Morning and Evening
Services, frequently eight times in a Morning, sometimes ten, which we think
carries with it at least an appearance of that vain repetition which Christ
forbids; for the avoiding of which appearance of evil, we desire it may be used
but once in the Morning, and once in the Evening.

Rubr. In such places where they do sing, there shall the Lessons be sung in a
plain Tune, and likewise the Epistle and Gospel. Or this Canticle, Benedicite
omnia opera.

Except. The Lessons, and the Epistles, and Gospels, being for the most part
neither Psalms nor Hymns; we know no warrant why they should be sung in any
place, and conceive that the distinct reading of them with an audible voice,
tends more to the edification of the Church: We desire that some Psalm or
Scripture Hymn may be appointed instead of that Apocryphal.

In the Letany; From fornication, and other deadly sins.

Except. In regard that the wages of sin is death; we desire that this clause
may be thus altered. From fornication and all other beynous (or grievous) sins.

From battle and murder, and from sudden death.

Except. Because this expression (of sudden death) has been so often excepted
against; we desire (if it be thought fit) it may be thus read: From battle and
murder, and from dying suddenly and unprepared.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by land and by water, all
women laboring with child, all sick persons and young Children, and to show
thy pity upon all prisoners and captives.

We desire that the term All, may be advised upon as seeming liable to just
exceptions, and that it may be considered whether Excep.
it may not better be put indefinitely, those that travel, etc. rather then
universally.

The Collect of Christmas day.
Almighty God which best given us thy only begotten son to take our nature upon
him, and this day to be born of a pure Virgin, etc:

The Rubric.
Then shall follow the collect of the Nativity which shall be said continually
unto New-years-day.

The Collect for VVhitsunday.
God which upon this day, etc.

We desire that in both collects the words (this day) may be Excep.
left out, it being according to vulgar acceptance a contradiction.

Rubric.
The same Collect to be read on Monday and Tuesday in Whitsun -week.

The two Collects for St. John's and Innocents, the Collects for the first day
in Lent, for the fourth Sunday after Easter, for Trinity Sunday, for the sixth
and twelfth sunday after Trinity, for St. Lukes day and Michaelmas day.

We desire that these Collects may be further considered and debated, as having
in them diverse things that we judge fit to be Excep.
altered.

The Order for the Administration of the Lords Supper.
SO many as intend to be partakers of the holy Communion shall signify their
Name to the Curate over night, or else in the morning Rub.
before the beginning of morning Prayer.

The time here assigned for notice to be given to the Minister is not
sufficient. Excep.


And if any of these be an open and notorious evil liver, the Curate having
knowledge thereof, shall call him and advertize him in any Rub.
wise not to presume to come to the Lords Table.

We desire the Ministers power both to admit and keep from Excep.
the Lords Table, may be according to his Majesty's Declaration of the 25.
October. 1660. in these words, The Minister shall admit none to the Lords Supper
till they have made a credible profession of their faith, and promised
obedience to the will of God, according as is expressed in the consideration of
the Rubric before the Catechism; and that all possible diligence be used as
is for the instruction and reformation of seandalous offenders, whom the
Minister shall not suffer to partake of the Lords table, until they have
openly declared themselves to have truly repented and amended their former
naughty lives, as is partly expressed in the Rubric, and more fully in the
Cannons.

Then shall the Priest rehearse distinctly all the ten Commandments, Rub.
and the people kneeling shall after every Commandment ask God mercy for
transgressing the same.

We desire,

First, that the Preface prefixed by God himself to the ten Excep:
Commandments may be restored.

Secondly, that the fourth Commandment may be read, as in Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
He blessed the Sabbath day.

Thirdly, that neither Minister nor People may be enjoined to kneel more at the
reading of this, then of any other parts of Scripture: The rather because many
ignorant persons are thereby induced to use the ten Commandments as a prayer.

Fourthly, that instead of those short prayers of the people intermixed with
the several Commandments, the Minister after the reading of all may conclude
with a suitable Prayer.

After the Creed, if there be no sermon, shell follow one of the Homilies
already set forth, or hereafter to be set forth by common authority Rub.


We desire that the preaching of the Word may be strictly enjoined, and not
left so indifferent at the administration of the Excep.
Sacrament, as also that Ministers may not be bound to those things which are
as yet but future, and not in being.

After the Sermon, Homily, or Exhortation, the Curate shall declare, Rub.
etc. and earnestly exhort them to remember the poor, saying one or more of
these sentences following.

Two of the sentences here cited are Apocryphal, and four of them more proper
to draw out their peoples bounty to their Minister, Excep.
then their charity to the poor.

Then shall the Churchwardens, or some other by them appointed Rub.
gather the Devetion of the people.

Collection for the poor may be better made at or a little before Excep.
the departing of the Communicants.

We be come together at this time to feed at the Lords Supper, to the Rub.
which in Gods behalf I bid you all that be here present, and beseech you for
the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, that you will not refuse to come.

If it be intended that these Exhortations should be read at the Excep.
Communion, they seem to us unreasonable.

The way and means thereto is, first to examine our lives, and conversations,
and if ye shall perceive your offenses to be such as be not 2. Exhor
only against God, but also against our neighbors, then you shall reconcile
your selves unto them, and be ready to make restitution and satisfaction. And
because it is requisite that no man should come to the holy Communion, but with
a full trust in Gods mercy, and with 3. Exhor
a quiet conscience.

We fear this may discourage many from coming to the Sacrament who lie under a
doubting and troubled conscience. Excep.


Then shall this general confession be made in the name of all those Rub.
before the Confession.
that are minded to receive the holy Communion, either by one of them or by one
of the Ministers, or by the Priest himself.

We desire it may be made by the Minister only.

Then shall the Priest or the Bishop being present stand up, and turning Excep.
Rub.
himself to the people, say thus.

The Ministers turning himself to the people is most convenient throughout the
whole ministration. Excep.


Before the Prefaces on Christmas day and seven days after.

Because thou did give Jesus Christ thine only Son to be born as this Rub.
day for us, etc.

First, we cannot peremptorily fix the Nativity of our Savior Excep.
to this or that particular day. Secondly, it seems incongruous to affirm the
birth of Christ, and the descending of the holy Ghost to be on this day, for
seven or eight days together:

Upon Whitsunday and six days after.

According to whose most true promise the Holy ghost came down Prayer before
that which is at the Consecration. Excep.
this day from Heaven; grant us that our sinful bodies may be made clean by
his body and our soul washed by his most precious blood.

We desire that whereas these words seem to give a greater efficacy to the
blood then to the Body of Christ, may be altered thus, That our sinful souls
and bodies may be cleansed through his precious body and blood.

Prayer at the consecration.

Hear us O merciful father, etc. who in the same night that he was betrayed
took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it to his
Disciples, saying, take, eat, etc.

We conceive that the manner of consecrating of the Elements is not here
explicit and distinct enough: And the Ministers Excep.
breaking of the bread is not so much as mentioned.

Then shall the Minister first receive the Communion in both kinds, Rub.
etc. and after deliver it to the people in their hands kneeling; and when he
delivers the bread, he shall say, The body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was
given for thee, preserve thy body and soul unto everlasting life, and take, and
eat this in remembrance, etc.

We desire that at the distribution of the Bread and Wine to the Communicants
we may use the words of our Savior as near as Excep.
may be, and that the Minister be not required to deliver the bread and wine
into every particular Communicants hand, and to repeat the words to eachone in
the singular number, but that it may suffice to speak them to diverse jointly,
according to our Saviors example. We also desire that kneeling at the
Sacrament (it not being the gesture which the Apostles used, though Christ was
personally present amongst them, nor that which was used in the purest and
primitive times of the Church) may be left free, as it was 1 and 2 Ea. 6. As
touching Kneeling, etc. they may be used or left, as every man's devotion
serves, without blame.

And note, That every Parishioner shall communicate, at the least, three times
in the year, of which Easter shall be one; and after shall Rub,
receive the Sacraments, and other Rites, according to the Orders in this book
appointed.

Forasmuch as all Parishioners are not duly qualified for the Lords Supper;
and those habitually prepared, are not at all Excep.
times actually disposed, but may be hindered by the providence of God, and some
by the distempers of their own spirits; We desire this Rubric may be wholly
omitted* or they altered. Every Minister shall be bound to administer the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, at the least, thrice a year: provided there be a
due number of Communicants manifesting their desires to receive.

And we desire that the following Rubric in the Common Prayer Book in 5 and 6
Ed. 6. established by Law as much as any other part of the Common Prayer Book,
may be restored for the Vindication of our Church in the matter of kneeling at
the Sacrament (although the gesture be left in different) (Although no order
can be so perfectly devised, but it may be of some, either for their ignorance
and infirmity, or else of malice and obstinacy misconstrued and depraved, and
interpreted in a wrong part. And yet because that brotherly Charity wills,
that (so much as conveniently may be) offenses should be taken away; Therefore
we willing to do the same whereas it is ordered in the Book of Common Prayer in
the administration of the Lords Supper, that the communicants kneeling should
receive the Holy Communion; which thing being well meant for the signification
of the humble and grateful acknowledgment of the benefit of Christ given to the
worthy Receivers, and to avoid the profanation and disorder, which about the
Holy Communion might else ensue) lest yet the same kneeling might be thought,
or taken otherwise: We do declare that it is not meant thereby, that any
Adoration is done, or ought to be done, either unto the Sacramental Bread or
Wine, there bodily received, or unto any real and essential presence there
being of Christ's natural flesh and blood, forasmuch as concerning the
Sacramental Bread and Wine they remain still in their very natural substance,
and therefore may not be adored; for that were Idolatry to be aborred of all
faithful Christians: And as concerning the natural body and blood of our
Savior Christ, they are in Heaven, and not here; for it is against the truth
of Christ's natural body to be in more places than in one at one time.

Of Public Baptism.
THere being diverse learned, pious and peaceable Ministers, who do not only
judge it unlawful to baptize children, whose Parents both of them are Atheists,
Infidels, Heretics, or unbaptized; but also such, whose parents are
excommunicate persons; Fornieators, or otherwise notorious and scandalous
sinners. We desire they may not be enforced to Baptize the children of such,
until they have made open profession of their repentance before Baptism.

Parents shall give notice over night, or else in the morning.

We desire that more timely notice may be given. Rub. Excep.


And then the Godfathers and the Godmothers, and the people with their
Children,

Here is no mention of the Parents in whose right the child is baptized, and
who are fittest both to dedicate it to God, and to undertake to God and the
Church for it. We do not know that any persons (except the parents, or some
other appointed by them) have any power to consent for the children, or to
enter anto Covenant We desire it may be left free to parents, whether they will
have Sureties to undertake for their children in Baptism. Excep.


Ready at the Font.

We desire it may be so placed, as all the Congregation may Rub. Excep.
best see and hear the whole administration.

In the first Prayer.

By the Baptism of thy well beloved Son, etc. did sanctify the flood Jordan,
and all other waters to the mystical washing away of sin.

It being doubtful whether either the flood Jordan, or any other waters were
sanctified to a Sacramental use by Christ's being baptized and not necessary to
be altered: We desire this may be otherwise expressed.

The third Exhoreation. Excep,


Do promise by you that are their Sureties.

The Questions.

Do thou forsake? etc. Do thou believe? etc. VVilt thou be baptized? etc.
We know not by what right the Sureties do promise and answer Excep.
in the name of the Infant: It seems to us also to countenance the
Anabaptistical opinion, of the necessity of an actual profession of faith and
repentance in order to Baptism. Th^s such a profession may be required of the
parents in their own name, and now solemnly renewed when they present their
children to Baptism, we willingly grant: But the asking of one for another, is
a practice, whose warrant we doubt: And we desire that the two first
Interrogatories may be put to the Parents to be answered in their own names;
and the last propounded to the Parents, or Pro-parents, thus;

Will you have this child baptized into this Faith?

In the second Prayer before Baptism.

May receive remission of sins by spiritual regeneration.

This expression seeming incovenient, we desire it may be Except.
changed into this, May be regenerated, and receive remission of sins.

In the Prayer after Baptism.

That it has pleased thee to regenerate this Infant by thy holy Spirit.

We cannot in Faith say, that every Child that is baptized, Excep.
is regenerated by Gods Holy Spirit; at least, it is a disputable point, and
therefore we desire that it may be otherwise expressed.

After Baptism.

Then shall the Priest make a Cross.

Concerning the Cross in Baptism, we refer to our eighteenth Excep.
General.

Of Private Baptism.
WE desire that Baptism may not be administered in a private place at any time,
unless by a lawful Minister, and in the presence of a competent number: That
where it is evident that any child has been so baptized, no part of the
administration may be reiterated in public under any limitation; and therefore
we see no need of any Lyturgy in that case.

Of the Catechism.
Quest. 1 What is your name?

Quest. 2. Who gave you that name?

Answ. My Godfathers and my Godmothers in my Baptism.

Qust. 3. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers do for you in Baptism?

We desire that these three first Questions may be altered, considering that
the for greater number of persons baptized within Excep.
these twenty years last past, had no Godfathers nor Godmothers at their
Baptism. The like to be done in the seventh Question.

Answ. 2. In my Baptism wherein I was made a Child of God, a member of Christ,
and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven.

We conceive it might more safely be expressed thus; Wherein Excep.
I was visibly admitted into the number of the members of Christ, the Children
of God, and the Heirs (rather than the Inheritors) of the Kingdom of heaven.

Of the Rehearsal of the ten Commandments.

We desire that the Commandments may be inserted according to the new
Translation of the Bible.

10. Answ. My duty toward God, is to believe in him, etc.

In this Answer there seems particular respect to be had to the Excep.
several Commandments of the first Table, as in the following Answer to those
of the second; and therefore we desire it may be advised upon, whether to the
last words of this Answer, may not be added particularly, On the Lords day,
otherwise there being nothing in all this answer that refers to the fourth
Commandment.

Qu. 14. How many Sacraments has Christ ordained?

Answ. Two only as generally necessary to salvation.

That these words may be omitted, and answer thus given, Excep.
Two only, Baptism and the Lords Supper.

Qu. 19. What is required of persons to be baptized?

Answ. Repentance, whereby they forsake sin: and Faith, whereby they steadfastly
believe the promise of God.

Qu. 20. Why then are Infants baptized, when by reason of their tender age they
cannot perform them?

Answ. Yes, they do perform them by their Sureties, who promise and vow them
both in their names.

We desire that the entering of Infants into Gods Covenant. Excep.
may be more warily expressed, and that the words may not seem to found their
Baptism upon a real actual faith and repentance of their own. And we desire
that a promise may not be taken for the performance of such faith and
repentance; especially that it be not asserted, that they perform these by the
promise of their Sureties, it being to the seed of Believers that the covenant
of God is made, and not (that we can find) to all that have such believing
Sureties, who are neither Parents nor Pro-parents of their children.

In the general; We observe that the Doctrine of the Sacraments was added
upon the conference at Hampton Court, is much more fully and particularly
delivered, then the other parts of the Catechism in short Answers, fitted to
the memories of children, and thereupon we offer it to be confidered.

1. Whether there should not be a more distinct and full explieation of the
Creed, the Commandments, and the Lords Prayer.

2. Whether it were not convtnient to add (what seems to be wanting) somewhat
particularly concerning the nature of Faith, of Repentance, of the two
Covenants, Justification, Sanctification, Adoption and Regeneration.

Of Confirmation.
The last Rubric before the Catechism.

AND that no man should think that any detriment shall come Rub.
to Children by deferring of their Confirmation, he shall know for truth, that
it is certain by Gods Word, that Children by being baptized, have all things
necessary for their Salvation, and be undoubtedly saved.

Although we charitably suppose the meaning of these words Except.
was only to exclude the necessity of any other Sacraments to baptized Infants;
yet these words are dangerous, as to the misleading of the vulgar, and
therefore we desire they may be expunged.

After the Catechism.
SO soon as the Children can say in their mother tongue the Articles Rub,
of the Faith, the Lords Prayer, and the ten Commandments, and can answer to
such other questions of the short Catechsm, etc: Then shall they be brought to
the Bishop, and the Bishop shall confirm them.

We conceive that it is not a sufficient qualification for confirmation, Except,
that Children be able memoriter to repeat the Articles of the faith, commonly
called the Apostles Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the ten Commandments, and to
answer to some questions of the short Catechism; for its often found, that
Children are able to do all this at four or five years old:

2. It crosses what is said in the third reason of the first Rubric before
confirmation, concerning the usage of the Church in times past, ordaining that
Confirmation should be administered to them that are of perfect age, that they
being instructed in Christian Religion, should openly profess their own faith,
and promise to be obedient to the will of God.

Thirdly, We desire that none may be confirmed, but according to his Majesty's
Declaration. Viz. That Confirmatioin be rightly and solemnly performed by the
information, and with the consent of the Minister of the place.

Rubric.
After the Catechism.
THen shall they be brought to the Bishop by one that shall he his Godfather
or God-mother,

This seems to bring in a second sort of Godfathers and Godmothers, Except.
beside, those made use of at Baptism, and we see no need either of the one or
other.

The Prayer before Imposition of hands.
Who have vouchsafed to regenerate these thy servants by water and the holy
Ghost, and have given them the forgiveness of all their sins.

This supposes all the Children who are brought to be confirmed, Excep.
have the Spirit of Christ, and the forgiveness of all their fins: whereas a
great number of Children of that age having committed many sins since their
Baptism, do show no evidence of serious repentance, or of any special saving
grace: And therefore this confirmation (if administered to such) would be a
perilous and gross abuse.

Rub. Before the Imposition of hands.
THe Bishop shall lay his hand upon each child severally.

This seems to put a higher value upon Confirmation than Except.
upon Baptism or the Lords Supper; for according to the Rules and Orders of the
Common Prayer Book, every Deacon may Baptize, and every Minister may Consecrate
and administer the Lords Supper; but the Bishop only may confirm.

The Prayer after Imposition of hands.
WE make our humble supplication to thee for these children, upon whom after
the Example of thy holy Apostles, we have laid our hands to certify them by
this sign of thy favor and gracious goodness toward them.

We desire that the practice of the Apostles may not be alleged as a ground of
the Imposition of hands for the confirmation of Except,
children, both because the Apostles did never use it in that ease, as also
because the Articles of the Church of England declare it to be a corrupt
imitation of the Apostles practice. Art. 25.

We desire that Imposition of hands may not be made (as here it is a sign to
certify children of Gods grace and favor toward them, because this serms to
speak it a Sacrament, and is contrary to that fore mentioned 25. Art. which
says, that Confirmation has no visible sign appointed by God.

The Rub. after Confirmation.
NOne shall be admitted to the holy Communion, until such time as he can say
the Catechism and be confirmed.

We desire that Confirmation may not be made so necessary to the holy
Communion, as that none should be admitted to it, Excep.
unless they be confirmed.

Of the Form of solemnization of Matrimony.
THe man shall give the woman a Ring, etc. shall surely perform and keep the
vow and covenant betwixt them made, whereof the Rub.
Ring given and received is a token and pledge, etc.

Seeing the Ceremony of the Ring in marriage is made necessary Excep.
to it, and a significant sign of the vow and covenant betwixt the parties: and
Romish Ritualists give such reasons for the institution and use of the Ring, as
are either frivolous or superstitious: It is desired that this Ceremony of the
Ring in marriage may be left indifferent to be used or forborne.

The man shall say with my body I thee worship, etc.

This word (worship) being much altered in the use of it, since this form was
first drawn up. We desire some other word may be Excep.
used instead of it.

In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost etc.

These words being only used in baptism, and here in the solemnization of
Matrimony, and in the absolution of the sick, We Excep.
desire it may be considered whither they should not here be omitted, lest they
should seem to favor those that count Matrimony a Sacrament.

Till death us depart.

This word depart is here improperly used. Excep.


Then the Mioister or Clerk going to the Lords Table shall say or Rub.
sing this Psalm.

The Psalm ended, and the man and woman kneeling before the Lords Table, the
Priest standing at the Table, and turning his face, etc. Next Rub.


We conceive the change of place and posture mentioned in these two Rubricks,
is needless, and therefore desire it to be omitted. Excep.


Consecrated the state of Matrimony to such an excellent mystery. Seeing the
institution of Matrimony was before the fall, and so Collect.
before the promise of Christ, as also for that the said passage in Excep.
the Collect seems to countenance the opinion of making Matrimony a Sacrament,
we desire that clause may be altered or omitted.

Then shall begin the Communion, and after the Gospel shall be said a Sermon,
etc. Rub.


The new married persons, the same day of their marriage must receive the holy
Communion. Lastrub.


This Rubric does either inform all such as are unfit for the Sacrament to
forbear marriage, contrary to Scripture, which Excep.
approves the marriage of all men, or else compels all that marry to come to
the Lords Table though never so unprepared. And therefore we desire it may be
omitted, the rather because that marriage festivals are too often accompanied
with such divertisements as are unsuitable to those Christian duties, which
ought to be before and follow after the receiving that holy Sacrament.

Of the order for the visitation of the sick.
BEfore Absolution, here shall the sick person make a special confession etc.
after which confession the Priest shall absolve him after Rub.
this sort.

Our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

And by his Authority committed to me, I absolve thee. Rub.


Forasmuch as the conditions of sick persons be very various and different, the
Minister may not only in the exhortation, but Excep.
in the prayer also be directed to apply himself to the particular condition of
the person as he shall find most suitable to the present occasion, with due
regard had both to his spiritual condition and bodily weakness, and that the
Absolution may be only recommended to the Minister to be used or omitted as he
shall see occasion.

That the form of the Absolution be declaratory and conditional, as (I
pronounce thee absolved) instead (I absolve thee) if thou do truly repent and
believe.

Of the Communion of the sick.
BUt if the sick person be not able to come to Church, yet is desirous Rub.
to receive the Communion in his house, then must he give knowledge over night,
or early in the morning to the Curate, and having a convenient place in the
sick man's house, he shall there administer the holy Communion.

Considering that many sick persons, either by their ignorance or vicious life,
without any evident manifestation of repentance, Excep.
or by the nature of the disease disturbing their intellectuals, be unmeet for
receiving the Sacrament: It is proposed that the Minister be not enjoined to
administer the Sacrament to every sick person that shall desire it, but only
as he shall judge expedient.

Of the order for the burial of the dead.
We desire it may be expressed in the Rubric that the prayers and exhortations
here are not for the benefit of the dead, but only for instruction and comfort
of the living.

THe Priest meeting the Cords at the Church-stile shall say or else Rub.
the Priest and Clerk shall sing, etc.

We desire that Ministers may be left to use their discretions in Excep.
these circumstances, and to perform the whole service in the Church, if they
think fit for the preventing of those inconveniences, which many times both
Minister and people are exposed unto standing in the open air.

For as much as it has pleased Almighty God of his great mercy to take unto
himself the soul of our dear Brother here departed, we Rub.
therefore commit his body to the ground, etc. In sure and certain hope of
resurrection to eternal life.

These words cannot in truth be said of persons living and dying Excep.
in open and notorious sins.

The first Prayer.
We give thee thanks for that it has pleased thee to deliver this our Brother
out of the misery of this sinful world. That we with this our Brother and all
other departed in the true faith of thy holy Name may have our perfect
consummation and bliss.

These words may harden the wicked and are inconsistent with the largest
Charity. Excep.


The last Prayer.
That when we depart this life we may rest with him, as our hope is this our
Brother does.

These words cannot be used with respect to those persons who have not by their
actual repentance given any ground for the Excep.
hope of their blessed hope.

Of the thanksgiving of women after Childbirth commonly called the Churching
of women.
THe woman shall come into the Church, and there shall kneel Rub.
down in some convenient place nigh unto the place where the Table stands, and
the Priest standing by shall say.

In regard that the woman's kneeling where the Table is in many Churches
inconvenient; we desire that those words may be left out, and that the Minister
may perform that service in the Excep.
Deske or Pulpit.

Then the Priest shall say this Psalm etc. Rub.


This Psalm seems not so pertinent as some others: as Psalm. 113. and Psalm. 128.
etc. Excep.


Lord save this woman thy servant, which puts her trust in thee.

It may fall out that a woman may come to give thanks for a Ans. Excep.
Child born in Adultery or Fornication; And therefore we defire that something
may be required of her by way of profession of her humiliation as well as of
her thanksgiving.

The woman that comes to give thanks must offer her accustomed offerings. Rub.


This may seem too like a Jewish Purification, rather then a Excep.
Christian thanksgiving.

And if there be a Communion it is convenient that she receive the The same
Rubric.
holy Communion.

We desire this may be interpreted (if duly qualified) for a scandalous sinner
may come to make this thanksgiving. Excep.


THus have we in all humble pursuance of his Majesty's most gracious endeavors
for the public weal of this Church, drawn up our thoughts and desires in this
weighty affair, which we most humbly offer to his Majesty's Commissioners for
their serious and grave confideration: wherein we have not the least thoughts
of depraving or reproaching the Book of Common Prayer, but a sincere desire to
contribute our endeavors toward leading the distempers (and as far as may be)
reconciling the minds of Brethren. And in as much as his Majesty has in his
gracious Declaration and Commission mentioned new Forms to be made and suited
to the several parts of worship: we have made a considerable progress therein,
and shall by Gods assistance offer them to the reverend Commissioners with all
convenient speed. And if the Lord shall graciously please to give his blessing
to these our endeavors, we doubt not but that the peace of this Church will be
shortly settled, The hearts of Ministers and People comforted and composed, and
the great mercy of Unity and Stability (to the immortal honor of our most dear
Sovereign) bestowed upon us, and our posterity after us.

August 30. 1661.
FINIS.
To the most Reverend ARCHBISHOP AND BISHOPS And the Reverend their Assistants,
Commissioned by his Majesty, to treat about the Alteration of the Book of
Common Prayer.
Most Reverend Father and Reverend Brethren;
WHen we received your Papers, and were told that they contained not only an
answer to our Exceptition against the present Liturgy; But also several
Concessions, wherein you seem willing to join with us in the Alteration and
Reformation of it; Our expectations were so far raised, as that we promised our
selves, to find our Concessions so considerable, as would have greatly conduced
to the healing of our much to be lamented Divivisions, the settling of the
Nation in Peace, and the satisfaction of tender Consciences, according to his
Majesty's most gracious Declaration, and his Royal Commission in pursuance
thereof: but having taken a survey of them, we find our selves exceedingly
disappointed, and that they will fall far short of attaining those happy Ends,
for which this meeting was first designed; as may appear both by the paucity of
the Concessions, and the inconsiderablenesse of them, they being for the most
part, Verbal and Literal, rather then Real, and Substantial; for in them you
all allow not the laying aside of the reading of the Apocrypha for Lessons,
though it shut out some bundreds of Chapters of Holy Scripture, and sometimes
the Scripture it self is made to give way to the Apochryphal Chapters; you
plead against the addition of the Doxology unto the Lord's prayer, you give no
liberty to omit the too frequent repetition of Gloria Patria, nor of the Lord's
Prayer in the same public Service, nor do you yield the Psalms be read in the
new Translation, nor the word Priest to be changed for Minister or Presbyter,
though both have been yielded unto in the Scottish Liturgy; you grant not the
omission of the Responsals, no not in the Let any it self, though the Petitions
be so framed, as the people make the prayer, and not the Minister; nor to read
the Communion service in the Desk, when there is no Communion, but in the late
Form instead thereof, it is enjoined to be done at the Table, through there be
no Rubric in the Common Prayer book requiring it; you plead for the bolinesse
of Lent, contrary to the statute; you indulge not the omission of any one
Ceremony; you will force men to kneel at the Sacrament, and yet not put in that
excellent Rubr. in the v. and vj. of Edw. 6. which would much conduce to the
satisfaction of many that scruple it. And whereas diverse Reverend Bishops and
Doctors, in a paper in Print before these unhappy Wars began, yielded to the
laying aside of the Cross, and the making many material alterations you after
xx. years sad calamities and divisions, seem unwilling to grant what they of
their own accord then offered; you seem not to grant that the clause of the
fourth commandment in the Common Prayer book (the Lord blessed the seventh
day) should be altered according to the Hebr. Exodus 20. the Lord blessed the
Sabbath day; you will not change the word Sunday into the Lord 's day, nor add
any thing to make a difference between Holidaies that are of Humane
Institution: and the Lord's day, that is questionless of Apostolical
practice; you will not alter Deadly Sin in the Letany into Heinous Sin, though
it hints to us that some sins are in their own nature Venial; nor that Answer
in the Catech. of two Sacraments only generally necessary to salvation,
although it intimates that there are New Testament Sacraments, though Two only
necessary to salvation; you speak of singing David 's Psalms, allowed by
Authority, by way of contempt calling them Hopkins Psalms; and though singing
of Psalms be an Ordinance of God, yet you call it one of our principal parts
of Worship, as if it were disclaimed by you. And are so far from countenancing
the use of conceived prayer in the public Worship of God (though we never
intended thereby the excluding of set Forms) as that you seem to dislike the
use of it even in the Pulpit, and heartily desire a total restaint of it in the
Church; you will not allow the omission of the Benedicite, nor a Psalm to be
read instead of it; nor so much as abate the reading of the chapters out of the
Old Testament, and the Acts for the Epistles; But rather then you will gratify
us therein, you have found out a new device, that the Minister shall say (for
the Epistle) you will not so much as leave out in the Collect for Christmas day
these words (this day) though at least it must be a great uncertainty, and
cannot be true stylo veteri, and novo. In public Baptism you are so far from
giving a liberty to the parent to answer for his own child (which seems most
reasonable) as that you force him to the use of sureties, and cause them to
answer in the name of the Infant, that he does believe, and repent, and forsake
the devil and all his work, which does much favor the Anabaptistical opinion
for the necessity of an actual profession of Faith and Repentance in order to
Baptism; you will not leave the Minister in the visitation of the sick to use
his judgment of discretion in absolving the sick person, or in giving the
Sacrament to him, but enjoin both of them, though the person to his own
judgment seem never so unfit; neither do you allow the Minister to pronounce
the absolution in a Declarative and conditional way; but absolutely, and
conditionately. And even in one of our concessions in which we suppose you
intend to accommodate with us, you rather widen then heal the breach, for in
your last Rubr. before the Catech you would have the words thus altered, That
Children being baptized, have all things necessary for salvation, and dying
before they commit any actual sin, be undoubtedly saved, though they be not
confirmed, which assertion, if understood of all Infants even of Heathen, is
certainly false, and if only of the Infants of Christians, is doubtful and
contrary to the judgment of many learned Protestants, and will give little
satisfaction to us or others; some more we might name, which for brevity sake
we omit: All which considered we altogether despair of that happy success which
thousands hope and wait for from this his Majesty's commission; unless God
shall incline your hearts for the peace and union of the Nation to a more
considerable and satisfactory alteration of the Liturgy. In which that we may
the better prevail, we here tender an answer to your Reply, both against our
general and particular Exceptions, of which we desire a serious perusal and
candid interpretation. We have divided both your Preface and Reply into several
Sections, that so you might more easily understand to which of the particulars
both in the one and in the otoer our Answer does refer.

THE PAPERS That passed between the COMMISSIONERS Appointed by His Majesty for
the Alteration of the COMMON PRAYER, etc.
THe strain of these Papers we fear is like to persuade many that your design
is not the same with ours: Being assured, that it is our Duty to do what we can
to the peace and concord of Believers, especially when we had the past and
present Calamities of these Nations to urge us, and His Majesty's Commands, and
gracious Promises to encourage us, we judged the fittest means to be by making
known the hindrances of our Concord, and without reviving the remembrance of
those things that tend to exasperate, to apply our selves with due submission
to those that may contribute much to our recovery, and without personal
reflections to propose the Remedies which we knew would be most effectual, and
humbly and earnestly to petition you for your consent. But instead of Consent
or amicable debates in order to the removal of our differences, we have
received from you a Paper abounding with sharp accusations, as if your work
were to prove us bad, and make us odious, which as it is attempted upon
mistake, by unrighteous means, so were it accomplished, we know not how it will
conduce to the Concord which ought to be our common end. If we understand
Christ's Commission, or the Kings, and our duty as Christians, or as Ministers,
our work now assigned us, was not to search after and aggravate the faults of
one onother, (though of our own in season we are willing to hear) but to review
the Liturgy, and agree upon such alterations, diminutions, and enlargement, as
are needful to our common unity and peace. What is amiss in us we shall
thankfully accept your charitable assistance to discover, but we take not that
for the question which his Majesty called us to debate: nor do our judgments
or dispositions lead us to recriminations, nor to cast such impediments in the
way of our desired accord: And were it not that our Calling and our Masters
work are concerned somewhat in our just vindication, we should not trouble you
with so low, so private, and unnecessary a work, but leave such Causes to the
righteous Judge, who will quickly, impartially, infallibly and finally decide
them.

PREFACE.
[BEfore we come to the Proposals, it will be perhaps necessary to say a Sect.
1.
word or two to the Preface, wherein they begin with a thankful
acknowledgement of his Majesty's most Princely condescension, to which we shall
only say, that we conceive the most real expression of their thankfulness had
been an hearty compliance with his Majesty's earnest and passionate request for
the use of the present Liturgy, at least so much of it as they acknowledge by
these Papers to be lawful: how far they have in this expressed their
thankefulness, the world sees, we need not say.]

The Reply to your Preface.
1. AS we hope it is no matter of offense to acknowledge his Majesty's gracious
condescension, so when his Majesty by his Declaration has granted us some
liberty as to the use of the Liturgy before the Alteration, and has by his
Commission engaged us in a consultation for the alteration of it, we conceive
our Brethren (nor the world to whose observation they appeal) had no warrant to
censure us as unthankful to his Majesty, because of our present forbearance to
use it, or part of it before the intended alteration: At least till they had
heard us speak for our selves, and render an account of the reasons of our
forbearance, and they had gone before us more exemplarily in their own
obedience to his Majesty's Declaration. As to our own Conscience, if we thought
not the Common Prayer Book to be guilty of the general and particular faults
which we have laid open to you, we durst not have found fault with it; and
while we took it to be a defective, disorderly, and inconvenient Mode of
Worship, it would be our sin to use it of choice, while we may prefer a more
convenient way, what ever we ought to do in case of necessity, when we must
worship God inconveniently, or not at all. And as to our People, for whose
Edification, and not Destruction, we have our Power or Offices, we have taken
that course, as far as we are able to understand, which most probably tended to
their good, and to prevent their hurt and separation from the Church: and
consequently that course which did most conduce to his Majesty's Ends, and to
his real Service, and the Churches Peace: none of which would be promoted by
our obtruding that upon our People, which we know them unable to digest, or by
our hasty offending them with the use of that, which we are forced to blame,
and are endeavoring to correct and alter. And we see not how it can be justly
intimated that we use no part of it, when we use the Lords Prayer, the Creed,
the Commandments, the Psalms, the Chapters, and some other parts; And how much
more you expect we should have used, that we might have escaped this brand of
Ingratitude, we know not. But we know that Charity suffers long and thinks
no evil, (1 Cor. 13. 4, 5.) and that we have not attempted to obtrude any mode
of Worship on our Brethren, but desired the liberty to use things of that
nature as may conduce to the benefit of our Flocks: And as we leave them to
judge what is most beneficial to their own Flocks, who know them, and are upon
the place; so it is but the like freedom which we desire, we are loath to hurt
our People knowingly. The time is short, if you will answer our reasonable
Proposals, it will not be too late at the expiration of our Commission, or the
date of the reformed Liturgy to use it: greater liberty has been used about
Liturgies in purer times of the Church, with less offense and accusation.

[It can be no just cause of offense to mind them of their duty as they do
Sect. 2.
us of ours, telling us, it is our duty to imitate the Apostles practice in a
special manner, to be tender of the Churches peace, and to advise of such
expedients, as may conduce to the healing of breaches, and uniting those that
differ; For preserving of the Churches peace we know no better nor more
efficatious way than our set Liturgy, there being no such way to keep us from
Schism as to speak all the same thing according to the Apostle.]

Reply. If you look to the time past, by our Duties we suppose you mean our
Faults; For it is not Duty when it is past: If you in these words respect only
the time present and to come, we Reply, 1. The Liturgy we are assured will not
be a less, but a more probable means of Concord after the desired Reformation
than before; the defects and inconveniences make it less fit to attain the
end. 2ly. Whether the Apostle by speaking the same thing did mean either (all
using this Liturgy of ours) or [all using any one form of Liturgy as to the
words] may easily be determined. This is of much later date, unless you will
denominate the whole form of the Lords Prayer, and some little parts. And those
that affirm, that the Apostles then had any other, must undertake the task of
proving it, and excusing the Churches for losing and dis-using so precious a
Relict; which if preserved would have prevented all our strifes about these
things. And in the mean time they must satisfy our Arguments for the Negative:
As 1. If a Liturgy had been indicted by the Apostles for the Churches, being by
universal Officers inspired by the Holy Ghost, and so of universal use, it
would have been used and preserved by the Church as the Holy Scriptures were.
But so it was not. Ergo no such Liturgy, was indicted by them for the Churches.
2ly. If a prescript form of words had been delivered them, there would have
been no such need of exhorting them to speak the same thing, for the Liturgy
would have held them close enough to that. And if the meaning had been (see
that you use the same Liturgy) some word or other to some of the Churches would
have acquainted us with the existence of such a thing, and some Reproofs we
should have found of those that used various Liturgies, or formed Liturgies of
their own, or used extemporary prayers: and some express exhortations to use
the same Liturgy or Forms: But the holy Scripture is silent in all those
matters: It is apparent therefore that the Churches then had no Liturgy, but
took liberty of extemporate expressions, and spoke in the things of God, as men
do in other matters, with a natural plainess and seriousness, suiting their
expressions to the subjects and occasions. And though Divisions began to
disturb their Peace and holy Orders, the Apostle instead of prescribing them a
Form of Divine Services for their Unity and Concord, do exhort them to use
their Gifts and liberties aright, and speak the same thing for matter,
avoiding Disagreements, though they used not the same words. 3. Just. Martyr,
Tertull. and others sufficiently intimate to us, that the Churches quickly
after the Apostles did use the personal Abilities of their Pastors in prayer,
and give us no hint of any such Liturgy of Apostolical fabrication and
imposition, and therefore doubtless there was nothing, for it could not have
been so soon lost or neglected. 4. It is ordinary with those of the contrary
judgment, to tell us that the extraordinary Gifts of the Primitive Christians,
were the reason why there were no prescribed forms in those times, and that
such Liturgies came in upon the ceasing of those Gifts: And 1 Cor. 14.
describes a way of public worshipping, unlike to prescript forms of Liturgy:
So that the matter of Fact is proved and confessed. And then how fairly the
words of the Apostles, exhorting them (to speak the same thing) are used to
prove that he would have them use the same forms or Liturgy; we shall not tell
you by any provoking aggravations of such abuse of Scripture. And indeed for
all the miraculous Gifts of those times, if prescript forms had been judged by
the Apostles to be the fittest means for the Concord of the Churches, it is
most probable they would have prescribed such: Considering 1. That the said
miraculous Gifts were extraordinary, and belonged not to all, nor to any at all
times, and therefore could not suffice for the ordinary public Worship. 2. And
those Gifts began even betimes to be abused, and need the Apostles Canons for
their regulation, which he gives them in that 1 Cor. 14. without a prescript
Liturgy. 3. Because even then divisions had made not only an entrance, but an
unhappy progress in the Churches, to cure which the Apostle exhorts them often to
Unanimity and Concord, without exhorting them to read the same or any
Common Prayer Book. 4. Because that the Apostles knew that perilous times
would come, in which men would have itching ears, and would have heaps of
Teachers, and would be self-willed, and unruly, and divisions, and offenses,
and heresies would increase: And Ergo, as upon such foresight they indicted the
holy Scriptures to keep the Church in all generations, from error and divisions
in points of Doctrine, so the same reason and care would have moved them to do
the same to keep the Churches in unity in point of Worship, if indeed they had
taken prescribed forms to be needful to such an unity: they knew that after
departure the Church would never have the like advantage, infallible,
authorized, and enabled for delivering the universal Laws of Christ: And seeing
in those parts of worship, which are of stated use, and still the same forms
might have suited all ages as this age, and all Countries as this Country: (in
the substance) there can no reason be given, why the Apostles should leave this
undone, and not have performed it themselves, if they had judged such forms to
be necessary, or the most desirable means of unity. If they had prescribed
them, 1. The Church had been secured from error in them. 2. Believers had been
preserved from divisions, about the lawfulness and fitness of them, as
receiving them from God. 3. All Churches and Countries might had one Liturgy,
as they have one Scripture, and so have all spoke the same things. 4. All ages
would have had the same without innovation, (in all the parts that require not
alteration) whereas now on the contrary, 1. Our Liturgies being the writings of
fallible men, are liable to error, and we have cause to fear subscribing to
them, as having nothing contrary to the word of God. 2. And matters of Humane
institution have become the matter of scruple, and contention. 3. And the
Churches have had great diversity of Liturgies. 4. And one age has been
mending what they supposed they received from the former faulty, and imperfect:
So that our own which you are so loath to Change, has not continued yet three
Generations. And it is most evident that the Apostles being entrusted with the
delivery of the entire rule of Faith and worship, and having such great
advantages for our unity and peace, would never have omited the forming of a
Liturgy of universal usefulness, to avoid all the foresaid inconveniences, if
they had taken this course of unity to be so needful, or desirable as you seem
to do. Whereas therefore you say you know no better or more efficatious way
than our Liturgy, etc. We reply, 1. The Apostles knew the best way of unity,
and of speaking the same thing in the matters of God: But the Apostles knew not
our Liturgy, (nor any Common Prayer Book, for ought has yet been proved) Ergo
the said Liturgy is not the best way of unity, or speaking the same thing, etc.
2. The Primitive Church in the next ages after the Apostles, knew the best way
of unity, etc. But they knew not our Liturgy, Ergo our Liturgy (not known till
lately) is not the best way (...). If it be said that our Liturgy is ancient,
because the Sursum Corda, the Gloria Patri etc. are ancient. We answer, if
indeed it be those ancient Sentences that denominate our Liturgy, we crave the
justice to be esteemed users of the Liturgy, and not to suffer as refusers of
it, as long as we use all that is found in it of such true antiquity.

[This experience of former and latter times has taught us, when the Sect. 3.
Liturgy was duly observed, we lived in peace, since that was laid aside, there
has been as many modes and fashions of public Worship, as fancies, we have
had continual dissension, which vaeriety of Services must needs produce,
whilst every one naturally desires and endeavors not only to maintain, but to
prefer his own way before all others; whence we conceive there is no such way
to the preservation of peace, as for all to return to the strict use and
practice of the form.]

Reply. Pardon us while we desire you to examine whether you speak as members
that suffer with those that suffer, or rather as insensible of the calamities
of your Brethren, that is as uncharitable: You say you lived in peace, but so
did not the many thousands that were fain to seek them peaceable habitations in
Holland, and in the Deserts of America, nor the many thousands that lived in
danger of the High Commission, or Bishops Courts at home, and so in danger of
every malicious neighbor that would accuse them, hearing Sermons abroad, when
they had none at home, or of meeting in a Neighbors house to pray, or of not
kneeling in the receiving of the Sacrament, etc. We would not have remembered
you of these things, but that you necessitate us by pleading your peace in
those days, as an argument for the imposing of the Liturgy. 2. Might not
Scotland as strongly argue from this Medium against the Liturgy, and say,
before the Liturgy was imposed on us, we had peace, but since then we have had
no peace. 3. When the strict imposing of the strict use and practice of these
forms, was the very thing that disquieted this Nation, (taking in the
concomitant Ceremonies and subscription) when this was it that bred the
Divisions which you complain of, and caused the separations from the Churches,
and the troubles in the Churches; it is no better arguing to say, we must
return to the strict use of that form if we will have peace, than it was in the
Israelites to say, we will worship the Queen of Heaven, because then we had
peace and plenty, when that was it that deprived them of peace and plenty, (we
compare not the Causes, but the Arguments) nor is it any better an Argument,
than if a man in a Dropsy, or Ague, that caught it with voracity, or
intemperance, should say, while I did eat and drink liberally, I had no Dropsy
or Ague, but since my appetite is gone, and I have lived temperately, I have
had no health, Ergo I must return to my intemperance, as the only way to
health. Alas, is this the use that is made of all our experiences of the causes
and progress of our Calamities? what have you, and we, and all smarted as we
have done, and are you so speedily ready to return to the way that will engage
you in violence against them that should be suffered to live in peace? If the
furnace that should have refined us, and purified us all to a greater height of
love, have but inflamed us to greater wrath, woe to us and to the Land that
bears us! what doleful things does this prognosticate you, that prisons or
other penalties will not change men's Judgments? And if it drive some to comply
against their Consciences, and destroy their Souls, and drive the more
conscientious out of the Land, or destroy their bodies, and breed in the minds
of men a rooted opinion, that Bishops that are still hurting and afficting
them, (even for the things in which they exercise the best of their
understanding, and cautelously to avoid sin against God) are no Fathers,
Friends, or edifyers, but destroyers. Alas! who will have the gain of this? O
let us no more bite, and devour one another, least we be devoured one of
another. Gal. 5. 15. or Christ be provoked to decide the Controversy more
sharply than we desire or expect. 4. But really has liberty to forbear the
Liturgy produced such divisions as you mention? The License or connivance that
was granted to Heretics, Apostates, and foul-mouthed raylers against the
Scripture, Ministry, and all Gods Ordinances, indeed bred confusions in the
Land; But it is to us matter of admiration to observe (clean contrary to your
intimation) how little discord there was in Prayer, and other parts of Worship
among all the Churches throughout the three Nations, that agreed in Doctrine,
and that forbore the Liturgy. It is wonderful to us in the review to consider,
with what love, and peace, and concord, they all spoke the same things, that
were tied to no form of words, even those that differed in some points of
Discipline, even to a withdrawing from local communion with us, yet strangely
agreed with us in worship. And where have there been less Heresies, Schisms,
than in Scotland, where there was no such Liturgy to unite them? If you tell us
of those that differ from us in Doctrine, and are not of us, it is as
impertinent to the point of our own agreement in Worship, as to tell us of the
Papists.

[And the best expedients to unite us all to that again, and so to peace, are,
besides our prayers to the God of Peace, to make us all of one mind in an
house, to labor to get true humility, which would make us think our Guides
wiser, and fitter to order us than we our selves, and Christian Charity, which
would teach us to think no evil of our Superiors, but to judge them rather
careful Guides, and Fathers to us, which being obtained, nothing can be
imagined justly to binder us from a ready compliance to this method of Service
appointed by them, and so live in unity.

Reply. Prayer and Humility are indeed the necessary means of Peace: But if
you will let us pray for peace in no words but what are in the
Common Prayer Book, their brevitie and unaptness, and the customariness, that
will take off the edge of fervor, with humane nature, will not give leave (or
help sufficient) to our souls to work toward God, upon this Subject, with that
enlargedness, copiousness, and freedom, as is necessary to due fervor. A brief
transient touch, and away, is not enough to warm the heart arigne; and cold
Prayers are like to have a cold return, and therefore, even for Peace sake, let
us pray more copiously and heartily than the Common Prayer Book will help us to
do. And whether this be that cause, or whether it be that the
Common Prayer Book has never a Prayer for it self, we find that its Prayers
prevail not to reconcile many sober, serious persons to it that live in
faithful fervent Prayer. 2. And for Humility, we humbly conceive it would most
effectually heal us, and by causing the Pastors of the Church to know that they
are not to rule the flocks as Lords, but as ensamples, not by constraint, but
willingly, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. and it would cause them not to think so highly of
themselves, and so meanly of their Brethren, as to judge no words fit to be
used to God in the public Worship, but what they prescribe, and put into our
mouths, and that other men are generally unable to speak sensibly, or suitably,
unless they tell us what to say; or, that all others are unfit to be trusted
with the expressing of their own desires: Humility would persuade the Pastors
of the Church at least to undertake no more than the Apostles did, and no more
to obtrude or impose their own words upon all others in the public Worship: If
they found any unfit to be trusted with the expression of their minds in
public Prayer, they would do what they could to get meeter men in their
places, and till then they would restrain and help such as need it, and not
upon that pretense as much restrain all the ablest Ministers, as if the whole
Church were to be nominated, measured, or used, according to the quality of the
most unworthy. And it is also true, that humility in private persons and
inferiors, would do much to our peace, by keeping them in due submission, and
obedience, and keeping them from all contentions and divisions, which proceed
from self-conceitedness and pride. But yet, 1. The humblest, surest Subjects
may stumble upon the scruple, whether Bishops differ not from Presbyters only
in degree, and not in order or office, (it being a Controversy, and no
resolved point of faith even amongst the Papists, whose faith is too extensive,
and favor too Ecclesiastical, ambition too great) and consequently they may
doubt whether men in the same order, do, by divine appointment, owe obedience
unto those that gradually go before them. 2. And they may scruple whether such
making themselves the Governors of their Brethren, make not themselves indeed
of a different order or office, and so incroach not on the authority of Christ,
who only makes Officers purely Ecclesiastical; and whether it be no disloyalty
to Christ to own such Officers. 3. And among those Divines that are for a
threefold Episcopacy, (besides that of Presbyters, who are Episcopi Gregis)
viz. General unfixed Bishops, like the Evangelists or Apostles, (in their
measure) and the fixed Bishops of Parochial Churches, that have Presbyters to
assist them, to whom they do preside, and also the Presidents of larger Synods)
yet is it a matter of very great doubt, whether a fixed Diocesan being the
Pastor of many hundred Churches, having none under him, that has the power of
Jurisdiction or Ordination, be indeed a Governor of Christ's appointment or
approbation, and whether Christ will give us any more thanks for owning them as
such, than the King will give us for owning an Usurper. Humility alone will not
seem to subject these men to such a Government. 4. And though their coercive
Magistratical power be easily submitted to, as being from the King, (how unfit
Subjects soever Church men are of such a power) yet he that knows his
Superiors best, does honor God more, and supposes God more infallible than
man, and will feel himself most indispensibly bound by Gods commands, and bound
not to obey man against the Lord. And whereas there is much said against the
peoples taking on them to judge of the lawfulness of things commanded them by
Superiors; we add, 5. That humble men may believe that their Superiors are
fallible; that it is no impossibility to command things that God forbids, that
in such Cases, if we have sufficient means to discern the sinfulness of such
Commands, we must make use of them, and must obey God rather than men; that
when the Apostles acted according to such a Resolution, Acts 4. 19. and Daniel
and the three Witnesses, Dan. 6. and 3. they all exercised a judgment of
Discerning upon the matter of their Superiors commands; that not to do so at
all, is to make Subjects Bruits, and so no Subjects, because not rational free
Agents, or to make all Governors to be gods. And lastly, That it will not save
us from Hell, nor justify us at Judgment for sinning against God, to say,
that Superiors commanded us, nor will it prove all the Martyrs to be sinners
and condemned, because they judged of their Superiors commands, and disobeyed
them. All which we say to show the insufficiency of the Remedy, hereby you
propounded, (the humility of Inferiors) unless you will also add your help,
without obedience there is no order or lasting concord to be expected: And by
abasing the eternal God, so far as to set him and his Laws below a Creature,
under pretense of obedience to the Creature, no good can be expected, because
no peace with Heaven, without which, peace with men is but a Confederacy
hastening each party to Destruction: And therefore absolute obedience must be
given only to God the absolute Sovereign. In all this we suppose that we are
all agreed: And therefore, 6. and lastly, We must say, that the way to make us
think the Bishops to be so wise, and careful Guides and Fathers to us, is not
for them to seem wiser than the Apostles, and make those things of standing
necessity to the Churches unity, which the Apostles never made so, nor to
forbid all to preach the Gospel, or to hold Communion with the Church, that
dare not conform to things unnecessary. Love and tenderness are not used to
express themselves by hurting and destroying men for nothing; And to silence
and reject from Church Communion for a Ceremony, and in the mean time to
persuade men that they love them, is but to stab or famish all the sick persons
in the Hospital or Family, whose stomachs cannot take down the Dish we offer
them, or whose throats are too narrow to swallow so big a morsel as we send
them; And when we have done, to tell them, the only remedy is for them to
believe we love them, and are tender of them. And who knows not that a man may
think well of his Superiors, that yet may question whether all that he teaches
or commands him, be lawful.

Sect 5.
[If it be objected, That the Liturgy is in any way sinful and unlawful for us
to join with, it is but reason that this be first proved evidently, before any
thing be altered: it is no Argument to say, that multitudes of sober pious
persons scruple the use of it, unless it be made to appear by evident reasons,
that the Liturgy gave the just grounds to make such scruples. For if the bare
pretense of scruples be sufficient to exempt us from Obedience, all Law and
Order is gone.]

Reply. To this passage we humbly crave your consideration of these Answers; 1.
We have not only said, (that sober pious persons scruple the Liturgy) but we
have opened to you those defects, and disorders, and corruptions, which must
needs make the imposing of it unlawful, when God might be more fitly served. 2.
It is strange, that you must see it first evidently proved unlawful for men to
join with the Liturgy (you mean, we suppose, to join with you in the using of
it, or when you use it,) before you will see reason to alter any thing in it:
what if it be only proved unlawful for you to impose it, though not for others
to join with you when you do impose it, is this no reason to alter it? should
you not have some care to avoid sin your selves, as well as to preserve others
from it? An inconvenient mode of Worship is a sin in the Imposer, and in the
Chooser, and voluntary User, that might offer God better, and will not, Mal. 1.
13, 14. And yet it may not be only lawful, but a duty to him that by violence
is necessitated to offer up that or none. And yet we suppose the Imposers
should see cause to make an alteration. If you lived where you must receive the
Lords Supper sitting, or not at all, it is like you would be of this mind your
selves. 3. Why should it be called a [bare pretense of scruples] as if you
searched the Hearts, and knew (not only that they are upon mistake, but) that
they are not real, when the persons not only profess them real, but are willing
to use all just means that tend to their satisfaction, they study, read, pray,
and will be glad of Conference with you, at any time, upon equal terms, if
they may be themselves believed. 4. Even groundless scruples about the matter
of an unnecessary Law, which has that which to the weak both is and will be an
appearance of evil, may be sufficient to make it the Duty of Rulers to reverse
their impositions, though they be not sufficient to justify the Scrupulous. 5.
If a man should think that he ought not to obey man, even when he thinks it
is against the Commands of God, though he be uncertain, (as in case of going on
an unquestioned Warfare, or doing Doeg's execution, etc.) yet it follows not,
that [all Law and Order is gone] as long as all Laws and Orders stand that are
visibly subservient to the Laws of God, and to his Sovereignty, or consistent
with them, and when the Subject submits to suffering where he dare not obey.

[On the contrary we judge, that if the Liturgy should be altered as is Sect. 6.
there required, not only a multitude, but the generality of the Soberest and
most loyal Children of the Church of England would justly be offended, since
such an alteration would be a virtual Confession that this Liturgy were an
intolerable burden to tender Consciences, a direct cause of Schism a
superstitious usage (upon which pretenses it is here desired to be altered)
which would at once both justify all those which have so obstinately separated
from it, as the only pious, tender conscienced men, and condemn all those that
have adhered to that, in conscience of their duty and loyalty, with their loss
or hazard of estates, lives, and fortunes, as men superstitious, schismatical,
and void of Religion and Conscience. For this reason and those that follow, we
cannot consent to such an alteration as is desired, till these pretenses be
proved, which we conceive in no wise to be done in these Papers, and shall give
reasons for this our Judgment.]

Reply. If the Liturgy should be altered, as is here required, and desired by
us, that it could be no just offense to the generality (or any) of the soberest
and most loyal Children of the Church (as you speak) is easy to be proved, by
laying together the considerations following: Because it is by themselves
confessed to be alterable, as not having it self its former Constitution, till
less than two hundred years ago. 2. And themselves affirm it to be not
necessary to salvation, but a thing indifferent, while they exclude all higher
institutions from the power of the Church. 3. They confess it lawful to serve
God without this Liturgy, without which he was served by other Churches above
1460 years, and without which he is now served by other Churches, when the
contrary minded doubt whether with it he be lawfully served. 4. Those that
desire the alteration, desire no more than to serve God as the Churches did in
the days of the Apostles, that had their most infallible Conduct. 5. And they
offer also such Forms as are more unquestionable as to their Congruency to the
word of God, and to the nature of the several parts of Worship. 6. And yet
though they desire the surest Concord and an universal Reformation) they desire
not to impose on others what they offer, but can thankfully accept a Liberty to
use what is to their own Consciences most unquestionably safe, while other men
use that which they like better. So that set all this together, with the
consideration of the necessity of the preaching the Word, and Communion that is
hereupon denied, and you may see it proved, That to have such a Liturgy so
altered, that is confessed alterable, for so desirable an end, to the use only
of those that cannot well use it, without urging others to any thing that they
do themselves account unlawful, cannot be a matter of just offense to the
generality of sober Children of the Church, nor to any one. And as to the
reason given, it is apparently none. For, 1. Of those that scruple the
unlawfulness of it, there are many that will not peremptorily affirm it
unlawful, and condemn all that use it, but they dare not use it doubtingly
themselves. 2. When our Papers were before you, we think it not just that you
should say, that it is here desired to be altered, on the pretense that it is a
direct cause of Schism and a superstitious usage: Have we any such expressions?
If we have, let them be recited; if not, It is hard that this should even by
you be thus affirmed, as is said by us, which we have not said: We have said
[that the Ceremonies have been the Fountain of much evil, occasioning
divisions, but not what you charge us to have said in words or sense. 3. And
may not you alter them without approving, or seeming to approve the reason upon
which the alteration is desired, when you have so great store of other reasons?
The King in his Declaration is far enough from seeming to own the Charge
against the things which he was pleased graciously to alter so far as is there
expressed. If a Patient have a conceit that some one thing would kill him, if he
took it, the Physician may well forbear him in that one thing, when it is not
necessary to his health, without owning his reasons against it: If his Majesty
have Subjects so weak as to contend about things indifferent, and if both sides
err, one thinking them necessary, and the other sinful, may he not gratify
either of them, without seeming to reprove their error. By this reason of
yours he is by other men in such a Case necessitated to sin; For if he settle
those things which some count necessary, he seems to approve of their opinion,
that they are necessary: If he take them down when others call them sinful, he
seems to own their charge of the sinfulness. But indeed he needs not to do
either, he may take them down, or leave them indifferent, professedly for unity
and peace, and professedly disown the Errors on both sides. We are sorry if any
did esteem these Forms and Ceremonies any better than mutable indifferent modes
and circumstances of Worship: and did hazard estate or life for them as any
otherwise esteemed: And we are sorry, that by our Divisions the Adversary of
Peace has gotten so great an advantage against us, as that the Argument
against necessary charitable forberance is fetched from the interest of the
reputation of the contending Parties, that things may not be abated to others
which you confess are indifferent and alterable, and which many of them durst
not use, though to save their lives. And this because it will make them thought
the pious, tender concienc'd men, and make others thought worse of. But with
whom will it have these effects? those that you call the generality of the
sober loyal children of the Church will think never the worse of themselves,
because others have liberty to live by them without these things. And the
rest, whose liberties you deny, will think rather the worse of you, than the
better, for denying them their liberty in the worshipping of God. You
undoubtedly argue here against the interest of Reputation, which you stand for,
your Prefaces to your indulgencies, and your open Professions; and (if you will
needs have it so) your own Practices, will tell the World loud enough, that the
things which you adhered to with so great hazards are still lawful in your
Judgment, and it will be your honor, and add to your reputation, to abate
them to others, when it is in your power to be more severe. And if you refuse
it, their sufferings will tell the World loud enough, that for their parts they
still take them to be things unlawful. As for the reasons by them produced to
prove them sinful, they have been publicly made known in the writings of many
of them; In Ames his fresh suit against the Ceremonies, and in the Abridgement,
etc. and in Bradshaw's, Nicols, and other men's Writings.

[To the first general Proposal we answer, That as to that part of it Prop. u.
1. Sect. 5.
which requires, that the matter of the Liturgy may not be private opinion or
fancy, that being the way to perpetuate Schism; the Church has been careful
to put nothing into the Liturgy, but that which is either evidently the Word
of God, or what has been generally received in the Catholic Church, neither
of which can be called private opinion: and if the contrary can be proved, we
wish it out of the Liturgy.]

Reply. We call those Opinions which are not determined Certainties, and though
the greater number should hold them as Opinions, they are not therefore the
Doctrines of the Church, and therefore might be called Private Opinions; but
indeed we used not the Word (that we can find:) the thing we desired, was, that
the materials of the Liturgy may consist of nothing doubtful, or questioned
among pious learned and orthodox Persons.] We said also (that the limiting
Church Communion to things of doubtful disputation, has been in all Ages the
ground of Schism and Separation (which is not to say, that the Liturgy it
self, is a Superstitious usage, or a directs cause of Schism,) And we cited
the words of a Learned man (Mr. Hales) not as making every word our own, but as
a Testimony ad hominem, because he was so highly valued by your selves (as we
suppose) and therefore we thought his words might be more regarded by you than
our own. 2. Where you say [that the Church has been careful to put nothing in
the Liturgy, but that which is either evidently the word of God, or that which
had been generally received in the Catholic Church.] We reply, 1. We suppose
there is little or nothing now controverted between us, which you will say is
evidently the Word of God, either the Forms or Ceremonies, or any of the rest.
2. If by [in the Church] you mean [not by the Church] but [by any part in the
Church] how shall we know that they did well. And if by [the generality] you
mean not All, but the Greater part, you undertake the proof of that which is
not easy to be proved. It being so hard to judge of the majority of Persons in
the Catholic Church in any notable differences. We do take it for granted,
that you limit not the Catholic Church, as the Papists do, to the Confines of
the Roman Empire, but indeed we can only wish, that your Assertion were true,
while we must show it to be untrue, if you speak of the Primitive Church, or of
an universality of time, as well as place, (if not its more against you, that
the Primitive Catholic Church was against you.) The very thing in question
that contains the rest [that its needful to the peace of the Church, that
all the Churches under one Prince should use one form of Liturgy] was not
received by the Catholic Church, nor by the generality in it: when it is so
well known that they used diversity of Liturgies and Customs in the Roman
Empire. The generality in the Catholic Church received not the Lords Supper
Kneeling, at least on any Lords days, when it was forbidden by diverse general
Councills, and when this prohibition was generally received as an Apostolical
tradition: We have not heard it proved, that the Surplice or Cross, as used
with us, wree received by the Universal Church; It is a private Opinion not
received by the Catholic Church, that [it is requisite that no man should come
to the Holy Communion, but with a full trust in Gods mercy, and with a quiet
Conscience,] though it be every man's duty to be perfect pro statu viatoris, yet
it is not requisite that no man come till he be perfect. He that has but a
weak Faith (though not a full trust) must come to have it strenthned: And he
that has an unquiet Conscience, must come to receive that mercy which may
quiet it. It is a private Opinion, and not generally received in the Catholic
Church [that one of the People] may make the Public Confession at the
Sacrament, in the name of all those that are minded to receive the Holy
Communion] It is a private and not generally received distinction, that the
body of Christ makes clean our bodies, and his blood washes our souls.] It is
a doubtful opinion, to speak easily, that when the Lords Supper is delivered
with a Prayer not made in the Receivers name, but thus directed to him by the
Minister [the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. preserve thy Body and Soul,]
it is so intolerable a thing for the Receiver not to kneel, in hearing the
Prayer, that he must else be thrust from the Communion of the Church, and yet
that no Minister shall kneel, that indeed does pray: But he may pray standing,
and the Hearers be cast out for standing at the same words. It is not a
generally received, but a private opinion, [that every Parishioner (though
impenitent, and conscious of his utter unfitness, and though he be in despair,
and think he shall take his own damnation) must be forced to receive thrice a
year: when yet even those that have not [a full trust in Gods mercy] or [have
not a quiet Conscience] were before pronounced so incapable, as that none such
should come to the Communion.] Abundance more such Instances may be given to
show how far from truth the Assertion is, that [the Church has been careful to
put nothing into the Liturgy, but that which is either evidently the Word of
God, or which has been generally received in the Catholic Church] unless you
speak of some unhappie unsuccesful Carefulness. But we thankfully accept of
your following words, [and if the contrary can be proved we wish it out of the
Liturgie] which we entreat you to perform, and impartially receive our proofs.
But then we must also entreat you; 1. That the Primitive Churches Judgment and
practice may be preferred before the present declined, much corrupted State.
And 2. If Gods Law rather than the sinful practices of men breaking that Law
may be the Churches Rule for Worship: For you call us to subscribe to Art. 19.
that [as the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch has erred, so also
the Church of Rome has erred, not only in their living, and manner of
Ceremonies, but also in matters of Faith: and says Rogers, in Art. 20. they
are out of the way, which think that either one man, as the Pope, or any
certain Calling of men, as the Clergy, has power to decree, and appoint Rites
or Ceremonies, though of themselves good, unto the whole Church of God,
dispersed over the universal world,] and indeed if you would have all that
Corruption brought into our Liturgy, and Discipline, and Doctrine, which the
Papists, Greeks, and others, that undoubtedly make up the far greater number of
the now universal Church do use: you would deserve no more thanks of God, or
man, than he that would have all Kings, and Nobles, and Gentry, levelled with
the poor Commons, because the latter are the greater number, or than he that
would have the healthful conformed to the sick, when an epidemical disease has
made them the Majority, or than he that would teach us to follow a multitude to
do evil, and to break more than the least Commands, because the greater number
break them; we pray you therefore to take it for no justication of any
uncertain or faulty passage in our Liturgy, though the greater number now are
guilty of it. 3. And we must beseech you, if the Churches Judgment or Practice
must be urged, that you would do us the justice, as to imitate the ancient
Churches in your sense of the quality, and the mode and measure of using, and
imposing things, as well as in the materials used, and imposed Consider not
only [whether you find such things received by the ancient Churches,] but also
consider how they were received, esteemed, and used,] whether as necessary or
indifferent, as points of Faith, or doubtful Opinions, whether forced on
others, or left to their free choice: If you find that the generality of the
ancient Churches received the White Garment after Baptism, and the tasting of
Milk and Honey as Ceremonies freely, though generally used, you should not
therefore force men to use them: If you find that the Doctrine of the
Millennium, or of Angels corporeity was generally received as an Opinion, it
will not warrant you to receive either of them as a certain necessary truth. If
you find that the General Councels forbad Kneeling in any Adoration on the
Lords days, but without force against Dissenters, you may not go deny the
Sacrament to all that kneel, nor yet forbid them to kneel in praying. So if you
find some little parcels of our Liturgy, or some of our Ceremonies used as
things indifferent, left to choice, forced upon none, but one Church differing
from another in such usages or observances, this will not warrant you to use
the same things as necessary to order, unity, or peace, and to be forced upon
all; use them no otherwise than the Churches used them.

[We heartily desire, that according to this Proposal, great care may be taken
to suppress these private Conceptions of Prayers before and after Sermon, Sect.
2.
lest private opinions be made the matter of Prayer in public, as has, and
will be, if private persons take liberty to make public Prayers.]

Reply. The desire of your hearts is the grief of our hearts, the Conceptions
of Prayer by a public person, according to a public Rule, for a public use,
are not to be rejected as private Conceptions: We had hoped you had designed no
such innovation as this in the Church: When we have heard any say that it would
come to this, and that you designed the suppression of the free Prayers of
Ministers in the Pulpit, suited to the variety of subjects and occasions, we
have rebuked them as uncharitable in passing so heavy a censure on you: And
what would have been said of us a year ago, if we should have said that this
was in your hearts? nothing will more alienate the hearts of many holy prudent
persons from the Common Prayer, than to perceive that it is framed and used as
an Instrument to shut out all other Prayers, as the Ministers private
Conceptions. Such an end and design will make it under the notion of a means,
another thing than else it would be, and afford men such an Argument against
it, as we desire them not to have: but we hope you speak not the public sense.
As the Apostles desired (as aforesaid) that all would speak the same things,
without giving them (that ever was proved) a form of words to speak them in, so
might we propose to you, that uncertain opinions be made no part of our
Liturgy without putting all their words into their mouths, in which their
desires must be uttered. Your hearty desire, and the reason of it, makes not
only against extemporarie Prayer, but all prepared, or written forms, or
Liturgies, that were indicted only by one man, and have not the consent
antecedently of others. And do you think this was the course of the Primitive
times? Basil thus used his private Conceptions at Caesarea, and Greg.
Thaumaturgus before him at Neocesarea, and all Pastors in Justin Martyrs and
Tertullians days. And how injurious is it to the public Officers of Christ,
the Bishops and Pastors of the Churches, to be called private men, who are
public persons in the Church, if they be not? every single person is not a
private person, else Kings and Judges would be so. And have you not better
means to shut out private opinions, than the forbidding Ministers praying in
the Pulpit, according to the variety of subjects and occasions: You have first
the Examination of persons to be ordained, and may see that they be able to
speak sense, and fit to manage their proper works with judgment and
discretion, before you ordain them; And some confidence may be put in a man in
his proper calling and work, to which he is admitted with so great care, as we
hope (or desire) you will admit them; If you are necessitated to admit some few
that are injudicious, or unmeet, we beseech you (not only to restore the many
hundred worthy men laid by, to a capacity, but that you will not so dishonor
the whole Church, as to suppose all such, and to use all as such, but restrain
those that deserve restraint, and not all others for their sakes: And next you
have a public Rule (the Holy Scripture) for these men to pray by, and if any
of them be intollerably guilty of weaknesses or rashness, or other
miscarriages, the words being spoken in public, you have witness enough, and
sure there is power enough in Magistrates and Bishops to punish them, and if
they prove incorrigible, to cast them out. In all other professions these means
are thought sufficient to regulate the Professors, His Majesty thinks it
enough to regulate his Judges, that he may choose able men, and fit to be
trusted in their proper work, and that they are responsible for all their
maladministrations, without prescribing them forms, beyond which they may not
speak any thing in their Charge. Physicians being first tried, and responsible
for their doings, are constantly trusted with the lives of high and low,
without tying them to give no counsel, or medicine, but by the prescript of a
Book, or determination of a College: And it is so undeniable, that your reason
makes more against Preaching, and for only reading Homilies, as that we must
like it the worse, if not fear what will become of Preaching also. For 1. It is
known that in Preaching a man has far greater opportunity, and liberty to vent
a false or private opinion, than in Prayer. 2. It is known de eventu, that it
is much more ordinary. And if you say [that he speaks not the words of the
Church, but his own, nor unto God, but man, and therefore it is less matter.]
We answer, it is as considerable, if not much more, from whom he speaks, than
to whom, he speaks as the Minister of Christ, in his stead and name, 2 Cor. 5.
19, 20. And it is as a higher, so a more Reverend thing to speak in Gods name
to the people, than in the peoples name to God; and to speak that which we call
Gods word, or truth, or message, than that which we call but our own desire: We
make God a liar, or corrupt in his words, if we speak a falsehood in his name;
we make but our selves liars, if we speak a falsehood to him in our own names;
The former therefore is the more heinous and dreadful abuse, and more to be
avoided: or if but equally, it shows the tendency of your reason, (for we will
not say of your design, as hoping you intend not to make us Russians) We do
therefore for the sake of the poor threatened Church, beseech you that you will
be pleased to repent of these desires, and not to prosecute them, considering
that to avoid a lesser evil (avoidable by safer means) you will bring a far
greater evil on the Churches, and such as is like to strip these Nations of the
glory in which they have excelled the rest of the world, even a learned, able,
holy Ministry, and a people sincere, and serious, and understanding in the
matters of their Salvation. For 1. As it is well known that an ignorant man may
read a Prayer and Homily as distinctly and laudably as a Learned Divine, and so
may do the work of a Minister, if this be it; so it is known that man's nature
is so addicted to ease and sensual diversions, as that multitudes will make no
better preparations, when they find that no more is necessary, when they are as
capable of their places and maintenance if they can but read, and are forced
upon no exercise of their parts, which may detect and shame their ignorance,
but the same words are to be read by the ablest and ignorantest man; it is
certain that this will make multitudes idle in their Academical Studies, and
multitudes to spend their time idly all the year, in the course of their
Ministry: and when they have no necessity that they are sensible of, of
diligent studies, it will let loose their fleshly voluptuous inclinations, and
they will spend their time in sports, and drinking, and prating, and idleness,
and this will be a Seminary of Lust: or they will follow the world, and drown
themselves in Covetousness and Ambition, and their hearts will be like their
studies: As its the way to have a holy, able Ministry, to engage them to holy
studies, to meditate on Gods Law day and night, so its the way to have an
ignorant, profane and scandalous Ministry (and consequently Enemies to serious
Godliness in others) to impose upon them but such a work, as in ignorance and
idleness, they may perform as well as the judicious and the diligent. If it be
said [that their parts may be tried and exercised some other way] we answer,
where should a Ministers parts be exercised, if not in the Pulpit, or the
Church, and in Catechizing, in private Baptism, and Communion, and in the
visitation of the sick? their work also is such as a Schoolboy may do as well
as they, their ignorance having the same Cloak, as in public. If it be said
[that a Ministers work is not to show his parts] we answer, but his Ministerial
work is, to show men their sins, and to preach the wonderful Mysteries of the
Gospel, to help men to search, and understand the Scriptures, and to search,
and to know their hearts, and to know God in Christ, and to hope for the glory
that is to be revealed: and fervently to pray for the success of his
endeavors, and the blessings of the Gospel on the people, and cheerfully to
praise God for his various benefits, which cannot be well done without
abilities. A Physicians work is not to show his parts ultimately, but it is to
do that for the cure of diseases which without parts he cannot do, and in the
exercise of his parts, on which the issue much depends, to save men's lives. The
ostentation of his good works, is not the work of a good Christian: and yet he
must so let his light shine before men, that they may see his good works, and
glorify God. And undeniable experience tells us, that God ordinarily
proportioneth the success and blessing, to the skill, and holiness and
diligence of the Instruments, and blesses not the labors of ignorant, ungodly
Drones, as he does the labors of able faithful Ministers. And also that the
readiest way to bring the Gospel into contempt into the world, and cause all
religion to dwindle away into formality first, and then to barbarism and
brutishness, is to let in an ignorant, idle, vicious Ministry, that will
become the peoples scorn: Yea, this is the way to extirpate Christianity out of
any Country in the world, which is decaying a pace when men grow ignorant of
the nature and reasons of it, and unexperienced in its power and delightful
fruits, and when the Teachers themselves grow unable to defend it. And we must
add, that whatsoever can be expected duly to affect the heart, must keep the
intellect, and all the faculties awake in diligent attention, and exercise: And
in the use of a form, which we have frequently heard and read, the faculties
are not so necessitated and urged to attention, and serious exercise, as they
be when from our own understanding we are set about the natural work of
representing to others what we discern and feel. Man's mind is naturally
sloathfull, and will take its ease, and remit its seriousness longer than it
is urged by necessity, or drawn out by delight, when we know beforehand, that
we have no more to do, but read a Prayer, or Homily, we shall ordinarily be in
danger of letting our minds go another way, and think of other matters, and be
senceless of the work in hand. Though he is but an Hypocrite that is carried on
by no greater motive than man's observation, and approbation; yet is it a help
not to be depised, when even a necessity of avoiding just shame with men, shall
necessarily awake our invention, and all our faculties to the work, and be a
concurrent help with spiritual motives. And common experience tells us, that
the best are apt to lose a great deal of their affection, by the constant use
of the same words or forms; Let the same Sermon be preached an hundred times
over, and try whether an hundred for one will not be much less moved by it,
than they were at first. It is not only the common corruption of our nature,
but somewhat of innocent infirmity that is the cause of this. And man must
cease to be man, or to be mortal, before it will be otherwise; so that the
nature of the thing, and the common experience of our own dispositions, and of
the effect on others, assures us, that understanding serious Godliness, is
like to be extinguished, if only forms be allowed in the Church, on pretense of
extinguishing errors and divisions: And though we have concurred to offer you
our more corrected Nepenthes, yet must we before God and men, protest against
the dose of Opium which you here prescribe or wish for, as that which plainly
tends to cure the disease by the extinguishing of life, and to unite us all
in a dead Religion. And when the Prayers that avail must be effectual and
servent, Jam. 5. 16. and God will be worshipped in spirit and truth, and more
regards the frame of the heart, than the comeliness of expression; we have no
reason to be taken with any thing that pretends to help the tongue, while we
are sure it ordinarily hurts the heart: And it is not the affirmations of any
men in the world, persuading us of the harmlesness of such a course that can so
far un-man us, as to make us dis-believe both our own experience, and common
observation of the effect on others. Yet we confess that some forms have their
laudable use, to cure that error and vice, that lies on the other extreme. And
might we but sometimes have the liberty to interpose such words as are needful
to call home and quicken attention and affection, we should think that a
convenient conjunction of both, might be a well tempered means to the common
constitutions of most. But still we see the world will run into extremes, what
ever be said or done to hinder it. It is but lately that we were put to it,
against one extreme, to defend the lawfulness of a form of Liturgy; now the
other extreme it troubles us, that we are forced against you, even such as
you, to defend the use of such Prayers of the Pastors of the Churches, as are
necessarily varied according to subjects and occasions, while you would have no
Prayer at all in the Church, but such prescribed forms. And why may we not add,
that whoever makes the forms imposed on us, if he use them, is guilty as well
as we of praying according to his private conceptions? And that we never said
it proved from Scripture, that Christ appointed any to such an Office, as to
make Prayers for other Pastors and Churches to offer up to God: and that this
being none of the work of the Apostolic, or common Ministerial Office in the
Primitive Church, is no work of any Office of Divine Institution.

[To that part of the Proposal, that the Prayers may consist of nothing Sect. 3.
doubtful, or questioned by pious, learned, and orthodox persons; they not
determining who be those orthodox Persons, we must either take all them for
orthodox Persons, who shall confidently affirm themselves to be such, and then
we say; First, The Demand is unreasonable, for some such as call themselves
orthodox, have questioned the prime Article of our Creed, even the Divinity of
the Son of God, and yet there is no reason we should part with our Creed for
that. Besides, the Proposal requires impossiblity, for there never was, nor is,
nor can be such Prayers made, as have not been, nor will be questioned by some
who call themselves, pious, learned, and orthodox: if by orthodox be meant
those who adhere to Scripture, and the Catholic Consent of Antiquity, we do
not yet know that any part of our Liturgy has been questioned by such.]

Reply. And may we not thus mention orthodox Persons to men that profess they
agree with us in Doctrinals, unless we digress to tell you who they be? What if
we were pleading for civil Concord among all that are loyal to the King, must
we needs digress to tell you who are loyal? We are agreed in one Rule of Faith,
in one Holy Scripture, and one Creed, and differ not (you say) about the
Doctrinal part of the 39. Art. And will not all this seem to tell you who are
Orthodox. If you are resolved to make all that a matter of Contention, which we
desire to make a means of Peace, there is no remedy while you have the Ball
before you, and have the Wind and Sun, and the power of contending without
control. But we perceive, [That the Catholic consent of Antiquity] must go
into your definition of the Orthodox, but how hard it is to get a reconciling
determination, what Ages shall go with you, and us, for the true Antiquity, and
what is necessary to that consent that must be called Catholic, is unknown to
none but the unexperienced. And indeed we think a man that searches the holy
Scripture, and sincerely and unreservedly gives up his Soul to understand, love
and obey it, may be Orthodox, without the knowledge of Church History; we know
no universal Lawgiver, nor Law to the Church, but one, and that Law is the
sufficient rule of Faith, and consequently the test of the truly Orthodox,
though we refuse not Church History, or other means that may help us to
understand it. And to acquaint you with what you do not know, we our selves
(after many Pastors of the Reformed Churches) do question your Liturgy, as far
as is expressed in our Papers: And we profess [to adhere to Scripture, and the
Catholic Consent of Antiquity] (as described by Vincentius Liniensis) If you
will say, that our Pretense and Claim is unjust, we call for your Authority to
judge our Hearts, or depose us from the number of the Orthodox, or else for
your proofs to make good your Accusation. But however you judge, we rejoice in
the expectation of the righteous Judgment, that shall finally decide the
Controversy; to which, from this Aspertion, we appeal.

[To those Generals, loading Public Form with Chapter pomp, garm. Imagery, Sect. 4.
and many Superfluities that creep into the Church under the name of Order and
Decency, incumbring Churches with Superfluities, over ridgid reviving of
obsolete Customs, etc. We say, that if these Generals be intended as applyable
to our Liturgy in particular, they are gross and foul Slanders, contrary to
their Profession, page ult. and so either that or this contrary to their
Conscience, if not, they signify nothing to the present business, and so might
with more prudence and candor have been omitted.]

Reply. You needed not go a fishing for our Charge; what we had to say against
the Liturgy, which we now desired you to observe, was here plainly laid before
you; Answer to this, and suppose us not to say, what we do not, to make your
selves matter of reproaching us with gross and foul slanders. Only we pray you
answer Mr. Hales, as Mr. Hales, (whom we took to be a Person of much esteem
with you), especially that passage of his which you take no notice of, as not
being so easy to be answered, for the weight and strength which it carries
with it; viz. That the li mitting of the Church Communion to things of doubtful
disputation, has been in all Ages the ground of Schism and Separation, and
that he that separates from suspected Opinions is not the Separatist. And may
we not cite such words of one that we thought you honored, and would hear
without contradicting our Profession, of not intending depravation or reproach
against the Book without going against our consciences? If we cite the words of
an Author for a particular use (as to persuade you of the evil of laying the
Churches Unity upon unnecessary things) must we be responsible therefore for
all that you can say against his words in other respects? we suppose you would
be loath your words should have such interpretations, and that you should be
under such a Law for all your Citations; do as you would be done by.

[It was the wisdom of our Reformers to draw up such a Liturgy as Sect. 2.
neither Romanist, nor Protestant could justly excopt against, and therefore as
the first never charged it with any positive errors, but only the want of
something they conceived necessary: so it was never found fault with by those
to whom the name of Protestants most properly belongs, those that profess the
Augustine Confession: and for those who unlawfully and sinfully brought it into
dislike with some people to urge the present Stave of Affairs, as an Argument
why the Book should be altered, to give them satisfaction, and so that they
should take advantage by their own unwarrantable Acts, is not reasonable.]

Reply. If it be blameless, no man can justly except against it; But that de
facto the Romanists never charged it with any positive errors, is an Assertion
that makes them reformed, and reconcilable to us, beyond all belief: Is not
the very using it in our own Tongue a positive error in their account? Is it no
positive error in the Papists account, that we profess [to receive these
Creatures of Bread and Wine?] do they think we have no positive error in our
Catechism about the Sacraments, that affirms it to be Bread and Wine after
the Consecration, and makes but two Sacraments necessary? etc.] 2. And unless
we were nearlier agreed than we are, it seems to us no commendation of a
Liturgy, that the Papists charge it with no positive error. 3. That no
Divines, or private men at home, or of Foreign Churches [that ever found fault
with the Liturgy, are such to whom the name of Protestant properly belongeth]
is an assertion that proves not what authority of judgeing your Brethren you
have, but what you assume, and commends your Charity no more than it
commends the Papists, that they deny us to be Catholics. Calvin and Bucer
subscribed the Augustine Confession, and so have others that have found fault
with our Liturgy. 4. If any of us have blamed it to the people, it is but with
such a sort of blame, as we have here expressed against it to your selves; And
whether it be [unlawfull, and sinfull] the impartial comparing of your words
with ours, will help the willing Reader to discern. But if we prove indeed that
it is [defective and faulty, that you bring for an Offering to God] when you
or your Neighbors have a better, which you will not bring, nor suffer them
that would (Mal. 1. 13.) and that you call evil good in justifying its
blemishes, which in humble modesty we besought you to amend, or excuse us from
offering, then God will better judge of the unlawful act than you have done.
But you have not proved, that all, or most of us, have caused the people at all
to dislike it; if any of us have, yet weigh our Argument, though from the
present state of affairs: or, if you will not hear us, we beseech you hear the
many Ministers in England, that never meddled against the Liturgy, and the many
moderate Episcopal Divines that have used it, and can do still, and yet would
earnestly entreat you to alter it, partly because of what in it needs
alteration, and partly in respect to the Commodity of others; Or at least we
beseech you recant, and obliterate such passages as would hinder all your
selves from any act of Reformation hereabout, that if any man among you would
find fault with some of the grosser things, which we laid open to you (tenderly
and spiringly) and would reform them: he may not presently forfeit the
reputation of being a Protestant: And lastly, we beseech you deny not again
the name of Protestants to the Primate of Ireland, the Archbishop of York, and
the many others that had diverse meetings for the Reformation of the Liturgy,
and who drew up that Catalogue of faults, or points, that needed mending, which
is yet to be seeu in print; they took not advantage of their own unwarrantable
Acts for the attempting of that alteration.

[The third and fourth Proposals may go together, the demand in N. 3, 4.
both being against Responsals, and alternate Readings, in Hymns and Psalms,
and Letany, etc. And that upon such Reason as does in truth enforce the
necessity of continuing them as they are, namely, for edification. They would
take these away, because they do not edify, and upon that very reason they
should continue, because they do edify: If not by informing of our reasons and
understandings, (the Prayers and Hymns were never made for a Catechism) yet by
quickening, continuing, and uniting our devotion, which is apt to freeze, or
sleep, or flat in a long continued Prayer, or form; it is necessary therefore
for the edifying of us therein, to be often called upon and awakened by
frequent Amens, to be excited and stirred up by mutual exultations,
provocations, petitions, holy contentions and strivings, which shall most show
his own, and stir up others zeal to the glory of God. For this purpose
alternate Reading, Repetitions and Responsals, are far better than a long
tedious Prayer: Nor is this our opinion only, but the Socrat. 1. 6. cap. 8.
Theodor. 1. 2. c. 24. 2 Chronicles. 7. 1, 4. Ezra 3. 11.
Judgment of former Ages, as appears by the practice of ancient Christian
Churches, and of the Jews also. But it seems they say to be against the
Scripture, wherein the Minister is appointed for the People in public Prayers,
the peoples part being to attend with silence, and to declare their assent in
the cloze, by saying Amen; if they mean that the people in public Services
must only say this word Amen, as they can no more prove it in Scriptures, so it
does certainly seem to them, that it cannot be proved; for they directly
practice the contrary in one of their principal parts of Worship, singing of
Psalms, where the people bear as great a part as the Minister. If this way be
done in Hopkin's, why not in David's Pslams? if in Meetre, why not in Prose? if
in a Psalm, why not in a Letany?]

Reply. What is most for edification, is best known by experience, and by the
reason of the thing; For the former, you are not the Masters of all men's
experience, but of your own, and others that have acquainted you with the same,
as theirs: We also may warrantably profess in the name of our selves, and many
thousands of sober pious persons, that we experience that these things are
against our edification, and we beseech you do not by us, what you would not do
by the poor laboring servants of your family, to measure them all their diet
for quality or quantity, according to your own appetites, which they think are
diseased, and would be better, if you worked as hard as they; And we gave you
some of the reasons of our judgment. 1. Though we have not said that the people
may not in psalms to God concur in voice, (we speak of prayer which you should
have observed) and though we only concluded it agreeable to the Scripture
practice, for the people in prayer to say but their Amen, yet knowing not from
whom to understand the will of God, and what is pleasing to him, better than
from himself, we considered what the Scripture says of the ordinary way of
public worship; and finding ordinarily that the people spoke no more in prayer
(as distinct from Psalms and praise) than their Amen, or mere consent, we
desired to imitate the surest pattern. 2. As we find that the Minister is the
mouth of the people to God in public (which Scripture, and the necessity of
order, do require) so we were loath to countenance the peoples invading of that
Sacred Office, so far as they seem to us to do; 1. By reading half the Psalms
and Hymns; 2. By saying half the Prayers, as the Minister does the other half;
3. By being one of them the mouth of all the rest in the Confession at the
Lords Supper; 4. By being the only Petitioners, in the far greatest part of all
the Letanie, by their [good Lord deliver us] and [we beseech thee to hear us
good Lord] while the Minister only recites the matter of the prayer, and
makes none of the Request at all, we fear lest by parity of reason, the people
will claim the work of preaching, and other parts of the Ministerial Office; 3.
And we mentioned that which all our ears are witnesses of, that while half the
Psalms, and Hymns, etc. are said by such of the people as can say them, the
murmr of their voices in most Congregations, is so intelligible and confused,
as must hinder the edification of all the rest; For who is edified by that
which he cannot understand? we know not what you mean by citing 2 Chronicles. 7. 1,
4. Ezra 3. 11. where there is not a word of public prayer, but in one place of
an Acclamation, upon an extraordinary sight of the Glory of the Lord, which
made them praise the Lord, and say, [He is good, for his Mercy is for ever]
When the prayer that went before was such as you call [a long tedious prayer]
uttered by Solomon alone without such breaks, and discants; And in the other
places is no mention of prayer at all, but of singing praise, and that not by
the people, but by the Priests, and Levites, saying the same words [for he is
good, for his Mercy endures for ever toward Israel.] The people are said to do
no more than shout with a great shout, because the foundation of the house was
laid: and if shouting be it that you would prove, it is not the thing in
question. Let the ordinary mode of praying in Scripture be observed, in the
Prayers of David, Solomon, Ezra, Daniel, or any other, and if they were by
breaks, and frequent beginnings and endings, and alternate interlocutions of
the people, as yours are, then we will conform to your mode, which now offends
us; But if they were not, we beseech you reduce yours to the examples in the
Scripture: we desire no other rule to decide the Controversy by. As to your
Citation, 1 Socrat. there tells us of the alternate singing of the Aruians in
the reproach of the Orthodox, and that Chrysostom (not a Synod) compiled
Hymns to be sung in opposition to them in the streets, which came in the end
to a Tumult and Bloodshed. And hereupon he tells us of the original of
alternate singing. viz. a pretended vision of Ignatius, that heard Angels sing
in that order. And what is all this to alternate reading, and praying, or to a
Divine Institution, when here is no mention of reading, or praying, but of
singing Hymns? And that not upon pretense of Apostolical Tradition, but a
vision of uncertain credit. Theodor. also speaks only of singing Psalms
alternately, and not a word of reading or praying so; And he fetches that way
of singing also as Socrat. does, but from the Church at Antioch, and not from
any pretended doctrine, or practice of the Apostles; And neither of them speaks
a word of the necessity of it, or of forcing any to it, so that all these your
Citations, speaking not a word so much as of the very Subjects in question, are
marvellously impertinent. The words [their Worship] seem to intimate, that
singing Psalms is part (of our Worship) and not of yours, we hope you disown it
not; for our parts we are not ashamed of it, your distinction between Hopkin's
and David's Psalms, as if the Meetre allowed by Authority to be sung in
Churches made them to be no more David's Psalms, seems to us a very hard
saying. If it be because it is a Translation, then the Prose should be none of
David's Psalms neither, nor any Translation be the Scripture. If it be because
it is in Meetre, then the exactest Translation in Meetre should be none of the
Scripture. If because it is done imperfectly, then the old Translation of the
Bible, used by the Common Prayer Book, should not be Scripture. As to your
reason for the supposed priority, 1. Scripture examples telling us, that the
People had more part in the Psalms, than in the Prayers or Readings, satisfy
us, that God and his Church then saw a disparity of Reason. 2. Common
observation tells us, that there is more Order and less hindrance of
Edification in the Peoples singing, than in their Reading, and Praying together
vocally.

[It is desired that nothing should be in the Liturgy, which so much N. 5.
Sect. 1.
us seems to countenance the observation of Lent as a religious Fast, and this
as an expedient to Peace, which is in effect to desire, that this our Church
may be contentious for Peace sake, and to divide from the Church Catholic,
that we may live at unity among our selves: For Saint Paul reckons them amongst
the lovers of Contention, who shall oppose themselves against the Custom of
the Churches of God; that the religious observation of Lent was a Custom of
the Churches of God, appears by the Testimonies following, Chrysostom. Ser. 11.
in Heb. 10. Cyrill. Catec. mist. 5. St. August. Ep. 119. ut 40. dies ante
Pascha observetur, Ecclesiae consuetudo roboravit: and St. Hierom ad Marcell,
says, it was secundum traditionem Apostolorum; This Demand then tends not to
Peace, but Dissension. The fasting Forty days may be in imitation of our
Savior, for all that is here said to the contrary; for though we cannot arrive
to his perfection, abstaining wholly from meat so long, yet we may fast forty
days together, either Cornelius his Fast, till three of the Clock afternoon,
or Saint Peter 's fast till noon, or at least Daniel 's fast, abstaining from
Meats and Drinks of delight, and thus far imitate our Lord.]

Reply. If we had said, that the Church is contentious, if it adore God in
kneeling on the Lords days, or use not the White Garment, Milk and Honey after
baptism, which had more pretense of Apostolical tradition, and were generally
used more anciently than Lent, would you not have thought we wronged the
Church? if the purer times of the Church have one Custom, and later times a
contrary, which must we follow? or must we necessarily be contentious for not
following both? or rather may we not by the example of the Church that changes
them, be allowed to take such things to be matters of Liberty, and not
necessity? If we must needs conform to the Custom of other Churches in such
things, or be contentious, it is either because God has so commanded, or
because he has given those Churches Authority to command it: If the former,
then what Churches or what Ages must we conform to? If all must concur to be
our pattern, it will be hard for us to be acquainted with them so far as to
know of such Concurrences: And in our Case we know that many do it not; If it
must be the most, we would know where God commands us to imitate the greater
number, though the worse; or has secured us that they shall not be the worst?
or why we are not tied rather to imitate the purer Ages than the more corrupt?
If it be said, that the Church has Authority to command us, we desire to know
what Church that is, and where to be found, and heard, that may command
England, and all the Churches of his Majesty's Dominions. If it be said to be a
General Council; 1. No General Council can pretend to more Authority than that
of Nice, whose 20th Canon, backed with Tradition and common pratice, now binds
not us, and was laid by without any Repeal by following Councils. 2. We know of
no such things as General Councils, at least that have bound us to the
religious observation of Lent. The Bishops of one Empire could not make a
General Council. 3. Nor do we know of any such power that they have ever the
universal Church, there being no visible head of it, or Governors to make
universal Laws, but Christ, (as Rogers on the 20. Article forecited shows) our
21. Article says that [General Councils may not be gathered together without
the Commandment and Will of Princes] and doubtless all the Heathen, and
Mahomitans, and all the contending Christian Princes, will never agree
together, (nor never did) to let all their Christian Subjects concur to hold
a General Council. It says also [and when they be gathered together (forasmuch
as they be an Assembly of men, whereof all be not governed with the Spirit and
Word of God) they may err, and sometimes have erred, even in things pertaining
unto God; therefore things ordained by them, as necessary to Salvation, have
neither strength nor authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken
out of the Holy Scriptures;] And if they may err in things pertaining unto
God, and ordained by them as necessary to Salvation] much more in lesser
things. And are we contentious if we err not with them? Our. 39. Article
determines this Controversy, saying, [It is not necessary that Traditions and
Ceremonies be in all places one, or utterly like; for at all times they have
been diverse, and changed according to the diversity of Countries, times, and
men's manners, so that nothing be ordained against Gods Word.] And after [every
particular, or national Church, has authority to ordain, change, or abolish
Ceremonies, or Rites of the Church, ordained only by man's authority, so that
all things be done to edifying] they that believe not this, should not
subscribe it, nor require it of others. As for the Testimonies cited by you,
they are to little purpose: We deny not that the Custom of observing Lent,
either fewer days or more, was as Ancient as those Authors. But 1. That Lent
was not known or kept in the 2d. or 3d. Ages, you may see as follows, Tertul.
de jejun. l. 2. cap. 14. pleading for the Montanists, [Si omnem in totum
devotionem temporum, and dierum, and mensium, and annorum erasit Apostolus, cur
Pascha celeramus anno circulo in mense primo? cur quodragin^a inde diebus in
omni exultatione decurrimus? cur stationibus quartam and sextam, sabbati
dicamus? and jejunits Parasceven? quanquam vos etiam sabbatum si quando
continuatis; nunquam risi in Pascha jejunandum, etc. And cap. 15. excusing that
rigor of their Fasts [quontula est apud ncs interdictio ciborum, duus in anno.
Hebdomadas xerophagiarum nec totas; excaptis scilicet sabbatis, and dominicis
offerimus Deo; The old general Fast at that time was only the voluntary
unconstrained fasting on Good Friday, and after that on one or two days more,
and then on six; Iraeneus in a fragment of an Epist. in Eusebius. Hist. lib. 5.
cap. 26. Gr. Lat. 23. says, (the Controversy is not only of the day of Easter,
but of the kind of Fast it self: for some think they should fast one day, some
two, others more, some measure their day by 40. hours of day and night; and
this variety of those that observe these Fasts began not now in our Age, but
long before us with our Ancestors, who as is most like, propagated to posterity
the Custom which they retein, as brought in by a certain simplicity, and
private will; And yet all these lived peaceably among themselves, and we keep
peace among our selves, and the difference of Fasting is so far from violating
the consonancy of Faith, as that it even commends it.] Thus Iraeneus, (read
the rest of the Chapter) thus is the true reading confessed by Bellarmine,
Rigaltius, etc. and Dionis. Alexand. Ep. Can. ad Basil. page 881. Balsam.
says, [nor do all equally and alike sustain those six days of Fasting; but
some pass them all Fasting, some two, somethree, some four, some more;] And
the Catholics in Tert. de jejun, cap. 2. say, neque de caetero differentur
jejunandum, ex arbitrio, non ex imperio nova disciplinae, pro temporibus and
causis uniuscujusque sic and Apostolos observasse, nullum aliud imponentes
jugum certorum, and in commune omnibus obeundorum jejuniorum; And Socrat.
admireth at many Countries, that all differed about the number of days, and
yet all called it Quadragesima, lib. 5. c. 22. Eat. Gr. 21. So Sozomen lib. 7.
c. 19. Gr. and Niceph. lib. 12. cap. 34. which may help you to expound Hierom,
and the rest cited by you, as Rigalitus does ad Tertul. de jejun. 128. as
showing that they did it with respect to Christ's 40. days fast, but not as
intending any such thing themselves as any fast of 40. days. It is against the
Montanists, that the Quadrages. was but once a year that Hierom uses the title
of Apostolic tradition. And how to expound him, see Epist. ad Lucin.
[u^aqueque provincia abundet in suo sensu, and precepta Majorum leges
Apostolicus arbitictur;] But says August. ad Casulan. Ep. 86. [In Evangelicis
and Apostolicis literis, totoque Instrumento quod appellatur Testamentum Novum,
animo id revolens video preceptum esse jejunium: quibus autem diebus non
oportet jejunare, and quibus oporteas, precepto Domini vel Apostolorum non
invenio definitum.] And that Christ ans abstinance in Lent was voluntary
[quanto magis quisque vel minus voluerit, vel potuerit.] August. affirms,
cont. Faustum Manich. lib. 30. cap. 5. And Soerat. ubi supr. says. [ac quontam
nemo de ear praeceptum literarum monumentis proditam potest ostendete,
perspicuum est Apostolos liberam potestatem in eadem cujusque menti, ac
arbitrio permississe: ut quisque nec metu, nec necessitate inductus quod bonum
sit ageret.] And Prosper de vit. Contempl. li. 2. C. 24 veruntamen sic
jejunare, vel abstinere debemus ut nos non jejunandi, vel abstinendi
necessitate subdamus, ne jam deveti, sed inviti, rem voluntariam faciamus.] And
Cossianus, lib. 2. col. 21. cap. 30. says in primitiva ecclesia equale fuisse
jejunium per totum annum: Ac frigescente devotione, cum negligerentur jejunia
inductum Quadragia Sacer dotibus. But when you come to describe your fast, you
make amends for the length, by making it indeed no fast; To abstain from meats
and drinks of delight,] where neither the thing, not the delight, is profitable
to further us in our duty to God, is that which we take to be the duty of every
Christian all the year, as being a part of our mortification, and self denial,
who are commanded to Crucify the flesh, and to make no provision to satisfy
the lusts of it, and to subdue our bodies; But when those meats and drinks, do
more help than hinder us in the service of God, we take it to be our duty to
use them, unless when some other accident forbids it, that would make it
otherwise more hurtful; And for fasting till noon, we suppose it is the
ordinary way of diet to multitudes of Sedentary persons, both Students, and
Tradesmen, that find one meal a day sufficient for nature: If you call this
fasting, your poor Brethren fast all their life time, and never knew that it
was fasting; But to command hard Laborers to do so, is but to make it a fault
to have health, or to do their necessary work. We beseech you bring not the
Clergy under the suspicion of Gluttony, by calling our ordinary wholesome
temperance by the name of fasting: sure Princes may feed as fully and
delightfully as we; yet Solomon says [woe to thee O Land when thy King is a
Child, and thy Princes eat in the morning; Blessed art thou O Land when thy
King is the Son of Nobles, and thy Princes eat in due season, for strength, and
not for drunkenesse: For mere sensual delight it is never lawful; And when it
is for strength it is not to be forbidden, unless when by accident it will
infer a greater good to abstain, Eccl. 20. 16. 17. so Prove. 31. 4. 6. It is not
for Kings to drink wine, not for Princes strong drink; give strong drink to him
that is ready to perish, and wine to those that be of heavy hearts.]

[Nor does the Act of Parliament 5 Elizab. forbid it, we dare not think a
Parliament did intend to forbid that which Christ his Church has commanded;
Nor does the Act determine any thing about Lent Fast, but only provide for the
maintenance of the Navy, and of Fishing in order thereunto, as is plain by the
Act. Besides we conceive that we must not so interpret, one Act, as to
contradict another, being still in force and unrepealed. Now the Act of 1 Eliz.
confirms the whole Liturgy, and in that the religious keeping of Lent, with a
severe penalty upon all those, who shall by open words speak any thing in
derogation of any part thereof, and therefore that other Act of 5 Elizab. must
not be interpreted to forbid the religious keeping of Lent.]

Reply. If when the express words of a Statute are cited, you can so easily
put it off, by saying (it does not forbid it,) and you dare not think that a
Parliament did intend to forbid that which Christ his Church has commanded,)
and (you must not interpret it as contradicting that Act which confirms the
Liturgy,) we must think that indeed we are no less regardful of the Laws of
the Governors than you; But first, we understand not what Authority this is
that you set against the King and Parliament, as supposing they will not forbid
what it commands? You call it Christ's Church, we suppose you mean not Christ
himself, by his Apostles infallibly directed and inspired: If it be the
National Church of England, they are the Kings Subjects; and why may he not
forbid a Ceremony which they command; or why should they command it if he
forbid it? If it be any Foreign Church, there is none has power over us. If it
be any pretended head of the Church universal, whether Pope or general Council,
having power to make Laws that bind the whole Church, it is a thing so
copiously disproved by Protestants against both the Italian and French Papists,
that we think it needless to confute it, nor indeed dare imagine that you
intend it. We know not the refore what you mean; But whatever you mean you seem
to contradict the forecited Article of the Church of England, that makes all
humane Laws about Rites and Ceremonies of the Church to be unchangeable, by
each particular National Church; And that it is not necessary that Ceremonies
or Traditions be in all places one, or utterly like* we most earnestly beseech
you be cautious how you obtrude upon us a Foreign Power, under the name of
Christ's Church, that may command Ceremonies which King and Parliament may not
forbid, whether it be one man or a thousand, we fear it is against our Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy, for us do own any such Power. And (not presuming
upon any immodest challenge) we are ready in the defense of those Oaths, and
the Protestant Religion, to prove against any in an equal conference, that
there is no such Power, and for the Statute, let the words themselves decide
the Controversy, which are these [Be it Enacted that whosoever shall by
Preaching, Teaching, Writing, or open speech, notify that any eating of Fish,
or forbearing of Flesh, mentioned in this Statuie, is of any necessity for the
saving of the Soul of man, or that it is the Service of God, otherwise than as
other Politic Laws are, and be, that than such persons are and shall be
punished, as the spreaders of false news are, and ought to be.] And whereas you
say the Act determines not any thing about Lent Fast, it speaks against eating
Flesh, (on any days now usually observed as Fish days: and Lent is such, and
the senfe of the Act for the Lituigy may better be tried by this, which is
plain, than thus reduced to that which is more obscure.

[The observation of Saints days, is not as of Divine, but Ecclesiastical
Institution, and therefore it is not necessary that they should have N. 6.
any other ground in Scripture, than all other Institutions of the same nature,
so that they be agreeable to the Scriptare in the general end, for the
promoting piety, and the observation of them was ancient, as appears by the
Rituals, and Liturgies, and by the joint consent of Antiquity, and by the
ancient translation of the Bible, as the Syriack and Ethiopick, where the
Lessons appointed for Holidays, are noted and set down, the former of which
was made near the Apostles times, Besides our Savior himself, kept a Feast of
the Churches Institution, viz. the Feast of the Dedication, S. Jo. 12. 22. The
choice end of these days being not feasting, but the exercise of Holy Duties,
they are fitter called Holidays, than Festivals, and though they be all of
like nature, it does not follow that they are equal; The people may be
dispensed with for their work, after the Service, as Authority pleases, The
other names are left in the Calender, not that they should be so kept as
Holidays, but they are useful for the preservation of their memories, and for
other reasons, as for Leases, Law-dayes, etc.]

Reply. The antiquity of the Translations mentioned is far from being of
determinate certainty: we rather wish than hope that the Syriack could be
proved to be made near the Apostles times; But however, the things being
confessed of humane Institution, and no Foreign Power having any Authority to
command his Majesty's Subjects, and so the imposition being only by our own
Governors, we humbly crave that they may be left indifferent, and the unity or
peace of the Church, or Liberty of the Ministers not laid upon them.

[This makes the Liturgy void, if every, Minister may put in, and N. 7. S. 1.
leave out all at his discretion.]

Repl. You mistake us: we speak not of putting in, and leaving out, of the
Liturgy, but of having leave to intermix some exhortations or prayers besides,
to take off the deadness which will follow, if there be nothing but the
stinted Forms; we would avoid both the extreme that would have no forms, and
the contrary extremes that would have nothing but forms; But if we can have
nothing but extremes, there is no remedy, its not our fault. And this moderation
and mixture which we move for, is so far from making all the Liturgy void, that
it will do very much to make it attain its end, and would heal much of the
distemper which it occasioneth, and consequently would do much to preserve the
reputation of it. As for instance, it besides the Forms in the Liturgy, the
Minister might at Baptism, the Lords Supper, Marriage, etc. interpose some
suitable exhortation or prayer upon special occasion when he finds it needful.
Should you deny this at the visitation of the Sick, it would seem strange, and
why may it not be granted at other times: It is a matter of far greater trouble
to us, that you would deny us and all Ministers the Liberty of using any other
Prayers besides the Liturgy then that you impose these

[The gift or rather spirit of Prayer consists in the inward graces of the
spirit, not in ex tempore expressions, which any man of natural S. 2.
parts, having a voluable tongue, and audacity, may attain to without any
special gift.]

Repl. All inward Graces of the spirit, are not properly called the spirit of
Prayer, nor is the spirit of Prayer that gift of Prayer which we speak of; Nor
did we call it by the name of a special gift,) nor did we deny that ordinary
men of natural parts and voluable tongues may attain it; But yet we humbly
conceive that as there is a gift of Preaching, so also of Prayer, which God
bestows in the use of means, diversified much according to men's natural parts,
and their diligence, as other acquired abilities are, but also much depending
on that grace that is indeed special, which makes men love and relish the holy
subjects of such spiritual studies, and the holy exercise of those Graces that
are the soul of Prayer, and consequently making men follow on such exercises
with delight and diligence, and therefore with success; And also God is free in
giving, or denying his blessing to man's endeavors. If you think there be no
Gift of Preaching, you will too dishonourably level the Ministry: If Reading be
all the Gift of Prayer or Preaching, there needs no great understanding or
learning to it. Nor should Cobblers and Tinkers be so unfit men for Ministers
as they are thought; Nor would the reason be very apparent, why a Woman might
not speak by Preaching, or praying in the Church.

[But if there be any such Gift as is pretended, it is to be subject to 4. 3.
the Prophets, and to the Order of the Church.]

Repl. The Text speaks (as Dr. Hammond well shows) of a subjection to that
Prophet himself, who was the Speaker; Inspiration excluded not the prudent
exercise of Reason; But it is a strange ordering, that totally excludes the
thing ordered. The Gift of Preaching (as distinct from reading) is to be
orderly and with due subjection exercised; But not to be on that pretense
extinguished and cast out of the Church: And indeed if you should command it,
you are not to be obeyed, whatever we suffer; And why then should the Gift of
Prayer (distinct from reading) be cast out.

[The mischiefs that come by Idle, Impertinent, Ridiculous, sometimes. 4.
Seditious, Impious, and Blasphemous expressions under pretense of the Gift, to
the dishonor of God, and scorn of Religion, being far greater than the
pretended good of exercising the Gift: It is fit that they who desire such
liberty in public devotions, should first give the Church security, that no
private opinions; should be put into their Prayers, as is desired in the first
Proposal, and that nothing contrary to the Faith should be uttered before God,
or offered up to him in the Church.]

Repl. The mischiefs which you pretend, are Inconveniences attending humane
Imperfection, which you would cure with a mischief; Your Argument from the
abuse against the use is a palpable Fallacy, which cast out Phisicians in some
Countries, and rooted up Vines in others, and condemns the reading of the
Scriptures in a known. Tongue among the Papists; If the Apostles (that
complained then so much of Divisions, and preaching false Doctrines, and in
envy and strife, etc.) had thought the way of Cure had been, in sending
Ministers about the world, with a Prayer Book, and Sermon-book, and to have
tied them only to read either one or both of these, no doubt but they would
have been so regardful of the Church, as to have composed such a Prayer Book,
or Sermon-book themselves, and not lest us to the uncertainties of an Authority
not infallible, nor to the Divisions that follow the Impositions of a
questionable power, or that which unquestionably is not Universal, and
therefore can procure no universal Concord. If one man among you draw up a form
of Prayer, it is his single conception: And why a man as learned and able may
not be trusted to conceive a Prayer, for the use of a single Congregation,
without the dangers mentioned by you, as one man to conceive a Prayer for all
the Churches in a Diocese or a Nation? we know not; These words (That the
mischief is greater than the pretended good) seem to express an unjust
Accusation, of ordinary conceived prayer, and a great undervaluing of the
benefits: If you would intimate that the Crimes expressed by you are ordinarily
found in Ministers prayers, we that hear so much more frequently than you, must
profess we have not found it so (allowing men their different measures of
Exactness, as you have even in writing) Nay to the praise of God we must say,
that multitudes of private men can ordinarily pray without any such
Imperfection, as should nauseate a sober person, and with such seriousness, and
aptness of Expression as is greatly to the benefit and comfort of ourselves,
when we join with them; And if such general Accusations may serve in a matter
of public, and common fact, there is no way for the Justification of the
Innocent. And that it is no such common guilt, will seem more probable to them
that consider, that such conceived Prayers, both prepared and extemperate, have
been ordinarily used in the Pulpits in England, and Scotland, before our days
till now, and there has been power enough in the Bishops and others, before
the Wars, to punish those that speak Ridiculously, Seditiously, Impiously, or
Blasphemously; And yet so few are the Instances (even when jealousy was most
busy) of Ministers punished, or once accused of any such fault in Prayer, as
that we find it not easy to remember any considerable number of them: There
being great numbers punished for not reading the Book, for playing on the Lords
days, or for preaching too often, and such like, for one that was ever
questioned for such kind of praying. And the former showed that it was not for
want of will to be severe, that they spared them as to the latter. And if it be
but few that are guilty of any intolerable faults of that nature in their
Prayers, we hope you will not go on to believe, that the mischiefs that come by
the failings of those few, are far greater than the benefit of conceived prayer
by all others. We presume not to make our Experiences, the measure of yours, or
of other men's. You may tell us what does most good, or hurt to your selves, and
those that have so communicated their Experiences to you; But we also may speak
our own, and theirs that have discovered them to us. And we must seriously
profess, that we have found far more benefit to our selves, and to our
Congregations (as far as our Conference, and Converse with them, and our
observation of the effects allows us to discern) by conceived Prayers, than
by the Common Prayer Book, We find that the benefit of conceived Prayer is to
keep the mind in serious Employment, and to awaken the affections, and to make
us fervent, and importunate, And the Inconvenience is that some weak men are
apt as in Preaching and Conference, so in Prayer to show their weakness, by
some unapt Expressions, or disorder, Which is an evil no way to be compared,
with the forementioned. good, considering that it is but in the weak, and that
if that weakness be so great as to require it, forms may be imposed on those
few, without imposing them on all for their sakes (as we force not all to use
Spectacles, or Crutches, because some are purblind or lame) and considering
that God hears not Prayers, for the Rhetoric, and handsome Cadencies, and
neatness of Expression, but will bear more with some Incuriosity of words
(which yet we plead not for) than with an hypocritical, formal heartlesse,
lipservice; For he knows the meaning of the Spirit even in the groans, which
are not uttered in words; And for the Common Prayer our Observation tells us,
that though some can use it judiciously, seriously, and we doubt not
profitably, yet as to the most of the vulgar, it occasioneth a relaxing of
their attention, and intention, and a lazy taking up with a Corpse, or Image of
devotion, even the service of the lips, while the heart is little sensible of
what is said. And had we not known it we should have thought it incredible,
how, utterly ignorant abundance are of the sense of the words which they hear,
and repeat themselves from day to day even about Christ himself, and the
Essentials of Christianity. It is wonderful to us to observe that rational
Creatures can so commonly separate the words from all the sense and life, so
great a help or hinderance even to the understanding, is the awakening or not
awakening of the Affections about the things of God; And we have already showed
you many unfit Expressions in the Common-Prayerbook, especially in the Epistles
and Gospels, through the faultiness of your Translations, as Ephesians. 3. 15.
(Father of all, that is called, Father in Heaven and Earth) And that Christ was
found in his Apparel as a man) That Mount Sinai is Agar in Arabia, and
bordereth upon the City now called Jerusalem) Gal. 4. 25. (This is the Sixth
Month which is called Barren) Luke 1. (And when men be drunk) John 2. with many
such like, which are parts of your public worship; And would you have us hence
conclude, that the mischiefs of such Expressions are worse, than all the
benefits of that worship: And yet there is this difference in the Cases, that
weak and rash Ministers were but here and there one; But the Common Prayer is
the service of every Church, and every day had we heard any in extemporary
Prayer use such unmeet Expressions, we should have thought him worthy of sharp
reprehension, yea though he had been of the younger or weaker sort; Diverse
other unfit Expressions, are mentioned in the Exceptions of the late
Archbishop of York, and Primate of Ireland, and others (before spoken of) And
there is much in the prejudice or diseased Curiosity of some hearers, to make
words seem Idle, Impertinent, or Ridiculous which are not so (and which perhaps
they understand not) some thought so of the inserting in the late Prayer Book,
the private opinion of the Souls departed praying for us; and our praying for
the benefit of their prayers; As for the security which you call for, (though
(as is showed) you have given us none at all against such errors in your forms,
yet) we have before showed you, that you have as much as among imperfect men
can be expected: The same that you have, that Physicians shall not murder men,
and that Lawyers and Judges shall not undo men, and that your Pilate shall not
cast away the ship, you have the power in your hands of taking or refusing as
they please or displease you, and of judging them by a known Law for their
proved miscarriages, according to the quality of them, and what would you have
more.

[To prevent which mischief the former Ages know no better way,. 5.
than to forbid any Prayers in public, but such as were prescribed by public
Authority: Con. Carthag. Can. 106. Milen. Can. 12.]

Repl. To what you allege out of two Councils, we answer, 1. The Acts of more
venerable Councils are not now at all observed (as Nice 1. Can. ult. etc.) nor
many of these same which you cite. 2. The Scripture, and the constant practice
of the more ancient Church allowed what they forbid. 3. Even these Canons show
that then the Churches thought not our Liturgy to be necessary to their
Concord: Nor indeed had then any such form imposed on all, or many Churches to
that end. For the Can. of Counc. Carth.) we suppose you meant Council 3. Can.
23.) mentions Prayers even at the Alter, and allows any man to describe and
use his own Prayers, so he do but first, cum instructionibus fratribus eas
confer, Take advice about them with the abler Brethren. If there had been a
stated form before imposed on the Churches, what room could there be for this
course. And even this much seems but a Caution, made newly upon some late abuse
of Prayer. The same we may say de Council. Male Can. 12.: If they were but a
prudentioribus tractata, vel comprobata in Synodo, new Prayers might by any man
at any time be brought in, which shows they had no such stated public
Liturgy as is now pleaded for. And even this seems occasioned by
Pelagianisme, which by this Caution they would keep out.

We hope your omission of our 8th. desire (for the use of the new Translation)
intimates your grant that it shall be so; But we marvel then that we find
among your Concessions, the alteration of no part but the Epistles and Gospels.

[As they would have no Saints days observed by the Church, so no N. 9.
Apocriphal Chapter read in the Church, but upon such a reason, as would
exclude all Sermons, as well as Apocripha, viz. because the holy Scriptures
contain in them all things necessary either in Doctrine to be believed, or in
duty to be practiced; if so, why so many unnecessary Sermons? why any more but
reading of Scriptures? If notwithstanding their sufficiency, Sermons be
necessary, there is no reason why these Apocriphal Chapters should not be as
useful, most of them containing excellent discourses, and rules of mortality,
it is heartily to be wished that Sermons were as good; if their fear be that by
this mean^ those Books may come to be of equal esteem with the Canon, they may
be secured against that by the Title which the Church has put upon them,
calling them Apocriphal, and it is the Church's testimony which teaches us
this difference, and to leave them out, were to cross the practice of the
Church in former Ages.]

Repl. We hoped when our desires were delivered in writing they would have been
better observed and understood: We asked not (that no Apocriphal Chapter may be
read in the Church,) but that none may be read (as Lessons) for so the Chapters
of holy Scripture there read, are called in the Book, and to read them in the
same place under the same title, without any sufficient note of distinction, or
notice given to the people that they are not Canonical Scripture, they being
also bound with our Bibles) is such a temptation to the vulgar to take them for
Gods Word, as does much prevail, and is like to do so still. And when Papists
second it with their confident affirmations, that the Apocriphal Books are
Canonical, well refelled by one of you, the R. Reverend Bishop of Durham,) we
should not needlessly help on their success. If you cite the Apocripha as you
do other humane writings, or read them as Homilies, (when and where there is
reason to read such) we speak not against it,) to say that the people are
secured by the Churches calling them Apocripha, is of no force, till experience
be proved to be dis-regardable, and till you have proved that the Ministers is
to tell the people at the reading of every such Chapter that it is but
Apocriphal, and that the people all understand Greek so well as to know what
Apocripha signifies. The more sacred and honorable are these Dictates of the
holy Ghost recorded in Scripture, the greater is the sin, by reading the
Apocripha, without sufficient distinction to make the people believe that the
writings of man are the Revelation and Laws of God; And also we speak against
the reading of the Apocripha, as it excludes much of the Canonical Scriptures,
and takes in such Books in their stead, as are commonly reputed fabulous. By
this much you may see how you lost your Answer by mistaking us, and how much
you will sin against God, and the Church, by denying our desire.

[That the Minister should not read the Communion Service at the N. 10.
Communion Table, is not reasonable to demand, since all the Primitive Church
used it, and if we do not observe that golden Rule, of the venerable Council of
Nice, Let ancient customs prevail, till reason plainly requires the contrary:
We shall give offense to sober Christians by a causeless departure from
Catholic usage, and a great advantage to enemies of our Church, than our
Brethren I hope would willingly grant, The Priest standing at the Communion
Table, seems to give us an invitation to the holy Sacrament, and minds us of
our duty, viz. To receive the holy Communion, some at least every Sunday, and
though we neglect our duty, it is fit the Church should keep her standing.]

Repl. We doubt not but one place in it self is as lawful as another, but when
you make such differences as have misleading intimations, we desire it may be
forborne. That all the Primitive Church used when there was no Communion in the
Sacrament, to say Service at the Communion Table, is a crude assertion, that
must have better proof before we take it for convincing, and it is not
probable, because they had a Communion every Lords day: And if this be not your
meaning, you say nothing to the purpose: To prove that they used it when there
was none; And you your selves devise many things more universally practiced
than this can at all be fairly pretended to have been. The Council of Nice
gives no such golden Rule as you mention; A Rule is a general applyable to
particular Cases, the Council only speaks of one particular; Let the ancient
Custom continue in Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, that the Bishop of Alexandria
have the power of them all;) The Council here confirms this particular
Custom, but does not determine in general of the Authority of Custom. That this
should be called a Catholic usage shows us how partially the word (Catholic)
is sometimes taken. And that this much cannot be granted, as least we advantage
the enemies of the Church, does make us wonder whom you take for its enemies,
and what is that advantage which this will give them; But we thank you that
here we find our selves called Brethren, when before we are not so much as
spoken to, but your speech is directed to some other (we know not whom)
concerning us, your reason is that which is our reason to the contrary, you say
(The Priest standing at the Communion Table seems to give us an Invitation to
the holy Communion, etc.) what when there is no Sacrament by himself or us
intended? no warning of any given? no Bread and Wine prepared? Be not deceived,
God is not mocked. Therefore we desire that there may be no such service at the
Table when no Communion is intended, because we would not have such gross
dissimulation used in so holy things, as thereby to seem (as you say) to invite
Guests when the Feast is not prepared, and if they came we would turn them
empty away. Indeed if it were to be a private Mass, and the Priest were to
receive alone for want of Company, and it were really desired that the people
should come, it were another matter; Moreover there is no Rubric requiring
this service at the Table.

[It is not reasonable that the word Minister should be only N. 11.
used in the Liturgy, for since some parts of the Liturgy may be performed by a
Deacon, others by none under the Order of a Priest, viz. Absolution,
Consecration, it is fit that some such word as Priest, should be used for those
Offices, and not Minister, which signifies at large every one that ministers in
that holy Office, of what Order soever he be; The word Curate signifying
properly all those who are trusted by the Bishops, with Cure of Souls, as
anciently it signified, is a very fit word to be used, and can offend no sober
person. The word Sunday is ancient. Just. Mart. Ap. 2. And therefore not to be
left off.]

Repl. The word (Minister) may well be used in stead of Priest and Curates,,
though the word (Deacon) for necessary distinction stand; yet we doubt not but
(Priest) as it is but the English of Presbyter) is lawful; But it is from the
common danger of mistake, and abuse that we argue. That all Pastors else are
but the Bishops Curates, is a Doctrine that declares, the heavy charge and
account of the Bishops, and tends much to the ease of the Presbyters minds if
it could be proved. If by (Curates) you mean such as have not directly by
divine Obligation the Cure of Souls, but only by the Bishops Delegation.) But
if the Office of a Presbyter be not of divine Right, and so if they be not the
Curates of Christ, and Pastors of the Church, none are; And for the ancient use
of it, we find not that it was so from the beginning: And as there is
difference, between the ancient Bishops of one single Church and a Diocesan
that has many hundred, so is there between their Curates. But why will you not
yield so much, as to change the word (Sunday) into the (Lords Day) when you
know that the latter is the name used by the Holy Ghost in Scripture, and
commonly by the ancient Writers of the Church, and more becoming Christians.
Just. Mart. speaking to Infidels, tells how they called the Day, and not how
Christians called it; All he says is that on Sunday, that is so called by
Heathens, the Christians hold their meetings. See the usage of the Church in
this point in August. Cont. Faustum Manithaeum. Lib. 18. Cap. 5.

[Singing of Psalms in Meeter is no part of the Liturgy, and so N. 1^.
no part of our Commission.]

Repl. If the word Liturgy signify the public Worship, God forbid we should
exclude the singing of Psalms: And sure you have no fitter way of singing than
in Meeter) when these and all Prayers conceived by private men (as you call the
Pastors) whether prepared or excemporate, (and by purity of reason-preaching)
are cast out, what will your Liturgy be? We hope you make no question, whether
singing Psalms, and Hymns were part of the Primitive Liturgy, and seeing they
are set forth, and allowed to be sung in all Churches of all the people
together) why should they be denied to be part of the Liturgy; we understand
not the reason of this [N. 13. 14.] The 13. and 14. we suppose you grant by
passing them by.

[The phrase is such, etc.] The Church in her Prayers uses no more offensive
phrase, than St. Paul uses, when he writes to the N. 17.
Corinthians, Galathians, and others, calling them in general the Churches of
God, Sanctified in Christ Jesus, by vocation Saints, amongst whom
notwithstanding there were many, who by their known sins (which the Apostle
endeavored to amend in them) were not properly such, yet he gives the
denomination to the whole, from the greater part, to whom in charity it was
due. And puts the rest in mind what they have by their Baptism undertaken to
be, and what they profess themselves to be, and our prayers and the phrase of
them, surely supposes no more than that they are Saints by calling, sanctified
in Christ Jesus, by their Baptism admitted into Christ's Congregation, and so
to be reckoned members of that Soeiety, till either they shall separate
themselves by willful Schism, or be separated by legal Excommunication, which
they seem earnestly to desire, and so do we.]

Repl. But is there not a very great difference between the Titles, given to
the whole Church (as you say from the greater part; as the truth is from the
better part, though it were the less) and the Titles given to Individual
members, where there is no such reason? we call the Field a Corn field, though
there be much Tares in it, because of the better part, which denominateth: But
we will not call every one of these Tares by the name of Corn. when we speak of
the Church, we will call it holy, as Paul does: But when we speak to Simon
Magus, we will not call him holy, but say (Thou art in the gall of bitterness,
and the bond of Iniquity, and have no part or lot in this matter, etc.) We will
not persuade the people that every notorious Drunkard, Fornicator, Worldling,
etc. that is burried as a Brother, of whose Resurtection to life Eternal, we
have sure and certain hope, and all because you will not Excommunicate them. We
are glad to hear of your desire of such Discipline: But when shall we see more
than desire: and the edge of it be turned from those that fear sinning, to
those that fear it not.

[The Connection of the parts of our Liturgy is conformable to the Example of
the Churches of God before us, and have as much dependence N. 16.. 1.
as is usually to be seen in many petitions of the same Psalm, and we conceive
the Order and Method to be excellent and must do so till they tell us what that
Order is which Prayers ought to have, which is not done here.]

Repl. There are two Rules of Prayer, one is the nature of the things, compared
(in matter and order) with nature and necessity: The other is the revealed will
of God in his word: In general the holy Scripture; more especially the Lords
Prayer: The Liturgy (for the greatest part of the Prayers for daily use) is
confused, by which soever of those you measure it; You seem much to honor the
Lords Prayer, by your frequent use of it (or part of it) we beseech you
dishonor it not practically by denying it for matter, and order to be the only
ordinary perfect Rule we know about particular Administrations, when it is but
certain select requests that we are to put up, suited to the particular
subject, and occasion, we cannot follow the whole method of the Lords Prayer,
which contains the heads of all the parts; where we are not to take in all
the parts, we cannot take them in that order; But that none of all your Prayers
should be formed to the perfect Rule, that your Let any which is the
comprehensive Prayer, and that the body of your daily Prayers (broken into
several Collects) should not (as set together,) have any considerable respect
unto that order, nor yet to the order which reason and the nature of the thing
requires, which is observed in all things else, and yet that you should admire
this, and be so tenacious of that, which in conceived Prayer you would call by
worse names than confusions, this shows us the wonderful power of prejudice; We
were thus brief in this exception, lest we should offend by instances: But
seeing you conceive the order and method to be excellent, and to be willing to
hear more, as to this and the following exception, we shall annex a Catalogue
of defects, and disorders, which we before forbore to give you: The Psalms
have ordinarily an observabe method: If you find any whose parts you cannot so
well set together, as to see the beauty of method, will you turn your eye from
the rest, and from the Lords Prayer, and choose that one to be your President!
or excuse disorder on that pretense.

[The Collects are made short as being best for devotion as we observed before,
and cannot be accounted faulty, for being like those ^^
short but prevalent Prayers in Scripture; Lord be merciful to me a Sinner; Son
of David have mercy on us; Lord increase our Faith.]

Repl. We do in common speech call that a Prayer, which contains all the
substance of what in that business and address we have to say unto God, and
that a Petition which contains one single request; usually a Prayer has many
Petitions. Now if you intend in your address to God, to do no more than speak
a transient request or ejaculation (which we may do in the midst of other
business) then indeed your instances are pertinent. But why then do you not
give over when you seem to have done, but come again and again and offer as
many Prayers, almost as Petitions. This is to make the Prayer short, (as a
Sermon is that is cut into single Sentences, every Sentence having an exordium,
and Epilogue as a Sermon,) but it is to make the Prayers much longer than is
needful or suitable to the matter; Do you find this the way of the Saints in
Scripture? Indeed Abraham did so, when Gods interlocution answering the first
Prayer, called him to vary his request, Genesis 18. But that is not our case: The
Psalms and Prayers of David, Solomon, Hezekiah, Asa, Ezra, Nehemiah, Daniel,
and the other Prophets, of Christ himself, Joh. 17. are usually one continued
speech, and not like yours, (as we said before.)

[Why the repeated mention of the Name and Attributes of God, should not be
more pleasing to any godly person, we cannot imagine, or. 3.
what burden it should seem, when David magnified one Attribute of Gods mercy,
26. times together. Psalm. 36. Nor can we conceive why the Name and merits of
Jesus, with which all our Prayers should end, should not be as sweet to us as
to former Saints and Martyrs, with which here they complain our Prayers do so
frequently end: since the Attributes of God are the ground of our hope, of
obtaining all our Petitions such Prefaces of Prayers as are taken from them,
though they have no special respect to the Petitions following are not to be
termed unsuitable, or said to have fallen rather casually, than orderly.

Repl. As we took it to be no Controversy between us, whether the mention of
Gods Name is deservedly sweet to all his Servants; So we thought it was none,
that this reverend Name is reverently to be used, and not too lightly, and
therefore not with a causeless frequency tossed in men's mouths, even in
prayer itself; and that tautologies and vain repetitions, are not the better
but the worse, because Gods Name is made the matter of them. It is not you that
have expressed your offense (as well as we) against those weak Ministers that
repeat too frequently the Name and Attributes of God, in their extemporate
Prayers? And is it ill in them? and is the same, and much more well in the
Common Prayer? O have not the Faith or worship of our glorious God in respect
of persons. Let not that be called ridiculous idle, impertinent, or worse in
one, which is accounted commendable in others. Do you think it were not a
faulty crossing, of the mind and method of Jesus Christ, if you should make 6.
Prayers of it he 6. Petitions of the Lords Prayer, and set the Preface and
Conclusion unto each? as (Our Father, which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy
Name, for thine is the Kingdom, etc. and so over all the rest; Yet we know
that the same words may be often repeated (as David does Gods enduring mercy,)
without such tautological vanity: when it is not from emptiness or neglect of
order, or affectation; But in Psalms or Hymns where affections are to be
elevated by such figurative elegancies, and strains as are best beseeming
Poetry or Rapture, we are not against such repetitions; But if we may
(according to the Common Prayer Book) begin and end, and begin and seem to
withdraw again, and make a Prayer of every Petition or two, and begin and end
every such petition, with Gods name, and Christ's merits, as making up half the
form, or near, nothing is an affected empty tossing of Gods name in Prayer if
this be not: We are persuaded if you should hear a man in a known extemporate
prayer do thus, it would seem strange and harsh even to your selves.

[There are besides a preparative Exhortation, several preparatory prayers: 1.
Despise not O Lord humble and contrite hearts. N. 17.. 1. Exc. 1.
Which is one of the sentences in the Preface; And this, That those things may
please him, which we do at this present) at the end of the Absolution: And
again immediately after the Lords Prayer before the Psalmody, O Lord open thou
our Lips. etc.]

Repl. Despise not O Lord humble and contrite hearts) is not prayer, for
assistance, and acceptance in that Worship, suited to the duty of a people
addressing themselves to God: But it is recited as a Scripture invitation to
repentance, and (that those things may please him which we do at this present)
are no words of Prayer, but part of an exhortation to the people; (and O Lord
open thou our lips) comes after the Exhortation, Confession, Absolution, and
Lords Prayer, and ergo, is not in the place of such an Address, as we are
speaking of, What will not seem to justify, what we have a mind to justify; and
to condemn that which we have a mind to condemn?

[This which they call a defect, others think they have reason to. 2. Exc. 2.
account the perfection of the Liturgy, the Offices of which being intended for
common and general services, would cease to be such, by descending to
particulars, as in confession of Sin, while it is general, all persons may and
must join in it, since in many things we offend all; But if there be a
particular enumeration of sins, it cannot be so general a confession, because
it may happen that some or other may by Gods Grace have been preserved from
some of those sins enumerated, and therefore should by confessing themselves
guilty, tell God a Lie, which needs a new Confession.]

Repl. If general words be its perfection, its very culpable in tediousness
and vain repetitions; For what need you more than (Lord be merciful to us
sinners.) There Is together a general confession of Sin, and a general Prayer
for mercy, which comprehend all the particulars of the peoples Sins, and wants.
We gave you our reason, which you answer not; Confession is the exercise of
Repentance, and also the helper of it; And it is noe true repentance which is
not particular, but only general. If you say that you repent that you have
sinned, and know not where, or do not repent of any particular sin, you do not
indeed repent, for Sin is not existent but in the Individuals: And if you ask
for grace, and know nor what grace, or desire no particular graces; indeed you
desire not grace at all: We know there is time and use for general Confessions,
and Requests; But still as implying particulars, as having gone before, or
following, or at least it must be supposed, that the people understand the
particulars included and have inward confessions and desires of them: Which
cannot here be supposed, when they are not all mentioned, not can the people
generally be supposed to have such quick and comprehensive minds, nor is there
leisure to exercise such particular repentance or desire, while a general is
named: And we beseech you let Scripture be Judge, whether the Confessions and
Prayers of the Servants of God have not been particular; As to your objection
or reason, we answer; 1. There are general Prayers with the particular, or
without them. 2, There are particular Confessions and Prayers proper to some
few Christians, and there are others common to all; It is these that we expect,
and not the former. 3. The Churches Prayers must be suited to the body of the
Assembly, though perhaps some one, or few may be in a state not fit for such
expressions: What a lamentable Liturgy will you have, if you have nothing in
it, but what every one in the Congregation may say as true of and suitable to
themselves? Then you must leave out all Thanksgiving for our Justification and
forgiveness of sin, and adoption, and title to glory, etc. because many in the
Assembly are Hipocrites, and have no such mercies, and many more that are
sincere, are mistaken in their own condition, and know not that they have the
mercies which they have, and therefore dare not give thanks for them, lest they
speak an untruth: Then the Liturgy that now speaks as in the persons of the
Sanctified must be changed, that the two forementioned sorts, (or the latter
at least) may consent; and when you have done, it will be unsuitable to those
that are in a better state, and have the knowledge of their Justification. This
is the Argument which the Sectaries used against singing of David's Psalms in
the Congregations, because there is much in them, that many cannot truly say of
themselves. But the Church must not go out of that way of worship prescribed by
God, and suired to the state of the ordinary sort of the spiritual Worshippers,
because of the distempers, or the super-eminent excellencies of some few: It
were easy to go over David's Psalms and your own Liturgy, and show you very much
that by this Argument must be cast out: He that finds any passage unsuitable to
himself, is not to speak it of himself.

[As for original sin, though we think it an evil custom springing. 3.
from false Doctrine, to use any such expressions as may lead people to think
that to the persons baptized (in whose persons only our Prayers are offered
up,) original sin is not forgiven in their holy Baptism; Yet for that there
remains in the Regenerate some relics of that which are to be bewailed, the
Church in her Confession acknowledges such desires of our own hearts as render
us miserable by following them; That there is no health in us, That without
Gods help our frailty cannot but fall. That our mortal nature can do no good
thing without him; which is a clear acknowledgment of Original sin.]

Repl. 1. He that has his Original sin forgiven him, may well confess that he
was born in iniquity and conceived in sin, and was by nature a Child of wrath,
and that by one man sin entered into the world, and that Judgment came on all
men to Condemnation, etc. The pardoned may confess what once they were, and
from what Rock they were hewn: even actual sins must be confessed, after they
are forgiven, (unless the Antimonians hold the truth against us in such points.
2. All is not false Doctrine that crosses men's private Opinions, which you
seem here to obtrude upon us. We know that the Papists (and perhaps some
others) hold that all the baptized are delivered from the Guilt of Original
sin; But (as they are in the dark, and disagreed in the Explicatio of it) so we
have more reason to incline to either of the ordinary Opinions of the
Protestants, than to this of theirs, 3. Some learned Protestants hold that
visibly all the baptized are Church members; pardoned and justified, which is
but that they are probably justified indeed, and are to be used by the Church
(upon a Judgment of Charity) as those that are really justified. But that we
have indeed no certainty that they are so; God keeping that as a secret to
himself concerning Individuals, till by actual Faith and Repentance, it be
manifest to themselves. Another Opinion of many Protestants is, that all
persons that are Children of the Promise, or that have the conditions of pardon
and Justification in the Covenant mentioned, are to receive that pardon by
Baptism: and all such are pardoned, and certainly in a state of Justification
and Salvation thereupon: and that the promise of pardon is made to the Faithful
and to their seed: and therefore that all the Faithful and their seed in
Infancy have this pardon given them by the promise, and solemnly delivered
them, and sealed to them by Baptism, which investeth them in the benefits of
the Covenant. But withal that first, the professed Infidel and his seed as
such, are not the Children of the promise, and therefore if the Parent
ludicruosly or forcedly, or the Child by error be baptized, they have not
thereby the pardon of their sin before God. 2. That the Hypocrite that is not a
true believer at the heart, though he profess it, has no pardon by Baptism
before God, as being not an heir of the promise, nor yet any Infant of his as
such: But though such are not pardoned, the Church that judges by profession,
taking Professors for Believers, must accordingly use them and their seed, 3.
But though the Church judge thus charitably of each Professor in particular,
till his hypocrisy be detected, yet does it understand that hypocrites there
are, and still will be in the Church, though we know them not by name. And that
therefore there are many externally baptized, and in Communion, that never had
the pardon of sin, indeed before God; as not having the Condition of the
promise of pardon: Such as Simon Magus was. We have less reason to take this
Doctrine for false, than that which pronounces certain pardon, and salvation
to all baptized Infants whatsoever: And were we of their judgment, we should
think it the most charitable Act in the world to take the Infants of Heathens,
and baptize them; And if any should then dispatch them all to prevent their
lapse, they were all certainly saved. We hope by (some relics) you mean that
which is truly and properly sin. For our parts we believe according to the
ninth Article, that Original sin stands in the Corruption of the nature of
every man, whereby man is far gone from Original righteousness, and inclined
to evil; And that this infection of nature does remain in the Regenerate; And
though there is no Condemnation for them that believe and are baptized, yet
Concupisence and Lust, has of it self the nature of sin.) you say, (The Church
acknowledges such desires, etc.) Devices, and Desires are Actual sins and not
Original, which consists in privation, and corrupt inclination: The next
words (There is no health in us) it seems the Translators that put it into the
Liturgy mis-understood; But however you seem here plainly by your
mis-interpretation to mis-understand it. Nulla salus in nobis, is spoken
actively and not possessively or passively, the plain sense is, that there is
no help deliverance and salvation in our selves: we cannot help our selves out
of this misery, but must have a better Savior; as Christ is often called our
salvation, so we are denied to be our own: so that yet here is no confession at
all of Original sin, but of the effects; The two next sentences confess a
debility, and privation, but not that it was ab origin, but may for any thing
that is there said be taken to be since contracted; Nor are the words in this
Confession, but in some other Collects else where, which proves not that this
Confession says any thing of Original sin.

[We know not what public prayers are wanting, nor do they tell. 7. Exc. 3.
us, the usual Complaint has been, that there were too many: Neither do we
conceive any want of public Thanksgivings there being in the Liturgy, Te Deum,
Benedictus, Magnificat, Benedicite, Glory be to God on high, Therefore with
Angels and Archangels, The Doxology, Glory be to the Father, etc. All peculiar
as they require, to Gospel worship, and fit to express our thanks and honor
to God upon every particular occasion, and occasional Thanksgivings after the
Letany, of the frequency whereof themselves elsewhere complain, who here
complain of defect; If there he any forms wanting the Church will provide.]

Repl. We have showed you in the forms which we offered you, what we judge
wanting, the Right Reverend Bishop of Exeter has taken notice of the same
want, and proposed a supply, those you name are either but general sentences,
or extend but to some few particulars, as being suited to the persons and
particular occasions of them, and none save the (Te Deum) designed to be the
distinct praise of the Church for the benefits of Redemption, as the suitable
and sufficient performance of this great part of the Liturgy; However it will
do you no harm that your Brethren be gratified, with fuller expressions and
variety. They that have complained of too many (because you shred your
Petitions into almost as many Prayers, and so the Thanksgivings into such
briefs) yet complained not of too much; But that too many (by the multitudes of
Prefaces, and Epilogues) was the the cause of too little.

[They complain that the Liturgy contains too many Generals,. 5. Exc. 4.
without mention of the particulars, and the Instances are such Petitions as
those, That we may do Gods will; To be kept from all evil, almost the very
Terms of the Petitions of the Lords Prayer: so that they must reform that,
before they can pretend to mend our Liturgy in these Petitions.]

Repl. We complain not that there are Generals, but that there is nothing but
Generals in so great a part of your Prayers and therefore they are very
defective: And if really these Generals suffice you, a few lines may serve
instead of your whole Book, Instead of all your Confessions, it may serve to
say (That we have greatly sinned) and no more: Instead of all your Let any or
Deprecations it is enough to say (Deliver us from all evil) Instead of all your
Petitions for Grace, Peace, Rain, Fair-weather, Health, etc. it is enough to
say (Give us the Good we want) Indeed the Lords Prayer has general Requests,
because it is the design of it, to be a Rule of Prayer, and so contain but the
Heads to which all Prayers are to be reduced; But if therefore you will have no
more particulars, why do you use any prayer but the Lords Prayer; We hope you
do not think to supply any defects pretended to be found in its Generals, not
to correct the order of it; If it be but because you would not on every
particular occasion be so long, as to say the whole, you may take that Head.
which suiteth that occasion: And so (Give us this day our daily bread) may
serve instead of all the Collects for temporal supplies: And all your Offices
may be blotted out, and one of the petitions of the Lords prayer placed in the
stead of each of them.

[We have deferred this to the proper place as you might have done.]

Repl. It was the proper place under the head of defectivenesse,. 6. Exc. 5.
to instance in this as well as other defects.

[We are now come to the main and principal demand as is pretended N. 18.. 1.
viz. The abolishing the Laws which impose any Ceremonies, especially three,
the Surplice, the Sign of the Cross, and Kneeling; These are the Yoke which if
removed, there might be peace. It is to be suspected, and there is reason for
it, from their own words, that somewhat else pinches, and that if these
Ceremonies were laid aside and these or any other Prayers strictly enjoined
without them, it would be deemed a burden intolerable, it seems so by N. 7.
where they desire that when the Liturgy is altered, according to the rest of
their proposals, the Minister may have liberty to add, and leave out what he
pleases; Yet because the imposition of these Ceremonies is pretended to be the
insupportable Grievance, we must of necessity either yield that demand, or show
reason why we do not; and that we may proceed the better in this undertaking,
we shall reduce the sum of their complaint, to these several heads, as we find
them in their Papers; The Law for imposing these Ceremonies, they would have
abrogated for these reasons.]

Repl. To what you object, to intimate your suspicion of us) from N. 7. we have
before answered: We must confess the abatement of Ceremonies, with the
exclusion of all Prayers, and exhortations, besides what is read will not
satisfy us. The liberty which we desired in all the parts of Worship (not to
add to the Liturgy, nor take from it) but to interpose upon just occasion,
such words of Prayer, or exhortation, as are requisite, and not to be tied at
any time to read the whole, we are assured will do much to preserve the
Liturgy, and bring it into more profitable use and take off much of men's
offense. And pardon us while we tell you this certain truth, that if once it be
known that you have a design to work out all Prayers (even those of the Pulpit)
except such as you prescribe, it will make many thousand people, fearing God,
to be averse to that which else they would have submitted to, and to distaste
both your endeavors and ours, as if we were about drawing them into so great a
snare. And as the Proverb is; You may as well think to make a Coat for the
Moon, as to make a Liturgy that shall be sufficiently suited to the variety of
places, times, subjects, accidents, without the Liberty of intermixing such
Prayers or exhortations, as alterations and diversities require.

[1. It is doubtful whether God has given power to men to impose. 2.
such signified signs, which though they call them significant, yet have in
them no real goodness, in the judgment of the Imposers themselves, being
called by them things indifferent, and therefore Cor. 11.
fall not under St. Paul's rule of Omnia Decenter, nor are suitable to the
simplicity of the Gospel Worship.

2. Because it is a violation of the Royalty of Christ, and an impeachment 2.
of his Laws as unsufficient, and so those that are under the Sea Hooker li. 3.
Sect. 4.
Law of Deuteronomy. 12. Whatsoever I command you, observe to do, you shall take
nothing from it, nor add any thing to it; You do not observe these.

3. Because sundry learned pious, and Orthodox men, have ever since the
Reformation judged them unwarrantable, and we ought to 3.
be as our Lord was, tender of weak Brethren, not to offend his little ones,
nor to lay a stumbling-black before a weak Brother.

4. Because these Ceremonies have been the fountain of many evils 4.
in this Church and Nation, occasioning sad divisions betwixt Minister, and
Minister; betwixt Minister and People, exposing many See Hookli. 4, Sect. 1.
Orthodox Preachers to the displeasure of Rulers; And no other fruits than
these can be looked for from the retaining these Ceremonies.

Repl. We had rather you had taken our Reasons as we laid them down, than to
have so altered them; Ergo having told you that some hold them unlawful, and
others inconvenient, etc. and desired that they may not be imposed on such, who
judge such Impositions a violation of the Royalty of Christ, etc. You seem to
take this as our own sense, and that of all the Ceremonies, of which we there
made no mention; You refer us to Hooker, since whose writings, Ames in his
fresh suit, and Bradshaw, and Parker, and many others have written that against
the Ceremonies, that never was answered, that we know of, but deserve your
Consideration.

[Before we give particular Answer to these several Reasons, it S. 3. R. 1.
will not be unnecessary to lay down some certain general premises, or rules,
which will be useful in our whole discourse. 1. That God has not given a power
only, but a command also of imposing whatsoever should be truly decent, and
becoming his public Service, 1 Cor. 14. After St, Paul had ordered some
particular Rules for Praying, Praising, Prophesying, etc. He concludes with
this general Canon, Let all things be done (...) in a fit Scheme, Habit, or
Fashion, decently, and that there may be uniformity in those decent
performances, let there be a (...) Rule or Canon for that purpose.]

Repl. As to your first rule we answer. 1. It is one thing to impose in
general, that all be done decently and in order. This God himself has imposed
by his Apostle: And its another thing to impose in particular, that this or
that be used, as decent and orderly. Concerning this we add, it is in the Text
said, Let it be done, but not let it be imposed, yet from other Scriptures we
doubt not but Circumstances of mere decency and order, as determined time,
place, utensils, etc. which are common to things civil, and sacred, though not
the Symbolical Ceremonies. which afterward we confute) may be imposed with the
necessary cautions and limitations afterward laid down. But 1. that if any
Usurpers will pretend a power from Christ, to impose such things on the Church,
though the things be lawful, we must take heed how we acknowledge an usurped
power by formal obedience. 2. A just power may impose them but to just ends, as
the preservation and success of the modified Worship, or Ordinances. And if
they really conduce not to those ends, they sin in imposing them. 3. Yet the
Subjects are bound to obey a true Authority in such impositions, where the
matter belongs to the Cognizance, and Office of the Ruler, and where the
mistake is not so great, as to bring greater mischiefs to the Church, than the
suspending of our active obedience would do. 4. But if these things be
determined under pretense of order and decency, to the plain destruction of the
ordinances modified, and of the intended end, they cease to be means, and we
must not use them. 5. Or if under the names of things decent, and of order, men
will meddle with things that belong not to their Office, as to institute a new
Worship for God, new Sacraments, or any thing forbidden in the general
Prohibition of adding or diminishing, this is a Usurpation, and not an act of
Authority, and we are bound in obedience to God to disobey them. 6. Where
Governors may command at set times, and by proportionable penalties enforce,
if they command when it will destroy the end, or enforce by such penalties, as
destroy or cross it, they greatly sin, by such commands. Thus we have more
distinctly given you our sense, about the matter of your first rule.

[Not Inferiors but Superiors must judge what is convenient and. 4. Rul. 2.
decent; They who must order that all be done decently, must of necessity,
first judge what is convenient, and decent to be ordered.]

Repl. Your second Rule also is too crudely delivered, and therefore we must
add: 1. A Judgment is a Sentence, in order to some Execution, and Judgments
are specified from the ends, to which they are such means; When the question is
either, what Law shall be made, or what penalty shall be exercised? the
Magistrate is the only Judge, and not the Bishop or other Subject, In the first
he exercises his judicium discretionis in order to a public Act. In the second
he exercises a public judgment: When the question is, what order pro tempore
is fittest in Circumstantials for this present Congregation; the proper
Presbyters or Pastors of that Congregation, are the directive Judges, by Gods
appointment. 3. The Magistrate is Ruler of these Pastors, as he is of
Physicians, Pailosophers, and other Subjects. He may make them such general
Rules, especially for restraint, to go by, as may not destroy the exercise of
their own Pastoral power: As he may forbid a Physician to use some dangerous
Medicine on his Subjects, and may punish him when he wilfully kills any of
them: But may not on that presence appoint him what, and how, and when, and to
whom he shall administer, and so become Phisician himself alone. 4. When the
question is, who shall be excluded from the Communion of a particular Church?
The Pastors of the Church (or Congregation) are the first proper Judges. 5.
When the question is, who shall be excluded from, (or received into) the
Communion of all the associated Churches, of which we are naturally capable of
Communion? The associated Pastors or Bishops of these Churches in Synods are
Judg^^; Beyond this there are no Judges. 6. When the question is, whether the
Laws of Magistrates, or Canons of Bishops, are agreeable or not to the Word of
God, and so the obedience is lawful or unlawful, the Conscience of each
individual Subject is the Judge, per judicium discretionis, as to his own
practice; And if men had not this judgment of discerning, but must act upon
absolute implicit obedience, then first man were ruled as unreasonable,
Secondly, the magistrate were made a God, or such a Leviathan as Hobbs
describes him; Thirdly, And then all sin might lawfully be committed, if
commanded: But we are assured none of this your sense.

[These Rules and Canons for decency made and urged by Superiors. 5. R. l. 3.
, are to be obeyed by Inferiors, till it be made as clear that now they are
not bound to obey, as it is evident in general, that they ought to obey
Superiors; for if the exemption from obedience be not Heb. 13. 17. Romans 13.
as evident as the Command to obey, it must needs be sin not to obey.]

Repl. To your third Rule we add; It is first considerable what the thing is,
and then how it is apprehended, if it be really lawful, and well commanded, and
to be obeyed, it is no ignorance, doubt or error of the Subject that can
exempt him from the duty of obeying; But it may ensnare him in a certainty of
sinning, whether he obey, or disobey: For as God commands him to obey, and
also not to do that which man commands, when God forbids it; So he
obliges the erroneous, first to lay down his errors, and so to obey. But if a
thing he forbidden of God, and commanded of man, and one man erroniously think
it lawful, and that he should obey, and another is in doubt between both, it is
neither a duty, nor lawful for either of them here to obey For man's error
changes nor Gods Laws, nor disobligeth himself from obedience; But this man's
duty is both to lay by that error, and to refuse obedience but if the question
be only of the order of such a persons duty, we answer; If the thing be really
lawful, and obedience a duty, then he that doubts or erreth, should, if
possible, suddenly lay by his errors or doubt, and so obey: But if that cannot
be, he should first go about the fittest means, for his better information till
he be resolved, and so obey. And so on the contrary, if really the thing
commanded be unlawful, if he be sure of it, he must resolve against it; if he
hesitate he is not therefore allowed to do a thing forbidden, because he is
ignorant: For his ignorance is suposed culpable it self, but he is first to
consult and use the best means, for his Instruction, till he know the truth,
and in the mean time to suspend his Act. But yet because of humane frailty,
between several faults, we must consider when we cannot avoid all as we would,
in what order most safely to watch, and to avoid them. And so when I have done
my best, and cannot discern whether a Command be just, and the thing lawful or
not; If it have the face of Idolatry, Blasphemy, or some heinous Sin; that is
commanded, and our dis-obedience have the appearance, but of an effect of
involuntary ignorance, it is more excusable in us to fear the greater Sin, and
so to suspend till we are better satisfied, than to do that which we suspect,
to be so heinous a Sin, though in leed it prove no sin; So on the contrary, if
our disobedience be like to bring Infamy, or Calamity on the Church, and our
Obedience appear to be but about a very small sin, if we doubt of it, it is
more excusable to obey, than to disobey, though both be faulty, supposing the
thing to be indeed unlawful, and we discern it not. So that your Rule of
obeying, where you are not as sure, etc, Is an unsure Rule, unless as we have
fullyer cautioned it.

[Pretence of Conscience is no exemption from obedience, for the. 6. Rul. 4.
Law as long as it is a Law, certainly binds to obedience; Romans 13. Ye must
needs be subject, and this pretense of a tender gainsaying Conscience cannot
abrogate the Law, since it can neither take away the Authority of the
Lawmakers, nor make the matter of the Law in it self unlawful; Besides if
pretense of Conscience did exempt from obedience, Laws were useless, whosoever
had not list to obey might pretend tenderness of Conscience, and be thereby set
at liberty, which if once granted, Anarchy and Confusion must needs follow.]

Repl Neither pretense of Conscience, nor real Error of Conscience exempteth
from the Obligation, to obey: though sometime it may so ensnare, as that
obeying shall become of the two the greater sin; so also real Errors, or
pretense of Conscience will justify no man for obeying when it is by God
forbidden.

[Though Charity will move to pity, and relieve those that are. 7. Rul. 5.
truly perplexed or Scrupulous: yet we must not break Gods Command, in Charity
to them, and therefore we must not perform public Services undecently or
disorderly for the ease of tender Consciences.]

Repl. O that you would but do all that God allows you, yea that he has
commanded you, for these ends! how happy would you make your selves, and these
poor afflicted Churches. But as to the instance of your Rule we answer. 1. When
the indecency and disorder is so small as that it will not cross the ends, so
much as our disobedience would, we are here so far more conformable, and
peaceable than you, as that we would even in Gods worship, do some things
indecent, and disorderly, rather than disobey; And so should you do rather than
destroy your Brethren, or hinder that peace, and healing of the Church. For
Order is for the thing ordered, and not contrarily. For example, there is much
disorder lies in the Common Prayer- Book, yet we would obey in it, as far as
the ends of our calling do require. It would be undecent to come without a
Band, or other handsome raiment into the Assembly: yet rather than nor worship
God at all, we would obey if that were commanded us; we are as confident that
Surplices, and Copes are undecent, and kneeling at the Lords Table is
disorderly, as you are of the contrary: And yet if the Magistrate would be
advised by us (supposing himself addicted against you) we would advise him to
be more charitable to you,, than you here advise him to be to us: We would have
him, if your Conscience require it, to forbear you in this undecent and
disorderly way; But to speak more distinctly. 1. There are some things decent
and orderly, when the opposite species is not undecent or disorderly. 2. There
are some things undecent, and disorderly, in a small and tolerable degree: And
some things in a degree intolerable. 1. When things decent are commanded, whose
opposites would not be at all undecent, there Charity and Peace, and
Edification, may command a Relaxation; or rather should at first restrain from
too severe Impositions: As it is decent to wear either a Cloak or a Gown, a
Cassock buttoned, or unbutton'd, with a Girdle or without, to sit, stand, or
kneel in singing of a Psalm, to sit or stand in hearing the word read, or
preached etc. 2. When a Circumstance is undecent or disorderly, but in a
tolerable degree, to an Inconvenience, Obedience, or Charity, or Edification,
may command us to do it, and make it not only lawful, but a duty pro hic, and
nunc, while the preponderating Accident prevails. Christ's instances go at
least as far as this, about the Priests in the Temple breaking the Sabbath
blamelesly and David's eating the Show bread, which was lawful for none to eat
ordinarily, but the Priests: And the Disciples rubbing the ears of Corn: (I
will have mercy and not sacrifice) is a Leston that he sets us to learn, when
two duties come together, to prefer the greater, if we would escape sin; And
sure to keep an able Preacher in the Church, or a private Christian in
Communion, is a greater duty caeteris paribus than to use a Ceremony, which we
conceive to be decent; It is more orderly to use the better translation of the
Scripture, than the worse as the Common Prayer Book does; and yet we would have
no man cast out, for using the worse: It is more orderly decent, and edifying,
for the Minister to read all the Psalms, than for the people to read each
second verse; And yet we would not cast out men from the Church or Ministry
merely for that disorder, It is more orderly, and decent to be uncovered in
divine worship, than covered: And yet rather than a man should take cold, we
could allow him to hear a Chapter or Sermon covered: why (not much more) rather
than he should be cast out. But let us come to the Application. It is no
undecent disorderly worshipping of God, to worship him without our Cross,
Surplice, and kneeling in the reception of the Sacrament. 1. If it were, than
Christ, and his Apostles bad worship undecently and disorderly; And the
Primitive Church that used not the Surplice, nor the transient Image of the
Cro^e in Baptism (but in an unguent) yea the Church for many hundred years
that received the Sacrament without kneeling. 2. Then if the King, Parliament,
and Con^ocation should change these Ceremonies, it seems you would take your
selves bound to retain them; For you say you must not worship God undecently:
But that they may be changed by Authority our Articles determine, and therefore
Charity may well require the Magistrate to change them without any wrong to the
worship of God. 3. We appeal to the common judgment of the Impartial, whether
in the nature of the thing, there be any thing that tells them, that it is
undecent, to pray without a Surplice in the reading place, and not undecent to
pray without in the Pulpit; And that it is undecent to baptize without
crossing, and not to receive the Lords Supper without: And that it is undecent
for the Receiver to take the Lords Supper without kneeling, and not for the
Minister to give it him standing that prays in the delivery.

[These premised we Answer to your first Reason, that those things. 8. Answ. 1.
which we call Indifferent, because neither expressly commanded nor forbiden by
God, have in them a real goodness, a fitness, and decency, and for that
cause, are imposed, and may be so by the Rule of St. Paul, by which Rule and
many others, in Scripture a power is given, to men to impose Signs, which are
never the worse surely, because they 1. Cor. 14.
signify something that is decent and comely, and so it is not doubtful
whether such power be given; It would rather be doubtful, whether the Church
could impose such idle Signs, if any such there be, as signify nothing.]

Repl. To your first Answer we reply. 1. We suppose you speak of a moral
goodness; And if they are such indeed, as are within their power and really
good, that is of their own nature, fi^ter than their opposites, they may be
imposed by just authority by equal means, though not by Usurpers, nor by
penalties that will do more harm than the things will do good. 2. Signs that
signify nothing, we understand not: It is one thing to be decent, and another
(to signify something that is decent: what you mean by that we know not. The
Cross signifies our not being ashamed to profess the faith of Christ
crucified, etc. do you call that (something that is decent) It is something
necessary to salvation. 3. Signs are exceeding various: At present we use but
two distinctions. 1. Some are signs, Ex primaria intention instituentis,
purposed, and primarily instituted to signify* (as an Esoucheon, or a sign at
an Inn door in common matters: and as the Sacrament, and Cross in sacred
matters) and some are signs but consequently secondarily, and not essentially
as intended by the Institutor (so hills and trees may show us what a clock it
is: And so every creature signifies some good of mercy or duty, and may be an
object of holy meditation: so the color and shape of our clothes, may mind us
of some good, which yet was none of the primary, or proper end of the maker or
wearer,) 2. Signs are either arbitrary expressions, of a man's own mind in a
matter, where he is let free, or they are covenanting signs between us and God
in the Covenant of Grace, to work Grace on us as moral causes, and to engage us
Sacramentally to him; such we conceive the Cross in Baptism to be. The Preface
to the Common Prayer Book says (They are apt to teach and excite, etc. Which
is a moral operation of Grace: And the Canon says It is an honorable badge,
whereby the Infant is dedicated to him that died on the Cross, We are signed
with it (in token that hereafter we shall not be ashamed to confess the faith
of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight, etc.) now if a thing may be
commanded merely as a decent circumstance of worship, yet it is unproved that a
thing, that in its nature as instituted, and in the primary intention is thus
sacramentally to dedicate and engage us in Covenant to God, by signifying the
grace and duty of the Covenant be lawfully commanded by man. 1. Decent
Circumstances are necessary in genere; There must be some fit Time, Place,
Gesture, Vesture, (as such) Utensils, etc. But that there be some such
dedicating engaging signs, in our covenanting with God signifying the Grace of
the Covenant, and our state and duty as Soldiers under Christ (besides Gods
Sacraments) this is not necessary in genere, and therefore it is not left to
man to determine de specie. 2. If there be any reason for this use of the
Cross, it must be such as was in the Apostles days, and concerns the
universal Church in all ages and places, and then the Apostles would have taken
care of it; Thus much here in brief of signs, and more anon when you again call
us to it.

[To the second) that it is not a violation of Christ's Royalty to make such
Laws for decercy, but an exercise of his power and authority, which. 9. ^. 2.
he has given to the Church: And the disobedience to such commands of
Euperiours is plainly a violation of his Royalty. As it is no violation of the
Kings Authority, when his Magistrates command things according to his Laws; But
disobedience to the command of those Injunctions of his Deputies, is violation
of his Authority; Again, it can be no impeachment of Christ's Laws as
insufficient, to make such Laws for decency, since our Savior as is evident by
the Precepts themselves, did not intend by them to determine, every minute and
circumstance of time, place, manner of performance, and the like, but only to
command in general the substance of those duties, and the right ends that
should be aimed at in the performance, and then left every man in particular
(whom for that purpose he made reasonable) to guide himself by rules of reason,
for private Services; And appointed Governors of the Church, to determine such
particularities for the public: Thus our Lord commanded Prayers, Fasting, etc.
for the times and places of performance; he did not determine every of them,
but left them to be guided as we have said; So that it is no impeachment of his
Laws as insufficient, to make Laws for determining those particulars of
decency, which himself did not, as is plain by his Precepts, intend to
determine but left us Governors for that purpose, to whom he said, As my
Father, sent me, even so send I you, and let all things be done decently, and
in order; of whom he has said to us, Obey those that have the over sight over
you; and told us that if we will not hear his Church we must not be accounted
as Christians, but Heathens and Publicans; And yet nevertheless they will not
hear it, and obey it in so small a matter, as a circumstance of time, place,
habit, or the like, which she thinks decent and fit, and yet will be accounted
for the best Christians, and tell us that it is the very awe of Gods Law, Deuteronomy.
12. 32. that keeps them from obedience to the Church in these commands, not
well considering that it cannot be any adding to the Word of God, to command
things for order and decency which the Word of God commands to be done so as
they be not commanded as Gods immediate Word, but as the Laws of men, but that
it is undenyably adding to the Word of God, to say that Superiors may not
command such things, which God has no where forbidden, and taking from the
Word of God, to deny that power to men, which Gods Word has forgiven them.]

Repl. To make Laws [to determine of undetermined circumstances necessary in
genere, to be some way determined and left to Magistrates, or Ministers de
specie, and to do this according to the general rules of Scripture, and in
order to the main end, and not against it. and is not against the Royalty or
will of Christ; But to make new dedicating covenanting Symboles, to signify the
doctrine of the Covenant of Grace, and solemnly engage us unto God, and place
those in the public worship, which are not meet Circumstances, but substantial
institutions, not necessary in genere (that there should be any such at all,
besides Gods Sacraments,) we fear this is a violation of the Royalty of Christ,
and a reflection on his Laws as insufficient: for first, if it belong to the
power proper to Christ, then it is a violation of his Royalty for any man to
exercise it; But it belongs to the power proper to Christ: ergo, etc. The
minor is proved thus, If it belong to the universal head, or Ruler of the
Church as such, then it belongs to the power proper to Christ (for we are ready
to prove there is none under him, no universal head or ruler personally, or
collectively and civilly one,) But etc. If in the reason of it, it should be
the matter of an universal Law, if of any then it should be the work of the
universal Lawgiver, if any: But etc. If in the reason of it, it be equally
useful to the Church universal, as to any particular Church or age, then it
should according to the reason of it, be the matter of an universal Law, if of
any: But, etc. it has the same aptitude, to engage us to a duty of universal
necessity, and has no reason proper to this age or place for it, but common to
all. Moreover it is no where committed to the power or care of man, ergo it is
proper to the care and power of Christ, no Text is showed that gives man power
in such things: To do all things decently and orderly, and to edification is no
giving of power on that pretense to make new Covenanting dedicating signs, to
do Gods work decently, etc. is not to make more such of our own heads: It is
but the right modifying of the work already set us. And to do all decently,
orderly, and to edification, was a duty in Moses time, when yet such things as
these in question might not be added by any but God: (when we say by God, we
mean by his inspired Instruments, and when we say by Christ, we mean by his
inspired Instruments:) If we should make Laws that every one is publicly to
taste Vinegar, and Gall, as a sign that we are not ashamed of, but resolved
through all flesh displeasing difficulties to follow Christ, that died so, and
thus to engage, and dedicate our selves to him, this were to do more, then to
do [all things decently, and orderly which he appointed: If milk were to be
publicly sucked or drunk, by all in profession, that we will feed on the
sincere milk of his word, and so dedicate us to him by Covenant, or if we were
to put on an Helmet, and other Armor in token that we will be his Soldiers to
the death, and manfully fight under, etc. These engagements by such public
signs, are Sacraments in the sense, as the word was used of old, when it
signified a Soldiers solemn lysting or Covenanting with his Commander. Thus by
distinguishing decent and orderly modes, and Circumstances necessary in genere,
from new ordinances, even solemn dedicating, covenanting or such like mystical
signs, we have showed you what we grant, and where you fail, and what is indeed
a wrong to Christ, and an accusation of his Laws and what not: and how unjust
your following accusation of us is: (who never yet told you, we would be
accounted the best Christians, but to desire to please Christ as near as we
can, is not blame worthy.) Abundance of things of lesser moment than these are
commanded by God in the Law, to which he added that sanction Deuteronomy 12. 32. What
ever things I command thee, etc. And we conceive that the words [as my Father
sent me so etc.] had some what proper to the extraordinary mission: and if he
hear not the Church etc. is neither spoken of a Church universal, nor of
Magistrates making Laws for such Ceremonies, or signs. But if he hear not the
Church, with which he was in Communion, and which admonishes him for his sin,
let the Church reject him from their Communion.

[The command for decent Ceremonies may still continue in the. 10. A. 3.
Church, notwithstanding the 12. of Deuteronomy. and so it may too for all the
exceptions taken against them, by sundry learned, pious, and Orthodox persons
who have judged them, they say, unwarrantable. And if Laws may be abrogated
as soon as those that list not to obey will except against them, the world must
run into confusion. But those that except are weak Brethren, whom by Christ's
Precept and example we must not offend. If by weak we understand ignorant, they
would take it ill to be so accounted, and it is their own fault if they be,
there having been much written, as may satisfy any that have a mind to be
satisfied: And as King James of blessed memory said at Hampton Court. If after
so many years preaching of the Gospel, there be any yet unsatisfied, I doubt it
proceeds rather out of stubbornness of opinion than out of tenderness of
Conscience, If by tenderness of Conscience they mean, a fearfulness to sin,
this would make them most easy to be satisfied, because most fearful to disobey
superiors. But suppose there be any so scrupulous as not satisfied with what
has been written, the Church may still without sin urge her command for these
decent Ceremonies, and not be guilty of offending her weak brother, for since
the scandal is taken by him, not given by her, it is he that by vain
scrupulosity offends himself, and lays the stumbling block in his own way.]

Repl. But the command for man's Institution of a new worship of God, or of
Rites Sacramental, or so like to Sacraments as the Cross is, or for the
unnecessary Imposition of unnecessary things, which should be left to every
prudent Ministers discretion, and this upon pain of being cast out of the
Church or Ministry, and the Law for subscribing that all these are lawful, and
for swearing obedience to the Bishops, all these Laws are not to be found in
Scripture. If you should but command your Servant to do what you bid him
decently and orderly, you would think he mistook you, if upon that pretense he
would do any other work, which he could but say tended to the decency of yours.
And we would gladly hear what you think your selves is forbidden in Deuteronomy. 12.
32. If not such humane Ordinances? And why you forbear giving the truer sense
of the Text. It is a sad case with the poor Church, when Gods wisdom, that
made a few and necessary things the matter of his Churches concord, is no more
valued; But we will be wiser, and when the experience of the Church that has
been torn into pieces 1400. years, by men's Inventions, and needless usages, and
Impositions, is yet of no more force with us that come after them, but what
ever can be said or done, or seen, we will still make Laws, that all men shall
be tantum non, unchristened and damned, (that is cast out of the Ministry or
Church communion) that will not wear this or that, or bow thus or thus, or look
this way or that way, or say this word or that word; and when we have laid such
a needless snare, we will uncharitably cry out the world will be brought into
cofusion, because men that list not to obey, would have the Laws abrogated.
Where has Christ set you to make such Laws? Is it not work enough for us and
you to obey the Laws that he has made? Why made he none for postures, and
vestures, and words and teaching signs of this nature, if he would have had
them: If he had not told us that there is one Lawgiver, one Lord, and that his
word is able to make us wise unto Salvation, and that he would lay no greater
burden on us, than necessary things, and would not have us despise, or judge
each other on such occasions: If he had but told us, that he left any Officers
after his inspired Apostles, for the making of Ceremonies, or new Laws of
worship, or teaching engaging signs for the Church, we would as gladly
understand and obey his will in these things as you, what hurt is it to us, to
use a Cross, or other Ceremony, if it were not for fear of disobeying God?
Enforce Gods Laws upon us zealously, if you will, and see if we will disobey.
But that the world shall run into confusion, rather than we shall have leave to
serve God as Peter and Paul did, without Crossing, Surplices, and Kneeling at
the Sacrament, and then that we shall be reproached as the cause of all by our
disobedience, God has told the world by his word, and will tell them by his
Judgments that this is not his way to Unity and Peace. As to the Argument from
your Brethrens weakness we say first, It is not your strength to slight it or
them: Nor is it their weakness that they are willing to be esteemed weak. The
Apostle called those weak that placed a necessity in indifferent things, Romans
14, And not those that understood their indifferency; But the truth is the
nature of things indifferent, is not well undestood by all on either side, some
may think evil of some things that deserve it not, and in this they are weak,
though in other matters they may be strong. And for the rest we speak according
to the worst that you your selves can charitably suppose, you can say no more
of them, but that they are weaker, that is, in this know less than you, though
perhaps we may take them to be stronger, that is, to be more in the right, yet
are we nor so confident as to censure you, or others; but speak of things
difficult, and doubtful as they are. But how prove you it, we would take it
ill, to be our selves, or have those we speak of accounted ignorant, in such
things as these use us no worse than the ignorant should be used: and till you
would turn a man out of the Ministry, or Church for being ignorant of the
nature of a Ceremony, (which never was in his Creed, the Decalogue or
Scripture) dealt not so by us, that would be wiser if we knew how. That all our
ignorance is our own fault we deny not, but it is an express of confidence and
uncharitableness to rell us, that there is so very much written as may
satisfy any man that has a mind to be satisfied, and when we profess in his
sight that knows the hearts, that we have a mind to be satisfied, and would
know the truth at what rate soever if we knew how, what would you have us do
that we do not, to be satisfied? Do we not read as much for Ceremonies, as the
dissenters use to do against them? Many Books against them are yet unanswered,
and we never shunned any public, or private conference with any of you, and
such reasonings as these are not like to convince us. If you will be the judges
of your brethrens hearts, and say it is not tenderness of Conscience, but
stubbornness, we shall refer that to the day when your hearts, and ours, shall
be opened, Must none be tender Conscienc'd that dare not venture to obey you in
such things? When you may with undoubted safety forbear the imposing of your
Ceremonies, and so forbear the casting out of your brethren, if you will not,
who shows less tenderness of Conscience? That the scandal is taken and not
given, is still the thing in question, as to many things: and if it were not
just occasion of oftence, you ought not to lay that which another weakness
will turn into a stumbling block unnecessarily before them; if the Apostles
Argument be good Romans 14. the Church may not urge unlawful things, nor things
merely lawful upon such penalties as will exclude things necessary. If an idle
word be to be accounted for, an idle Law is not laudable, much less when all
men must be excluded the Ministry, or Communion that scruple it: when yet a man
may be a prophan swearer, for 12 pence an oath, and may swear an hundred times
before he pays that 12 pence. A Papist shall pay 12 pence for not coming to
Church, and a Protestant be thrust out of your Communion, for not kneeling at
the Sacrament, and a Minister suspended, imprisoned, undone for not crossing a
Child or wearing a Surplice: May Magistrates, or the Church thus urge their
commands? Can any thing be spoken plainer, than the Scripture speaks against
this course? And would you make the world believe that the brethren that do not
all that you bid them are so unreasonably and obstinately scrupulons, as to
have no matter of offense, but what they lay before themselves? when they have
the practice of the Apostles, and the custom of the Primitive Church, for many
hundred years against you, and this called by them an Apostolical tradition,
and decreed by the most uncharitable Councils that ever were. If you had but
one of these (the decree of a General Council, or practice of all the purest
Churches alone) for one of your Ceremonies, you would think him uncharitable,
that so reproached you for pretending Conscience.

Sect. 11. The case of St. Paul not eating of flesh, if it offended his
Brother, is nothing to the purpose, who there speaks of things not commanded
either by God, or by his Church, neither having in them any thing of decency,
or fignificancy to serve in the Church, St. Paul would deny himself his own
liberty, rather than offend his Brother, but if any man breaks a just Law or
Custom of the Church, he brands her for a lover of Schism, and Sedition, 1 Cor.
11. 16.

Reply. But because at our last meeting it was said with so much confidence by
one, that the case in Rom, 14. and 15. was nothing to ours, we shall here say
the more to what you say, that St. Paul's not eating flesh is nothing to the
purpose: your reasons are, first, because he speaks of nothing commanded by God
or his Church. Secondly, not of any thing of decency or significancy to serve
in the Church. To the first, we have often told you, that which is undeniable;
First, that Paul was a Governor of that Church himself, that had no superior
to control him. If you say that he then wrote not as a Governor; we answer,
Yes: For he wrote as an Apostle, and wrote the Epistle that was to be a
standing Law or Canon to them: If this be not an act of his Office, and
Authority, there was none such; And then you must say the like of all the rest
of the Epistles. 2ly: Moreover, as Paul the Apostle excludes all such
impositions; so he wrote to all the resident Pastors that were at Rome, for he
wrote to the whole Church: and therefore these commands extend to the
Governors, that they make not such things the matter of Contempt or Censuces,
or any uncharitable Course, but bear with one another in them. Will you call
men obstinate self-offenders, that differ from you, when you have no better
answers then these, to the plain decisions of the Holy Ghost? What we speak of
Romans 14. 15. we speak also of 1 Cor. 8. And 3ly. It is to the Rulers of the
Church, that we are speaking, and it is they that answer us: and shall the
Rulers say [If it were not a thing commanded we might bear with you] when it is
themselves that command them ecclesiastically; and we entreat them but to
forbear that, and to concur with us in petitioning the King, to forbear
commanding them coercively, who no doubt will easily for bear it, if they do
their part. 4ly. Yea, a fortiori, it lays a heavier charge on such
Governors, then others: If it be so heinous a sin as Paul makes it, to
censure or despise one another, for meat, and days, and such like things; how
much more to excommunicate, silence, and undo one another, and deprive
thousands of souls of the preaching of the Gospel that consented not to their
Pastors nonconformity? 5ly. Paul lets you know, that these things are not
the Center, or matter of our necessary concord, but of mutual forbearance, and
therefore condemns all that will make them necessary to our united Ministry,
or Communion. And the difference is wholly to the advantage of our cause: For
those that Paul spoke to, were not come so high as to go about to force others
to do as they did: but only to despise them for not doing it. 2. And therefore
to your second Reason we answer. 1. If the things had been different, yet so
was Paul's injunction different from our Request; For Paul goes so high as to
command them to deny their own liberty in not eating lawful meats themselves,
lest they offend and hurt their brethren: whereas we are now desiring you, that
you would not force others to do that which they take to be a sin, and that
with penalties that fall heavier on the Church then on them. They had on both
sides fairer pretenses then you have: The Cases before us to be compared, are
four; The Case of the Refusers of meats, and observers of days then; The Case
of the users of those meats and non-observers of those days; The Case of our
Imposers; And the Case of non-Conformists. The pretense of their Refusers of
meats had in 1 Cor. 8. was that being offered to Idols; they thought it made
them partakers of the Idolatry, and so they sinned through weakness in being
offended at others, and censuring them that used their liberty: And had they
not here a fairer pretense, for their offense and censures, than you for your
impositions? you cannot show half so great an appearance of good in the things
commanded, as they could do of evil in the things for which they were offended.
And the offended censurer in Romans 14. had this pretense, that the thing was
forbidden in Gods own Law, even the meats, which he refused; and the days
commanded which he observed: and he knew not that the Law in these matters of
Order and Ceremony was abrogated (which Peter was ignorant of, when he refused
to eat things common and unclean.) But you have no pretense of Gods own
command, for the matter of your impositions, as these men had for the matter of
their offense and censure, so that here you are in the worser-side. And for the
other party that in 1 Cor. 8. abused their liberty, and Romans 14. despised their
brethren, they had a double pretense: one was that it was their liberty, and if
every scrupulous party should drive them from their lawful meat and drink,
they knew not whither they might drive them: another was, that the Law was
abrogated by Christ; and therefore if they complied in practice with the
scrupulous, or did not show their difference, they might seem to be guilty of
the restoring of the Law, and complying with the Jews, and the Heretics, that
both then were enemies to the Church, and agreed in this: Had not these men now
a far fairer pretense for eating 1 Cor. 8. and for the dissent showed Romans 14.
then you ever yet produced for forcing others from Ministry and Church into sin
and Hell, if they will not obey you against their consciences, and all for that
which you never pretended to show a command of God for, and others show you, as
they think, Scripture and Councils, and customs against. To tell us then that
Paul spoke of things [not decent, and sign ficant] is [pardon our plainess] to
say much less then nothing: For it was not against imposing that Paul spoke,
but using, and not using censuring, and despising; And their Arguments were
(suitable to their cause) of another kind of moment, then decency, or indecency,
significancy or insignificancy, even from supposed Idolatry, rejecting Gods
Law, and complying with the Jews and Heretics, in restoring the Law, and
casting away the liberties purchased by Christ even in their private eating,
and drinking. To be no more tedious now, we humbly offer in any way convenient
to try out with that Reverend brother tha^ so confidently asserted the
disparity of the Cases, and to prove that these Scriptures, most plainly
condemn your impositions now in question, though we should have thought that
one impartial reading of them might end the controversy, and save the Church
and you from the sad effects. As to that 1 Cor. 11. 16. We answer, first, it is
uncertain whether the word Custom referr to the matter of Hair, or to
Contention: so many Expositours judge (q. d. The Churches of God are not
contentious) 2d. Here is no institution (muchless by fallible men) of new
Covenanting, dedicating, or teaching Symbols or Ceremony, nor is here any
unnecessary thing enjoined: but that which nature, and the custom of the
country, had made so decent as that the opposite would have been abusively
undecent: This is not your case. A Cross or Surplice, is not decent by nature,
or common reputation, but by institution (that is not all: for if it be not
instituted because decent, it will not be decent because instituted); nor are
these sodecent, as the opposite to be indecent. The Apostles worshipped God as
decently without them, as you do with them; the Minister prays in the Pulpit
as decently without the Surplice, as in the reading place with it. 3d. Paul
does but exhort them to this undoubted comeliness, (as you may well do, if men
will do any thing which nature or common reputation makes to be slovenly,
unmannerly or indecent, as being covered in prayer or singing Psalms, or any
such like, about which we will never differ with you,) but even here he talks
not of force, or such penalties as tend to the greater hurt of the Church, and
the ruin of the person.

Sect. 12. A. 4. That these Ceremonies have occasioned many divisions, is no
more fault of theirs, then it was of the Gospel that the preaching of it
occasioned strife, betwixt father and son, etc. The true cause of those
divisions is the cause of ours, which S. Jam. tells us is Last, and inordinate
desires of honors or wealth, or licentiousness, or the like; were these
Ceremonies laid aside, there would be the same divisions, if some, who think
Moses and Aaron took too much upon them, may be suffered to deceive the people,
and to raise in them vain fears and jealousies of their Governors: but if all
men would as they ought, study peace and quietness, they would find other and
better fruits of these Laws of Rites and Ceremonies; as edification, decency,
order and beauty in the service and worship of God.

Reply. Whether the Ceremonies be as innocent, as to divisions, as the Gospel,
(a strange assertion) will better appear when what we have said, and what is
more fully said by Dr. Ames, Bradshaw, and others, is well answered. If the
true cause of our divisions, be as you say (lust and inordinate desires of
honors or wealth, or licentiousness) then the party that is most lustful,
ambitious, covetous, and licentious, are likest to be most the cause. And for
lust, and licentiousness, we should take it for a great attainment of our ends,
if you will be entreated to turn the edge of your severity against the
lustful, and licentious: O that you would keep them out of the Pulpits, and
out of the communion of the Church, till they reform! And for our selves, we
shall take your admonitions, or severities, thankfully, when ever we are
convicted by you of any such sins: We are loath to enter upon such comparison,
between the Ministers ejected (for the most part), and those that are in their
Rooms, as tends to show by this Rule who are likest to be the dividers. And for
inordinate desire of honors and wealth, between your Lordships and us; we are
contented that this Cause be decided by all England, even by our enemies at the
first hearing, without any further vindication of our selves; and so let it be
judged who are the dividers: only we must say, that your intimation of this
Charge on us that seek not for Bishoprics, Deaneries, Archdeaconries, or any
of your preferments; that desire not, nor could accept pluralities of
Benefices, with cure of souls; that never sought for more then food and raiment
with the Liberty of our Ministry, even one place with a tolerable maintenance,
whose provoking cause has been our constant opposition, to the Honors, Wealth,
Lordships, and pluralities of the Clergy; yea who would be glad, on the behalf
of the poor Congregations, if many of our brethren might have leave to preach
to their Flocks for nothing; we say, your intimation makes us lift up our
hearts, and hands to heaven, and think, Oh what is man! What may not by some
History be told the world! Oh how desirable is the blessed day of the righteous
universal judgment of the Lord! how small a matter till then, should it be to
us to be judged of man? we hope upon pretense of not suffering us to deceive
the people, you will not deny us liberty to preach the necessary saving truths
of the Gospel, considering how terrible a Symptom, and Prognostic, this was in
the Jews, 1 These. 2 15, 16. Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own
Prophets, and persecuted the Apostles, and God they pleased not, and were
contrary to all men, forbidding to preach to the Gentiles, that they might be
saved, to fill up their sins always: for wrath was come upon them to the
utmost. We can as easily bear what ever you can inflict upon us, as the
hinderers of the Gospel, and silencers of faithful Ministers, and troublers of
the Churches, can bear what God will inflict on them. And so the will of the
Lord be done.

Sect. 13. Cer. 3. There has been so much said not only of the lawfulness, but
also of the conveniences of those Ceremonies mentioned, that nothing can be
added: This in brief may here suffice for the Surplice, that reason and
experience teaches, that decent ornaments, and habits, preserve reverence and
awe; held therefore necessary to the Solemnity of Royal Acts, and Acts of
justice: and why not as well to the Solemnity of Religious Worship? And in
particular no habit more suitable then white linen which resembles purity, and
beauty, wherein Angels have appeared, Rev. 15. Fit for those whom the Scripture
calls Angels; and this habit was ancient; Chryso. Ho. 60. ad pop. Antioch.

Repl. First, if nothing can be added, then we doubt the unanswered writings
extant against these impositions, will never be well answered. 2ly. We are
desirous, that no indecent Vestures or habits, be used in Gods service. Those
that Scruple the surplice do it not as it is a habit determined of, as decent;
but as they think it is made a holy vestment, and so part of external worship,
as Aarons vestments were (as may be seen in the Arguments of Cotton, and
Nicholls lately printed together.)

Sect. 14. The Cross was always used in the Church, in immortali lavacro,
Tertul. And therefore to testify our Communion with them, as we are taught to
do in our Creed, as also in token that we shall not be ashamed of the Cross of
Christ, it is fit to be used still, and we conceive cannot trouble the
conscience of any that have a mind to be satisfied.

Repl. That the Cross was always used in the Church in baptism is an assertion
certainly untrue, and such as we never heard or read till now: Do you believe
it was used in the baptism of the Eunuch, Lydia, the Jailer, Cornelius, the
300. Acts 3. or in those times? And when it did come up, it was with Chrism,
and not ever any transient Image, and therefore you so far differ from the
users. 2ly. The condemnation of genu flection on the Lords days in adoration,
was at least as ancient and universal, and commanded by Councils when the
Cross was not, and yet you can dispense with that, and many such usages. And if
you will your selves fall in with custom, yet every ancient common custom,
was never intended to be a matter of necessity to union or toleration of our
brethren: use no other force about the Cross, than the Church then did. 3ly.
Your saying that [you conceive it cannot trouble the conscience of any that
have a mind to be satisfied] does but express your uncharitable censoriousness,
while your brethren have studied and prayed and conferred for satisfaction,
(its like as much as you,) and profess their earnest desire of it, and their
readiness to hear or read any thing that you have to say in order to their
satisfaction.

Sect. 15. The posture of kneeling best suites at the Communion, as the most
convenient, and so most decent for us, when we are to receive, as it were from
Gods hand, the greatest of Seals of the Kingdom of heaven: he that thinks he
may do this sitting, let him remember the Prophet Mal. Offer this to thy Prince
to receive his Seal, from his own hand sitting, see if he will accept of it.
When the Church did stand at her prayers, the manner of receiving was more
Adorantiun. S. Aug. Psalm. 98. Cyril. Catech. Mystag. 5. Rahter more then at
prayers, since standing at Prayer has been generally left, and kneeling used
instead of that, (as the Church may vary in such indifferent things); now to
stand at Communion, when we keel at Prayers were not decent, much less to sit,
which was never the use of the best times.

Reply. To all this about Kneeling we say first, we have considered the Text in
Mal. and what you say, and yet first, we find that our Betters even Christ's
Apostles, and the universal Church for many hundred years thought not kneeling
more decent, nor did the Church in the first Age think sitting unmeet in that
service to the King of the Church; and we hope you reprehend them not. 2ly. You
require not the Adult that are baptized, to receive that Seal or Sacrament
kneeling. 3ly. When kneeling at Prayers was in use, in the Apostles times, yet
kneeling in the reception of the Sacrament was not. 4ly. Why can you so lightly
put off both the practice, and Canons of the Church, in this more then in other
such things? However you cannot here deny de facto, but that kneeling on the
Lords days in the receiving of the Sacrament was for many hundred years of
the purer times of the Church dis-used, and condemned; And why do you not tell
us what other general Council repealed this, that we may see whether it be such
as we are any way bound by? When you say [the Church may vary in such
indifferent things.] First, if kneeling or standing at prayer be an indifferent
thing, then so are they at this Sacrament. 2ly. Then you follow the changes,
and we the old pattern. 3ly. Then the Canons of general Councils, and Customs
pretended to be from Apostolical tradition may be changed. 4ly. What is it that
you call the Church, that changes, or may change these? A Council or a popular
custom? Bring us not under a foreign power. 5ly. The thing then being so
indifferent and changeable, you may change it if you please for ends that are
not indifferent. 6ly. And if now the Ministers may pray standing, why may not
the people receive standing. 7ly. When you say that to sit was never the use of
the best times] you deny the Apostles and primitive times to be the best: as to
the extent of the Church they were not the best, but as to purity of
administrations they were.

Sect. 16. That there were ancient Liturgies in the Church is evident, S.
Chrysostom, S. Basil, and others, and the Greeks tells us of S. James's, much
older then they; and though we find not in all ages whole Liturgies, yet it is
certain that there were such in the oldest times, by those parts which are
extant, as Sursum Corda, etc. Gloria Patri, etc. Benedicite, Hymnus,
Cherubinus, etc. Vere dignum and justum, etc. Dominus vobiscum. Et cum spiritu
tuo, with diverse others. Though those that are extant may be interpolated, yet
such things as are found in them all consistent to Catholic and primitive
doctrine, may well be presumed to have been from the first, especially since we
find no original of these Liturgies from general Councils.

Reply. We know there wants not a Lindanus, a Coccius, to tell the world of
S. Peter's Liturgy, which yet prays that by the intercession of S. Peter, and
Paul, we may be defended, etc, and mentions Linus, Cletus, Clemens,
Cornelius, Cyprian, Lucia, Barbara, and abundance such: shall we therefore
conclude, that there were Liturgies from the first? and that what is here
consentient to Antiquity, was in it? There wants not a Marg. de la Bigne, a
Greg. de Valent. a Coccius to commend to us the Liturgy of Mark, that prays,
Protege Civitatem istam proper Martyrem tuum and Evangelistam Marcum, etc. And
tells us, that the King where the Author lived was an Orthodox Christian, and
prays for the Pope, Subdeacons, Lelors, Cantors, Monks, etc. Must we
therefore believe that all that is Orthodox in it is ancient? So there wants not
a Bign. Bellarm. etc. to tell us of S. James his Liturgy, that mentions the
Confessors, the Deiparam, the Anchorets, etc. which made Bellarm. himself say
[de Liturgia Jacobi sic sentio, Eam aut non esse ejus, aut multa a
posterioribus eidem addita sunt]. And must we prove the Antiquity of Liturgies
by this, or try ours by it? There wants not a Sainctetius, a Bellarm. a
Valentia, a Peresius to predicate the Liturgy of S. Basil, as bearing witness
to transubstantiation, for the sacrifice of the Mass for praying to Saints,
etc. When yet the exceeding disagreement of Copies, the difference of some
forms from Basils ordinary forms, the prayers for the most pious and faithful
Emperors, show it unlikely to have been Basils: many predicate Chrysostomes
Mass or Liturgy, as making for praying to the dead, and for them, the
propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass, etc. when in one edition, Chrysostom is
prayed to in it, says Cook: in another. Nicolaus, and Alexius that lived 1080
is mentioned: in another, doctrines are contained (as de Contaminata Maria)
etc. clean contrary to Chrysostoms doctrine: must we now conclude that all is
ancient, that is Orthodox, when one Copy is scarce like another? or can we try
our Liturgies by such as this? The shreds cited by you prove a Liturgy indeed,
such as we have used while the Common Prayer Book was not used, where the
Psalms, the words of Baptism, and the words of Consecration, commemoration and
delivery of the Lords Supper, and many other, were used in a constant form,
when other parts were used as the Minister found most meet so Sursum Corda was
but a warning before, or in the midst of devotion, such as our [Let us pray]
and will no more prove that the substance of prayer was not left to the
Minister's present or prepared Conceptions, than Ite missa est, will prove it.
The Gloria patri Bellarm. himself says, according to the common opinion was
formed in the council of Nice, which was in the 4th Century. And even then such
a particular testimony against the Arrians might well stand with a body of
unimposed prayers, and rather shows that in other things they were left at
liberty; If the Benedicite, the Hymns, or other passages here mentioned, will
prove such a Liturgy as pleases you, we pray you bear with our way of worship,
which has more of Hymns and other forms then these come to; That these
Liturgies had no original from general Councils adds nothing with us to their
Authority, but shows that they had an arbitrary original: and all set
together, shows that then they had many Liturgies in one Prince's Dominion, and
those alterable, and not forced, and that they took not one Liturgy to be any
necessary means to the Churches unity or peace, but bore with those that used
various at discretion. We well remember that Tertull, tells the Heathens that
Christians showed by their conceived Hymns, that they were sober at their
religious feasts, it being their custom [ut quisque de scripturis sanctis, vel
de proprio ingenio potest, provocetur in medium Deo canere] Apol. cap. 39. Note
here 1. that though there be more need of forms for singing then for praying.
yet even in this, the Christians in public had then a liberty of doing it de
proprio ingenio, and by their own wit or parts. 2. That those that did not de
proprio ingenio, did it de scripturis sanctis, and that there is no mention of
any other Liturgy, from which they fetch so much as their Hymns. And the same
Tertul. Apol. cap. 30. describing the Christians public prayers says [sine
monitore, quia de pectore, oramus] [we pray without a Monitor or promptor,
because we do it from the heart, or from our own breast,] And before him Just.
Mart. Ap. 2. p. 77. says, (...). But if all these words seem not plain enough
to some, it is no wonder when they rest not in the greater plainness of the
holy Scriptures, where prayer is so frequently mentioned, as much of the
employment of believers; and so many directions, encouragements and
exhortations given about it: and yet no Liturgy or stinted forms, except the
Lords prayer, is prescribed to them, or once made mention of, no man directed
here to use such, no man exhorted to get him a Prayerbook, or to read or learn
it, or to beware that he add or diminish not: whereas the holy Scriptures that
were then given to the Church, men are exhorted to read, and study, and
meditate in, and discourse of, and make it their continual delight: and it is a
wonder that David, that mentions it so often in the 119. Psalm, does never
mention the Liturgy, or Common Prayer Book, if they had any: And that Solomon,
when he dedicated the house of Prayer without a Prayer Book, would only beg
of God, to hear [what Prayers, or what Supplication soever, shall be made of
any man, or of all the people of Israel, when every one shall know his own
sore, and his own grief, and shall spread forth his hands in that house] 2 Chronicles. 6. 29. and that he gives no hint of any Liturgy or form, so much as in
those common Calamities; and talks of no other book then the knowledge of
their own sores, and their own griefs: And in the Case of Psalms, or singing
unto God; where it is certain, that they had a Liturgy or form, (as we have,)
they are carefully collected, preserved, and delivered to us, as a choice part
of the holy Scripture. And would it not have been so with the prayers? or would
they have been altogether unmentioned, if they also had been there prescribed
to, and used by, the Church, as the Psalms were? Would Christ and his
Apostles, even where they were purposely giving rules for prayer, and
correcting its abuse, as Matthew. 6. 1 Cor. 14. etc. have never mentioned any
forms but the Lord's Prayer, if they had appointed such, or desired such to be
imposed, and observed? These things are incredible to us when we most
impartially consider them. For our own parts, as we think it uncharitable to
forbid the use of Spectacles to them that have weak eyes, or of Crutches to
them that have weak Limbs; and as uncharitable to undo all that will not use
them, whether they need them or not: so we can think no better of them, that
will suffer none to use such forms, that need them; or that will suffer none to
pray, but in the words of other men's prescribing, though they are at least, as
able as the prescribers. And to conclude, we humbly crave, that ancient
customs may not be used against themselves, and us; and that you will not
innovate, under the shelter of the name of Antiquity. Let those things be
freely used among us, that were so used in the purest primitive times. Let
unity and peace be laid on nothing, on which they laid them not; let diversity
of Liturgies, and Ceremonies be allowed, where they allowed it. May we but have
love and peace, on the Terms as the ancient Church enjoyed them, we shall then
hope we may yet escape the hands of uncharitable destroying Zeal: we therefore
humbly recommend to your observation the concurrent Testimony of the best
Histories of the Church concerning the diversity of Liturgies, Ceremonies, and
modal observances in the several Churches under one and the same civil
Government: and how they then took it to be their duty to forbear each other in
these matters, and how they made them not the test of their Communion, or
center of their peace. Concerning the observation of Easter it self, when other
Holy days, and Ceremonies were urged, were less stood upon, you have the
judgment of Irenaeus, and the French Bishops, in whose name he wrote in Eusebius.
Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c: 23. Where they reprehend Victor for breaking peace with
the Churches, that differed about the day, and the antecedent time of fasting,
and tell him that the variety began, before their times, when yet they
nevertheless retained peace, and yet retain it; and the discord in their
fasting declared, or commended the concord of their faith, that no man was
rejected from Communion by Victor's, predecessors on that account, but they
gave them the Sacrament, and maintained peace with them, and particularly
Polycarp, and Anicetus, held Communion in the Eucharist, notwithstanding this
difference. Basil Epist. 63 does plead his cause with the Presbyters, and whole
Clergy of Neocaesarea, that were offended at his new Psalmodie, and his new
order of Monasticks: but he only defends himself, and urges none of them to
imitate him, but tells him also of the novelty of their own Liturgy, that it
was not known in the time of their own late renowned Bp. Greg Thaumaturgus,
telling them that they had kept nothing unchanged to that day of all that he
was used to, (so great alterations in 40. years were made in the same
Congregation) as he professes to pardon all such things, so be it the
principal things be kept safe. Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 5^. c. 21. about the
Easter difference says, that neither the Apostles, nor the Gospels, do impose
a yoke of bondage on those that betake themselves to the doctrine of Christ,
but left the Feast of Easter, and other Festivals, to the observation of the
free and equal judgment of them that had received the benefits. And therefore
because men use to keep some Festivals, for the relaxing themselves from
labors, several persons in several places, do celebrate, of custom, the
memorials of Christ's passion arbitrarily, or at their own choice. For neither
our Savior, nor the Apostles commanded the keeping of them by any Law, nor
threaten any mulct, or penalty, etc. It was the purpose of the Apostles not to
make Laws for the keeping of Festivals, but to be Authors to us of the reason
of right living, and of piety. And having showed that it came up by private
custom, and not by Law, and having cited Irenaeus, as before he adds, [that
those that agree in the same faith, do differ in point of Rites and Ceremonies]
and instancing in diverse, he concludes that because no man can show in the
monuments of writings, any Command concerning this, it is plain, that the
Apostles herein permitted free power to every ones mind and will; that every
man might do that which was good, without being induced by fear, or by
necessity.] And having spoken of the diversity of customs, about the
Assemblies, Marriage, Baptism, etc. He tells us that even among the Novatians
themselves, there is a diversity in their manner of their praying [and that
among all the forms of Religions and parties, you can no where find two, that
consent among themselves in the manner of their praying.] And repeating the
decree of the Holy Ghost, Acts 15. [To impose no other burden but things
necessary] he reprehendeth them that, neglecting this, will take Fornication as
a thing indifferent; but strive about Festivals, as if it were a matter of
life, overturning Gods Laws, and making Laws to themselves.] etc. And Sozomen
Hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 18. and 19. speaks to the same purpose, and tells us
that the Novatians themselves determined in a Synod at Sangar in Bythinia, that
the difference about Easter being not a sufficient Cause for breach of
Communion, all should abide in the same concord, and in the same Assembly, and
every one should celebrate this Feast as pleased himself: and this Canon they
called (...), and c. 19. He says of Victor, and Polycarp, that [they
deservedly judged it frivolous, or absurd, that those should be separated on
the account of a custom, that consented in the principal heads of Religion: For
you cannot find the same traditions in all things alike, in all Churches,
though they agree among themselves] and instancing in some Countries, where
there is but one Bishop in many Cities, and in other Bishops are ordained in
the Villages.] After many other instances, he adds that they use not the same
prayers, singings or readings, nor observe the same time of using them.] And
what Liturgy was imposed upon Constantine the Emperor, or what Bishops or
Synods, were then the makers of Lyturgies, when he himself made public prayers
for himself and auditory, and for his Soldiers? Eusebius. de vit. Constantini, l.
4. c. 18. 20, etc. But the diversity, liberty, and change of Lyturgies in the
Churches under the same Prince, are things so well known, as that we may
suppose any further proof of it to be needless. In the conclusion therefore, we
humbly beseech you, that as Antiquity and the custom of the Churches in the
first ages, is that which is most commonly, and confidently pleaded against us,
that your mistake of Antiquity may not be to our Cost, or paid so dear for, as
the loss of our Freedom, for the serving of God in the work of the Ministry to
which we are called; we beseech you let us not be silenced or cast out of the
Ministry or Church, for not using the Liturgy, Cross, Surplice, kneeling at
the Sacrament, till ye have either showed the world that the practice or Canons
of the Catholic Church have led you the way as doing it, or requiring it to be
done. And make not that to necessary as to force men to it on such dreadful
terms, which the ancient Churches used with diversity, and indifferency of
liberty; we beseech you show the world some proof, that the ancient Churches
did ever use to force, or require Ministers to subscribe to their Liturgies, as
having nothing in them contrary to the word of God, or to swear obedience to
their Bishops, before you impose such things on us, while yet you pretend to
imitate Antiquity. And have but that moderation toward your brethren: as in
suffering, or at death, or judgment, you would most appear. Remember how
unpleasing the remembrance of such differences about Ceremonies was to Bp.
Ridley, as toward Bp. Hooper, when they were in prison: and how the Arrians
fury made the Orthodox gladly to go to the Churches of the Novatians, and meet
with them and join with them in prayer, and had almost been united with them in
the bond of Concord, if the Novatians, in a stiff maintaining of their old
customs had not utterly refused it; But yet in other matters they embraced
each other with so singular a benevolence and love, that they would willingly
have died for each other] as Socrat, tells us Hist. l. 2. c. 30. And may we not
all here see our duty? When Atticus was urged to deny to the Novations the
Liberty of then meetings within the City, he refused it, because they had
suffered for the faith, in the Arrians persecution; and changed nothing in the
faith, though they separated from the Church: and was so far from violence
against dissenters, as that he gave large relief to them, that differed from
him in Religion, Socrates Hist. l. 7 c. 25. It was the much praised saying of
Theodosius to him that asked him, Why he put none to death that wronged him. [I
would I could rather make them that are dead alive] Socrates l. 7. c. 22. Much
more should Christian Bps. be enemies to cruelty who know that Charity is more
essential to Christianity then this, or that form of Liturgy, or Ceremonies.
If you think it unsufferable that we should have differences about such things,
remember that there will be no perfect Unity till there is perfect Charity, and
sanctity; and that destroying one another, and consequently destroying Charity,
is an unhappy way to Unity. And that Unity is to be held in things necessary,
and Liberty in things unnecessary, and Charity in both: remember that it was in
a far greater difference, where Constantine persuades the Christians to
mutual forbearance by the example of the Philosophers, that suffered
differences in abundance of their opinions, Eusebius. de vita Constant. l. 2. c.
67. And that Valens the Arrian was made more moderate, and abated his
persecution of the Orthodox by the Oration of Themistius, who bid him not
wonder at the dissentions of Christians; for they were small if compared with
the multitude and cloud of opinions that are among the heathen Philosophers, as
being more then 300. And that God will by his diversity of opinions manifest
his glory and make men the more reverence him, who is so hardly known] Socrat.
l. 4. c. 27. Those that dissent from you in these colerable Cases cannot change
their own Opinions; But you can, if you will, forbear hurting of your brethren.
Do that which you can do; rather then urge them by unsuitable means to that
which they cannot do. These are not matters sufficient to justify contention,
and uncharitable usage of your brethren. When many of the Macedonian faction
petitioned the good Emperor Jovianus to depose those that affirmed the son to
be unlike the Father, and to put their party in their places, he gave them no
answer but this [I hate contention; and I love and honor them that are addicted
to concord] Socrat. l. 4. c. 21. [Then, says Eusebius Hist. l 8. c. 1. did the
Lord obscure the daughter of Sion, and cast down the glory of Israel, etc. When
those that seemed our Pastors, rejecting the rule of godliness, were inflamed
among themselves with mutual contentions, and drove on only those contentions,
threatenings, emulations, mutual hatred and enmity, and the like, Tyrants
prosecuted their Ambitions]. We thought it no impertinent digression here to
take this occasion again to crave your exercise of the ancient Charity, and our
enjoyment of the ancient Liberty, instead of forcing the anciently free
Liturgy, and Ceremonies, and that by improportionable penalties; And if yet we
cannot prevail with you, we shall still beg for peace of the God of peace,
where we have better hopes to be heard and shall hold on in seeking it, how ill
soever our endeavors may be interpreted or succeed. And as the good man wept,
Socrat. l. 4. c. 18. when he saw a woman pompously adorned, because he was not
so careful to please God, as she was to allure men: so we shall confess we
ought to weep, that we cannot be more Charitable, and laborious in building up
the Church in holiness and peace, then others are by uncharitable courses, to
afflict it. And it shall be our hope that whether by their labors, or their
sufferings, God will serve and honor himself, by those many faithful servants
of his, whom he has called into his work, and whose cause we plead, and that
however they are used they shall not be unuseful to the ends of their vocation.
As Theodoret observes Hist l. 4. c. 30. that in a Calamitous time, [the
Moderator of the Universe raised up such guides as were sufficient, in so great
a fluctuation, and opposed the valor of the Leaders, to the greatness of the
enemies incursion, and gave the best remedies in the hardest times of
Pestilence.] so that the banished Pastors did from the uttermost parts of the
earth corroborate their own, and refute the adversaries by their writings] And
for ourselves, as we were truly desirous to do our parts to preserve your
reputation with the flocks, in order to the success of your Government for
their good, and never envied you, even that worldly honor or revenew, which
yet some have thought unsuitable to the simplicity and employment of Christ's
Ministers: so if you will neither suffer us quietly to serve God or
conscionably to serve you, we shall be the less sollicitous for that part of our
task, from which you have power to discharge us. And as Basil said to Valens
the Emperor that would have him pray for the life of his Son [If thou will
receive the true faith, and restore the Churches to concord, thy son shall live,
which when he refused, he said [The will of God then be done with thy Son,] so
we say to you: If you will put on Charity, and promote your brethrens and the
Churches peace, God will honor you, and good men will honor you, and your
calling will have advantage by it. But if you will do contrary, the Will of the
Lord be done with your honors. But know that them that honor him, he will
honor, and those that despise him shall be lightly esteemed: and that by the
course of uncharitable violence, which we deprecate, you will most deeply wound
the Cause of your Pre-eminence, even more than its adversaries could have done.
And if it be the will of God, that suffering at home where we have served him,
must be our Lot, we doubt not but he will furnish us with strength, and
patience, and we shall remember such ensamples as Ruffin records, Hist. l. 2.
c. 3. When a military Bishop sent his Soldiers, to assault 300 scattered
Christians, there appeared a strange kind of warfare, when the assaulted
offered their necks, saying only, Amice, ad quid venistr? Friend, why came
thou thither? Or if we must be removed from the land of our Nativity, as Maris
told Julian, He thank't God that had deprived him of his sight, that he might
not see the face of such a man, Socrat. Hist. l. 3. c. 10. So we shall take it
as a little abatement of our affliction, that we see not the Sins, and
Calamities of the people, whose peace and welfare we so much desire. Having
taking this opportunity here to conclude this part with these Requests and
Warnings; we now proceed to the second part, containing the particulars of our
Exceptions, and your Answers.

Concerning Morning and Evening Prayer.
Sect. 1. [Rubr. 1. We think it fit that the Rubric stand as it is and all to
be left to the discretion of the Ordinary.]

Reply. We thought the end and use more considerable than custom and that the
Ordinary himself should be under the rule of doing to edification.

Sect. 2. Rub. [For the reasons given in our Answer to the 18th General,
whither you refer us, we think it fit that the Rubric continue as it is.]

Reply. We have given you reason enough against the imposition of the usual
Ceremonies; and would you draw forth those absolute ones to increase the burden?

Sect. 3. Lords Pr. [Deliver us from evil. These words, For thine is the
Kingdom, etc. are not in S. Luke, nor in the ancient Copies of St. Matthew. never
mentioned in the ancient Comments, nor used in the Latin Church, and therefore
questioned whether they be part of the Gospel: there is no reason that they
should be always used.]

Reply. We shall not be so over-credulous as to believe you, that these words
are not in the ancient Copies: It is enough that we believe that some few
ancient Copies have them not; but that the most (even the generality except
those few) have them. The judgment of our English Translators, and almost all
other Translators of Matthew. and of the reverend B of Chester, among your
selves, putting the Copy that has it in his Bible, (as that which is most
received, and approved by the Church) do show on which side is the chief
authority: if the few copies that want it had been thought more arthentick and
credible, the Church of England and most other Churches would not have
preferred the copies that have this doxology. And why will you in this
contradict the later judgment of the Church, expressed in the translation
allowed and imposed? The Syriack, Ethiopick, and Persian translations also have
it: and if the Syriack be as ancient as you your selves even now asserted, then
the antiquity of doxology is there evident: and it is not altogether to be
neglected, which by Chemnitius and others is conjectured, that Paul's words in
Tim. 4. 18. were spoken as in reference to this Doxology. And as Pareus and
other Protestants conclude, it is more probable the Latrines neglected, than
that the Greeks inserted of their own heads this sentence. The Socinians and
Arrians have as fair pretense for their exception a ainst 1 John 5, 6, 7.
Masculus says, [non cogitant vero similius esse, ut Graecorum ecclesia magis
quam Latina, quod ab Evangelistis Graece scriptum est, integrum servarit,
nihilque de suo adjecerit. Quid de Graeca ecclesia dico? vidi ipse
vetustissimum Evangelium secundum Matthew. Codicem Chaldaeis and Elementis, and
Verbis conscriptum, in quo Coronis ista perinde atque in Graecis legebatur. Nec
Chaldaei solum, sed and drabes Christiani paciformiter cum Graecis orant, and
Exemplar Hebraeum a docto and celebri D. Sebast. Munstero vulgatum, hanc ipsam
Coronidem habet; Cum ergo consentiunt hac in re Hebraeorum, Chaldaeorum,
Arabum, and Graecorum Ecolesiae contra omnes reliquas, tantum tribuitur
authoritatis, ut quod s^la diversum legit, ab Evangelitis traditum esse
credatur: quod vero reliquae omnes concorditer habent and orant, pro addititio
and peregrino habeatur. And that Luke has it not, will no more prove that it
was not a part of the Lords Prayer, than all other omissions of one Evangelist,
will prove that such words are corruptions in the other, that have them. All
set together give us the Gospel fully, and from all we must gather it.

Sect. 4. Lords Pr^often used. [It is used but twice in the morning, and twice
in the Evening Service, and twice cannot be called often, much less so often.
For the Letany, Communion, Baptism, etc. they are Offices distinct from morning
and evening prayer, and it is not sit that any of them should want the Lord,
Prayer.]

Reply. We may better say, we are required to use it six times every morning
than but twice, for it is twice in the Common morning prayer, and once in the
Letany, and once in the Communion service, and once at Baptism, (which in great
Parishes is usual every day) and once to be used by the Preacher in the Pulpit.
And if you call these distinct offices, that makes not the Lords Prayer the
seldomer used: sure we are, the Apostles thought it fit that many of their
prayers should be without the Lords Prayer.

Sect. 5. Glor. Patri. [This Doxology being a solemn Confession of the blessed
Trinity should not be thought a burden to any Christian Liturgy, especially
being so short as it is: neither is the repetition of it to be thought a vain
repetition, more than His mercy endures for ever, so often repeated Psalm. 136.
We cannot give God too much glory; that being the end of our Creation, and
should be the end of all our Services.]

Reply. Though we cannot give God too much glory, we may too often repeat a
form of words, wherein his name and glory is mentioned: there is great
difference between a Psalm of praise, and the praise in our ordinary prayers:
more liberty of repetition may be taken in Psalms, and be an Ornament; and
there is difference between that which is unusual (in one Psalm of 150.) and
that which is our daily course of worship. When you have well proved that
Christ's prohibition of battology extends not to this (Matthew. 6.); we shall
acquiesce.

Sect. 6. P. 15. Ru. 2. [In such places where they do sing, etc.] The Rubr.
directs only such singing, as is after the manner of distinct reading, and we
never heard of any inconvenience thereby, and therefore conceive this Demand to
be needless.]

Reply. It tempts men to think they should read in a singing tone: and to
turn reading Scripture into Singing, has the inconvenience of turning the
edifying simplicity and plainness of Gods service into such affected unnatural
strains and tones, as is used by the Mimical, and Ludicious, or such as feign
themselves in raptures: and the highest things (such as words and modes that
signify Raptures) are most loathsome, when forced, feigned, and hypocritically
affected; and therefore not fit for Congregations, that cannot be supposed to
be in such Raptures; this we apply also to the sententious mode of prayers.

Sect. 7. Benedicite. [This Hymn was used all the Church over, Conc. Tolet.
Can. 13. and therefore should be continued still, as well as Te Deum, (Ruffin.
Apol. cont. Hieron.) or Veni Creator, which they do not object against as
Apocryphal.]

Reply. You much discourage us in these great straits of time to give us such
loose and troublesome citations; you turn us to Ruffin Apol. in gross, and tell
us not which of the Councils of Tolet (among at least 13.) you mean: but we
find the words in Council 4. But that provincial Spanish Council, was no meet
Judge of the Affairs of the universal Church, unto the universal Church: nor is
it certain by their words whether (quem) refer not to (eadem) rather than to
(Hymnum): but if you so regard that Council, remember that Can. 9. it is but
once a day that the Lords prayer is in joined, against them that used it on the
Lords day only; and that Can. 17. it is employed, that it was said but once on
that day. The Benedicite is somewhat more cautelously to be used than humane
Compositions that profess to be but humane; when the Apocryphal writings that
are by the Papists to be Canonical, and used so like the Canon in our Church,
we have the more cause to desire that a sufficient distinction be still made.

In the Letany.
Sect. 1. The alterations here desired are so nice, as if they that made them
were given to change.

Reply. We bear your Censure: but profess, that if you will desert the
products of Changers, and stick to the unchangeable Rule delivered by the Holy
Ghost, we shall joyfully agree with you. Let them that prove most given to
change, from the unchangeable Rule and Ensamples, be taken for the hinderers of
our unity and peace.

Sect. 2. From all other deadly sin, is better, than, From all other heinous
sin] upon the reason here given; because the wages of sin is death.

Reply. There is so much mortal poison in the Popish distinction of mortal, and
venial sin, (by which abundance of sins are denied to be sins at all properly,
but only Analogically) that the stomach that fears it, is not to be charged
with niceness. The words here seem to be used by way of distinction, and all
[deadly sin] seems not to be spoken of [all sin.] And if so, your reason from
Romans 6. 23. is vain, and ours firm.

Sect. 3. From sudden death, as good as, From dying suddenly, which therefore
we pray against, that we may not be unprepared.

Reply. We added [unprepared] as expository, or hinting to show the reason why
sudden death is prayed against, and so to limit our prayers to that sudden
death, which we are unprepared for; there being some ways of sudden death no
more to be prayed against, than death it self simply considered may. When you
say [from sudden death] is as good as [from dying suddenly] we confess it is.
But not so good as [from dying suddenly, and unpreparedly: we hope you intend
not to make any believe, that out turning the Adjective to an Adverb was our
Reformation. And yet we wondered to hear this made a common jest upon us, as
from those that had seen our papers: Would you have had us said [from sudden
and unprepared death?] you would then have had more matter of just exception
against the words [unprepared death] than now you have against dying suddenly:
A man may be well prepared to die suddenly by Martyrdom for Christ, or by War
for his Prince, and many other ways.

Sect. 4. [All that travel,] as little liable to exception as [those that
travel,] and more agreeable to the phrase of Scripture, 1 Timothy 1. 2. I will
that prayers be made for all men.]

Reply. An Universal is to be understood properly, as comprehending all the
Individuals, and so is not an Indefinite; And we know not that we are bound to
pray for Thieves, and Pirates, and Traitors that travel by land, or water, on
such errands as Faux, or the other Powder-plotters, or the Spanish Armado in
88. or as Parry, or any that should travel on the Errand as Clement or Raviliac
did to the two King Henry's of France; Are these Niceties with you?

Sect. 5. P. 16. [The 2d. Collect, etc.] We do not find, nor do they say, what
is to be amended in these Collects; therefore to say any thing particularly,
were to answer to we know not what.]

Reply. We are glad that one word in the proper Collects, has appeared such to
you as needs a Reformation, especially when you told us before that the Liturgy
ws never found fault with by those to whom the name of Protestant most properly
belongs]; which looked upon our hopes of Reformation, almost as destructively as
the Papists Doctrine of Infallibility does, when we dealt with them. As for the
Collects mentioned by us, you should not wonder that we brought not in a
particular Charge against them: For first, we had a conceit that it was best
for us to deal as gently and tenderly as we could with the faults of the
Liturgy, and therefore we have under our Generals, hid abundance of
particulars, which you may find in the Abridgement of the Lincolnshire
Ministers, and in many other Books; And Secondly, we had a conceit, that you
would have vouchsafed to treat with us personally in presence, according to
the sense of his Majesty's Commission, and then we thought to have told you
particularly of such matters: but you have forced us to confess, that we find
our selves deceived.

The Communion Service.
Sect. 1. P. 17. Kyries. To say [Lord have mercy upon us] after every
Commandment is more quick and active, than to say it once at the Close, and why
Christian people should not upon their knees ask their pardor for their life
forfeited for the breach of every Commandment, and pray for Grace to keep them
for the time to come, they must be more than Ignorant that can cruple.

Reply. We thank you for saying nothing against our four first requests: though
we are thought more than Ignorant for our scruple, we can truly say, We are
willing to learn. But your bare opinion is not enough to cure Ignorance, and
more. By your reason, you may make kneeling the Gesture for hearing the
Scriptures read, and hearing Sermons, and all; If you will but interweave
prayers, he must be more than Ignorant that will not kneel. The universal
Church of Christ was more than Ignorant for many hundred years, that not only
neglected, but prohibited Genuflexion in all adoration each Lords day: when now
the 20th. of Exodus or 5th. of Deuteronomy. may not be heard or read without kneeling,
save only by the Clergy.

Sect. 2. P. 18. Homilies. Some Livings are so small, that they are not able to
maintain a licenced Preacher, and in such and the like Cases this provision is
necessary: nor can any reason be given, why the Minister's reading a Homily,
set forth by common Authority, should not be accounted preaching of the Word,
as well as his reading (or pronouncing by heart) a Homily, or Sermon of his
own, or any other man's.

Repl. When the Usurper would quickly have brought Livings to that competency,
as would have maintained able Preachers, we may not question whether just
Authority will do it. 2ly. When abundance of able Ministers cast out, would be
glad of liberty to preach for nothing, this pretense has no taste, or sense in
it. 3ly. When we may not without the imputation of uncharitableness once
imagine, that your Lordships with your Deans, and other Officers, do not value
the saving of souls above money, we may conclude, that you will voluntarily
allow so much out of your ample Revenues, as will supply such places or many of
them; The rather because we find you charging them, as desiring inordinately
the honors, and wealth of the world, that would have had all Ministers to have
had 100. li. or 80. li. per annum a piece: and therefore may conclude that you
will take no more, if you hate that sin, more than they do that are accused of
it. But the next place of your Answer frighteth us more: to which we say, that
we will not differ with you for the name, Whether reading Homilies may be
called Preaching. But we take the boldness to say, That it is another manner
of preaching that Christ and his Apostles sent men to perform, and which the
Church has gloried in, and been edified by, to this day, and which thousands
of souls have been brought to Heaven by, and which we again desire may be
enjoined, and not left so indifferent.

Sect. 3. Sentences.
[The Sentences tend all to exhort the people to pious liberality, whether the
Object be the Minister, or the Poor, and though some of the Sentences be
Apocryphal, they may be useful for that purpose.] Why Collection for the poor,
should be made at another time, there is no reason given, only change desired.

Reply.
1. We have often told you why the Apocrypha should be cautelously used in the
Church: That Usurper that should pretend to the Crown, and have a more numerous
party then the King, (that has the undoubted right) will be looked on more
suspitiously then ordinary subjects. 2. It is a sordid thing for Ministers to
love money; and its sordid, unless in extraordinay necessities, to have them
beg, and beg for themselves, and beg under pretense of serving God, even in
times when the Clergy seems advanced. 3. We confess our selves deceived, in
thinking we should have free personal debates with you, which made us reserve
many of our Reasons. Reasons are, 1. for less disturbance. 2. Because the
peoples affections are much more raised usually, and so fitter for returns,
when they have received. 3. Because especially it is most seasonable to do the
Acts of gratitude, when we have received the obliging benefits; and so say
(What shall I give the Lord for all his benefits?) when we have partaked of
them, and to offer our selves first, and with our selves, what he gives us,
unto Him, when we have received him, and his grace offered to us.

These are the Reasons that brought us under your censure of desiring a change.

Sect. 4. P. 19. 3. Exhort.
[The first and third Exhortations are very seasonable before the Communion, to
put men in mind how they ought to be prepared, and in what danger they are, to
come unprepared; that, if they be not duly qualified, they may depart, and be
better prepared another time.

Reply.
But is it not more seasonable, that, in so great business, such warning go a
considerable time before? Is there leisure of self-examination, and making
restitution, and satisfaction, and going to the Minister for Counsel to quiet
his conscience, etc. in order to the present Sacrament? We yet desire those
things may be sooner told them.

Sect. 5. Exc. 1.
[We fear this may discourage many] Certainly themselves cannot desire, that
men should come to the holy Communion with a troubled conscience, and therefore
have no reason to blame the Church for saying, It is requisite, that men come
with a quiet conscience, and prescribing means for quieting thereof: If this
be to discourage men, it is fit they should be discouraged and deterred, and
kept from the Communion, till they have done all that is here directed by the
Church, which they may well do, considering that this Exhortation shall be read
in the Church, the Sunday, or Holiday before].

Reply.
But we can, and do, desire that many that have a troubled conscience, and
cannot otherwise quiet it, should come to the Communion for remedy and not be
discouraged, or kept away.

Sect. 6. Minister's turning.
[The Minister's turning to the people, is not most convenient throughout the
whole Ministration: when he speaks to them as in Lessons, Absolution, and
Benedictions, it is convenient that he turn to them; when he speaks for them to
God, it is fit that they should all turn another way, as the ancient Church
ever did; the reasons of which you may see, Aug. lib. 2, de Ser. Dom. in monte.

Reply,
It is not yet understood by us, why the Ministers, or people, (for, which you
mean by [they all] we know not) should turn another way in prayer: we think,
the people should hear the prayers of the Minister; if not, Latin prayers may
serve; and then you need not except against extemporate prayers, because the
people cannot own them; for how can most of them own what they hear not,
whatever it be? As for August. reason for looking toward the East, when we
pray, (Ut admoneatur animus ad naturam excellentiorem se convertere, id est, ad
Dominum; cum ipsum corpus ejus, quod est terrenum, ad corpus excellentius, id
est, ad corpus celeste convertitur): We suppose you will not expect that we
should be much moved by it; if we should, Why should not we worship toward any
of the creatures visible, when we can pretend such Reasons for it, as minding
us of superior things? and why should not we look Southward, when the Sun is
in the South?

And we fear the worshipping toward the Sun, as representing or minding us of
Christ's heavenly body, is too like to the prohibited worshipping before an
Image, and too like that worshipping before the Host of Heaven, in which the
old Idolatry consisted, or at least which was the Introduction of it; of which
our Protestant Writers treat at large against the Papists, on the point of
Image Worship; See also V^ssius de Idololatria, lib. 2. cap. 23. etc.

Sect. 7. Exc. 3.
[It appears by the greatest evidences of Antiquity, that it was upon the 25.
day of December. S. Aug. in Psalm. 132.]

Reply.
It is not Aug. alone in Psalm. 132. that must tell us which way the greatest
Evidences of Antiquity go: and his reasoning that John must decrease, and
Christ must increase, as proved by John's being born when the days decrease,
and Christ's being born when the days increase, does not much invite us to
receive his Testimony. We conceive the Ancient opinion of Jerusalem, and other
Eastern Churches that were nearest to the place, is a greater Argument for the
contrary, then you have here given us for what you thus affirm: We might set
Epiphanius against Augustine, and all the Greek Church, till in the midst of
Chrysostom's time, when they changed their opinion. And in our time the
judgment of the famous Chronologers, Scaliger, Beroaldus, Broughton, Capellus,
Clopenburgius, with many others, are not contemptible, as set against such an
unproved Assertion as this.

Sect. 8.
[That our sinful Bodies, etc.) It can no more be said, those words do give
greater efficacy to the blood, then to the body of Christ, then when our Lord
says, This is my blood which is shed for you, and for many, for the remission
of sins, etc. And says not so explicitly of the Body.]

Reply.
Sure Christ there intimates no such distinction as is here intimated: there
his body is said to [be broken for us] and not only for [our bodies]

Sect. 9. 20. Com. Kneel.
[It is most requisite that the Minister deliver the Bread and Wine into every
particular Communicant's band, and repeat the words in the singular number; for
so much as it is the propriety of Sacraments to make particular obsignation to
each Believer, and it is our visible profession, that by the Grace of God,
Christ tasted death for every man.

Reply. 1.
Did not Christ know the propriety of Sacraments better than we, and yet he
delivered it in the plural number to all at once, with a [take ye, eat ye,
drink ye [all of it]; we had rather study to be obedient to our Master, than to
be wiser than he. 2. As God makes the general Offer, which gives to no man a
personal interest, till his own acceptance first appropriate it; so it is fit,
that the Minister that is Gods Agent, imitate him, when his example, and the
reason of it so concern to engage us to it; Clemens Alexandr. Stromat. lib. 1.
Prope. In it gives a reason (as we understand him) for the contrary; that man
being a free Agent, must be the chooser or refuser for himself, -- (...).
Quemadmodum eucharistiam cum quidam, ut mos est diviserint, permittunt
unicuique ex populo ejus partem sumere: and after renders this reason, (...)
ad accurate enim perfecteque eligendum ac fugiendum, optima est conscientia.

And that thing is so agreeable to your own doctrinal principles, that we fear
you dis-relish it, because it comes from us.

Sect. 10. Kneel at Sacra.
[Concerning Kneeling at the Sacrament we have given account already: only thus
much we add, that we conceive it an error to say that the Scripture affirms
the Apostles to have received not-kneeling. The posture of the Paschal Supper
we know, but the institution of the holy Sacrament was after Supper; and what
posture was then used the Scripture is silent. The Rubr. at the end of the 1.
Ed. C. that leaves kneeling, crossing, etc. indifferent, is meant only at such
times as they are not prescribed, and required. But at the Eucharist, kneeling
is expressly required in the Rubr. following.]

Reply.
Doubtless, when Matthew and Mark say it was [as they did eat] to which before
it is said, that [they sat down]; and when Interpreters generally agree upon
it, this would easily have satisfied you, if you had been as willing to believe
it, as to believe the contrary. Matthew. 26. 20, 21, 26. the same phrase is used
v. 26. As

In verse. 21. where it shows, they were still sitting: For the sense of the
Rubr. if you prove that the makers so interpret it, we shall not deny it; but
the reason of both seems the same.

Sect. 11. Com. three times a Year.
[This desire to have the Parishioners at liberty, whether they will ever
receive the Communion or not, savours of too much neglect, and coldness of
affection toward the holy Sacrament: It is more fitting that order should be
taken to bring it into more frequent use, as it was in the first, and best
times; Our Rubr. is directly according to the ancient Council of Eliberis C.
81. Gratian. de Consecrat. no man is to be accounted a good Catholic Christian
that does not receive three times in the year: The distempers which indispose
men to it, must be corrected, not the receiving of the Sacrament therefore
omitted: It Hooker. l. 5. Sect. 6. 8.
is a pitiful pretense to say, they are not fit, and make their sin their
excuse; Formerly our Church was quarrelled at for not compelling men to the
Communion, now for urging men; how should she please?

Reply.
We confess it is desirable that all our distempers, and unfitnesses should be
healed; and we desire with you that Sacraments may be oftener: But that every
person in the Parish that is unfit, be forced to receive, is that which we
cannot concur with you to be guilty of. Two sorts we think unfit, to be so
forced (at least.) First, abundance of people, grossly ignorant and
scandalous, that will eat and drink judgment to themselves, not discerning the
Lords Body. Secondly, many melancholy, and otherwise troubled doubting Souls,
that if they should receive the Sacrament before they find themselves more fit,
would be in danger to go out of their wits, with fear, lest it would seal them
to destruction, and as the Liturgy says, lest the Devil enter into them as
into Judas: or at least it would grievously deject them. As formerly, so now,
there is great reason at once to desire, that the unprepared be not forced to
the Sacrament, and yet that so great a part of the body of the Church may not
be let alone in your Communion, without due admonition and discipline, that
ordinarily neglect or refuse the Churches Communion in this Sacrament: those
that are so profane should be kept away, but withal they should be proceeded
with by discipline, till they repent, or are cast out of the Church.

Sect. 12.
[This Rubr. is not in the Liturgy of Queen Elizabeth, nor confirmed by Law,
nor is there any great need of restoring it; the World being now in more danger
of profanation, then of Idolatry: besides the sense of it, is declared
sufficiently in the 28. Article of the Church of England: The time appointed we
conceive sufficient.]

Reply.
Can there be any hurt or danger in the people's being taught to understand the
Church aright? Has not Bishop Hall taught you in his life of a Romanist, that
would have faced him down, That the Church of England is for
Transubstantiation, because of Kneeling, p. 20. And the same Bishop (greatly
differing from you) says in the same Book, p 294. But to put all scruples out
of the mind of any Reader concerning this point, let that serve for the upshot
of all, which is expressly set down in the fifth Rubric in the end of the
Communion set forth, as the judgment of the Church of England, both in King
Edward and Queen Elizabeth's times (note that) though lately upon negligence
(note upon negligence) omitted in the Impression] and so recites the words.
Where you say, there is no great need, etc. We reply, 1. Profaneness may be
opposed nevertheless for our instructing the people against Idolatry. 2. The
abounding of Papists who in this point seem to us Idolatrous, shows that
there is danger of it. 3. The commonness of Idolatry through the World, and the
case of the Israelites of old, show that man's nature is prone to it. 4.
Profaneness and Idolatry befriend each other; As God is jealous against
Idolatry, so should all faithful Pastors of the Church be, and not refuse such
a caution to the people and say, There is no great need of it.

Public Baptism.
Until they have made due profession of Repentance, etc. We think this desire
to be very hard and uncharitable, punishing the poor Infants for the Parents
sakes; and giving also too great and arbitrary a power to judge which of his
Parishioners he pleases, Atheists, (...) Heretics, etc. and then in that name
to reject their children from b(...)Baptized: Our Church concludes more
charitably, that Christ will (...)vourably accept every Infant to Baptism, that
is presented by the Church according to our present Order: And this she
concludes out of Holy Scriptures, (as you may see in the Office of Baptism)
according to the Practice and Doctrine of the Catholic Church, Cypr. Ep. 59.
August. Ep. 28. and de verb. Apost. Ser. 14.

Reply.
We perceive you will stick with us in more then Ceremonies; To your reasons we
Reply, 1. By that reason, all the Children of all Heathens or Infidels in the
World should be admitted to Baptism; because they should not be punished for
the parents sakes. 2. But we deny that it is (among Christians that believe
original Sin) any absurdity to say, that Children are punished for their
Parents sakes. 3. But yet we deny this to be any such punishment at all, unless
you will call, their non-deliverance a punishment. They are the Children of
wrath by nature, and have original Sin; The Covenant of Grace that gives the
saving benefits of Christ, is made to none but the faithful, and their seed;
Will you call this a punishing them for their Fathers sakes, that God has
extended his Covenant to no more? Their Parents infidelity does but leave them
in their original Sin, and Misery, and is not further it self imputed to them.
If you know of any Covenant or promise of Salvation made to all without
condition, or to Infants, or any other condition or qualification, but that
they be the seed of the faithful dedicated to God; you should do well to show
it us, and not so slightly pass things of so great moment, in which you might
much help the World out of darkness, if you can make good what you intimate; If
indeed you mean as you seem to speak, That its uncharitableness to punish any
Infants for the Parents faults, and that a non-liberation is such a punishment;
then you must suppose that all the Infants of Heathens, Jews, and Turks are
saved (that die in Infancy), or else Christ is uncharitable; And if they are
all saved without Baptism, then Baptism is of no such use, or necessity; as you
seem to think: What then is their privilege, of the seed of the faithful,
that they are holy, and that the Covenant is made with them, and God will be
their God? We fear you will again revive the opinion of the Anabaptists among
the people, when they observe that you have no more to say for the Baptizing of
the Children of the faithful, then of Infidles, Heathens, and Atheists. To
your second Objection we Answer; You will drive many a faithful labourer from
the work of Christ, if he may not be in the Ministry, unless he will baptize
the Children of Heathens, Infidels, and Excommunicate ones, before their
Parents do repent: And the first Question is not, Who shall be the judge? But,
whether we must be all thus forced? Is not the Question as great, Who shall be
the judge of the unfitness of Persons for the Lords Supper? And yet, there, you
think it not a taking too much upon us to keep away the scandalous, if they
have their Appeals to you? And is it indeed (a power too great and arbitrary)
to have a judiciam discretionis about our own Acts; and not to be forced to
baptize the children of Heathens against our Consciences? Who judged for the
Baptizers in the Primitive Church, what persons they should baptize? We act but
as Engines under you, not as Men, if we must not use our Reason; and we are
more miserable then brutes or men, if we must be forced to go against our
Consciences, unless you will save us harmless before God: O that in a fair
debate you would prove to us that such children as are described are to be
baptized, and that the Ministers that baptize them, must not have power to
discern whom to baptize. But who mean you by the Churches, that must present
every Infant that Christ may accept them? Is every Infant first in the promise
of pardon? (If so, show us that promise) and then sure God will make good that
promise, though Heathen Parents present not their children to him, (as your
grounds suppose); if not, then will the sign save those that are not in the
promise: But is it the Godfathers that are the Church? Who ever called them so?
And if by the Church you mean the Minister, and by presenting, you mean
baptizing them, then any Heathen's child that a Minister can catch up and
baptize shall be saved: which if it could be proved, would persuade us to go
hunt for children in Turkey, Tartary, or America, and secretly baptize them in
a habit, that should not make us known. But there is more of fancy then charity
in this; and Christ never invited any to him, but the children of the promise
to be thus presented and baptized.

Sect. 3. P. 23.
[And then the Godfathers, etc.) It is an erroneous doctrine, and the ground of
many others, and of many of your Exceptions, that children have no other right
to Baptism then in their Parents right. The Churches Primitive practice S. Aug.
Ep. 23.
forbids it to be left to the pleasure of Parents, whether there shall be other
Sareties or no? It is fit we should observe carefully the practice of venerable
Antiquity, as they desire Prop. 18.]

Reply.
We conjecture the words that conclude your former Subject being mis-placed,
are intended as your Answer to this: and if all the children of any sort in the
world that are brought to us, must by us be baptized without distinction,
indeed it is no great matter what time we have notice of it.

It seems we differ in Doctrine, though we subscribe the same Articles we
earnestly desire you distinctly to tell us, What is the Infants title: to
Baptism, if it be not to be found in the Parent? Assign it, and prove it when
you have done, as well as we prove their right as they are (the seed of
Believers dedicated by them to God), and then we promise to consent: Its
strange to us to hear so much of the Churches Primitive practice, where so
little evidence of it is produced, Aug. ep. 23. talks not of Primitive
practice: Ab initio non fuit sic; Was it so in the Apostles days? And
afterward you prove not that it was the judgment of the Catholic Church, that
bare Sponsors instead of Parents. Pro-parents or Owners of the Children, might
procure to the Children of all Infidels a title to Baptism, and its benefits.
Such Susceptors as became the Owners or Adopters of the Children, are to be
distinguished from those that pro forma stand by for an hour during the
Baptizing of the Children, and ever after leave them to their Parents: who as
they have the natural interest in them, and power of their disposal, and the
Education of them, so are fittest to covenant in their names.

[The Font usually stands as it did in Primitive times, at or near the Church
door, to signify that Baptism was the entrance into the Church mystical, we
are all baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. and the people may hear well
enough. If Jordan and all other waters be not so far sanctified by Christ, as
to be the matter of Baptism, what authority have we to baptize? and sure his
Baptism was Dedicatio Baptismi.]

Reply. Our less difference of the Font, and flood Jordan, is almost drowned in
the greater before going: But to the first we say that we conceive the usual
situation for the people's hearing, is to be preferred before your Ceremonious
position of it. And to the second we say, that Dedicatio Baptismi, is an
unfitting phrase: and yet, if it were not, what is that to the sanctification of
Jordan, and all other waters? Did Christ sanctify all Corn or Bread, or Grapes
or Wine to an holy use, when he administered the Lords Supper? Sanctifying is
separating to an holy use; But the flood Jordan and all other water, is not
separated to this holy use, in any proper sense: No more than all mankind is
sanctified to the Priestly office, because men were made Priests.

[It has been accounted reasonable, and allowed by the best Laws, that
Guardians should Covenant and contract for their Minors to their benefit: by
the same right, the Church has appointed sureties to undertake for Children,
when they enter into Covenant with God by Baptism; And this general practice
of the Church is enough to satisfy those that doubt.]

Repl. 1. Who made those Sureties Guardians of the Infants that are neither
Parents, nor Pro-parents, nor Owners of them? We are not now speaking against
Sponsors: But you know that the very original of those Sponsors, is a great
Controversy: And whether they were not at first most properly Sponsors for the
Parents that they should perform that part they undertook (because many Parents
were Desertors, and many proved negligent) Sponsors then excluded not Parents
from their proper undertaking, but joined with them; Godfathers are not the
Infants Guardians with us and therefore have not power thus to Covenant and Vow
in their name: We entreat you to take heed of leaving any Children indeed out
of the mutual Covenant that are baptized; How are those in the Covenant that
cannot consent themselves, and do it not by any that truly represent them, nor
have any Authority to act as in their names? The Authority of Parents being
most unquestionable (who by nature, and the word of God, have the power of
disposing of their Children, and consequently of choosing and covenanting for
them), Why should it not be preferred? at lest you may give leave to those
Parents that desire it, to be the Dedicators of, and Covenanters for, their own
Children, and not force others on them whether they will or no. 2. But the
question is not of Covenanting, but professing present actual believing,
forsaking, etc. In which, though we believe the Churches sense was sound, yet
we desire that all things, that may render it liable to misunderstanding, may
be avoided.

Receive remission of sins by spiritual Regeneration]. Most proper for Baptism
Sect 6. page 24.
is our spiritual Regeneration, S. John 3. Unless a man be born again of Water
and the Spirit, etc. And by this is received remission of sins, Acts 2. 3.
Repent, and be baptized every one of you, for the remission of sins 's So the
Creed [one Baptism for the remission of sins.]

Repl. Baptism, as an outward Administration, is our visible Sacramental
Regeneration: Baptism as containing, with the Sign, the thing signified, is our
spiritual real Regeneration. As we are regenerated before Baptism, (as, you
know, adult Believers are), so we cannot pray to receive remission of sins by
that same Regeneration renewed. As we are regenerated really in Baptism; that
Regeneration and Remission, are conjunct benefits: But if Baptism at once give
Regeneration and Remission, it follows not that it gives Remission by
Regeneration: But as Regeneration comprehends the whole change (real or
Physical) and relative; so we acknowledge, that as the part is given by the
whole, you may say that Remission is given by Regeneration, but more fitly in
it than by it; But we are not willing to make more ado about words than needs.

[We cannot in faith say that every Child that is baptized is regenerate,
etc.]. Sect. 7. page 24.
Seeing that Gods Sacraments have their effects, where the Receiver does not
ponere obicem, put any bar against them (which children cannot do); we may say
in faith of every child that is baptized, that it is regenerated by Gods Holy
Spirit, and the denial of it tends to Anabaptism, and the contempt of this holy
Sacrament, as nothing worthy nor material, whether it be administered to
children or no: Concerning the Cross, we refer to our Answer to the same in
general.

Repl. All Gods Sacraments attain their proper end: But whether the Infants of
Infidels be the due Subjects, and whether their ends be to seal up Grace and
Salvation to them that have no promise of it, or whether it be only to seal the
Covenant to believers and their seed, are Questions yet Tit. 3. 5.
undecided, wherein we must entreat you not to expect that we should implicitly
believe you; and it is as easy for us to tell you, that you are promoting
Anabaptism, and much more easy to prove it: We take those but for words of
course.

PRIVATE BAPTISM.
[We desire that Baptism may not be administered in a private place]. And so
Sect 8.
do we, where it may be brought into the public Congregation. But since our
Lord has said, S. Joh 3. Unless one be born of Water and the Holy Ghost, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. We think it fit that they should be
Baptized in private, rather than not at all; It is appointed now to be done by
the lawful Minister.

Repl. We must needs suppose you are disputing with Protestants, who ordinarily
show the Papists that that Text, Joh. 3. asserteth no absolute necessity of
Baptism to salvation. But we believe as well as you, that it is the regular
way of solemn Initiation into the Covenant and Church of Christ, which none
that indeed are the Children of the promise should neglect. As Coronation
solemnizeth his entrance upon the Kingdom, that had before the title; And as
Marriage solemnizeth that which before was done by consent; So Baptism
solemnizeth the mutual Covenant, which before had a mutual consent, and none is
authorized to consent for Infants but those that by nature, and Gods Law, have
the power of disposing of them, and whose will is in sensu-forensi, the
Childrens will: It solemnly investeth us in what we had an Antecedent right to,
and therefore belongs to none but those that have that right; And this we are
ready to make good by any fair Debate that you will allow us.

[Nor is any thing done in private reiterated in public, but the solemn
reception into the Congregation, with the prayers for him, and the public
declaration before the Congregation of the Infants now made by the Godfathers,
that the whole Congregation may testify against him, if he does not perform it,
which the Ancients made great use of.

[Repl. Do you not say in the Rubr. (And let them not doubt, but the Child so
baptized is lawfully and sufficiently baptized, and ought not to be baptized
again). And after (I certify you that in this case all is well done, etc.) And
yet you do not renew all the Baptismal Covenant, renouncing the flesh, etc. and
engaging into the Christian belief; And that you may see that the Church of
England takes not all Infants infallibly to be regenerated by Baptism (unless
you grant that they repent to the substance of Baptism) the Baptismal prayer is
here used, for the fore-baptized, [that God will give his holy Spirit to this
Infant, that he being born again, and made heir of everlasting Salvation, etc.]
which shows that he is now supposed to be Regenerandus, non regeneratus. Do
they pray for his Regeneration, whom they account regenerate already? You must
either confess that there they repeat much of the substance of Baptism, and
take the Child as not baptized, or else that they take the baptized Child to be
not-regenerate. And then we may well take them for unregnerate, that show no
signs of it, at years of discretion, but live a carnal and ungodly life, though
they can say the Catechism, and seek Confirmation.

Of the CATECHISM.
[Though diverse have been of late baptized without Godfathers, yet many have
been baptized with them, and those may answer the Questions, as they are: Sect,
1. p. 2. 26. An. 3.
the rest must answer, according to truth. But there is no reason to alter the
Rule of the Catechism, for some men's irregularities.

Reply. If you will have a Catechism proper to those that had Godfathers, give
leave to others to use one that will teach them, as you say, to answer
according to truth: And let us, in the same, have that liberty, of leaving out
the doubtful Opinion of Godfathers and Godmothers, and that which we think
too childish a beginning, [What is your name,] and let us use one that speaks
more of the necessary Doctrines of Salvation, and nothing but Necessaries.

[We conceive this expression as safe as that which they desire, and more fully
expressing the Efficacy of the Sacrament, according to S. Paul, the 26, and
Sect. A. 2.
27. of Gal. 3. Where S. Paul proves them all to be Children of God, because
they were baptized, and in their Baptism had put on Christ; If Children, then
Heirs, or, which is all one, Inheritors, Romans 8. 17.

Reply. By Baptism Paul means not the Carkase of Baptism, but the Baptismal
dedication, and covenanting with God; They that do this by themselves, if at
age, or by Parents, or Pro-parents authorized (if Infants) sincerely, are truly
members of Christ, and children of God, and Heirs of Heaven; They that do this
but hypocritically, and verbally, as Simon Magus did, are visibly such as the
others are really. But really are still in the gall of bitterness, and bond of
iniquity, and have no part or lot in this business, their hearts being not
right in the sight of God. This is that truth which we are ready to make good.

[We conceive the present Translation to be agreeable to many antie^^ Copies,
therefore the change to be needless.]

Repl. What ancient Copy has (the Seventh day) in the end of the Cor.
fourth Commandment, instead of the Sabbath day? Did King James cause the Bible
to be new translated to so little purpose? We must bear you witness, that in
some Cases you are not given to change.

[My duty toward God, etc.] It is not true that there is nothing in that
Answer which refers to the 4th Commandment; for the last words of the Answer
Sect. 4 page 27.
do orderly relate to the last Commandment of the first Table, which is the
fourth.

Repl. And think you, indeed, that the 4th. Commandment obliges you no more to
one day in seven, than equally (to all the days of your life)? This Exposition
may make us think that some are more serious, than else we could have imagined
in praying after that Commandment, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our
hearts to keep this Law.

[Two only as generally necessary to salvation, etc. These words are a Reason
of the Answer that there are two only, and therefore not to be left out.] Sect.
5.


Repl. The words seem to imply by distinction, that there may be others not so
necessary: and the Lords Supper was not by the Ancients taken to be necessary
to the salvation of all.

[We desire that the entering of Infants, etc.] The effect of Childrens Baptism,
Sect. 6.
depends neither upon their own present actual Faith and Repentance, which the
Catechism says expressly, they cannot perform; nor upon the Faith and
Repentance of their natural Parents, or Pro-parents, or of their Godfathers or
Godmothers; but upon the Ordinance and Institution of Christ: But it is
requisite that when they come to age, they should perform these Conditions of
Faith and Repentance, for which also their Godfathers and Godmothers charitably
undertook on their behalf. And what they do for the Infant in this Case, the
Infant himself is truly said to do, as in the Courts of this Kingdom daily, the
Infant does answer by his Guardian, and it is usual for to do homage by proxy,
and for Princes to marry by proxy. For the further justification of this
Answer, See St. Aug. Ep. 23. ad Bonifac. Nihil aliud credere quam sidem habere;
ac per hoc cum respondetur Parvulum credere qui fidei nondum habet effectum,
respondetur Fidem habere propter fidei Sacramentum, and convertere se ad Deum
propter Conversionis Sacramentum, quia and ipsa responsio ad celebrationem
pertinet Sacramenti: itaque parvulum, etsi nondum fides illa, quae in
credentium voluntate consistit, tamen ipsius sidei Sacramentum, fidelem facit.]

Repl. 1. You remove not all the inconvenience of the words that seems to
import what you your selves disclaim. 2. We know that the effects of Baptism,
do depend on all the necessary con-causes on Gods mercy, or Christ's merits, on
the Institution, and on Baptism it self according to its use, as a delivering
investing Sign, and Seal; and they depend upon the promise sealed by Baptism;
and the promise supposes the qualified subject, or requisite Condition in him,
that shall have the benefit of it. To tell us therefore of a common Cause, on
which the effect depends, viz. the Institution of Baptism it self, when we are
inquiring after the special condition that proves the person to be the due
subject, to whom both Promise and Baptism does belong; This is but to seem to
make an Answer. Either all baptized absolutely are justified and saved, or not:
If yea, then Christianity is another kind of thing than Peter or Paul
understood, that thought it was not the Washing of water, but the Answer of a
good Conscience to God: Then let us catch Heathens and dip them, and save them
in despite of them; But if any condition be requisite (as we are sure there is)
our Question is, What it is? and you tell us of Baptism it self. Did ever
August jure, vel injuria was to be esteemed a Believer? We grant with Austin,
that Infants of Believers, propter Sacramentum fidei, are visibly and
professedly to be numbered with Believers; but neither Austin, nor we, will ever
grant you that this is true of all that you can catch, and use this form of
Baptism over. The Seal will not save them that have no part in the Promise.

[The Catechism is not intended as a whole Body of Divinity; but as a
Comprehension Sect. 7. pa. 28.
of the Articles of Faith, and other Doctrines most necessary to Salvation; and
being short, is fittest for Children, and Common people; and as it was thought
sufficient upon mature deliberation, and so is by us.]

Repl. The Creed, the Decalogue, and the Lords Prayer, contain all that is
absolutely necessary to Salvation at least. If you intended no more, What need
you make a Catechism? If you intend more, Why have you no more? But, except in
the very words of the Creed, the essentials of Christianity are left out; If
no explication be necessary, trouble them with no more than the Text of the
Creed, etc. If explication be necessary, let them have it; At least in a larger
Catechism, fitter for the riper.

CONFIRMATION.
[It is evident that the meaning of these words is, that Children Baptized,
Sect. 1. Rub. 1.
and dying before they commit actual Sin, are undoubtedly Saved, though they be
not Confirmed; wherein we see not what danger there can be of misleading the
vulgar, by teaching them truth: But there may be danger in this desire of
having these words expunged, as if they were false; for St. Austin says, He is
an Infidel that desires them to be true, Ep. 23. ad Bonifac.]

Repl. What? all Children Saved whether they be Children of the Promise or no?
Or, can you show us a Text that says (Whoever is Baptized, shall be Saved)?
The Common Prayer Book plainly speaks of the non-necessity of Unction,
Confirmation, and other Popish Ceremonies and Sacraments, and means that, ex
part Ecclesiae, they have all things necessary to Salvation, and are
undoubtedly Saved, supposing them the due Subjects, and that nothing be wanting
ex part sui; which certainly is not the case of such as are not Children of
the Promise, and Covenant. The Child of an Heathen does not ponere obicem
actually quo minus baptizetur, and yet being baptized is not saved, on your own
reckoning, (as we understand you); therefore the Parent can ponere obicem, and
either hinder the Baptism or effect, to his Infant. Austin speaks not there of
all Children whatever, but those that are offered per aliorum spiritualem
voluntatem, by the Parents usually, or by those that own them after the Parents
be dead, or they exposed, or become theirs: He speaks also of what may be done,
and de eo quod fieri non posse arbitratur: But our question is, What is done?
and not, What God can do: Our great Question is, What Children they be that
Baptism belongs to?

[After the Catechism we conceive that it is not a sufficient qualification,
etc.] We conceive that this qualification is required rather as necessary, than
Sect. 2. Rubr.
as sufficient; and therefore it is the duty of the Minister of the place, Can.
61. to prepare Children in the best manner to be presented to the Bishop for
Confirmation, and to inform the Bishop of their fitness; but submitting the
judgment to the Bishop, both of this, and other qualifications, and not that
the Bishop should be tied to the Ministers consent. Compare this Rubr. to the
second Rubr. before the Catechism, and there is required what is further
necessary and sufficient.

Repl. 1. If we have all necessary ordinarily, we have that which is sufficient
ad esse: there is more ordinarily necessary, than to say those words. 2. Do you
owe the King no more obedience? Already do you contradict His Declaration,
which says, Confirmation shall be performed (by the information, and with the
consent of the Minister of the place?) But if the Ministers consent shall not
be necessary, take all the charge upon your own souls, and let your souls be
answerable for all.

They see no need of Godf. here] The Compilers of the Liturgy did, and so does
the Church; that there may be a witness of the Confirmation.] Sect. 3. Ex. 1*


Repl. It is like to be your own work as you will use it, and we cannot hinder
you from doing it in your own way. But are Godfathers no more than witnesses?
etc.

[This supposes that all children, etc.] It supposes, and that truly, that
all children were at their Baptism, regenerate by Water, and the Holy Ghost,
and had given unto them the forgiveness of all their Sins; and it is
charitably presumed, that, notwithstanding the frailties and slips of their
Childhood, they have not totally lost, what was in Baptism conferred upon them,
and therefore adds, Strengthen them we beseech thee, O Lord, with the Holy
Ghost, the Comforter, and daily increase in them their manifold gifts of Grace,
etc. None that lives in open sin ought to be Confirmed.]

Repl. 1. Children baptized without right, cannot be presumed to be really
regenerate, and pardoned. 2. We speak only of those that by living in open sin,
do show themselves to be unjustified; and these you confess should not be
Confirmed. O that you would but practice that; If not, this Confession will
witness against you.

[Before the imposition of hands, etc.] Confirmation is reserved to the Sect.
5. p. 30. Rub.
Bishop, in honorem Ordinis; To bless, being an Act of Authority; so was it of
old. St. Hierom, Dialog. Adv. Lucifer. says, it was totius orbis consensio in
hanc partem. And St. Cyprian to the same purpose, Ep. 73. And our Church does
every where profess, as she ought, to conform to the Catholic usages of the
Primitive times; from which causelessly to depart, argues rather love of
contention than of peace. The reserving of Confirmation to the Bishop, does
argue the Dignity of the Bishop above Presbyters, who are not allowed to
Confirm; but does not argue any excellency in Confirmation, above the
Sacraments. St. Hierom argues the quite contray, ad Lucif. cap. 4. That because
Baptism was allowed to be performed by a Deacon, but Confirmation only by a
Bishop; therefore Baptism was most necessary, and of the greatest value; The
mercy of God allowing the most necessary means of Salvation, to be administered
by inferior Orders, and restraining the less necessary, to the higher, for
the honor of their Order.]

Reply. O that we had the Primitive Episcopacy, and that Bishops had no more
Churches to oversee, than in the Primitive times they had; and then we would
never speak against this reservation of Confirmation to the honor of the
Bishop: But when that Bishop of one Church, is turned into that Bishop of many
hundred Churches; and when he is now a Bishop of the lowest rank, that was an
Archbishop, when Archbishops first came up, and so we have not really
existent, any mere Bishops, (such as the Ancients knew) at all, but only
Archbishops and their Curates; Marvel not, if we would not have Confirmation
proper to Archbishops, nor one man undertake more than an hundred can perform:
But if you will do it, there is no remedy, we have acquit our selves.

Prayer after the Imposition of hands, is grounded upon the practice of the
Sect. 6. Ex. 1.
Apostles, Heb. 6. 2. and Acts 8. 17. Nor does 25. Article say, that
Confirmation is a corrupt imitation of the Apostles practice, but that the 5.
commonly called Sacraments have ground partly on the corrupt following the
Apostles, etc. which may be applied to some other of those 5; but cannot be
applied to Confirmation, unless we make the Church speak contradictions.

Reply. But the question is not of Imposition of hands in general; but this
Imposition in particular: And you have never proved, that this sort of
Imposition, called Confirmation, is mentioned in those Texts: And the 25.
Article cannot more probably be thought to speak of any one of the 5. as
proceeding from the corrupt imitation of the Apostles, than of Confirmation as
a supposed Sacrament.

We know no harm in speaking the language of holy Scripture, Acts 8. 15. Sect.
7. Ex. 2.
they laid their hands upon them, and they received the Holy Ghost; and though
Impositions of hands be not a Sacrament, yet it is a very fit sign, to certify
the persons what is then done for them, as the Prayer speaks.

Reply. It is fit to speak the Scripture language in Scripture sense; But if
those that have no such power to give the Holy Ghost, will say, Receive the
Holy Ghost, it were better for them to abuse other language, than Scripture
language.

After Confirmation.
There is no inconvenience that Confirmation should be required before the
Sect. 8.
Communion, when it may be ordinarily obtained: that which you here fault, you
elsewhere desire.

Reply. We desire that, the credible approved profession of Faith, and
repentance, be made necessaries: But not that all the thousands in England that
never yet came under the Bishops hands (as not one of many ever did, even when
they were at the highest) may be kept from the Lords Supper: for some cannot
have that Imposition, and others will not, that yet are fit for Communion with
the Church.

The Ring is a significant sign, only of humane institution, and was always
Marriage the Ring. Sect. 1. p. 31.
given as a pledge of fidelity, and constant love, and here is no reason given
why it should be taken away; nor are the reasons mentioned in the Roman
Ritualits given in our Common Prayer Book.

Repl. We crave not your own forbearance of the Ring; but the indifferency in
our use of a thing so mis-used, and unnecessary.

[These words (in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost) if they seem to
make Matrimony a Sacrament; may as well make all sacred, yea civil actions
Sect. 2. p^. 32. Ex. 1.
of weight to be Sacraments, they being usual at the beginning and ending of
all such. It was never heard before now, that those words make a Sacrament.]

Reply. Is there no force in an argument drawn from the appearance of evil, the
offense and the danger of abuses, when other words enough may serve turn?

They go to the Lords Table, because the Communion is to follow.

Reply. They must go to the Table, whether there be a Communion Sect. 3.
or not.

[Consecrated the estate of Matrimony to such an excellent mystery, etc.]
Though the institution of Marriage was before the Fall, yet it may be now, and
Se. 4. Col.
is consecrated by God to such an excellent mystery, as the representation of
the spiritual marriage, between Christ and his Church, Ephesians. 5. 23. We are sorry
that the words of Scripture, will not please. The Church in the 25. Article,
has taken away the fear of making it for a Sacrament.]

Reply. When was Marriage thus consecrated? If all things, used to set forth
Christ's offices, or benefits, by way of similitude, be consecrated; then a
Judge, a Father, a Friend, a Vine, a Door, a Way, etc. are all consecrated
things: Scripture phrase pleases us, in Scripture sense.

The new married persons the same day of their marriage must receive the Se. 5.
p. 33. Rubr. 18.
Holy Communion.] This inforces none to forbear Marriage, but presumes (as well
it may) that all persons marriageable ought to be also fit to receive the Holy
Sacrament; And marriage being so solemn a Covenant of God, they that undertake
it in the fear of God, will not stick to seal it by receiving the Holy
Communion, and accordingly prepare themselves for it. Is were more Christian,
to desire that those licentious Festivities might be suppressed, and the
Communion more generally used by those that marry: the happiness would be
greater then can easily be expressed. Unde sufficiat ad enarrandum felicitatem
ejus Matrimonii, quod Ecclesia conciliat, and confirmat oblatio. Tertul. lib.
2. ad Uxorem.

Reply. Indeed! will you phrase and modify your administrations upon such a
supposition, that all men are such as they ought to be, and do what they ought
to do? Then take all the World for Saints, and use them accordingly, and blot
out the doctrine of Reproof, excommunication, and damnation from your Bibles;
Is it not most certain that very many married persons are unfit for the Lords
Supper, and will be when you and we have done our best? And is it fit then to
compel them to it? But the more unexpected the more welcome is your motion, of
that more Christian course of suppressing of licentious festivities. When shall
we see such Reformation undertaken?

Visitation of the Sick:
FOr as much as the condition, etc.] All which is here desired, is already
Sect. 1.
presumed, namely, that the Minister shall apply himself to the particular
condition of the person; but this must be done according to the Rule of
prudence and justice, and not according to his pleasure: therefore if the sick
person show himself truly penitent, it ought not to be left to the Ministers
pleasure to deny him Absolution, if he desire it. Our Churches direction, is
according to the 13. Can. of the venerable Council of Nice, both here, and in
the next that follows.

Reply. But the question is whether he show himself truly penitent or not. If
we have not here neither, a judgment of discretion, for the conduct of our own
actions, What do we with reason? Why are we trusted in the Office? and, Whose
judgment must we follow? The Bishop cannot have leisure to become the Judge
whether this man be penitent. It must then be the Minister, or the man himself;
And must we absolve every man that says he repents? Then we must believe an
incredible profession, which is against reason: Some are known Infidels, and in
their health profess that they believe not the Scripture to be true, and make a
mock at Jesus Christ; and perhaps, in a sickness, that they apprehend no danger
in, will send for the Minister in scorn, to say [I repent] and force him to
absolve them, that they may deride him, and the Gospel. Some of us have known
too many of those that have for twenty, or thirty years been common drunkards,
seldom sober a week together, and still say when they came to themselves, that
they were sorry for it, and did unfeignedly repent; and as they said in health,
so they said in sickness, dying with in a few days or weeks after they were
last drunk: must we absolve all these? Some dye with a manifest hatred of an
Holy Life, reviling at those that are careful to please God; yet saying, they
hate them not as holy, but because they are all Hypocrites, or the like: And
yet will say, they repent of their sins. Some forbear not their accustomed
swearing and cursing while they profess repentance. Some make no restitution
for the wrong which they say they repent of: And must we take all these for
truly penitent? If not; the Minister must judge. What you mean by your saying,
(Our Churches direction is according to the 13th Canon of the venerable Council
of Nice, both here and in the next that follows) we know not: the second
Council of Nice you cannot mean (its Can. being uncertain) and the 13th is of
no such sense. And the 13th Can. of the first Council of Nice, is only, that
lapsed Catechumens shall be 3, years inter and ientes before they pray again
with the Catechumens. This shows they then took not up with every word of
seeming penitence as true repentance, but what it is to your purpose we know
not, nor is here any other Can. in that Council for you: The 11th Can. is
sufficiently against you. The lapsed that truly repented, were to remain among
the penitent for three years; and seven years more, if they were fideles, etc.
(Ab omnibus vero illud praecipue observetur, ut animus eorum, and fructus
poenitentiae attendatur: quicunque enim cum omni timore, and lacrimis
perseverantibus, and operibus bonis, Conversationem suam, non verbis solis sed
opere and veritate demonstrant, cum tempus statutum etiam ab his fuerit
impletum, and orationibus jam coeperint communicare, licebit etiam Episcopo
humanius circa res aliquot cogitare:) We know this rigor as to time was unjust,
and that to the dying it was abated: but you see here that bare words (that
were not by seriousness and by deeds, made credible) were not to be taken, as
sufficient marks of penitence, of which it was not the person himself that was
to be the Judge.

The form of Absolution in the Liturgy, is more agreeable to the Scriptures,
Sect. 2.
then that which they desire; it being said, in St. John 20. Whose sins you
remit they are remitted, not, whose sins you pronounce remitted; and the
Condition needs not to be expressed, being always necessarily understood.

Reply. It is a Controversy among the Learned Expositors, how much of that of
John 20. was proper to the Apostles, and such others as were then to have the
spirit in an extraordinary manner, who did remit sin effectively by remitting
the punishment of it, by casting out Devils, healing the sick, etc. according
to that of Jam. 5. 14, 15. Is any sick among you, let him call for the Elders
of the Church, and let them pray for him, and anoint him with Oil, in the name
of the Lord; And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall
raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. If
besides this remitting them effectively, the rest be no other then a
Ministerial pronouncing them forgiven by God according to his Covenant in the
Gospel, then you cannot plead the phrase of a Text, which respects another
way of Remission then we pretend to: But must phrase it according to the nature
of the thing, and the sense of other Scriptures also that fullier open it;
There are three ways of pardoning, 1. By grant or Gift, (whether by a general
Act of pardon, or a particular.) 2. By sentence. 3. By execution; that is,
preventing, or taking off, the penalty: The first of these is done already by
God in the Gospel. The Second, God does principally, and his Ministers
instrumentally as his Messengers: The third (the taking off the penalty) they
can do no otherwise in the Case before us, then by praying that God will take
it off, and using his ordinary means. So that it is most evident, that this
Absolution that Ministers are to perform, can be no other then to pronounce the
penitent Believer to be absolved by God according to his Covenant: And if there
be no other, should we not speak as intelligibly as we can? Indeed there is
more in absolving the excommunicate; for then the Church both judiciously, and
executively, remitteth the penalty of excommunication (to which also the Text
John 20. may have much respect) but the penalty of damnation can be no
otherwise remitted by us, then as is expressed. And indeed the thing is of such
exceeding weight, that it behooves us to deal as intelligibly and openly in it,
as we can. And therefore we admire that you should say (the Condition needs not
be expressed, being always necessarily understood) by necessarily do you mean,
necessitate naturali, and irresistibili? so that all the wicked men in the
world cannot choose but understand us, to speak conditionally? Surely this is
none of your meaning; if it were, it were far from truth: Or do you mean not de
necessitate vel actitudine eventus, but de debito ex obligatione? no doubt but
it is necessary as a duty, and also ad finem as a means: And therefore it is,
that we desire it may be expressed. And doubtless you think not that all men do
their duties, and understand all that they ought to understand: no not in this
particular. If you mean that all sick men may be rationally supposed to
understand it; this can never be believed by us that are acquainted personally
(and have been) with so many of whom it is not true. How many think the
Minister's Absolution, and the Sacrament, will serve turn, with their unsound
hypocritical repentance? how easily is that understood absolutely, or as bad,
while they take you to take it for granted, that they have the Condition, which
is absolutely expressed.

It is not fit the Minister should have power to deny this viation, or holy
Communion Sect. 3. p. 34, Exc. 1.
to any that humbly desire it, according to the Rubric; which no man disturbed
in his wits can do, and whosoever does, must in charity be presumed to be
penitent, and fit to receive.

Repl. There is no condition mentioned in the Rubric, but that he (be desirous
to receive the Communion in his house) humbly is not there: And why may not a
man disturbed in his wits desire the Communion? you deny things that ordinarily
fall out, and yet lay the weight of your Cause on that denial. But why must we
give the Sacrament to those that have lived in gross ignorance, Infidelity, and
profaneness, and never manifested credibly, that they repent? You say that
(whosoever desires the Sacrament, according to the Rubric, must in charity be
presumed to be penitent.) But where has God commanded or approved so blind and
dangerous an act as this, under the name of Charity? the ordinary observations
of our lives, is not to be confuted by men's Assertions: we know by sad
experience, that there is abundance of the worst of men among us, that are
desirous to receive this Sacrament when they are sick, that give no credible
evidence of true repentance; but some in the ignorance, and deceit of their
hearts; and some as conscious of their impiety, for which they seek any
shifting remedy to quiet their Consciences, for the time, are much more eager
for this Sacrament in their sickness, then many better and more penitent
persons. And must we judge all these penitent, and give them the Sacrament as
such? we must needs profess that we think this Course would not be the least
effectual service unto Satan, to deceive poor sinners, and keep them from
knowing their misery, and seeking aright after the true remedy in time. Pardon
us, while we lay together the parts of your Doctrine, as we understand it here
delivered; and leave it to your Consideration, what a Church, and what a
Ministry it would make. 1. All Infants of any Parents in the world that we can
baptize, are undoubtedly regenerate, and in a state of life, and shall be
saved, if they so die. 2. The Holy Ghost, and Forgiveness of sin, being then
given them; it is charitably presumed that they have not totally lost this,
notwithstanding the frailties and slips of their Childhood; and so when they
can say the Catechism, they are to be confirmed. 3. Being confirmed, they are
to be admitted to the Lords Supper. 4. All that marry, and others, thrice a
year must receive the Lords Supper (though unfit.) 5. The Minister must absolve
all the sick, that say they repent: (if we understand you) for we suppose you
allow not the Minister to be Judge. 6. This Absolution must be absolutely
expressly (I absolve thee from all thy sins) without the Condition (if thou
repent and believe.) 7. Whosoever desires the Communion in his sickness, must
in charity be presumed to be penitent, and fit to receive. 8. The Minister must
not have power to forbear such Baptizing, Absolving, or delivering the
Communion as aforesaid (we now omit what is said of the dead at Burial.) And if
this be not the ready way to hinder thousands, from the necessary knowledge of
their unrenewed hearts, and lives, and from true repentance, and from valuing
Christ as the Remedy, and from making a necessary preparation for death, and
also the way to lay by abundance of faithful conscionable Ministers, that dare
not take such a deceiving dangerous Course; we must confess our selves much
mistaken in the nature of man's corruption, and misery, and the use of Gods
Ordinances for his recovery.

The Burial of the Dead.
IT is not fit so much should be left to the discretion of every Minister: And
Sect. 2. p. 2.
the desire that all may be said in the Church, being not pretended to be for
the ease of tender Consciences, but of tender Heads, may be helped by a Cap,
better then a Rubr.

Reply. We marvel that you say nothing at all to our desire, (that it be
expressed in a Rubric, that prayers and exhortations there used, be not for
the benefit of the dead, but only for the instruction etc. comfort of the
living.) You intend to have a very indiscreet Ministry, if such a needless
Circumstance may not be left to their discretion. The contrivance of a Cap
instead of a Rubr. shows that you are all unacquainted with the subject, of
which you speak: and if you speak for want of experience of the Case of Souls,
as you now do about the Case of men's bodies, we could wish you some of our
experience of one sort (by more Converse with all the Members of the Flock)
though not of the other. But we would here put these three or four Questions to
you.

1. Whether such of our selves as cannot stand still in the cold winter at the
Grave, half so long as the Office of Burial requires, without the certain
hazard of our lives, (though while we are in motion, we can stay out longer)
are bound to believe your Lordships, that a Cap will cure this better then a
Rubr. though we have proved the contrary to our cost? and know it as well as we
know that cold is cold Do you think no place but that which a Cap or Clothes do
cover, is capable of letting in the excessively refrigerating Air?

2. Whether a man that has the most rational probability, if not a moral
certainty, that it would be his death, or dangerous sickness (though he wore
20. Caps) is bound to obey you in this Case.

3. Whether usually the most studious laborious Ministers, be not the most
invaletudinary and infirm? And 4ly, Whether the health of such should be made a
jest of, by the more healthful; and be made so light of, as to be cast away,
rather then a Ceremony sometime be left to their discretion? And whether it be
a sign of the right and genuine spirit of Religion, to subject to such a
Ceremony, both the life of godliness, and the lives of Ministers, and the
peoples souls? Much of this concerns the people also: as well as the
Ministers.

We see not why these words may not be said of any person, who we dare Sect 3.
p. 33.
not say is damned; and it were a breach of Charity to say so, even of those
whose repentance we do not see: For whether they do not inwardly, and heartily
repent, even at the last act, who knows? And that God will not even then
pardon them upon such repentance, who dares say? It is better to be Charitable,
and hope the best, then rashly to condemn.

Reply. We spoke of persons, living and dying in notorious sins; suppose they
were whoredom, perjury, oppression, yea Infidelity, or Atheism, etc. But
suppose we cannot be infallibly certain, that the man is damned, because it is
possible that he may repent, though he never did express it: will you therefore
take him for a brother whose soul is taken to God in mercy? You are not sure
that an excommunicate person, or an Heathen, does not truly repent after he is
speechless: But will you therefore say, that all such die thus happily? This is
a most delusory Principle. The Church judges not of things undiscovered: Non
esse and non apparere, are all one as to our Judgment; we conclude not
peremptorily, because we pretend not here to infallibility. As we are not sure
that any man is truly penitent, that we give the Sacrament to; so we are not
sure that any man dies impenitently. But yet we must use those as penitent,
that seem so to reason, judging by ordinary means, and so must we judge those
as impenitent, that have declared their sin, and never declared their
repentance. It seems by you, that you will form your Liturgy, so as to say,
that every man is saved, that you are not sure is damned, though he show you no
repentance; and so the Church shall say, that all things are, that are but
possible, if they conceit that Charity requires it. But if the living by this
be kept from Conversion, and flattered into Hell, will they there call it
Charity, that brought them thither? O lamentable Charity, that smoothers men's
way to Hell, and keeps them ignorant of their danger, till they are past
remedy! millions are now suffering for such a sort of Charity. Lay this to the
formentioned propositions, and the world will see that indeed we differ in
greater things then Ceremonies, and Forms of Prayer.

Churching Women.
IT is fit that the woman performing especial service of Thanksgiving, should
Sect. 1. p. 36. Exc. 1.
have a special place for it, where she may be perspicuous to the whole
Congregation; and near the Holy Table, in regard of the Offering she is there
to make: They need not fear Popery in this, since in the Church of Rome she is
to kneel at the Church door.

Reply. Those that are delivered from impenitency, from sickness, etc. perform
a special service of thanksgiving, etc. yet need not stand in a special place:
but if you will have all your Ceremonies, Why must all others be forced to
imitate you? We mentioned not the Church of Rome.

[The Psalm 121. is more fit and pertinent, then those others named, as 113,
Sect. 2. Exc. 2.
128. and therefore not to be changed.]

Reply. We have poposed to you what we think meetest in our last pages; if you
like your own better, we pray you give us leave to think otherwise, and to use
what we propounded.

If the woman be such as is here mentioned, she is to do her penance before she
Sect. 3. Exc. 3.
be Churched.]

Reply. That is, if she be accused, prosecuted, and judged by the Bishop's
Court to do penance first, which happens not to one of a multitude; and what
shall the Minister do with all the rest? All tends to take away the difference
between the precious and the vile, between those that fear God, and that fear
him not.

[Offerings are required as well under the Gospel, as the Law: and amongst
other times most fit it is, that oblations should be, when we come to give
thanks Sect. 4. Exc. 4.
for some special Blessing, Psalm. 76. 10, 11. Such is the deliverance in
Childbearing.]

Reply. Oblations should be free, and not forced: to some special use, and not
to ostentation.

[This is needless since the Rubr. and Comm. require that no notorious person
Sect. 5. Exc. 5.
be admitted.]

Reply. We gladly accept so fair an interpretation, as freeth the Book from
self-contradiction, and us from trouble; but we think it would do no hurt but
good, to be more express.

The Concessions.
WE are willing that all the Epistles and Gospels be used according to Sect. 1.
the last Translation.

Reply. We still beseech you, that all the Psalms, and other Scriptures in the
Liturgy recited, may (for the same reason) be used according to the last
Translation.

That when any thing is read for an Epistle, which is not in the Epistles, the
Superscription be, [for the Epistle.] Sect. 2.


Repl. We beseech you, speak as the vulgar may understand you: [for the
Epistle] signifies not plain enough to such, that is indeed none of the
Epistles.

That the Psalms be collated with the former Translation, mentioned in Sect. 3.
Rubr. and Printed according to it.

Reply. We understand not what Translation, or Rubr. you mean.

That the words (this day) both in the Collects, and Prefaces, be used only
upon Sect. 4.
the day itself, and for the following days, it be said (as about this time.)

Reply. And yet there is no certainty, Which was the day it self.

That a longer time be required for signification of the names of the Com. and
Sect. 5.
the words of the Rubr. be changed into these (at least some time the day
before.)

Reply. (Sometime the day before) may be, near or at night, which will not
allow any leisure at all, to take notice of the proofs of peoples scandals or
to help them in preparation.

That the power of keeping scandalous Sinners from the Communion, may be Sect 6.
expressed in the Rubr. according to the 26. and 27. Canons, so the Minister be
obliged to give an account of the same immediately after to the Ordinary.

Reply. We were about returning you our very great thanks, for granting us the
benefit of the 26. Canon, as that which exceeds all the rest of your
Concessious; But we see you will not make us too much beholden to you: and poor
Christians that will not receive the Sacrament contrary to the example of
Christ and his Apostles, and the custom of the Catholic primitive Church, and
the Canons of general Councils) must be also used as the notorious impenitent
sinners. But the Canon requires us not to signify the cause, but upon
complaint, or being required by the ordinary

That the whole Preface be prefixed to the Commandments. Sect. 7.


Reply. And why not the word (Sabbath day) be put for the (seventh day) in the
end. Must not such a falsification be amended?

That the second Exhortation be read some Sunday, or Holy Day, before the Sect.
8.
celebration of the Communion, at the discretion of the Minister.

That the general Confession at the Communion be pronounced by one of the Sect.
9.
Ministers, the people saying after him, all kneeling humbly upon their knees.

That the manner of consecrating the Elements, may be made more explicit, Sect.
10.
and express; and to that purpose, those words be put into the Rub. [then shall
he put his hand upon the Bread, and break it] then shall he put his hand unto
the Cup.]

That if the Font be so placed as the Congregation cannot hear, it may be
referred to the Ordinary, to place it more conveniently. Sect. 11.


That those words [yes they do perform them, etc.] nay be altered thus:
[because they promise them both, by their Sureties, etc. Sect. 12.


That the words of the last Rubr before the Catechism, may be thus altered,
(that children being baptized have all things necessary for their salvation,
and Sect. 13.
dying before they commit any actual sins, be undoubtedly saved, though they be
not Confirmed.]

That to the Rubr. after Confirmation, these words may be added (Or be ready,
and desirous to be Confirmed.] Sect. 14.


That those words (with my body I thee worship) may be altered thus: (with
Sect. 15.
my body I thee honor.)

That those words (til death us depart) be thus altered (till death us do
part.) Sect. 16.


That the words (sure and certain) may be left out. Sect. 17.


Reply. For all the rest we thank you, but have given our reasons against your
sense expressed in Sect. 13. before, and for satisfactoriness of the last: And
we must say, in the conclusion, That, if these be all the abatements and
amendments you will admit, you sell your innocence, and the Church's peace for
nothing.

FINIS.

