A LEARNED Useful and SEASONABLE DISCOVRSE Concerning The CHVRCH of ENGLAND,
And The CHVRCH of ROME.

Addressed By way of Letter to M. St. JOHN, a ROMISH PRIEST, By that Eminent
Author and worthy Patriot, Dr. JOHN BASTWICK, Now PRISONER under the POPISH
Tyranny at YORK.

Imprimatur, JA. CRANFORD.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright, Junior, at his Shop at the upper end of the
Old-Bailey. 1643.

A Learned, Useful, and Seasonable Discourse, concerning the Church of
ENGLAND, and the Church of ROME. To the most accomplished and learned, Mr. St.
JOHN.
Most worthy Sir,
FAme does not ever delude us. She proclaims you not only for a Scholar, but
celebrates you as a profound Divine and Philosopher. It seems yet to me, by
her sparing Relation, that she was loath to offend your Modesty. For, after our
acquaintaince, you appeared to me far greater then your Fame. Verily, you have
so tempered Excellent Learning, with sweet Conversation, that your Demerits
exceed the praises even of an eloquent Lover.

This rare Elogy is the more illustrious in you, as it is most seldom to be
found in Others of your Rank and Roman profession: (to deal freely with you,
as your Courtesy invites me.)

Being both of us cast into the same Prison, but for different Causes, you for
defending the Pope, I for impugning him; I confess, that (at first) I purposly
shunned your Acquaintaince; not in hate to your Person, but out of fear of your
Party, which after some private Colloquies had wronged me and the Truth, dearer
to me then my self: reporting, that the Defenders of our Religion were
unlearned and dishonest: and absurdly caluminating our Doctrine, as false and
Heretical. It happened likewise, that after we had casually met together in
company, (but had then no leisure to enter into any Dispute) it was bruited
abroad, (I know not by whom) that being challenged by you to a Scholasticall
Combat, I had cowardly declined it. As my credit is not so weak, to be wounded
with such silly Rumors, so I hold it not fit to let them pass without
Comptroll. Your Conference (indeed) I refused, for this reason, because I
conceived, there was small hope to win you to our fide, by any evidence of
Truth, being such an old Soldier of the Popes, and now grown aged and gray
hair'd in Popery. But when (after) I had learnd by experience, that you were a
Gent. of singular Ingenuity and Candor, and perceived likewise how
affectionately you loved me, and how zealous you were of my Soules-health: I
began to be much inflamed with desire of your Society. For, Civility and
Courtesy is of so winning a nature, that it is a stronger Allurement then the
strongest Enchantment. You were often heard to say, that you would give any
thing to procure my Conversion, yea, go to Rome barefooted, if such a painful
journey might reclaim me to the Roman-Church. How much am I obliged for so
eminent a Favor? I confess, I was (now) as zealously desirous of your
welfare. For how could I retaliate so solicitous a Love, but by a reciprocal
Solicitude of your Salvation?

Nor did your Courtesy and good will, rest only in good wishes; but you
promised also very kindly to lend me your helping hand to raise me from my
Fall, and gently to show me the way after my wandering. I began therefore to
persuade my self, that if happily (like a straid Sheep) I had gone out of the way
into the Mazes and by-pathes of Error, I could not possibly find out a better
guide to conduct me to the Temple of Truth. Your Sufficiency, for Learning, was
well known to me: and your Humanity so apparent, that it was still ready to
seize on me, even against my will. I saw, we had (Both) leisure more then
enough, and that we could not better bestow our Time, nor find a more pleasant
Recreation during our Imprisonment. I was desirous therefore to hear your
Instructions, and to be better informed by you; not by any interloquntory
Conference (which is subject to inconveniences, and not so safe for either of
Us) but by this silent and temperate way of Writing, which is more considerate,
and not unbecomming our present condition.

I remember, at our last Parley, you most confidently affirmed, the Roman Party
to be the only true Church, renowned for Antiquity, Succession,
Conspicuousnesse, Amplitude, and Unity. That in her Faith our Ancestors lived
and dyed; of whose salvation, should their Posteity doubt, it were gross
impiety. That she is reputed a true Church by her professed and Capital Enemies:
and that eternal Woe will be the Reward of them that err or deviate from her.

Lastly, you wished, out of your hearty desire of the common salvation of all
that all differences being accorded, and all Factions abandoned, all men would
return to the Roman Church, casheering the dull and droway Religion of Luther
and Calvin: concluding (withal) that you could easily coin (if you were
disposed) one far better and more tolerable.

I, as confidently urged, that our Church wanted neither Divine-Truth, nor
saving-Faith. Thus, all our talk, at that time, ended in your Yea, and my No.
But because the matter in controversy, was of such important consequence, I
conceived that it ought to be asserted, not by bare words, but forcible
arguments: yet, not with pride or pertinacy, but with Christian Humility, and a
mind prepared to embrace the Truth.

The principal and most impregnable Reason, inducing me to believe, that ours
is the true Church, is because I clearly see, it has all those Requisits that
constitute the essence of a Church. For, when our Savior Christ sent forth his
Apostles to instruct the whole World, he gave them only this Commission, to
preach the Gospel, and administer the Sacraments, promising his Peace (which
includes all happiness to all Nations, Cities, and people that resisted not
their Evangelicall Legation. Wherefore, since the sincere preaching of the
Word, and belief of that Word preached, together with the incorrupt
administration of the Sacraments, contain the sum and substance of our
Religion, and are the very essentials of the Church, why should we not not both
hope and judge most worthily of ours, that has neither corrupted the Doctrine
of the Gospel, nor adulterated the Sacraments?

Contrariwise, your Church, having polluted the Fountain of the Gospels with
the mire and dirt of humane Inventions, and having corrupted the purity of the
Sacraments with a number of trifling Ceremonies, it seems to me, to have
declined far from Truth, and to have no right to challenge to it self the
Title of Catholic, (...)ver. (...)gi. c. 5.
to which she vainly pretends. S. Augustine defines them to be Christian
Catholics, that are keepers of Integrity, and follow those things that are
right.

And now you may see how weakly done it is of our wilful Adversaries, to cry
out and calumnate us, for Heretics: For, if men would be pleased to try our
Doctrine and yours by the Rule and Canon of the Gospel, 'twere no hard matter
to judge whether Church were the preserver of Integrity, and the Vassal of
Heretical impiety.

Think not (most courteous Sir) that I say thus, to object to you the Faults of
others, which out of over-zealous Piety (as they conceit) regard not to violate
Charity; truly, when I reflect on such kind of men, the Image of the Samaritan
Church comes into my mind: For that also was ancient, splendid, rich in Rites,
and shining with Ceremonies; yea, it honored Moses, and eagerly expected the
Messiah: notwithstanding all this, the Author of Salvation, sentenced Her (from
his own mouth) not to be in the state of Salvation. This I am the more
confident to say to you, whom I know to be a person of excellent moderation,
and not to be taken with specious Toies and empty Titles. For, what a brainsick
piece of Braggardisme is that; The Roman Church is ancient? Admit it be so: yet
is it (withal impious and Superstitious. But, she is brave and Magnificent.
Who denies it? yet is she fallen into Idolatry. It Is the most pernicious policy
of Satan, to gild most execrable Errors with the false (but glittering) show of
Titles. By these artifices, how foully has he defiled your Church? The very
Rites of Pagans, condemned and exploded by the Apostles, he has revived and
obtruded, having painted and varnisht them with new names. But, Christ himself
he has banished from the Church and Souls of men, retaining only his Name,
for a show. This was Satan's subtilty, that he might place Antichrist in the
Throne of Christ. By these tricks, that Man of Sin mounted to the height of his
Ambition. For, openly to have attempted to dethrone the Majesty of Christ, had
been Folly and Madness: as appeared (long before) in those frantic
Heretics, Arius, Samosatenus, Valentinus, and Nestorius, scornd, contemnd, and
plagued for their Blasphemies. For, who is so desperately hopeless of
Salvation, that could endure to hear an open Blasphemer of Christ? They which
deny the Godhead, or the Trinity, or which rage. and rail at Christ, are by
the common consent of Christians, adjudged to Death. But the mystery of
Iniquity was (by secret engines) to be contrived more cleanly. The Name of
Christ was to be kept, and Adoration to be given at the naming of Jesus, but
the virtue and efficacy of his Merits, to be abolisht. By this Stratagem, was
Christ to be exterminated, that room might be made [at Rome] for the seat of
Antichrist in the Temple of God. Horrible impiety! to deny that underhand,
which openly dare not be attempted. Excellently was it said of Seneca: What
difference is there betwixt denying and defaming God? So, what matters it,
whether you deny Christ, as a Renegado, or whether you strip him of his
Offices? For if Christ be not vested and dignified with his Office, he is no
Christ to us. Since then, under the Name Christ, his Regal, Sacerdotall, and
Prophetical Offices, and under the Word Jesus, all the saving Benefits flowing
from that triple Office are comprehended: there is no doubt, but, that is a
corrupt Church, which has corrupted those Offices. Not to aggravate the
atrocity of the Fact, with words: I say impassionately: The Roman Church erres
grievously about Christ's Offices; which she has corrupted, destroyed, and
violated. Of this heinous and hideous Crime our Church was never guilty, but
ever maintained and defended them.

Intending to make a Parallel of the Doctrines of both Churches, I first say,
by way of Preface, that in all your Doctrinall Additions and Corollaries, which
(as so many unsound Fringes) you have sewed to our Assertions, there is nothing
which is not superfluous, and which without any hazard of our Souls, may be
canceld, exploded, and rejected. But, let us now begin this
parallel-collation of Doctrines, from Christ's Regal Office.

This is the Faith of the Reformed Chrurches. That Christ Jesus is the only
Monarch, Moderator, Defender, and Governor, both of the whole World, and of his
Church in the World, (...)ol. 2: (...)ac. 28 (...)eb. 7. (...)ay. 9. (...)oc.
17:
as being set by God upon his Holy Mountain, who has given him all power in
Heaven and Earth: and as being the King of Righteounesse, the King of Eternity,
and the King of Kings. That he has a provident care of all things, but watches
over his Church with a special eye of Providence, as having bin sought and
bought with his own most precious Blood, and rescu^d from the Usurpation of
Satan. That into this Church there is infused from Christ her Emperor,
Righteousness, Peace, Joy, Happiness, Light, Knowledge of God, Certainty of
Salvation, and whatever other Benefits may redound to loyal and faithful
Subjects, from so Great and Gracious a Prince. That this Kingdom and Empire is
of Divine and Celestial nature, (...) 18.38. (...)k. 1.33.
not of a Worldly or vanishing splendour, as being governd and guided by the
Scepter of the Word and Spirit, not by the Authority of Humane Power. That this
Regiment had never any Vicar or Deputy assigned to it. That to call Peter, the
Monarch of the Church, and the Popes, his Successors, are mere Toies and
Fopperies of Puff-paste Ambition. That after the Apostles times, no infallible
Guides or Doctors are to be found. That Multitude, Miracles, Riches, and
worldly Pomp, are no Marks of the true Church. That the Church is not at all
times (alike) conspicuous and visible. That we are not to follow Fathers and
Counsels, decreeing any thing dissonant from Christ's Edicts.

But, your Papal Church teaches otherwise: viz. That Christ is a King, but a
worldly one: and not King alone neither, but the Pope his Vicar, shares with
him in Reign and Regiment. That in this Vicariat, there is a long Series and
succession of Popes, which are the Heads and Foundations of the Church. That
the Church must be regulated and governd not by Christ's Laws only, but by the
Canons also, and Constitutions of Counsels and Fathers: and that the Violaters
of such Decrees are more severely to be punished, then the Transgressors of Gods
Law. That she is to be ruled by Traditions, not by Scripture only. That those
Traditions (of straw) are equal to that Sacred Scepter. That the genuine Notes
and surest signs of the Church, are multitude of Men, a continued Succession,
Worldly Pomp and Magnificence, Miracles, Antiquity, Unity.

Here, I appeal to your Candor and Ingenuity, that setting aside Partiality
(for a while) and considering well what both sides affirm, you would be
pleased to judge, without Hate or Love, whether of us teach and deliver the
Doctrine of Christ's Princely Office, more soundly and sincerely?

Our Divines leave to Christ alone, his Privileges, Prerogatives, Honor and
Glory, inviolate: yours either ascribe all these to Men, or associating M^n
with Christ in his Regiment, contaminate his Crown and Dignity, with the
contagion of most sordid company.

But perhaps you are loath to condemn that Doctrine as impious, which you have
bin so long used to, consider yet, whether at least, it be not superfluous and
needless. For tell me if any man utterly ignorant of Pope, Fathers, and
Counsels shall submit only to Christ's Scepter, and obey his Laws, in
believing in him alone, as his only comforter, and protector in Adversity, and
his sole patron in prosperity: shall this man (think you) on his deathbed,
need to fear any Doom for his premention'd ignorance? I know, you are not so
harshly opinionate. Again, if any man that knows there is a Pope, shall
confidently believe that Christ has no Vicar on earth, that the Pope is very
like Antichrist: that Rome is Heriticall, that we must rather obey Christ's
Laws, then Decrees of Fathers, and Counsels, that no mortal man is
inerrable; Multitude, Antiquity, Unity, and worldly Felicity, have bin often
found In a false and Malignant Church, will you take from this man so
believing, and dying in this belief, all hope of Heaven? Far be such Immanity
from your Humanity. For, wherein has he offended? what crime is he guilty of,
that so believed? This I would feign know, what Law (by that Faith) he has
broken. For, without transgression of a Law, no man is a Delinquent. I suppose
therefore (most learned Sir) you will grant me, that the Pope and his Gew-gawes
may either be unknown, or unacknowledg'd, without loss of Salvation.

The Reformed Church believes, that Christ only is the sole Mediator betwixt
God and men, that he only has made satisfaction to God, fulfilled the Law, paid
our Ransom, offered himself in Sacrifice, that he alone is our intercessor to
God the Father, opens the passage for our prayers to the throne of grace, and
emboldens us with confidence to address our supplications to God, and
(therefore) that he alone is Mediator both of Redemption and Intercession:
whence it follows that we ought not to pray to the Saints departed (nor to the
Angels) as being ignorant of our present State of calamity or infirmity, and
not able to penetrate the secrets af our hearts, as also, that this
Mediator-ship is impiously assigned to the Virgin Mary, who though she were
indeed of all Women the most blessed, yet had she need (her self) of this
Mediator. That this our Priest offered himself a Victime for his chosen flock
and people, not promiscuously for all men whatsoever. That he is the
Sacrificing Priest of the New Testament, and that there are on Earth no other
Priests to offer daily a propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of quick and
dead. That this Priests Sacrifice being of infinite virtue and value, is
applied to the Faithful, by the operation of the Holy Spirit, the preaching of
the Gospel, and administration of the Sacraments: which Sacrifice having bin
once consummate on the Cross by himself, is not to be reiterated by any man
on Earth. That we are clad with the Righteousness of this Priest, and by
virtue thereof, absolvd from guilt and punishment. That beside his blood, there
it no Purgatory that can cleanse the spots and blots of our souls. That there
are no torments or tortures, by the suffering whereof, any man can satisfy
divine Justice, much less can there be any works of super-erogation, which
being laid up in the Granary or Treasury of the Church, may by the sale of
Indulgences, be dispensed to others of less desert or merit. That our works
being far from perfection, cannot purchase eternal life. That remission of
sins, is concredited and consigned to Ministers, as Preachers, or Proclaimers
of it, not as Judges.

But your Churches Creed runs thus, viz. That Christ is indeed Mediator of
Redemption: yet Saints and Angels act likewise their parts in mediating: but
most of all, the Virgin Mary, the Gate of Paradise, and Queen of Heaven, and
that (therefore) We ought to address our Vows, Prayers, and Petitions, to
them that so well, know our Wants. That there must be on Earth other Priests
after the order of Melchizedek, to offer Christ daily as a Sacrifice
propitiatory for dead and living. That the Righteousness of this Sacrificing
Priest is not imputed to us. That by his Merits, we are indeed delivered from
the guilt of Sin, not from the punishment, to which we are still liable. That
the souls departed are purged and cleans'd by the Fire of Purgatory. That by
our own sufferings, we may make satisfaction to God. That there are works of
supererogation in the Churches Magazine, which the Pope may sell to lewd and
loose persons. That life eternal is due to our works, as wages are to a
labourer. That to the goodness of a work, it is sufficient, if the mind and
intendment of the worker be good: Lastly, that Ecclesiastical ministers have
Judicial power and authority, to forgive Sins.

Is not this (most worthy Sir) a gross Collusion, to acknowledge Christ to be
a Priest, in word, but to deny him indeed? To leave a show only, and evacuate
the virtue and substance of his Priesthood. This mighty mass of Blasphemous
contumelies against Christ, may it not be unknown without detriment to our
faith. Can it hurt or prejudice a Christian to disbeleeve such fainged devices?
Admit, there be a good man, and careful of his Salvation, which reposes his
confidence in Christ's only Mediation, offers his prayers in his only Name to
God, seeks for righteousness by his bloody Sacrifice alone, being utterly
ignorant of other sacrificing Priests, of any other Mediator, Sacrifice, Merit,
or Purgatory: think you, that this his ignorance, shall be any impeachment or
prejudice to him at Gods Tribunal? I trow you are not so unwise, to think so.
Imagine now, there is one that is rooted and strongly grounded in this belief.
That beside Christ, there is no Mediator or Sacrificer, that the Dignity of
Mediation is not to be communicated to Angels, Saints, or the Virgin Mary. That
our affairs are to them unknown and vnregranted. That to them we are neither
to make Vows, nor Prayers. That soul tormenting Purgatory is no where to be
found, but in the cracked brains of Lunaticks, or the juggling knavery of
cozening Priests. That the Saints of God, are freed both from guilt and
penalty. That Christ's Righteousness is imputed to the Faithful. That our
sufferings can effect nothing toward satisfaction, nor our doings conduce
ought to salvation, by way of merit. That supererogation, is a Bravado and
Braggardisme, and a device of Avarice to draw on filthy lucre. That good
intents are not sufficient for good works. That the minister has no judicial
Authority to remit Sins. What? do we think this man in danger, for this his
confident persuasion? this belief breaks no Law nor Commandment. What danger
then can there be where is no Delinquency?

The Reformed Church believes: That Christ is constituted by God, a Prophet,
Pastor, Doctor, and Preacher of Peace: that he promulgated Gods secret and
cabinet-counsell of the redemption of mankind, that he publikly preached this
good tidings and gospel, Deuteronomy. (...) 18.
confirming and strengthening it by his spirit in the use of the Sacraments,
that this Prophet declares to us all that God commanded him. That in him, God
was well pleased, and that we were to hear him. Mat. 17.5. That from this
Prophet, Gods perfect will was manifested to the World, and the same (by his
Order) written in the Old and new Testament, not in dark or doubtful terms,
but plainly and perspicuously, as far as was necessary for our Salvation. That
these sacred Scriptures, being the Judges of all controversies, need not the
addition of humane Traditions. That we are to serve and obey God, not according
to the Commandments of men, but his own celestial sanctions: and that
(therefore) the worship of Images, is to be abolisht out of our Churches and
minds, not commanded by God. That Holidaies, not appointed and sanctified by
the Lord, need not be observed. That the use of all kind of Meats, is at any
time lawful, being frugally and moderately taken. That divine service is
mis-celebrated in a language unknown to the people. That there is no inherent
sanctity in some place, more then other, nor in any Church: and that our
prayers are no sooner heard in some one place, then another.

Thus believes the Reformed Church. But she gives no credit to those prodigious
paradoxes, viz. That iustifiing faith, may be without charity and good works.
That faith may be without knowledge of what is to be believed. That men drowned
in their own corruptions, are endued with certain preparatives to grace, or
furnished with merits of congruity. That our conversion to God is not wholly to
be ascribed to grace, but in part to Natures endeavor. That election depends
of faith fore-scene and the motion of our free will. That the faithful may:
Apostatize, and fall from grace. That concupiscence is void of sin. That
Kings have not their pre-eminence by divine Right. That the Clergy are exempt
from the subjection and jurisdiction of Kings. That faith is not to be kept
with Heretics. That blind Monastic obedience is lawful and laudable. That
children may lawfully make and break vows without their parents consent. That
a Clergy man's marriage is more detestable then adultery or murder. That the
gift of continence is given to all that refuse it not. That the Pope may
lawfully take tribute of stews. That Sacraments confer grace by the work
wrought. That infants baptized are not tainted at all with sin. That Christ's
body is in diverse places at once, yet neither visible nor tangible. That Bread
and Wine are transformed into the very substance of Christ's Flesh and Blood.
That wicked men eat the flesh of Christ in the Eucharist. That it is not lawful
for Laics to drink of the Sacramental Cup. These and the like monstrous
opinions, since Christ the Prophet of the Church has not taught, the Reformed
Churches do not believe. But concerning Christ's Prophetic office, your
Doctors teach most insincerely, viz. That Christ indeed is given by God as a
Prophet, yet has he not declared to the Church all the will of God, nor
purposely caus^d it to be written in the Scripture for the decision of
controversies of Faith by its Light and Evidence. That Scriptures are obscure,
perilous, and not to be permitted Laymen to read. That Authority of
Traditions, Fathers, and Councels, are necessary to the Church, to supply the
Scriptures imperfection. That God is to be worshipped according to the prescript
of Men's Laws. That Images are to be set in Churches, as instructers of the
Ignorant. That God may lawfully be effigiated and represented in humane Form.
That Holidayes are religiously to be observed and celebrated. That we ought to
obstaine from Meats, at Times appointed by the Church or Pope. That it is no
prejudice to our prayers, to use an unknown Language in the public Lyturgy.
That one place is more holy then another. That a man may believe, and yet be
ignorant: and that Faith is best defined by Ignorance. That charity may be
wanting to justifying Faith. That men swallowed up in the Whirpoole of
corruption, retain yet certain preparatories to Grace. That our Conversion is
to be ascribed both to Nature and Grace. That Election depends of Faith and the
right use of our free Will. That Concupicence is not to be reputed sin. That
Kings reign not by the Authority of Scripture. That Clergymen are not bound to
any Secular Authority. That blind and foolish Obedience in Monks, is
commendable. That the Marriage of Clergymen is equal to Sacrilege, or worse.
That the Bond of Matrimony is not dissolved by Adultery. That the Gift of
Continence is given to all promiscuously. That the Pope may well exact Tribute
from Strumpets. That children may vow against the will of their parents. That
Sacraments confer Grace by the work wrought. That children once washed with
Baptismall water, are utterly void of sin. That all unbaptized persons are
condemned to eternal Death. That Christ's Body, is in many places at once, yet
not subject to sight or touch. That Bread and Wine are transubstantiated into
Christ's Body and Blood. That our Lords Body is swallowed by impious persons.
That Christian people ought not to communicate of the Chalice in the Sacrament.
Thus, they attribute indeed the name of Prophet and Doctor to Christ, but all
the force and power of his prophetic Office is translated to the Pope,
Counsels, and Fathers.

Now (Worthy Sir) suppose some well-affected Christian, to be of this Belief:
that he will wholly give ear to, and be instructed by Christ, our Prophet:
that he will obey only the Scripture and Gods will therein revealed: suppose
this man to believe that the Scripture is perfect, perspicuous, the Judge of
all controversies and determiner of all doubts: that Laics ought to read it,
and regulate their lives and manners by it. Do ye think, the high honor
which this man gives to Christ as to our Chiefe-Prophet, shall or can prejudice
him? Far be so wide and wild a conceit from your ingenuous Candor. For, what
crime has he committed, which being ignorant of Traditions, Holidayes, Images,
Fasting-dayes, and a number of the like Ceremonious observances, does soly
embrace those Doctrines which Christ has taught for the Churches comfort and
edification? Add now hereto, that the same man is fully confidenced, that
Scripture cannot (without extreme impiety) be charged with imperfection or
obscurity: that it is a great crime to debar the people from reading Scripture:
and no less sin, to train them to the belief of Traditions: that it is
impious, to worship God in the shape or likeness of Man, or to expose Images
to the peoples Adoration: that it is Tyranranicall to obtrude the observance of
Holidaies (under the terror of Penalties) which are instituted by men; as also
to forbid Meats, to sober men at certain Seasons. That it is unlawful to mumble
and mutter prayers in a strange Tongue. That it is absurd to think one place
holier then another. That it is impossible, at once to believe, and yet to be
ignorant: or that justifying Faith should subsist, without charity: or, that
man wallowing in his corruption, should be able to prepare himself for Grace:
or, that concupiscence should be put out of the catalogue of sins. That they
are most execrable Miscreants, that deprive the Kings Crown of its divine
Right, or exempt the Miter from obedience to the Scepter: or break their Faith
with Heretics; or draw monastic persons to a blind obedience: or calumniate
the Marriage of the Clergy, as worse then Adultery. That they are absurd and
senseless, that teach, the Gift of continence to be promiscuous and obvious to
all: which approve of tribute taken from mercenary Prostitutes: which think
that children may vow or dis-avow against their parents wills: which hold that
Matrimony is not violated by Adultery. That they err grievously, that pretend,
the Sacraments collate Grace by the bare work done: that all baptized persons
are without all Sin, and all unbapatized liable to eternal Damnation. That
they are the maddest Bedlams that (like Corybanticall Priests) teach, Christ's
Body to be in many places at once, unseene, and insensible: which dream of a
Metamorphosis, and change of Bread and Wine into his Body and Blood: which dote
that our Lords Flesh may be swallowed and devoured by impious Wretches: which
preclude the Cup from the people, though Christ himself reach it to them in
the Scripture: which adore a Wafer in stead of Christ: which vainly imagine his
corporal presence on earth, being consigned to Heaven till the end of the
World. Can such a man's ignorance of these Romish Trumperies, or his belief of
Christ's sincere Doctrine, hurt him when he is alive, or damn him for ever
being Dead? What cruel Rhadamanth (or Judge of Hell) can pass such a
Sentence? For; what crime is there here? What Law has he transgrest? shall any
man be blamed, for being afraid to Idolatrize, or to worship God after his own
voluntary invention? shall he be condemned for abandoning the impious and
absurd Traditions of Men, and obeying the Doctor and Prophet that is given us
from Heaven?

Thus, if we collate and parallel the adverse Opinions of the Romish and
Reformed Churches, it will soon appear which Party is most Zealous of
Religion, and Piety, which is its proper Fruit and product.

And now (most Worthy Sir) if I seem to you to be of a dull understanding and
weak judgment, pray be pleased to help me in this exigent: which as it will
be a work worthy of you, so most welcome to me. Take the Lanthorn of Gods Word
in your hand, and enlighten my Darkness, show me the way of God, and reduce
me from the By-pathes of Error. I promise you to banish from me all
pertinicious opinionativenesse, if I shall see you compleately armed with
Scriptures proofs. But if should attemt to cry down our Churches Doctrine,
with clamors only, and Great words and brags of Eminent (but Humane)
Authorities, We shall easily slight such braving Arrogance, your rare courtesy
commands me to be confident, that you will not fail to do me this good
Office. For it is not credible, that you who are reported to have challenged
the chief of our Champions, to the Combat; will now refuse, as a Master, to
instruct in the ways of God, so willing a Scholar.

Adieu (most Learned Sir) and love Your most affectionate JOHN BASTWICK.

FINIS.

