AN APOLOGY or DEFENSE For the requisite Refuting of the shameful,
disgraceful, Writings and horrible Libell, against the Book Of TRUE REPENTANCE
And Of TRUE RESIGNATION Which Gregory Rickter Primate Of GOERLITS Has spread
abroad against it, in Open Print.

Answered In the Year of Christ, 1624. 10. April.

By Jacob Behme Also called Teutonicus Philosophus Englished by JOHN SPARROW.

LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Giles Calvert, at the Sign of the Black Spread
Eagle, at the West End of St. Paul's. 1661.

Christ says, Matthew: 5. 11, 12. Blessed are you when Men despise you, and
persecute you, and speak all manner of Evil of you, for my Names Sake, if they
do it falsely; rejoice and be Glad, you shall be well rewarded in the Kingdom
of Heaven; for so have they persecuted the Prophets that were before you. Also
Matthew: 11. 25, 26. I thank thee O, Father, and Lord of Heaven and Earth, that
thou have hid these things, from the wife and prudent, and have revealed thou
to Babes: Yes Father, for, so it pleased thee. The PREFACE To the Reader who
loves God.
1.
CHrist says to Pilate: My Kingdom is not of this world; else would my
servants fight for it: John 18. 36. And to his Disciples he says: Behold I
send you as Sheep amongst Wolves, Mat: 10. 16. To signify: that where Christ
shall become manifest in a Man; that Man MUST in this world be surrounded only
with Enemies, who without ceasing would root out, and kill, Christ.

2. Which is the way of all true Christians, for they must walk in this world
among the Devils Thorns; as now it is with the Name of the Author of that
despised Book, as also with his Person, that Satan raises his stormy winds
against the Gifts of the Holy Spirit, and will not endure Christ in his
Members, as in this enimicitious Libell is to be seen, how enraged Satan is and
how abominably he slanders and reproacheth the I. B.
Author, and how he sets himself as a Richter or Judge over Gods work, and
would suppress and not it out.

3. Dear Reader and Brother in Christ, who love God; though I am an Enemy
from my heart, to such accursed, unworthy, reproachful, contentious writings
of controversy, not accounting those divulged reproachful writings contrary
to Christian Love and Truth, worthy any answer at all: Yet for the Command sake
and Love of my Lord Jesus Christ, I would make an answer, for their sakes, who
do not understand the Matter, and have not read my little Book of True
Repentance and Refignation, as the way to Christ; nor know my person, and who
only regard the respect and favor, of the Primate; and suppose he reproacheth
me out of Christian zeal, and does it for the sake of God, in respect of his
Office or Ministry.

4. As the most Part of them are thus lead astray, to give him applause, and
think, he does right, and that it is all true which he cries out on in the
Pulpit; seeing he makes use of Gods Name in it, and thereby so cloaketh the
Matter, that Men can not see his fierce wrathful Heart, and appeals to his
Office and Ministry, then the simple people which know nothing of his dealing,
how maliciously he persecuteth me, and deals quite contrary to his Office,
and never will examine me, about it, but condemns what himself understands
NOT: therefore have I made an answer; to try whether any will become seeing and
go forth from reproaching the gift of God.

5. And do here with testify in the presence of God that I have answered out
of no other intention, then barely for the Love-sake of our Neighbor.

6. And do admonish the Primate, to consider better of me, for he has no Lion
to deal with, but a Lamb of JESUS CHRIST; or else he will find into whom he
has Pierced, least the Sheep in the Spirit of Christ become a Lion, and the
Sheep judge the Wolf; And this I (...) heartily and faithfully;

Jacob Behme.

Here follows the Title of the Libell.

Judicium GREGORII RICHTERI Ministri Ecclesiae Patriae Primarij Goerlicij De
FANATICIS SUTORIS ENTHUSIASTICI Libris, quorum Tituli sunt 1. Morgenrothe im
Auffgang. 2. Der weg Zu Christo. 3. Von Wahrer Busse.


Ad Avertendas finistras de Ministerio Goerlicensi Suspiciones.

Here follows The Title of the Libell.

The Censure of GREGORY RICKTER Minister of The Church of GOERLITS And Primate
Of that Country concerning the ENTHUSIASTIC SHOEMAKERS FANATIC Books The
Titles whereof are 1. The Aurora. 2. The Way to CHRIST. 3. Of True Repentance.


For The Removing of the scandalous Suspicions touching the Ministry Of Goerlitz

The Libell begins and says.
I. NEW manner of Speaking, brings commonly New Errors along with it.

Answer.

2. The Scripture says; Try all things, hold that which is good. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
21.

Libell.

3. So many Lines as there are, so many Blasphemies against God, are to be
found in the Shoemakers Book: which stinks abominably of Shoemakers Pitch and
Blacking: fie, fie, let this stink be far from us.

Answer.

4. That little Book teaches the way to Christ, very earnestly and sincerely;
And that FIRST; how a man should go forth from the wicked ways of this world,
and enter into true Repentance, and put on Christ in Faith, and be new born in
Christ's Spirit, and how he must be renewed in Mind and Thoughts, and follow or
imitate Christ.

5. SECONDLY; it teaches of True Resignation, how a Penitent Man, must give up
himself to God wholly and altogether and begin and finish all his works in
divine Trust and Confidence, and it signifies moreover, how the Devil lays
Snares, continually, for the children of Christ; that Man cannot otherwise go
quite through those Snares, then with prayer and true humility; and how Christ
himself brings them through with HIS power, and preserves them; and how a
Christian Man, must be John 15. 5.
a Branch on the Vine Christ, also John 6. 53.
eat his flesh and drink his blood. if he would be a Christian.

6. And THIRDLY; It teaches very earnest penitent Prayers; how the poor Soul
must in Great Earnestness enter into Christ's Merits Suffering Death and
Resurrection, and 1 Cor: 15. 31.
dayle dye away in Christ's Death, from the Evil Earthly will: And how it must
go to the Father through Christ's wounds and bloud-shedding.

7. And then FOURTHLY; in the Dialogue or Conference between the Master and the
Scholar, concerning the Supersensuall Life, is signified, what our Eternal
Fathers or Native Country is, and how the Entrance into it is effected.

This Doctrine is the true Ground of the New Testament, as Christ and the
Apostles have taught us.

8. But seeing the Libeller says, there are as many blasphemies against God,
in it, as there are Lines in that Book; it is manifest, that he blasphemeth and
reproacheth the Holy Spiri; in that he calls Repentance Prayer, a blasphemy
against God, for the book treats only of Repentance and of the New Birth.

9. Dear Herr Richtender Kichter, Sir, thou Judging Judge, where will you go
out, or where will you go in, when the Supreme, Richter, or Judge, CHRIST, whom
you disgrace, in his Members, will appear in his wrath, and will Richten den
Richtenden Richter, Judge the Judging, Judge, and will himself be the jus,
right or Law, and the Judgment?

10. That Richter, or Judge, will not respect a Primate or his followers, which
he draws after him, nor any King, Prince or Lord of the world, according to the
Authority they have had, nor their Laws, Statutes or Institutions, but will
judge the LIFE; and try it in HIS Fire.

11. Where will then your reproachings and disgracings abide, which you have
exercised against Christ in his Members: It is written; he that blasphemeth the
Holy Spirit, has no forgiveness Eternally, Math. 3. 29. What will you then
Answer to him? you, who have knowingly blasphemed his Gists, and so miserably
persecuted the Children of Christ? when Christ will say, What you have done to
these the least of my brethren, you have done unto me, what Answer will you
then Give?

12. You despise me, in that I am a Layman or Idiot.
Layick, and not come from the high Schools or Universities with my skill or
knowledge, and cry out, Fie, upon my Gifts, which yet I have received from God,
as a Noble Bounty, which also is more dear to me than the whole world, and
reproachest my Trade or Handicraft, with your crying fie upon it, and call
it together with my Gift a stink, how can it go well with you, when such
reproaching blasphemies, and your crying fie upon it, whereby, you cry fie upon
the Gift of the Holy Spirit, shall awaken in you in Body and Soul, and become
kindled with Gods Anger? so that the world will become too narrow for you? what
would you then afterward give, that you had never done such a thing?

13. The Spirit which now rejoices you, that you may have your will upon me,
with reproaches, and disgraces; If that should now become a Hellish fire and
enter into your Conscience, where will you then remain?

14. You force Tears from me, and earnest Prayers against the reproaching or
blaspheming of God, in that you blame me altogether with untruth, have a care,
that my Tears become not, Romans 12. 20.
Red hot Coals, upon your head.

15. I have prayed much to God for you, that God would enlighten you, and give
you to acknowledge the Truth, but you become continually the worse, I will be
blameless concerning you, if Gods Anger touch you.

16. Why do you despise me because I am a Layick, and yet have high Divine and
Natural knowledge? Do you suppose the Holy Spirit is bound to your Schools or
Universities? Did not our dearest Christ say? My Father will give the Holy
Spirit to them that ask him for it? Luke 11. 13. Also ask and you shall
receive, seek and you shall find, knock and it will be opened unto you? Matthew:
7. 7.

17. I have received my Gift through earnest PRAYING and knocking, and relish
it so, that I would not give it for all the worlds Honors and Goods, also can
never deny or forsake it, wherefore do you ascribe the Gift of God to the
Devil?

18. Do but look back into the world, what kind of simple People has he used
for his work? what was Abel, Seth, Enoch, and Noah? what were the Patriarchs?
Shepherds, none of them was a Doctor: what was Moses? A Shepherd: what was
David? A Shepherd; what were the Prophets, especially Elisha and Habbakkuk
honest simple people, who were Tillers of the Ground: what was Mary the Mother
of our Lord CHRIST? A poor honest destitute young Maid: what was the
Foster-Father of Christ, during his childhood? A Carpenter: what were Christ's
Apostles all of them? poor simple Handicrafts-men or Tradesmen, as Fishermen
and the like; why did not Christ reject them also, seeing they had not studied?
did HE cry fie upon them, because they were Handicrafts People, as you do?

19. What was Christian Nobility from the Beginning? even Humility, and the
Fear of God; where now lies your great boasting in the Scripture, as also in
Art? show me it. Saint Paul was a Scribe, learned in the Scriptures, but when
he became a Christian, then he must first 1 Cor. 3. 18.
become a Fool to his Art and knowledge, that the divine wisdom might find a
place in him.

20. Why do you brag so much of your Art, if you call your self a Christian? do
you not know, that we are ALL ONE in Christ, which is Christ us ALL? If Christ
teaches us and loves us, why then do you curse us; and call, Christ in US, a
stink.

21. Moreover, has not that an ill aspect or symptom, as if the ill spirit
were in you, that can not endure Christ, nor willingly would see, that Men do
repent and pray, being you call Repentence and Prayer, a stink? which you can
not deny, being, you say that every Line is a blasphemy against God; and you
forbid the people to read it under pain of Eternal punishment.

22. Do but open your Heart, and read that little book aright, you will find
some what else, therein; you have not read it at all, yet, that, I perceive, by
the Title of your Libell, for you set down the Title wrong, and have not seen
the little book of true Refignation, of the Imitation or following of Christ,
therein; you set the Morning Redness or Aurora for the First Book, of which
you know little, or nothing, and the way to Christ for the Seccond Book, and
yet it is no single Book, but is only the General Title, And the Book of
Repentance he sets for the Third; whereas it is the First in the printed Book,
and the last, he has never seen.

23. O Primate! Satan has blinded you, and led you into Anger, that for anger
you could not so much as read it, but he has instantly made haste with you, to
reproachings and scandalizing, for it is a stink in his Eyes, thus you have
imitated and followed him, do but drive away Evil affections from you, and
read it aright, and you will see very much otherwise therein.

24. Also you know, that God has converted 'some thereby, so that they are
entered into true Repentance, and have attained that very thing which Christ
has promised us, that is to say, the Gift of the Holy Spirit, Luke 11. 13.
there are eminent Examples near by.

25. These Men's Gifts of the Holy Spirit, you call them all, A stink, whereby
Men may espy and discern that this little Book, is altogether against the
Devil, and that in you no good Spirit must dwell, while you blaspheme the Gift
of God, for you say; this Stink viz: Repentance and Prayer, which is the whole
Contents of this Book, be far from you, it may well so come to pass, that
Gods Gifts should remove, and be far from you.

Libell.

26. You say also that Great Plagues hang over those places, where such
Blasphemy against God, unpunished, may be devised, divulged, and believed;
where Men may also freely without interruption, think write believe and
divulge, what they will.

Answer.

27. Yes, I believe so too, that those places, where Men blaspheme the Gifts of
God, and ascribe them to the Devil, great punishments hang over them; Also
there hangs over the Ear^hly Man, where such an Earnest sincere Repentance
becomes exercised, clearly great punishment, for he must be daily killed, and
be made a Fool to the world, when he shall walk in the Divine way.

28. You see very well, how I am punished by you, in such ways, and not only,
by you, but you egg; and set on the whole City also with reproaching, upon my
Neck, so that they believe you, and punish me; but it is the Badge Character or
Mark of Christ.

29. But that you will prescribe a Model or platform of FAITH for the People,
so that they should not every one believe in his own Divine Gift, as the Spirit
of God in their soul, manifests or reveals it self, to them; Another Libell is
requisite of that, this is not sufficient for that purpose.

30. But that you threaten them with punishment, that I believe you in, very
well, If you had the Power, then, they must either into the Fire, or out of the
Land, or Country.

31. But that you say, the way to Repentance is a E^dachte.
devised Doctrine; that, the New Testament, says not, for when Christ began
his Gospel with John the Baptist, then he said, Repent, Mark 1. 15. and my book
says also the same.

32. The Natural Man receives or perceives nothing of this way, 1 Cor. 2.
14. you need not punish him, he goes without that enough in the ways of the
Devil, till Christ in Repentance does enlighten him: Now look upon your self,
and try your self, whether your self be in such away, Before you prescribe to
me and other children of God, limits and bounds, in our Gifts of God, whereas
your prescription is but a defaming desgracefull Libell.

Libell.

33. Further says the Libell; God will wonderfully rescue his honor, and will
not suffer his Eternity to be taken away by such Sectarian or swarming
Shoemakers, Tanners, Tailors, Woman, Priests, and Doctors.

Answer.

34. I hold the same opinion and believe steadfastly, that God, will suffer, his
honor, which he in JESUS CHRIST, with the victory over Death and Hell, has
manifested or revealed in us poor Men, to be taken away, by no Devil, much
less a Primate, Doctor, Priest, Shoemaker, Tailor, Tanner, or Woman: but
whosoever among these, shall Repent, and turn himself to him, upon those he
will bestow his honor: I believe also well, that he will deliver his children
from all Evil, and fave them.

Libell.

35. The Poison of Arrius, which denies the Eternity of the Son of God, was
not so bad and pernicious, as this Poison of the Shoemaker, which takes away
the Eternity from the Eternal Father, and in a blasphemous way against God
Teaches the Quaternity or fourfoldnesse, in God.

36. The Eastern Countries, in respect of the Heresy of Arrius, have been
horrible punished with the Mahumetan darkness, what kind of horrible darkness
should we then Expect, if we do not with diligent earnestness, hunt away and
root out this Poison out of our Native Country?

Answer.

37. To this I say clearly NO; you can not in Eternity Demonstrate this; that I
take away the Eternity from the Father, much less that I teach the Quaternity
of the Deity; you have a long time groundlessely feigned that upon me, and
cited my writings with a strange understanding, and in the Pulpit said, that I
have written, that the Son of God was made of Quicksilver, you should
demonstrate that; else it shall remain Eternally an untruth, in such untruth it
might be well said, Fie upon it.

38. I acknowledge ONE only God; which it the Eternal beginninglesse one only
Good Substance, which dwells every where without or beyond besides or
distinct from all Nature and Creature in it self, and needs no space or
Place: and in subject to no Measurableness, much less to any Comprehension of
Nature and Creature.

39. And I do acknowledge that this one only God it Threefold in Persons in
Equal Omnipotence and Power, viz: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit: and
acknowledge, that this Triune Substance fills all things alike at once, and
also has been the Ground and Beginning of all Things, and still is, and will
abide so, Eternally.

40. Moreover, I believe and acknowledge, that the Eternal Power, viz: the
divine breathing or speaking, is flown forth and become visible; in which
out-flown word, the inward Heaven and the visible world stands; together with
every Creaturely Substance; and that God has made all things by his Word.

41. That I have written in the Aurora, of Salniter, and Mercury, thereby I
mean, NOT, the mere pure GOD, I mean HIS out-flown Substantial word; viz: NOTE
a shadow of the inward Ground, wherewith the word has introduced it self into
a Natural working, and thereby made that Material; so I Demonstrate the Three
Principles in Nature, which are viz: a Spiritual Mercury Sulphur and Sal; and
what the Ground and Original of them is; seeing the Total Nature, together
with all Creatures; stands therein.

42. I have written of Three Births, First of an Eternal beginningless Divine;
Secondly, of a Heavenly, wherein light and darkness, that is Gods Love and
Anger is understood; and Thirdly, of a beginning or inceptive temporary one;
viz: the visible world: and I understand the Salniter and Mercury in the Third,
viz: the Created Substance.

43. I demonstrate what the Heavenly and Earthly Mystery is; viz: the Holy and
pure Element, and its Efflux with the Four Elements, and the Constellations. I
demonstrate how the Divine Powers are flown forth out of the Heavenly and
become visible; also what the invisible Ground of all Substances, and what Time
and Eternity, is. I believe very well that you understand Nothing thereof, for
it is not every Man's, Gift, but theirs to whom God gives it.

44. But that you say, that I by this, will search out the Deity, and call it
Devilish: thereby you show your ignorance to the day light, that you
understand nothing of the book of Nature, and also do not read the New
Testament; for Saint Paul says: the Spirit searches all things, even the
depths of the Deity, 1. Cor: 2. 10.

45. It is not of Man's Ability, but Gods Spirit performs that searching
through Man's Spirit: But you call it Devilish: if I should speak with you, of
the hidden secret Mystery of Nature, you would be able to understand very
little thereof: but I would demonstrate to you, my book of the Morning
Redness, or Aurora, in all things; if you were not such and angry zealous or
furious Man, so that a Man could but speak with you; but with such disgracing;
you do but hinder the Gift of God, and make your self unworthy.

46. It stands written, And after these days I will pour out my Spirit upon
all flesh, and your Sons and Daughters shall Prophecy, and your Old Men
shall have Dreams; and your young Man shall see visions. Joel 2. 28. also at
that time I will pour out my Spirit upon servants and hand-mayds: why will you
hinder the Spirit of the Lord?

47. If you see any of them, then you say, he is the Devil, and put
reproachful blasphemous names upon him, and cry out, Men should baneish him
from City and Country; pray show in your banishing, your Christian Heart.

48. Are you Christ's Shepherd? where is your Love? wherewith Christ has loved
us; and wherewith we should also Love one another? John. 13. Does the Scripture
bid you, drive out and hunt any into Misery? without hearing of any Cause? what
does it say to you? If thou see that thy Brother is a Heathen: then go to him
and admonish him in private, if he yields to thee, then have thou won thy
Brother; if not, then take one or two with thee, if he yields not then, show
it to the Congregation, if he hear not the Congregation then account him as a
Heathen and Publican, Matthew: 18. 15. Not hunt him out, and reproach and condemn
him unheard, as you have done to me.

49. You have set your self in a Judgment that does not belong to you: read I
pray the Epistles of Saint Paul to Titus and Timothy, How a Bishop ought to be;
and then you will find, that you have not a right Bishops Heart.

50. Why do you reprove my Book Orient Redness.
Morning Redness or Aurora, seeing you do not understand it, also it is not
written for the Pulpit, or that it should come among the People, I have written
it for my self, for a Memorial to me, with such words as at that time I could
understand, what is that to THEE? why have you published, it, and leant it to
other People? None had known of it, if you had not mentioned and divulged it in
the Pulpit, and lent it abroad.

51. Thou supposest, thou will stop and hinder these writings; and yet thou thy
self art he that furtherest them; None would have known any things of me and of
MY writittings, if THOU thy self had not proclaimed them, and lent them out.

52. Afterward the Learned enquired for them, they have all had none so ill
thoughts of them, as you have; Men may indeed find as Learned People among
them, as you are, surely it is not you alone that have studied, also a Man may
find more fear of God, in many of them, who read these writings, and account
them Good, then in you; which you demonstrate by this Libell, and by your whole
Life.

53. But all the works of God, must serve him, God has used you for an
Instrument, of this Publication of them, which God has given me to know;
therefore have I patiently a long time, born upon me, your unjust reproachings
and disgracings, wherein yet no true word has been; elfe I would have answered
you, long ago.

54. You liken my Book of Repentance, to the Heresy of Arrius, and say, that
the Mogenlander. Eastern-Countryes. Morgenrothe. Eastern-rednesse, or
Orient-rednesse.
Eastern Countries, for the sake of that, are punished with horrible darkness,
and if men do not wholly root out my writings; and hunt me therewith: out of
the Country, then it would go just so with us also.

55. Tell me I pray, whether also Lying and Sin be from the Devil or no;
show me the Opinion of Arrius in my little Prayer Book; there is indeed more
Devotion, and divine power in the words of that little book, then is yet at
this time come into your heart; which a Man may observe by your injurious
persecution, in that you would wholly root out, the Author, for his divine
Gifts sake, had you the power, I should not live one jot longer.

56. Christ said: Be ye Merciful as your Heavenly Father is Merciful; forgive
and you shall be forgiven, Luke 6. 36. Also Blessed are the Merciful for they
shall obtain Mercy; Also, Blessed are the Or Peaceful.
Peaceable, for they shall be called the Children of God: Matthew 5. 7. 9. Where
is your Mercifullness and peaceful Heart? do but once put away the Serpents
poison from it, and Sease from reproaching, and forcing untruth upon me; that I
may acknowledge you, that you are a Christian in the Meekness of Christ.

57. Hearken, Herr Primarius, Lord Primate: do you know wherefore God took from
the Eastern Countries the Rev: 2. 5.
Candlestick, as he threatens in the Revelations; It was for the sake of the
Contention Pride and State of the Learned, in that they were only Mouth
Christians, and sought only their Belly God, and earthly Lucifer; and covered
the Antichrist with Christ Purple Mantle: and contended about Opinihns, they
forsork the Holy Spirit in Power, and set themselves in Christ's stead, they
were but contenders and disputes, and their Aim was only at honor and respect.

58. These things the Eastern Countries looked upon and saw that in such
Contention, Gods Love was not, and in that respect they began to doubt
concerning the Faith, and seeing the Learned did but contend, and one part
acknowledged Christ, and the other part denied him, and run on to mere IMAGES
and Opinions, wherein none saw conformity to the other, then the Potentates
thought, with themselves, who knows, how it is with the Priests contention,
whether there be any thing in IT or no?

59. Then came forth Mahumet, and taught the ONE only God, without Trinity; to
whom the people fell away, when they saw, that therein there was no strife in
respect of the TRINITY, for they had enough of strife.

60. Also God permitted it to be so, because in their Contention they did only
blaspheme CHRIST, then he took the Candlestick away, and so they became
Mahumetans, and began to war and dispute with blood and Sword, and drove out
the Titulary and Mouth-Christians, and God suffered it, that they might no
more, contend about Christ's honor, seeing Christ honor is only NOTE
Humility and Love.

61. Behold, and consider well, how are you, the Learned, at present, marked or
characterized; howiis it concerning Christ's Kingdom among you? see and compare
the Times of Arrianisme and the strife of the Learned, in respect of the
Religion of your Times; and your Contention, which you have had along time.

62. Show me the true Christ in Love and meekness, in all your Books of
controversy or Contention, are they not mere libellous papers, and
reproachful slanders, and evil affections? wherein every one cries out,
Heresy: Matthew. 24. 23, etc. Mark 13. 21. Luke 17. 23.
Here is Christ, there is Christ; behold, he is in the Wilderness, in the
Chamber, in the Field, Also in the Supper, in the Baptism and in Confession;
and the other say No: he is not there, it is only a Remembrance, and send forth
such blasphemies reproaches and disgracings about Christ's Cup Office and
Person, as was done in the time of Arrius.

63. Therefore you are now your own Prophet and threaten darkness to your
self; it may very well befall you; and unless you be altogether blind, you
may see it before your eyes, yet you had rather contend, and reproach Gods
children, yes wholly thrust from you, CHRIST, in his Members, then repent.

64. Those who hitherto have prayed to God, and have confessed the peoples
Sins; they have kept back the deserved punishment but you make haste, with
them, out of the Country.

65. And seeing you call me Prophet; but with an evil acceptance for scorn
and disgrace; therefore I shall tell you; what the Lord has given Me to know;
viz: that the Time is born, or come, wherein God will require an account of
your strife about the Cup of Christ, and punish you for it, that which you now
fear, and yet do not Repent, THAT will come upon you.

66. And thea you shall give an account to God of your reproaching, for it will
be required of you, how you have walked before the Lambs committed to your
trust, with Good Life and Titus 2. 1. 8.
sound Doctrine there you will find a heap of Scorners, in that you have made
all Erroneuos and Blasphemous; and have cast your poison and reproaching upon
them, and bespattered them therewith; where will you become, when Ezekiel: 3. 18.
20. Chap: 33. 6. 8. Chap: 34. 10.
Their blood will be required at your Hands?

67. Look but upon your Luke 6. 44.
Fruit, the whole City reproacheth in respect of your powerings out, upon a
Lamb of Christ, and John 16. 2.
think in their simplicity, they do right in it, because, you bid them do it;
where will you abide, when this Lamb will at the Last Judgment Day stand
before your eyes, and your Auditors or Hearers, whom you have made Blasphemers,
shall say, behold is not this He, whom we once accounted a Fool, and made sport
in derision of him, and accounted his Life a shame, how is he now numbered among
the Children of Christ and his Col: 1. 12.
inheritance among the Saints? Owe Fools and unwise, have missed the right way;
Then will all Curse you, that you have lead them to such blasphemy and
Reproach; Wisd: 5. O Primate! be you warned and admonished by the Life of Our
Lord JESUS CHRIST; it is time to abstain; or else you will then see what has
been here told you.

68. You call, in your Libell, Zu them Rechten Richter, to the Righteous Judge,
that he should awake and defend the Majesty of God; Now if the Judgment should
come upon you seeing you do persecute! Christ in his Members, it is you your
self that have called for the Sword.

69. Look I pray upon you own Heart, you paint a Mist or Smoke before the Eyes
of the Church or Congregation, that they should believe you, that your Libell
is right and true; why then do you not take the Certainty out of the Printed
Book? It is likely you have none of them, or it does not relish with you; For
earnest Sincere Repentance puts the Flesh away; assuredly it relisheth not with
you; but the People that read my little Book; and compare it with your Libell;
they will distinguish us, and judge aright.

70. Have a Care, that the Dirt and Burres, which you cast upon me, do not
remain sticking upon you; I will no more remain silent as I have done:
abstinence were good, Peace is a good Country.

The Second Part in the Libell.
The Libell says.

71. THe Libell says; The Shoemaker is the Antichrist.

Answer.

72. If I should describe Antichrist; I could not demonstrate him Otherwise,
then that he calls himself a Christian, and covers himself with Christ's
Purple-Mantle; and acknowledges and teaches Christ with the Mouth; but his
Heart is altogether set against Christ, he teaches one thing and does another;
outwardly he calls himself a Christian, and inwardly he is a Serpent, he
persecuteth Christ in his Members, and resists the Spirit of Christ: he
flattereth and plays the Hypocrite, and will be honored in Christ's Name, but
is inwardly a devouring Wolf; as Christ calls the Pharisees, who sat upon
Moses Seat, and Managed the Law, Matthew: 7. 15. But Christ said, they were from
beneath from the Father of this world, viz: from the Devil, John 8. 23, 24.

73. Herewith I would not touch or disturb the good Conscience of any; but
would try the Libeller, whether a young Antichrist does not peep out of the
Shell.

Libell.

74. Thou Meek and Gentle Lord CHRIST say, My word is True and faithful:
and thou perjured Shoemaker say also; My words are true; which of them both
now shall credit and Faith be given to? To THEE thou True and Faithful Christ?
or to thee Shoemaker, and thy Dung?

Answer.

75. CHRIST is the Word of the Father, the way to God, the Truth and the Life,
and whosoever puts on Christ, from his body shall flow streams of Living
Water; as Christ said, John 14. 6. and 7. 38. Christ said, Whosoever eats my
Flesh and drinks my Blood, he continues in Me, and I in him, John 6. 54. And
Saint Paul says: You are the Temple of the Holy Spirit, which dwells in you:
2. Cor: 6. 16. Also, The Word is near thee, viz: in thy Mouth and thy Heart:
Rom: 10. 8. Deuteronomy: 30. 14.

76. To this Living John 1. 14. Chap: 6. 53.
Word which is become Man, I have wholly given up my self to be its own; And
he, my Lord Christ, has given me his Flesh and Blood in My Faiths Desire, and
so incorporated tied and united himself with me, according to the inward ground
of my Soul and Spirit, that I am ascertained and steadfastly believe, that I am
in John 10. 28.
his hand, and none can pluck me on thence, also Rom: 8. 35. 38.
none can separate me from the Love of Christ, neither Height nor Depth nor
Principality nor Power or Authority, nor any Creature shall separate me from
the Love of Christ.

77. He, My Savior, has given to me to be Rom: 8. 6.
spiritually minded, as Saint Paul says: Rom: 8. 14.
Those whom the Spirit of God drives, they are Gods Children, for we have not
received a slavish or servile spirit, that we should fear again, but we have
received A Child-like Spirit whereby we cry Abba Dear Father, that witnesses
to our Spirits, that we are Gods Children, if we be Children, then we are also
Heirs, viz: Heirs of God, and Coheirs with Christ, if we suffer with him that
we may also be glorified with him. Rom: 8. 14, 15, 16, 17.

78. Therefore say I, I have my knowledge, Gal: 1. 12.
Not from Man, or through Man, but from the Gift of my Savior Jesus Christ,
and desire to seduce none from Christ, but I show them sincerely and heartily,
how they should, through true Repentance and Prayer Matthew: 11. 28.
come to Christ my Savior; as my printed little Book teaches throughout
nothing else.

79. Why then do you separate me away from Christ, and call my words which
direct to Christ, Dung? It is a sign, and the way of Repentance, which leads
to Christ stinketh like filth, this is the true Color or Antichrist, for the
Libeller spits Fie, and filth, against the Repentance and the very earnest
Prayers in my-little Book, and calls it a stink.

80. This I offer to the impartial Reader to consider, of, whether this Libell
of the Primate, be not dictated from the Antichristian Spirit: seeing he will
press that upon me, I offer it that it might be considered and known, from
whom he is.

Libell.

81. Moreover the Libell calls me a perjured Shoemaker, and in the Pulpit he
has called me, a Rascally knave.

Answer.

82. This reproachful defamation, is in all Statutes and Laws of the Empire
forbidden upon pain of severe punishment, that none should disgrace another
good Name and honor, or should make any defamatory Libell or disgraceful
writings; He should be the Man to forbid others, and does it himself.

83. O Primate! I ask you, if I had caused such a Libell to be printed against
you, and had So abominably vilified and disgraced you, to what place would you
have sent it and condemned it? surely to the Gallows, and the Author with it:
but what shall I say to you; even, God forgive it you.

84. I have sworn an Oath to the Emperor, also to the Prince Elector, my
Gracious Lord, as also to the honorable Council, and the City Goerlitz, to be
true and faithful in their defense, and that I have firmly kept to this very
hour, and you call me a perjured or forsworn Fellow and Rascally Knave: I have
brought my honor and reputation to Goerlitz, and you would bereave me of it,
for a perjured Man is not good enough to be in any bodies company.

85. Well now, you should and ought to demonstrate that I am such a one; and
flee with earnest complaint for it to the Magistrate, and implore Justice and
protection: but seeing you oppress me, therefore in the mean time these
deaming reproaches shall rest upon your self, so long, till you set before my
Eyes, my perjury.

86. You have studied upon it this Fasting Time, how you might bespatter
Christ's Children in the whole Church or Congregation with Serpents filth; so
that they are become Reproachers and disgrace me, and have not stopped there,
but moreover caused such defaming Poison to be printed, that they may read it
at home, and tickle themselves therewith, that the Devil indeed may be proudly
Courted and Banqueted in state.

87. I ask also your self, is not that a sign of the Antichrist? was not this
your Office and Ministry, that you should this Fasting Time have considered,
CHRIST'S, Bitter Passion Dying and Bloud-shedding, and represent it well to your
Parish. Children, that they might also have laid it to Heart, but you on the
Contrary have this Fasting time, contrived two Libells, and been angry at
miserable People; so that you have been fain to leave Christ's Passion Wounds
and Death, lying on the Sickbed; and you lay your self by it as an awakened
Poison.

88. Thus unworthy, have you been before the Eyes of God, consider your self a
little seriously, if men would lay it rightly to heart, it might well make ones
Hair stand upright, for fear and amazement, that you possess the place of
God, and stand in the stead of the Holy Spirit, and yet pour out such poison,
upon the poor innocent People, and not only here at Goerlitz, but you also send
your disgraceful writings into strange places and Countries, and poison them,
so that they help you to reproach and blaspheme.

89. All this is a certain sign of the Antichrist, which the Libell would
thrust upon me: I pray, and he curses me. Now judge upon it, those that
understand, with which of US; Antichrist, dwells.

Libell.

90. O Christ! the Holy Spirit has Heb: 1. 9.
anointed thee with Oil, more then thy fellows, and has made thee a Priest.
But thou Shoemaker, the Devil has desiled thee with Dirt and Dung, and made
thee a Heretic.

Answer.

91. The Holy Spirit has anointed Christ and his Children with Gods Oil of
Gladness^, and has introduced that anointing into our Soul, so that we believe
in him, and that I take or receive to my Self; as a Branch of Christ, and have
tasted his Anointing, powerfully in me; which I rejoice my self IN, under the
Cross of CHRIST in my bodily Misery.

92. But that the Primate says, the Devil has defiled mewith Dirt and Dung:
that is true after his manner, for that very Dung, wherewith the Devil has
defiled me, is his reproaching in the Pulpit against me, and this Evil dirty
Libell wherewith the Antichristian Devil, has defiled me, and made me as a
Fool before the whole Congregation: so that the Ignorant People, which have a
Mind to it cast such Dirt at me: But the Primate thinks it were better to throw
Stones at me for then would the Book of Repentance have a riddance out of the
way. But the remembrance of Steven is still taught at this very day, though the
Highpriests did Stone him: Acts. 7. 57. what God builds, no Devil CAN destroy.

93. But that he also says: and made thee a Heretic. that is also a Ray of
Antichrists colors; for when Men would persecute the right true Christians,
and worry burn and kill them, then has Antichrist cried out, they are
Heretics; none other Cause Men had to bring against them, yet thereupon
execution proceeded.

94. O how will these Heretics at the last Judgment day, be set before your
Eyes; when they shall be set, in the divine Power, with Christ, in the
Judgment, and judge the Antichrist, who has persecuted and killed them; what
will you then answer to CHRIST, and to me, when your Libell will burn forth IN
your Soul? who? has given you authority so to Judge? demonstrate it out of the
Apostles doctrine: There is yet time to ropent before I must, through Gods
driving, summon you before the severe Judgment of Jesus Christ: Observe what I
say to you! I am a Christian in Christ, you call Christ in his Member a
Heretic, and his power, Dirt or Dung.

95. The Mercifullnesse of Christ calls you herewith, yet once more, to try
whether you will repent, if Not, I will be blameless concerning you, if you be
set in the Judgment, you have a great Mountain before you, through which you
must climb up: then if Christ leave you, you may well remain Eternally in this
Cliffe.

96. Observe what is said to you, it is well known, Hypocrisy avails
nothing, it must be earnest sincerity: to sin upon Grace, makes a Man
incapable of Grace, the hour is near, be persuaded, you will have no Such
Protector or assistance there; as you draw to your self here, upon which you
rely: you must stand before My eyes, and give an account for your Malice and
reproaching Blasphemy.

97. Christ, in me, and in all the Members of Christ, citoth you before the
Judgment of Christ; what shall I then say to you, for all your scandalous
blemishes you have put upon me here on Earth? I pray you as a fellow Member of
my Soul; convert yet, while the Door of Grace stands open, before the Great
Cliffe, or Gulf between me and you be shut: Luke 16. 26.

98. It becomes A High Priest indeed very ill: who should bring into his mouth
the Divine word of the Love of Christ, that instead thereof takes filth into
his mouth, and polluteth Christ's word, which he should teach; with filth, and
spit such filth, into the Heart of the People, and poison them as you do; for
where filth is, there is not at all the Holy Spirit in that Mouth; but Satan.

99. The Christian Church or Congregation, should do well to open its eyes, and
observe what it is Men teach them, the punishment of God follows; be
persuaded, dear Brethren, there will shortly come a Time, wherein you will well
see, what I here say.

Libell.

100. CHRIST taught Men the divine Commandments, but this fellow teaches with
great earnestness the Seduction.

Answer.

101. Where stands that in my Book, that I teach Men the outword Versuckung.
Separation? show me that, or else it is not so. I teach them the Anointing of
Jesus Christ, with his delicate humanity after a spiritual Kind, IN us,
according to the inward ground of Faith, concerning which CHRIST says, he
which Eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood, he continues in me and I in him,
John 6. 53, 54.

102. For THAT is the Temple of the Holy Spirit, where Christ's Flesh and Blood
continues in us, as Saint Paul says: 1 Cor: 6. 16. Also it is the NEW
Regeneration, wherein the HOLY SPIRIT in us SEARCHES THE DEPTHS OF THE DEITY:
1 Cor: 2. 10. It is the outpowred word of the substantial Divine Love, which
marryeth, and incorporateth, it self with our Soul, as the whole New Testament
teaches.

103. Where it is written; Try whether Christ has gotten a form in you, Gal:
4. 19. If Christ be to get a form in us; then must not that be absent, if we
are to be a Branch on that Vine of Christ, then we must not cleave to an other:
for none can serve two Masters, says Christ, Matthew: 6. 24. Also. My Father
will give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him for it; when that shall come, it
will declare me in You: Luke 11. John 6. 14.

104. It is not an outward Seduction, but an inward Enlightening, whence the
Soul, when it tastes this Heb: 1. 9.
Oil of Joy and Gladness, comes into such great rejoicing, as is mentioned
in my little Book concerning the Noble Sophia; which is, viz: the Substantial
Love of JESUS CHRIST.

105. I understand very well, that you know not this Noble Sophi. a, it is no
good sign, that you deny her and call her an Enthusiastris.
Enthusiast, I know her well and have a love to her, For, she is my Souls dear
Bride; If, I knew her not, then surely, I would not have suffered so very much
for her Love sake, srom you and other people.

106. Christ says, John 10. John 10. from 8. to the 14.
Whosoever enters not through me to the Sheep, viz: Into the Sheepfold, But
climbeth in, some other way, he is a Thief and a Murtherour, and but an
hireling, and is come only with suttlety to rob the sheep of their food, and to
shear off their wool; these belong to the Wolves, and have not the Shepherds
Crook or Staff of Christ, but the Devils Sheers, and must, hereafter
eternally howl with the Wolves: But YE say, he that enters not in through the
high Schools or Universities, he is a Thief and a Murtherour, and so you deride
the Door of CHRIST, viz: the anointing or Unction of the holy Spirit, and will
needs have it to be, that men must draw the divine knowledge and skill only
from the high Schools or Vniversitles, and bind and tie up Gods Gifts, to AR^*

107. But Christ teaches us quite otherwise, that this thing is hidden from
the wise and prudent, and revealed to the seeking and hungry Babes: Math. 11.
25. As Mary also says; He thrufleth out the Mighty from their Seat, and
exalts the miserable and lowly, who are humble in their hearts before him,
Luke 1. 12. She means not Might and Authority but Spirit and Power.

108. O Primate! I had much to say to you here; but I know not whether it would
be well bestowed or no, for you would cover your self only with Christ's Purple
Mantl^; that you might live Rom: 13. 13, 14.
according to the Lusts of the flesh; you would not become regenerated, and
daily dye away from sin, Ephesians: 2. 3.
but only comfort your self, that it is Christ, has done it.

109. But I tell you, it will not avail you, unless you put on Christ's
Satisfaction, through earnest Ropentance and turning in, to grace; and become a
Branch on the stock of the Vine Christ, that Christ in you also do kill sin,
and renew to you your senses thoughts and mind, so that you desire to imitate
Christ, else will your tickling, be unavailable, and be only an hypocritical
flattering Show.

110. I tell it you in love, observe it well. I have received it from God, so
that I know it, also the New Testament throughout teaches you the same; I have
in my little Book very well signified to you; that No man knows or
understands, this Noble Sophiah, in the feeling or Experimental Love of
JESUS CHRIST, John 3. 27.
unless it be given him from God.

111. I will not here further cast the pearl under your feet, till you are fit
and prepared for it in true Repentance, if that were done, which I would wish,
then would I have further speech with you about it, for now you are not yet
worthy of it, seeing you contemn it.

112. In that regard also, is your teaching so cold, because you have not this
power in you, for you yet have not the right Hammer to strike the Clock, you
cannot yet strike the Clock which awakeneth the poor captive Soul, you must use
the right Hammer; if you would strike the right Hour and awake the Soul out of
sleep; you have the WORD indeed, but the right power is not in you, wherewith
you should Co work with the Litterall Word it self; Therefore said Christ, The
sheep hear not the voice of the Hireling, John 10. 3. for his crying and
calling is but mere juggling, and a fighting with a shadow; He is with his
teaching, without Gods Hammer, but a Jugler, a Belly-Hammer, an Ear-Hammer, and
not a Soul-Hammer.

113. This Power, which I mean, is the Doro, to the Sheep, you often use with
your blaspheming reproaches, Satan's Hammer, under Christ's Purple Mantle, your
Heart is as Acts 8. 23.
full of Gall and Bitterness. O, alas, it is Time! Repent!

Libell.

114. CHRIST has directed us to the Word and to the hidden secret Mystery
which the Believing hearts hold or retain in the Faith; but the Shoemaker leads
us to headlong Verzuckung.
Seduction, and to Dreams which rob the believing hearts of Faith.

Answer.

115. I lead not Men away from the Preached and written Word; you do me wrong
in that, but I say, that they should bring along with them the Temple of JESUS
CHRIST, to the preached or written word, viz: a Repentant hungry Soul, which
hears in its own self Christ, which is, viz: the LIVING Word, in the
Litterall and preached Word; as David says, I will hear what the Lord says in
me, Psalm. 85. 9. And Christ also says: He that is of God, hears Gods word:
and to the Pharisees he says: therefore you hear not, for you are not of God,
John 8. 47. also you are not my sheep, John 10. 26.

116. This now I intend in my meaning, that a Man should have divine Ears, viz.
a repentant Soul, if he will hear Christ's voice, be it in the Preaching, in
Reading or Conference; for, this, has CHRIST taught us, whom I more believe
then, I do, all ART whatsoever; for the Historical Faith, to tickle and
comfort ones self with knowing without power, and an earnest sincere will, is
dead, and but a Husk.
Shell, it attaineth not the divine Childship or Filiation, it must be earnest
sincerity that will do it.

117. It is not enough, that we go to Church and to the Sacrament, and sit
there an Hour; playing the Hypocrite and hearing a Sermon; wherein oftentimes
Wheat and Tares are sown together, one among another: in that you many times
reproach and blaspheme; No, going to Church makes none virtuous or honest;
unless he hear in the Church, Gods Word operatively in his Soul, for the Lord
says by his Prophets, they draw near to me with their Lips, but their Heart is
far from me: Ezekiel: 29. 13.

118. Not all that go to Church and say, LORD, LORD, shall (...) into the
Kingdom of Heaven, but they that do the will of my Father in Heaven, says
Christ; Matthew: 7. 2. It must not be Historical believing only, but bowerfull
doing; Now if they are to do the Divine will, then must the same, viz: the
Spirit of CHRIST, work powerfully IN them; for Christ says, without ME you can
do nothing, John 15. 5.

119. Therefore flattering Hypocrisy: and Luke-warmnesse; avails not, for
the true says is not only an imprinted or imaged figure, but it is power
Spirit and Life, it is a Fire of the Divine word; which there burns, and
shines abroad, which Co-worketh with God, the right and true Faith, is the
Seat of God, on which he sits and speaks.

102. Faith is not mere historical Breath, wherewith a Man only comfort
himself, and flattereth the Evil Beast full of false and wicked desires: No,
it is a living working Power of God, its burning Fire, is the fire-flaming Love
of God, which breaks forth, and does the work.

121. Your Preaching is all in vain, if CHRIST works not through your word in
the Hearers, but if that must be done; then you Must teach them LOVE, not
Contention disgracing and Contemning, you must put the Dung and scorn out of
your Mouth, not Judge falsely, and Blaspheme or reproach; for in reproachings,
SATAN works, but with a pure soul, CHRIST works; the Reproaching, is the
ANTICHRIST.

122. But that you say; I direct Men to Dreams, that is worthy of no answer,
for it is not so: this reproaching is also a Signaturo or Sign of Antichrist,
which thus defiles the children of Christ, show it, or it is not true.

123. But that you also say; My Dreams, for such you hold my writings to be, do
rob the believing hearts, of FAITH, that also is not so, but they lead Men from
the Historical Faith, from Hypocrisy; to the Living Faith, which is, JESUS
CHRIST: and do show them, how they should daily dye away from sin, and become
new born in Christ, and imitate or follow him in Faith and Spirit, and become
ONE Spirit with Christ.

124. Which makes the Devil, afraid, that Men will no more endure him under
Christ's Purple Mantle, but the time is Born or Come, that his Kingdom shall be
revealed and brought to scorn, which No Primate shall hinder, it is so ordained
of God.

Libell.

125. CHRIST has handled weighty Matters, but the Shoemaker, slight
contemptible matters.

Answer.

126. Christ has brought, and showed us the way to Blessedness and salvation,
and the Shoemaker desires to walk therein, but Satan calls it a slight and
contemptible way, seeing it is a Crosse-way, wherein a Man in this world in
misery and humility must follow or imitate Christ; for Satan is a Spirit of
Pride, and therefore he despises the Path of Christ's Pilgrimage: being this
way is straight and narrow, and pleases not the fat Belly, and the Eyes that
are full of their own Honor and self-hood.

127. Christ has destroyed Satan's Kingdom, and generated Christianity, but the
Antichrist has set himself in Christ's Seat, and this the Shoemaker reveals
or Manifests, according to the will of God, and that the Primats supposes to
be a slight contemptible matter; but when the Hour shall strike but Note Note
See the first Apology against Baltazar Tylcken. verse 5. 40.
Seven: then, it will have been a Good matter.

Libell.

128. Christ Contemned worldly Riches, but the Shoemaker desires them.

Answer.

129. CHRIST said, Come to me, all you who labor and are heavy laden: Matthew:
11. 28.
Math. 11. He made no difference between Rich and Poor, which came to him; but
that the Primate is troubled, that a Layick is helped by Rich people that fear
God, thereby, it is likely, he supposes, somewhat goes away from him, it
belongs to him alone to converse with the Rich, for his own Profit, to him
belongs Riches: On the contrary they Shoemaker desires no Great Riches, in
this world, for he is not Proud, as men may well see by him.

Libell.

30. Christ led his Life soberly, but the Shoemaker uses commonly to be full
and drunken.

Answer.

131. CHRIST was indeed Sober: but what the Primate lays upon the Shoemaker,
he is that himself; Men use sometime to take him from lying drunk under
Tables, abroad, and bring him Home: Men may indeed find him ost drunk in one
week, but the Shoemaker not in Three years.

132. This Article he has wholly taken from his own Conversation. Saint Paul
says to the Rom: 2. 1. 3.
Romans 2. Therefore O Man, thou can not excuse thy self whosoever thou art,
who judge, for wherein thou Judge another, thou condemnest thy self,
seeing thou do the same thing, which thou judge; for we know, that Gods
judgment (...) just against those that do such things.

Libell.

133. Christ has abstained from superfluous Laughter, but the Shoemaker laughs
in all that he speaks.

Answer.

134. Men find not that Christ ever laughed, but only rejoiced in Spirit, but
that the Primate, has imputed Laughter and Phantasticallnesse to the
Shoemaker, and says, he laugheth at every word, that is indeed an open gross
untruth, and cannot be made appear; neither can any honest faithful Man say
it; but that Nature gives to one to laugh and to be friendly and affable, more
then to another, and makes of another a Saturnine Sour Grim looked Man, that
the Primate cannot Mend: he should do well to be silent in that, if a Man
should describe him, Marcolpbus (...) feigned in Germany, to have been ^olomons
Je^^r, who ^hen he was condemned to be hanged, desired of the King he might
chose the Tree upon which he must be executed, which being granted him: he
looked a while, and being asked which he chose, answered he could not find any
that he could choose, and so escaped for that time; these and many other
stories are in a Book of him, in the German Tongue.
and his foolish flouts, which he oftentimes in his Tiplings and Quaffings
gives forth, a Man should be constrained to bring out some strange Monsters.

135. It seizes upon me with wonder, that he is not ashamed, being he is an Old
Man, in whom a Man should seek for wisdom, that he dares write such open
untruths and foolish flouting Expressions, and cause, an honest Man of Credit
to be oppressed, with scorn, they are yet worse then a common jeering flouting
Jester; this Libell is very like * Marcolphus his filthey scurrilous scoffings,
who always carries filth in his Mouth, as this Libell also does.

136. It brings but little repute to a Teacher of Christ, who should forbid
it others, and yet does it himself: The Shepherds Office, will be handsomely
served by it; none should trust his SOUL to such scoffings; he will be
deceived: this Spirit standard upon the Sand, and tottereth to and fro, Men may
try him now, in such scoffings.

137. Men may well know the Foul by his Feathers: Christ said: That which is
within, that comes forth, what the Heart is full of, that comes out upon the
Mouth? Also, how can you that are evil speak that which is Good? Also, Can a
Man gather Grapes of Thistles, or Figs of Thorns? A Good Man brings Good,
forth, out of the Treasure of his heart, and an Evil Man brings Evil forth,
out of the Treasure of his Evil Heart, Luke 16. 45.

138. This I give now to the Reader, to ponder of, what kind of Good Treasure
can the Primate have in Heart, when he brings forth such wondrous things out of
his Heart, there must certainly needs stick many strange things, therein, which
he ought indeed to be a little ashamed to bring forth; seeing he is the
High Priest, but if a Man come to him, and but displease him with one word,
then a Man may hear Satan many times laugh, out from him, with reproachings and
blasphemies.

Libell.

139. When Christ Taught the People, he did it openly, but the Shoemaker uses
to creep into secret Corners.

Answer.

140. CHRIST was a Teacher sent from God, and yet must oftentimes, depart from
the Pharisees, and Scribes learned in the Scriptures, and go into the
Wilderness to teach the People, when they saw him teach, they would sain have
killd him, and called him a deceiver and maker of uproars: and said: he had his
Or Art.
skill and Doctrine from the Devil: and though they saw the wondrous signs or
Miracles, yet they were so Mad and hardened, and supposed, Teaching, belonged
only to them, and did to him also, as the Primato does to the Shoemaker: Math:
11. 10. Luke 7. 34.
they called him a Wine-bibber; and Minister or Servant, to rich Publicans; And
John the Baptist preached also in the Wilderness; yes in the Wilderness was
the Gospel, of Christ began by John, also the Apostles must often for fear of
the Highpriests, Teach in Corners, and Houses, as the Acts of the Apostles
witness.

141. But the Shoemaker is no Preacher, but he gives only an account of his
Gift and knowledge, and speaks often with Honest Hearts, concerning The Way
to Christ; how we must convert and repent, and become newborn, for CHRIST
says also thus; Where two or Three of you are met together in My Name, there
am I in the midst among them: Matthew: 18. 10.

142. The Primne should teach us, that when we come or meet together, we should
speak of GOD and of our Salvation, and edify or build up one another in true
Love; on the Contrary, he forbids us this, whereby Men may try what spirit he
serves; A high Glass of Wine, in his meetings, is better liked by him, then A
hearty blessed Conference, concerning the New Birth.

143. CHRIST on Earth had no greater Enemies, then the High Priests, it will be
so still at this Day, for all Wars and strife, come from the Highpriests
disputings and reproachings, as it is before our Eyes, if our Eyes be open to
see it, but the account is near at hand.

Libell.

144. Christ desired no Kingly honor, but the Shoemaker if he could, would be
King, and God to o

Answer.

145. CHRIST came upon Earth, poor, that he might have compassion on us, and
make us rich in Heaven, and like his Dear Angels. The Shoemaker also is upon
Earth Poor, and despised, but desires from CHRIST the Heavenly Kingly Honor,
and to be like the Angels, also he desires in Christ, according to his Inward
Faiths Ground, to become with and in CHRIST, Deified, that Christ's Deity, may
dwell and Eternally Note Note
abide in him, and that, No Primate shall take away from him. Hallelu-jah.

146. Matthew: 2. 1, 2.
The Star is appeared which leads tho wise men or Magi, to the Babe JESU:
oppose it how thou will, O Devil! it is in vain, here is Body and Life: MY
Eternal Kingdom with CHRIST and the Holy Angels, can none take away from me;
and if the whole world lay full of such Libells, yet I would keep my Kingdom
in Christ, and tread the Libells under foot, and not spare my outward Life for
it; I know a better Life, which Christ my Lord will give me.

147. Therefore then be gone thou fair wicked world, I ask not after thy
Honor, Goods nor Money, Phil: 3. 20.
our Conversation is in Heaven with Christ, for he is mine and I am his, the
Enemy shall not part us, Hallelu-jah; Rev: 18. 2.
It is fallen it is fallen, Babylon the Great City upon Earth, and become
habitation of all Devils and unclean Spirits: Now is the Kingdom of our
Christ; sing my Soul, and rejoice, that the Dragon in THEE, is killed, and the
Life of GOD is brought forth again.

Nun last zornen Te^fell und die Hell,
Gott's sohn is it worden unser Gesell.
Let Devils rage, and Hell, have Indignation;
The Son of God, 's become our sweet Companion.
Libell.

148. Christ desired no Title and vain honor, but the Shoemaker is brag of his
Titles.

Answer.

149. The will of his Father, was the Title of CHRIST, his honor was in God,
and he introduced it into our Humanity, and exalted our humanity to the right
hand of the Power of God: that very honor he has bestowed upon his
Christians, that they also in him, sit at the right hand of the power of God,
an reign over Sin, Death, the Devil, Hell, and the World; THIS high Title
also the Shoemaker claims to himself, an desires, the highest kingly Title in
the victory of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, as a Champion over Death and Hell, he
desires such a high Title, that he may stand in the strife against Death and
Hell, and that, in CHRIST he thinks, to conquer and overcome the whole world,
to be a King in Christ; and to rule over all Enimicitious Libells and
reproaches of the Primate; otherwise, he desires no worldly Titles for the
Kingdom of a Christan is not of this world: John 15. 19. for Christ says, I
have called you out of the world so that you may be where I am: John 17. 24.

150. But the Primate does desire a Title, for he has set his Titles of the
Highpriests Office, and of his Person, in the Libell, with GREAT LETTERS, that
men might see the Richter, or JUDGE, who has authority over Christ's Children,
also, if one come a little too near him: and did but forget to take of his Hat,
for fear of him, he might well expect-some strange king of Title from him, if
he were not kicked for his pains.

Libell.

151. CHRIST was satisfied with the Name of a Master, but this Fellow, will be
called Doctor and a New Prophet.

Answer.

152. Thomas said to CHRIST, My LORD, and my GOD: Joh. 20. 28. and Christ did
not speak against it; now there is no higher Name then GOD: therefore it is
likely the Primate seldom reads the BIBLE; seeing, he does not know, that
Christ took, a higher Title then Master, and before Pilate he said; I am indeed
a King; Luke. 23. John 18. 33.

153. It is a Wonder to me, that seeing he has studied so much, he is not yet
come to that place, where CHRIST'S Titles stand IN the SCRIPTURE.

154. But that he says, the Shoemaker, will be called Doctor and a New
Prophet, that is only his Fiction, as Men use in such Libells to seign, after
the Manner of Poets. The People need not believe it all, for a good Man may now
and then Err, especially when a Man is Drunk, an puts on a Vizard a Man can
not know him; and though he were High Priest, if men see him go so from one
house to another, then People say, there comes a Fool, and many may well say,
it were the Devil: But it is not all true; the People give them only such a
Title, when they assume such Images shapes or Gestures; afterward they become
Men again, when they put off the Vizard, many a one goes so, only that he may
come to his Paramour or where, then he makes some foolish Occasion; but men
should not in such matters believe the Title, when the People say, one with a
Vizard, is such a Beast, it is Death, or the Devil; No, he is but a captive of
the Devil.

155. Thus also men Should not believe, when the Primate puts Titles upon the
Shoemaker, and calls him A Heretic, A Sectary, Fool, Fantastic or
Fanatic, Enthusiastic, A Rascally Knave, A forsworn or perjured Shoemaker,
and more, like that they are such stretched strained Names, like a Vizard,
which the Devil puts upon him, because he is in strife and at odds with him;
It is not good to believe, though the High Priest himself say it, men may be
deceived, for great people may be mistaken, for, the Pharisees, were mistaken
in CHRIST'S Titles, how then will the Primate not be mistaken in the Shoemakers
Titles, seeing he knows that he is but a Laick, and he knows not the Name of
CHRIST-in him.

156. The good LORD, sure, was once with some Shoemaker, who had touched the
Blacking, which made him stink, whence is so very much angered offended and
enraged, that he supposes, that THIS Shoemaker always smells of that
coloring, and therefore he is so fiercely enraged against the Shoemakers
Titles; likely some Shoemakers Pitch remains sticking to his Hands, that is
dried to them, and in that regard, he gives the Shoemaker such abominable
Names, that he is still angry at it: He can not endure the Shoemaker yet, and
is afraid, the Shoemaker may defile his own Pen, and therefore forbids him to
use it: O, Primate! the Shoemaker has his Titles IN himself, you can not
defile them, he will Eternally keep THEM, well nough.

Libell.

157. CHRIST gave the Thirsty, water of Eternal Life to drink, But the
Shoemaker runs every Morning, to the Brande-wine or Strong-water, or the Water
of Death.

Answer.

158. Christ at this very day bestows on his Children Water of Life, and
gives them His blood of Love to drink; that very water he gives to my thirsty
Soul to drink, for which I thank him Eternally, that he has through this
Water, made me living and Seeing, that very water I drink; and that is a water
for or against Death, though the Primate speaks thereof in a perverted way.

159. But that he says, I run every Morning to the Brande-wine or
Strong-Water, that is not true, I may not nor cannot drink any Brande-wine, and
have a long time had a dislike against it, it is contrery to me, so that I do
not willingly smell to it; It is a wonder to me, that he being a High Priest,
should be so very much mistaken, he would look upon it very ill, if a mean Man
should do so, then a Man would say, he were a Liar, I know not at all, what
answer I should give to such untruth, I believe verily that the Satanicall
spirit of Error has feigned this untruth.

160. I counsel you, that you hunt that away, from you, it defiles you with
such untruth very much: but if you will have it right, then set before me an
honest honorable Man of credit, whether he be, in the City, or out of the
City, whoever he be; that can with truth say, he sees me every Morning at the
Brande-wine; I appeal to the whole City, and a Noble Councillors Cellar
Keeper: whether there be any Man, that can say so, of me.

161. It is a great shame, that you cause such untruth, to be printed to the
reproach of another; with you, men may well find great Cups and Glasses of
Brande-wine; but as you are mistaken and do err in this, so you are mistaken
also in all other Articles of the Libell, there is not one of them true in the
sense you represent them.

Libell.

162. CHRIST scarce drank any wine, but the Shoemaker guzzles freely,
Outlandish wine, and Brande-wine.

Answer.

163. John 2. 1. to the 10.
Christ made Water to be good Wine, John 2. and is himself the Good Wine for
the thirsty Soul, which my Soul freely loves to drink of; but that the Primate
says, I love to guzzle Outlandish Wine and Brande-wine, that he takes from his
own Example, and thinks another does as himself does; O, no, we poor men
have not to pay for it, we must be content with a draught of Beer or small
Drink as we can buy it, but men must give the Primate Outlandish wine indeed,
though other Guests at the same time must be content with smaller.

164. Sa^k.
Spanish wine causes, that Men sometime want or loose the Primate, for a
while, also men may see by the red Wine-pimples in his Face, that he drinks
strong Wine much more then I, for I have no such signs of it as he; he drinks
more foreign wine in a week then I in a whole year.

165. But I understand very well where the matter pincheth, He knows that I
through divine appointment, have often been requested to go to Great Lords and
Noblemen, then thinks he, when we come to meet, we sit together, and quaff our
Fill, as he uses to do, with his Companions; But No! the Nobility and
Potentates in Authority, which are served with full draughts, do not cause me
to be sent for, to them, but only honest Lords fearing God, who earnestly seek
after Salvaiton.

166. But there is in the Primate a Mistrust and grutching, he thinks
somewhat is going away from him; but he need not fear it. Those People, which
desire to have ME, they desire not to have HIM at all, there is a great
difference between Hypocrisy or Flattery and telling the Truth to ones Face;
whether the Primate will believe it or no, it is not my Custom, to slatter the
Rich for gifts and presents; as he supposes.

167. I believe verily, that some Old Ruffians, have brought him those tidings
as News concerning Me, And the Good Lord has believed it as Gospel, and with
great earnestness written it, and so enraged himself at it, that he has
thereupon condemned the poor Shoemaker, unheard, but it would look strangely,
if Men should ask after the Ground of it, and compare this Answer with the
Libell.

168. It is truly a great Matter, for such a Man as you are, so to deal with
the Truth. The City Goerlitz know very well, that I for a long time without
necessity, have come into No Man's House, The Tap-houses and Wine-Cellers, are
at quiet for all me; for you have so judged and condemned me that I would
willingly come no whither; now if I should go to drink in Tap-houses; how many
hundred of your Flouts should I not get; which you have cast among
Common People, which are all, your Fruits, which will follow you, you may well
rejoice at them.

Libell.

169. Now if by this thou know the Shoemaker, as the Lion by his Paw: Will thou then read his Books? No, but Shun them as the filthy Spawn of a Devil,
and abominable Error, and hold thee close to the Word of God, and beware of
the Shoemakers Scholars or Disciples, whether they be Noblemen or Doctors,
Taylours, Men or Women; The LORD CHRIST destroy Satan's Instrument, and let not
THY Word be suppressed or obscured.

Answer.

170. In these words it may well be observed, wherefore, the Libell has been
written, viz: that he might bring to nothing and quite root out my writings, by
these defamatory Reproaches; It vexes the Devil, that my writings do lay open
his Smoak-Hole, and therefore it is, that he paints me with such colors; that
NONE should READ me, Men might otherwise Repent, and so there would be a
greater Breach made, to his Kingdom.

171. But this Devil is so very Grossly vile, that he goes quite Naked, the
People may easily observe him, and learn to know him, for men see his Paws in
his disposition and reproachings, and that he is altogether a Poisonous
venomous or Spiteful Spirit; It is now quite an other Time, then it has been,
Men will not now so suddenly believe what every one says; Men will see proof
for it: why does he not demonstrate what he says out of the printed Book;
seeing he forbids it, to the Congregation of the People: such defamatory
reproaches, are no demonstrations, men may well call them Filth and Dung.

178. He speaks of the Lions Paw, by which Men should know the Shoemaker; Now
it may well be true, that men at present may easily see the Lions Paw in Me,
how the Lion with contemning and reproaching, has griped and clawed Me; but
the Blood of JESUS CHRIST has hitherto resisted the Lion, else he had torn the
Shoemaker in pieces.

173. But that he says; the Shoemakers Doctrine is Filth and Dung: therein he
calls CHRIST'S Mind or Thoughts, and Spirit, Filth and Dung. And that Men should
beware of the Shoemakers Scholars or Disciples, to that, I say, I know of No
Scholars or Disciples, but only of Christian Men, where one SOUL is refreshed
by an other: I have no New Doctrine, but only the Old, which is to be found in
the BIBLE, and in the Kingdom of NATURE.

174. But that he calls his reproaching Blasphemies, GODS WORD, which men
should hear, only from HIM, and should so reproach; as he does; that I offer to
Christian Hearts to consider of, what Spirits Child he is.

The Third Part in the Libell.
A Spending Penny on the Way.
Libell.

175. THe City of Goerlitz: still drives thee Shoemaker away, and commands
thee, to be gone thither, where thy writings are highly Esteemed; away quickly,
and get thee A great way off, thou vain Mouth which reproachest and blasphemest
GOD, and try thou Miserable Man, what Mischief is prepared for thee.

Answer.

176. O Primate! keep this Spending Penny for your self against you go to
Heaven, I desire nothing from you: your vain reproaching Blasphemies, will
indeed follow after you for a Spending Penny; 1 Cor: 10. 12.
Be not deceived, he that stands, let him take heed least he fall; Though
indeed you persecute Me, and intend to Bannish me; who knows? who it is,
will, persecute you so also in a short time.

177. The Signatures, or signs of it, are at hand, it is equal that you before
hand do to others, as afterward you would it should be done to you for a
Punishment; but, you must fill up your Measure; and if you do not Repent, then
will the Evil Spirits one day sing you a very grievous Song, and command you
to go away a far off from the Countenance of God; For what you do now at
present, that you do to CHRIST in his Members; and that will He also do to you,
if you do not quickly convert and Repent.

Libell.

178: Thou art just like Oedipus, whom the Earth swallowed up; O take heed,
that the like does not befall thee also; his Shadow did much hurt the People
who stood near him, but believe me, thy Shadow hurts many of them exceeding
much.

Answer.

179. The Acts 5. 15, 16.
Shadow of St. Peter did the Devil also very much hurt, so does my Shadow
also do hurt only to the Devil and so Antichrist; its likely you suppose, that
my shadow might hurt you as to your earthly Life; because I make known the
imitation or following of Christ, and so the people, who receive that Doctrine,
would require of you, that you also should live as the Apostles of Christ did,
and Imitate or follow their example, and that relisheth not with you, therefore
you say my Shadow hurts some, viz: the false or wicked Spiritualty or Clergy,
very Mightily: It may not be otherwise; it must so come to pass.

180. But I know, very Many Spiritual Priests, or Clergymen, whom it will NOT
hurt, but do them much good, whose Office of the Ministry, is sincerely and
earnestly intended by them; BUT who can, [do any thing], before the Time, which
brings ALL THINGS to pass?

181. If the Primate with his Warning or admonition, intend so faithfully, then
let him leave, his reproaching Blasphemies in the PULPIT, and only require me,
to come to him, and show me my Error, if I did but find that he had any thing
of Truth, against me, and would show me a better way; O how I would cheerfully
love him, and faithfully thank him for it; he rejoices, that he has but any
thing that he CAN reproach.

182. AT the beginning, after his first reproaching Blasphemy, and persecution,
I bowed and yielded to him for Note J. B. did forbear writing of his Works for
six years.
Six years together, and wrote No word further of my works, why did not he
cease to Reproach? who did any thing to him? But he could not; why? Because God
had made him a driving Hammer, that must drive on the work.

183. His reproaching has become my strength and growth, through his
Persecution my Pearl is grown, he has pressed it forth, and published it
himself, and in that regard I wish him Gods Mercy and Compassion, that he
might yet partake thereof, seeing God has used him for my instrument in my
work.

184. I would deal much humblyer, toward him, if he would convert, then he
has done toward me, He need not think I shun coming before his Face; I have a
good Conscience, and wish him one too.

185. In no Judgment, to sentence one, unheard, does avail, I submit not my
self in such a way to his Judgment, for my heart is not convinced, with such a
sentence, I am innocent of all that is laid to my charge; All that he has
spoken against me in the Pulpit, is quite contrary to my sense and meaning, and
not one true word of it, he has wrested and perverted all my words, with a
strange understanding.

186. Therefore seeing I can now, have no other Richter, or Judge, who himself
will understand my Gift, I appeal from his Judicium, Censure or Judgment,
before the Judgment of my Savior JESUS CHRIST, till I be orderly heard, then
I will give an Account of My cause.

Libell.

187. Thou have hitherto Imitated or followed after Cerinthus, in that thou
have feigned and Cooked wondrous Matters, and proclaimest horrible things: when
this Cerinthus was in the Bath, he despised the LORD CHRIST, and raged in his
railing, babbling vehemently against GOD, but the House fell down and Slew him:
thus was the Teacher together with the Scholars or Disciples, brought to
destruction.

Answer.

188. Was Cerinthus against CHRIST? that I leave as it is, in its own place; I
am with Christ, and acknowledge JESUS CHRIST for my LORD and GOD: and have
submitted and given up my self in Obedience to him, to live according to his
Will and Commandment; but that the Primate says, that I have done Like
Cerinthus, that needs well to be demonstrated, else it will not be true.

189. But that he speaks of my Wondrous Things; To that I say with truth, I
have written of No Wondrous things; I have only written, what NATURE and MAN
is; but seeing this seems to be wondrous to the Primate, the fault thereof is
only this, that He does NOT understand it.

190. What can I help that? that he is blind concerning it; I have not written
it for him, but only for those, to whom God gives, to understand it: Let him
remain a High Priest, and not be a Philosopher or knower of Nature, and so we
are parted; he ought not to thrust the old Sects upon me, I have seen none of
those writings, it is only his Malice.

Libell.

191. Thy filth O Shoemaker, has exceedingly defiled OUR City.

Answer.

192. You have so bespattered it with Dung of Reproaching Blasphemy, in regard
of the Shoemaker, that Many, stink with reproachings; that is the Filth, which
hurts them in their souls; you are the cause thereof, that it hurts them;
in that they believe the reproachings, and take them into their heart, and so
reproach Gods Gift.

Libell.

193. O, that all those who read thy writings, might away, along with thee into
Perdition.

Answer.

194. What a Christian wish is this of the High Priest? Man could scarce, Nay
not at all, find such a one, in Caiphas: also it might not well stand, any
where, in the BIBLE: It will soon come to that, that his Christian wish will be
true, that the Sheep will be severed from the Goats, and be parted one from
another; that the Goats may have scope and room in Hell, seeing on Earth they
could endure none other to be among them.

Libell.

195. Yes, thou have kindled or inflamed all Silesia it self with thy Doctrine,
where thou will be received by Many whom I very well know; who, as they are in
respect of their Nobility, much more of Note then others, so they have a
greater influence upon others, with their Novelties; but you his Companions,
beware and take heed least these notorious writings of this notorious Man; and
you perish together.

Answer.

196. Men find indeed at present in Silesia, many excellent Learned Men fearing
God, which see further, then the Lord Primate does, whose Christianity is in
right sincere Earnest; who walk in the Imitation or following of CHRIST, they
read many good Books, which lead to the right ground or foundation Stone; they
have not first learned of me the Imitation or following of CHRIST; but they had
it before, and now do but rejoice themselves in this, that God also powers out
such knowledge into simple People, which is indeed A wonder of God.

197. But you ascribe it to the Devil, as the High Priests did to Christ; some
of the Nobility also follow after you; yet some of the highest of the Nobility
in Silesia, observe the Time, and see, that God has some great Thing in hand,
but you are blind concerning it, and hardened, as the Pharisees were also in the
Time of Christ; Therefore the Day of your punishment from God, comes on apace,
and is near, know that.

Libell.

198. O, now then be gone, and come no more, that thou may miserably perish,
and rather take a Shoe into thy hand, then a PEN. The 27. March 2624.

Answer.

199. CHRIST said, if they Curse you, then bless them, and then are you the
Children of the Most high: Matthew: 5. 44. Seeing therefore the Primate wishes
me a Miserable Death, his wish must needs be from the Devil, for it runs quite
contrary to Gods Will and Commandment, as also contrary to all honorable
reason, and honesty here: Luke 6. 44.
Men shall know the Tree by its fruit, and every one may well conceive out of
what Spirit and Mind he persecutes me, and that he does it to please SATAN, and
is No Minister of Servant of Christ.

200. But seeing Note
he curses me, therefore, I bless him through the Blood and Death of our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, in the Name of God the Father and of the Son and of the Holy
Spirit; Amen: and wish unto him, that this Blessing may take effect and light
upon him, and generate him to be a Child and Heir of Eternal Life, that he
may become and Eternally remain to be, my brother in the Life of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, Amen, Amen, Amen: and I conclude it with my whole heart, will and
desire.

Dated at Goerlitz the 10. April Anno. 1624. Jacob Behme.

The APPENDIX to the Libell.
NO Error is so Gross or abominable which has not those that give
Countenance to it and Maintain or stand by it.

Answer.

A Good Man Maintains, or stands by the GOOD, and an Evil, by the EVIL,
viz: by reproaching and blasphemy; But to those that love God, all things must
serve to the Best for them, Rom: 8. 28. And if they stuck in the Midst of all
Errors, yet they are then in Gods Hands, and preserved from Thee reproaching
Blasphemer, for it is a horror to them, and they do not willingly hear People
despise and reproach others.

Libell.

THE Error is first Small, and at length Great.

Answer.

CHRIST says, The Kingdom of God is first Small, as a grain of Mustard Seed,
afterward it grows as great as a Tree. Matthew: 13. 31. Mark 4. 51.

Libell.

In the World there is always one kind of Comedy or Scene Acted, only with
alteration of Time Place and Persons.

Answer.

GOD has wrought from Eternity, and works in Eternity, and yet remains
solely, the same, ONE, Only, Eternal, GOD.

This Translation into English finished this 26. of September, 1659.


