AN APOLOGY Concerning Perfection Being A Fundamental Answer and Reply upon
Esaiah Stiefel His Exposition of Four Texts of the Holy Scripture Written In
the Year 1622. finished the 6. April.

By Jacob Behme Also called Teutonicus Philosophus. Englished by JOHN SPARROW.

LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Giler Calvert, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Black-Spread-Eagle at the West end of St. Paul's. 1661.

THE PREFACE.
1. COurteous Reader who love Truth: There has lately come to my hands a
Treatise, sent from Good friends, concerning some Points of Conclusion, which
one has explained and as to his sense sufficiently expounded at large.

2. Thereupon I have been entreated by them, also to give My apprehension or
understanding, and explanation upon those very Points.

3. Seeing, therefore I observe, that, in that very Explanation, there are some
Erroneous Opinions that run contrary to the Holy Scriptures and true
Understanding: which are of concernment to the Reader, and may almost stagger
him; therefore I would take the labor, and express it in a more rectified
understanding.

4. Not to disturb or judge any man; but that the understanding thereof might
be made more clear, for the sake of the Reader, who with earnestness, seeks
the PEARL of Divine Knowledge, that it might introduce their hungry Minds into
better security and Rest; and so might have occasion, to seek with the greater
earnestness the Pearl of Divine knowledge; and to refresh themselves
therewith, till we can attain the PERFECT enjoyment thereof in the other Life,
2 Cor. 5. 1.
After this Tabernacle.

5. Therefore will I set before me, those Points of Couclusion, together with
the meaning of him, that has explained them, and briefly and summarily peruse
the understanding of the Points, as also the understanding of the Expositour?
and show the true Ground, and bring it into a round current express
understanding at large: and leave it to the Reader of the Divine knowledge to
consider of.

The Points to be explained are these Four Texts of Scripture.
I. The First is Genesis the 1. Chapter, Verse 27. God Created Man according to
his Image. II. The Second is 1 Timothy 3. 16. The Divine Mystery is apparently
Great; God is Manifested or Revealed in the Flesh. III. The Third is Isaiah 54.
5. He who has made thee is thy Husband; his name is called the Lord of Hosts,
and the Redeemer, the Holy One in Israel, who is called the God of the whole
World. IV. The Fourth is 1 Corinthians 11. 12. As the Woman is from the Man, so
also the Man comes by the Woman, but all things from God.
these alleged Texts, the Expositour gives his meaning in the following words
and expressions to the sender of the Texts, thus.
Tri-une living God, Governor and Lord of Heaven and Earth, born of the
Tri-une highly praised God, and most holy Substance of the total Perfect
Tri-unity, from Eternity; and begotten to his Image in the Love of his Divine
voice to his most holy delight and most holy Joy and Pleasure, from and in
Eternity.

2. Upon your last and lately sent Questions, as they are written in order one
after another, I shall and have, according to your desire, answered them, with
God the Tri-une wisdom in Christ, yes, with that very wisdom Christ himself,
the Eternal most Holy Omniscience; This which follows: to the holy Tri-une
praise of God, to the alone salvation of the Souls of all you that are holy and
faithful, in, and out of the Tri-une Heart and Mouth, with the Eternal
Powerful and Living Word, in, with, and out of all holy Members of Christ the
highly praised God: and shall or will in the Testimony of the Letter, bring
them forth to the day light.

The First Text.
3. And as is first mentioned: and set down in the Text of the 1. of Genesis,
verse 27. and expressed in Scripture: Genesis 1. 27.
God Created Man according to his Image, first of all in Adam.

4. This Text has been urged by you particularly, in regard of the outward
appearance of the German Text, Got schuff den Menschen Jhm Zum Bilde, [and
therefore because of your unskilfulnesse therein, you ought not so very much to
be blamed] yet you have alleged it slightly and contrary to the Divine Sense.

5. Because the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin Text mentions it thus; God Created
Man in his Image: From which it clearly and Manifestly appears; that the
Tri-une God, in Christ, his first begotten or born Son and most holy express
Image of his invisible Deity before all Creatures, has created not only Man,
but also all Heavenly and Earthly Creatures, yes all whatsoever was made, John
1. In him, and he has made and brought them forth in Christ to his holy praise
and Glory.

6. Therefore your Exposition, as you set it, first in Adam, cannot here be
applied and alleged; as also your Scripture brought to prove it, even To the
Image of God Created he him, a second time in Christ, cannot avail or be
allowed, because all this came to pass before the fall of Adam.

7. Whereas at that time there is no mention of the Regeneration in and through
Christ, and according to the Testimony of Scripture, is not recorded for the
Created Man to know, from and with God.

8. The Hebrew Greek and Latin Text also mentions, that the Tri-une God, In
Col. 1. 15, 16, 17.
Christ, his first begotten or born Express Image before all Creatures, in
whom and Joh. 1. 3.
through whom, he made all that is made, has Created Man according to his
Image, that is, according to Christ his Divine Express Image.

9. And as Christ was generated or born out of, and with, God, in the Love of
the Mother and divine voice from Eternity, to his express Image of his total
perfect Substance from the greatest to the least and from the least to the
greatest from Eternity.

10. So he did in the Creation, make man visible in Christ, to and according to
the Image of Christ, and created him to his praise and Glory, that he should
through the obedience of Christ steadfastly be and appear like him in Innocence.

11. This according to your meaning or sense of the Scripture, is not done and
Manifested a second time in Christ, but a second time in the Creation of Man.

follows My Answer upon this forementioned Explanation, and furthermore My
Explanation.

1. MEn find in no place of the Holy Scirpture, that Man is proceeded forth,
in Totally PERFECT Power, authority Omnipotence, and Omniscience and that he
had the same for his creaturely proper own.

2. For, that may not be said even of the Person of CHRIST, as he conversed in
this world visibly amongst us, according to the Humanity received from US, but
only according to his Eternal Deity.

3. For his Soul and Humanity, has also called and prayed to and in God, and
on the Mount of Olives said, when he would go into his suffering; Math. 26. 39.
Father, if it be possi^le, let this Cup pass from me; and he prayed to God
so, Luke 22. 44.
that he sweat a bloody sweat.

4. Also, when he would do Wonders or Miracles and Signs, then he prayed his
Father to hear him, as may be seen by his raising Lazarus from Death: Moreover
it is written, also, that Isa. 42. 8. Chap. 48. 11.
God will give his honor to no other. Also, Deuteronomy. 32. 12. Isa. 43. 11.
I only am the LORD, and GOD: Also, God is one only God, and none Else.

5. Therefore his Title and Introduction, to the Person for whom he sets forth
the Explanation, is instantly very Erroneous: and he will answer in the Perfect
power of the Omniscience, in, and out of, the Holy Trinity, and esteems
himself like God in every thing or substance, and sets himself up, as if he
were God himself.

6. He will in Christ with his total humane substance, outwardly and inwardly,
in all Saints, be and know, that, which no Creature can know or do, or be; but
the Spirit of God only; which IN Every Man blows up the knowledge, and
imparteth, to every one, his own measure according to his gifts as be will: not
as the Creature wills.

7. But E. S.
this man says, He will answer, out of Christ out of his Eternal Wisdom, out
of the Heart and Mouth of God, out of the holy Trinity.

8. And though he had a divine command for it [which a Man may very well doubt
of] and come to us in an Angelical Embassy; yet he could NOT speak to us out
of the Manifested or revealed sound or voice of the Holy Trinity out of Christ's
self-subsisting Person, but out of his Creature in divine Power, through the
Creaturely and humane Property, in that kind as all men from the beginning of
the world to this time have spoken.

9. And though Men may with truth say: that Gods Spirit speaks through the
Humane sound; yet men should give the honor to God; and not ascribe it to
himself: For, it is written, God will not give his honor to another; he has
given it to his Son JESUS CHRIST, to whom alone he has given the holy Spirit
in the Eternal Word without Measure, and to no other. Joh. 3. 34.


10. Whence Christ says, Matthew: 28. Mat. 28. 18.
All power in Heaven and on Earth, is given to me of my Father; which no other
Man, while he lives in this world, dare say concerning his creaturely
Humanity, that he has all power in Heaven and on Earth, but only this JESUS,
whose outgoing has proceeded from Eternity.

11. Also this JESUS CHRIST said, when he would depart from us: Luke 21. 8.
If any shall come and say, he is Christ; that we should not believe it, and
prophesied to us that Math: 24. 23, 24. Mark 13. 21, 22.
Many false Christ's and Prophets would arise after him, of whom we should
beware.

12. Therefore it is very suspicious to us, that this man will of himself,
speak out of the Heart and Mouth of the Holy Trinity; for the Creature should
humble himself before God; and by no means say, that he is God himself, but a
created work and Image of his Likeness, with whom God may do what he will.

13. Further, He speaks of the Original and Creation of Man so wonderfully,
that he cannot show it in the Holy Scripture, nor in the Light of Nature; and
there belongs clean another Explanation to it.

14. Yes he speaks also of Christ so strangly, that in brief it appears to
be no sufficient intelligible Explanation: he says, CHRIST is from Eternity
the express Image of God in the Divine Mother of his Love, generated or born
out of the voice of the holy Trinity: and so makes a difference between the
first born before all Creatures and the Holy Trinity, and yet will have him
also dwelling in the Holy Trinity.

15. So he makes very wonderfully FOUR Persons as it should seem, in the Deity;
as if the holy Trinity had from Eternity generated in it self some other
Similitude and Image: in which birth or geniture he also will have the Humane
Original from Eternity; and so wonderfully blendeth one thing with another,
that a Man can not understand what, God, is, and what, Creature, is.

16. He says: God has Created all Heavenly and Earthly Creatures in that
first begotten or born Son of God, and begotten the Son out of the Greatest
Substance even to the least, from Eternity out of God; he understands
thereby, out of the Holy Trinity.

17. And makes all things one in another, as a whirling Wheel, so that a Man
cannot understand, out of what, the Creaturely Original is, seeing he
concludes all without distinction in Christ; and so sets the Name of CHRIST
as proceeding from Eternity.

18. And says, that God has brought forth all things in Christ: and then he
must also have brought forth, all Evil venomous poisonous Worms and Beasts in
Christ, as also Darkness and the hellish quality source or Torment, and all
whatsoever lives in such a property.

19. John says in the first Chapter: Joh. 1. 1, 2, 3.
At the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and God was the
Word: the same was in the beginning with God, through that he has made all
things that were made, and without it was nothing made that was made: John
says; God was the Word, Joh. 1. 4.
and in him was the Life of Men.

20. He says NOT At the Beginning was CHRIST, but the Word: that very Word
became Man in the Virgin Mary; that, was Christ, which quenched the Anger of
his Eternal Father in the humane property through the Christ and the Crusher
or bruiser of the Serpent: and destroyed the Devils Den of Robbery in the
humane property.

21. When the Luke 1. 26, 27.
Angel Gabriel came to Mary, and brought her the Message; Luke 1. 31, 32. Mich.
4. 7.
That she should be impregnate and bear a Son, whose Name she should call
JESUS, Col. 1. 17.
whose out-going is from Eternity; to whom God the Father will give the Throne
of his Father David.

22. He says NOT there, whose Name you shall call JESUS CHRIST; but only
JESUS, whose beginning and Exit is from Eternity: but the Name CHRIST existed
in the JESUS, when he possessed the Throne of his Father David, and brake the
Head of the Serpent; and shed his Heavenly Blood into the Fathers Anger; and
quenched the same in the humane property with divine Love.

23. There he obtained the Name CHRIST, as a Or Anoynter or Salver.
Healer of the Soar, or the Anointed of God, a breaker through Death, a
victorious Prince over Hell, Death, and the Devil.

24. No Creature is Created or made in the CHRIST; but he in the Regeneratour
of the humane property, he brings the humane Life out of Death, and
generateth, that, in CHRIST through the Name JESUS in the divine Power, anew,
and to be the Child of God.

25. For CHRIST is the Mother of the Regeneration, and not the Creator of All
things, in which all things lie enclosed.

26. The CHRIST is become Man, but the JESUS in the CHRIST is the Creator of
all things.

27. The CHRIST says, Math. 28. 18.
To ME is given all power both in Heaven and on Earth; he says not, from
Eternity: God the Father has given the power to CHRIST through the JESUS: for
he to whom a thing is given, has not had it from Eternity, nor made it
himself: but he that has himself made a thing, to him, it can not be given.

28. Has CHRIST made all things in himself, understand in the CHRIST, and out
of himself; then nothing can be given to him, but he has had it from Eternity,
and there is no giving.

29. But he says; all power was given to him of his Father; Now if the power
be given of the Father to this Son, viz: to this CHRIST, then must a Man
think, that the power that is given, originateth in the Fathers Will.

30. For, that which is given, was not from eternity, like or equal with, the
Gift in the Giver: Indeed the Dear Name JESUS had it from Eternity, for he had
an Eternal Original in the Eternal Ever speaking Word.

31. He is the Name of the Heb. 1. 8. Luke 1. 32, 33.
Firstborn of the Father, from Eternity, whose out-going and beginning is from
Eternity, as the Angel said to Mary; which Name, in the Word which Created all
things and generated all things, in Mary in the Humane and Divine Essence and
Substance, became Flesh; both a Heavenly and Humane Flesh, which dwells both
Joh. 3. 13.
in Heaven and on Earth at once, Joh. 3.

32. Which, in the holy Trinity was from Eternity the Second Person of the
Divine Substance, and Eternally generated of his Father; also in Eternity, also
still in CHRIST, becomes ever and eternally generated of his Father.

33. Not that CHRIST becomes continually generated, that is once become
generated in Man; but the Eternal Word, in CHRIST becomes from Eternity in
Eternity ever generated from the Father.

34. For CHRIST said to Philip, Joh 14: 10.
Do thou not believe, that the Father is in Me, and that I am in the Father;
for the Words which I speak are not Mine, but the Fathers that dwells in Me.

35. They were not Christ's Words but the Fathers, viz: the Fathers Sound and
Eternal Voice, which had manifested it self in the Humanity: Therefore said
the Humanity; the Words are Not Mine, but the Fathers Words wherein and
wherewith he has assumed the Humanity.

36. The Humanity is Eternally under the Deity in the assumed humanity, in THAT
the Word became Flesh; the Name Christus or CHRIST originateth, as a Savior,
of the Flesh and of the Soul, and not out of the humane fleshly property, but
out of the Name JESUS, in the Word of the Father of all things or Substances.

37. Now, if I will speak of the Holy Trinity, then I say not, That the Divine
Love is an Exgenerated Substance and a Mother of God, or a Woman or Wife of
God, as this E. S.
Author Conceiteth, as if the first begotten, which he calls CHRIST, were
generated out of the Mother of his Voice and Love.

38. The Eternal Word or the first begotten out of the Father from Eternity,
is it self the generating of the Love, for from him and the Father goes forth
the Holy Spirit.

39. The Eternal Wisdom is the Out-generated or out-spoken Substance, as a
Looking-glass and Ornament of the Holy Trinity, in which the Power, Colors,
and virtues, of the Deity become Manifest, and in which the Spirit of God has
seen ALL things from Eternity.

40. Both according to the Fathers Property, in which he calls himself, an
Exodus 20. 5. Deuteronomy. 4. 24.
Angry Zealous or Jealous God, and a Consuming Fire: in which Property is
generated the Darkness and source or quality of pain or Torment, as also
Nature, and all Spirits, and all whatsoever lives in the Sulphur and Mercury,
both according to the Eternal Spirits, and according to the Temporary Spirits.

41. And then according to his Love, and the Property of the Eternal Light,
according to which Property the Name GOT God; viz: the GUTE or Good,
Originateth from Eternity, in which the Name JESUS, Originateth from the
Eternal Light, viz: from the Creator of the Humility or of the well-willing
in it self: as the Meekness of the Light Originateth in the Fire, and brings
along with it, another Will of another quality then the Fire, according to
which God Calls himself a Merciful and Good Munificent God.

42. Thus the Name JESUS is the first Eternal Original to Gods Mercifulness:
Therefore says Saint Paul; Ephesians. 1. 3, 4.
We were foreseen or Elected in CHRIST JESUS, before the Foundation of the
World was laid: For in the Fathers Anger was the Fall known, and in the Name
JESUS in his Love, was CHRIST, as a Redeemer from the Anger, known.

43. For, Act. 15. 18.
To God are all his works known, from Eternity, the Good and the Evil: The
Evil is become known in his Anger, the Good in his Love.

44. That same Eternal God in Trinity, has Created all things with and
through the Eternal Word, which is his Mouth and the Sound of his Voice, out
of himself out of BOTH Properties, out of the Anger, as out of the Eternal
Nature, and then out of the Love, as a Healer or Savior of Nature, into
Substance.

45. Understand; God in the Trinity, is a Spirit and no Substance: But in the
Word of his Sound, he has in his Desire introduced it into Substance: His
desire is the Fiat, which originateth in verbo Domini, in the Word of the Lord;
viz: an Eternal Desire.

46. God, in himself, is the Eternal Longing Delight of the Liberty, free from
all things or Substances; but with his Desire out of the Longing Delight as out
of the Eternal Fires-Property, he has Created all Spirits, viz: the Angels
and Souls of Men: In which Fires-Property, the Center of the Light in all
Angels, with the Fire of the Anger stood in Equal Balance Harmony or Temper.

47. For, when God once moved himself to the Creation, then he moved himself,
according to ALL whatsoever himself was in all things, especially according to
the Eternal Wisdom; in which the Form of the Creation was seen from Eternity,
in the Fire and Lights Glance in the Spirit of God, according to Love and
Anger, according to Darkness and Light.

48. The Creation is nothing else but an out-breathing or out-speaking of his
Substance: Whatsoever GOD, is, in the Nature of the Fire, and then also in the
Eternal Liberty of all sources or qualities: that has the Free Longing
delight introduced into a Desire, and impressed into a Moving Substance.

49. The Desire, viz: the Fiat of all things or Substances, Originateth; in
that, the Unchangeable God; viz: the Abyss, has once Moved it self in the
Eternal Longing Delight, where then Time began.

50. All Angels and Creatures which are Created to Eternal Life, are all of
them Grasped or contracted.
comprised in the Out-breathing of the Father through the Word; in the Desire
as in the Moving in the Fiat, and in a Model of the Eternal Longing Delight,
as the Eternal Spirit in the Wisdom has comprehended it in its wonders,
become Created into an Image of the Longing Delight: and there remained in all
things the possibility to Good and Evil, according to the whole Divine
Property, both as to Light and Darkness.

51. And yet we are not so to think; that a Spirit or Angel, is it self the
Out-breathing of the Eternal Birth or Geniture, of the Holy Trinity in the
Divine Voice: But it is the out-spoken Word, as a Model and Image of the
speaking Word, a fitted Instrument of the Spirit of God; through which the
Spirit of God, as by his fitted Instrument plays or melodiseth and sounds.

52. So far as the Instrument remains standing in its fitted Order, as with
the Desire of the Fiat; which stands in all Angels, as the Angels proper
own: wherewith the Will of the Angel, may lift up it self into the Good, viz:
into Gods Love, or into the Anger; and introduce it self into the Figure and
Tang thereof: then is the sound of the Word out of the Fathers Love and Anger
out-breathed and become introduced into an Image in verbo Fiat, in the Word
Fiat.

53. As is to be seen, how some Prince-Angels, give up themselves with the
Desire into the Love; and some as Lucifer into the Anger, viz: into the Desire
of the Fiat, and Created or Extracted a Will in the Desire of the Anger, in the
Fires Might, to Live and to Rule according to the Fathers Anger Property; and
thus to domineer over all Principalities of Angels, over the Love, in the
fierce wrathful Fires Might, whence followed upon him his thrusting out by the
Word Fiat, into the Darkness of Gods Anger.

54. Thus we can not say of the Creation of all things or Substances, that the
Eternal Substance of the Ternary or number Three, has thus formed it self
into an Image of an Angel, but in the Eternal Desire, which has Originated
it self in the Longing delight of the Deity; through the Moving of the Father
of all things or Substances, as an ETERNAL Nature, and a Revelation or
Manifestation of the Eternal hidden Nature.

55. In that Eternal beginning-lesse Nature, viz: in the All-being
All-substantiall working of the Great Mystery, have the Angels and Souls of
Men received their Original, in the Eternal Out-spoken Word, in the Eternal
Wisdom of God, according to Love and Anger.

56. For, if they had Originated only in the holy voice of God, viz: in the One
only Love, then they could not have attracted or framed in themselves, any Will
to the Anger; or if the Love-Will of God in the Angels were fallen, then it
would have this understanding, that God in the Creature had fallen, and become
a Devil, which were abominable to be spoken.

57. No Creaturely Spirit can subsist in the Creature without the Fire-world;
for even the Love of God would not be, if his Anger or the Fire-world were not
in him: The Anger or the Fire of God is a cause of the Light, and of the power,
strength and Omnipotency.

58. But in the Love, the Fire dies, and transmuteth it self into the Kingdom
of Joy; for at the End Death originateth; which is as a dying in the Fire; out
of which dying, the Light as another source or quality originateth; viz: a
Desire of Love, which is called Gods Mercifullnesse, or the Divine Kingdom of
Joy; the Life of Holiness without source or pain, goes from the dying in the
Fire, sorth, as a Glance of the Majesty, a Glance of the Liberty.

59. This dying, Lucifer contemned, he would Live and Domineer in the Fires
Regiment in the Self-hood, so he became also, driven forth out of the Fire,
back into the Root of the Fire, viz: into the darkness.

60. Every Angel and Soul, which will live in Gods Light and Power, must DYE
to the Self-hood of the Fires Dominion in the Desire, and wholly immerse or
cast himself with his own Propriety into Gods Will, viz: into the Divine Sound,
and dye to the own self Will in the Fire, but bud or sprout forth in the Light
of Love, in the Resignation, into Gods Sound or Word, as a fruit of the Love of
God, that Gods will-spirit may rule and guide his Life.

61. And that the holy Tincture of the Fire and Light, may be the Glance of the
shining of his Life; out of which again, Divine Will and Desire Originateth;
that the same Life may be able to live in the Power and virtue of the Wisdom
of God, to behold it self therein, and frame or attract a Divine Will therein.

62. Which Wisdom is the Angels Food, out of which they generate to their
Creator Eternal Praise; that Gods Joy play or-Melody, in the Angelical Voice
may be an Instrument, of the Spirit of God, all directed into the Harmony of
the Divine Kingdom of Joy.

63. For every Prince-Angell bears the Name of the Great God, every one
according to his property as a peculiar Instrument directed into the Praise of
God in the Divine Sound.

64. In like manner, we are not so to think of the Creation of Heaven and of
the Earth, that the Heaven and the World with its Substance or Matters are
Created out of Gods holy Voice or Word, but, IN the Voice, and through the Word.

65. Not out of the Sound of the Divine property, but in the word Fiat, viz: in
the Impression of the Eternal Mystery, of the Eternal Fire-and-Lights Desire,
and entered into a Substance, according to the fires and Darknesses Property,
as also according to the Lights Desire, viz: according to the Free Longing
delights Property: as a Revelation or Manifestation of Evil and Good, of Joy
and also of pain and Torment.

66. All which is undeniably before our Eyes, and the whole Creation convinces
us thereof, whereby men know that in ALL things there is Good and Evil, for
which things sake the Last judgment of God is appointed, viz: a Day of
Separation, wherein all shall again enter into its beginning.

67. This visible World is a Similitude of the Eternal Mystery, out of which,
Joy and Sorrow, Light and Darkness, originateth, through which Eternal
Mystery, the Spirit of the Ternary in the Trinity, manifests or reveals it
self; and introduces it self into Three Principles.

68. Viz: First, into the Dark, Cold, and Fire, World, viz: into an Abyss of
the Mystery. And then Secondly, into the divine Light World of the Kingdom of
Joy. And Thirdly, with or by a Similitude of the Dark Fire and Light World,
which are Eternal.
Similitude of the Dark Fire and Light World, viz: with or by this outward
visible and Elementary World.

69. In which, it generateth the Image of the Eternal World, The Spirit of the
Ternary.
in Evil and Good, as, is to be seen in all living Creatures of this world, as
also in the Stars, Elements, Herbs and Trees; how all is contrary one o the
other; and yet the Birth or Geniture of all Life, stands in such a Contrary.

70. Every Life stands in Evil and Good, viz: in Poison and Oil, out of
which the Life in the Fire burns or shines; which ALL, is a similitude of
the Eternal Birth or Geniture of the Mystery of all Substances or of every
thing: also Men see the similitude of the Holy Trinity in every Life, viz: the
Fire, Light, and proceeding Air, from the Fire and Light.

71. And Man, viz: the Image of God, should not be such a Calfe, as not to know
and learn to understand his Fathers house; nor should he indeed forbid THAT, as
this E. S.
Author does in his Explanation; to whom, that God would give a better
apprehension, is my hearty wish and desire.

72. Concerning Man's Original, Moses tells us, God said; Genesis 1. 26.
Let us make Man, an Image of us, which may rule over all that is upon the
Earth, etc. And says further; Gen: 1. 27.
God Created man in his Image, yes to the Image of God, Created he him.

73. This now is very rightly spoken, but the Explainer is here a Wrester or
Perverter, and understands it not, Whereas yet he accounts he has spoken
out of the voice of the Holy Trinity, and gives forth his matters for totally
Divine, without blemish: but to this time yet he has not heard the divine
voice nor apprehended it in the Sound, but only the voice of the out-spoken
Word in Evil and Good, in his own Reason and Self-hood.

Saint Paul says; Ephesians. 1. 3, 4.
Man was foreseen or elected in Christ, before the Foundation of the world was
laid; In this lies the Kernel; before the times of this world, the Model of
Man was known in the Eternal wisdom, as an out-breathing of the Word, from
the Fire and Light, as a Form in the Divine wisdom: but stood in No Creature or
Image, but after a Magick-kind, as an Image appears to One in a Dream; which
is without Substance.

75. Thus is the Appearance in the Universal out-breathed
out-spoken-substance, in the Spirit of God, which has known all things
according to every ones property; viz: according to the Anger of the Fires
property in the Darkness, and in the Light in the Love.

76. For, the Flash of the Creation, out of the Great-Mystery, was seen in the
wisdom in Evil and Good, according to the property of BOTH Desires, as an
Eternal Contrary.

77. The Anger, viz: the Dark-world, has in its desire seen the Image or
similitude of God, and so also has the Love in its free longing delights
desire: Not that the property of the Love plungeth it self into the Anger, and
beholds The Image.
it in the Anger, but each property IN it self.

78. Therein has the Spirit of God, which eternally goes forth out of the
Fathers Fire and Light, known the Fall in the Anger of God: so that when this
Image of the Figure of God, should become created into a living substance, it
would be also drawn by the fierce wrath, and loose its Glory.

79. Here, in this Place, has the CHRISTUS or Christ, in the Name JESUS, as a
will to the CHRISTUS, set it self toward the Similitude of God, and given the
Will thereinto, out of the JESU, into the Created humanity to be a Christus or
SAVIOR.

80. And in this Will, was created the Similitude of God, MAN, in the Time,
viz: on the Sixth day of the Creation, into an Image, out of a Mass or Extract
of all the Creation of this worlds Substance, as also out of the heavenly
worlds substance;

81. Out of the out-breathed or out-spoken Substance of the Eternal Word, and
become formed in verbo Fiat, in the word Fiat, according to the Similitude of
the Eternal Mystery, and the Eternal birth or Geniture of the Holy Trinity,
into an Image.

82. Into which, God the Father, through the Word or Divine Sound with his
Spirit, has introduced, the Spirit of Life out of all the Three Principles,
viz: out of the Fire-Light-and outward-World.

83. Viz: First, The Fire-Spirit of the First Principle, out of the Eternity,
out of the Fathers Property, which is the true Soul.

84. And Secondly, the Lights Source or Quality and Spirit, out of the voice of
the Love, which is the Noble Image of the Deity, each standing in its own
Principle, and governing its world.

85. Thirdly, The Spirit-Aire in like manner Cen: 2. 7.
inbreathed from without into his Nostrills.

86. So that Man is a living Spirit of all the Three Principles according to
the Similitude of God, as God himself is all in all: but with the true Deity,
viz: with the Good, is known or comprehended by nothing, but by his Similitude,
viz: whatsoever is generated out of the GOOD, and stands therein.

87. Now understand me aright; As God in his Light in the Holy Light world,
shines through ALL, and tinctureth all, and brings it from the Fiery
Property, into the power of the Joyfulnesse, and with the same power also
presses through the outward world through all things, and gives all things
power and life.

88. And yet the Substance IN which God works is not called God, though it
has a working, from the out-breathed Mystery in it self, in which the
Vegetative or growing Life stands, viz: a Sulphury and Mercuriall Sued.
seething, which in the Salt of the power becomes Corporeal, viz: an own self
Fiat, or Generating, like an Impression, according to the Property of the
Eternal Spiritual Mystery, as a Manifestation or Revelation thereof.

89. Thus also was the Similitude of God Man, in his innate station, and thus
from God Created out of the Substance of all Substances into an Image according
to the Substance of all Substances; and that even in his, understand, in Man's
Image, which was known from Eternity in the wisdom, viz: in the Glimps of the
out-breathed shining of the Divine Revelation or Manifestation; in that kind
and manner as the Spirit of God has seen all things in his wisdom from
Eternity.

90. This Image was not a Substance, but a will to a Substance, which with its
root and original stood in the Name JESU, viz: in the Humility of God, where
it introduced it self out of the Fire into the Light, viz: into the Good.

91. And in this Place, although it is no place, where the Meek Love-Will goes
forth out of the Property of the Fathers Fire into the Light and Joyfulnesse or
kingdom of Joy, and compriseth and includes in it self, an own self Center of
the Will and desire, Originateth from Eternity, the Name of the SON of God,
viz: the Col. 1. 15, 17.
first born of the Father from Eternity before all Creatures, and here is
called the Fathers Heart and Love; and out of this Love, goes the Holy Spirit
forth from the Father and the Son: and is the Fathers Love-Flame.

92. Understand us thus, In that very Will which is out-breathed or out-spoken
out of the Holy Name JEHOVA or JESUS out of the Speaking Eternal Word of the
Father, into the wisdom of God, as a Glance of the knowledge or Representation
of the Spirit, like a Looking-glass; was man created into an Image out of the
heavenly and earthly Elementary Substance; out of the out-breathed substance of
Eternity, and out of the Substance of Time, standing one in another; as the
Eternity stands in the Time, and neither is the other; and yet not divided
asunder, but only as through a Principle.

93. The Substance of Eternity is the pure Element, in which the vegetative or
growing Life is a Paradise, and the substance of Time are the four Elements; in
which the Constellations make a seething and Life, viz: an Earthly NOTE.
Mortal Paradise.

94. For, the earthly seething has its Original in the Mystery, where the
Fires and Lights Property, divides it self into two Principles, each in it
self; and therefore it is Evil and Good, out breathed out of Gods Love and
Anger.

95. And that out-breathed Property, God moved in the beginning of Time, and
introduced it into a Desire, which has thus generated Earth and Stones in the
Desire of the Impression, according to the property of the Dark, Fire, and
Light, World; and Sulphur Mercury and Sal, were the properties of that desire:
and in that regard, those very Properties are the Life of all Elementary
Substances or Things.

96. And understand us aright; In these Properties we have the Oil in all
Things, that is the Similitude of the heavenly Lights Property from the Good:
Out of this Substance, has the Outward Body out of the Third Principle been
comprehended in the word Fiat; and in the Second Principle in the Angelical
World, has the Pure Element been comprehended in the Paradisicall Sulphur
Mercury and Sal of the Power.

97. That was now the Body which God Created in his Image and Likeness,
understand in the Humane Image, which God has seen from Eternity in his
out-breathed Glimps of the Wisdom in the Looking-glass.

98. In which Looking-glass he impressed the Substance, out of the two
Principles in the word Fiat, and Created it into an Image, and introduced or
in-breathed, the out-breathed Sound or Voice of his Word, out of all the Three
Principles to be a Soul and Spirit, to be a Life, understanding, and Regiment
or Dominion, out of the Sound of his Mouth, viz: a Fire, Light, and Air,
Spirit; both out of the Eternity and Time; that was the Image of God.

Of his Regiment or Dominion.
99. AS the Light is the Regiment or Dominion in all or every Life, and that
very Light of Life burns and shines out of the Oil of the Sulphur Mercury
and Sal of the power; as no understanding Person can deny: so in the Inward
Man, which was Created out of the Second Principle, viz: out of the pure
Element; burned the pure Paradisicall Sulphur and Mercury, and in that pure
Fire-burning or Life, totally without blemish, shone Gods true Light.

100. For, the Name JESUS, had incorporated it self together in the Image of
the Eternity, as a future CHRIST, which would become a Savior to Man, and out
of the dying of the Anger, generate him anew again in the pure Sulphur of the
divine and Paradisicall Power.

101. Understand this aright: The pure Element in the Holy Sulphur pressed
through and through the Outward Man, and took the Four Elements into its power;
Heat and Cold were in the Flesh not manifest: they were indeed, in the Sulphur
Mercury and Sal of the Body; But while Gods Light shone therein they were in
equal accord, so that neither of them might be manifested above the other.

102. For, All the desires in the Mercury, viz: in the Cold and Hot Fire-wheel,
stood in the Light and were wholly enlightened through and through, and their
desire was a Paradise of Joyfulnesse or the Kingdom of Joy: No enmity of
Nature was manifest in them.

103. Just as God the Father is called a fierce wrathful zealous or Jealous
God and a Consuming Fire, and indeed he is so in these properties: But in his
Light in the Love-desire, viz: in his Col. 1. 15. 17.
first begotten from Eternity, which is his Beloved Heart, none of them do
become manifested or revealed.

104. According to this Heart he calls himself GOD, for he is in this the
GOOD: and according to the Fire, he calls himself Anger: and according to the
Desire to the Fire-Life, as to the Revelation or Manifestation of the
Generating, where the free Longing delight introduces it self out of the
Nothing into Something, viz: into an Impression of the Desire, he makes the
Nature, and the dark World, out of which Properties, Sulphur Mercury and Sal
exist.

105. As in our Book of the Signature of things, concerning the Original and
Marking, of the signification, of all things or Substances, is expressed
largely highly and intelligibly: To which for the Readers better understanding
he is referred, and here I will let it pass in brief.

Concerning the Fall of Man.
106. THe Will-spirit of the Soul out of the Fires Property, has listed up it
self into the Earthly desire, where Evil and Good were in the Center of the
hiddennesse under the Paradisicall source or quality, one among another, but in
equal accord, and introduced it self, into a desire of Evil and Good, to
manifest the same in it self.

107. Moreover the Devil gave it cause to do so, who introduced his desire or
Imagination into the evil part, viz: into the fierce wrathful fiery Mercury
in its property, wherein the Poison and Anger-Life stands; whence the
poyson-Life began to hunger after the Similitude of its property.

108. Then came the Commandment of God, and said to the Soul, Genesis 2. 17.
eat not of the Tree of Vegetation of the knowledge of Good and Evil, else
thou dyest, to the holy divine Life, in the pure Sulphur and Element of the
Substance; and the day that thou will eat thereof, thou will dye the Death.

109. For, in the poisonous Mercury, according to the property of the Fathers
Anger, was the dying Life, which before was not manifested or revealed, but
through the Devils Imagination became stirred, and introduced into the Desire
of the Similitude.

110. Thus know, that we have truly and highly apprehended that the Tree of
Temptation, is grown up through this power of the hunger after the apprehension
of Evil and Good, to know it: but yet a man can NOT say, that it was ANOTHER
Tree or Vegetable then the rest: only the Earthly Source or quality in Evil
and Good, was manifested or revealed in it.

111. In the other Trees and Vegetables, the holy paradisicall Mercury pressed
through all, and the Properties were in equal accord, and the evil of Heat
and Cold was not manifested; but in this Tree, the properties of Heat and Cold
in the poisonous earthly Mercury, were manifested.

112. Which the hunger of the Soul caused: For the Soul was a Sparkle out of
the great Omnipotency of God; whence Christ said to us; Math. 21. 21.
If it would be born, or generated of God again in the Faith; then it might say
to the Mountain, lift thy self up, and cast thy self into the Sea, and it
would be done.

113. How then would it not, when it stood in the strong Might of God, be able
to bring forth the Properties in the Tree.

114. To which, the Devil in the Serpents Property laid it self, and persuaded
Eve, that Genesis 3. 5, 6.
she should be Wish if she did eat of Evil and Good.

115. Which hereafter shall be explained, in the Question, 1 Cor. 11. 12. Text.
4. Point. 2. Verse. 50. to 72.
how The Woman comes from the Man, and the Man from the Woman.

116. And by the Fall, we are to understand nothing else, but that the Earthly
property, which before stood as it were swallowed up in the Paradise,
manifested it self in the Souls Desire, whence Heat Cold and the poison Life of
all Contrariety and Opposition, took or gat the Dominion in the Body: and the
fair or bright heavenly and Paradisicall Image disappeared.

117. For, the Soul, as a Fire-Life, generated out of the Fathers Property,
went out from the Element of Paradise into the Four Elements, and there the
Paradisicall Sulphur in the holy Element, lost its Life, and the Substance
disappeared.

118. And that was a dying of Paradise: the Soul dyed to Gods Light, and went
into its self-hood into its own propriety. It would be a self-Lord, to know
Good and Evil, and Live in both; it dyed to God, and awakened upon the Earthly
World, and lived to the Will of the Devil, viz: to the stern Anger of God, in
mere Anxiety Lamentation Misery Toil and necessity; as we poor Children of Eve
now see and Feel in us.

119. But here I am to inform the Reader, concerning the perfect Creation of
Man, and what the error and insufficient understanding, in the Expositour of
the Points of Conclusion, is, in this place, as was above mentioned.

120. I say, the same as he says in this; That, MAN in his Image, viz: in Gods
Image, was Created wholly perfect, to Eternal Life in Paradise: I say also to
the Image of God; it is true as to BOTH: For in the Eternal Image, which was
only a shining or Looking-glass of the Image in the Name, and in the Eternal
Birth or Geniture of JESUS or JEHOVA, was, the Image of the Three Principles,
Created, and Created to the Image or Similitude, according to the Three Worlds,
as an Image of Gods Substance of all Substances; out of, and in, ALL things or
Substances.

121. But as God Rules, over and in All, and no THING is God, for in his
Gloriousness he is as a Nothing, and yet is the Life in all; so should this
Image stand in the Resigned Life of God, as an Instrument of God, in which the
Spirit of God does what HE will.

122. He Created him not a Lord, but a Servant, a Lute or Instrument of Music;
I cannot say, that Man was Created out of the Divine Voice, and out of the
Center of the Heart of God, as this E. S.
Author very wrongfully puts himself into the Holy Trinity.

123. No, No; an Instrument is not the Master, the Master cannot make an
Instrument wholly like himself: God cannot make another God wholly like
himself: Out of his Eternal Mystery indeed he can make to himself, an Image Or
in Imitation of his Similitude.
according to his Likeness, for a Sport of Joy; as a Master of Music does an
Instrument, which yet, makes such a Melody as the Master will: but such
another Master as himself is, he makes not, but only of or out of himself.

124. Therefore, seeing God is a Spirit and no Substance, also not Nature;
therefore Man is not God, but his Life is sounded forth out of Gods Life; yet
understand, out of the THREE Principles.

125. Not that the Life is God himself, else, if it should fall, and become a
Devil as Lucifer did, then had God become a Devil.

126. The humane Life, is the out-spoken Word, in which the speaking Word
inhabiteth, either in Evil or Good, as the Out-spoken Word draws a Property
out of Gods Harmony or Concord into it self; 2 Samuel 22. 26. 27. Psalm: 17. 25,
26.
As a people are, such a God they have also in them; and yet it is but the ONE
only; but he manifests himself in ALL and every Life, according to the Life's
Desire in good or evil.

127. First: Therefore the strife or Controversy between me and that Author,
is this; That he casts or Confounds all one in another, and gives forth no
right or Direct Understanding, and sets himself so finely as a Creature in the
holy Trinity, in the first Born or begotten before all Creatures: Therefore he
concludes the Creation in the CHRIST, But he erreth, he should conclude it in
JESU or JEHOVAH, in the Eternal Word of the Father, as Saint John does in the
First Chapter.

128. He should make for me, no Woman of the Genetrix of God, wherein Christ is
borne or generated from Eternity; but he should say, out of or according to the
Scripture; that the Father generateth the Word; and that the Word is the Voice
of God and the Second Person in the Deity; and that the Holy Spirit goes forth
from the Father, and the Son.

129. It is not Supposition or an Opinion that will do it, and to set himself
up therein as a Fair Bride, which yet sticks full of Sins and evil
affections; but to humble ones self before God and be submissive to him; and
not say; Here is the Lord, viz: the Voice of the holy Trinity, out of Gods
Heart, sounding; No, that we will not grant to this Author: He should continue
in the Harmony, and hear what kind of Note the Lord, in the Tang of the
Harmony, brings forth in the Creature; as the Lord Sounds.

130. And though it had been at the Best, that likely, the glimps of the Holy
Spirit, had permitted it self in his Harmony of his Tone, to be heard; yet he
should say: Lord Luke 17. 10.
I am an unprofitable Servant: Thou do what thou will.

131. Not say, I will, and shall, speak to you, out of Gods Heart, out of the
Voice of the Holy Trinity, that, has no Angel or Prophet done; but they have
all of them only said; that the LORD had laid his Word in them, to make known
to them the Word of the Lord: For the Prophet says only, Thus says the LORD;
he accounts himself only an Instrument, to whom is commanded what he shall
speak.

132. He says not, I am the Woman, the Bride of the Voice of God, I will speak
in and out of Gods Heart; My Sound is Gods Voice, but he bears Gods Sound, in
his own humane Voice, and the Spirit of God sounds only in the humane Voice
when and how he will; which Man should not assume to himself as his proper own;
but stand before him in fear and trembling; and lend his humane Voice for an
Instrument. Not say, I have aforehand apprehended what the Spirit of God will
speak, unless he have an express Command by word of Mouth.

133. The Name JESUS which in the Humanity is also become CHRIST, that stands
within in the Holy Trinity; It stands in its own Principle in the Birth or
Geniture of the Holy Trinity, and not in the Power or Authority of the Creature.

134. Yet Christ says, Joh: 5. 31, 37.
If I Witness concerning my Self, my Witness is nothing; but it is my Father
in me that witnesses concerning me Joh: 16. 27, 28.
that I am come forth from God: I am proceeded forth from God and come into the
World; again I leave the World and go to the Father.

135. He says not; I, that is, in my humane self-hood; am the Voice of God: I
speak as God, in and with God, but he said Joh: 14 10.
The Words which I speak are the Fathers who dwells in Me, that is in the
humane self-hood; I do as the Father Commands Me.

136. Men should always distinguish the Humanity and the Deity, and the humane
Will from Gods Will: for, No man can attain Gods Mind or Sense, Thoughts, and
Will, in Self-hood; Man sees after or behind the Spirit of God; even Moses
Exodus: 33. 20.
could not see Gods Face or Countenance, he must see after, or Exodus: 33. 23.
Behind him, after he is passed by, that is his back parts.
Behind him; When he did see him, he saw but the Lords Track or footsteps; How
then will this Man, speak in, with and through God; and though the Lord do
speak through him, yet he knows it not till he see and know his Footsteps.

137. It is therefore a vain enterprise or rashness, which, beside is not
sufficiently grounded, It is only intricate Confusion; he will not be Nature,
and yet in Man there can be no divine knowledge without Nature.

138. Nature is Gods Revelation or Manifestation; the humane Spirit is, or is
from, the Eternal Nature, understand the Soul; and the outward Spirit is, or
is from, the Outward Nature; and yet they are not two Spirits, but they stand
in one another in Three Degrees, after the kind of the Three Principles.

139. And yet all Three are only the out-spoken or expressed Word of God; the
speaking remains Eternally dwelling in it Self; this expressed or Out-spoken
Word, may give it self up into Love and Anger; BOTH are therein, it CAN alter
or Change it self in the source or quality: Note Note:
but the speaking Word, which dwells in it self IN the Out-spoken or
expressed; CAN NOT alter it self; for it stands in the Eternal Birth or
Geniture: it is generated, and is become continually generated from Eternity in
Eternity.

140. Man has it not IN self-hood, but IN the free Resignation God becomes
generated in him: Man has Original, God has none; God is as to Man, as a
Nothing, Man is the Nothings somewhat, therefore now the somewhat can not
comprehend the Nothing.

141. Therefore beware dear Brethren, make not Gods Dear Redeemed Children to
Err, and to become their own self-Idol-Gods, it is an abomination in the
presence of God.

142. We are indeed his beloved Children, but begotten out of the Somewhat, we
are not the Nothing without or besides all source or quality and Nature; let
every one feel in his Bosom, and consider what he is, and not think that he is
wholly like God, or GOD himself.

143. We are indeed the Manifestation of God: viz: the Instrument of his
Harmony: We are his Pipe through which he Pipeth; Now there are Three sorts of
Pipers in us, which Pipe in the Pipe; viz: The Three sorts of Properties, of
the Spirit of Life, out of all the Three Principles.

144. When now, will the Pipe know, when Gods Love-Will, will Pipe, or when his
Anger-Will, will Pipe? Must it not as a Pipe give the Mercury to Good and
Evil? It finds it indeed when Gods Love-Will Pipeth; but beforehand it
knows it not.

145. Thus this E. S.
Author should not say; He can Pipe out of the Sound of the Holy Trinity, for
we understand his Sound that the Tang sounds out of his Self-hood, not out of
Gods Love Voice; while himself will be the Piper, we hear his Tone only as a
humane Tone; CHRIST will not receive the honor in the selfhood, therefore,
much less does it become us.

146. Secondly: That the E. S.
Author says; God has created all Heavenly and Earthly Creatures IN Christ;
this has no Ground; it is very erroneous and ill applied; therefore it shall
be here better explained and given forth for the better understanding of the
Reader: that he may know, how to speak distinctly concerning Christ, and
concerning the Eternal Word of God.

147. It is not set down for a reproach to the Author, but for a Direction to
the Reader of his writings, that he may not be Lead astray in his writings:
Moreover only out of a true Christian Love desire toward all that Love God;
also not thereby to lift up my self, and to fly aloft over this Author; but
to give forth that understanding that God has given me out of Grace, written
for Good Friends upon their frequent desires and importunity.

148. Thirdly, That the Author mentions, that he will Speak and Act through
and out of the Omnisciency; that a very child may well understand what he
means thereby; and that he is not Omniscient, else he had known that I would
better explain it: He has no more in his knowledge than a Creature has; but
if he has that which he boasts of; then let him tell what shall be done to
Morrow and next day; and what shall be done at all times to the End of the
World.

149. It is written in the Evangelists Matthew: 24. 36. Mark 13, 32.
that the Son of Man according to his assumed humanity, NOTE how the Son
knows not the end of the World.
knows not the END of the World, and that this knowledge is only in God, how
then will this Man be Omniscient?

150. And though he should say, he will know it in Christ; yet I say, no: he
must see after or behind the Spirit of Christ which is Omniscient, what and
when THAT will know in him.

151. This Author E. S.
He is not a Knower of every thing: therefore he is not sufficiently grounded,
but is as a mixed confusion; he sets himself wrongfully in the seat of God, for
he lives yet in Evil and Good, and is Mortal, which time will show forth.

152. Fourthly, But that he also says, he will answer out of all the holy
Members [of Christ's Body]: they are almost all against him in their Gifts; how
then will he speak out of their Spirit? It is a vile confusion; he has not all
Men's Gifts, but only his own.

153. I am also a Member of Christ; but do not see that he answers out of me:
In deed he has borrowed from me, but he answers not out of my Mind thoughts or
apprehension; I would he would let his borrowing alone, and did not make
Confusion in my Gifts, that he might there by boast himself; It would become
him better.

154. Fifthly, Though indeed he says; E. S.
He will do this for the salvation sake of all the Faithful Believers; yet it
is not enough perceptible to me, that he seeks such a thing only, seeing he
sets himself in Christ's Seat, and somewhat else may lie behind [the green Leaf].

155. Seeing E. S.
he says; God has brought forth to Light all things, whether they be Heavenly
or Earthly, in Christ; and cloatheth himself wholly, in Christ's Might and
Omniscience; therefore it is very considerable to me; especially seeing he
ascribes immortality to himself, that I should therefore follow and observe
Christ's Words, viz: If any should come and say he is Christ, we should not
believe it, till he demonstrate it in Power.

156. Sixthly, Also, if he be the Omnisciency of the Holy Trinity, he needs no
Litterall Testimony or demonstration, he may show his Omniscience, in Divine
power, as Christ did; and then I may better comply with him therein.

157. Seaventhly; But that E. S.
he says; God was not manifested or revealed, in the First Adam; He First
manifested himself in CHRIST with the Deity in the Humane property: and so
casts away wholly, the first Created Man in his Nature; and brings a total
new and other Man forth out of Christ, which is not at all the First, which is
wholly wrong and erroneous, and he should demonstrate it by the NOTE.
Holy Scripture, or else we will not grant it to this New Bride.

158. For although the first Man fell wholly into Sin as to Body and Soul;
yet we should Consider what Sin Is; viz: this is Sin, that he departed or
went out from the Order or Ordinance, wherein God Created him.

159. He went out of the Free Resignation, in which the Name JESUS in the
Divine Light was Manifested in him, and manifested in the Flesh, the Anger of
God: so that it began to qualify or operate, and took in wholly the Life in
the Flesh of the three Principles; For, the Souls Will went forth from the
Resignation, from the JEHOVA or JESUS, and so the Substance also disappeared,
wherein JEHOVA was.

160. Thus the Outward Earthly body became accursed, that is, the
through-pressing power JEHOVA, which before made Paradise in the Flesh, that
departed from the Flesh into it self; and so came the Death and dying into the
Flesh.

161. For, the Eternal Life, stood in JEHOVA, viz: in the Name JESU, wherein
man was foreseen before the time of the world, that it would manifest it self
again in the Humane Soul, and make the disappeared Image of the Divine
Substantiality, living again, and receive that into it self, and would be the
CHRIST, therein, Else it must follow, that the sinful Soul, were become wholly
rejected or cast away.

162. If the Original of the Regenerate Man were wholly strange, what would
become of Job's word, where he says, Job 19. 26, 27.
I shall see God in this my Flesh: and my Eyes, and not a stranger, shall see
HIM.

163. No strange Man it is, that shall arise from the Dead, but only that which
God Created, in Adam, in his Image, in which God himself took mercy and
compassion on him again, and for that purpose moved the Name JESUS in the
humane property, which assumed the Woman's Seed on him, and therein quenched the
Anger of God in the Soul, in the Fathers Property, with Heavenly Blood, and
became Heb: 2. 14.
a Pestilence to the Devils Poison in the Soulish Property, and a sting of
Death to Death, so that Death must dye in his Death.

164. For JESUS, with the CHRIST, brought the Life out of Death and Anger; it
is written, 1 Cor. 11. 30.
He is made unto us Righteousness and Redemption; understand, the CHRIST, but
he which has been from Eternity, in Eternal full or Equal Omnipotency, and
the Creation of all things, he cannot be made to be Righteousness, for he is
himself the Creator, but this CHRIST, is out of JESU, or JEHOVA, whose
out-going is from Eternity, become in our Flesh, made to be Righteousness and
Redemption from the Anger of God.

165. Now, that which is made, begins it self in the Making; indeed out of
the Eternal; for the Soul has introduced it self into Time, viz: into
self-hood, but CHRIST, who out of the Eternity out of the JESU, became born in
the Humane Property, he brought it again into himself into the Eternity out of
the Time, viz: forth out of the corrupt or perished Source or Quality of the
Mercury.

166. CHRIST was not in the Person from Eternity, but in the Power in the Name
JESU, he was from Eternity in the same co-equall Substance with God; and E. S.
this strange Bride shall not persuade us that God was not manifested in Adam:
Indeed not in CHRIST but in JESU, whose Exit was from Eternity.

167. The Soul went forth out of JESU, into own self-will, but God took mercy
and compassion on it, and promised yet once to move himself in Man, with the
Name JESU: and in Man to generate the CHRIST out of Gods and Man's Substance.

168. NOT out of Sinful Flesh from the Outward world, but out of the Divine
Flesh, which in Adam, when he entered into the outward Earthly, disappeared and
dyed; so that the outward only hung to him.

169. For, in the Outward Flesh, was the Death; in THAT should Christ break
death in Pieces, and New Generate in him, the Whole Man, as God Created him:
not introduce a strange one, but to Isa. 42. 3. Matthew. 12. 20.
heal the broken Reed.

170. As a Grain of Seed is sown into the Earth, out of which a fair Stalk
grows; with many fruits, where the Essence of the Grain, gives forth that
Stalk, and the NOTE What Dies in Man.
Shell or Husk only dies; so also in Man the husk of Sin only dies; the
humane Essence in the Name JESUS in the CHRIST, which became manifested in Man,
becomes that very CHRIST, not the King or the Stock, but a little Twig or
Branch out of that very Stock.

171. Therefore this Man cannot persuade us, except he demonstrate it to us,
that CHRIST the Express Image of God, out of the Stock of the Love his Mother,
was generated from Eternity, and was an Express Image of God.

172. But in this he was the Express Image of God from Eternity, viz: in the
Figure of Man, in which Figure, God Created Man with beginning and Creature,
there the Image of the similitude, became known in God; and even in the Name
JESU; which in this Looking-glass of the Express Image in the power of JESUS
would become a CHRIST.

173. The Life of Christ, began it self with the second Moving, when God moved
himself according to his Heart, in the Humane Property; in the Eternal seen
similitude of God, in the JESUS, and gat the Name of CHRIST: as a Savior or
healer of the Sore: and not from Eternity.

174. For, the similitude of God, which was Seen in Gods wisdom from Eternity,
and known in the JEHOVA, wherein God created Man, that was before the Times of
the world, without Life and Substance, and was only a Looking-glass of the
Image, wherein God saw himself, how he might be in an Image.

175. But when JEHOVA moved himself in this Image and Similitude, then God
manifested his Life in this Looking-glass in humane Property, then was CHRIST
conceived and generated or born: for, according to the Humanity he is called
CHRIST, not according to the Deity before all Creatures.

176. According to the Deity, he is called the Eternal Word of the Father: for
it is written, John 1. 14.
The Word became Flesh; Not, Christ became Flesh; Christ is that simple Servant
of which God says in Esaiah, Who is so simple as my servant: He became the
Servant of God, by whom God brake death in Pieces, and destroyed Hell.

177. This Christ is ascended up to Heaven; Matthew: 26. 64. Mark 14. 62. Acts 7.
55.
and sits at the right hand of God, as a Prince of God, and bears the
Eternal Name of God, which is there called JESUS or JEHOVA.

178. He is the Heb: 2. 17.
High Priest that offers the Sacrifice of Righteousness, which avails
before God; but he that offers, offers to him, whom he would atone or
Reconcile; but if he himself be the Creator, he cannot also be the Atonement
or Reconciliation, but he is 1. Tim: 2. 5.
The Mediator between God and Man, for God has set him up to be a Throne of
Grace; but he that is set up, is not the Throne it self, but he brings his
Gift, viz: the Prize or Spoil which he had gotten in the Battle of Gods Anger,
to the Throne.

179. There say I, Man was not at first Created in Christ, as this E. S.
Author will have it, but the second time he is become generated in Christ; The
Name Christ was IN the Name JESUS, in which Man was Created, whose out-going
was from Eternity.

180. They are indeed one, but the Author brings forth strange matters under
it; a Man cannot admit, that he should fold up all Creatures in the Name of
CHRIST, and will have the Redemption of ALL Creatures in the Name of Christ.

181. It looks very strangely and yet a Man may well see what he means
thereby: viz: that HE would be the very ONE only Christ that men are to Hear,
as the Word of God whereas yet, when he is at best, he is scarce a little Twigg
or Branch on that Tree; not the Mother it self, which has generated and will
generate; I put not my trust in him; but in the First Christ, who in JESUS
became a CHRIST, whose Twig or Branch I desire to be.

182. CHRIST was hidden in JESU, and all powers of the wisdom lay in the hidden
Christ, which no Angels Tongue can express, that revealed it self first of
all, when JEHOVA that is JESUS moved in the humanity, there was CHRIST first
Manifested, In the first Adam was JEHOVA Manifested, and in the second Adam,
CHRIST, viz: Col. 2. 15.
The Treasure of the Wisdom of God.

183. The first Adam was created Perfect in JEHOVA, and to Eternal Life, viz:
in the Eternal Natural; but being the Eternal Natural would not stand, then
JEHOVA manifested Christ in the Natural Life, that Christ might generate and
bring again the Natural into Perfection, thus Christ has with his Birth or
Geniture, opened the Treasures of wisdom that were in JEHOVA.

184. Yet CHRIST was hidden in the Treasure of wisdom; but the wisdom was in
JEHOVA in the first Adam manifest; but not after that manner as the Life
breaks the Anger in pieces; for it was not necessary, if Adam had remained
standing; but when he fell, it was necessary that this Form should become
Manifest.

185. Even this Form is called CHRIST, and dwells in the JEHOVA, for out of
the JEHOVA it is become Manifested. Therefore being JEHOVA was manifest in
Adam, therefore was God manifested in him: else it would follow that JEHOVA had
Created Adam to Sin, that he might manifest the Treasures of wisdom in him,
which is Not so; for, God so far as he is called God, can NOT Will Evil.

186. But if Adam in his Creation be wholly manifested in Christ; as this E. S.
Author sets it down: then with his entering into the humanity, nothing New was
performed: the Crusher or Bruiser of the Serpent was first manifested in the
Body or Womb of Mary: Adam needed him not before the Fall, but after the Fall
he needed that.

187. This Crusher or Bruiser of the serpent, was CHRIST and no other, he was
generated out of IEHOVA, that is, out of JESUS, out from Eternity but in the
Humanity: after the Fall from Eternity, he was in Gods Word, viz: in Gods
voice, and in no Image manifested, as this * Author writes; but after the Fall
he became manifested in the Flesh, then he was called CHRIST, as viz: a breaker
through of death.

188. For from Eternity was no Death, but only a Fire-dying, in which, out of
the dying, the holy Life originateth: but with Sin it entered into the world
into the Flesh; with the Curse Death began in the world: with Christ, the
Eternal Life came again; for he brake death in pieces, and therefore he is
called Christ; and not in the Creation.

189. In Christ, there is Nothing Created, but in his power in the speaking
Word, all is Created, in which his Name is called IEHOVA.

190. In Christ man is New born or Regenerated, but not Created into the Image:
therefore this E. S.
Author erreth where he speaks of the Mother Love of God.

191. IEHOVA is the Generator of the Love, and JESUS is IEHOVA who generateth
the Love; and CHRIST is become generated out of the Love; in the Humanity: for
he was no CHRIST from Eternity, but only the Love in IEHOVA in JESUS.

192. Sin caused IEHOVA, that he gave us the CHRIST out of the Love: for in
the Eternity will be no CHRIST, but NOTE
IEHOVA, all in all, the whole Humane Tree in IEHOVA.

193. Not that the Person of Christ will Cease to be; only the Killing or
Mortifying of Sin, in which IEHOVA is called CHRIST, is then Ceased: The
Creature remains; but CHRIST is then the Eternal High Priest in ALL, and the
Creature of CHRIST, a King of Men.

194. NOw may the Reader Ask, what is the strife or controversy in this place?
It is THIS. The E. S.
Author says.

12. CHRIST was the Image of God, and was generated out of the Woman or Wife of
God, viz: out of the Divine Voice and Mother of the Love from Eternity, to Gods
express Image. And that God has visibly made and Created, Adam, and all
Heavenly and Earthly Creatures in this Christ.

13. That God has been manifested only in Christ, and not in Adam, that Adam
was Created and Manifested IN Christ; And that in Christ was only manifested
the Treasure of wisdom; and accordingly he has not at all manifested himself
to Adam in the first Creation; That Adam had no divine knowledge, but should
have been obedient IN Christ; which he was not, but let the Serpent betray or
deceive him, and so he followed the Devil, and perished in Sin with Soul and
Body.

14. That then Christ after this Fall manifested himself in him, and became a
Man, and new generated the Humanity, in ALL whatsoever it was inwardly and
outwardly; and made it Wholly to be Christ and God, so that this Man Christ,
was in all things or substances, like God the Holy Trinity, in power and
substance.

15. And that all Men who believe on this Christ, do become all like this one
only CHRIST: That they instantly dye away as to Nature, and they become in Soul
and Body this one only CHRIST, who is indeed God and Man in ONE only Person.

16. And like the Holy Trinity, in Will, knowledge, power or virtue, and
substance, and in all Divine Properties; Eternal, Unchangeable, Immortal;
Perfect, without any ONE Sinful thought: as we are to be, and must be,
Eternally.

17. And in that regard; that, he in Christ is wholly Perfect and immortal;
and is changed from Death to the Eternal Life in Christ, in and to all that,
whatsoever Man inwardly and Outwardly is and does, as to Conversation words and
works.

And thereby NOTE
Denies the Mortality, and the Resurrection of the Dead; being he says, that
he has wholly put on the Eternal PERFECT Life, Inwardly and Outwardly; and
that he is no more what he was after Man's Fall: it is only altogether CHRIST in
him.

19. Therefore he holds himself to be wholly like God the Eternal One only
substance in all things, in knowledge will and deed, etc.

195. This is the whole Sum of his Doctrine in all E. S.
HIS Writings.

196. Here follows J. B.
my Answer very briefly upon this.

197. Man was not from Eternity; only he was a Shadow of an Image, after the
manner as God has known all things from Eternity in his Wisdom; he was in the
wisdom without Image, not particularly in One place alone, but every where all
over known by the Spirit of God in the wisdom.

198. Man's Life also was not a Form, but a Mystery of the Generating of the
Holy Trinity; viz: in the out-breathed Longing delight or Lust; which from
Eternity in Eternity, impresseth it self in the desire to the Eternal Nature:
which Form is the Eternal Fiat in the outspeaking or out-breathing of the
Free-Lust or Longing delight, viz: of the Nothing.

199. The Nothing is GOD, who introduces himself with the Free-Lust or Longing
delight, of the Nothing, into Desire; for in the NOTE What the Nothing is.
NOTHING is an Eternal will to Manifestation or Revelation; which no Creature
Angel or Man can sathom or search out, That very will manifests it self with
the Eternal Lust or Longing-delight, through the Desire in Trinity.

200. The Will in the Free-Lust or Longing, is called God, for it is free from
the Desire; In the Desire the Will generateth, viz: in the Impression of the
Desire; Three Properties, viz: Darkness, Fire, Light; in which generating the
Eternal Voice existeth, which the Will of the Free-Lust or Longing carries
along with it.

201. This Voice is Gods Word, viz: the Col. 1. 15. 17.
First Born, without and before all Creatures; through which Voice, the Will in
the Impression, generateth the Darkness and Anguish, as also perceptibility
and feeling, viz: the eternal Nature: which stands in a spiritual Sulphur
Mercury and Sal, viz: a Similitude and Out breathed Substance of the voice of
the Eternal Will of the Abyss, viz: of God.

202. The Voice in the Eternal Will which is a Spirit, is, resonant, or such a
thing as will Sound, viz: a possibility of a Sound, but in it self it is still
quiet or silent; and the properties of the Impression, viz: of Nature; are the
Voice of the Wills Instrument, through which, Gods Voice manifests it self.

203. For the Properties have also the Properties of the Voice as a Lute or
other Musical Instrument, has the Tang in it self, yet there must be a Motion
or else it ringeth not.

204. Thus, the eternal Will-spirit, to the Voice of the Eternal Sound, is
the Lute Player, or Manifester of the Tang, in Nature; viz: in the Seven
Properties of the Generating of the Eternal Nature; as in the Book of the
Threefold Life, also in the Book of the Signature, and other Books of Mine I. B.
is written very expressly at Large.

205. Now, out of this Voice of the Eternal Nature, which the Spirit of God
with the Eternal Sound or Word of the Eternal Will, moves, and makes to be
generating or Sounding, are all eternal Spirits, as Angels and Souls of Men
Originated, viz: out of the Center of the Eternal Nature, out of which the
Dark-Fire-and Light-World take their Original from Eternity, out of which, Joy
and Sorrow, Pain and Source or Torment, originate, each in ITS property in the
Generating of the SEVEN properties of all Substances or Things.

206. And in this Place, where the Eternal Sound or Divine Voice through the
Free Will of the Abyss becomes always continually generated: originateth the
highly Dear Name JEHOVA, as an ^ A. O. V. being the Character of the Holy
Trinity, which with the right form stands thus (...) JEHOVAH.

207. The A is the Eternal beginning or Manifestation of the Nothing, viz: of
the Abyss, and makes in it self an ^, That is, Beginning and Spirit, and with
the Lust or Longing Closes in it self the O, that is the Center of the Deity,
and stands between A and V; and V is the Spirits Character, which in the
Outgoing from the A and O is an S viz: a fire Fire of the Light-Flame, and
stands with its right Character and Word, thus (...) that is ESCH, by which
the Hebrews, with such a Word, as there stands, understand, viz: the
understanding Spirit, which generateth it self, and eternally goes forth out
of the A and O, and has in it self, the Fire and Light.

208. Viz: The Property of the free-Lust or Longing without source or Torment,
and the property of Nature, in all the Seven Forms of the generating, viz: a
Fire and Light-Flame, which in all things, whether it be in Darkness, viz: in
the Cold of the Impression, or in the Sulphur to the Fire, or in the Fire, in
every thing of any property, CAN be, as it will.

209. In this place; the eternal Voice, where the Fire in the desire of the
Impression, and the Light in the Free-Lust or Longing, viz: in the Will to
Manifestation, eternally generateth it self through the Fire; the Dear Name
JESUS originateth it self, and is, the humility, or Love, viz: the Lights
Desire or Property, in the Divine Voice in the eternal Sound, viz: an eternal
Lust-Longing, or Power of the Deity.

210. In this Birth or geniture, now there is no other originating of any other
Spirit at ALL, neither can there any other similitude or Image more at All be
generated out of this holiness or Voice of God: For God said to Moses, Exodus
20. 4.
Thou shall make to thy self no Similitude of a God, for nothing can be like
him: He has also Created or generated no Image in himself, that could be like,
comparable, or Consormable, to this JEHOVA in Trinity.

211. For, he is ONE only Spirit, and is in all things or Substances, HOW he
will; He is the potentiality of ALL things.

212. He has generated no express Image from Eternity, in the Mother of the
Love, as this E. S.
Author Conceiteth, but in his Voice, viz: in the Eternal Word, were all
things, which the Word through the Impression or generating of the eternal
Nature and properties has Manifested, and through the Impression which is the
Fiat, has Created them, and in the Desire of the Fiat, introduced them into
Substance.

213. There was no CHRIST here, in which the Sound or Voice of God, has
manifested all things; but his out-breathing of the Will in the Voice, was the
eternal Wisdom, viz: the Glance of his Glory, which God out of his Voice,
eternally generated, in which the Spirit of God has seen all things from
Eternity, and through the Impression of the Desire in verbo Fiat, in the word
Fiat, Created.

214. Not in the Holy Trinity in JEHOVA, but with the Will of JEHOVA, viz: with
the Voice of the Word in the Impression of Nature, which in the Eternity is
only a Spirit: but with the Moving of God, in the beginning of the Creation of
this World, is in the Spirit become a Substance, viz: an own self Principle.

215. Man is not become Created and Manifested in CHRIST, without the Divine
Manifestation in him, CHRIST was yet in JEHOVA viz: hidden in JESU in the
out-speaking Word, as a Power of the Deity.

216. JEHOVA, that is, God, has moved himself, in the JESU, viz; in the Lust
or Longing of the eternal Desire, viz: with Gods Heart, and generated and
Manifested CHRIST in the Humanity, as a Treasure of Divine Power and Wisdom.

217. For Mary said to the Angel Gabriel, to the Prince of Gods Wonders, when
he brought her the Message, that she should be impregnate or conceive with
Child: Luke 1. 34, 35.
How should that come to pass, for I have known no Man? The Angel said, the
Holy Spirit will come upon thee; and the Power of the Most High, will
overshadow thee, Luk: 1. 31, 32, 33.
thou shall be impregnate with Child and generate or bear a Son, whose Name
thou shall call JESUS, he will be great, and be called the Son of the Most
High, whose outgoing has been from Eternity.

218. This was the Original of CHRIST, in the eternal Word, in the Power of
the Most High of all, which has moved it self, and out of and in the JESU,
viz: in the desire of the Divine Love, generated the CHRIST, viz: the Champion
in the Battle between Gods Love and Anger: Not so, as that the power of CHRIST
was not from eternity in the Word: It was indeed, but not manifested in such a
property, as a Breaker of Death in pieces.

219. God generated to himself, the breaker of Death in pieces out of the
Fountain of HIS Self hood: For in the Creation there was no Death, so there was
also no breaker of Death in pieces, Romans 5. 12.
With Sin came Death into the World, and through the Breaker in pieces of
Death, it came out of the World again.

220. In Adam was JEHOVA; the great All being All-substantiall God, manifested,
but not in the Form of the breaker of Death, but in the Power of his Spirit
according to Love and Anger, according to the property of the Fiat, viz:
through the glimps of the Tincture of the Fire and Light; as an express Image
of God.

221. Adam, was not God himself, he was not Created in the Trinity in JEHOVA,
as a Self-subsisting God; as this E. S.
without writes, he was made an express Image of God in CHRIST, visible and
Manifest but without Divine Knowledge: and that God first Manifested the
Treasure of this Wisdom in Adam: when Christ became Man?

222. No! God, Created Adam to the Eternal Life in Paradise, with Paradisicall
source or quality and Perfection; he forbade him to eat of the source or
quality Evil and Good; he Created a Perfect express Image, in the
Looking-glass of the Eternal seen Image without Substance; The Power JEHOVA,
viz: Gods, the Fathers Love, thoroughly enlightened him, as the Sun
through-enlighteneth the whole World.

223. The Divine Sun shone through and through Adam in his heavenly
substantiality, viz: in the pure Element: and outwardly the Outward Sun
enlightened him, neither Heat nor Cold, touched him, for he stood in equal
Harmony or accord in them: the Pure Element held the Four Elements swallowed up
and Captive in it self, as the Day the Night; and this Man shall not persuade
me, that God was not manifested in Adam, he is indeed manifested in all things,
but according to every things Property.

224. In the Property, as Adam was Created, God was manifested in him, but when
he Manifested the Center of the Anger in him, then God put enmity against the
Evil and manifested the Serpent Crusher or Bruiser in Man, which before,
without Sin, was hidden in Gods Power, and was in the Divine Unity in the
Love of God, in JESU: Thus this Crusher or Bruiser of the Serpent became set as
a Mark or Limit to Man, into which he should turn in his Desire.

225. Not that Man should become the JESUS, or a God, but that we should carry
our Faith into him, and in our Desire receive into us the CHRIST, who has
broken Death in pieces, that he may make our Soul and the faded Image in Adam,
living the Divine Life, in himself.

226. For, in JESU, the Eternal Sun shines forth through the CHRIST: JESUS is
JEHOVA, that is God; and Christ is the Mediator between Gods Love and Anger.

227. To CHRIST is all Power given from JEHOVA, or JESUS: JESUS has given the
divine power to CHRIST, not that CHRIST should bear the Power or Authority to
or for himself, but GOD who is a Spirit, he uses the Christ for an Instrument,
whereby he takes away the Power and Authority, from the Anger: JESUS is the
Power or virtue of CHRIST, which gives the CHRIST the power or authority: For
Joh. 8. 28.
in own self authority, CHRIST did Nothing upon Earth; for he said at the
Cross when the Jews Hung him upon it; Luke 23. 34.
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.

228. And when he raised Lazarus up, he said, Joh. 11. 41, 42.
Father hear me; yet I know that thou hear me always. And David said in
Spirit: Psalm. 16. 8, 9.
He has set the Lord before him, therefore shall Irest secure; there he
means CHRIST, that he had set before him the JESUS or JEHOVA, wherein CHRIST
rests.

229. Now Christ is a Regeneratour or Restorer of that which is Lost; he is not
come for the sake of the Earthly Man; that he should keep THAT in its Dominion,
but that he might regenerate, that, in Adam, which when he awakened to sin,
disappeared and dyed; concerning which God says, Gen: 2. 17.
That Day thou will eat of the Tree of Good and Evil, thou shall dye the
Death; he dyed to the Divine World, and awakened to the Outward-World, viz: to
the Sinne-House, full of Misery and Ever dying source or quality.

230. He would not generate the Sinne-Life, anew; for he dyed away in his Body
of OUR Sinnes-Life (which in the Regiment or Dominion of the Four Elements, was
existed with the Sin in Adam) and brought our true Life of the pure Element
aloft again; his death was our Life; The Four Elements held us Captive in the
Anger, but he brought our Life of the Four Elements through Death forth in the
Element again, and made for us in the humane Life, a path or Way, to heaven
again.

231. Now we must follow after him, and also dye away from the Life of the Four
Elements aforehand; yet first of all receive Christ in us, who introduces us
through the Death of our Dying, into his Way or Path, through Death into the
pure Element.

232. This outward Visible Body, cannot inherit the Element of God, unless he
break that in pieces aforehand; but if we have put on CHRIST in the Faiths
Desire; he introduces our Life's Essence into himself into his Mystery, viz:
into his Rest in the Grave.

233. Concerning which David says, Psalm. 16. 8, 9.
He should rest secure; for the Lord was set before him in Christ, in whose
Protection he rested in Christ, viz: in the Limit or Mark of the Covenant, in
the Looking-glass of Christ, which God set before him, in the Covenant of the
Circumcision, and in the Sacrifices, as if Christ were therein; for he had
Promised Christ therein, till the fullfilling in the Flesh, came.

234. Therefore shall not this E. S.
Author persuade us, That the Earthly Man in Sin without the breaking of the
outward Life, does wholly put on Christ, inwardly and outwardly; and that the
sinful outward Nature, when Man enters into Repentance, does wholly dye, and
Christ alone awake or arise, and become generated inwardly and outwardly in Man.

235. No! Christ is come to heal the Soar which Adam made, when he instantly
dyed to the Kingdom of Heaven, in the Sinne-Bit, viz: to awaken or raise up,
the inward Man which disappeared in Adam, and new generate it in him in his
power; and introduce, the poor Soul again into a Divine Will, and give it the
Noble Jewel of the Holy Spirit again.

236. And continually Crush or bruise the head of the Anger and falsehood of the
Old Serpent, dwelling with its Will in the outward Flesh also continually slay
the earthly Will, till the earthly Adam dye, altogether consume, and enter into
its Mystery in which God Created it, to the Judgment of God, there shall that
give its Mystery to the *. outward Image again, viz: the Third Principle, and
the whole Man, as God Created him in Adam, shall stand forth in CHRIST'S
Property and power again: and live again in JEHOVA's Light and Power.

237. For, when Christ has finished all, NOTE when Christ will deliver up the
Kingdom.
Then shall he deliver up the Kingdom in the Regeneration, to his Father
again, 1 Cor. 15. 24.
and God shall be ALL in ALL; as he was before the Times of the World.

238. The E. S.
Author erreth in this, that he conceiteth, That the Man who turns himself
to CHRIST wholly puts on Christ inwardly and outwardly; and becomes wholly
CHRIST; and that the Nature of the Properties dies away: There is no ground
for this: Christ's Flesh became conceived in the Power of the Holy Spirit in
Maryes Essence; but our evil Flesh, we receive from Adams sinful Male or
Masculine Seed, in the Power or virtue of the two Tinctures of the Man and of
the Woman.

239. Christ says; Joh. 3. 6.
That which is born of Flesh, is flesh; but that which is born of the Spirit,
that is spirit; 1 Cor. 15. 50.
Flesh and Blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; Joh. 6. 63.
The Spirit is the Life, the Flesh profits nothing, it shall putrify or rot
and enter into its first Substance.

240. The Spiritual Man, according to the Kingdom of God, which dyed in Adam,
but in the Repentant Sinner is regenerated in Christ, that dwells in Heaven,
as St. Paul says, Phil. 3. 20.
Our conversation is in Heaven, from whence we expect the Savior CHRIST, Joh.
11. 25. Chapter 14. 6.
who is the Life.

241. His Mystery, wherein the earthly Flesh of Sin dwells, that passes
into the beginning, and expects the Savior JESUS CHRIST, to the Resurrection
and Restoration into Life.

This is my apprehension, and knowledge.

242. I say rot, that a Man in this Flesh is Perfect, and does put on Christ
outwardly; but the Mystery, viz: the Quintessence puts on Christ to the
Resurrection of the Dead: and the Soul in the heavenly substantiality according
to Christ's true heavenly Corporeity, awakeneth or arises as to ITS Substance
which it had, but dyed in Adam.

243. Christ gives US his NOTE to whom Christ gives his Body and Blood.
Body to Eat, and his Blood to drink, but NOT to the Man of Sin, but to the
Man in CHRIST new Born to Life, viz: that from the Divine Worlds Substance, to
the Paradisicall Man, which has a Heavenly Mouth to partake with.

244. For, Christ dwells in Heaven, and feeds us with his Body and Blood in
the Heaven; this Heaven is IN Man, and not in the Four Elements as to their
Operation; but in the pure Element, Christ feeds the Body of his Similitude,
viz: the Soul and the heavenly Part in the New born Man.

245. Adam eats of the four Elements, and is fed with evil and good; Adam
the outward Flesh Man, sins; the inward Man wills not the Sin: Therefore
says Paul, Romans 7. from 17. to 24.
Now if I sin, it is not I that do it, but it is the sinful Desire which
dwells in the flesh: Now therefore with my Mind I serve God, and with the
flesh, the Law of sin; for I do that which I would not; but if I now do it,
it is not I that do it, but sin in the flesh.

246. Therefore, let the Christian Reader that loves Truth, be warned,
according to my very good bounden Duty and Love-Will, not to esteem himself
Perfect, and to set himself in the Omnipotent Power or virtue of God; in the
Omniscience, and to say, He is without sin and cannot sin.

247. O, alas, the Poor Captive Soul in sinful flesh, can daily Sin; for
Prove: 24. 16.
The Righteous falls seven times a Day; Also, Psalm. 143. 2.
Before thee no Living Man is Righteous, if thou will impute sin; 1 John 1. 8.
and he that says he has no sin, is a Liar, says Saint John.

248. E. S.
This Author, erreth in almost all the highest Articles of Faith, I therefore
admonish you all, wisely to consider; Pray to God for understanding, and
continue in true Resignation and Humility before God; and continually pray to
God according to the Doctrine of Christ: Luke 11. 4.
Forgive us our Sins.

249. E. S.
This Man will be without Guilt or fault: he says, he is dead in Christ to the
Guiltiness; and if it were at the best with him, yet there lies the Guilt
still in Adams sinful flesh; which according to Christ's Doctrine, shall not,
may not, can not, inherit the Kingdom of Heaven: NOTE:
NOT the Husk of Sin, but the Mystery, shall remain for Ever.

THus is the true understanding upon the Text, 1 Timothy. 3. 16. sufficiently
explained already; also the Expositors erroneous Meaning Discovered: but yet I
will set down his own words here following for the Reader to Ponder.

The Second Text.
1 Timothy 3. 16. The Mystery of Godliness is apparently great; God is
manifested in the Flesh first in Adam.
The E. S.
Explainers Exposition.
1. WHich Text as also the whole Epistle and ALL Writings of the Holy Apostles
and Prophets, when they illustrate and speak of the apparent Revelation and
great Mystery of God, can or may no way with Truth be understood, applied, or
signified, Concerning the First created Adam.

2. Seeing God, in and with this holy Name, the whole holy Trinity, the whole
Divine fulness, from the least to the greatest, with his holy, Divine,
Saving, apparent Revealed, Great Mystery, was not at all manifested in Adam
before the Fall; or appeared in him; much less with his Divine fulness, has
wrought livingly powerfully and actively, IN him, or dwelt or been implanted:
but Once and only in Christ the first born of God before all creatures.

3. Which revealed great Mystery, with the whole Divine fulness, afterward
in its appointed Time, in the assuming of our humane Body, and Soul, Flesh and
Blood, in the Flesh of Christ became known and Manifested; whence This second
Text, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
this Text, according to your Scripture signification, in Eternity cannot be
severed; or the The first Text, Genesis 1. 17.
first, secluded from the Created Adam, but the second viz: the Justification
in the Spirit, following according to your Meaning, is to be understood only in
Christ: but The two former Texts.
both belong only and alone to the Regeneration of Christ, and of ALL his holy
Members in the flesh.

4. As indeed according to your visible Explanation, in the Letter, not only
the flesh of the Created Adam, but the whole Person Body and Soul, the Total
Soul-Man which is created in the Natural Life; has sinned, and through the
Fall come into Eternal Perdition.

5. Whence the Justification and Regeneration through God, the Lord; who is the
Spirit in Christ, yea Christ the highly praised God himself, is appropriated to
all the faithful and Elect new Creatures, and Imaged or Represented and United
in the Faith.

6. Through which highly praised Triune God CHRIST JESUS, the Express Image of
the total holy perfect Divine Triunity, all Elect, rightly, Believing, in with
and through himself, are GLORIFIED in his Express Image, and brought from one
Glory to another; as by him the Lord, and Triune God himself, who is the Lord
the Spirit.

7. As, really, the Justification cannot be applied and explained concerning
God and Christ, without the Regeneration and union of Body and Soul, of the
whole humane visible and palpable Person, who is the Eternal Righteousness it
self; but concerning the converted and redeemed whole humane Person in ONE
Body, concerning Body and Soul, and not concerning the Flesh alone, which
without Soul and the inbreathed breath of God, is nothing but Dust and Ashes,
according to the Testimony of Scripture in Many places and Texts. Thus far
Esaiah Stiefel.

J. B.
My Answer upon this.
1. LEt the Christian Reader but look this Author Rightly into his heart: and
consider what he seeks under this description: where he says, God has created
ALL things in Christ, as also created and made Man visible in him: but wholly
without divine manifestation and knowledge; so that God with his Mystery in the
least was not manifested in Adam: whereas yet the Spirit of God did breath into
him the living Breath: whence Man became a living Soul.

2. Also how this Author speaks quite against himself; for he acknowledges
in many places; That God did breath into Man a powerful living Spirit-Life,
out of the Divine understanding and Mouth; in which Man was the Image of God.

3. Now if the Spirit of God did breath into him his Breath, viz: the living
understanding Soul, how then was not God manifested in Man? But he must do it
for another cause, that thereby he might give forth or profess himself wholly
and altogether to be God: for he sets it down thus, That God Created and made
Adam visible in Christ and not further manifested himself in Adam, but only in
Christ; and so Created Adam only to and for the Natural Life, and he
understands properly under it, only that he should or must Fall: For if he
had no Divine knowledge and if God had never been manifested in him, then the
Devil might easily have got the Game of him.

4. This E. S.
Author understands it thus; that God might have cause to bring forth the
hidden Treasure of the Divine wisdom the Second Time in Christ, and manifest
himself in Christ in the Humane Property; and new Regenerate Man totally in the
Treasure of his Divine wisdom, so that Man is wholly Christ; out of which he
frames to himself such a thought, that HE himself is Christ.

5. And this must help him to it, and be the ground and Corner stone thereof;
That God did Create and make Man visible the First Time in Christ; and is now
the Second Time wholly new generated in Christ.

6. From this now it follows, seeing Christ manifested himself the Second
time in the Flesh, and manifested the Soul and Body of Man in him, with the
WHOLE fulness of the Deity: that MAN is TOTALLY God and Christ: and so E. S.
HE cannot fail of his purpose.

7. For, if, in CHRIST, he be come to be visible, as to this world in Adam, and
that Christ as God, the second time manifest himself wholly in him, with the
fullness of the Deity inwardly and outwardly in the total humane Property, so
that God and Man is totally one, then it cannot fail him, but that; Man must be
God.

8, Now understand this Authors confusednesse or intricacy; First he says,
God Created and made Man manifest in his Image, that is, in Christ's Eternal
Image: which is the Authors Cornerstone, but altogether erroneous and not
right: CHRIST in JEHOVA in JESUS from Eternity, was no Image of the Deity, and
even NO Christ: The first begotten or born of the Father before all Creatures
from Eternity, is Gods Heart, Voice, Word or Manifestation of the Divine Mouth;
the Scripture understands no other Image.

9. The Man Adam, became not created and manifested in Christ's Image, but in
his own Image, which God had seen from Eternity in his wisdom in the
out-spoken word: he can show us no other.

10. God created Man in his Image, and to the Image of God; it stands not
written, of Christ, but of God: to the Image, he became created to substance:
and IN the Image he became created in his own Image from Eternity known by the
Spirit of God.

11. Not He was Created into an Image, not into a God.
to A God, but Gen: 1. 26. Chap: 5. 1. James 3. 9.
to a Similitude of God: as Moses says, God Created Man according to his
Similitude; Also Let us make Man a Similitude according to us, that the Spirit
of God may behold it self in a Similitude; and might Melodise with himself.

12. And therefore he breathed into him, the Breath, out of his Sound of all
his Substance, out of all the THREE Principles, viz: a Tang and Voice of his
Instrument, viz: a Harmony of God, upon which the Spirit of God would melodise,
and take pleasure in the Tang of the outspoken Mercury or Word in the Humane
Sound, and with this Instrument Govern all whatsoever is and lives in the
world, and so manifest himself in this humane Sound in Man's voice; and ride
upon the wings of Man's Spirit; as David says Psalm: 104. 3.
The Lord rides upon the wings of the Wind.

13. In this respect his Cornerstone upon which he builds is erroneous, and
not rightly understood. If Adam had continued in Gods Harmony, there had needed
no Christ in Man, for the Power of the Serpent Crusher or Bruiser, to be the
Christ, was hidden in the Word of Gods voice, and manifested in no Image.

14. God also took not his Love to himself for a wife, in that he would
generate an Image to himself; He himself generateth the Love; the Love, is
JESUS or IEHOVA: viz: the Second Principle or the Second Person in the Deity.

15. When the fair Harmony in Adam became poisoned by the Devil, so that the
Souls Will-Spirit, which should have been wholly resigned into Gods Love-voyce;
went forth out of GODS Harmony and Tang into the Harmony of the DEVIL and all
Evil or Malice, then the true Divine Lute-player departed from him: For Adams
Spirit went out from him.

16. Now if Adam had been created and brought forth wholly in Christ's Image and
had been standing in the Harmony of Christ; then were the Image of Eternity
which God, (as this E. S.
Author conceiteth) Generated in his Love-Mother from Eternity in him,
destroyed; and had suffered it self to be overpowered by the Devil, and then
were the Devil stronger than God, seeing he had destroyed Christ's Image.

17, O, how were it possible that any thing should perish that were brought
forth only and solely, out of the Image and will of the Love of God: then must
GOD perish.

18. And though he would say, the Body over-loaded or overswayed the Soul, yet
the Soul was breathed into Man out of the Mouth of God out of the Holy Spirit:
also it were much, that God would Introduce an Earthly Man into the Image of
the holiness of God, viz: into CHRIST, who was generated in the voice of the
Mother, of the Love, from Eternity out of God, (as he says,) So he would
indeed have had Divine holy Substance, which the Debill had not been able to
Sift.

19. I believe we shall here leave the Author to his Conceit: and must Say;
That God has Created Man IN his own Image known of God, without Substance into
a Substance and Image, according to Gods outspoken and Created Substance: as
Moses says; Gen: 1. 26.
To be Lord over all Creatures upon the Earth: we shall not dare to set him
into the Seat of the Deity.

20. The Omniscience of MAN, was never at all; nor in Eternity ever will be;
for indeed no Throne Angel is Omniscient: but all is indeed under God and a
work of his Hands.

21. When God manifested himself in and with the Serpent Crusher or Bruiser, he
said, John 3. John 3. 13.
None goes to Heaven but the Son of Man who is come from Heaven, and who is in
Heaven. It is an empty or void Point, which the Author mentions, that Christ
has manifested himself in a total pure Virgin immaculate or without blemish,
and Sin.

22. He said he was come from HEAVEN, and NOT out of his Image which perished:
as this Author conceiteth, and yet became Man, in Maryes right humane Essence.

23. Of which this Author as is to be observed, in his Omniscience and Deity,
knows nothing at all: O that he would learn beforehand the Theosophick A. B.
C. in the School of the Holy Spirit, e're he give himself forth, or professes
himself to be holy and Omniscient, and were a while under Gods Harmony; e're he
would himself be Gods Lutenist. There is for certain a Luciferian Pride, under
it.

24. Observe, loving Brother; he comes in Christ's Name, and wholly in his
person; try him: Christ is gone to Heaven, this is but a confused Man; MARY was
the daughter of Joachim and Anna according to Flesh Soul and Spirit, Rom: 3. 9.
Gal: 3. 22.
shut up under the Law of Sin, and under the Fall of Adam and Eve.

25. But in HER was the Limit or Mark of the Covenant, which God had promised
in Paradise; understand in the faded Image of the heavenly substantiality; in
which Adam dyed to the Kingdom of Heaven: that can receive NO Sin, for the
Heaven of God is subjected under no Sin.

26. When Lucifer perished in his Creature, the Heaven spewed him out from it
self; The true Soul of Adam, was the Life in the Heavenly Substantiality; but
when the Souls Will, entered into the Earthly Substance, viz: into Evil and
Good, into Heat and Cold, viz; into the Center of Nature, after sutlety and
cunning then faded his heavenly substance wherein Gods Light shone; and Gods
Light remained standing in its self in its Principle.

27. This Gods Love-Will Lamented, that its similitude perished, and promised
Adam the Crusher or Bruiser of the Serpent out of the Seed of the Woman: which
had with the Limit or Mark of the Covenant, here stuck or set it self in MARY.

28. Not in the sinful Flesh of Mary, but in the faded Image, which JESUS, by
his entrance, would move, and move himself in the Limit or Mark of the
Covenant, and open the CHRIST, viz: a New Life out of himself, and out of this
Limit or Mark of the Covenant, of Promise, in the faded Seed of Mary.

29. So that the faded Substance in the power of the moving of JESUS, in that
this JESUS with his moving, moved the divine wisdom and hidden power in it,
and gave this hidden Seed for a Life; might become manifest, and in Christ
living again: who was God and MAN in ONE Person; to whom the outward Kingdom
of our Flesh in the seed of MARY hung.

30. WHEREIN NOTE In what CHRIST took upon him our Sins.
he took upon him our Sins and Infirmities, upon his Shoulders: and querched
them with the blood of the now present Newborn heavenly Substantiality, with
the true Woman's Seed, and drowned the fierce wrath which became manifested in
the center of Nature in the Soulish Property together with the disobedient
Will, and introduced it again into Gods Will.

31. And in this, that God moved himself in the Seed of Mary, in the shut up
hiddennesse of the Humanity, and manifested himself with his Love, and
conceived CHRIST in the Faded or disappeared Seed, viz: the Eternal Life in
the still death, NOTE why Mary is the blessed of all Women.
Therefore is Mary become the blessed of all women.

32. For, that happened to None, that God had moved himself in their right
Seed, that dyed and disappeared in Adam; For here came the first Image; again,
which Adam was, in the Creation; and God now gave to this Image, which could
not stand but dyed, in Adam, this Serpent Crusher or Bruiser, out of JESUS or
JEHOVA, for an assistant, that should Help the Soul to overpower the Anger of
God, and the Devil.

33. JESUS has with this CHRIST, which he manifested out of his moving in the
Seed of Mary, and gave Life to the Seed; not received the outward sinful Seed
of Mary into the Deity; so that God is become manifested in the outward Seed of
Mary.

34. This proves it self in Christ's Person, that he on Earth, in form or Shape,
condition and Outward Conversation and Flesh; was like US; for the outward
Flesh was mortal: wherein he also slew death: He took only the Inward Seed,
viz: the disappeared, which dyed in Adam, wherein Gods Light shined.

35. And in the JESU, viz: in Gods Love and wisdom; he manifested the divine
power and strength; wherewith he would overcome the Anger of the Father, and
transmute or change IT into the divine Kingdom of Joy.

36. But the Soulish and outward Fleshly Seed of Mary, Wherein Sin was, hung
to the inward disappeared Seed, These mix not themselves, also they are not
sundred: but as God dwells in the world, and yet the World is not God; a
Principle severeth them; and as God with his Anger, dwells in the Creature,
and yet also in the hiddennesse, Note, How in Eternity the Love is among the
Anger.
with the Love among the Anger; and yet, the Anger receives not the Love.

37. For, I can say, that God dwells with the Love in the Devil, but the
Devil cannot receive it, the Love is his Enemy, as the water is the Fires
Enemy, and yet the Fire dwells in the Original in the water; so God dwells
in all things, but the thing is not capable of his Love, so also the Earthly
Seed of Mary, wherein Sin was, was not capable of the Deity; but it hung as
another Principle, to the Inward Seed in which God manifested himself.

38. The Inner Man which now became Christ, THAT took our Sin upon it self,
and hung the Body, upon which he had Laid Man's Sin, on the Cross, as a Curse
of God: For there hung the first Adam which God cursed for the sake of Sin;
on the Cross with the curse of Sin, and dyed to Sin on the Cross; and in
his dying he shed the Blood of the holy man in Christ, into the Mystery of the
Soul, and of the Outward Man wherein Death was.

39. For, the holy Blood was conceived in the Holy Spirit, and was immortal,
it was conceived IN the water of the Eternal Life, in the Tincture of Gods
Light in his sweet Love: and had resolved it self into, and appropriated it
self with, the Blood of the disappeared Image.

40. Now when this Blood fell together, into Death, then Death Quaked or was
Terrified.
Trembled before this holy Eternal Life; the Anger trembled, before the Love,
and fell in its Poison, and Fierce wrath which held us captive, into its dying,
according to the kind of the fierce wrath.

41. And yet there is no dying, or ceasing, to be understood; but it went in
the terror of the Love, up in the divine Kingdom of joy; as a Light becomes
shining, out of an anxious hot Source or Quality, where all anxiety takes an
End.

42. The Fierce wrath, which before was evil and angry, that was now the cause
of the great Fiery Love and Kingdom of Joy; for nothing must pass Away in
Man; he must remain as God created him in Adam; but he must again be transmuted
into that very Image, into that very resigned will; and be obedient to God.

43. For the Scripture says; The Son of God Christ Phil: 2. 8.
became obedient to the Father, even to the Death on the Tree of the Cross, so
wholly must also our humane will be broken in Christ's death, and the Anger in
HIS Blood be Transmuted into the Love.

44. And that is it which David says; Psalm: 16. 10. Act: 2. 27.
Thou will not let thy Holy ONE see Corruption, or Consumption; Now when he
shed his holy Blood, in the true Image of God in Christ; then became the Poison
of the Anger in Adams Flesh Soul and Spirit, sanctified, and transmuted into
Love, and the Devils Den of Robbery, wholly destroyed.

45. There enmity ceased, and God became IMMANUEL Man with God, and God with
Man, for here Adams Flesh became Tinctured, and prepared for the Resurrection:
for Death brake, in the Eternal Newborn Life of CHRIST out of JESU.

46. And here, the Job 28. 17. Psalm. 9. 13.
Gate of Death, viz: the Eternal Darkness in Man's Body and Soul, became
broken open; and the Gen: 3. 24.
Cherubine, with the Sword, which, did cut off the humane Life, from the Light
of Nature, was taken away: and the fountain began to flow out of Sion, viz: out
of Christ's Spring in the whole Man, so that man could now henceforth drink of
the Water of the Holy Element, and Eat ex verbo Domini of the Word of the Lord.

47. Thus now we are to consider our Imitation of, or following after him; we
cannot say, that we can do, what God in JESU did through CHRIST; in breaking
the way for us; No WE can NOT shed heavenly Blood; and transmute the Anger of
God into Love; else if that were any way possible, then we must also as a Curse
be Nailed to the CROSS; and though that should be, yet our inward Man is not
exalted into the degree of Christ, to be wholly like him,

48, For JESUS, viz: the Col: 2 9.
total fulness of the Deity, dwells in CHRIST without Measure; and in him
viz: in his Mother MARY, was the Limit or Mark of the Covenant which God
blessed in Paradise; into THAT God looked, and through it, Gods Imagination
entered in through the Jewish Sacrifices.

49. God brake death in pieces only through him, but we must introduce our
Imagination and desire into him, that our Tinder of the faded Image in him, may
begin to glimmer or Glow in the Spirit and power of Christ, which apprehends
the true hunger of the right Faith, wherewith, Man through the glowing or
glimmering Tinder: which if it be sincere and earnest, at length becomes a
shining Light of God in JESUS: can break the Power of Sin in the Flesh; and
keep it in subjection, as a Churlish unruly evil Dog, which can NOT altogether
be freed from ITS Malignity or Malice, till it break wholly and altogether.

50. That the Shell into which the Devil has introduced his Imagination and
had his Den of Robbery therein, be altogether dissipated that there be no more
life therein; and then so soon as the outward Man dies, that the Soul be freed
of the Evil Beast, THEN it has the open Gate, in its beloved Image, in which
Christ has opened himself with the Divine Love-Fire.

51. And then is the Union already there, the Bride cheereth her Bridegroom,
viz: the Noble Virgin in the Love of Christ, being awakened again, which takes
the Soul, viz: its loving Bridegroom and Man or Husband, into her Arms of the
Divine desire; and what is there done I have no Pen to write it with, It is
more than humane or Natural to write that.

52. What Gods Love and sweetness is, which the converted Man, if he enter
into his Father again, and acknowledge himself a Swineheard, and bewail his by
past Sins, and seeks the Fathers Grace and Favor, experienceth, when
Christ his Bridegroom sets upon him the Virgin-like Garland or Crown, where the
Pearl of the divine reception of Grace at first becomes sown.

53. What Joy the Virgin has when it obtains Life again, and receives its
Bridegroom Christ, how very amiably and blessedly it presents it self toward
the soul; and comprehends the soul, viz: its Man or Husband in its Love: at
which indeed Soul and Body tremble in Joy.

54. Which those only know, who have been Guests in this Place; and this E. S.
Author who in the Letter will be PERFECT, and newborn, only and merely with
a litteral skill and knowledge, it is likely has yet never experienced, and
scarce tasted the Supper of Christ.

55. Seeing he is but a Litteral Saint and a Contender, and moreover a
high-minded despiser of the children of Christ in their unlike Gifts, and his
holiness is confined merely within the Letter, and does but talk Historically,
and has not yet attained the Spirit of Christ to the Revelation or
Manifestation thereof.

56. As his reproaches, and disgraceful writings, many whereof he has sent
abroad, sufficiently prove, that no true Love-Spirit is generated in him, and
that it is not Christ inwardly and outwardly, but Adoms Pride and State,
together with a conceit or supposition, which persuades IT self, that it is
Christ, and seduceth, the innocent Hearts.

57. Therefore I would have the Reader Christianly warned and in Love, not to
account himself Holy Perfect and immortal, for though likely it is so, that
the Prodigal lost Son, comes to the Father, and that his Father receives him
again with Joy, and puts on him a new Garment, and puts the Seal-Ring in
Christ's Death, on to the hand of his Soul.

58. Yet is the Garment only put on to the Virgin, that it should, as a Noble
Ministresse or Maid of Honor to its Bridegroom the Soul, draw the Soul
thereinto, that it may give its Love thereinto, and continually break the head
of the old Serpent, viz: the Evil Will.

59. For, the Woman's Seed should break the Serpents head, that is, the Noble
Virgin in Christ's Life and power, awaken and rise again, and be New born to
Life; that should change the Souls, viz: the Fire-Spirits Evil Will, with its
Love, and turn the Anger of the Fire and Poison into a Love hunger, and
with-stand or oppose, the hunger desire of the Flesh, in false or evil Lust;
Till the Flesh falls away or deceaseth.

60. Note what dies and what rises again.
And then the Mystery of the Flesh, viz: the Sulphur Mercurius and Sal, falls
into the Eternal Mystery; out of which it was created in the Beginning, viz:
into the Word Fiat: the Four Elements dye and consume, and the Quintessentia or
Fifth Essence passes into the Mystery of God: into the Fiat, to the Holy
Resurrection of the Flesh; according to the tenure of our Christian-Faith,
which is true,

61. So that then, the whole Image shall again be in one; and as at the
beginning, as God created it to his Image, and no otherwise, neither more nor
less: Gods purpose must stand, he created Man to be in the PARADISE, into
which he shall go again and eternally remain therein.

62. But the Wicked, whom the Anger devoureth, they are Eternally bereaved of
their Noble Virgin-like Image, which dyed in Adam; and get instead thereof, on
to the Soul, an Image of the fierce wrathful dark worlds Substance; according
to their here temporal hunger which they had, in their malicious wicked
pleasure and voluptuousness.

63. As also Lucifer has lost his fair bright Angels Image, and now appears
in the Figure or Shape of an abominable Worm and Beast; for he has given
himself up into the Center, he can figure or shape to himself Or any Image as
he will.
an Image HOW he will.

64. For he thirsted after that also, that he might be a self Lord of his own
and Maker of his form or shape: Adam also did almost aim That he might do so.
at that, but in the outward Principle the might or power is NOT, though the
Serpent persuaded Eve, that she should be wise and know all things, but it came
not to pass.

The Third Text. Now follows the Text.
Esaiah 54. 5. He who has made thee is thy Man or Husband, the Lord of Hosts
is his Name, and thy Redeemer the Holy One in Israel, who is called, the God of
All the World.
Hereupon follows the E. S.
Explainers Exposition to the Sender of these Texts.
1. THis Text you mention therefore, that you may receive the explanation
thereof; how it is and what kind of thing is the union of Christ, the Man or
Husband, and highly praised Triune God, whose Name is called the LORD of Hosts,
and the Redeemer of the Wife or Woman, and the Holy One in Israel, who is
called the God of all the world; and also what kind of thing is his Wife or
Woman, and united whole humane Person of all the Called Elected truly faithful
Christians, both of Masculine and Feminine Sex.

2. Thereupon, with Christ the Triune highly praised God; and Eternal
Endless, unchangeable, most holy Wisdom and Truth; this is sent you in
writing, for a visible or evident manifestation or Revelation, and palpable
confirmation to the truly faithful desirous hearts, with Christ the Triune
highly praised God, to be perfectly united, and to remain in all Eternity
inseparably united, to the highest praise of the Triune highly praised God:
this is in and with Christ, for a holy consideration, here set down, and
pourtrayed before your Eyes.

3. And First, as to what belongs and concerns the Man or Husband CHRIST, the
Triune highly praised LORD of Hosts, and Redeemer of all Mankind, but
especially of the Faithful, and the Holy Ones in Israel, that is, of all the
truly Faithful; even their Lord, and the God of all the World: And therein to
speak of,

I. First; His Birth and Original.

II. Secondly; His Substance, what he is according to his first Birth before
all Creatures.

III. Thirdly; What the Action and operation of his first Birth was, yet,
before the Fall of Man.

IV. Fourthly; What he became after the Fall of Man, and IS henceforth now and
to Eternal Times, and remains so unchangeably.

4. Hereupon now follows this holy Divine or Deicall.
Divine or Deicall instruction.

First; As concerning, the Holy Birth, original and out-going from Eternity in
Eternity, of this I.
holy Man or Husband, he is from Eternity generated or Born, out of the Triune
Eternal highest Good, the Eternal God and Father, through this Triune highest
Eternal Good, the Triune highly praised God himself, with through and out of
his most holy self-subsisting substance.

5. And begotten, to the most holy express Image Glance and shining most holy
Substantial Glory of the Total Divine fulness, of the Totally most holy
Triune Divine Substance, before all Created and uncreated things.

Secondly; As concerning this holy Man's or Husbands substance, what he is
according to his first Birth before all Creatures; it shall be signified and
mentioned: that according to the information to the first Question, he is
totally like the Triune Generator and Father of the whole Triune perfect
substance, out of which he has Generated from Eternity this his Tri-une Son
of his whole perfect Substance, and remains in with and through the same in
Eternal unseparable Triunity wholly perfect.

7. Chiefly and Principally as to what the most holy and most Glorious, in the
most holy Triune total Divine, in Eternity inseparable fulness of the Deity,
is, and remains from Eternity, in Eternity therein unchangeably and
unaltered; to the highest praise and Eternal honor thereof.

8. There is and shall be from Eternity in Eternity, Three found to be therein;
whence also, the whole Divine fullness, is called a Triune Divine Substance,
yes, the Total holy Triune GOD himself.

9. I. One of them is called the Paternall Substance, the Father, the
Generator, the Power of the Triune Totally perfect Divine or Deicall substance.

10. II. One other is called the filial substance, the Son, the Birth, the
Word, Speech, the in-and-out-speaking Substance of the Paternal Substance, of
the Father the Generator of the Power of the Triune Total Perfect Deity.

11. III. One, the Third, is called the Spiritual Living Substance, the Spirit,
the Life, the Exit in and out of the Paternal Filial Substance, Power, Word, or
powerful word of the Triune Total fullness of the Father and of the Son, or
in the Father and the Son, the total holy Spirit and Eternal Life in Power
and Word, Father and Son of the whole Triune Deity.

12. And this most holy Triune Deity, Power Word and Life, Father Son and
Holy Spirit, are and remain from Eternity in Eternity, undividably ONE, before,
in, and after the Birth, one only GOD, and one only LORD, over all, through all
and in all, that set their faith and trust in Divine working and dominion
therein.

13. And this Triune God, Power, Word, and Life, Father Son and Spirit, in
Eternal UNITY, has generated to himself the Medium of his most holy Substance
from Eternity the Word, to his Son and Glance of his total divine fullness,
and begotten him to his most holy Triune Deity's highest praise and honor.

14. And presented it to the most holy Glorious Throne, Glance and Express
Image of his Total holy Divine Triune Fullness, and invincible confirmation, in
the Love of the Divine Fullness, which the Triune highly praised God, has
trusted with him, and his Paternal Substance, in and with the Word and Spirit,
in Eternal Eternity, for a Wife and Mother, of his own Triune Substance of his
Son, and Word, from Eternity in Eternity in and with himself.

15. And united to the Eternal Genetrix, and betrothed or promised, to in and
with, this most holy Triune Divine Substance, to an unity, this, from Eternity
most holy Birth of God, CHRIST JESUS, The Triune highly praised God, is all
that, himself, which to the Total Deity to its highest praise and honor, is
ascribed and appropriated from Eternity; also remains peculiarly so in it
self, to its Eternal stability.

16. Viz: the Eternal Substantial, Eternal steadfast unalterable Love,
Righteousness, Wisdom, Truth, Mercifulness, Humility, Patience,
Longsuffering, Holiness, Purity, Innocence, and in brief all virtues of the
Deity, which through the Power, Word, and Spirit, the most holy Triune God,
from Eternity in Eternity, may or can be expressed.

17. Yes, all whatsoever may be called good and profitable, and serviceable in
Heaven and Earth, and be apprehended with or by the Triune God; that, is this
most holy birth of God, self-subsistingly, Substantially, from Eternity, in all
Eternity.

Thirdly; what this most holy Triune Divine Births acting and working was,
before the Fall, of Man; the Holy Scripture witnesses thereof, in many places
here and there, that through this most holy Triune Birth of God, CHRIST JESUS,
not only all Creatures, Heaven and Earth and all that lives and moves
therein, was made and is proceeded: But that this most holy Triune Birth of God
is also in it self, Co-Creatour, Generator, Bringer forth, Worker, yes himself
in the Creating was the Will and operative substantial self-subsisting Deed,
yes, all in all, so that he was not only the Creator, Eternal Father, and
Generator of all Creatures whatsoever they may be called, but also of Angels
and Men.

Fourthly; what this Holy Eternal Birth and Son of God, the whole Fulness
of the Deity, came to be after the Fall of Man, and is henceforth now and to
Eternal Times and remains to be unchangeably; the Testimony of the Holy
Scripture mentions in several places very much.

20. That this Eternal Divine Triune Birth and Son of the Triune Deity, to
the Comfort of whole Mankind, to the Redemption and Renovation of the same,
after their horrible Fall, losing of all their Glory received and inbreathed
from God; in his holy breath and renewing regenerating and changing out of the
Dead, damnable Substance of Satan, into the Holy unfadable immaculate
untransitory Inheritance of the Eternal God, and most holy Glorious Eternally
enduring Life and Substance of Eternal Happiness or Salvation.

21. Not only of fallen Man, through the Anger and just Curse of God for Sins
sake thrown into Eternal Pain and Torment; but also of all Heavenly and Earthly
Creatures, which are set and ordained by the Lord for the service of the
Created Man in his Innocence; in which respect they also after the Fall of Man
for the same Man's sake, by the Anger and Curse of God were come and brought
into an unstedfast, troublesome, miserable, pitiful, state, and changeable,
sorrowful, perishable, transitory, Substance or thing.

22. For the Comfort and Salvation of all these, and the restoring of the loss
of all the Glory and Holiness, this Son of God Eternally Born out of God,
out of mere Grace and Mercy, in the Love of the Divine Voice, wherewith this
Triune God, loved the whole world with all its Generations or births, not only
has foretold and promised to Man and the aforesaid heavenly and Earthly
Creatures, first for a Redeemer through this Triune Deity.

23. But also has livingly, substantially operatively and actively, in the
Regeneration and assuming of the Humane Flesh and Blood in the Body or womb of
the Virgin MARY, God and Man in one person, visibly palpably and substantially
here upon Earth Regenerated and presented.

24. As then this Triune highly praised Son of God and Man, in one holy
Visible and palpable Person, has rescued and redeemed not only whole Mankind,
all truly faithful, Men wholly perfect, through this his holy Incarnation or
becoming Man, innocent suffering and dying, Resurrection and Ascension into
Heaven, from all sins and the total Satanicall Diabolical and Mortal
Substance.

25. But also all Called Elected truly Faithful, who from their hearts trust
and believe in this Redeemer, as or according to their Redemption from all
sin unrighteousness, Death Devil and Hell, and the treacherous World, 1 John 2. 16.
the Lust of the Eyes, and of the flesh; and with their whole Person, yes, with
every true Believer, especially among Men and Women Kind, wholly Espoused with
himself his total most Holy Perfect divine substance, in the Unity of the
Humane Body and Soul.

26. Has united and betrothed himself, and bound himself to an unseperable
UNION in Eternity, in the Love, so that this whole truly faithful Mankind, in
General, and every Man and Woman kind in Particular, in special he himself,
calls his own Divine Substance, and full or entire Love, which before in
Unbelief, was not his of Substance, and his Love.

27. So that now this Elect truly faithful holy Church together, and also
every person in particular, in with and through this most holy espousall and
uniting with Christ the Triune highly praised God, are NOT two several
Persons, two Substances and two Loves.

28. But through with and in the most holy Union, ONE good holy Divine
unblameable Eternal steadfast Substance, one Divine, one Christian, one wise
true and real One, and with all Divine perfect Virtues and Names, ONE holy
Church of GOD together; and every person in the same, one Christ, one Man of
God, one holy unblameable wise Just One.

29. To the highest Praise of the Triune highly Praised God CHRIST JESUS, who
in them, over them, through them, and to all in a Personal Manner, with his
most holy Name and seed, is the Will, accomplishment, senses thoughts works and
Life, speech and all in all substantially visibly palpably, inwardly and
outwardly, and to Eternal Times remains undivided and unalterably, and has
and keeps the Dominion.

30. Not only in Heaven at the right hand of God, but also in the Union with
all the faithful together, and in and to every true faithful person of Man
and Woman kind, is called, and in Eternity remains here upon Earth one God,
one Christ, who Rules from one End of the Heaven and from one End of the Earth
to the other.

31. And in such eternal steadfastness remains one eternal Lord, in all, over
all, through all, and to all, substantially, and in Eternity is for ever
esteemed so, and in and with himself, is honored praised and Magnified, one
Man-God, one God-Man, or one Humane Good God, one Divine Good Man, one Christ,
one Body, one Soul.

Hitherto the Explainer.
HEreupon follows Jacob Behme's Answer:
my Answer and Explanation: highly to be considered by the Reader.


1. FIrst as concerning the Text Isaiah 54. 5. Which this Author explaineth,
he has much more confused it, and brought it altogether out of a right and
orderly understanding into a confused unintelligible matter thing or Substance;
and has altogether confounded the Eternal birth of the holy Trinity wholly
with the Creature.

2. His intent is to search out the Birth or Geniture and Original of all
things or Substances: he has demersed himself into the Birth or Geniture of
the Deity, and highly elevated himself, and set himself up to be totally like
God, and made himself a God: and yet understands as little of it, as the Cow
does of the Bell which it carries about her Neck, only it hears it sound and
Ring.

3. Secondly: He involves all Heavenly and Earthly Creatures in the perdition
of Man, and will have them all regenerated and Redeemed again in Christ, and
makes a Lamentable forced desolation of the right understanding by confounding
one thing with another.

4. Thirdly: He totally and altogether confounds the Distinction between God
and the Creature, and forces them together into one contrary to all Reason and
Truth; and sets the earthly Man, if he but believe, totally with his mortal
Substance, in the Deity, and gives him full power or authority, in Heaven and
Earth, quite contrary to the Ground of the holy Scripture, and also contrary to
visible or apparent things, or Substances.

5. He will, be, rule, overpower, know and understand all in all, yes God
himself, and yet he understands not the Ground of a Fly in its Essence and
Substance, much less the Divine and uncreaturely: and makes a confused Wheel
like a Drunkenness.

6. And if such flattering hypocrisy should once become totally believed, then
were the greatest Antichrist of all born or generated: which sets it self in
the Seat or Throne of God, and very audaciously gives forth himself for GOD,
and presents his own great holiness without blemish in immortality.

7. Quite contrary to the visible or apparent ground of all Truth, and totally
hides the Man of Sin in the Anger of God; and makes of him-a-dear Son of
God in his outward Flesh, and thus brings us so totally out of the true
understanding; that we should not understand, how and in what manner Christ
becomes generated or born IN us; what the Heavenly and Earthly Man is.

8. He will persuade us, we are both inwardly and outwardly, totally perfect
holy and without all Blemish and Sin; we should but believe, and then the
natural outward sinful Man dies, and becomes wholly and altogether changed
into Christ's Person; so that, Man, here in this Time upon Earth is as he says
wholly and altogether Christ; who in Heaven sits at the right hand of God;
and is on Earth a total perfect God-Man inwardly and outwardly without defect.

9. And there is nothing more wanting, but that the poor Sinner, who would
feign repent and believe, fall down before THIS great holy God, which he
himself will BE, and worship him, that he may receive him to Grace, into this
HIS Holiness.

10. For HE will needs be the Christ in ALL, in Divine Omnipotence and
Substance, and distinguishes not at all, what God, Christ, and Man, is, what
the Creature, Humanity and God are; in him Flesh and Spirit is all one,
moreover Mortality and Immortality.

11. Yet I would very fain see him, to know whether he be otherwise then other
Men: I have not all my Life long, heard any tell of any such wonderful Man in
the World, not in any History read of such a Wonder: And if that be true which
he says, then he must according to the Tenure of the Scripture, shine seven
times brighter then the SUN, and other Men and Living Creatures would be struck
blind before him, because of his Great Holiness and Clarity or Brightness.

12. But if he should say Men can not see that in him; as indeed he does,
neither has any Man on Earth seen it in him or in any other Man especially
being Heat and Cold, as also Pain and Sickness take hold of him, and that he
continually cloatheth himself with the Clothing of Beasts, he sleeps and
waketh, uses Earthly Food and Drink in the Curse of God; and which is much
more, lives in repreaching and cursing of honest people that love God.

13. In that regard, we yet very strongly doubt of his perfect holiness, and
do not hold his confusednesse, for Gods Voice, out of Gods Holy Substance;
especially since we see, that he yet understands nothing of the Divine and
Natural Birth or Geniture, and eternal Revelation or Manifestation of all
things or Substances, how one originateth out of another; and yet thus
elevateth himself, without Divine knowledge, out of a mere litterall Conceit,
which yet he perverteth, and styeth aloft without Wings, before they are
feathered.

14. But seeing it is a subtle extravagant Error, wherewith, likely, honest
hearts fearing God in Innocence might be seduced, without sufficient searching
into this extravagancy; therefore I would have the Reader who loves the Truth
informed of this almost quite hidden Error, and will a little unfold the same;
that men may see the high insuperably superlative sense, as he supposes, and
therewithal a little to open the true ground; which has better Testimony, and
also agrees with that which is visible or apparent.

15. Not at all to contend with this confused Wheel and to defame him; but for
the sake of Christ's Children, whom Christ has Redeemed with his Blood; to try
whether many, will not become better discerning, and would learn to distinguish
such an Error, and get a more assured certainty.

16. At the Beginning, he makes a great Speech or Sermon, signifying, how He
will Answer out of Christ the Triune God out of Gods Mouth and Heart out of all
Saints, men should hearken to it and look upon it as Gods infallible Word.

17. This now, is sufficiently explained above, that it is groundless, and
that to speak in such a manner is ineffectuall, also it does not become any
Angel or Man so to speak.

18. But concerning the Text, Isa. 54. 5. The Explanation thereof is very
sufficiently made before, yet for the Readers sake I will set down somewhat
more.

19. The Prophet says, Isa. 54. 5.
He who has made Thee is thy Man or Husband; The Lord of Hoasts is his Name;
and thy Redeemer, the Holy One in Israel; who is called the God of all things.

20. The Prophet speaks here in his own understanding, not of a Man or
Husband, but by way of Similitude; in like manner as the Seed to Man lies in
the Man or Husband, from which Man becomes manifested: So all, yes all
whatsoever is manifested, lay in the Eternal Man or Husband, viz: in the
Generatour of all things or Substances.

21. But especially of man's Life; which he has breathed into the Created
Image, according to the Similitude of his Substantiality; and out of all his
out-breathed Substance; as John says; Joh. 1. 4.
The Life of Man was in HIM.

22. And yet in this we are not so to think, as if the inbreathed Life or
Substance of Man, were only and solely the Spirit of God, in Divine Holiness
and Omnipotency; No: else if that were perished [as it came to passe] then God
were perished: but each Life of each Creature becomes given to the Creature
out of the Original of its Substance.

23. So the Substance of Man is given forth out of the Three Principles, viz:
out of the Eternity and out of the Time; viz: out of the Substance and Source
or Quality of Darkness, which contains in it, Nature, viz: Sulphur,
Mercurius and Sal.

24. As to the First Part and Principle, Spiritual, as a Regiment or Dominion
and Source or Quality, out of which, Substance comes to be: and as to the
Second Part, according to the outward World, corporeal; in the first Principle
fiery; and in the Third Principle out of the dark impression Earthly and Four
Elementary, and sydereall from the Sun and Stars: And from the Second
Principle, from the Light and Power of that out-breathed or generated
Substance, Heavenly Holy and Oily, viz: from the pure Element and divine
indwelling, also Paradisicall in Power and Highness.

25. In this created Images Substance, out of Three Principles, viz: out of the
out-spoken Substance of all things or Substances; has the eternal Spirit of
God, extracted the Original of this whole Substance, which is a Spirit, out of
all the Three Principles, out of and through the Substance, and made it a Ruler
and Life of the Substance, viz: a Living Soul.

26. That is: A Fire-spirit, out of the First Principle with the Root of the
first Impression to the manifestation of the Deity, and in standing in the
Darkness; and in the Center of the first Fire of the eternal Nature, with the
first Life in generating in the seven properties, out of which ALL Substances
are existed.

27. THAT is the true Fire-Soul, out of the Fathers property; wherein God
calls himself a Strong Zealous or Jealous God and a Consuming Fire; but is
not known or manifested in the Light of God; but is only the CAUSE of the
Kingdom of Joy.

28. And in the dark Root, viz: in the first Impression, viz: in the true
Center of the Creature, is the Original of Sin, viz: of the Evil, if that
property in the Creature becomes manifested: then is that Life a life in the
fierce wrath and Anger of God, and an Enmity of the Love and Meekness.

29. And Secondly, the Spirit of God has inbreathed into him, the Original of
the Substance of the Second Principle, viz: the Life out of which the heavenly
Substance in the desire of Love, becomes generated; out of and through that
very Substance, in which Life, the Soul is the true Image and Similitude of
God, and an Angel in the Kingdom of God.

30. Which Life Adam squandered away, and lived only in the dark fiery and
Earthly part, which Life, God has manifested out of JESUS, viz: out of the
greatest depth, of humility in CHRIST, out of himself again, in Man.

31. Thirdly, Gods Spirit has inbreathed into him, the Air, viz: the Soul of
the outward earthly Substance, out of and through the earthly Flesh; as viz: a
Life of the Flesh of the Earthlinesse: which Life should be subjected to the
holy, and stand hidden in him as a help and Instrument in equal agreement of
Heat and Cold; and neither of them be in the Dominion, but the holy Life of the
Second Principle in the Son, should Rule: The Sulphur and Mercurius should
Rule in a holy power, viz: in a Quintessence in the pure Element, then the
Paradise had continued manifest.

32. Understand us aright thus; the Man or Husband, who has spoken or
expressed this forementioned Substance out, of himself, has Created Man, out
of this his generated corporeal Substance: The Prophet means THAT, where he
says; He who has made thee is thy Man or Husband.

33. For in him, lies ALL, viz: as a Seed in the Man or Husband; out of his
Exhalation or out-breathing a Seed became manifested: First the Three
Principles, and out of the Three Principles the Creature.

34. The Second Clause of the Verse. The LORD of Hoasts is his Name.

This, the Prophet of God understands concerning the Eternal Substance of
God without besides or beyond all Nature and Creature; and without besides or
beyond the Principles; as the eternal Will of the Free Longing Lust or
Delight, manifests it self, in the Abyss.

35. Which at this place or in this Birth or Generating is NOT said to be THREE
fold; but ONE only GOD, who rises up in himself, and goes forth out of
himself in a Spiritual Manner, and manifests himself through the Center of
his Fire with the Light and the Power of the Love desire in the Transmutation
of the Fire into the Light.

36. Which Birth or Geniture, and manifestation manifests out of the Fire,
the Divine Sound Power and Understanding, after the Manner of the Five Senses,
as a peculiar Life; a Life of Love; and this Life is called the Second Person
of the Deity, viz: the Second Principle of the Divine Substance;

37. Wherein the Abyss viz: the eternal Nothing in the stillnesse of the
Will, manifests it self through the Fire in the Light, and makes the Fire to
be the Kingdom of Joy; and this Birth or Geniture, is called, the Col. 1. 15.
First Born of the Father of all Genetrixes, through which the Father has
generated and Created all things to the Light: Whatsoever is out of or from the
Inward Spiritual Eternal, and then out of or from the outward Nature, entered
into Spirit and Substance: and here is God rightly understood in TRINITY.

38. Viz: The Father in the First Original from Eternity, in the Fiery and
dark Substance; and yet is no Substance, but spirit, out of which Substance,
the Impression of Nature, viz: an inward eternal Spiritual Sulphur Mercurius
and Sal, of all Power, originateth, also the original of all Creaturely Life,
which is generated out of the Eternity, viz: Angels and Souls, and the Spirits
of the Third Principle, in the out-birth of the Inward, viz: all earthly
Creatures.

39. And in the Second Principle, wherein the Light Power and understanding
with the Love-Will, becomes generated out of the Eternal Father, HE is
rightly called God: For, the Father is in the Light, viz: in the Son, in his
Eternal first Birth or Geniture Manifested in the Love.

40. And here, he is called Merciful; and in that the Free Will of the Anger,
enters through the Transmutation of the Pain into Love and Joy: he is called
JEHOVAH; and with that Longing Delight of the Relish or taste of the penetrating
through, he is called JESUS; as the Spirit in the Language of Nature gives us
sufficiently to know; and the Tincture of the Fire and Lights Glance, gives in
the Properties the Color, viz: a Manifesteresse of the Power.

41. Thirdly, the Exit of the Power, viz: the true Life, viz: the Eye of God in
the Father of the Fire, and in the Father of the Light, in the First Born, is
the out-going Sound, viz: a Flame of the fiery Love-desire, a Formour of the
Eternal Will; a Blower up of the Fire, and constant kindler of the Light of
the Love, viz: of its own Substance out-going from the Father of the Fire and
Light, as a Constant Exhalation or outbreathing; wherein the Father generateth
forth the Son out of himself: Thus the Spirit, viz: the POWER of the Sound or
Word in the outbreathing goes forth: and that is now the God JEHOVA in the
Trinity.

42. Fourthly; That which is out-breathed; which the Father in the Son,
through the Sound of the Word or Voice, breaths forth out of the Spirit; is
the Eternal Wisdom and Omnisciency; for therein becomes Manifest whatsoever
God is in his Deep.

43. The Wisdom is Gods Manifestation, and the Holy Spirits Corporeity, the
Body of the Holy Trinity; and this whole Name; in one Eternal Substance,
manifests it self through the Wisdom, and is called the LORD of Hoasts; or
Lord ZEBAOTH.

44. We have no other Language to Express this with; only the Spirit of God in
Man, in its own Principle, which searches the depths of the Deity, that
understands it in it self, but we stammer childishly thereof; so far as the
outward Tongue or Language is able to lift up it self, and commit this here to
every Soul in its Apprehension: for here is no Beginning nor End; neither place
nor Limit, but the Manifestation of the Abyss in a Bysse or Ground.

45. But as concerning the words, or that clause of the verse which the Prophet
annexes, And thy Redeemer the Holy one in Israel, who is called the God of all
the would.

46. With these words the Prophet looks distinctly forward upon CHRIST, and
divides these words from the First, saying and thy Redeemer, and therewith
looked upon the humane Misery, viz. upon the Second MAN, who should new
regenerate us in himself, and Redeem us from the Anger of God: 1 John: 5: That
the same should then be called the God of all the World.

47. The Prophet sets it down first: He who has made thee is thy Man or
Husband, and afterward he sets it down thus, and thy Redeemer the holy One in
Israel.

48. The First Man, viz: the Creator, he calls Lord of Hoasts or Zeboath; and
the Second he calls the Redeemer and holy One in Israel, who is called the
God of all the World; Understand, out of the Zebaoth, comes the Name to the
Redeemer, THAT he is called the God of all the World, and this Name arises in
the JESU, with the Moving of JEHOVA.

49. Viz: CHRIST became manifested out of JESU, in the Limit of the Covenant,
as a God and Judge of all the World; Joh. 5. 22.
To whom the Father has given the Judgment of the World.

50. Therefore the E. S.
Expositour shall not persuade me to set the Second Man, viz: the Redeemer in
Israel, in the Creation; For the Prophet says: He who has made thee is thy
Man or Husband, the Lord of Hoasts or Zebaoth is his Name, and thy Redeemer and
the holy One in Israel, whom the Lord of Hoasts or Zebaoth manifested to Man
for Redemption: and gave to him for Regeneration; he is called the God of all
the World.

51. For, therefore has God manifested him, that he should separate the Evil
and the Good, as a GOD of all things or Substances of this World; for all
Prophets have prophesied concerning THIS God CHRIST; that he should be
manifested and generated in the Flesh, out of the Eternal Original of the
Word of the Divine holy Voice.

52. And therefore E. S.
this Author shall not persuade me to set him as Creator of all things or
Substances; For when the World was created, then was he hidden in the Word of
the Divine Power; the World is become created through the Word, out of which
Christ is generated or Born: Joh. 3.

53. For John says, Joh. 1. 2.
in the Beginning was the WORD; he does not say: CHRIST; but all things were
made by it, and without it was nothing made that was made: and though indeed
all which is spoken of the Word may also be spoken of Christ; yet men should
distinguish, that men might know what God and the person of Christ are, and the
Office of each of them.

54. E. S.
This Author Cooketh or Minceth all together, that Men cannot understand, what
the Office and Substance of each of them is, and how the Original of the Word
and of the Person of Christ, should be distinguished, and what God and Creature
is.

55. He wrongfully concludes the CREATION in Christ; he should conclude the
END of the World in Christ, and not the BEGINNING; though indeed Christ was
from the Word in Eternity; yet he was not called CHRIST but JEHOVAH or JESUS.

56. And for Man's and this Worlds sake JESUS has manifested the CHRIST out of
himself; and that in the Time and not from Eternity, as a high Priest and King
of Men; who is a Prince of God.

57. We ought not to speak otherwise of him, for he has in this World spoken
no otherwise of himself; and ascribed all Power to his Father: For he said
indeed; Jo. 16. 27, 28.
he was come forth from God, and come into the World; and that was indeed done
in Time, and not from Eternity.

58. Though indeed he was in the Eternal Divine Birth or Geniture; yet he has
only in Time, manifested himself out of God in the World, and not in the
Creation of all things or Substances.

59. Note Note.
Thus also CHRIST is NOT the Savior and Redeemer of the Angels; for they need
none, and the Devils have NONE; much less has Christ redeemed all heavenly
and earthly Creatures, as this E. S.
Author conceiteth: For the heavenly need no Redemption, and the earthly are
NOT created in the Eternal Life; for indeed the earthly Creatures are NOW just
as EVIL as before the Suffering and Death of Christ: and so is the earth also
yet or still in the Curse.

60. In that regard this Omniscient Word, is very Erroneous in this place: And
although indeed, there is mention made in the holy Scriptures, concerning the
Redemption of the Creatures: That all Creatures groan together with us, to be
delivered from vanity, and that CHRIST shall Redeem them.

61. But it has NOT this understanding, to mean Oxen Calves Wolves Bares, and
other Beasts and Living Creatures, BUT the Creation, wherein the Vanity of the
Curse of God, which holds Captive in it self the Fair Paradise, viz: the GOOD
part of the pure Element in this Worlds Substance: THAT shall the Judge CHRIST
in the Harvest Separate, and give the Chafe to all Devils and Wicked Men to
possess.

62. The Creatures are not yet redeemed, they yet groan all this while to
enter into the Mystery out of which they are gone forth; it is but an erroneous
Conceit which runs contrary to any visible or apparent ground, like a mad
senseless or raging Drunkenness.

63. Also the Crusher or Bruiser of the Serpent, as E. S.
this Author sets it down, in Paradise after the Fall, was not promised to the
BEASTS and earthly Creatures, he can not show that, though he so much appeal
to the SCRIPTURE.

64. It is false, and stands not in the Scripture with such a meaning; and
men should not think while he speaks falsely, that he speaks only and solely
out or from God; he that believes him will be deceived.

65. The Author Esaiah Stiefel sets these words down concerning the
Regeneration of Christ, viz: With Viz: The Christ.
which this Triune God loved the WHOLE World with all its Births or Genitures;
and not only promised it to Man and the abovesaid heavenly and earthly
Creatures, first for a Redeemer, through this Triune Deity; but also
Regenerated and presented IT livingly, substantially, operatively, and
actively, in the precious Birth and assumption of humane Flesh, and Blood, in
the Womb of the Virgin MARY, God and Man, in one Person, visibly, palpably and
Substantially, here upon Earth.

66. But Jacob Behme inserts, that Christ has Regenerated NO earthly Creatures
but MAN.

67. And while this Author Esaiah Stiefel, with or by these words includes ALL
Creatures be they what they will in Heaven and Earth, in the Becoming Man or
Incarnation of CHRIST, and in his Redemption, and says clearly it is so,
palpably and substantially now here upon Earth, a Man may thereby well know
what Spirits Child this Author Esaiah Stiefel is.

68. Viz: That he is stark drunk with or from the Stars; and likely, also, from
that evil Enemy the Devil, which I offer the Reader to ponder of, and do
pray God, that he will give this Author Esaiah Stiefel, a better Mind and
Thoughts, to leave off such an Error that Christ's Children be not deluded.

69. E. S.
He says also; God has in CHRIST, even Note.
while we are here upon Earth, if we do but believe, redeemed and delivered us
from ALL Sin and Lust of the Flesh, yes from the Devil Death and ALL
unrighteousness: And I understand it so too, but according to, or as to Note.
that Will which enters into Christ; but he who lives in self-hood in the
flesh, he is NOT yet free from Sin, he Sins Daily, in himself, till death
cut off Sin and the source or quality of sin from the Note.
Faith and good Will.

70. At this place, he should distinguish, the Earthly, Evil, and the
Heavenly, good Will, and Spirit, asunder; which he compriseth all together in
Christ's Redemption; that he might be able to say, HE has no sin, and that he
is GOD in CHRIST; but the Earthly Hide or Husk is not Christ, but belongs to
the Earth and to Death, till it dies, and gives up, the Sin Life, or Life
of Sin.

71. But that E. S.
he says the truly Faithful, is ONE Substance with Christ; That I say also;
but according to the Note.
Inward Man and Soul; the house of sin, is so long severed from Christ,
whiles it sins; but when it dies to sin, then it stands in the Rest, to
or for the Resurrection and Restoration.

72. But, for what virtues, he ascribes to the Faithful man, those all, only
and solely the * Inward Man has; the outward does nothing that is good freely
and willingly, unless the Inward Compel him to it; that is proved in the
Author himself he should clearly distinguish that, else no credit will be
given to him against all Reason Sense and Experience.

73. I am persuaded that there are more that be Christians then he; yet they
must all acknowledge themselves to be sinners; For it is written; All the
Saints will call on thee for the forgiveness of sins; therefore these men
ought to consider with themselves.

74. But that E. S.
he says, Christ in the Faithful is ALL, the Will and the Performance or
Deed, Mind or senses and Thoughts, working, speaking, living, and all in all,
substantially, visibly, palpably, inwardly, and outwardly; This is agreeable to
no Truth: If Man does any thing that is good from an inward driving, that
indeed is from God; but he does also, much Evil, from the Lusts of the Flesh,
and the Devils instigation; and that, Christ does not, but the outward sinful
Man, whether it be by Words Deed or Thoughts.

75. E. S.
He tells me much, of such truly Faithful as cannot sin at all: I believe
not that such a ONE lives in the World, he is himself a great sinner and a
scornful proud surly Man, I believe he is altogether Drunk in Sin, so that
he knows not himself.

76. I know also well, that CHRIST in Man, if he once dwells in him, SINS
not; but the FLESHLY Man sins daily; he cannot rule from one Sea to another;
Christ can do it well, but Man cannot, he is only an Instrument; this high
painting for Man ought not to be the Tenth part so much: Man is as to the
Outward, but a STINKING Sack of Worms, full of filth and Evil Lusts, one as
well as another.

The Fourth Text. Now follows the Text.
1 Corinthians. 11. 12. As the Woman is from the Man, so also the Man comes by
the Woman, but all from God.
Now follows the Answer of the E. S.
Explainer upon this Text in Four Points.
I. IN this is especially required. First, what the Divine good Wife or Woman
is, which comes from Christ her only Lord Husband or Man and God; and takes
her Original according to a Divine humane Manner. II. Secondly; How and in
what Manner, and kind She proceeds from her God and Husband or Man. III.
Thirdly; How also the Husband or Man, God, Christ, is proceeded and Manifested
through the divine Humane Wife or Woman. IV. And Fourthly; How also this
Feminine Man or Masculine Wife or Woman; One in Eternity, comes out of the
Divine Humane Eternity Unity, and has its Eternal beginning in God without
End: and without ceasing keeps it in Eternity with and in God in Eternal
Unity.
The First Point Of the Fourth Text.
I.

1. NOw concerning the divine Good wife or woman, which comes from Christ her
only Lord Husband or Man and God, and has her original out of him, according
to a Divine humane Manner: that is a faithful Body and Soul; or the faithful
Souls Body, in indivisible unceaseable Unity.

2. Not begotten out of the perished Substance of the fallen Adam and naked
fleshly Lust; and perdition of the whole Substance of the fallen Man; and
proceeded to the Light; and become visible; but through Christ, the Triune
divine Substance; generated from Eternity.

3. It is a total New, through Faith prepared Divine good Man, in Body and
Soul; yes out of Christ, the express Image of the Total holy Divine Triune
good Substance; yes, proceedded forth through himself, and in the world, become
manifested, to the Faith and in the Faith, visibly, apparently, corporeally,
and palpably; A True, Good, Divine, Holy, Faithful, Visible and Comprehensible,
to all the truly Faithful.

4. But to the unfaithful, wicked, perished, in Sin persevering Adamical,
world; an Invisible, Incomprehensible, Man, participating of all good holy
divine Properties, in and with Christ, the Triune highly praised God, the
Husband or Man, in Eternal undivisible Unity, operatively and substantially,
and according to his own kind and property, a visible, holy, truly faithful,
divine, good, MAN.

Here follows J. B.
my answer upon this first Point, together with an Explanation of the right
understanding.
1. JAcob Behme says; we would fain see a clear demonstration, in the outward
visible operative comprehensible substance; since it has not yet proved it
self in any Man since Adams Fall; and yet this Man speaks of a visible
palpable operative substance, which is totally divine Perfect and without
blemish of Sin, which works mere holy unblameable works in Gods Love-will.

2. But seeing the Holy Scripture, speaks in No place of such a thing; that
such a one has been after the Fall; who has been born totally Holy without
blemish: but without difference; all are concluded under Sin, as it is
written, Romans 3. 23.
They are all Sinners, and want the Glory, which they should have with God.

3. And yet E. S.
this man gives himself forth, That he is so totally and altogether God in
Christ, and the Glorious Antitype of this New Bride of Christ; and yet likewise
no Man can say, that has been present with him; that he is any otherwise then
all other sinful Men are.

4. And therefore from his giving forth, we are not at all assured, but desire
that he would powerfully and effectually show it in himself, that Men might
with truth see; that God has done some special thing in him; that it is so as
he says; but seeing we yet all of us, find our selves in no such Perfection,
and cannot say so of our fleshly Birth or Geniture; for we should be found as
Liars before God; if we did come before him and say; we were come holy and
totally righteous from our Mothers womb: and if he should prove us and find us
faulty, then he would not suffer it to avail us.

5. In Our Father; CHRIST teaches us, we should pray to God and say; Matthew. 6.
13.
Lead us not into Temptation, for if he should tempt us, we should not be found
pure: and it might well be as Isaiah says; Isa. 1. 6.
From the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot, there is no soundness in
thee; but mere wounds botches and putrified sores, which cannot be healed.

6. Also Christ had in vain taught his Disciples to pray Forgive us our
Trespasses, IF they had had none; Also men find from the beginning of the world
in the Old and New Testament, how very often honest people have begotten evil
children; thus without doubt the possibility has yet been with none, that they
have begotten Children merely out of CHRIST; like this Author: I would fain
see his Wife and Children; whether they have another skin on, since they are so
Holy.

7. I have been told, how partly they are finely uncircumcised; but if their
Holiness were hidden from us; then that were good counsel and advice; that
Men should keep them by themselves, that they might not mix with the sinful
children of Adam: but get children among themselves only; and raise up a NEW
World.

8. Then men might justly call that People SION and a marriage State, and say:
Here is the Lord: but since it shows not it self yet in the work in power and
Life, therefore we are not yet sufficiently assured of this Bride; for, a good
discourse or Romance, without Life, does not assure us.

9. But, that he says, Men can NOT see the Holy People that is very
wonderfully spoken; For was not Christ himself AFTER his Resurrection in the
Flesh, SEEN? Shall we then believe without the power of the proof? seeing it is
without the Ground of the Scripture; therefore it will be very hard to persuade
us.

10. Who will assure us this, when Saint Paul says; Gal. 1. 18.
If an Angel from Heaven should command bring another Gospel then he brought,
let him be accursed: and he nevertheless in his Epistle, has Gal. 3^. 22.
concluded all under Sin; and has spoken of a twofold Man; that Romans 7. 17.
Rom: 7. 25.
If he sins yet he does it Not, but the Sin in the Flesh does it; Also,
with the Flesh, he serves the Law of Sin, and with the will out of Christ,
he serves God.

11. And Saint Peter says; 2 Pet. 1. 13, 14.
It is signified unto me that I must lay off this Earthly Tabernacle; Therefore
we cannot be assured of this total holy Perfection upon Earth Outwardly and
Inwardly in the total humane Substance without feeling Experience.

12. And though E. S.
this Man speaks plainly SO of himself; yet we believe him not, unless he
assures us of it in Power: for it might probably be only an Imagination; and
not in Deed or in Substance; and then we were very silly people, that we should
without ground and assurance, so proudly present our self before God; as if we
had NO Guiltiness; I suppose it would be fine humility before God, for a
stinking loathsome Sinner, to present himself before God, and say; I am Holy,
and am GOD himself, in Divine Omnipotency; I cannot Err nor Sin.

13. Dear Brethren, look to it, it is not far from this, nor is much wanting,
that a new Antichrist is generated or Born: Germany has certainly with its
security caused it; in that men live so securely or carelessly under Christ's
Purple-Mantle, and tickle our selves with Christ's sufferings, and do but only
fatten or (...) the Man of Sin under it; and this is a certain Image of
humane security and negligence, in that we boast we are good Christians.

14. And say: we are Christ's Children and moreover Holy, and will be
distinguished from other People: therefore God shows us in this Image, that
we stand with the Mouth trimmed and adorned before him; but the Spirit is a
false or wicked Man: As this E. S.
Author says; We should call our selves Holy, and deny the Earthly Name, and
firmly believe we are NO Sinners but God in Christ, born Totally Holy.

15. And when this seeming Holy World, existeth, then is the knowledge or
acknowledgement of Sin totally Dead; and although God should blame us; yet
would the flattering Hypocrite, Murmr against God and say; he did him wrong,
and then is the enmity against God generated, and Sin totally Or Blinded,
from, us.
blind.

16. No Man would know more of Sin, and though likely we were totally sinful
before God; yet then is the time of which Christ said; NOTE
Do thou suppose that when the Son of Man shall COME, that he shall find
FAITH on the Earth: there would be NO Faith, in Power, but only mere Faith of a
History, so that we will not believe, if any should charge us as guilty of
Sin; thus there would be a fine secure negligent or careless SION -like,
Life.

17. Whatsoever we did then, it were all Good; there would be accounted no
Sin in the world, none would be said to have sinned, Christ must do all; and
though many were very Thieves; yet no NOTE
MAGISTRACY or Government would be useful, for CHRIST rules all in all.

18. Where there is no Sin, there is also no punishment; then also men would
need no Superior to Judge, for every one judges himself; and whatsoever he
does, that does God through him; which indeed would run contrary to the
Angellicall Government, and against the Government of the Inward and Outward
Nature.

19. I admonish all Readers of E. S.
His writings, very sincerely from a true heart, as a brother, for our eternal
salvations sake, diligently and well to ponder and consider; what is hidden
under this giving forth the bring Holy: and how the Devil thinks to take us
with a New (...); seeing he perceives that his smoak-hole shall be manifested.

20. Therefore will he now drive us wholly forth from the acknowledgement of
Sinner that we should be wholly secure or negligent, and understand no Sin
more, and supposes that we in our present evil life which we have, shall
finely learn to cover our selves With Christ's Purple Mantle, and introduce us
totally into security and carelessness, and so keep us from the ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
of Sins and entrap or take US all.

21. But dear Brethren observe, and convert or turn away from security, and
acknowledge your selves to be the lost, and returning Son to the Father, and
say continually, you have shamefully spent your inheritance; and that the
Father has received you again for his Son, he has done it of Grace and
Favor.

22. Be not proud again, say not to the Father divide the inheritance between
us; continue only in humility, under the servitude of a Son, as CHRIST has
set before us in his Similitudes or Parables; if God will effect any thing New
with us, he will well manifest it with power; we suppose words without
demonstration, are too little, in so high a matter, whereon salvation and
blessedness depends.

23. But therewith I set before the Reader, the true ground what Adam and
Christ are in ONE Person; and which Man is without Sin, therefore Mark this
which follows.

24. The Kingly Prophet of God, David, 1 Samuel 13. 14.
Was a man after Gods own Heart, as the Scripture testifies of him, in whom
was the Spirit of God; and he prophesied of Christ; but he said Psalm. 51. 5.
In Sin was I born, in Sin did my Mother conceive me: which also manifested
it self in him, so that he had near the Spiritual Man, also a sinful Man IN
him, which was a Murtherour and an Adulterour: as the like may be seen in the
Patriarchs.

25. But who will now say of David, that he was not holy? Seeing he was a Man
after Gods Heart; who also will say, that his Murder and Adultery was without
Sin? The Man that in David was a Prophet, THAT was no Sinner: but that which
was a Murderer was a Sinner; and yet it was but one only MAN, in one Person;
but in two Properties, viz: one Heavenly and one Earthly.

26. The Spirit of God speaks of things to COME, and of CHRIST; concerning
the Heavenly Property: and the fleshly desire, into which the Devil introduced
his desire, speaks out of the Earthly Property, out of the Earthly cursed
Life, viz: out of the Murder and Unchastity.

27. Note.
In ALL men lies the Heavenly Image; which disappeared in Adam; but it lives
in one, and in another it is Vnlively: That Heavenly Image, viz: the second
Principle, is that out of which CHRIST was conceived and born out of JESUS.

28. For, Note.
God is in all places, but not Manifest in all things, but if he manifests
himself in the disappeared Substance, then is Christ born, who dwells in his
Principle; and the Earthly Man of the Earthly part in the Curse of God;
dwells in its own Principle, in it self.

29. The Spirit of Christ dwells in the inward Substance of the disappeared
Image, from the Divine worlds Substance, that dyed in Adam; and the Elementary
Spirit dwells in the Four-Elementary Flesh.

30. The Spirit of Christ has Spiritual Flesh, for it takes the Spiritual
Flesh which dyed in Adam, on again for a Body; and Makes it living, THAT, is
in its Flesh, holy; but the outward Spirit of the four Elements in the Earthly
Flesh, is longing after falsehood and wickedness, and brings its Lust against
the Inward Man, for the Devil sifteth it.

31. And that is it which the Scripture says: Gal. 5. 17.
The Flesh lusts against the Spirit; understand against the inward Divine
Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh; And God said to the Serpent, in the
Outward Flesh of Adam; I will put Enmity between the Seed of the Woman and of
the Serpent.

32. The Inward Spiritual Flesh is Heavenly, the Devil cannot possess that;
for if the Soul forsake that and go out from it, then is THAT vanished or
disappeared and as a Nothing; In the wicked it is as a Nothing.

32. But when the wicked turns himself to God, and turns the Will of the
Soul to God; then is Christ out of the disappeared Seed born a Man; and is set
before the Devil in the outward Flesh, for a Crusher or Bruiser of the
Serpent, which hinders and breaks the Will of the evil Flesh, so that Sin
is NOT committed.

34. NOTE
And THEN there is a constant Enmity; Christ Governs in his Heavenly Flesh,
through the outward; and strikes the Outward Lust to the Ground; then comes
the Anger of God in the Center of the Soul, and will also have its fierce
wrathful Government: and the Devil with the false or wicked Lust; crowds
himself thereinto.

35. And the Elementary Spirit hungers constantly after its Mother the
Elements, and then the Devil brings the Lust aloft, and wheeleth the desire
about; then the Hand and the Mouth Fall on; and does the work of the false or
Evil desire.

36. Then stands Christ in his tender humanity in the inward Holy Body, and
reproves the outward Man, presses upon him, and takes his power from him,
and sets him before the Eyes in the Mind, that it is abomination and Sin;
and drives him again to the unloading of that, which the desire of the Flesh
has laden upon him, viz: to abstinence and Repentance.

37. Which is nothing else, but a going again out of the Abomination, and then
the wrought Abomination, remains to the Anger of God and to the Devil for
food, that is ITS refreshing; but the Mystery of Man, becomes Free again in it
self.

38. But as the Fowler, Lauret.
watches the Fowls, so the Devil watches upon the Soul, so soon as it
gazeth a little upon him, then he brings his Imagination into it, and
stirs the desire of the Flesh; and then begins the Devils Dance again;
with whom Christ must fight without ceasing.

39. But if he be not yet born and manifested in Man in the Heavenly
Substantiality, so that the fair Image stands yet disappearing and without
Life: As in Truth, with MOST it is so, then know this; That IMMANUEL, viz: the
Spirit, which in Paradise promised it self to Adam and Eve, and went to meet
them in their Light of Life; and called them, saying Genesis 3. 9.
Where art thou Adam, in the Light of Life of the Soul, and did set it self
toward them with great desire; and now continually calls the soul saying it
should incline and turn it self to GOD.

40. Then will JESUS, manifest himself in the faded or disappeared Image, and
Generate CHRIST, viz: a New Life, in the heavenly Substantiality; and that is
the true drawing of the Father, whereof Christ speaks; saying; John. 6. 44.
None comes to me except the Father draw him; the Father draws the Soul;
that it should enter into Gods Love and Mercy.

41. And if it enters in, then is JESUS CHRIST, a true Man, in the faded
disappeared Substance, and possesses the Gates of the Deep; and, of those,
says Christ; John. 10. 28, 29.
My Lambs shall none pluck out of my hands; for if HE be born, then may the
Devil, rage and rave, and throw the BODY as it were to the ground, yet then
the Savior stands in the Battle, and draws the whole Man continually again
out of the misery, and raises him up before him, that man runs continually
again to Repentance of his abominations heaped on him from the Devil, and
unloadeth himself of them again.

42. But concerning the Conception of Children, That a right true Regenerate
Christian Man, should beget his Children totally Holy without Guilt, as E. S.
this Author conceiteth; that is Babell and a great Error, which the Serpent
introduces, under which it will cover it self, that a Man might not know the
Kitling, it would fain be called Holy, Men have a long time called it the Black
slick Evil Devil; and now it would once fain be called also Christ, and a
God: but the Most high has discovered it, so that we see, and know, it: and
would have you Christianly warned.

43. Every Tree and Vegetable brings forth fruit out of it self; as the
Plant is; but know this; That the spirit of Nature, presses so hard together
into the power, out of which the branch grows, that the branch oftentimes
becomes, evil, withered, yea altogether a dry, rotten, Branch.

44. THUS it is with Man; that which is sown, that grows; but Gods Anger,
through the Devils Imagination, especially when he observes, that the outward
Constellation of the Stars in the Elements is evil; presses it self often
in, therewith; so that honest Parents beget evil Children, and on the contrary
also many times evil Parents beget honest Children, as experience makes it
apparent before our Eyes.

45. And to that End; CHRIST has commanded us the Pedobaptisme.
Infant Baptism, to baptize the Child in the Name of the Holy Trinity: then he
will thus in this his Covenant be powerful; and with his power kindle again
the poor captive Tinder, and take the Serpents Poison, away, out of the Light
of Life; so that the divine drawing stands open.

46. Then the introduced Poison remains IN the outward Flesh, which will
afterward be broken in CHRIST, and the Gates out and in stand open to Man: and
then it is, as it is written, Romans 6. 16.
To whom you give your selves, as Servants in Obedience, his servants ye are;
whether of Sin to Death, or of the Obedience of God; to Righteousness.

47. The Soul has free will to go OUT and IN, but it Note.
can NOT generate it self in Christ; it must only go out of its own Evil Will,
and enter into Gods Mercy; Then CHRIST'S Spirit: which in JESU, stood presented
to the Soul in the Light of Life: takes it in his Arms of the desire; and
Sprouteth in its desire in the faded disappeared Substantiality, forth, from
the pure Element of Heaven; as a New Life out of Death, and that is CHRIST, Man
and God.

48. Readers let me persuade you, iry it, go with it into the Holy Scripture,
try it inwardly and outwardly, and learn the Truth out of Christ's Spirit, then
you will put no belief in E. S.
him: but we have seen it in Ternario Sancto, in the holy Ternary: and know
what we write.

49. But I am a Child, whose understanding hangs at the Breasts of my
Mother, and have no authority, and NO understanding, unless what my Mother
gives me; I lie in imbecility as a dying Man, but the most high raises me up
in his Breath; so that I go according to his Wind.

50. But I warn you Christianly, that you would understand the zeal, to the
welfare of your own Souls; I have wages enough, If I attain your Breath, and
may Sprout up IN you, and may give you my Life; what should I give you more?
take the present and lay it well to Heart.

51. Not in opinion only; but introduce it into the Breath of God, and try it
in Body and Soul; and take the cleernesse thereof, let affections go, they are
not the Pearl; but set for the shame, of a sinner: that the Evil and Malice
might cease and not pride it self in FLESH; take only the pure Oil for
healing, the rest takes not hold of the Souls Wounds, but only the wounds in
the outward Man; I pray the Reader not to interpret this otherwise, then as it
has its true Ground.

52. Now as to what the E. S.
Author, says concerning the Good Divine Wife or Woman, which does not exist
from Adams sinful Flesh and evil Lust, which conceives and generateth the
Holy Man, which is CHRIST, God and Man; THAT I also believe; it is true: But
his understanding is erroneous, in that he understands it to be out of the
outward Man, and will have a total transmutation of the outward into the
inward, in this world.

53. The Good Wife or Woman is the Heavenly Image, viz: the second Principle,
which dyed in Adam, in that very faded or disappeared Substance, the Father of
all Things or Substances, strikes up the sparkle of his divine power: and if
it be so that the Soul also in the drawing of the Father hungreth after it; the
sparkle begins to glimmer.

54. And Mat. 13. 31, 32. Mark. 4. 30, 31, 32.
is first small as a grain of Mustard Seed, as Christ says, and if the Soul
persevereth, and introduces ITS Will and hunger continually into THAT
Glimmering Tinder; then he blows the Holy Fire up in its desire; so that it
glimmereth very much, whence the soul gets great hunger.

55. Now if it be so, that the Soul casts away its self-hood, and desires
totally to cast away the fals-hood or wickedness of the Devil, and in earnest
strife with earnest Prayer and giving up it self, enter into the Love-Fire;
then the Love-fire apprehends the Souls Desire, and one Fire becomes kindled
in the other: for the Soul is the Fathers Fire, and the sown Love-Fire is the
Sonnes-Fire.

56. And now comes the lost Son, viz: the soul, again into the Fathers Love,
and the Luke. 15. 7.
Great Joy in Heaven begins, so that the Angels rejoice more than at Ninety
Nine righteous, that need no Repentance.

57. And at this Place; in this conjunction; the Noble Virgin, viz: the Good
Wife or Woman, takes its Bridegroom the Soul again into the Triumph of the
Divine Kingdom of Joy, and gives its Bridegroom the Garland of Pearls.

58. Not totally for its own propriety of its substance; No, there are Two
Principles; God remains God, in himself; but the Divine Light brings the
Virgins-Spirit out of the Love-fire, into the Souls-Fire; and kindles the
Souls-Fire also; so that the Virgins-Light, shines IN its Bridegroom, viz: the
SOULS Light.

59. And here is Christ in the Wifes or Woman's seed become Man; viz: in the
second Principle; out of Gods Light-and-Love-world; and what is here done, and
what kind of Joy, is at this Espousall and Wedding, we have no words to write;
but I wish the Lover of Christ may experiment it: For the outward Natural Man
believes US not; unless himself has been at this wedding; which is kept both
in Heaven and on Earth; sufficiently to be understood by those that are OURS.

60. But know this, As Fire blazeth through Iron, whence the Iron is a mere
Fire-Source or of a fiery Quality; and yet remains in it self, in its
Substance Iron as well at one time as at another: and is never Fire in its own
self-property, and yet is Fire; But the Fires Might, stands not in the Iron,
but it gives only its Nature to it, as an Instrument or a Body; wherein the
Fire blazeth.

61. NOTE
Thus understand us also, as to GOD and the CREATURE. The Fire, when it blazeth
in the Iron; signifies the Soul, when it is kindled in Gods Light; and the
Light and the Shining of the Fire, signifies the Holy Fire, and the Virgin;
the Power of the Light is the Pearly-Garland, whereof I write in my writings:
THAT, the Virgin gives not, to the Fire-Soul, viz: to the Original of the
Fire, to be ITS own.

62. But it sets the same upon it, and presses the same into its heart, but it
cannot comprehend it, as its proper own; as the Fire cannot comprehend the
Light; and yet the Light shines out of the Fire; the Fire has another Source
or Quality then the Light; the Fire is Father and the Light is Son, and yet
they make two Principles one IN another.

63. Thus know; That the Creature is not God, it remains Eternally under God;
but God blazeth through it, with his desire of the Love-Fire, viz: with his
Light and shining, and that very Light, the Soul, viz: the Man, reteineth, so
long for its own, as the Will remains in Gods Light.

64. But if it enter again in its own propriety, viz: in the Center of its
original in its own Might out of the Resignation, into selfhood; then the
Virgin takes away this Pearly-Garland, from the Soul; for the Soul, viz: its
Bridegroom, is run away from its Spouse Christ, viz: from its Love-fire, and
become perjured.

65. Then goes the Soul in the outward Flesh, into the Devils Net in the dark
restraint, and seeks its own Place; and rest, but finds nothing; but the
Beastiall Pleasure of the Flesh; with which it Pampereth it self.

66. But the Noble Virgin calls it continually, to return again; if it come
again, then it is well and readily received: but the first wedding is not kept
again: there is indeed a glorious welcome, but not like the first Espousall; we
speak as we know.

67. But if the Bridegroom viz: the Soul, comes not again, then Christ takes
its Garland, which he gave the Virgin for a Life, again from it, then it
remains in ITS Nothing without Source or Quality, as disappeared or faded:
and Eternally not perceptible nor visible to the Soul.

68. And the Soul remains in its Gremen.
anxiety, if the Soar be in it at the End of the outward Body; in that regard
it stands in Eternal shame and scorn, that it has lost ITS Kingly Crown;
and is driven out from the Kingdom of God, as an Evil doer, or as a perjured
Person from its most beloved Bride and Virgin.

69. Further also know this, that Gods Light suffers NOT it self to be sown
forth abroad into the Flesh; the Mother or Tinder to the Light is indeed sown,
but standing within, IN its Principle; the NOTE
outward world, is not God, nor will it in Eternity be called God; but only a
Substance wherein God manifests himself; viz: a Similitude of the Holy Divine
Heavenly Substance, in which God works.

70. When a Woman is impregnate from a Man, and generateth a Child, THAT,
although likely it comes from holy Parents, is not Wholly CHRIST, from within
and without; as this E. S.
Author conceiteth without ground of Truth out of his obscurity.

71. CHRIST, viz: the WORD, is indeed, a glimmering Mother or Tinder; according
to the Property of the true Image, which is propagated in all Men as a
possibility, but NOT in the outward Flesh in this worlds Substance; but in the
second Principle; and the Soulish Property is in the first Principle; each
dwelling in it self.

72. Therefore has Christ instituted the Baptism, and Espoused himself with
the Mother or Tinder to Souls, with this Covenant, that though the Mother or
Tinder did not come to a burning Light, and that the Child should dye, even in
its Mothers Body or Womb; yet nevertheless, the Soul would be in Christ's Arms,
in which he would kindle HIS Light.

73. And though holy Parents beget Children, if I did look upon them, I would
not say, here stands or goes in this Child, Christ; it is wholly Christ: HE
is indeed IN the Child, but in his own Principle, and in the Child's Property,
as a Glimmering Mother or Tinder; on the Band of Christ; but the Soul of the
Child is also on the Band of the Fathers anger, in the property, wherein Adams
Soul has broken it self off from God.

74. The Properties of the Soul stand not in Equal Concordance, as God created
the First Soul, they stand in the Elevation, in the Multiplicity of the Wills,
and not in One Will; in the Multiplicity of the Wills is the Turba; for one
Will is the Enmity of the other: and they cannot be broken, for their original
is out of the Eternity from the Center of Nature.

75. Unless Gods Light kindle it self in them, then they become in the Light
transmated into One Will; and then the Enmity and contrary will in the Center
of the Life of the soul, cease: also then the outward-Life in the Child, is
together, inthe Flesh of perdition, and is subject to Death.

76. For as the Properties in the Souls Life, are in strife and Contrariety, so
also are the Properties of the outward Life; for in Adam all went forth out of
the equal concordance, and now one kindles the other: and the strife between
heat and cold also Evil and Good, continues so long as the OUTWARD Life
continues.

77. Therefore, it is a wrong Exposition of the E. S.
Author; where he says; Holy Faithful Parents generate altogether CHRIST:
yes, that Christ himself is the work of Humane Propagation; which a Cow would
almost laugh at, to see its like in the outward Man, so that he does more
foolishly than a Beast: Christ dwells in Heaven in his own Principle; and the
outward Man upon Earth in his own Principle.

78. The holy good wise or woman, whereof he speaks much without sufficient
understanding, generateth not the outward Beastial Man of the Four Elements,
but the Inward of the pure Element; God drives not on the work of humane
propagation, HE has given it to MAN into his own: will in Christ God drove it
on, but without humane Concurrence, out of his own Predestinate purpose.

79 Now if this E. S.
Author, can generate children without, Man, then we will believe him, that
God has begotten a Christ-Child out of him, or out of his Wife, if without
Man, she is impregnate from Gods word.

80. But he will fail in that, Adam has squandered this power; as we have
expressed, concerning it at large, in the Book of the Three Principles, also in
the Book of the Threefold Life, as also in the first Part of the Incarnation of
Christ.

81. The NOTE
Conjunction of the Seeds is clearly in strife, and contrary Will, and in the
strife and contrary Will, is the Life in the Child manifest; and not in the
Slime, but in the Anguish in the choked Blood: The beginning of Life in a
Child, is a DYING of the Masculine and Feminine Tincture, of the Seed, and out
of this dying goes a new own Life, up.

82. As the Light shines from the Candle; so we are to conceive in like
manner, that the Man and Wife only sow the BODY of the Life's Candle; out of
which, the Life in the dying, viz: in the anguish-Fire, in the choking of the
first Blood, wherein the Child Or is incarnate.
becomes Man, is generated: not as a dying of Consumption, but in the anguish
of the dying Source or Quality, the First Principle, viz: the true Fire-Soul in
its Principle, becomes manifest.

83. It is not, conceiting will do it, but understanding the Center of Nature,
how a Life originateth; not only to say; Christ, and God, does a thing; but to
know, WHAT, God, Christ, and Man, is, each in IT self.

84. Man must understand the Principles, and not with Historical conceit, with
Literal knowledge; and confound one thing in another; such a Master as this E.
S.
Author will needs be; viz: a God, that is Omniscient, he should beforehand
know very well, and not so sottishly, with such loud cry, come and draw up,
without Ground and understanding.

85. Men know also well, that the Holy Woman or Wife viz: the Virginity, is
from God; but it has not the might of Generating; It is in Adam, with the Wife
Eve, squandered; it cannot generate more; unless the Generatour viz: CHRIST
were beforehand generated in it; and then it generateth the Soul, its
Bridegroom, otherwise, in the WILL; that is, it transmuteth it into ITS Love,
and sets Christ's Garland or Crown of victory, upon it.

NOw follows The Second Point of the Fourth Text, The E. S.
Explainers own Words.
1. BUt how and in what measure, manner, and kind, She, from her God and Man
CHRIST JESU, goes, comes, is Created or Made, and prepared: hence now the
Triune God and Lord signifies in the Testimony of Holy Scripture, for the
better and cleerer knowledge of the holy Marriage-state; and wonderful divine
Union of Man and Wife, in one Flesh, for a Type and Looking-glass, gives
therein, through the Divine knowledge and wisdom, to acknowledge and consider.

2. How and in what measure, manner and kind, the holy woman or wife, and
faithful humane visible Flesh and Blood, under the Masculine and Feminine Sex,
from CHRIST, the Triune highly praised God, her Man or Husband, proceeded, was
made and prepared.

3. And as true Christian honest faithful married people; whom God joyneth
together, (for here I speak not of those married people, who highly esteem
outward bravery, riches, honorable familyes, and outward Name, whom the Lust
of the Flesh and of the Eye, in this world, brings together, and causes to
marry) yes, truly faithful Christian Married people; who many times, never saw
one another with their eyes.

4. As, all truly faithful Christian People, will, to the highest praise of God
in their hearts, with God the Triune Eternal Truth and Seal, give Testimony,
with me, that oftentimes, very wonderfully and strangely, their whole person,
altogether unknowing, are brought together and joined by the Triune God JESUS
CHRIST.

5. In that, the LORD gives and incorporateth in the Masculine heart, his holy
Love, toward the Feminine Image, which before; as it often comes to pass, he
never saw, much less, found any desire after such a One at any time, which in
her presents the holy divine Love and voice, with all manner of friendly,
richly amiable, words and works toward the feminine Image accordingly.

6. And by 1 Pet. 1. 15.
all manner of outward Modesty and Chaste Service or Ministry, and Conversation,
without ceasing, in care day and night, is diligent in, and does not give over,
till through the divine good power and working, it presses into the midst and
Center of the feminine heart: and with its powerful burning operation, it
Imageth to it self the Masculine person; and binds with it self the very
divine Good Holy Chaste Love.

7. In both which Christian hearts, this Triune divine fire-burning Love, in
the holy Divine working reception and growing does not cease, till it bring
both these Masculine and Feminine Persons into one.

8. So that they through this powerful working in the Love, are one Heart, one
Soul, one Body, one Flesh and Blood; as indeed in the Love of the Divine voice,
each calls or names the other his own heart Soul and undivided own propriety.

9. And then in this Chaste Divine richly amiable working through the divine
power, in holy, and not unchaste fleshly mixture and union, in right holy love
and purity in the divine powerful blessing, the divine Word, and holy discourse
incorporated in the Faith, bring forth fruit of the pure Chaste love, through
and out of them, and generate Children.

10. Which the LORD by 1 Cor. 7. 14.
Paul, 1 Corinthians 7. in regard of the faithful married people, and honest
Christians, (through and in whom, he with his most holy in the Love, is
powerfully and actively) calls holy generatings and holy Children.

11. Which holy wedlock Divine Love, in and among honest Christian Children, is
an Eternal never ceasing band of Divine Unity, which never more in and to
them, is rent quenched or caused to cease.

12. Just in such a manner it is with CHRIST the Triune highly praised God, the
Triune holy Man or Husband; which in and with his divine voice of his holy
fully perfect Love, according to the Testimony of St. John 3. John 3. 16.
has so loved the world, whole Mankind, yes when they were yet Enemies, and
presented his Love to all Men, under the Masculine and Feminine Sex.

23. Whereby and wherein, the Children of Men, (which through the Fall of Adam
and Eve, were Enemies of God the Eternal Good, and of all Divine Matters) he
himself would new prepare them in their hearts, with his own divine Voice and
holy Love, with his own power and substantial working, and bring them again,
out of the Kingdom and Dominion of the reproachful, in and to the Domineering
of Death the Devil Sin, and the outward Naked fleshly World, and Lust of the
Eye, and new Create and Regenerate them, in and with, this his holy Divine Love.

14. As indeed through this Triune in-working Divine holy Love CHRIST JESUS, in
the Elect; the stony Adamicall sinful cold unchaste malicious heart, with all
evil Lusts and Enimicitious Desires, against God, the Triune Eternal Good, is
wholly done away; and through this holy Divine working in the Love, is prepared
anew.

15. Which appears totally richly amiable and a perfect Love-heart of God;
which burns toward the Triune highest Good, in and with full Love, in the
full Love it self; and through the most high Triune God Christ Jesus himself's
own in-working Power, in the Love toward her Man or Husband of the high Divine
Majesty CHRIST JESUS, becomes so fiery and burning.

16. So that also the Divine new Love-heart, appears so great and surpassing
in the Love, that it presses into all, inward and outward Members of the Body,
in full Power, and changes all the Members; and to the Triune highest praise
of God Christ Jesus, her Man or Husband; totally renews them.

17. So that in and to these men new prepared in the Love through CHRIST;
nothing but all good holy divine things in Love, in words, life, works and
deeds, are traced and manifest, and visibly known and seen by faithful Eyes.

18. In and to which holy total new Divine Person prepared in the Love, the
Word of the LORD becomes richly and Gloriously filled; Hos: 2. Hos. 2. 23.
Romans 9. 25. 1 Pet. 2. 10.
I will call them my beloved People which were not my Beloved.

19. As now through this holy Divine working in the Love of the Triune highly
praised God CHRIST JESUS, the express Image and selfsubsisting Substance of
the Triune Deity it self; has prepared, new made, and set, here upon earth,
from the beginning of the World, to himself, truly Faithful Holy Patriarchs,
Prophets, and all the faithful of the old Testament, out of or from all
generations: as also all Evangelists Apostles Prophets and honest Christians
under Masculine and Feminine Sex of the New Testament; in such a Manner, as is
mentioned before, to his holy Service or Ministry Praise and Glory of his holy
Name, yes, to his own Love, IN the Love.

Now follows J. B.
my answer upon this Second Point, together with an Explanation thereof.
1. THAT which this E. S.
Author sets down concerning Christian Married People, that it IS so; ought
well to be wished, that it WERE so; but it is not so, perfectly, in any; there
is a Good Spring wanting to them, for this Great holiness is squandered away
in Adam.

2. Indeed Christ says; Mat. 18. 20.
Wheresoever two or Three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the
midst amongst them; Christ is indeed with Holy Married people that fear God, if
they begin all their Matters in his Name; he governs and blesses them, if in
earnest sincerity they abide with him, that, I speak not against at all, also
all their works in the true married state, are acceptable to him; for Christ is
come, that he may destroy the works of the Devil.

3. But the E. S.
Author must not here in the work of humane propagation, put or ascribe so
great Perfect holiness; and though indeed it may be called holy, yet it must
be better distinguished, what, therein is holy, and what unholy: else would all
men's Burning brutish and beastiall Lust of the Flesh, be accounted for
Holiness.

4. As when they vehemently with the Imagination and Desire, toward Man and
Wife, tickle themselve, as if there stuck therein great perfect holiness, and
that it were done only and solely out of Gods driving on, in Christ's Power and
instigation.

5. And here the E. S.
Author, distinguishes NOT what is Divine and what is natural; he jumbles
the whole work in one, and calls ALL Divine, as if the work of such
conjunction, and inclination of the Desire in one toward the other, were all
done in the Driving of the Spirit of Christ.

6. As he draws also totally to this purpose, the coming together of two
Married People; which as to honest virtuous Children, who pray to God in
earnest sincerity for it beforehand; and put their Will into his; it is so
indeed, that often two persons come together through Gods sending.

7. Which I also praise, when it is SO done; whereby also more blessing and
Salvation or happiness may be, then in THOSE, whom the Lust of the Eye merely
brings together; and nature coupleth: And I would not in this oppose the
Author, but willingly receive and allow it for right; IF the Thorn and Poison
did not stick in it and under it, concerning the total Holy perfection;
wherewith he supposes he begets children void of Original inherited sin.

8. For this ONE Articles sake I will unfold this Point, that Men may but see,
what is divine and what is Natural, what is Holy, and what Beastiall, and that
the flattering hypocrisy and seeming holiness, under which Men will cover the
Original inherited Sin might be known.

9. And that honest married people should not be secure or careless, but know,
that they also are Sinners; and learn to be afraid of Gods Anger, and be humble
before God, and diligently learn with great circumspection to Pray one with
another, that the Devil may not sift the native impurity, and throw them into
the beastiall property.

10. Which indeed co-hangeth to this marriage work, for the holy work is
performed with a Beastiall work, and this originateth in respect of the Fall of
Adam and Eve; and that married people might learn to distinguish the holy in
the Love, from the beastiall, and learn in this work to remain Modest Chaste and
Temperate, before God and Man.

11. And not as a burning Lustful Bull, to which brutish work this E. S.
Author opens a wide Door, while he calls it totally holy, and so at last
in his holy giving forth; All shame would be extinguished.

12. Whereas yet the understanding, and also Nature testifies, that an
Abomination hangs to it, which is not quite holy before God: in respect that
also Nature it self together with the Soul, is ashamed of it: which ought well
to be considered; and how the poor Soul, which appears by the Eyes, is
ashamed before its Bridegroom CHRIST: that it now after the Fall, must
propagate it self after such a Beastiall Manner, like other Beasts.

13. For this cause I will unfold it, that married people may learn to know
themselves, and that this Author might not make them So totally blind, and
they live in abomination before God, as Beasts without any knowledge thereof;
unless for this; I would not particularly oppose him in this Article: for holy
people should get also holy children, which yet miserably often fails, as is
apparent to our Eyes.

14. We know what Moses says: That Gen: 1. 26.
God said: Let us make Man, an Image that is like us; He says not TWO Images,
but ONE Image that is like us.

15. God is according to the Fire and Light but ONE substance, viz: according
to the Fires and Lights Tincture in the Eternal Nature he is also but ONE
substance; And that he is, and is called Father and Son, yet he is therein
also but ONE substance.

16. But manifested in TWO Principles; viz: with the stern Fire-world according
to the Fathers Property, and according to the Light and Love-world in the
Sons Property; And yet is, but ONE only substance undivided, but ONE God; as
Fire and Light is ONE.

17. Thus he has also created his Image Man, according to his similitude, out
of his out-spoken substance; out of ALL into ONE substance into one only Image:
and also inbreathed the Spirit of all the THREE Principles into ONE only Spirit.

18. All the Three worlds; viz: The Eternal dark cold fiery, viz: the Eternal
Nature; as also the Eternal Light fiery, together with the substance thereof,
viz: the pure Element, and therein the Paradise; for also the outward Four
Elementary and Syderiall world with its substance, were in this created Image,
but One in like or Equal Concord or agreement.

19. Man was and is the Inward and outward world, the Inward World is the
Heaven wherein God dwells, thus was Man upon Earth in Heaven: the Inward and
outward was ONE; the Inward manifested it self in the outward, viz: God in the
Time: the Outward is the Time, that was in Man swallowed up in the Eternity;
but it was manifested in it self, not totally for the Dominion, but for the
wonder of the Dominion of the Divine World.

20. The Outward World knew it self not in the Time, but it wrought in it
self as an Instrument of the Master: The outward Sulphur and Mercury of the
Body, were manifested in the power of the inward Spiritual Sulphur and
Mercury; The Tinctures of both were manifested in one another as One, the
Spirit wrought through the Time, and that was a Paradise where neither heat nor
cold might be manifested.

21. The Life of Both worlds, viz: the Heavenly Holy, in the Pure Element; and
also the outward in the Four Elements, were but One only Life; and that was a
Similitude according to God; viz: an Express Image.

22. For God dwells in the Time, and the Time is not manifested in him, but
before him, as a similitude, it is IN him in the dominion all one: The Time is
servant and his work, it lives in it self, but God is the Life of Time, But in
comprehensible to Time: the Time rules not in God, but it is in him as an
Instrument; wherewith he rules and makes or works.

23. But now understand us concerning the Soul, The Soul is not out of the
Temporary or Time-Nature; the Time-Nature is but its dwellinghouse, even as an
Instrument with which it makes or works: The Soul.
It has in it self the Center to the Fire and Light world, and out of the
Center, it became inbreathed into Adam by the Holy Spirit, in the Moving of the
Father out of the Three Principles.

24. And this is its Fall and Sin, that it has through its mighty desire,
manifested the Properties of the Dark World in the Center of the Eternal
Nature; which was done through Imagination; in that it introduced its Lust into
the Instrument of Time, viz: into the Outward world.

25. And would try how it relished, when the Equality of agreement went forth
or away one from another, so that Evil and good were Manifested, each in it
self: it lusted to eat of the relish of both, and thereby be omniscient, and
subtle; as Lucifer in like manner so perished; who lusted after the dark Center
in the Fire-birth, and awakened that in his desire, that so the like
concordance or equal agreement, in him, might be Manifested in an awakening of
all Properties: whence Lust and falsehood or wickedness existed to him.

26. For if the Life's forms, viz: the Forms of the Eternal Nature, were
manifest every One in it self, then there is a great Enmity, for every one will
rule, every One has its own will, and if this were not, then there would be
neither perceptibility, nor finding, but an Eternal stillnesse.

27. But now the Life's forms should not be manifested in the qualifying or
operating each pressing forth; but instanding in equal agreement, like a Tuned
Lute: and the Spirit which was brought forth out of this equal agreement, by
Gods Spirit, was also in equal agreement, viz: the Spirit of the Soul; as the
Air out of the Fire; that should enter into the Sound of God, and strengthen
it self in the power of the Light, and with that very power strike the Cittron
of the Life's forms.

28. But that it did not, but it entered into own will, and reached after the
Center of the Life's forms, and awakened the same; it would it SELF be GOD, and
made it self a dark Devil; according to the first impression in the Fiat of
its Property; out of which in this world, are evil poisonous worms and beasts
come to be; according to the outward Impression: and that is the real Fall of
the Devil, as also of Adam.

29. But that we may render it better intelligible concerning Adam, as also
concerning his Wise: Adam was a total entire Image of God, when God had
created him, then he was Man and Wife, and yet neither of them; but a modest
Virgin in the Similitude of God.

30. He had the Fires Matrix, and also the Lights Matrix, out of which, through
the Element, water becomes generated through the dying in the Fire; He had the
Fires and Lights Desire in him; viz: the Mother of the Love and of the Anger,
according to the Principles.

31. The Life stood in a Conjunction of continual inward joyful desire of one
in another, the Fire loved the Light, viz: its meekning and beneficence; and
the Light loved the Fire, viz: its Life and Father; as God the Father loves
his Son and the Son the Father in such a Manner or Property.

32. And in such Love-Desire, viz: according to Fire and Light, in which desire
also, the dark impression with its hunger has intermixed it self; God has
generated Substance; The impression in the Desire is his Fiat, which he leads
with the voice of his Fire and Light; viz: his making or working.

33. Thus also in his Image, Man, was the Fire -Mitrix, and the Lights desire
in great richly Joyful Eternal Conjunction, or as I may somewhat explain it,
when TWO desires meet together; as a great richly amiable relish; and the
Impression, viz: the Fiat, makes this Conjunction hard or loud sounding, as
the Tone of a word; wherein the clear founding richly joyful Life stands, in
the Feeling Tasting Smelling Seeing and Hearing, as an amiable manifestation of
the Eternal stillnesse.

34. And as this is to be known concerning the Spirit-Life; so also in the
Flesh-Life; for what the Spirit in the Three Principles is in it self: In Word
and Power: that the Flesh in it self is in the Substance thereof.

35. The Flesh has the Tincture of the Fire and Light in it self, to such a
Glorious Conjunction and relish; and the Fiat, viz: the Impression is also the
Middle or Means of the desire in the Flesh; and makes the relish substantial,
whence vegetation or growing existeth.

36. Yet now Adam was but ONE, and standing in such great Glory, as a total
Similitude according to God; in Operation Life and generating; as God had
generated all things out of his UNITY.

37. And in the FLAT, which was in all things, he had created to himself his
Image according to the Property; that is nothing else, but in the impression of
the Fiat in that Conjunction, he manifested that very Lust or Longing delight
with the Impression; Now if Adams Soul in its self hood, had entered with its
Spirit, into the word of the Holy power of God, and had not awakened the self
hood in the Fiat, and had strengthened it self in Gods holy power in the desire,
viz: in the Impression.

38. THEN had the Impression, viz: the Fiat, again formed a Similitude in
Spirit and Substance in it self; THEN might Adam have generated magically
after a divine manner; as God generated the Creature, and set it forth VISIBLY.

39. For, the Matrix of the possibility was in him; but when the Souls will,
viz: the out-going Spirit, brake it self off from Gods power, and went into
the Fiat into its Center, into own Lust, to taste evil and good and went out of
the Resignation into self-hood: then went also the Conjunction in the flesh
into such a desire; and hungered after the Mother out of which it was created;
and the hunger was just in such a Property, as it was in the Spirit.

40. And with this hunger of the Spirit and of the Flesh, was the vanity in the
Center, manifested through the FIAT: For the Fiat impressed the desire, so that
the vanity in the substance of the Flesh came and was manifested: then all was
done concerning the fair Image: for the vanity loved it self: it would not
enter into Gods Love, viz: into the Holy power; also it could not; for God
receives NOT that for a Child.

41. Now when this was done, God saw the Fall, as indeed he had known it
before, and in that regard, he saw, and foresaw, Man, in the Center of his
Heart in the Love Desire; determining to move himself in the Center of his Love
in the Humane Image: and to set the CHRIST in JESUS, or out of JESUS, viz: the
greatest humility out of God; in this For a Mediator.
Middle between God and the Creature.

42. Then said God in himself, as Moses says: Gen: 2. 18.
It is not good that this man should be alone; for he had clearly lost the
divine Might to generate Magically out of himself through ONE, We will make a
fellow Companion or Help to be about him.

43. He Adam could now not generate Magically; for he was clearly passed into
the Lust of self-hood; had he kept GOD for a Help; then he had been able; but
seeing he could not: therefore said God: It is not good; in the beginning it
was good indeed, but in the Lust it was not good.

44. For, in God alone stands the ability; out of which, Adam was gone with
the lust into self-hood; for the Fathers Anger, turned it self together in the
Fiat aloft and would be Creaturely, whence the Lust after Evil and good
existed, viz: after darkness Fire and Light, and the substance of all these.

45. And now when the Verbum Fiat, the Word Fiat stood in Adam in the desire,
and impressed the Property in the Lust, into a substance of its Similitude,
then appeared the Magical Image, viz: the Similitude according to Adam in the
Spirit, but the ability of the Creature was gone, for it stood in the self
hood, then sunk the self-hood down in unability.

46. Now then said Moses: Gen: 2. 21.
And God suffered a deep sleep to fall upon him, seeing he was gone from God
into the self-hood, therefore God let him fall into unability, viz: into sleep;
he let it be done, that he fell into unability; for in the self-hood he was in
the Fires-might even become a Devil, and so was not able; but he slept: and
this Sleep is CHRIST'S Rest in the Grave.

47. Dear Brethren observe it well, it is become highly known, not in
Conjecture and Conceit, but in Terrario sancto in the Holy Ternary, according
to Gods Counsel and Will.

48. NOTE The worlds change.
The Sleep signifies Death, viz: a destruction of this outward Dominion: for
as the outward World in its self-hood and Dominion, cannot stand Eternally, but
must go again into the beginning, into the Eternal divine Dominion; and
totally break to pieces in its self-hood, and be purged and tried through Gods
Fire.

49. So must also the Outward Mystery of Man in the NOTE Man's change with the
worlds chang.
self-hood, break to pieces, and enter again into the Magic Image into Gods
Willing Working and Living.

50. Note Text. I. verse 115. and following to verse 72.
And understand us here right: The Woman, viz: Venus'es Matrix from the Light
Air and Water out of Adams Essence, became in Adams Sleep, viz: in the
unability impressed in the Fiat, as a Mother to the Propagation; wherein the
Fire, in the Property of the Love-Desire, viz: in the Center of the
Transmutation of the Fire into Light, became comprehended in the Fiat.

51. But the awakened vanity in the desire of the Fiat in the own self-hood of
the Souls will, was clearly stirring and manifested in the Lust: the Magic
Birth was lost: therefore God through the Fiat, Gen; 2. 21.
took a Rib in Adams side, according to the Impression of the power of Adams
Soul and Spirit, in the Sulphur Mercury and Sal: and manifested that in
Venus'es Matrix.

52. Understand: from Adam was taken his fair Rose garden of the great Lust
Desire or Pleasure, of the Kingdom of Joy; viz: the Lights Tincture according
to the Property of the Love-desire; And according to the bodily substance, the
Property of the Spiritual Water; which in the Love-desire, becomes generated
through the Fire, and is the Fires or Souls-Spirits greatest refreshment, in
which the Fire-spirit had impregnated it self in Substance, and generated its
Similitude; viz: in the Love-desire.

53. This Venus Mother, became figured into a Wife or Woman, and in Adam
remained the Fires Mother, which continually, introduces its hunger into the
Venus Mother, in like manner also the Venus Mother into the Fires Mother, viz:
into its Father and Man or Husband, which gives it Essence and Life.

54. In which Conjunction, the PERFECTION of the Kingdom of Joy stands, and
the fulfilling of the desire, which should damp and hold Captive the Lust of
Vanity, out of the Center of the Impression according to the dark worlds
property; and only refresh it self in the Love, viz: in the Kingdom of Joy.

55. This Love-sport or Scene of both the Tinctures of Fire and Light, were
divided in Adam in his Sleep; for God parted them in the Fiat, and here Adam
lost his chaste Love-sport: and his Virginity, which CHRIST brought to him
again; and in the place of his Rib for a Wife, where he became broken must
Longinus'es Spear enter; and the Regenerate Virgin-like blood, must Tincture
this Breach; and heal and make it whole again; and quench the wrath which was
in the Breach.

56. Thus we understand what the Woman or Wife is, viz: A half Adam; Adam has
in the Or Predominancy.
Superior might: the first Principle; and Eve the second. In Adams part the
vanity became first manifest, viz: in the Center to the Fire.

57. Which Fires-desire entered into the Venus desire, and in the Lust became
manifested in the Substance; in which the propagation was; therefore God in
Paradise promised to enter again into the Seed of the Woman, and with the new
generated Love-desire, to break the Head of the Serpents desire which was
existed out of the Center to the Fire-Life.

58. That is, to overcome IT with the great Love, to go it self into the
abomination, viz: into the Woman's Seed, which the abomination in Venus'es
Matrix has poisoned, and introduced into false or wicked Lust; and to break
that very will, which against Gods holiness and purity went into own self, and
turn it again into the Lovedesire.

59. And here when Adam was divided, and the Divine might or power, slept, he
together with his Wife, with his Pleasure-Garden, was ordained into the outward
Life; for the divine understanding was in him, faded.

60. For, he was gone forth from the Divine Love-Fire, with his desire, into
the self-hood after the vanity, viz: after the Manifestation of Nature, after
Art and much knowing, THAT, he gat also; but he lost thereby the knowledge of
the DIVINE Kingdom of Joy.

61. He was yet indeed in Paradise with his Eve, when the Spirit of the outward
World awakened to him; but in the Lust of the vanity together with his Eve, to
which the Devil afterward gave him more cause, at the Tree of Temptation, as
is See before Text. I. verse: 115.
above mentioned.

62. Adam Slept in the Divine world, and awaked to the outward world, and with
the Earthly Eating of the Tree of Temptation which was Evil and good; the
vanity in the Substance of the Flesh fully awaked; for there began the
Properties of the abomination in the Center of Nature; to qualify or opperate,
as a seething.

63. Now was Heat and Cold, moreover, bitter, sweet, and sour, and all
whatsoever is manifested in the Dominion of the Stars and the Elements;
manifested also in him: The Sulphur and Mercury became manifest and stirring in
vanity of the Poyson-Life: of which now, the Souls Spirit in Adam and Eve, was
ashamed when they saw, that they in their self-hood, stood in such misery; and
that Heat and Cold pressed upon them.

64. And when God called them, again with the voice of Grace, Adam said, Gen:
3. 10. to the 14.
I am naked, and am afraid, But God said, who has told thee that thou art
naked: have thou not eaten of the Tree which I forbad thee; and he said; the
Woman gave me, and I did eat: and the Woman said, the Serpent beguiled me.

65. Here now lies the whole forementioned matter or Substance, how it came to
pass; for the Lust stood in Adam, and was in the Love-Desire in the Fiat
become introduced into Substance; in which, Adam, had the Birth standing, that
was divided from him; and now began that very abomination of false or wicked
Desire in the Woman, to lust; and raised fully the whole work up, to Sin and
abomination against Gods holiness.

66. And this is the very abomination before God; that the Life's Forms are gone
out from the equal agreement every one into the Manifestation of IT self:
whence in the Life, contention, viz: rising up of Pride, as also Covetousness,
Envy, Anger, and false or wicked suttlety; existeth.

67. So that every Form knows it self in the self-hood, and is Manifest to
it self, whence Man, viz: the Flesh in this opposite Strife; is introduced into
Sickness, woe pain and corruption.

68. For in the equal agreement NO Corruption can be, for all Wills of the
Life's Forms are but One only Substance, they go in one equal harmony, every
property is the good relish and love-desire to the other, but in the inequality
or disagreement there is mere Enmity; not at all willing in its property, to
hear see smell taste and feel.

69. In these Five Senses stands the Enmity of the Life, wherein there is
nothing but mere strife, in respect of the inequality or disagreement and
disharmony, which the sound viz: the Voice of God receives not or suffers
not to come into it self: unless the multiplicity of the Wills let their right
or propriety go; and sink down again totally in resignation, into Gods Mercy.

70. As Christ says; Unless ye convert and become as Children which know of
no falsehood or wickedness: ye shall not not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven:
Also ye must be born anew: That is, this Will of falsehood and vanity must
totally break, and a new spring forth, which wills the falsehood or
wickedness no more: else there is no blessedness or Salvation.

71. And therefore must the Flesh totally Dye and corrupt; wherein the
abomination and the vanity lies in the Substance, and go again to the Limit
where it originally existed in Adam, to a new Revelation or Manifestation.

72. Now we are to weigh, the Propagation of Man; the humane body is become
earthly; for, the vanity, out of which the earth became generated, is awakened
in it; and has swallowed up the holy heavenly Substance into it self.

73. For, the true Love-Spirit, departed in the Curse of the Earth from Man,
when the vanity awakened, then God Gen: 3. 17. to the 20.
Cursed the Earth; then all was done concerning the fair Paradise of Man; his
heavenly Image of the divine Substantiality faded: and was no more known.

74. Which in a Similitude is understood to be no otherwise, then as when look
upon LEAD which before had been GOLD, and had through MERCURY, turned it self
into LEAD, wherein the poisonous Mercury is manifested; which before in GOLD
stood in great brightness and Perfection.

75. And as now in the Lead there is yet a possibility to be Gold; but it was
not manifested in the Mercury; the Mercury could not turn it self again into
Gold; unless the Artist came and brake to pieces the Lead Totally: and turned
it into the first matter, out of which it was Created; then might out of that
matter fair Gold come to be, as it was at first.

76. Or else, if the power of Sol, did move it self in this Mercury of the
Lead, which yet is a Saturn, but yet has the Impression, viz: the first Ground
to Gold in it self; and generate in its power Gold again in the Lead, so that
I see Lead and Gold in ONE Substance; and yet it is not manifested: but the
Lead holds the Gold as it were half Swallowed up and covered.

77. Thus we are to understand in like manner concerning Adam and Eve; their
fair Golden Body in divine power and Substance, became a Dark obscure Lead;
spoken by way of Similitude; The Golden Mercury awaked in the vanity of the
poison, then faded and vanished the Gold, viz: the holy Body in the
Abomination: and now it was totally Earthly, and must to Earth again.

78. But the voice of God which called them again, espoused it self again with
the promise of the Serpent Crusher or Bruiser, in Venus'es Matrix, viz: in the
Second Principle, in the part of the Heavenly Substantiality, in which before,
the Word of the Divine sound had been manifested: But when the Souls desire
went out from it, it faded and vanished in it self.

79. Thus in this espousall in the Lead, there was Gold and Lead one in
another, but the Gold was not manifested, till Gods Mercury, in the word of
Promise; manifested it self in the Lead, viz: in the Flesh; then became the
Lead in Christ's humanity again changed into Gold: and the process was held, as
the Transmutation of Metals is performed, which becomes changed into Gold: as
in our Book of the Signature or Seal of things is very largely and expressly
written of.

80. And we are hereby to understand; that the Limit of the Covenant, viz: the
promised new Golden Life, is become propagated in Venus'es Tincture, as a
Possibility of the Divine Regeneration, which God, through the Center of his
Heart, through that very moving Manifested in Christ.

81. And manifested the CHRIST, viz: the Anointed, out of JESUS, and out of his
deepest humility and Love, and changed the poisonous Mercury in dark Lead, into
bright Gold.

82. Whereby we are clearly to understand: that in all men the VANITY, viz: the
awakened Life's forms in their self-hood and strife, are again become
propagated; and will still continually be propagated, till in the breaking or
Corruption of the Earthly Body; for so long as Man finds Heat and Cold or
sickness and opposite will in his Spirit and Body, NOTE
so long the Abomination is in FULL Life.

83. Concerning the Saints of God, which as Prophets in the Spirit of JESUS,
have prophesied of the CHRIST to Come; they have all spoken out of the Limit of
the Covenant, out of the promised Word, which would move it self again in the
Flesh; none of them was totally new born again in the Flesh.

84. For the Word stood in the inward faded Image, and opened it self with the
voice, through the outward Mercury, and showed the outward Man, what would yet
happen and be done to him, when the word of Promise should he manifested in the
Mercury of the Flesh; and therein break to pieces the abomination, and death of
the Strife in the Life's forms.

85. But after CHRIST out of JESUS, became manifested in the Flesh, then that
very Flesh became anointed; and therefore he was called the Anointed of the
LORD: and if we introduce our Souls desire, into this Manifested Word in the
Flesh of Christ, then will also that very promised word, which is together
propagated in ALL men in the Limit of the Covenant, be manifested in our
Souls-desire in the faded Image of the Divine Substantiality: and in Venus'es
Matrix, viz: in the Second Principle, wherein God is, viz: in his right Heaven
which is in MAN, comes to Life.

86. That is, the faded Image, gets the Divine sound in the Souls desire;
Christ becomes Man in the faded Image, and crusheth or bruiseth Death, viz:
the Abomination of the vanity in the outward Leaden Flesh, viz: the poisonous
Mercury in the Life's forms, the Head of the false or wicked will, and brings
forth the Souls will in it self into GOD.

87. Now understand us further; concerning the Propagation between Man and Wife
both in the Holy Children and in the wicked: How and in what manner it is with
the Conjunction of the Masculine and Feminine desire; and How in NO Man holy
children without Sin CAN be begotten; as this E. S.
Author paints it forth to us without sufficient understanding.

88. The Conjunction of the Desire toward Wife or Woman and Husband or Man
comes from both the Mothers, viz: from the dividing of Adam; from both the
Tinctures of Fire and Light: which are in themselves not much nobler, and purer
than the Flesh, or the Mercury in the Sulphur of the Flesh: they are done with,
and have not the true Life in them, but they are the fiery desire to the true
Life.

89. But if they come together into ONE, into Substance; then they awaken the
true Life in the Mercury; their vehement desire is after Life; they would again
be that which they were in the Image of God; when Adam was Husband and Wife or
Man and Woman, out of which existeth now the vehement Imagination in the
Sulphur and Mercury in the Flesh.

90. The Fires Tincture longs in the Flesh thus vehemently after the Lights
Tincture, and the Lights after the Fires, The Man or Limbus or Limus Terrae et
Coeli, the extract of Earth and of Heaven; longs after Venus'es Matrix, viz:
after the Joyous Conjunction of the Love-Life, viz: of the Love-relish; which
relish in Adam was one in another, wherein he loved himself, and the
Perfection consisted therein.

91. For the Flesh knows not what it does; it is indeed a substance of that
desire; for in the desire of the Tinctures the Seed is Generated, wherein again
the Tincture lies, and so vehemently drives on, that it also might come to
Life; for all Life or every Substance and thing presses after its Center out
of which it is generated.

92. Now it is to be known what is there sown; The Tinctures which Imagine so
vehemently, are in the Seed of Man and Woman, and the Seed becomes in the
Impression of the Fiat, viz: in the hunger of the desire; Material; and
originateth out of the power of the Flesh and of the Spirit; both of the Man
and of the Woman.

93. In the Man, the Spirit is fiery, that sows the Fiery Tincture, in the
Woman the Spirit is watery according to the Light; that sows the Spirits
Tincture, in the Inward Kingdom, the Image of the faded Substantiality; and in
the outward, the Aires property out of the abomination of the Earthlinesse.

94. Her seed is in the outward totally Cagastrish; [or drossy] but if She be
Holy, then it is in the Inward according to the saded Image; Iliastrish; that
is, half Paradisicall; for it bears the Rose-Garden wherein God became Man;
it bears according to the second Principle, the house of PARADISE; but in the
Outward Principle, it bears the Child, of the existed abomination out of
Adams Lust; and in the Third Principle, viz: in the Earthlinesse, it bears
the Dying, viz: the Death and Earthlinesse.

95. The Man bears in his Seed in the first Principle, the Fire-world, viz:
the Fathers Property, out of which the Father manifests his Son, viz: his
Love, viz: Venus'es Matrix: that is, the second Principles Property in him, but
in his Seed not manifested, but only as a Glimmering Tinder or Mother; so far
as he is holy; and in the Third Principle; he bears in the Sulphur and
Mercury in his Seed; the awakened Anger of God: in which the abomination
against God existed, and became Manifested in Venus'es Matrix, viz: in the
Woman's Property:

96. These Properties, become with the Seeds of Man and Woman in the
Conjunction brought into ONE, there the TWO Tinctures receive one another in
great Joyfulnesse, as it is found by experience, when the Seed goes forth, How
the Tincture lifts up it self in Joy; whence man's Life is moved, as a Joyful
aspect; enough understood by those that are OURS.

97. And the Two Tinctures espouse themselves thus instantly in the Sulphur of
the Seed into One; and awaken the Mercury viz; the Work-master of the Life, so
that he labors in the Seed, and awakeneth the Life's forms in the Sulphur.

98. And if the Mercury be not potent enough, then it draws the Mothers
Menstruum to it self; and brings it into the Seed of the Conjunction, then it
makes the Seed in Menstruo to be FLESH; in which yet there is a material
poison, and the great abomination against the holiness and purity; as is
sufficiently understood by all Lovers of Mysteries, what kind of poison lies
in the Menstruum; which desttoyeth and poysoneth any tender plant of the Earth:
as is undeniable.

99. Now in this Menstruum and poison is the Seed come to be Flesh; and both
the Tinctures are therein, and have their nourishment from their Substance; and
the true Life in Soul and Spirit existeth out of THAT.

100. Where now, in this is the total holiness without blemish according to
this E. S.
Author? Let him show it me here; and then I will esteem him for the Bride of
Christ; as he will needs be so in his outward Flesh.

101. The Scripture says; 1 Cor. 15. 43.
Man is sown in dishonor, but rises up in power: Here is understood the
second Principle, in which the Word of Life, stands together in that
Espousall, but not in the Evil sinful Flesh, which is full of kindled
affections and false or wicked desires.

102. But if the Seed be of wicked Parents, then is the Mother Tinder in the
second Principle not stirring; but if the Parents be Holy, then is the Seed
manifested in the Threefold Life, viz: in the Threefold Essence; but if not,
then is the Divine Mother or Tinder, not Manifested according to the
Love-power, but only according to the Anger; and according to the outward
world.

103. And though it be so, that honest married people beget children, and join
themselves together with Love-desire, yet it has NOT this meaning or
understanding, That the Imagination or Desire of Man and Wife is holy; and that
Christ's Spirit drives on the Imagination; as this E. S.
Author supposes: Indeed the Noble Soul is ashamed of it.

104. The Imagination arises out of the Tinctures, which kindle the Mercury
with their Lust, and the Mercury kindles the Spirit of the Life, and now
existeth the Lust and Will in the Heart, viz: a vehement desire; the tenderer
the Complexion is, the Nobler also is the Tincture, in its sweet desire.

105. But if also it be shot with a Ephesians: 6. 16.
fiery Dart in Venus'es desire, then is the Life kindled, so that it is as it
were more than half Mad with Love -Thoughts; and yet knows not what is
happened to it.

106. Must all this now be holy? then would the Secret WHOREDOMS where
oftentimes one vehemently and fierily loves another Wife, and in like manner
one Woman another husband, and so is shot with this Dart; be also Holy: also
when two young persons look upon one another, whence instantly Venus shoots
with her fiery Dart; then must that also be Holy; whereas indeed the Dart often
goes forth in false or wicked Lust.

107. And though it be at the best; yet it is a thing that is in all Beasts, it
is Natural; Men find some Beasts that are even ashamed of it; wherein it
appears that Nature it self is ashamed of it: and when men will give it the
best and rightest name, then it is called an abomination before Gods holiness:
being a thing existed out of Sin, through Adams-Fall: which indeed is boarn
with all under divine patience, seeing it cannot be otherwise; of which we
could take many Examples in the Holy Scripture.

108. Look upon the people Israel; when God would give them the Law at Mount
Sinai, and manifest or reveal himself with his voice; then he commanded the
Young People which were laden with such burning Lust; to NOTE Exodus: 19. 15.
Levit: 15. 16. to the 19.
abstain from their WIVES; and that pointed not only at the Marriage work, but
also at the * Imagination.

109. When 1 Samuel: 21. 4, 5.
David came to Nob to the Priest Abimelech; and there was no Bread but the Holy
Bread; the Priest said to David; if the young Men had abstained from Women,
then would he give to them; and David said; the Women were left these Three
days.

110. Herein Men have a very clear example; that even the People of David ought
not to eat of the holy Bread, if they had touched Women, then were they
unclean, and David had shut up the Women therefore from the Young Men; that
they should not be Made unclean with the Women through burning and Lust; for
they were in the wars, that they should not be an abomination before God; and
so God suffer them to fall, in Battle.

111. And Saint Paul says: 1 Corinthians: 7. 5. concerning Married persons; That
they should not depart one from another unless it be with both their consent,
that they may apply themselves unto Prayer. Saint Paul; means that Men should
FORBEAR the Marriage work, when they will Repent, viz: enter into true sorrow,
with Prayer before God: It is just such an Example as that of Moses, and David.

112. Therefore, a Man cannot say, that the Spirit of Christ promoteth it and
drives it on, and intoduceth it self into the burning or ardent Imagination:
Christ therefore became a Man, without the help or Co-working or concurrence of
any Man or Husband; that he might bring us forth out of this abomination before
God, through his holy Incarnation or Becoming Man: he became such a Virgin-like
Child with both the Tinctures one in another with own self-Love, that he might
bring our Rent, in himself, into ONE.

113. And this is the abomination in the Marriage work, that the Seed is
unclean, in the Conjunction of both the Tinctures, when they are brought
together into One, it is the Property of the Eternal Joyfullnesse, viz: of the
highest desiring and fulfilling; if that might be done without abomination,
THEN it were holy.

114. But the Sulphur of the Seed is an abomination before the Holiness: The
Elevation of the Natural Life's Forms, where the Forms of Nature lift up
themselves in self-hood, they lie in the Seeds, and are kindled in Gods Anger,
viz: in the abomination of the dark world through the Devils Imagination.

115. Therefore this impure Sulphur, out of which the Tinctures in the Fire
Life, viz: in the Fiery Tincture become generated, is an abomination before
Gods holiness, and therefore must also this Sulphur with the abomination
totally corrupt or break in pieces, and go again into the beginning of the
Creation.

116. And though it be so; that the Word of the LORD Verbum Domini, intermixeth
it self together in the Holy People, that is done according to the inward Man,
where the Divine Sparkle is propagated in the Image of God in the Heavenly
Substantiality.

117. For, the Word of the Deity in the Spirit of Christ dwells in Heaven,
and the right true Image created from the Divine worlds Substance, which in
Adam dyed and faded, is the Heaven's Substance, into which NO abomination CAN
Enter: for the Holy Spirit receives not that.

118. The Spirit of Christ possesses and manifests it self in HIS Tents,
and not in the beastial Conjunction of the Abominations of Sin; It is not in
the power of the Imagination of the Flesh; but in the pure Love-desire of
Chastity and Faithfulness, where TWO join their Minds together in the
Marriage Band, and give up their Love and faithfulness one to another to be
their own, and desire to be ONE Heart and Will.

119. There the Spirit of Christ, is the Love-band, and here now is rightly
that thing, Gen: 1. 28. Chap: 9. 1.
Increase or Multiply, and be fruitful: God said to Adam and Eve, they should
multiply themselves in their Marriage Band.

120. He says not; HE would do it with the promised Crusher or Bruiser of the
Serpent, but he gave them the power of the Natural Man; but the Holy Spiritual
Birth or Geniture he promoteth in his own Principle, and not in the perished
corrupt Flesh, not in the Imagination of Lust, which is more Beastiall than
truly Humane.

121. Indeed he brings holy children together but by the means of his Officer
Nature, how he will have it; but the marriage work according to the outward
Man, is not Holy; but according to the inward it is holy in the children of the
Saints; and Not in Beastiall Vessels.

122. But that E. S.
this Author sets it down; That through this Conjunction of Man and Wife, in
their Lust-desire; the Evil Properties and Lust of the Flesh are separated
asunder; and totally sanctified in the Spirit of Christ; the Love-Spirit of
Christ mixeth it self in their Imagination; and drives on all Abominations,
and works in the Imagination this Lust of the Man and Woman, and sanctifies
the Imagination and the Seed, sin dies, and a total holy child becomes
conceived, viz: a Christ little -Child or Infant, that is without blemish and
Sin, moreover God and Man outwardly and inwardly.

123. And this he speaks as one that understands nothing of the Mystery of
CHRIST; and takes upon him freely, as a Saint of his own making, a self elected
one without power; who knows not his beastial abomination and Filth.

124. He will make Christ to be OUTWARDLY; and yet Christ himself says; John
18. 36.
His Kingdom was not of this World; after his appointed work was accomplished,
he went to Heaven; and in the Heaven which is IN us, he dwells with us, and
works in that very Heaven in us, and not at all in the Beastial Man, in the
fleshly birth, in which Death is.

125. It is a mere fiction, whereby young people which are very eager and fiery
in Venus'es desire, are made altogether wanton and Luxurious, when it is so
finely pourtrayed before them, that their desire and Lust is Christ's driving,
and that it is the Spirit of Christ, which would mix it self and beget
Children.

126. When he conversed upon the Earth, HE never desired to mix himself but
only in the Spirit in the Soul, and in the Image of God; will he then now mix
himself in the beastial outward Work? we have NO testimony for that.

127. In David was also the Spirit of God, should therefore the Spirit of God
have mixed it self in his outward whoredom, and have driven on the work of the
outward Imagination toward 2 Samuel: 11.
Bathsheba, the Wife of Vriah, whom he murdered; then, God would have had, the
whoredom, to have been.

128. No! God punished David for that very fact: therefore men should not say:
the Spirit of Christ mixeth it self in the Center of the Imagination of fleshly
Lust, and sanctifies the outward Seed; it is altogether false.

129. He sanctifies his Tabernacles, which he possesses; he indeed opens
and shuts in the work of the Life, so that the Mercury, viz: the Work master
cannot many times bring his work to Life, and also many times brings it to
Life according to Gods will; as in many times to be seen among the Saints of
Old, especially in the Line of Christ; but men should distinguish the outward
from the Inward.

130. The Marriage work in it self, if it Be done Col. 3. 5.
Ordinately, is not sinful, for it is driven on by Gods Officer, Nature, and
boarn withal under divine patience.

131. God sets before him the Becoming Man or Incarnation of Christ his Son,
as among the Jews, the Sacrifices, which God set before him in the Covenant,
through the future Humanity, and reconciled himself in the Covenant; that the
Anger might not burn in the humane Abomination.

132. Thus also in the outward Marriage work; God sets before him, the true
Image, which lies shut up in our Seed, in Christ his Son; and enters in
the working power into the Substance of that Image of the Heavenly
Substantiality, as a Glimmering Mother or Tinder of divine Property; and herein
lies the holiness of the holy married peoples Children.

133. But in the outward Flesh, as also in the Soul, the Abomination of Sin
cleaves to them, and so NO child is born into the world without Sin: The
will to the outward work of the mixing together, men should distinguish from
the Will of the Divine Holiness, and from the will of own self Lust.

134. Nature wills the Burning eager Lust, viz: the Mixture; and Gods
holiness wills the Conjunction of the pure Tinctures: in which Conjunction
the Divine Center; viz: a holy fire-sparkle together incorporateth it self, in
the Substance of the heavens Image in the word of Power, and does not together
incarnate it self in the Outward Flesh.

135. This E. S.
Author says, When Christ is born or Generated, then the Earthly Man must
depart: But in this Time; Christ is in the Heaven of Man, and the Earthly Man,
upon Earth in his Self hood in the Four Elements.

136. E. S.
This Author Cries out upon the Confusion of others ways, and despises
other Men gifted from God, in their Gifts; and yet his whole work is nothing
else but a mere confusion of one thing in another; the outward World with God,
the Creature with the Holy Trinity; so that no rational Man at all can see by
him the distinction between God and the Creature.

137. There, never came to my knowledge, any writings wherein all things are so
wholly spoiled confused and darkened or obscured under long circumlocutions and
Glosses, as in these: that he may under such confusion, but present and give
forth himself for a GOD.

138. That is the whole contents of his meaning, that it is no more he that
wills, does, speaks, thinks, or purposes any thing, but that God in
Christ is it ALL, in him, the will, the deed, the speaking, understanding,
thinking, begetting of Children, eating, drinking, sleeping, waking: but then
must he also be even the Coughing in him; and whatsoever else he does in any
secret place.

139. Which is very easily understood by reading in him, because he will
distinguish Nothing, but will be All in all, God in Christ; which is fit should
be signified concerning him, that other people might learn to beware of such
seeming flourishing Luster; and learn to know themselves inwardly and
outwardly, what the Creature, Man, God, and Christ are, and not so Groundlesly
call the cursed world, God.

140. I write not this to the reproach of the E. S.
Author; but for the Reader to consider, that he may know, that he is a
Sinner, and what his Holiness in him is, for a total faithful instruction,
from my Gifts, which in the Grace of the Divine Love, have been imparted, to me.

NOw follows
The Third Point of the Fourth Text.
The E. S.
Authors Own Explanation.

1. THus now hereupon follows Thirdly; How and after what manner and kind,
also, the Man-God CHRIST, comes and is manifested through the Divine-humane
Wife, or Woman.

2. And how, through Christ the first born before all Creatures, the most holy
express Image, yes the Self-subsisting Substance of the total most holy
Divine Fulness; the Triune highly praised living powerful word of God, God
himself; through whom and for whom, all things not only were Created, but after
the Fall, through his holy becoming Man or Incarnation, and precious innocent
passion, dying, Resurrection, ascension into Heaven, and perfect merit, were
perfectly redeemed or delivered.

3. As heretofore is mentioned, he has united the total faithful Mankind, in
the Love of his divine voice, to him, to his holy Names highest praise and
honor, for his proper own body and Wife or Woman [which he not in an outward
Manner prepares to himself, creates and makes new; but in the inward Center and
middle of the Heart] from the beginning of the World Suddenly after the Fall;
betrothed in Grace Love and Mercy, yes, in the Faith, and tied it and prepared
it for his Eternal Rest.

4. In like manner also, this most Holy Man CHRIST JESUS, John 1. 29. 30. Rev.
13. 8.
the Innocent Lamb of God, yes, the Triune highly praised Son of God, God
himself, [which according to the Testimony of the Holy Scripture was slain from
the beginning of the world] in all faithful and Saints, with his holy living
powerful richly spiritual word, divine substance, working willing and
perfecting, according to the measure of his appearing gifts, has appeared from
the beginning of the world.

5. And himself has manifested the true Woman's Seed, in the Woman or Wife of
his Love, prepared for himself; Against which this self own holy Woman's Seed;
He the highly praised Triune God himself, according to the Testimony of the
Scripture has permitted and set the Enmity.

6. So that the Satanical Serpents Seed, the unfaithful wicked corrupt world,
through Satan and his naked outward fleshly sinful wicked Diabolical matters,
also evil heart and John 2. 16.
Lust of the Eye, is governed and driven on; this his own Self-seed, in, and
together with his own Love and Wife is persecuted derided scorned despised
scandalized worryed and put to death: As the Testimony of the Holy Scripture
truly and clearly in and to all the Saints, witnesses and manifests.

7. But this Holy Divine Woman's Seed, in and to the Saints, has after many
kinds and ways appeared, as in Adam and Eve after the Fall, and after that,
through Christ the Triune highly praised God himself, the promise of the
perfect Woman's Seed of the Messiah, was spoken and pronounced to them, the
strong Hope, Faith and Confidence, in this Woman's Seed, was openly caused to
sound forth from them; As indeed Eve in this assured Faith, mentioned the LORD
Messiah Gen: 4 1.
saying her first born son Cain, was the Man of the LORD.

8. In Gen: 4. 4.
Abel, this holy Woman's Seed, and Lamb of God, manifested it self, in which
Faith, he also sacrificed to the Lord, and caused his holy praise and
Thanksgiving, to ascend to God the highest Good: and thereupon he was slain by
the Serpents seed Cain.

9. In Gen: 5. 21. to the 25.
Enoch, the holy Woman's seed, manifested it self so powerfully, that through
and with God, in the holy Faith the Mother together with the Holy Birth, went
Bodily into Heaven.

10. In Gen: 6. 9.
Noah, this holy Woman's seed, and living substantial word of God, manifested
it self so powerfully, with Teaching Preaching, Prophesying, Reproving and
admonishing to Repent, Instructing, Comforting, and Divine Confirmation, in and
to the building of the Ark, pointing at the Future Deluge; which holy woman's
seed, also his Faithful Parents; with living voice at his Birth testified and
said; this will Comfort us in our Misery.

11. This holy Woman's seed in Gen: 12. 3. Chap: 18. 2.
Abraham, was witnessed by the high divine Majesty, from Heaven it self, the
most holy Triunity, which in the outward form of the Persons of Three Men One
LORD, caused himself to be manifestly heard saying, In this, thy seed, shall
all people be blessed; understand, those which believe in him, and suffer him
to rule them.

12. This holy Woman's seed was witnessed also by the Triune God Christ Jesus
himself, in Gen: 24. 60. etc.
Isaac: In Rebecca, was manifested in her womb before the Birth, both this Holy
Woman's, and also the Serpents seed, in which the unbelief and Serpents seed
Esau, out of the Saw or Swine of Unbelief.

13. Which persecuted the Holy Faiths seed, of the holy Woman in Rebecca; Gen:
25. 6.
Jacob; and beat and struck him: who afterward after the birth did himself
terribly and damnably persevere; and Gen: 27. 41.
purposed to slay the beloved Jacob.

14. How mightily holily and gloriously this holy Woman's seed, manifested it
self in the beloved Jacob, concerning which, the Lord Zebaoth himself, gives
glorious holy Testimony; in so much as he so highly entitled him, that he
called him Gen: 32. 28.
Israel; a Prince and Ruler with God.

15. This should the faithful Children and Woman's seed, of the highly praised
Triune God, united with and in this God, further consider of; and especially,
through this holy good divine living working substantial Seed of God CHRIST
JESUS, apprehend, to themselves the living word of God, from the least grain of
Mustardseed, and least minutest measure and piece, even the total appearing
fulness of the Deity in and to themselves; according to the Testimony of the
Holy Scripture.

16. To which holy new birth original and beginning in the Faithful Hearts; no
worldly Wit Art skill, learning in the Scriptures and getting it without Book,
Phylosophicall, Logical, Natural, puffed up Art, can any thing at all in the
least attain or perform, according to the Testimony of the Scripture.

17. 1 Cor: 1. 20.
Where are the Scripture-Learned or Scribes? where are the Worldly wise Men?
where are the Judges? where are the Councillors? Has not God turned the
wisdom of the world into Foolishness? as it appears clearly and manifestly,
in all the worldly wise, in Scripture-Learned Art and Experience; though likely
many years from their childhood, to their highest age, they have in their
state and condition taken great pains for worldly Art.

18. Yet they must at last be ashamed before this Triune seed of God CHRIST
JESUS, the living substantial word of God, from the least particle to the
highest Perfection in all Saints; and let go their ART and lament over it
saying: that it has not at all profited them to salvation, but been totally
hurtful.

19. As many of them also before their decease have forgotten this acquired Art
and worldly natural wisdom which they have learnt, and have become so foolish
and childish, and indeed in all Stations and conditions; that they alas, could
not any more preserve and recollect in their memory, OUR FATHER, which they
learnt from their childhood according to the Letter.

20. As then they will apprehend this necessary information according to the
Glorious appearing of this holy woman's seed, according to the measure in all
Saints, in Joseph, Moses, Joshuah, Rebeccah, Samuel, David, Solomon and all
holy honest faithful people and Prophets of the Old and New Testament, in
works words and deeds; to the total perfection, inwardly and outwardly visible
Birth of the Son of God, born out of the perfect pure Virgin and Genetrix of
God, MARY: even every Elect, to the highest praise of God will partake with GOD
himself, and delight himself therein, and will know how to praise the most high
Eternally for it, with himself.

Jacob Behme's Answer To this Explanation of this Third Point of the Fourth
Text.
1. THis E. S.
Author, mentions concerning the Triune God and Man CHRIST, and concerning
the Divine Woman or Wife, and signifies; that not only all things were
created, through and for that Triune Man CHRIST; but also after the Fall, were,
by his holy Becoming Man or Incarnation, and precious Inward Passion and Dying,
Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven and perfect merit, perfectly Delivered.

2. All which, needs far another explanation: for if I say, CHRIST is the
Triune God; then I speak of no Man or Creature; for the Holy Trinity is no Man
nor Woman, much less a Creature.

3. Only he has manifested himself, through and IN the Humanity, and made
himself visible in a humane Image; but the visible palpable Substance of the
Flesh, is not the Triune Deity: but the Spirit in the power of the Flesh, the
divine Spirit in the Spiritual, the uncreaturely IN the creaturely is GOD.

4. CHRIST, so far as he is called the Triune God, according to the Eternal
Word, in the Name JEHOVA or JESUS, so far as concerns the unmeasurable God,
is no Man or Creature; but the Fulness of all things, dwelling in himself.

5. But according to the Name CHRIST, the Deity is visible; and this (...).
CHRIST, viz: The Anointed of God, penetrateth, only, or presses upon, the
humanity, NOT upon ALL Creatures; he uniteth himself to NO Creature but Man; he
has also with his Incarnation, Suffering Dying and Resurrection, delivered NO
creature but MAN.

6. With the Name CHRIST he is become manifest only in the Humanity, not in the
Earthly or Heavenly Creatures, NOTE The Heavenly Creatures need NO CHRIST, and
the Hellish Creatures have NO CHRIST.
The Earthly and Heavenly Creatures, need NO Christ, and the Hellish have NONE.

7. This Christ it is, through whom God, who dwells in him, and has
manifested himself, with the Christ, who will judge all things, and separate
the Good from the Evil: HE is not manifested in the Creatures, that he would
deliver them to Eternity; and dwell Creaturely in them, as he dwells in MAN:
all Creatures of this world except Man, go again into that out of which they
proceeded in the beginning.

8. When I will speak of the Man CHRIST, what kind of Threesold God and Man he
is; then I distinguish the humane Creature, which he has received of us Men,
and difference it from the Triune Deity; the manifested Substance, from the
power and Omnipotence.

9. Not that he is divided, but that the Spirit of God is higher then the
Substance, which he generateth in his Desire, in his exhaled Sound: for
according to Our Substance CHRIST calls himself, the Son of Man: and
says; the NOTE
Father is greater than HE.

10. According to the humanity, he has a given power; and according to the
Deity he is the Giver himself. The Man is our Humanity; and the Christ is the
Anointed of God; which God has manifested out of the Name JEHOVA or JESUS out
of the Deep of the wisdom, out of the Center of God, out of the Great Love,
and given it to the humane Creature for a Light and Eternal Seed.

11. Not that this amiable blessed sweet Love of Christ is the Man, but the
holy SUN -shine in the Great Love-flame, in the Man; for, when I see a holy
Christian Man going or standing, I do not say there goes or stands Christ;
but I say there goes or stands a Christian Man; in whom, the Sun CHRIST,
shines.

12. The Person of Adam is not the Christ; but the Person of the power of God,
which dwells in the Man Adam according to the Heavenly Part; That is Christ.

13. As the Sun shines in the whole outward world, and impowereth all and
makes it fruitful; and the world is not the Sun: so also the CHRIST shines
as a revealed or Manifested Sun, out of JEHOVA or JESUS, in the Creaturely
humanity of Christ.

14. The Name Christ, is the revealed or manifested Sun out of the Eternal
Name JEHOVA, or JESUS: JEHOVA is the Eternal Divine SUN, in which this great
Love-Sun, CHRIST; as a Heart in the Center of the Holy Trinity, has been
hidden to all Creatures, and yet is through the second moving of the Deity, as
a holy sweet Love-Sun, become manifested.

15. I must not say, that, in the Person CHRIST, viz: in the Man, according to
his humanity, according to that part which he has on him from us Men from our
Body and Soul, that is, on to the Deity, on to the Divine Substantiality, or
Heavenly Corporeity, taken on to him; That the Creature is ceased and taken up,
or that the Creature Soul and Body from us Men is unmeasurable.

16. No: for such a One is not our Eternal High Priest, which I could never
more see in the Form of Man; for, the Men, when he went to Heaven said: Acts 1.
11.
Ye shall SEE this JESUS, come again, as he is Ascended.

17. Only the Deity in him, and the Christ, understand, the divine property,
together with the Heavenly divine substantiality, wherewith, he says, John 3.
13. He was come from Heaven. THIS is uncreaturely, and yet IN every Man, as an
own Sun, yet only in one point, which shines forth out of the fountain of this
Sun, indeed from no place or space, but the place of this holy revelation or
Manifestation, is in ALL Men the Center of the Original.

18. This SUN is in all Men, but this Sun is not revealed or manifested in all
Men, but only in the Desire to the That is, to be like Christ, humble and meek.
Point, which is CHRIST; which point is JESUS out of JEHOVA.

19. But concerning the Holy woman or wife, which this Author mentions,
which is holy and PERFECT, wherein the Man CHRIST becomes generated, needs
also a far other Explanation.

20. And though he sets down the Holy Christianity to be the woman or wife;
which I blame not: yet a Man must not speak that concerning the outward Earthly
Man, for the Earthly Man is not Christ's Spouse or Wife, but the inward
Spiritual which faded or disappeared in Adam, the Heavenly, which Christ, as
viz: the Holy SUN, vivifieth.

21. But E. S.
this Authors writing is altogether Contradictory and runs counter against
it self; for here in this Point, he writes of this Spouse or Woman and Body,
thus; which he NOT outwardly prepares, creates and makes new, but in the
Inward Center and middle of the Heart, from the beginning of the world
instantly after the Fall, in Grace Love and Mercy, yes in the Faith, espouseth
betrotheth and uniteth to himself, and prepares it for his Eternal Rest. In
like manner also this holy Man CHRIST JESUS, the Innocent Lamb of God, yes, the
Triune highly praised Son of God, God himself; which was slain from the
beginning of the world IN all Faithful and Saints, according to the Testimony
of the Scripture.

22. Before E. S.
this Author has set down in another place; that if CHRIST became manifest or
revealed in Man, then Nature falls Totally away; Now he sets it down; that
CHRIST, in the Inward Center and middle of the Heart, has from the beginning
of the world, espoused and united himself with the Saints in the Faith; which
indeed were true, if he did not speak it concerning the Man CHRIST, but
concerning the Promised CHRIST in the Covenant, which first in Time fulfilled
the Covenant.

23. For, Not CHRIST the Man, who in the Time in the Limit of the Covenant
manifested or revealed himself; was slain in the Holy Patriarchs; but the
Children of Faith in whom the Covenant became manifested.

24. CHRIST Heb: 7. 27. Cha: 9. 26. 28. Chap: 10. 10. 1 Pet: 3. 18.
has once given and offered up his holy Life in the sweet Love, to his Father,
into his Anger, which was manifested in the Humane Property: and with the Love
broken the Anger to pieces. He has not dyed in ALL the Saints from Adam to
this time, and suffered himself to be slain and put to death: Only the Children
of the Faith of the Covenant have suffered themselves to be put to death
according to the MAN of SIN, that the word of Life in the Covenant in them,
might put on the new promised Life, which would manifest it self in the
Covenant with the future Sun of the New Life in the Spirit of the Covenant.

25. So that when Christ would manifest himself in the Covenant in the Flesh,
he also in that Covenant, which had manifested it self in them, would be
manifested in them with the divine Substantiality, viz: with Christ's heavenly
Flesh.

26. For even after the Resurrection of Christ, when he had assumed the
Humanity, and slain death; it was not CHRIST, that dyed any more in his
Members, in the Christians, or was slain, but Adam, in Christ's Death, that
Christ's Spirit in the Soul and the holy Man, might Live: When Christ becomes
born then should the Man of Sin continually Dye, till at last when the
Outward body departs, it WHOLLY cease.

27. But if Christ the Lamb of God, were become slain in the Old Patriarchs,
then the reconciliation was performed IN them, and then it comes not solely
and only from the Son of MARY.

28. Abel, was NOT the Lamb of God which was slain for Sin: Christ dyed not
in Abel, but in the BODY which he received from MARY.

29. Abel and all the Martyrs dyed as to their own Bodies; for the sake of the
Covenant, which opened it self in them, they were slain, and dyed as to their
sinful Adamicall Body, and not as to the Holy Body, which was shut up in the
Covenant, which, Christ, when he would manifest himself in the Covenant, would
manifest it to be an Eternal Life and holy Flesh; in which he would dwell and
be the power and Life thereof.

30. When the Holy Scripture says, Rev: 13. 8.
CHRIST was slain in the Saints, then it understands, then Members of the
Body of CHRIST, according to Christ's humanity, which HE, the Christ, assumed:
It understands not the Triune God, that should suffer it self to be slain
from the beginning of the world; for doubtless God cannot dye: That which
dies is only the Body of Christ's Members, according to the humane Creature,
and not according to the Spirit of Christ.

31. The Spirit of Christ has therefore manifested it self in the Humanity,
and slain Death in his assumed Body; that the Gates of Life in us should be
opened; for if I be murdered for the sake of Christ's Name, and the Testimony
thereof; then does not Christ dye in me, but Note.
Adam dies in Christ's death; and Christ in my dying becomes first rightly
manifested.

32. My dying is Christ's Resurrection in ME; for I dye away to the sinful
self-hood or Nothingnesse, and live to the Resignation in the Spirit of Christ.

33. Therefore this is a void and groundless thing, that E. S.
this Author writes: that the Man Christ, the Innocent Lamb of God, God
himself, which; from the beginning of the world, according to the Testimony of
the Scripture, was slain in all the Saints and faithful, etc.

34. The Triune God is not from the beginning of the world slain in his Saints;
the Scripture says not so, but the Faithful Men were slain for Christ's sake;
and NOT the Triune Christ IN them.

35. Man in his self-hood and I-hood; is not Christ himself, but Christ
dwells in him, he is the shining Luster of his holy Life, as himself says,
John 8. 12. I am the Light of the World; This he speaks, according to the
Name CHRIST out of JESUS, and not according to our Humanity, which Dyed on the
Cross; concerning which Isaiah calls him, a simple Servant; in that he
says, who is so simple as my servant?

36. This Servant of God, is not the Holy Trinity, but the revelation or
Manifestation, and habitation, of the holy Trinity; the servant is become slain
as a Lamb; and not the holy Trinity; Men should always make a difference
between God and the Humanity; else if God were dead in his Trinity, then were
Death stronger than God, who must thus, have given himself up, to Death.

37. Christ is indeed God and Man in ONE Person, but the Deity, viz: the Divine
Property, is not the Person, the Man; but the Mensch.
Homo, or humanity, is the Man and the Lamb of God, which was slain; and is
called Christ, from the Anointing; so that God has anointed this humanity of
CHRIST; with his Spirit John 3. 34.
without measure: for the JESUS is the Anointing, viz: the Deep Love in the
Deity.

38. Therefore now the Lamb of God according to the humanity, viz: IN the
Members thereof, wherein the promised Covenant was, out of which Covenant the
Anointing would manifest or reveal it self: was slain; not Christ the Anointed
of God, which in the Covenant was hidden in them.

39. Abel was not anointed with Christ, but indeed with the promised word in
the Covenant, in which the Christ manifested himself, and when Christ
manifested himself in the Covenant in the Humane property, THEN Abel put on
Christ in the Flesh: before Christ's humanity Abel had put on the Covenant in
the promised Word; and NOTE How Abel arose when Christ arose from the Dead.
WHEN Christ arose from the Dead, then Abel also arose in Christ's anointing in
Christ's humanity out of Christ's Death, and lived in the Anointing of Christ.

40. The Man Christ is the First that arose from the Dead in the Anointing, and
is also the First who in the Anointing dyed to the Humane I-hood: He is only
and alone the Lamb of God, in whom God brake his wrath to pieces: Abel and all
Martyrs are his Members, upon whom the breaking death in pieces pressed or
penetrated out of this Lamb Christ.

41. Abel received an imputed Righteousness, not a self wrought one of his
own. Abel before the humanity of Christ was not the Lamb of God; but he was a
Member in the Lamb of God: Christ has in all things the pre-eminence; and none
of them has been able to call himself a Christian, much less the Lamb of God;
that is, has been Slain for or instead of Christ.

42. They have all of them only been put to death in the spirit of Faith upon
Christ's future coming, they have put on Christ in the Covenant of Promise in
the Spirit of Faith; Not as a Lamb or Man, but in Power, not in the Flesh but
in the Spirit, so that Christ is the First who in the Flesh should be called
Note.
The Lamb of God.

43. E. S.
This Author mentions in this Manner, But also this holy divine Substantial
woman's seed, has in and to the Saints appeared and been manifest in many kinds
and ways, as in Adam and Eve after the Fall: If this be so, that the divine
substantial woman's Seed was manifest in Adam and Eve, then they have put on
Christ, viz: the true woman's Seed in Substance.

44. And then they need not expect further about any other woman's seed; why did
Eve then say when she bare Cain: Gen: 4. 1.
I have the Man the LORD? if she had before the substantial woman's seed
manifested in her, why did she then hope for another?

45. And God said also to Abraham: Gen: 22. 18. Chap: 26. 4. Chap: 28. 14.
In thy seed shall all Nations be blessed; this was spoken concerning the
future woman's seed, which would manifest himself in Abraham's seed Substantially
with divine Heavenly Substantiality.

46. If it were spoken as to the present, then God had not commanded him the
Circumcasion, and after that the Sacrifice; The Substantial woman's seed was
not in the Sacrifice, but the word of Promise in the Covenant.

47. The substantial seed, of which God said, therein all Nations should
become blessed, that lay shut up in Abraham, unless the opening of the Name
JESUS, should open it; the Promise to Abraham, went on as to the Limit.

48. That very substantiality, wherein God would become Man, was saded or
disappeared in Adam, when he dyed to the Kingdom of Heaven and Paradise: This
saded or disappeared Seed, become in its Principle, co-propagated.

49. And in this Seed stood the limit of the Covenant, out of which the Spirit
of God in the Saints manifested it self; and not through the faded or
disappeared substance, but with Christ's becoming Man or Incarnation, the
Substantial revelation or Manifestation proceeded, where God dwells within
in the substance, viz: as a Life of the Substance.

50. Also this E. S.
Author writes further: And after that, through Christ the Triune highly
praised God himself, the promise of the Perfect woman's seed of the Messiah,
was pronounced and promised to them; The strong Hope Faith and Confidence, in
this woman's Seed, caused it self openly to sound forth from them.

51. Now if Christ dwelt substantially in Adam and Eve, what need he then
promise another substance to them? I verily think Christ would not be
manifested or revealed in Adam: much less has Christ promised Adam to become
Man in his seed: but God promised the Christ to Adam, viz: to awaken the
Anointed of God in his seed, viz: in the woman's seed, and not in the Man's seed,
As in the Fourth Point shall be expressed at large.

52. Christ stood in Adam and Eve, in the Limit of the Covenant in the Name
JESU, in JEHOVAH, in divine hiddennesse or secrecy, in the seed of Adam and
Eve, without humane substance, and unmoveably in the promised seed, till the
End of the Limit, there he moved himself in the woman's seed.

53. This High hitherto much repeated Speech concerning the Triune Woman's Seed,
before Christ's Humanity, is much more a Confusion than an Explanation: the
CHRIST in the woman's seed was manifested in No Saint before Christ's Birth; but
only in the Spirit of the Deity, in a Prophetic manner, and not in a Humane
Manner.

54. By the woman's Seed, is always understood, the NOTE The Paradise is the
woman's Seed.
Paradise, which faded or disappeared in Adam, viz: the Heavenly corporeity
from the pure Element; and NOT the FOUR Elements, this was manifest neither in
Adam nor Abel, till the Savior CHRIST became manifest in this Seed.

55. This Author so wonderfully blends one in another, that it has no
sufficient understanding: one while he speaks of Faith, that the Saints have
had the woman's seed manifested in the Faith, then suddenly he speaks of the
substance, whereas in the Substance there was no manifestation or revelation in
THEM, but only in the Faith, was the divine and humane Conjunction IN the
Spirit, and NOT in the Woman's Seed.

56. Men should not set down the Triune God Christ to be in the Humane
substance, before Christ's becoming Man or Incarnation: for after the Word
became Flesh, then he was called CHRIST, and no theretofore, in the Covenant,
where he was only in the Promise.

57. And though indeed he was in the Deep of the Deity from Eternity; yet he
was not then called the Woman's Seed, for the woman's Seed was not sooner called
Christ, then till the word of God manifested it self in the Woman's Seed, and
sanctified the Wo-Womans Seed, and generated it to a Divine Life or Substance.

58. The woman's Seed attained the Anointing in the Motion of the Name JESU in
MARY, and not in Adam, Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and David.

59. The Saints of Old knew not Christ in their Seed, that he moved and
manifested himself in their Seed, but in their Spirits and Souls, not in the
Fleshly Seed, but in the Faiths desire, viz: as a Divine Conjunction.

60. What this E. S.
Author speaks further, concerning the Serpents Seed; that it has
manifested it self in the Saints near to the holy Woman's Seed, as he
peremptorily sets it down, that Esau was generated out of the Saw, or Swine,
viz: out of the Serpents Seed; that is with the Author a plain ignorance and
confusion.

61. Esau was generated of NO Saw, or Swine, for his Mother was NO Saw or
Swine; He was begotten out of Isaac's and his Wifes Seed; as well as his
brother Jacob, but the kindled Anger of God, which Adam awakened, had laid hold
on Esau.

62. For, the Love and Anger were both manifested in Man, viz: Evil and Good,
and they were always in the wrestling, till at last CHRIST came, and overcame
the Anger, with the sweet Love of God, out of JESUS, and changed it into Divine
Joy.

63. Esau was a Type or Shadow, of the Earthly Sinful Adam, and Jacob was a
Type of Christ; Christ would bless and reconcile the Esau through Jacobs Seed:
for Math: 9. 13.
he was come to call the poor sinners, viz: the perished or corrupt Adam and
Esau to repentance, and Not the Righteous Jacob in the Line of Christ.

64. Esau was not begotten out of the Serpents Seed, else must the Devil have
dwelt in Isaac and Rebecca in their Seed out of which they begat Esau: which
were abominable to be spoken.

65. This E. S.
Author sets Open a Hellish door, in the Holy Patriarchs, which yet he will
have to be Perfect: His writing is much more a blasphemy and reproaching of
God, than a Christian Explanation.

66. That this Jacob and Esau have striven in their Mothers womb, signifies,
the Paradise as to one part and as to the other Part, the Earthly world, viz:
Gods Love and Anger, which were both stirring in the Humane Essence, and in
strife about Man: as I have expressed it at large in another place.

67. This E. S.
Author should not make of Esau a Saw or Swine; nor of Cain, so totally a
Serpents Seed, It should be shown in the Holy Scripture, or else none will give
credit to him: for the Judgment belongs to God and not to Man.

68. He cannot show that Cain and Esau were generated Devils totally out of
the Serpents seed: for God said to Cain, Gen: 4. 7.
Rule over Sin, Suffer it not to have the Dominion: Thus there was a
possibility in Cain, that he could rule over Sin, else God had not commanded
him to do so; but whatsoever is totally the Serpents and the Devils, therein
is, NO Possibility.

69. Esau had even such a Soul, as Jacob had, both begotten from their Parents,
and this only was the difference, that in the one the Divine Love, and in the
other, the awakened anger, was manifested, which, yet, Christ, with his Blood,
would drown, in all those who would introduce their Souls desires, into him.

70. But that this E. S.
Author, rejects all worldly Wit and Art, and says, they serve nothing to
the kingdom of God: but that they are much more hurtful: needs also another
Explanation.

71. ART indeed gives no divine power or wisdom, and helps nothing to the
kingdom of God; but it belongs to the outward Man of Gods WONDERS, that he
should behold Gods wonders and great hidden wisdom, and Psalm: 145. 10. Ps:
148. 149, 150.
praise God, in all his works.

72. If the outward Man learneth NO Art, then he is most NEAR to a Note, what
Man is without Art Outwardly.
BEAST; which knows not; what the substance of all Substances is.

73. Indeed the Divine wisdom stands NOT in Art and Reason, but it shows
Art the way, what it should do and how it should Seek: ART is really the Tool
or Instrument of God wherewith the divine wisdom works or labors: why
should I then despise it? Through ART; Gen; 1. 26.
All Creatures are ruled by Man, and in Art is the Outward Body Covered and
defended from Heat and Cold.

74. But that this E. S.
Author also mentions; that by Repentant Men, ALL Art is cast behind and
forgotten, and that many in their Old age, become so childish they do at length
forget, OUR FATHER, which they had learned: that is very cunningly and Slyly
intended by him.

75. For before he had said, He was so perfect, that he need not any More to
PRAY, OUR FATHER, etc. likely he would fain that none should learn to PRAY, and
besides should learn NO Art, and then he need forget nothing.

76. If none should learn any Art, then could we no more manage our Estate and
Employment upon Earth, and if none should learn to PRAY, then all Men would
continue in Self-hood, and then Sin is TOTALLY Covered, and is no more known
or acknowledged; and then Folly stands in the place or stead of ART, and Man
in his Reason is like ALL the Beasts.

77. The deeper a Man is Or Taught of God.
LEARNED concerning GOD, the deeper he seeks and SEES into Gods deeds of
Wonder in ART; for all profitable ARTS are revealed or manifested out of Gods
Wisdom, NOT that they are THAT, by WHICH Man comes to God, but for the
Government of the outward Life, and for the Glorious Manifestation of the
Divine Wisdom and Omnipotence.

78. With the supposed Woman's Seed, wherein he conceiteth himself to be totally
divine and holy, he will not make all ARTS to Cease; for the Woman's Seed is
Humane; but when CHRIST, viz: Gods Love, assumeth it, and manifests himself
therein, then is that Woman's Seed, the Humanity of Christ: viz: the true Image
of GOD.

79. This E. S.
Author calls the Woman's Seed, the good holy divine living working Seed of
God, CHRIST JESUS, the Living Word of God, and yet understands not what Gods
Seed or the Woman's Seed is, what the Life and power is: when I speak only and
alone of the Woman's Seed, then I say not, Gods seed CHRIST JESUS: The Name
JESUS is divine, but the Name CHRIST is God and Man.

80. When JESUS manifested himself in the Woman's Seed and assumed THAT, then
the Person was called CHRIST; yet now the Name JESUS is the holy divine Life,
viz: the Divine Seed out of the word of the Deity: the Woman's Seed is his
assumed Substance.

81. And therefore HE is called the Woman's Seed, because he is from the woman,
viz: from the heavenly Virginity which faded or disappeared in Adam; and as to
another part from the outward worlds substance; in which the Name JESUS, viz:
Gods seed, John 3. 9.
destroyed or brake in pieces, Death and Gods Anger.

82. The woman's Seed, is a total humane Seed from Soul and Body, but it must
be rightly understood, as to THAT Seed, wherein Adam might have generated
Magically, if his Longing or Lust, had not plunged it self into vanity, Evil
and Good, and awakened the Abomination, as is before mentioned and here
following in the Fourth Point.

83. Now if I will in this place, speak so highly, of the divine Woman's Seed,
then I must distinguish Gods and the Woman's Seed: and must rightly show; How
Gods Seed, viz: the Name JESUS, out of the word of the divine Sound or Life
has united it self with the woman's Seed: and given up it self into ONE Person,
which is called CHRIST.

84. The Name JESUS, is the anointing of the Woman's Seed, and in the anointing
he is called CHRIST the Son of God: the Seed of the Woman has a given power,
and the Seed of the Woman is under or beneath God, as the Body is beneath the
Soul: but the Name JESUS is the Giver.

85. This E. S.
Author mixeth ALL, TOGETHER, and that for TWO Causes, one is, because himself
does not rightly understand it, the other, because he may advance all humane
things, and give forth himself only for CHRIST; viz: for the Divine power and
Omniscience, and therefore he rejects all ART and PRAYER it self; and calls
it a Forgotten thing, as if it were without Or a Powerless thing.
power or powerless; and did not attain that which is Eternal.

86. He will needs persuade us, that the Woman's Seed CHRIST, God and Man, is
according to BOTH Natures totally ONE, and that will HE E. S.
Himself be: But the humane Nature continues indeed Eternally beneath the
Diety; though it is not divided for all that, yet the Substance is not AS the
Spirit.

87. God, with or by creating Man has not created to himself a GOD, which is
of his own Substance, but an Image of a Similitude according to himself, viz: a
Manifestation of his unsearchable divine Substance, in which he manifests
himself; to his own Joy of himself, and Deeds of WONDER.

88. And has given to Man again, to seek and to reveal or manifest the wonders
of God in THIS worlds substance, to his, viz: man's own Joy delight and longing
pleasure, that God might be praised, known, and acknowledged, in ALL works, and
Substances, or THINGS.

HEre follows The Author Esaiah Stiefel's Fourth Point of the Fourth Text.
1. HItherto has been Mentioned, How Christ the Triune highly praised God, and
Man, the holy Seed the living substantial powerful word of God, has
appeared, according to Measure from the beginning of the world, in all the
Saints, his wife or woman, and been manifested in the Eyes and Hearts of the
Faithful.

2. Hereupon now it is rightly acknowledged by all the Called Elect truly
faithful Christians, that this most holy woman's Seed, the Eternal Birth of
God, before all Creatures the Triune highly praised Son, and living totally
substantial powerful word of God, and most holy Seed of the total fulness
of the Triune Deity.

3. In the holy body and woman or wife of God, the pure chaste undefiled Virgin
MARY, humane Nature, yet through and in the FAITH, of the New-and re-generated,
holy pure flesh and blood in unity, has taken to himself the pure humane Body
and Soul, to the undivided Eternal union, and united it.

4. And has been generated and Manifested, in and out of the faithful Love
and Wife or Spouse or Woman of God, the Holy Virgin Mary, a little infant and
visible holy Creature, the Son of God and Man in ONE Person.

5. And as the greatest and least, yes, the total fulness of the Divine
Substance in the kingdom of Heaven, from the least to the greatest, here upon
Earth, in the Flesh of the least of all and most despised and unworthy,
generated, in the Holy divine Unity, such a Man and little child; which is
equally in the Most high highness of all, the great Triune GOD and LORD.

6. This Perfect holy Seed and Word of God, in one holy pure undefiled Person,
God and Man, in the union of the woman, Body, and Soul, through the Faith out
of God, and this his holy Seed, regenerated, viz: the right Bridegroom, which
has united and taken to himself the Bride of all faithful, good divine holy
Flesh and Blood in his holy humane Person.

7. Concerning which the faithful witness, John the Baptist, and Forerunner
of Christ, mentions this; John 3. 29.
He that has the Bride is the Bridegroom.

8. In this perfect total divine, total humane holy substance, in one Person,
has this Triune God and Man CHRIST JESUS, delivered his wife or woman of his
Body, yes faithful Body and Soul to and in a Masculine and Feminine Person,
who from the beginning to the end of the World, have put their FAITH and trust
in him, in this his holy becoming Man or Incarnation; from all Sin, Death
Devil Hell world, and ALL worldly Lust of the Flesh and of the Eye, temporal
and Eternal Damnation, through his holy Passion dying and blood shedding.

9. And through his Innocent Death, has rescued, from the Guilty Death and
sinful will, and out of the shameful Kingdom of the abominable Satan Thief
Liar and Murtherour, and set us in his own kingdom of Glory, with himself, to
the Eternal Endless Joy and holy peace, out of the Eternal Satanical
sadness, misery, anguish, necessity, disquietnesse, hatred, envy and enmity of
the mischievous Devils, yes set us in the Eternal rest and blessedness or
Salvation.

10. Now as this Perfect Triune Seed and word of God, the total Col: 2. 5.
fulness of the Deity, in visible union of the Humane yet faithful Nature, a
little Infant has been and appeared, which according to the testimony of the
Scripture like other faithful Children, grew to visible palpable, greatness,
and was received to wisdom, Luke 2. 52.
Age and Grace or favor with God and faithful Men.

11. Which also the most holy high divine Triune Majesty, exalted in and to
himself, from hours days and years, in his visible Holy Person: Gloriously,
and also at last here upon Earth visibly, through his holy innocent Suffering
and Dying, Joyful Resurrection and Ascension, Heb: 2. 10. Chap: 5. 9.
made PERFECT: and himself presented for a perfect Man or Husband of his total
Bride, all the faithful Holy Flesh and Blood, of his total Church or
Congregation, in holy undivided Eternal Unity.

12. And as he was from the beginning of the world, in all Saints, his Woman or
Wife, and faithful Flesh and Blood, viz: a child, and Son of God, of the
Faithful Flesh and Blood of his woman's Seed, always by the Serpents seed, the
unfaithful wicked world, slain persecuted despised scorned and put to Death:
in which regard also the Death of all Saints was before the Lord, very highly,
dearly and preciously Esteemed.

13. So he has also in his divine fulness, and perfect Seed and word of God,
the pure faithful woman's and Virgins Son, God and Man in one Person, the
right Seed Son and Word of God, of the perfect faithful Flesh and Blood, the
total persecution enmity hatred and envy, of the abominable Satanicall
Serpents Seed, of the woeful Devil, (substantially united in all unfaithful
unrepentant children of the world) has Math: 8. 17.
taken upon him, for the sake of the redemption of all the faithful of his
body and holy woman.

14. And through his innocent suffering and dying; has paid the penalty and
debt of all the Sins of the world on his most holy body and woman: reconciled
it with the Deity in himself; overthrown all Enmity between God and Man; and in
and according to this his most holy total or UNIVERSAL Redemption, through
his guiltless Cross, with and in divine union through God, and out of the
infancy to a perfect Man presented himself to his total holy Church or
Congregation.

15. In, and with, which, he now according to his most holy prediction, Hosea
2. Hosea 2. 19.
I will Espouse my self with thee in Eternity; I will betroth my self with
thee in Grace and Mercy; Yes, in the Faith I will unite and bind my self with
thee: with this his holy, unreproveable undefiled Church and perfect Bride and
most holy Sulamith: Cant: 6. 13.
Canticles: Reconcileth and espouseth in Eternity.

16. In which he now according to his own most holy revelation of himself here
upon Earth: Esaiah 9. Esaiah 9. 6.
The Eternal Father, in an undivided Person, God and Man, ONE Eternal
Generatour, TRIUNE God and Lord, yes ALL in ALL, his beloved total perfect
Bride, his holy body and woman, wherein he Eternally generateth his holy Seed,
his holy Word, Will, Work and Performance, substantially livingly and
powerfully.

17. And to his Eternal praise, laud and honor, in this his holy Church, holy
Jerusalem and perfect City, of the perfect appearing divine Peace, which is
kept in Heaven, but now on Earth, in this ending ceasing Last time of the
world; manifests himself in the Eternal Unity of his body and woman, the
undefiled, untransitory unfadable Inheritance.

18. And the receiving his holy kingdom and Dominion according to the Testimony
of the Holy Scripture. Dan: 7. Daniel 7. 27. Luke 1. 33.
under the whole Heaven, in his Saints, his united woman, and Eternally ruling
it, to be openly proclaimed.

19. The Bride the Woman, of all faithful Flesh and Blood, according to the
Testimony of the Scripture. Revelations 22. has called; Come LORD JESU: the
Bridegroom and Man Christ appears, and says in the unity of his Wife or
Woman, Exodus 33. 14. Psalm. 132. 13, 14. Esaiah 14. 3, 7. 2 Cor. 6. 16. Rev. 21.
3.
Here I am, Here I am, Here will I dwell, this is my Rest Eternally.

20. Here thou will with the beloved woman of all faithful Flesh and Blood, in
divine unity of thy Man, with this Scripture Explanation, for further holy
consideration, in and with thy united Bridegroom, according to thy desire, for
Love and divine will, acknowledge and receive this.

21. In which, the Triune highly praised Son and Word of God, the fulness
of the Deity, generated from Eternity, the most holy seed of the Woman from the
beginning of the World, after the Fall of Adam and Eve, as also the regenerated
new faithful flesh and blood, the woman in that which is in Part, and perfect
holy substance is discovered to thee and manifested: to the Eternal and in
Eternal unchangeable Union.

22. NOT Tinctured, according to the Cabalisticall, Theophrasticall,
Roso-Crucian kind; and transmuted out of the unfaithful Substance into the
Faithful.

23. But according to the Testimony of the Scripture, a New Birth, not out of
the old sinful Substance, but in the Center and inward Heart, in the Love of
the divine voice, a new beginning, a New Heart, a New Flesh and Blood, a New
faithful Person as to Body and Soul, a Faith, not born out of the unbeleef but
out of God.

24. A Body, a Woman, a Man, an unity of the Woman, a Seed, a faithful visible
good Substance of God, A Christ, a Lord, a God, a Spirit Substantially,
opperatively, livingly, powerfully and actively, the selfsubsisting Eternal
ONE only blessedness or salvation, an 1 Pet: 1. 4.
undefiled, unfadable, untransitory, inheritance, reserved in Heaven.

25. But now in this Last Time revealed or manifested to all, over all, through
all, and in all faithful, with himself the Triune Eternal God, an Eternal
REST, and holy City and habitation of the highest of all and lowest of All, in
Heaven and upon Earth; which is and is called in All Eternal Eternity,
according to the Testimony of Scripture, of Ezekiel the last Chapter: A Wedding
City.

Here is the LORD, Psalm. 48. 1, 2. Very greatly and highly to be praised is The
Mountain SION; the fair Branch, with which the whole Land is Comforted.

Yours always willingly. A. V. E. Esaiah Stiefell.

HEre follows My Answer upon this Fourth Point of the Fourth Text.
1. T Fourth Point, I would even leave unexplained, if it were produced by the
Author in a right understanding: but he jumbleth all together, and sticks
his erroneous meaning therein, and makes much more a Confusion of it, then a
right explanation: But seeing I have explained the contents of it above almost
in every particular, I will therefore only expound the chief matters, and
extract the Erroneous Opinions out of his Confusion, for the sake of the Reader.

2. Concerning the becoming Man or Incarnation of Christ, concerning which the
E. S.
Author here mentions, That the Seed of the Holy Trinity in the Total
divine Substance, is become Man or Incarnate in the Total Holy Perfect,
totally united with the Deity, virgin MARY, and has taken HER Flesh and Soul
upon him, and so made MARY the Genetrix of God, viz: the holy word of God, as
he writes: and that MARY was before new born in the Faith, e er she was
impregnate or with Child with the Savior.

3. This needs yet a sharper explanation and exposition; and it had stood this
Master in hand, that will needs be Perfect and Omniscient, to have unsolded
this Mystery, and not to have confused it so, that a man cannot know what he
understands thereby; but only that a Man may see his secret in sown Grain or
Seed, spring up therein.

4. He will not herewith satisfy the seeking Mind, which enquireth after the
Ground; and lead him into the Center of Nature, he must put on other Stieffeln,
or Boots, if he will ride with Christ's Spirit over Death and Hell; and say,
how Gods Anger is quenched, Death broken to pieces, and the Devils Kingdom IN
Man destroyed.

5. His explanation is much more erroneous, and an obscuring the understanding
of the seeking Mind, than an Expounding. He h^nteth some high Points concerning
the manner of the becoming Man, or Incarnation of Christ; and produces none.

6. He mentions that MARY was totally sanctified and Perfect before CHRIST
was conceived: Now if the Faith could have attained and have discovered the
Perfection, and Totally have new Generated Man, that he had been united with
and in God in Body and Soul, in Total perfect holiness: then Christ had come
in vain.

7. And his suffering and Death had not been profitable to us, if the FAITH,
could have broken the Anger of God, also Death and Hell, and have appeased the
Angry Father, and have quite taken away the abomination in the vanity of the
Flesh.

8. Also if CHRIST, viz: the Word of God; had totally inwardly and outwardly
taken to himself a holy and perfect Body and Soul upon Earth, wherein had he
broken Death? And in WHAT Body had he taken on himself, the SINS of All Men?
And in what Body then has he dyed to Sin? WHAT Body became a Curse on the
Cross?

9. If it had been only the holy Perfect Body: then would Gods holiness have
made it self a Curse, and our Restitution had been only a Sacrifice, which
might well have been done in the Faith, or through the Judaicall Sacrifice; O
it must needs be an Evil God, who will not suffer himself to be appeased,
unless he revenge himself upon his Perfect holy Substance.

10. Else, why should he lay all SIN upon one holy perfect Man? and cause his
fierce wrath to be shown upon him? and so Revenge himself? such an
understanding this gives, if we say, Mary was in the Faith, in flesh and
blood, in body and soul, totally perfect; and totally united with the Holy
Divine Substance.

11. But seeing the Omniscient E. S.
Author, here spoils his breath: therefore we will here in part, a little
blow up our sparkle, and unfold the Mystery better.

12. King David said: In Sin was I born, and in Sin did my Mother conceive me;
and this David it is, out of whom MARY was born, viz: out of the Seed of David;
of the Seed of Joachim her father, and Anna her Mother.

13. Now if MARY had attained in the Faith, the highest Perfection, why not
also David, and the Patriarchs? in whom was the Holy Ghost as well as in MARY.

14. And though this E. S.
Author indeed determines, that they were totally Holy and Perfect, yet their
Sin and Mortallity, moreover their Infirm life, in Sickness, Care,
perplexity and necessity, will not permit that, in which they all lived in the
Curse and abomination, in the vanity of the Earthly Flesh: which abomination,
in their dying, was first broken and ceased as to them.

15. In the Abomination of the vanity, there is not by far, any total
perfection, but Sin and Death; as David witnesses of himself, as also all
the Patriarchs.

16. But concerning MARY and CHRIST this is the true, understanding: MARY was
the Limit of the Covenant of God in Paradise, instituted after the Fall; That
Covenant stood in the true Image, which faded or disappeared in Adam, when he
manifested or revealed the vanity in his outward Flesh.

17. Concerning which God said: Gen: 2. 17.
The day that thou shall eat of the Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil, viz:
of the vanity, thou shall dye the Death; which also instantly came to pass; he
dyed to the divine world, and awakened to the Earthly world in the vanity,

18. For, the Soul, viz: the true Life of the heavenly substantiality, entered
with its Desire, into the Abomination; then the Divine Light departed from the
Image of the heavenly Substantiality; and now it stood in Death as a Nothing:
and this true Image it is which God from Eternity has beheld with his holy
Spirit in the wisdom, but without Substance, which he created into Substance,
that is, brought Substance into this Image, from the Three Principles.

19. But when the Spirit of the Three Principles, viz: the true Soul, went from
its Eternal Image of the purity into the Dan: 9. 27. Matthew: 24. 15. Mark 13.
14. Rev. 21. 27.
Abomination of vanity, viz: into the Earthly Substance; and awakened the same
in the Forms of Nature, and manifested it in the Flesh; then the fair Image
disappeared, and stood again in the hiddennesse, at its Eternal Limit, without
knowledge and perception of the Earthly Adam in Abomination.

20. But seeing Gods purpose was, that this fair Similitude of God, should
stand Eternally before him in Substance, as a beloved Scene of his Joy, and a
Similitude of the Eternal Substance, and Spirit; therefore he promised to move
himself yet once, and with his highest Love and Humility: viz: in the Center
of the sweet Love, in the word of his Sound, to manifest the Image in Substance
again.

21. Now in MARY lay the disappeared Substance in the Covenant, this was the
dry Rod of Aaron, which grew again in One Night, and bare Almonds, as is to be
read in Moses.

22. Now when the Angel came to MARY, and brought her the Message, that she
should be impregnate with Child and generate or bear the Savior of the World,
though indeed she wondered how it should come to pass, yet she said, Luke 1.
38.
Behold I am the Maidservant of the Lord, let it be done as thou have said;
that is, she gave up her will and desire into Gods will, he should do what he
would.

23. And in this Point, has the Center of the voice of God, according to the
deepest Love of the hiddenness of God, in the Image of the disappeared
substance, with the Introduction of the divine heavenly substance of the
Paradise and Element, and all whatsoever the Deity in the Holiness contains;
manifested it self in the Natural seed of MARY.

24. Understand in the seed of MARY, of her spirit and Flesh, wherein lay the
souls and bodies Essence, viz; in Venus'es Matrix in the woman's seed, as it
was promised in Paradise, also to Abraham, and to David.

25. Now understand us aright, what the clear Deity, has received to it
self; not Marys sinful Seed, in which, death became broken on the Cross;
indeed it had received it to it self but in another Principle.

26. The pure Holy Deity, was always from Eternity in Eternity, surrounded
with the substance of the Heaven in the inward, viz. with the Holy substance:
that very holy substance, has the voice of the holy Deity, with the Moving of
the Word; introduced into Marys disappeared Substance, understand into the
Seed of Mary; and united it self with Maryes substance, in the Covenant of
God.

27. For, John the 3. he says; Joh: 3 13.
None goes to Heaven but the son of Man who is come from Heaven; also, I am
gone forth and Come out from God into this world: Now the clear Deity needs
no coming for it is in all places before hand, it needs only to Manifest it
self to or in the ^^ace: and all whatsoever comes, that is substance; but God
in his Trinity is a spirit without substance, as to what he is solely in the
Deity.

28. Therefore, when God would move and Manifest himself in his Covenant, in
Maryes heavenly disappeared substance, then came he with the substance, and
manifested himself, in the united substance; he united his coming substance
with the Humane substance, understand, with the heavenly humane substance.

29. For when God Created his Image Adam, wherein he dwell and manifest or
reveal himself, then could his holiness be manifested in NO other substance,
THEN in the Heavenly holy in the pure Element and Paradise.

30. This he received again in Marys Seed, into his holy living substance,
and in that substance was Christ in the Faith of Mary, become conceived by the
Holy spirit, for the Faith which demerseth it self into Gods will, that
demerseth also the seed in the Covenant, into the holy Living substance.

31. Here again was the living holy conjunction with or between the Substance
of Mary and of God, and in this united substance Numb. 17. 8.
Sprouted the Rod of Aaron forth, that was the deepest Love of God in the
Center of the Holy Trinity, whose Name is called JESUS.

32. Now observe further, in this Seed of Mary, which disappeared in it self,
and was not manifested to the Soul, lay in in the soulish property, but
according to the feminine property in Venus'es Matrix, according to the first
Principle, according to the Fathers property, Manifested, viz: a living Essence
in the seed of Mary.

33. Which Essence otherwise in the Masculine Conjunction with the Springing up
of the life, in the Exit of the Fourth Month, affords a living Creaturely
Soul: This soulish seed has also received to its self, the Divine Word, but
in its own, in the soulish seeds, Principle.

34. For, the soulish seed has always the First Principle, according to the
Fathers property according to the Fire-world; and the Second Principle has the
Sons property according to the Light-world.

35. Yet now, the Father is another Person then the Son; And so it is here
also to be known, or acknowledged; the soulish property, has its original
from Adam, out of the Eternal Nature, out of the First Principle; it has the
Center to the inward and outward Nature, and it is it self, that, in it self,
in its life's Forms, for a Fire and Light.

36. This soulish property, has, the Name JESUS received to it self, after a
Creaturely kind and manner, as an Eternal Espousall: but NOT so to understand
that the holy power JESU, and the souls Natural substance, and ONE in the
Essence.

37. As little as fire and light are one, though indeed they stand in One
Birth, yet they have a twofold source or quality; Thus truly in JESU, the
source or quality is totally Holy and God himself; but in the souls property,
lay the Worm of the Kindled Anger of God; which God, with this his holy Love
out of JESU, would quench and put to death.

38. And in this soulish property, was the Abomination existed, whereinto the
Devils Imagination had woven it self: This soulish property, was tempted in
the wilderness, to try whether it would totally give it self up into JESUS,
viz. into Gods love, and eat of Gods Holiness.

39. And in this Abomination of the soul, (in which the life's forms were
Elevated, and gone forth out of the equal agreement, every Form into its
proper own, out of which the Enmity and opposite will existed,) has CHRIST
shed his holy Blood of the Image of the holy heavenly substantiality, and
introduced it thereinto with the sweet love JESUS: whence the fierce wrath in
(...) life's Forms, of the soul, in the Angry Fathers property, became drowned.

40. For when the altogether sweet Love, in the Holy Blood, gave it self up
into the fierce wrathful anger of the soul; then the fierce wrath trembled or
shook before this great Holiness, Sweetness and Love, so that its own right
brake in the Trembling Crack, to pieces, and became transmuted into the
Kingdom of Joy.

41. So that the Anger became transmuted into another Will, and all properties
of the self-hood, of the Eternal Nature in the self-hood, became all ONE in
this sweet Love for the Love fulfilled or satisfied them all.

42. And then the abomination and the Enmity against Gods holiness Ceased: for
the abomination had dyed in the Crack or terror of Death, which rose up into
the Joyfulness: and now the souls Will was called; LORD GOD, Thee will we
praise.

43. Now understand us Further: With the receiving of the soulish property,
JESUS also has received or assumed, the outward humane Fleshly substance, in
the seed of Mary, viz. the outward Humanity, the Third Principle,

44. But not into the Image, or into the seed of the holiness, in JESU, but
after the Manner, as God is in the World, and yet the World is not God, but
they hang in ONE substance one to another, and yet they sever themselves in
themselves in TWO Principles.

45. The soul hangs to the outward World, to the Flesh, the nearest, for the
Soul has (...) THREE Principles if it be Holy: if not, then it has only ^WO
manifest to it, and the Holy is hidden to it.

46. And in the outward fleshly seed, lay the Death, and the abomination
before Gods holiness, THAT became as a Curse banged to the Cross, and the
death of Sin in this abomination became drowned with the holy Blood: and the
Outward Mystery of the outward Body and Life Redeemed from the abomination and
Curse, and totally Sanctified, and changed into Gods unblemished Image.

47. In this outward Flesh, lay the Evil child, which Adam generated, when he
dyed as to God; here the evil child became taken in again into Gods Love;
for Isaiah says; Isai. 53. 4. Math. 8. 17. 1 Pet. 2. 24.
He took ALL Our sins UPON himself, not into himself, not into the JESUS
or CHRIST, wh^ was manifested in the holy Image, but UPON himself in the
perished or corrupt Adam.

48. The accursed Adam, HUNG to the Cross, as a Curse, and THAT, Jesus Christ
REDEEMED with his Innocent suffering and with the shedding of his Blood: Adams
Body dyed on the Cross, and CHRIST borne out of JESUS, in the Woman's sanctified
seed, Tinctured it, and 1 Pet: 1. 21.
sprinkled it with his precious Love -blood.

49. At which the Curse in the EARTH trembled or quaked, because this Judgment
came upon it: And the SUN, did hide or withdraw its shining at or for this
Judgment of this Holiness, at or before this NEW shining Sun, Math: 27, 45. 46.
From the Sixth Hour to the Ninth, which is and signifies Adams sleep, when
he slept in the Sixth Hour, and in the Three Hours. Three Days.
Ninth Hour, that is on the THIRD Day of the outward World, awakened or arose
with his now prepared WIFE or woman.

50. Now in the Or Bounds. Note what the Limit of the Covenant is.
Ninth Hour the outward SUN with its shining Sprung forth or arose again; and
in the Death of Christ, the Paradisicall SUN, [arose or sprung forth] which
Adam in Christ's Resurrection discovered or beheld again.

51. Now observe us Further concerning Marys BLESSING, For the Angel said to
her, Thou blessed among all Women, the LORD is with thee.

52. In this Mary, stood the highly blessed limit of the Covenant of God,
through which all the Holy Patriarchs, and Prophets have spoken: viz. through
Gods voice, which causes it self to be heard through the Aim Scope, Mark.
Limit of this Covenant.

53. For the Covenant was inher^^ed all along from one to another, and in Mary
it stood at the ^^^MIT, that is, at the End of the Manifestation or Revelation;
wherein JESUS would Manifest himself with the CHRIST, viz. with the anointed
of God.

54. And Now the Hour of the Revelation or Manifestation came, wherein God
would manifest himself, in this his holy Covenant. And God sent the Angelical
Message to HER, and she gave up her will into Gods will; so that the highly
precious Name JESUS, manifested it self in her seed of the disappeared Image,
and then also the word of Power, awakened her own disappeared Image of the
second Principle, in HER Body and Life.

55. For the seed of the disappeared Image, which became thus propagated
without life; that qualified or operated with the substance, whence it was
generated; and THIS was her high Blessing before or above ALL Women, from Eve
to that time in that she attained in the Inward Man the holy Life IN the
disappeared Image.

56. For JESUS pressed or penetrated out of his own received or assumed
substance, into the Mother of the seed; but in HER outward Flesh, as also in
the Soul, was the Sin and Death; which must also with Christ's holy
bloud-shedding, be overthrown.

57. For CHRIST alone was the Serpent bruiser or Crusher, even IN his Natural
Mother MARY: He is with the Soul the first borne from the Dead, to Gods
Glory: His soul was the first, as a Door to the Re-opening; and through THIS
Door we must all Enter in.

58. MARY in her outward Body was Mortal: as also CHRIST according to the
outward Humanity; Christ Lived in the outward Man in the Dominion of the Four
Elements, in the source or quality of Heat and Cold, as WE do.

59. But the ABOMINATION which Adam inherited to us, that he received NOT to
himself from Man's or the Masculine Seed, but in the Woman's or the Feminine
Seed, as a BURDEN upon him which he must Isai: 53. 6. Math. 8: 17.
Bear.

60. This was his outward received or assumed humanity a Vessel for it, NOT
that a Man may any way say, that CHRIST has wrought any sin and abomination
with his outward Body, NO, that COULD NOT be.

61. For he took on himself, the First Principle of the foulish property in
Venus'es Matrix in the woman's seed, understand, in the Property of Eve; for Eve
was the child that Adam should have generated Magically; but seeing he awakened
the abomination in the Center of the Genetrix, therefore that could not be done.

62. Eve was Adams beloved and fair well relishing sweet-savoured Rose Garden
and Paradise, when she was yet in Adams Essence, and Now that very fair
Rose-Garden became Manifest again in the humanity of CHRIST.

63. THUS NOTE Math. 8. 17.
he took the Abomination of SIN, upon this Image in the Flesh; as if he were
Adam; and yet was NOT: but in the Woman's or Feminine Seed he was THAT, and Not
in the Man's or Masculine Seed.

64. He took the MAN'S Sin on to the highly blessed Limit, in the WOMAN'S
outward Seed, and brake in pieces the Man and the Woman, and brought again the
virginity, viz: TWO Tinctures into ONE unseparable Eternal Conjunction in the
Love, no more in the Desire after SUBSTANCE, as it was in Adam, but only in the
Desire after POWER.

65. The TWO Tinctures generate NO more Substance, viz: a Propagation; but holy
power, and relish or Savor, and Gods

66. And this is the information concerning Mary and Christ's Humanity plainly
unsolded; and not so covered as this E. S.
Author has done, that a Man cannot understand; how it is come into Substance.

67. But that this E. S.
Author presses so vehemently upon the New Regeneration of the Old
Patriarchs, and will have THEM New Born in Christ and totally Perfect; by that
I see very well what he means by it and under it; even that HE also may be
esteemed totally Holy and totally PERFECT.

68. For, if the Old Patriarchs have put on Christ, when as yet he was not A
Man.
Man, how much more, HE, seeing Christ is now become Man; which I would
heartily fain allow him if it were but True; and if it were not so, that it
might yet be so.

69. Why does he not set the Apostles of Christ, and THEIR Successors Imitators
or followers, in the humanity of Christ; as he set the Old Patriarchs before
Christ's Birth? Even this is it, that he might bring in this Schism or
Sectarisme, that God has created ALL Creatures in CHRIST his express Image,
and Redeemed them ALL.

70. Which revealed express Image, he will have to be only in those that are
HIS Followers; that Men might not thrust him, with THIS outward Tabernacle; out
of Christ's Image.

71. For if he be created in Christ's Image in Adam, and God now do reveal the
same in Christ's humanity again, and that he be proceeded out of that very
Image, and stands therein; then he can not Fail; he is CHRIST inwardly and
outwardly.

72. If it were certainly true, and that the Old Patriarchs had not also the
Image of Sin on them, that he could show they had been totally Holy, then in
the Old Patriarchs there had been NO Transmutation of their Bodies; also NOT in
the Apostles, according to the outward Flesh.

73. Christ's Apostles and their Successors Imitators or followers, have put on
Christ in their Angelical Image in the holy Flesh: but their Outward Body was
sinful, and an ABOMINATION; viz: in the Turba The outward Abomination in the
Flesh, MUST Dye; and enter into Christ's Death, that Christ, who is arisen from
the Dead, may raise up their outward Body, into himself.

74. The Outward Life generated from MARY, is RESERVED to the NOTE What is
reserved to the Resurrection of the Dead.
Resurrection of the Dead, when the Man in the VIRGINITY shall arise.

75. But if this E. S.
Author be Perfect, then is he neither Man nor Woman, How then does he beget
children of his Wife? The Old Patriarchs have put on the Covenant of Christ;
and CHRIST the Man, became put on in the Word of Promise, pointing at the
future fulfilling.

76. God reconciled himself in the Covenant, and therefore they sacrificed,
that Gods Imagination, which entered into the promised Covenant, might receive
their Imagination in the sacrifice, into the Covenant of Promise, through the
Limit wherein God became Man: they were in the Covenant elected to be children,
in which Covenant God became Man, and fullfilled the Covenant with the
Humanity, which was done in the Seed of MARY and not in the Bondage or
Servility.

77. The Old Patriarchs, did not put on Christ in the Flesh, but the Covenant
to the Filiation and to the Resurrection of the Dead; but now WE put on
Christ's Humanity, for the Covenant is fulfilled with the Humanity.

78. But the Kingdom of this world does NOT put on Christ, for he said; NOTE
the Resurrection of the outward Body of this world.
My Kingdom is not of this world; The Kingdom of this world in the Flesh;
puts on CHRIST'S Death and dying, it should dye in Christ's death, and put on
HIS Resurrection out of the GRAVE; That the Man which dies according to Flesh,
in the Limit which God has set or appointed, viz: at the Last DAY; should
ARISE out of Christ's Death.

79. He has given us his Death and Burial for a REST, where the OUTWARD Body
rests from the working of vanity, as in a meek soft Sleep.

80. But what this E. S.
Author sets down concerning the opposition of the total fleshly Man; that
the Earthly Man which he calls the Serpents Seed, despises, contemns,
derideth and persecuteth Christ in his Members and continually crucifieth and
puts them to death, together with Christ; that is so, and cannot otherwise
be.

81. For when Christ is become born, then the Man of Sin in his self-hood
MUST dye: the Faithful Man, becomes, himself, an Enemy of his own Sins in
the Flesh: the Faithful Man according to the Heavenly Substance, is indeed yea
undeniably the Bride of CHRIST, in whom Christ dwells, that I contradict not.

82. But that this E. S.
Author sets it down, that Christ was born a poor despised Infant in the
highest Lowliness out of MARY; and yet was equal in the Height of the Triune
God and LORD? there he should better explain it, and show; wherein he is the
Triune God and LORD.

83. Not according to the Creature, viz: according to our Flesh and Soul, which
is Eternally under or beneath God, but according to his Divine, and according
to the Heavenly Substantiality and Corporeity; wherewith he came from Heaven,
and took our Substance upon him.

84. The divine Substance is unmeasurable, BOTH according to Spirit, and
Corporeal Substance; but our humane Substance is measurable: to our humane
Substance, the Power or Authority is given, but to the divine, nothing CAN be
given.

85. God will judge the humanity, through the voice of the humanity of Christ,
so that the humanity of Christ according to our humanity, is the Instrument to
do it with; Not that our humanity in Christ's Person and Creature, has the
power or authority out of it self.

86. It is a given power or authority from the Father; As Christ himself
says; Math: 28. 18.
ALL Power or Authority in Heaven and upon Earth, is given me of my Father,
Matthew: 28. Not to the self-hood of the Creature, that the Creature, is as
Omnipotent and self powerful, as GOD; but that the CREATURE, is the Instrument
whereby the Spirit of God will Note what shall judge and separate at the Last
Day.
Judge and separate ALL things.

87. The Spirit of the Holy Trinity, IN the Creature is the will, and the
Creature is the Instrument of performance, as through a clear visible open
Image and Substance; seeing God has manifested himself through the Creature,
therefore through the Creature also he produces a Manifested or revealed
authority or power and Dominion.

18. As an Artist fitteth an Instrument of Music, and himself strikes or
plays upon it, that it may sound and give melody to him, SUCH as he would sain
HEAR: Thus also in like manner the Creature is Gods Instrument upon which God
strikes or plays, and has introduced his own sound out of the divine voice,
into this Creaturely Lute, which sounds and Melodizeth to him, (...) (...)
will.

89. This Lute does not play upon it self; for CHRIST says also: John 5. 19.
All whatsoever the Son sees the Father do, that the Son does also: John
^^. ^^.
And the word which I speak to you, is not mine, but the Fathers who dwells
in me; Also, John 10. 30.
I and the Father are One, John 14. 28
but the Father is greater than I.

90. The Father is the Eternal Beginning, and the Son is the Eternal Begun,
viz: the Manifestation of that Spirit which is called Father, and the Holy
Spirit is that, which the Father through the Son Manifests, with the
Eternal outspoken wisdom, out of the sound, which the Father with the Son
Generateth.

91. The Son is the Fathers sound or word; and the Creature is the clear or
Loud manifested word, through which the Father in the Eternal Generating of
his holy word, sounds or speaks: (...) hear the Creature, viz: the voice of
the Person CHRIST; then I hear what the Father, in his holy sound in the exit
of his Holy Spirit manifests and expresses in and with the Creature.

92. Here it is not called, beloved Woman or Wife, with or as to the Creature;
but Gods Image, Gods Manifestation; Gods manifest Dominion; Gods own Doing or
self-acting; viz: the invisible and incomprehensible, acting through a visible
comprehensible image and Substance of his own propriety.

93. For without God there is Nothing; HE alone is ALL; but all whatsoever is
perceptible or comprehensible, that is only an Image of the Invisible Divine
Substance, wherewith the Invisible has Manifested or revealed it self.

94. Therefore the Creature should NOT say of it self, that it self is any
thing; but introduce its ability into THAT out of which it is originated, that
it may be the Omniscient Gods work and play or Melody in his Love; that it may
do what he will; and SO God be 1 Cor. 15. 28.
ALL in ALL.

95. And if God will do any thing through his Creature, and manifest his will;
then speaks not the Creature from or of it self, but says, NOTE the Prophets.
Thus says the LORD, thus has the Lord spoken, this is the Command of the
Lord: and not esteem it self at all to be the speaking Word or divine Sound:
also not say with this outward Body; that the outward Body is espoused with
Gods Holiness, as this E. S.
Author sets it down.

96. The inward Man is indeed, together with or in Gods Harmony, through which
God sounds and Sings, and is a Wedding-Place or City, of God: but all
whatsoever is Creaturely is tinder or beneath that which has made the
Creature: The Creature is Gods Artifice or workmanship, which he has made
through his wisdom: for it is the Nature, it stands in the Principle, viz:
in a Beginning, but God stands in NONE: Heb. 7. 3.
God is without all Beginning, his desire makes Beginning.

97. But what this E. S.
Author says concerning the woman of Faithful Flesh and Blood, is not spoken
plain enough to be understood; For Flesh and Blood believes not, but the
Spirit; Flesh and Blood is a House of the Spirit.

98. And what he also sets down concerning the Man CHRIST who is in the
Marriage with the Woman; cannot at all be spoken of the outward Flesh and Blood
of this [Life] time: for Christ is himself the Woman and the Man, God and Man.

99. Of the Inward Man, it may WELL be spoken, that is in the Marriage with
Christ, but the Outward is in the Marriage with the Outward World, and with the
vanity and Sin, as also with Death and Corruptibility, weakness sickness
and Misery, THAT is called Eve, and not the Marriage City of God, in Gods
holiness, as this Author says it is.

100. But a waste Tabernacle wherein the Spirit is perished, understand the
Outward Spirit, which dwells in Flesh and Blood, not that we would or should,
DESPISE, the Spirit, viz: the Soul of the Great world which gives Life to all
Creatures; but in the Curse of the vanity, viz: in SIN, lies the Evil
Child, which Adam awakened and manifested.

101. But what kind of ^^illen.
Whimseyes this E. S.
Author has, that He will not allow the Divine Tincturing and Transmutation
to consist with the New Birth, and contemns and rejects ALL that: it cannot
be enough discerned why he gives forth so altogether Blind and absurd Matters.

102. He tells us of a total New strange Creature, which is generated in
CHRIST: if that were so, then we could not at all say, that Christ had taken on
himself our Flesh and Blood, Much less the Soul: then also he might not at all
be called Gen: 3. 15.
The Woman's Seed, How should we then be partakers of him?

103. Has not Christ taken on him my Creature? how then has he in my Flesh,
slain Death, and quenched the Anger of God? but if he has taken on him, my
Creature: what kind of strange New Creature should enter into me.

104. I know of no strange one: It were directly contrary to the Article, Note
the Resurrection is a Transmutation.
of the Resurrection of the Dead: I must not speak of another Man, of another
Creature, but of a TRANSMUTATION of the Course stone into Gold; the unholy into
pure holiness.

105. If that must be done; then must the right Artist in ME Come; viz: the
Holy Spirit, with the divine Tincture, which is Christ's Blood, wherewith he
brake in pieces the vanity of our Humanity, and brought our right Life, forth
through Death.

106. I must be Tinctured or else I cannot be Transmuted; If Christ do not
Tincture me with his Blood; then my HOLY Paradise-LIFE remains faded or
disappeared in Death; but if he does Tincture ME, then the Holy Spirit in me
becomes stirring, who CAN, in Christ's Flesh and Blood, Transmute ME, according
to the Inward Paradise-Man.

107. God had not to do about a strange Creature, in that he became Man, but
about that which in Adam he created in Paradise; Job says Joh. (...)
In this MY Flesh shall I see GOD, and my Eyes shall see him and NOT another.

108. My Own Essence of the INWARD Man, is in this [Life] time tinctured and
Transmuted, and my OUTWARD Mortal Man, is Tinctured with Christ's Death: to
DYE, and the MYSTERY of the outward Man, viz: the Fifth Essence or QUINTESSENCE,
(understand the Outward Spirit WITHOUT the Abomination, wherein the Four
Elements stand in Equal agreement in One Will and Substance) is Tinctured for
the Last release, and Resurrection of the Dead; which What will be done in the
Last (...).
transmutation will be effected at the Last DAY.

109. This Man Imageth or frames a Fantasy in himself and Thinks, he is no
more what he was, his Nature is totally gone from him, he is totally a New
Creature inwardly and outwardly, and that is totally false and groundless.

110. His earthly Man is not Christ's Bride, in Gods holiness, but he is
Christ's Bride in Christ's Death, so far as he is capable or partaker of that.

111. But while he will needs be Perfect and cursorily pass over Christ's
Death, and be already risen again in Christ's Death, he truly in the Self-hood
goes back with Christ's Death into the (...).

112. I wish him from my Heart, that his Body visibly were capable or partaker
of Christ's Death: for Gal. 2. 20.
in that I live in my self-hood, I do not rejoice, but I rejoice in this, that
I in my self-hood stand in CHRIST'S Death, and continually DYE.

113. And I wish, that I yet might totally dye to self-hood, that my self-hood
might be totally resigned up into God, and I be only an Instrument or Tool of
God, and knew nothing more of my Self-hood.

114. But that this E. S.
Author mentions, that he is altogether dead to self-hood, and is the
Glorious Type of Christ's Bride, which God would manifest upon Earth in this
Last Time, totally inwardly and outwardly, holy and PERFECT without vanity,
blemish or Sin, we would readily allow him to be so if he would sufficiently
assure us of it.

115. But upon his supposititions, insufficient, groundless, literal
demonstration, whereas yet he does not understand, How the Scripture speaks,
we shall not be able to believe him, unless we see the Paradise upon him, and
see that he is dead from the outward world, and do use it no more.

116. For no conceit avails, but Feeling by Experience and so (...): all the
while he lives in the vanity, and perplexeth himself in the vanity and is
affected with strife, we believe him NOT: neither can we believe him in regard
of Christ's word which warns us, that we should Matthew. 24. 4, 5.
beware of those that give forth themselves to be CHRIST.

117. And if one did go about in doing Miracles, and did live still in the
vanity in Evil and Good, yet then we must say, that he is a Mortal Man, even
though he were inwardly holy and Newborn in CHRIST.

118. The Golden Mountain which E. S.
he promises in this Tabernacle, the old Adam might or would readily allow and
put on, if it were possible, and that God would do so, with us.

119. Also we would very heartily esteem him for the Type and the first born of
the Adamicall Bodies, if it were he, that could manifest or perform so great a
promise upon OUR Mortal Bodies, or if he could but manifest it on HIS own.

120. But that he says, we can not see it on him; we should believe it, none
can assure us of it; I cannot believe him, unless he assure me of it; that I
may conceive it is true, else I take it to be an Imagination.

121. What the Spirit of GOD signifies concerning the Last Sion; has another
A. B. C. we understand it NOT to be with clarified NOTE
Transfigured, or Glorified Bodies, wherein the vanity shall be totally Dead;
but concerning the Fall of Babel and that the end belongs to the Beginning:
NOT the Two Tinctures turned into One, according to the OUTWARD Man; but we
understand Eve in the REPENTANCE, and in the simplicity, for the evil Lust or
Longing which SHE had.

122. E. S.
His marriage State or City, which he supposes to be, is only an Eve, his SION
is a Vale of Misery, in Care, Toil, Labor and Necessity; Gen: 8. 2^.
For, Winter and Summer, Day and Night, Seed time and Harvest, shall not cease,
as was said to Noah, till the Great and Terrible DAY of the Lord shall COME.

123. Also thus the Mountain of God, viz: SION, is in the whole world, where
there be honest virtuous people that fear and Love God: HE himself is IN the
Honest Men; the marriage City of GOD, must be in MAN; as also the Temple of
CHRIST, where the HOLY SPIRIT teaches.

124. We need no conceit, nor running up and down, the City of Gods Habitation
IS every where, where honest Men are together, as Christ says, Math: 18. 20.
Where TWO or THREE are met together in My Name, there am I in the midst
amongst them.

125. But seeing E. S.
he speaks of a visible holy Seed and woman of Christ, and will have that to
be totally without blemish, We desire to see a sign or token thereof, let him
Set that before us, that we may acknowledge it, and see it on him, and THEN we
will believe him.

126. And let him leave others whom God has gifted 1 Cor: 13. 9.
in Part, undisgraced; else we will say of him, that he has neither Part nor
Perfection, but only a bare Imagination, and Vain spiritual pride, which is
instigated by the driving of Satan; who fain would erect such a flattering
seeming Holiness.

127. Seeing he perceives that 2 Thessalonians: 2. 3.
the Man of Sin shall be revealed or manifested, therefore he will set such a
Glistering Chapel near it, That Sin might no more be known or acknowledged,
and that he might still, under such a Glistering Cloak have his hypocrisy and
Church, totally Blind in Sin.

128. For that is the Devils manner, when he sees that Sin in Man becomes
manifested or discovered, then he casts over Sin, (...) a fine Glistering
Trimmed or adorned Cloak; and gives it into (...) persuasion; that he is Holy
Perfect and Righteous.

129. Thus he lays the Man of Sin, in a Fine soft Bed, and covers him
with Christ's Purple Mantle, to try whether he might under such a cover sift and
betray him: Thus will he also do at this Time, for he observes that the Man of
Sin shall be manifested, and that Babel shall be discovered.

130. Therefore he comes very finely and Lovely Covered with a shining Luster
or appearance, and would cover the Adamicall evil child totally, that it
should no more be called sinful, it shall deny its sinful Name in the vanity,
and call it self totally Christ, and holy; and says, it is a Lie, if the
Earthly beastiall Man calls it self, after its own self Beastiall Property.

131. O beloved Brethren and fellow Members of Christ, all that read this, be
faithfully warned and admonished, cover NOT the Man of Sin with Christ's
Purple Mantle, and lay him not at all in his Bed of Best; but uncover him
continually before GOD, and cast him daily and hourly into the GRAVE, into
Christ's Death, CRUCIFY him without ceasing, all the while ye live in this
vanity of this Flesh.

132. NOTE Concerning the Resurrection.
Let him have no REST, hold him for your Enemy, who has devoured your Noble
Pearly Jewel, viz: the PARADISE; press generate or pierce him with Christ's
Death, that you may attain your Pearl again out of Christ's Death, in his
Resurrection out of this Tabernacle, where it lies shut up in Death:
acknowledge your selves only for poor SINNERS before GOD, and go continually
with the Prodigal lost, and yet returning: Son to the Father, and pray to him
for Grace.

133. Our whole life should be a continual RESISTANCE, (...) even a continual
SINNING: and though indeed the (...) Branch new generated or Born, IN Christ's
Spirit, (...); yet the Earthly Man IN Soul and Body, sins; and which
continually, to break or destroy the Noble Rose-Bud again; and altogether
obscure it.

134. The more, Divine OIL is introduced into the (...) Rose-Bud, out of the
Wounds and Death of CHRIST; the fresher and fairer it grows, and the fairer
it Blossomed.

135. Here is the Field, where the fruit grows, let man be persuaded to such
sluggishnesse, and to lie on such a soft Bed; as to think, he IS fairly grown
and quite or full BLOSSOMED; O, No, no by no means.

135. But continually without ceasing draw divine (...) self, in the Greatest
Humility from and out of Gods Love, (...) Honey, out of the fair Blossoms or
Flowers; for as soon as (...) cure or careless, and thinks he is HOLY Honey,
then the (...) brings to him Poison in the vanity, which the own-self (...)
own self Lust or Longing, sucketh into it self.

137. The Man that would fain grow and bear fruit in Gods Kingdom, can not do
better, then to suck all his power and virtue, which he will use for the
growing or Springing of his Life, through CHRIST'S Blood and Death, and
continually cast his vanity to the Ground, before the Truth and Clarity of God,
and continually be, as if he were a DYING, where he mightily presses on to the
Death of SIN.

138. * No City or place of REST, belongs to Sin and vanity; for so soon as
Sin Rests, THEN grows the desire to vain Lust or pleasure: But while the
Death and destroyer or Breaker in pieces is UPON it, then it dies, without
ceasing, away, from vain Lust or Pleasure, and the fair Rose-bud grows out of
this dying, which becomes carried in GODS Hand to a Joy and rejoicing of the
DEITY.

139. Dear Brethren, I have made this explanation out of a (...) mind; not at
all with intent, to scorn or disgrace the Author; for I know his miserable
confusednesse, more then he does himself, and wish him from my Heart, that he
will yet be humble, and know himself, that he yet stands in the Field or
Soil, where the fruit grows; and not boast himself before the time of fruit.

140. For most certainly and truly, there will be A SION, as I then; my self
Hope; that the Man of Sin will be manifested or revealed, and seek himself,
in GODS MERCY: then must follow a constant continual Repenting Life, wherein
Man knows and acknowledges himself to be in the (...), and continually
presses from vanity out from vain Lust and pleasing into Gods Mercy.

141. The poor sinful Man, must only with the poor Lazarus Lay himself at Gods
feet under his Table, and at his Door, and desire the Crummes from Gods Table,
and continually cloth himself in the Ganaanitish Woman, with Heart and total
Mind.

142. NO Flattery or Hypocrisy attaineth the Pearly Jewel, for it lies
buried in NO place, but in the Death of the Earthly MAN; THAT, must be gone,
and then it is manifested: the Adamicall Death must be changed into Christ's
Death, if any would find the Pearl of Christ.

143. CHRIST prayed to his Father, so that, he sweat a Bloody Sweat, when he
would brake or destroy Death in the Flesh. Now if we will be and his Children,
and be generated or born out of HIS Death, then (...) we also dye with him in
his Death, and continually introduce our (...) great desire into HIS Bloody
Sweat, and drown the awakened vain Lust and Pleasure, IN his Bloody Sweat.

144. It must be sincere and earnest, and not comforting and flattering
Hypocrisy, NOT to say to the Old Adam, Thou art Christ's Flesh: No, NO, only
Say, In me lies Sin and vanity, O God have Mercy upon Me in CHRIST thy dear
Son, and break and destroy my SIN and VANITY in thy Death; and bring me in
HIS victory and Resurrection forth out of Death.

145. Make thou Sin and Death, Nothing, and grow THOU in CHRIST forth out of
ME; bring my Soul forth out of the Jaws of Death and vanity, in CHRIST, that I
may (...) to THEE and NOT to my self.

146. Man in self-hood should ascribe no Divine Substance, or Thing to himself,
but in all things give the honor to God, and account himself in the Divine
Life to be nothing and untoward; and that all whatsoever is introduced into him
from the Divine power, he should offer it up to God again and say:

147. Rev. 4. 11.
LORD! Thou have Might to receive strength, power and wisdom, thine is the
honor; I will be nothing before thee: be thou dear GOD in ME, what thou (...)
be praised in thy power which thou (...) to me.

148. Also, a Man in this world, should (...)
NOT desire to KNOW HIS Holiness, but continually (...) of his Tree CHRIST,
and commit and leave it to the (...) of Twig or Branch THAT will generate out
(...).

149. And not at all present himself and say, Behold (...) death the Tree of
Christ: I am a Branch and grown (...) Bride of the Lamb in all the world, but
to (...) under Christ's Death, and leave himself to the (...) to be led to
Pasture among the Lambs.

150. Not lay about him as a Goat, and (...) Doar, and not let any Sheep More
enter in, (...) has done, in that he has very obstinately in a Treatise (...)
Doare of Grace against US, which truly is not the manner (...) Christ has
opened it for us: No Lamb desires to shut it (...) us.

151. This I mention to the Loving Reader faithfully and (...) him very
brotherly, as my fellow Member, yes in the (...) great humility, before God,
and his Children, to persevere, and go on, and not boast of the VICTORY in the
Flesh, all the while the Man of Sin still lives.

152. And John (...)
whosoever says he has NO Sin, he is a Liar, says John. But then when the
earthly Man, dies away totally, Sin has an End; and then we will Sing the
Song of the Driver, who held us captive, and also the Song of the Bride, SION;
in the Marriage City Jerusalem.

153. And that the (...)
Author says, Sin has clearly: Ceased on the Type of the Bride of Christ,
to the praise of God: this I would have to be understood concerning the true
Christianity, in the Children of Christ, concerning the Inward New Man in the
Spirit of Christ.

154. And this deceit should not be concealed from him by no means, that he
wills to cover the Man of Sin; moreover we would for that cause discover
the Evil Child, that he should be known or (...) of the world: Yes we would
FIX the Man of (...) on to the Cross of CHRIST; that the poor Sinner might
see him.

155. And not so boldly play with Christ's Purple Mantle under the Cover; which
belongs to the poor Converted Sinner, which (...) continual Repentance, and
especially to the Sinner that is captivated and hard held by the Devil,
against whom the Devil would shut the Door of GRACE.

156. Such a one should enwrap himself therein; and the strong who is strong in
Faith and knowledge, should cast about him the Mantle of Christ his Chief
Shepherd, and as a Lamb in (...); go among the Flock; and the Mantle which
Christ continually casts upon him, he should cast upon his brethren and
fellow Members.

157. And HELP to fight and wrestle IN them, with praying (...) and Life, that
Gods will be done in US, and his Kingdom (...) to US, and we bear fruit, as
ONE Only Tree, in (...) or Sprigs and Branches and show our Blossoms or (...)
before God and his Angels, and that we also may enjoy the Fruit ETERNALLY.

AMEN.
Finished the Sixth of April Anno 1622. Now ended this Translation out of the
German Language in Manuscript into English, this Saturday the 31. of December,
1659.

