THE PROPOSAL For the Raising of The Silver Coin OF ENGLAND, FROM 60 Pence in
the Ounce to 75 Pence, CONSIDERED; With the Consequences thereof.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Cumberland, at the Angel in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCVI.

The PROPOSAL for the Raising the Silver Coin of England from 60 Pence in the
Ounce to 75 Pence, considered; with the Consequences thereof.
THE protence for this is, That Bullion is bona side at this time worth six
Shillings and three Pence of the best of our English Money, though neither Worn
nor Clipped: Now if this is true, then It is now averred that Bullion in
Holland is but 5 s. 2 d. the Ounce.
the Consequence of it is, That an Ounce of Sterling Silver is made one
Shilling worse than it was before by having the King's Stamp put upon it, yet
this Ounce of Silver may again be reduced to Bullion as it was before for two
Pence.

This Assertion in the mean time may easily be confuted, by trying how much
Bullion or Spanish pieces of Eight may be had for a Milled five Shilling-piece
of full weight, for by that the trial is to be made, and not by clipped or
over-worn old Money; for the Refiner and Goldsmith will ever consider the weight
and fineness of the Money he is to take for his Plate or Bullion.

I believe it is very hard for human Understanding to conceive how an ounce of
Mill'd-mony of the Standard-allay should be made one Penny the worse by having
the King's Stamp put upon it, except it be by depriving Men thereby of the
liberty to Transport, Melt, or otherwise use it as they think fit, as they
might have done before it had that Stamp; and then, perhaps, it were better to
allow Men that liberty, which would occasion the bringing more Bullion to the
Mint than the raising the Denomination of the Species ever will. Men love to
have in their own Hands the disposal of what is their own, and will not easily
be tempted to deprive themselves of that liberty.

Though there are many Things alleged as causes of this rise of the Bullion at
this time, as the scarcity of Money and Bullion, the overbalance of our Trade,
the Exchange running high against us abroad, etc. yet the only true Reason why
an Ounce of Bullion is worth a Shilling more than 5 Shillings of our
Miinted-mony, is the Clipping, Corrupting and Wear of our old Minted-mony, by
which it is made of real less value above the proportion of one Shilling in the
Ounce; and it has been observed, that Plate bought at 6 Shillings and three
Pence the Ounce, besides the making, have yet after all weighed as much again
as the Money that was given for it. So that it is a wonder to me the Goldsmith
has not raised his Plate to ten Shillings the Ounce; for so much it is worth
when it is paid for in such clipped Money, besides the making.

This Method has, nevertheless, one signal Benefit and piece of Justice in it,
which ought however to be taken care of if it be rejected, which is, the
payment of all public and private Debts in a sort of Money more proportionable
to the Money lent than that of the old Standard is; it being most certain, that
all the Money lent since the Revolution, is not of much more than half the
Weight it ought to have had; and there is no reason that besides an exorbitant
Usury, freedom from Taxes at this time, etc. these Men should receive at last
two Ounces of Silver for every one they lent; for so it will be, if the Money be
kept upon the old Foot and up to the Standard, when it is paid in.

Having mentioned this, I pass in the next place to consider the Effect it will
have upon the Royal Revenue and the private Estates of the Subject.

The Book of Rates having fixed the Sum the King is to have for all sorts of
Goods Exported and Imported, he will certainly lose 25 per Cent. in all his
Customs of what by Law he ought to have: And yet it will soon appear, the
Merchant will not sell him any thing one Penny the cheaper, for he will raise
his Goods on some pretense or other as much as the Money is raised, well knowing
that in 75 such Pence there is but one Ounce of Silver: And the same Effect
will attend all his other Revenues in every Branch of it, to the utter Ruin of
the Crown; Which, as His Majesty says in His last Speech, is not able to
maintain the Civil List, as things now stand, without the Assistance of the
Commons.

The same Effect will follow upon all the Manors, Rents of Assize, Quit-Rents
and Fee-farm Rents, in whose Hands soever they are. When these Rents were first
set, a Penny was a Penny weight of Silver; which, as Mr. Lownds rightly asserts
page 17. of his Essay, was three times as much as now it is; and so it
continued to the 27th of Edward III. when the Pound weight of Silver being 12
Ounces Troy weight, was raised from twenty Shillings to twenty five Shillings;
which, in the 9th of Henry V. was again raised to thirty Shillings the Pound
weight. In the 1st of Henry VI. it was raised to thirty seven Shillings and six
Pence; but in the 4th of that King's Reign it was again lowred to thirty
Shillings, and in the 49th Year it was again raised to thirty seven Shillings
and six Pence. In the 1st of Henry VIII. it was raised to forty five Shillings
by tale, which was double the proportion it bore in the Reigns of Edward I. II,
and III. and so on to the 9th of Henry V. So that by this time, all the
Nobility and Gentry had lost in their Manors and Quit-Rents, the one half of
their Income, and five Shillings over in the Pound Troy.

In all the former raising the Money of England, if the History of England be
consulted, it will appear, That they were Times of great Trouble, when the
Nation had been exhausted by Foreign or Domestic Wars; and therefore it is
probable, the same Reasons were used to persuade both Prince and People to
consent to it, that are used now: But in the mean time it is wonderful that
none of these Princes should consider, That as they raised the Money, they
abated their Revenues.

That Rise made in the 1st of Henry VIII. seems to have been the most causless
of all, that Prince being left exceeding Rich by his Father, and not having any
War at home or abroad to occasion it. In the 34th Year he raised the Coin to
forty eight Shillings in the Pound weight of Silver, though there was but 10
Ounces fine Silver and 2 Ounces base. After this time the Corruption of the
Money grew so fast, that in the 1st of Edward VI. there was 8 Ounces Alloy to 4
of fine Silver: And in the 5th Year of his Reign he put nine Ounces Allay to
three of fine Silver, which raised twelve Ounces of fine Silver to 14 l. 8. s.
and thereby the Mischief became so sensible that the next Year after he began
to reform his Money, and eleven Ounces one Penny weight fine, and nineteen Penny
weight Alloy was Coined into three Pounds by tale; and so it continued to the
19th of Queen Elizabeth, when the old Standard of fineness, viz. 11 Ounces 18
Penny weight fine Silver and 2 Penny weight Alloy was restored, and the Money
Coined at 60 s. to the Pound Troy weight, as it ought to be now, and has been
ever since.

By which it will appear, That the Nobility and Gentry were so wearied out by
the detestable debasing of the Coin in the Reigns of Henry VIII. and Edward VI.
that they willingly consented to have the Money raised to sixty Shillings the
Pound Troy, though thereby they lost parts of what was paid to their Ancestors,
provided they might have the Money brought nearer to its former Purity, though not
full up to the Sterling Standard; which was after done by Q. Eliz. and has
ever since been observed by all her Successors.

Besides the value of Silver, compared with Gold and other Merchandise that is
brought from abroad, there is another value belongs to it, which is to be found
by considering the price of a Bushel of Wheat, or a Years Wages of a Servant or
Day-labourer. Now it is most certain that Silver, by the Discovery of the
West Indies in the Reign of Henry VII. becoming much more plentiful in the
times of the succeeding Princes than it had been before; all that the Crown,
and the Nobility and Gentry bought became much dearer, i. e. it cost much more
Silver than it did before, and yet the Incomes of their Manors, etc. were but
one third of what had been paid to their Ancestors: But then they helped
themselves a little by dividing the Church and Abbey Lands among themselves, and
by raising the Rents of those Lands which they had not put out of their Power;
but the Clergy could not do so too, and thereby many of the Bishoprics became
exceeding Poor, that would have been Rich, if their Rents had been paid at
three Penny weight to the Penny; for so every hundred Pound the Year they now
receive, would have been three hundred Pounds.

These Considerations are so material, that they deserve, at this time, to be
reflected upon with the utmost Attention: And although it is said, the Money may
be lowred to 60 Pence in the Ounce when the War is ended and Money is become
more plentiful; yet it may be observed, when once it is raised it can never be
kept down, but will soon rise again to what it was before: And if the People of
England come once to pay 5 s. with 3 s. 9 d. they will never come back to the
old Rent again without the hazard of a Civil War.

So that if it be thought fit to raise the Money to 75 d. in the Ounce, I humbly
offer it to Consideration whether it be not reasonable, That all Quit-Rents,
Fee-farm Rents, Rents of Assize, and all other Rents that are due upon Leases,
should be paid in the same Money, and at the same value they were at before; or
that at least, the time be limited how long they shall be thus paid, and no
other Tax, in the mean time, be laid upon them; this Tax being 25 per Cent. as
the Owners will soon find, whatever is pretended to the contrary.

The first Rises were very moderate, but 5 Shillings in a Pound weight of
Silver, which is 15 Shillings of our Money in 3 Pound, a quarter part; but in
the Reigns of Henry VIII. and his Son Edward, when Silver was become much more
plentiful than ever it had been before, it was raised from 37 s. 6 d. to 3 l.
which was above a third part; 2 s. 6 d. and this would never have passed, if
the Gentry and Nobility had not been sweetened, by the giving them the
Abby-Lands, or selling them at easy Rates, which was almost the same thing.

Since that time there has no alteration been made in the value of our Coin,
though we have had a Domestic War that lasted 20 Years, nor could any thing but
this impudent Clipping and Counterfeiting of our Money have made it seem
necessary now; and if the Clipped Money be made to go by Weight at 5 s. to the
Ounce, it will put an end to the Clipping, and bring out all the Hoarded Money
too; and so put an end to this seeming Necessity.

It were better to give 6 s. an Ounce for Bullion, and to pay it back again at
5 s. the Ounce, for then the Nation loses only 1 s: in every Ounce of Silver
that is Minted; but the raising the Money to 75 d. in the Ounce gives away 25 l.
per Cent. of all our Estates, as long as it is continued at that rate.

The continuing the same Names of our Money when the Value or Weight was
altered, has been the Cheat that has deceived our Ancestors, and it is to be
hoped that this Generation is wiser than to suffer it self to be so deluded.

In the times of Confusion between the Years 1640 and 1660. the Merchants and
other Monied Men began first to put their Cash into the Hands of the Goldsmiths
of London to keep it for them; and from that time the Clipping of our Money
became frequent, and as long as the Goldsmith would take it, no other Body
scrupul'd it; though it may be observed to have grown every Year less and less,
but especially since the calling of great quantities out of their Hands for the
Royal Bank of England, the East India Company, and other such public Fonds;
and there has special Care been taken by some Men, that all the good Money that
has been brought into the Exchequer in all this War, should never go down into
the Country again till it was put into as bad a Condition as the rest; so that
though no particular Man can be charged, yet it is apparent who have been the
Promoters of this Mischief, and for what End it has been done, and upon what
Occasion.

There may be two Uses made of this Consideration. 1. That it is but reasonable
those Cash-keepers who have had so great a share in the Profit made by this,
should also have the greatest part of the Loss left upon them. 2. That if any
Money that may hereafter be Clipped be left in the old Form, it will certainly
be an occasion to continue both the Clipping and the Counterfeiting too, if
Provision be not made to secure the Weight of it from time to time. It is said,
That 3 s. 9 d. thus Milled, will buy as much as 5 clipped Shillings. Now
suppose it will, I should think it but reasonable to put us into the same
Estate we should have been in if the Money had never been Clipped, and not to
pretend to redress the Grievance by giving us Mill'd-mony that will go no
further than the Clipp'd-mony will. It is intended, That a Milled five Shilling
piece should go for 6 s. 3 d. Now in Money of that weight and fineness ought all
the Quit-Rents of the Lords of Manors to be paid: And whilst such care is
taken of the Moniedmen as to repay them the Damage they have done the Money, by
furnishing the Clippers, and purchasing the Bullion Clipped off, it is thought
convenient to abate a quarter part of our Revenue, only because the other 3
Parts will go as far as the Clipped Money.

It is alleged, if our Money is so good that the Neighbor Nations will draw it
away from us, and leave us but little; but if they should, we shall certainly
draw in as much as is drawn out, and there will nothing be lost but the Minting
Charges, and it is hard if the Trade will not overbalance that.

But when Money is scarce, be the Standard great or small, it will not so easily
be sturred: And had our Clipped Money been called in but 10 Years agon, we had
now had some Millions of Mill'd-mony more than we now have. When the corrupt
Money minted by Henry VIII. and Edward VI. went with the good Money of Edward VI,
Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, the good Money was hoarded up and Transported;
but when Queen Elizabeth had once refined and reminted that bad Money, good Money
became so plentiful as the bad was before, and continued so till till the
Clippers brought us into the same Estate we were then in.

I have been informed (how truly I know not) that the States of Holland suffer
their own Money to be carried out and in as freely as any other Commodity, and
yet for all that have ever a vast Treasure by them. And we see all the severe
Laws in Spain cannot keep their Money at home; nor has that effect followed in
any other Country: So that perhaps the leaving Men at perfect Liberty is the
most effectual method of increasing our Money; for then Men will bring their
Plate and Bullion to the Mint, when they know it may be easily and safely
reduced back to what it was before, or be Transported as it is to any part of
the Earth where they can hope for Advantage: But if this is denied them, then
they will keep it as it is, because in so doing they keek the liberty of
disposing of it as their Occasions require. Who would carry his Dollars to the
Mint, who for ought he knew might have occasion in a few Weeks to employ them
abroad, and by so doing should be deprived of the liberty to make use of what
was his own?

Men pretend that Foreigners will give more for our Money than can be made of it
at home. This is not true when generally asserted; there are times when they
will draw our Money, and there are times when we shall draw it back again, and
some of theirs with it, as appears by our Guineas, though to our loss perhaps.

But when our Money becomes scarce our Neighbors will gladly exchange
Commodities with us, because such a value will grow upon our Money (by what Name
soever it is called) that there will more be saved by our Commodities than by
taking our Money. But still this is upon a Supposition our Money is reduced first
all of it to the old Standard, both in Weight and Goodness, or Purity. The
Clipping and Debasing of our Money is, by Mr. Lownds, acknowledged to be the
cause of the rise of our Guineas; but then it is as certainly the cause of the
rise of Plate and Bullion 15 d. in the Ounce; take away this disorder and the
Guineas will sink, says he, and so will the Bullion too to its former price of
5 s. 2 d. the Ounce, as it is sold now in Holland.

There is in Money an Intrinsic and an Extrinsick value. The Intrinsic
consists in its weight and purity, and this may be fixed and kept at the same
Standard, abating what by time and use is worn of it if it go by tale. The
Extrinsick value is never to be fixed, but depends both upon the plenty and
scarcity of Money, and of all other things that are bought with it. In the
beginning of the Reign of Q. Mary the usual price of a quarter of Wheat was 6
s. 8 d. which is 10 d. a Bushel. In the 1st 1 Phi. and Mary, c. 5.
Year of K. James 1. it was 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. which is four times as much. So that
the Extrinsick value of an 1 Jam. 1. 25.
Ounce of Silver sunk so much in that time, by reason of the greater plenty of
it. By the 20th Year of that King's Reign the price of a quarter of Wheat rose
to 1 l. 12 s. that is 4 s. the Bushel; so that an Ounce of Silver was worth
almost 4 times as much in the beginning of Q. Mary, as it was the 21st of K.
James, the plenty of it being 5 fold greater then than it was before. By the
Year 1663. the quarter of Wheat was estimated at 2 l. 8 s. which is 12 s. the
Bushel; so that between the 20th of K. James and the 15th of Charles II. the
Silver sunk two thirds in its value.

But then it is to be noted, That there are dear and cheap Years which depend
upon the plenty or scarcity of the Commodity. Wheat has in my memory been sold
for 10 s. the Bushel, viz. In 1648. and 1663. by reason of wet Harvists, and
yet in 1647. it was but 2 s. 6 d. the Bushel; and in 1690. Wheat was sold in my
Country for 2 s. the Bushel, and the same Wheat the next Year after was sold
for 5 s. the Bushel, which was occasioned by excessive Rains that laid and
spoiled the Crop.

So the same Corn that is sold in Kent for 6 s. the Bushel, may be bought in
Herefordshire for 4, or perhaps for 3, by reason of the distance of the Country
from a Market that can carry it off, and the price Men give for the Lands it
grows on. But I think I may safely say, That a Bushel of Wheat is scarce ever 2
Years together worth less than 4 s. which in the beginning of Q. Mary's Reign
was seldom worth more than 10 d. and therefore there is now more than 4 times
as much Money as there was in 1553. and consequently that it is less than a 4th
part of the value it was then. So that he that had then 10 l. the Year, could
live of it as well as he that has 45 l. the Year can now; and 50 l. the Year
then, was equal to above 100 now.

This is the true method of finding the Extrinsick value of Money, for a Bushel
of Wheat has in all these times been of the same use and natural value; and I
do not doubt but in the times of William the Conq. a Bushel of Wheat was not
worth above 1 d. of our Money; and if so, an Ounce of Silver was worth 10 times
as much in his Reign as it was in hers, and 48 times as much as it is now: So
much has the Money increased since that time, and by its plenty abated the
Extrinsick value.

And although the certain Extrinsick value of an Ounce of Sterling Silver is hard
to be now fixed by reason of the great abuse of our English Coin, yet without
question it is not of the 4th part of that value that it was in the beginning
of Q. Mary's Reign; and it is as certain, that there is but a small difference,
of 2 d. or 3 d. at most, between an Ounce of Sterling Bullion and an Ounce of
Sterling Money, be it Clipped or Unclipp'd.

Supposing this Project of raising the Money should succeed, that which is now
but 15 s. Sterling would by the Law be called a Pound; and if 4 s. be raised
upon every such Pound, then the remainder would be but 11 s. which with the
Reparitions would come but to 10; so that by it one half of our Estates would
be taken from us, though the Charge were but equal to that of the last Year.

That Land in my own Estate that was Rented at 1 s. per Ann. in the Reign of
Edward IV. has for many Years last past been Rented at 20 s. And this is
another Effect of the Increase of Money in England since the Discovery of the
West Indies, which happened after the times of that Prince. We may well suppose
that the Rents of those times bore a proportion to the plenty of Money as they
do now; for where Money is scarce there Lands will be cheap, and so on the
contrary. And when the Nation grew Rich by the Peace of Spain, and the Trade
that followed upon it in the Reign of James I. the Lands became of double the
value they were in the beginning of Q. Eliz. only by bringing so much of the
Spanish Silver and Gold into England; for besides what we drew thence by our
Trade, all the Money that was sent from Spain to maintain the Wat with the Dutch
in Flanders, came by the way of England, and as fast as it came in was sent to
the Tower to be minted: So that whereas in all the long Reign of Q. Eliz. there
was bus little above 4 Millions in the first 12 Years of his Reign; 1558014 l.
9 s. 9 d. which was much more than was Coined in her time in so short a space,
if the Money fetched out of the debased Money minted by her Father and Brother be
deducted, as of right it ought to be.

Yet this turned much more to the Advantage of the Merchant, Shopkeeper and
Tradesman, than to that of the Crown, Church, Nobility and Landed Gentry. The
Revenues of the Crown (the Customs excepted) were reduced to one third part of
what they had anciently been; and that too was sunk in its Exrrinsive value, as
I have shown above: So that King James I. as he made the Nation richer than any
of his Predecessors had done by his peacable Reign, made himself the poorest
King that ever sat on the Throne of England; and this Poverty of the Crown was
the occasion of the Domestic War that happened in the Reign of his Son.

The Nobility of England that had been so over powerful in the former times,
when their Revenues were paid upon the foot of a Penny-weight for a Penny, that
they were able to grapple with the Crown, became so poor by the raising the
Money to 60 d. in the Ounce, or the loss of two third parts of their Manors,
that they retained only the Honors of their Ancestors, but had very little of
the Power and Splendour that attended them.

The Gentry too, though they escaped better at first because they had more of the
Lands in their Hands which they raised the Rents of, which the other could not
do by their Manners and Quit-Rents; but though they had the same denominations of
Money, had indeed but the third part of the Silver that was at first reserved
and paid to their Ancestors: The Gentry, I say, too were over-topp'd by the
more wealthy Merchants and Tradesman, and endeavoring above their Ability to
keep up the ways of Living that had been practiced by their Ancestors; this and
the War that followed, and the immense Taxes paid since the War began, etc.
have entirely Ruined many of the ancient Families, and brought the rest under
such Debts, that there wants but this taking a 4th part of what is left, and
the heavy Taxes that must be kept up during the War, to accomplish their Ruin
too.

The Church, whether we consider the Dignified Clergy or the Parish Priests,
have been as great Losers as any of the other three; and if now their Revenues
be sunk from 20 s. to 15, and the old Rents of their Manors, and the Customs
in their Parishes stand as now they are, the Service of God in many Places will
wholly fail for want of a Subsistence for the Minister; and some of our
Bishoprics, that are now but low, will find no Body that will accept of them.

The Love I have for my Native Country has forced me to lay these
Considerations before my Superiors, who perhaps in the multiplicity of their
other great Affairs, may not of a sudden have all those things represented by
their Memories to them, which they otherwise well know, and I pretend to no
more than to be their Remembrancer.

If I have mistaken in any thing, I humbly submit it to the Correction of my
Superiors, and pray, That at least I may not be treated for this my Charity to
my Country, as have before been on all Occasions, for no other Cause that I
know of.

FINIS.

