Discommendatory VERSES, ON THOSE Which are Truly Commendatory, ON THE AUTHOR
OF THE Two ARTHURS, AND THE Satyr against WIT.

Laudat, amat, cantat nostros mea Roma Libellos,
Meque sinus omnes, me manus omnis habet.
Ecce! rubet quidam, pallet, stupet, oscitat, odit,
Hoc volo, nunc nobis Carmina nostra placent.
Mart. LONDON: Printed in the Year, MDCC.

The Preface.
AS it requires not much Thought to find out the Author of the Dedication to
the Commendatory Verses, so there is no necessity of much Pains to return an
Answer to it. Since Falsities are known to People who are unprejudiced by their
first appearance, and there is occasion for no other Method to find 'em out,
than a true knowledge of the Gentleman who is abused. The Dedicator has long
since been conversant in Scandal, and Abuses are as familiar to him as it is to
be abused: We shall therefore leave him a while for his Masters who set him at
Work, and distinguished him, by giving him the Title of Secretary to the
Confederates at Will' s Coffee-house. They may be fine Gentlemen for all that I
know in their Chambers, and pretty Conversation for the Ladies they Dress
themselves up for; their Coaches may make a noble Appearance, and their
Footmens Hatbands may, like their Masters, rise up and take leave of the Crowns
of their Hats; their Perukes may be well adjusted, and their Persons set off to
the greatest Advantage; yet for all this Sir R -- Bl -- re might choose whether
or no he would be laughed at for running into their Commendations. Several of
'em are Quality by their Cloths, but forfeit the Name by their Expressions.
They have reason perhaps to boast of the Lady's Favors, but will never have
any (till they Write better) to brag of the Reader's. In short, if they are
Gentlemen, it is more than their Verses speak 'em to be; and it is manifest, that
they who have chosen T -- B -- for their Leader, fall not a Tittle short of
coming up to his admirable Qualifications. Every individual Man is a Giant in
Scandal, and shows his Teeth to a Miracle, but what they would have done, had
not the Gentleman they barked at been a Physician, it is not in our Power to
divine. Bills, Pills, and Kills, are excellent Rhimes; and they had lost the
greatest part of their Endeavors after Satyr, had Sir Richard been without
that Title, which as it has done him Honor, so he has amply returned it on the
Profession by the Regularities and Success of his Practice. But we have taken
the liberty to give some Account of their Works, and ought to do the same by
our own; and since in some Places we may be accused for running into the same
Faults we blame them for, we ought to make what Excuses we can for so doing. We
have endeavored to answer every individual Copy as the Nature of 'em seemed to
require. The Scurrilous we have returned a suitable Roughness to, and to the
Dull (which are not very few) a Contempt which is proper for 'em. But where
their Verses have seemed too long for Epigrams, which they were designed for,
we have either answered 'em with those that are shorter, or made two or three
on the same Subjects; and though the Covent Garden Wits may make Cuckolds of
those Citizens which are Old and Superanuated, yet we hope we have given such a
Specimen of our Performance in the following Sheets, that they cannot make
Fools of those which are Young. And let their Editor be, as soon as he thinks
fit, out with the Verses he promised us on Job and Habbakuk, unless he answers
'em himself, he shall not stay so long for our Answer as he has been
endeavoring at the performance of his Promise. In the mean time since his
Motto speaks him to be a Reader of Martial, without doubt he has met with the
following Epigram, which we desire him to apply to himself; and have rendered
into English for his Service.

Festive credis te Calliodore jocari,
Et solum multo permaduisse sale.
Omnibus arrides, dicteria dicis in omnes,
Sic te Convivam posse placere putas.
At si ego non belle sed vere dixero quiddam,
Nemo propinabit Calliodore Tibi.
B -- n Thou believ'st You Are famous for a Jest,
And none like Thou, for Wit, can bear the Test;
Thou flatter'st All, on All Thou fling'st Thy Spite,
Thus think Thy Company must needs delight:
But if I speak what is Truth, though course and plain,
Thou never will it have thy Reckoning paid again.
Discommendatory VERSES, ON THOSE Which are Truly Commendatory, ON THE AUTHOR
OF THE Two ARTHURS, AND THE Satyr against WIT.
A Short and True History of a certain Captain General.
BY Nature Small, and of a Dwarfish Breed,
Peevish was sent to School, to Write and Read;
Where bribed by Gifts the Pedagogick Don
Abused the Father, and Deceived the Son;
As for a fresh Reward he praised his Child,
And grasped one's Sugar, as he the other spoiled.
Thence, swol'n with Figures, and possessed with Tropes,
On Isis he bestowed his Parents Hopes;
And there He Had scarce put on the Tufted-Gown,
And wildly viewed the Colleges and Town,
But Fortune, who no time would let him lose,
Gave him a Royal Infant for his Muse;
And Him he sung with Whimsies in his Brains,
Praising a borrowed Prince, with borrowed Strains.
Next, when the Doubtful Times were changed He saw
He left the Son, to praise the Son in Law;
And with his Righteous Undertaking warmed,
He star'd, and in Pindarick Frenzy stormed;
As wisely He the strongest side caressed,
And Cursed the Babe his selfish Lays had Blessed.
All Matters fixed, and likely to remain
In favor of the Great Nassovian's Reign,
The Dapper 'Squire revolving in his Thought,
That he that Rhim'd, not pleased as he that Fought;
To Arms, as fast as Legs would carry, ran,
And Fretfully resolved to be a Man.
And since no Spark had walked up High Street bolder,
The Fellow-Commoner turned Fellow-Soldier;
In Camps pursuing what in Schools he had read,
As he Lampoon'd the very Foes he Fled.
But Heaven, least some mischievous Ball should hit
This little Prodigy of Rhimes and Wit,
Put it in William's thoughtful Head to make
A Peace, and fight no more for Fighting's sake;
Thence he returned, and a rich Father Dead,
Fatten'd the growing Maggots in his Head,
As he wrote Epigrams for Ladies Smiles,
And governed in B -- street the Leeward Isles.
And now he rides a Tiptoe in his Coach,
Frowning at every Hack that dares approach;
As he by Prince and Subject both preferred,
Is owned a Patron, and adjudg'd a Bard;
A Patron fit for Br -- n's and Ma -- g's Flights,
If he Rewards no better than he Writes.
To the Poetical Knight, who would have no Body spoil Paper but Himself.
APox on Rhimes and Physic, S -- ly cried,
(And he had Sense and Reason on his side;)
For both of Rhimes and Physic He Had his fill,
And swallowed more than every Verse a Pill.
A Doctor coming by, and loath to lose
A Knight so Famous for a P -- and Muse,
Offered him means to give his Knighthood ease,
And make the radicated Torments cease.
Vile Quack, said he, go patch up Mother Q -- les,
Sir Richard turn Prescriber to Sir Ch -- Is?
It shall not be, jog Homeward if you please,
I Will have no Paper spoiled on my Disease.
The Doctor cried, It Is true, the Infection's such,
Twill certainly discolour't with a Touch;
But I Will affirm, and so withdrawing smiled,
My Papers may, but Thou can never be Spoiled.
To the Prosaick POET, occasioned by the two following Lines: Thy Satyrs Bite
not, but like Aesop's Ass,
Thou Kick'st the Darling whom thou would Caress.

It Is plain that Wit at Will's is very scarce,
By the poor Contradictions of thy Verse;
Else surely some Acquaintance would have made
Those Hobbing Lines speak Sense, which Sense upbraid;
But thou brim full of emptiness of Thought,
Betray'st thy self, and by thy self art caught:
As thou art fashioned for a standing Jest,
And giv'st us the Reverse of Aesop's Beast;
Who should, if Bl -- more's Folly thou would have shown,
Caress the Man he would Kick, as Thou have done.
The Noble Corrected; or Advice to a Quality Commentator, who Writes in Defense
of Greek Epistles as if he understood 'em.
LET B -- le write on, and stilled a Man of Letters,
Prefer Dull Heavy Authors to their Betters;
Let him His own to B -- lv's Sense oppose,
And knowing little fancy much he knows;
Let D -- nis in his Commendation strain,
And Codron praise him, to be praised again:
Let every Wit, and every Beau declare
What his bright Genius is, and what They are;
As some commend his Parts, and some his Cloths,
Let him be any thing they please in Prose.
But ye, who seemingly appear his Friends,
And basely flatter him for sordid Ends,
Persuade him to avoid the Muses Hill,
And cease to Wound himself, who'd others Kill.
For its enough that he in Prose is Brave,
And Butchers many an Author in his Grave,
That against Truth, and Bently's Worth he joins,
And plays the Tyrant over a Tyrant's Lines.
To the Sorry Poetaster at Will's Coffee-House.
PRithee, dear Scribbling Doctor, why so short?
Rail on if thoud'st have Bl -- re thank thee for it
Be permanent in Censure and Dispraise,
And grinning show thy Teeth ten Thousand ways:
For it is acknowledged by the Court and Town,
Nothing can make him smile like M -- Frown.
He Patients has, it is true, which often Die,
And so, thoud'st vainly say perhaps, have I.
But Quack, it is false, thy Self-destroying Pill
Never had it in its Power as yet to kill,
And as for Patients which thou Dead would own,
Thou have as many Living, that is none.
An Equal Match, or the Drawn Battle.
IF Bards would have a Shortliv'd Poem writ,
P -- ck should dictate Rules, and T -- mb Wit;
Like which no Mortal piece can e're be found
With Lines of Constitution so unsound.
But that where T -- mb shall a Judge commence,
To file the Rust of Wit from P -- ck's Sense.
To the Noble Captain, who was in aD amn'd Confounded Pet, because the Author
of the Satyr against Wit, was pleased to Pray for his Friend, occasioned by
this Distich: His Mercy, not his Justice, made thee Knight,
Which P -- r may demand with equal Right.

BOld Man of War, the drift of thy Designs?
And let us know the meaning of thy Lines.
If Mercy is a Suff'rance of a Fact,
How comes it then to give Rewards, and act?
Define, and tell us when you are in the right,
And own that Mercy spares, but cannot Knight.
P -- r and Thou may be forgot and spared,
He for a Traitor, thou a Senceless Bard.
Yet neither can atone for either's Crimes,
He for his Foolish Plot, or Thou for Rhymes.
Though D -- ke to purge thy Muse should Physic send,
Or S -- d should absolve him as a Friend.
To the Inviolably Dull Critic, on his Heroical Strains upon the Satyr against
Wit.
SOme Scribbling Fops as D -- is is by Name,
Never can hit, although they always aim,
And Storm, and Swear, and Drink, and Write for Fame.
What Star prevents 'em, or what Planet shines,
To keep the Lucky Goddess from their Lines;
Let those decide, who have it in their Sphere,
Doubtless they err, because they persevere.
But thou, my crabbed piece of blustering Wit.
Erring do think the wished for Mark is hit;
And, Pox upon thy Judgment and thy Skull,
Labour'st to be thought intricate and dull.
For shame, Grave Don, it is time that thou were wise,
Having seen Years enough before thine Eyes.
Even do, as Men of Ancient standing should,
Or understand, or else be understood,
Since it is in vain to show thy fruitless spite,
And thou can find less Faults, than thou can write.
To a Rhimer, who if he takes pains, Writes as if he did not.
WHO e're Thou art, to Me and Sense unknown,
Correct not others Follies but thy own;
Nor dare to Censure R -- ff's healing Arts,
Or point at G -- n's Wit thy Leaden Darts.
What have they done to call thy Nonsense forth,
And make thee show thy Penury of Worth?
Or how could B -- re's Muse deserve thy Spite,
Unless it was for teaching thee to write?
Prithee, for shame acknowledge this Offense,
And own 'em Men of Skill, and Men of Sense.
But Oh! Kind Heaven forbid it that thy Quill
Should dare t'attempt their Judgment or their Skill,
That thou should rise and injure 'em with praise,
And stab their Reputations with thy Lays,
For nothing but the poison of thy Lines,
Defeats their Cure, and mocks their great Designs.
A Modest Request to the Poetical Squire.
SInce You to Poetry will make pretense,
And H -- ly 'll be a Wit in H -- ly's Sense,
As you resigned to Dullness, in your Chair,
Think on foul Lines to gratify the Fair:
Long may you Rhyme, and on your Lute and Spinnet
Play many a woeful Tune with nothing in it.
But in return my dear Facetious Squire,
For once to gratify a Friends desire,
Think as I do, you will fling your Verses in the Fire.
To a L -- d who would be a Saint, if he was as free from all other Sins, as he
is from Hypocrisy.
ADvice to P -- rs, the Adviser's Zeal may prove,
But never like Praise can swell 'em into Love.
Then give me leave to do the thing that is safe,
And fling away some Verse in your Behalf.
That you have Traveled, is exceeding true,
And that your L -- p's Muse has Teeth to show,
But among all the Frolicks you have shown,
Religion is a Trick you never have known.
To a Lady dignified and distinguished by the Name of Critic and Poet, on Her
incomprehensible Raileries on the Satyr against Wit.
BElieve me, Madam, that your Muse has shown
So foul a Face, I beg you would hide your own;
And if you are real Quality be Civil,
For T -- d and A -- se all over is the Devil.
That you're no Pious Lady is confessed,
By making Wesly's Sacred Work your Jest;
Which (though it does not with the Witty take)
Might please the Wise for its great Subjects sake.
Not but I think you have been at Church sometimes,
Because you write of Sextons and of Chimes;
But that you are a Woman few can tell
So right, as those you think you praise so well.
For Heaven's sake, Madam, qualify this Fit,
Some speak you Nobly Born, and yet a Wit?
Nor let me be successless in my Prayer,
A Muse should not take up a Lady's care;
For it is a Composition most absurd,
That Is made of Rhimes, of Woman, and of Turd.
To an Author, who never wrote but two Distichs and an half, and those could
not pass Muster.
YOU bid me take my Pen again, it is true,
But I shall scarce request the same of You.
Five Lines already have your Judgment shown,
Though you would be more esteemed for writing none;
And if excess of Dullness Life can give,
You need not scribble Knight, you are sure to Live.
Occasioned by the News that Tom B -- n had the Courage to Engage with Sir
Richard Blackmore, after his Bookseller had Defeated him.
WHen B -- Contending I with R -- r spied,
I wondered, but not pitty'd either side;
Well knowing, if they were of Scratching sick,
Abel could buy, and Tom could beg a Stick.
Next came a Dun, and at his Garret stood,
He Would have his Money truly that he would;
But still I could not pity him, as knowing
Tom would soon find a Trick to send him going.
But when I saw him brandishing his Muse,
The Bad to Flatter, and the Good Abuse,
With Pity then, and much Concern, I cried,
Tom, Do thou know what Folly's on thy side?
Give the fierce waspish Col'nel back his Gold,
Nor let thy Praise be bought, thy Lies be sold;
Blackmore and Job believe it will subdue
Ten Thousand such Malicious Fiends as You.
How? Said the Bard, Most excellent Advice!
A Poet, and be Master of a Sice?
Find out that Place where e're I paid one Score,
Then I Will return the Guinea's, not before.
A Tale taken to pieces.
IF Shallow Critics, as your pleased to say,
Judge Tully when at Poetry at Play,
And Ignorance would censure and suppose
He never had been a Consul but for Prose:
How comes it then that Caesar, who is confessed
To know the Man, and know his Talent best,
Who in Fame's List for Judgment is enrolled,
(Whether you mean the Modern or the Old)
Should with the Shallow for a Judge be brought,
And make their Sense authentic with his Thought.
O Youth, though sweet and flowing be thy Song,
Thy Numbers beauteous, and thy Beauties strong;
Though Force and Ease alternately appear,
And Fancy glads the Sight, and charms the Ear;
Yet, if amidst thy Turns of Verse and Thought
Mistake should blend, or Have neglect a Fault;
If uncorrected Errors shall be found
To Offend our Senses, or our Judgments wound;
As to be fearless, is not to be Brave,
And Squire's a Noble, while a Knight's a Slave;
In vain you measure out your fruitless Lays,
And gloss your want of Sense with gilded Praise;
For if you would write with Credit and Success,
You must mind Judgment more, and Friendship less.
To Codron's and the Lady's Humble Servant.
NOT that I blame your Flattery, or your Spleen,
But prithee give's the Sense of what you mean:
Can Bl -- re write without Design, or Art,
And yet design a -- at Codron's Heart?
Unthinking Bard! stuffed up with Praise and Spite,
Gravely consider next before you write;
And if you would show a Man of Sense and Style,
Bring other Vouchers than a Lady's Smile:
For if I know 'em well, they would rather choose
His P -- tle to divert 'em than his Muse.
To the same, on the same Subject.
CODRON may please the Ladies, as he writes,
And pretty things for pretty things Endites;
But Thou be damned, and fling away thy Pen,
Such Fops as Thou, can never please the Men.
To the same, occasioned by the Verse which reflects on Dr. Gibbons, (viz.) He
will his Health to Mirmil's Care resign.
FRiend, by my Soul, the Devil's in thy Quill,
Or Thou would never write and judge so ill;
For whilst thou Laugh*st at Gibbon's skill, it is sure,
Thou stand'st in need thy self of Dr. Tyson is Physician to Bethlem Hospital.
Tyson's Cure.
Nor would the Youth, the Subject of thy Song,
Accept thy Flatt'ries, or permit thy Tongue
To blast his Credit with defaming Praise,
And take Lethargick Opiats from thy Lays;
Was He the Man thy Rhimes would have him be,
Or Thou the Man for whom he judges thee.
An Epigram on Dr. Ch -- ood.
Poor Job was plagued, of Holy Men the best,
But Ch -- ood sins, and in this Life is Blessed;
With Losses he, and Pains, and Fire was vexed,
And he divides Fat Capons with his Text.
One had a Friend and Woman to persuade,
But the other He can Curse without their aid.
As he delights to play the Tempter's part,
And labors to be Damned with all his Heart.
When having lost the Preacher in the Beast,
He shows the Devil, who should act the Priest.
An Answer to a great many Impertinent Questions.
MEthinks you take too much upon you, Sir,
And though you stirring stink, you needs must stir;
Else, why so many Foolish Queries brought
T'upbraid the Querist's want of Sense and Thought?
That he found fault with Wit, is very true,
But, Captain, what a Pox is that to you?
Untouched by Satyr you may safely pass,
Unless to be a Wit's to be an A --.
To the same upon his calling Sir R -- B -- re's Composures; Coffee Rhimes.
IF Coffee does Awake the Senses keep,
And guards our Eyelids from approaching Sleep,
Well have thou given the Doctor's Rhimes the Name,
And praised his Merits, which thou would defame;
For we with wakeful Pleasure can peruse,
And meditate the Beauties of his Muse,
When Thy Composures we for Opiats take,
And only run 'em over for Sleepings sake.
To the Quibling, Drib'ling, Scribbling Poetaster, who has let himself out for
Scandal to the Wits at Will's Coffee-House.
BE not puffed up with Punning, Friend of mine,
I Have Slep't over many Jests as good as thine;
And though at present thou may strut and stare,
Blown up with Treats and Covent Garden Air;
Yet when their Turns are served, believe it, then
Spark thou must Dine on Smoke at How Is again;
So different is thy wretched State from his,
Thou have been Ush, but never can be phiz.
To the-same Trifling Fellow, T -- B -- n.
DAme Fortune's just, malicious Fool, I see
By what sh' has done for Blackmore, and for thee.
He in his Chariot, which is paid for, sits,
And dares the feeble Spleen of Thredbare Wits,
Who just like thou brushed out in Tally Suit,
Laugh at his Coach, but Rascals, laugh a foot.
Even take thy fill, and play a Zany's part,
And censure Judgment, and reflect on Art,
While he by Parents, and by Children blessed,
By Husbands prayed for, and by Wives caressed,
Brings Health and Safety at the Patient's call,
And rises when thou can not lower fall.
Upon seeing a Man wipe his A -- se with T -- B -- 's Satyr against the French
King.
IF shitten Lines should wipe a shitten A-se,
Thomas, the Man does Justice to thy Verse;
As it was Born, whatever thou may think,
Thy Ballad makes its Exit too in Stink.
When Mortal Man is buried, then the Word
Is Dust to Dust, but here it is T -- d to T -- d.
An Epigram, occasioned by Mr. B -- dy's, about his Friend Mr. Tate.
PRithee, my gentle Man of Crape, and Prayer,
Why so concerned, and full of Noise and Care?
T -- e, it is allowed, makes Payments when he can,
And slowly shows himself an Honest Man:
But I never heard of B -- dy's Payments yet,
Either in ready Money, or in Wit.
Then rest contented, as a Man should be,
Sir Richard never will say the same of Thee.
A Reply to the Story of the Greek Chevalier.
IF Monarch's (as you will hav't) on Trust reward,
I shall not ask why Sh -- ld was preferred?
But I Will be sworn, and vouch, it as it is true,
That Author's balked, who waits Rewards from you.
To the same.
IF you are a L -- d, as whispering Fame reports,
And know the Constitutions well of Courts,
Does not your Honor think 'twould be a hard case,
He could not make a Knight, who made a M -- ss.
To the Unworthy Author of the Verses on the Satyr against Wit.
IF B -- re labors as he writes, to please,
Why do not thou consult thy Reader's Ease?
And hammer out a Thought may show thy pains,
To countenance thy Scarcity of Brains?
Sense may decline, and Wit consummate may
VVear itself out in time, and know decay;
But Wit like thine, and stumbling into Rhyme,
Defies the Injuries of Fate, or Time:
It Is still the same amongst the Learned and Wise,
And as it cannot fall, it cannot rise.
Merry Thoughts on Dr. B -- d's Melancholy Reflections on the Deficiency of
Useful Learning.
THat B -- d Raves, both Friends and Foes conclude,
Yet neither Friends nor Foes can say he is rude;
Rudeness they know's a meditated Crime,
But B -- d never thought in all his Time:
Absolve him then from Guilt, his Soul is clean,
For he that never thinks, can nothing mean.
On the same, to a Friend who said Dr. B -- d Talked like an Apothecary.
WILL, thou do much mistake the Doctor's Parts,
And wrong'st his Knowledge, and his great Deserts.
He mimicks no Discourse, or Talks by Rule,
But prattles like Himself, and that is a F -- l.
On the same Eternal Tatler.
B -- d with noisie Cures may make us smile,
Yet cannot show one Bill on any File:
What can it be that thus obstructs his Fame?
Because his Patients cannot say the same.
He on his own Report prescribes his Pills,
But Fame gives out, He neither Cures nor Kills.
To a midnight Author who does not Cant I Will be Sworn.
THat c -- Drinks hard, and late in Taverns sits,
It Is known for Truth amongst the B -- w-street Wits;
But I deny that VVitness can be brought
That c -- k was ever Drunk with too much Thought.
The Adviser taken to Task.
IF Knighthood only be the Hero's Right,
What made a certain Man at Will's, a Knight,
Who never burned a Town, or gained a Fight?
Sir, you remember certainly what scores
Your Bombs defeated, of dull Sunburn'd Moors,
And how 'twas counted Valor to retreat,
And Nobler to be beaten than be beat.
Then pray deal fairly, and with Fame agree,
Owning the Justice of the Doctor's Plea;
Since He for saving many lives, is known,
When Thou just sav'dst thy self, and that is One.
To the same.
THe Parliament who cried down Squibbs and Rockets,
Provided for our Safeties and our Pockets.
Not thinking Engineers in warlike times,
Instead of Squibbs would fall a making Rhimes.
But it is no matter, Knight, pursue thy Punns;
They Will do as little Mischief as thy Guns.
To a Great Man who makes himself Little.
WEre I to turn Physician, and prescribe
To certain P -- a most facetious Tribe,
I Would not make use of Syringes, and Tricks
To cure their Ulcers, and to mend their
That Ladies foul might hug 'em in their Arms,
And praise their Money, while They praise their Charms.
No, I Would another sort of Cure begin,
And leave their Running-Nags to smart for Sin,
As I prescribed Restringents in my Bills,
To cure the running Humors of their Quills,
And make 'em some more noble Frollick seek;
Not try to write that Sense, They cannot speak.
To T. B -- upon His concealing his Name, when He made the Author of the Satyr
against Wit, the Subject of his harmless Satyr for concealing His.
SOme Folks may write, and writing be concealed,
When such as Thou take pains to be revealed.
Scandal's a sort of Wit thou giv'st the Town,
And a B -- n's Works speak nothing but a B -- n.
As thy lewd Muse with Infamy her Task
Cannot, because she is poor, provide a Mask.
No more than when her Master in a heat,
Resolving to be Cudgelled, or to Beat;
For want of Cane-Man's Faith, and want of Pence,
Could get a Stick to show his want of Sense.
To the same.
JOB, as thou say, being willing to forget
The Cause, for which thou made him storm and fret,
Plundg'd into Lethe's Streams to seek relief,
And lost the sad remembrance of his Grief.
But take my word, Sir Richard need not use
That method for the Scandal of thy Muse:
For what e're flows from such a triffling Sot,
Dies of it self, and's born to be forget.
To the same.
TOM, take my word, thou'st done like Man of Skill,
And I applaud the Conquest of thy Quill;
The Wife and Satan failed in Their design;
But thou had brought their Wish about in thine.
Thou teach Job most heartily to Curse;
Satan could never have taught him what was worse.
So well thou'st played the subtle Tempter's part;
Yet he must give precedence to thy Art.
As full of Wonder we can neither grant,
Or Job the greater Fiend, or B -- n the greater Saint.
To an Epigrammatic Parson.
It Is false, lewd Priest, I speak it to thy Face,
As are thy Actions infamous and base.
His Satyr tickle? No, it cannot be;
Especially that part which touches Thee.
Wounds almost cured, Experience will teach,
May have a Titillation, and an Itch.
But as for Thine, I Would have Thee rest assured,
Thou'l never be tickled, who can never be curd'.
A Gonsolatory Paper of Verses to Dr. D -- ke, upon the News that He commended
the 4th. Edition of Dr. Garth's Dispensary, and could not get His own
Translation of Herodotus to bear One.
BOld thy Attempt, let Truth and Friendship speak,
In these dull Times to venture forth at Greek.
And dare to Construe and Translate with speed,
What Gentlemen of Practice could not read.
Yet as Success not always waits the Brave,
And Heroes lose the Laurel for the Grave;
So though thy Volumes by their Bulk disclose,
What havoc thou have made of Sense and Prose.
Yet to our sorrow We, thy Friends, behold
Thy Price beat down, and every Sheet unsold;
While other Versions are received and bought,
Pigmies in Mischief to the Giant thought.
However, Man, take heart of Oak, and dare
Even still to show the World thy stupid Care,
To mangle other's Works thy time employ,
Fools may, perhaps, at last be found to buy;
And thou acknowledged with thy skilful Pen,
As fit to murder Sense, as murder Men.
O D -- ke! How great shall be thy future Name?
What multitudes of Trunks shall speak thy Fame!
Band-Box shall in thy Vindication rise,
And many a Cook with thee defend his Pies,
Which otherwise (I Am to thy merit just)
Would never tempt Young Children with their Crust.
Then take Thy Pen, as Men of Letters should,
And Scrible for succeeding Trader's good.
What! If some certain Booksellers agree
Not to be Broke by such a Scribe as Thee,
It Is Ten to One, but Thou a Chap may find
Among the Trading sort of Human Kind,
Who for the sake of dealing once in Greek,
Will take it off Thy hands, and nobly break.
Arise then, Friend, and reassume thy Pen,
And swear B -- G -- d, it is good, like Ancient Ben;
Like a true Author magnify thy Pains,
And tell Ben T -- k he has no Guts in's Brains,
Who durst such useful Knowledge to decry,
He cannot understand who does not buy.
These are the ways preceding Writers used
When once flung by, and Their own Price refused,
And These, my Friend, are what the present tread,
As soon as slighted and returned unread.
Curse every thing in Print which has Success,
Make Author's write, and Readers buy, by guess;
Like Paper Kites, let other's Labor's fly,
And by mere force of Wind be born on high.
But rest assured, and easy in Thy Mind,
Thy Volumes dare the most Tempestuous Wind,
Though North and South, and each contending Blast
Should in united Storms their Furies cast,
Unmoved by Force, and uninform'd by Sense,
Stupidity shall be their safe Defense;
Fixed to their Shelv's no Winds can make 'em rise,
And there Thou Wilt let 'em lie if thou art wise.
To Mr. F. M. on his Incomprehensible Farce, which goes by the Name of the
Generous Choice.
By a Lady.
THy Thoughts were never great, it is very plain,
By this poor Trifling product of Thy Brain;
But I, in question do my Judgment call,
If Thou had Brains, Thou would not write at all.
To the same, on his Poem, called Greenwich-Hill.
By another Lady.
LAwyer, and Bard, believe me for Thy Friend,
If I Thy stupid Poem don't Commend.
The Lady's are Indebted to Thy Quill,
And Greenwich must acknowledge Thy good will;
But now Thou'st praised 'em both, dear Scribbler see,
If any Fools will do the same by Thee.
A Pun, by Mr. D -- P -- To T -- B -- upon his Witches Trusty Broomstaff.
BY all the Punns that D -- l ever made,
Most wisely fitted, and most bravely said,
Broomstaff must own, if Broomstaff had a Tongue,
It owes it is chiefest glory to thy Song.
Trusty's a Noble Epithet, and Safe,
A Witch can never fall from such a Staff:
But Thou must own, if Thoud'st to Truth be just,
Thou Would sooner giv't a Vintner, if He Would Trust.
To the same, by one who is Free of the Sadler's Company.
THat we have wooden Horses at our Doors,
Is full as True as Thine has Chalks and Scores,
Our's stand without, but Thomas, it is no Sin,
To say, Thy Garrat has an A -- ss within.
To the Infamous Poetastor at Will's Coffee-House.
IF Wit (as Thou art told) is a Disease,
Thou need'st not give Sir R -- Bl -- re Fees,
For every Fool, with any Brains, must own,
He cannot Purge off Humors, where are none.
To the Gentleman whom Dr. C -- lb -- ch Cured of the Gout.
SIR, If you would show the Doctor's VVorth and Skill,
Ask Him, who Cured your Legs to cure your Quill,
And You will never Write so cursed Ill.
To the same.
SIR, We Rejoice to hear that You are sound,
That you drink Wine, and send the Glasses round;
That Punks no more your want of Strength upbraid,
But all Love's reck'nings now are fully paid.
Even take the Manly Pleasures of the Field,
And follow the Delights which Drama's yield.
But be Advised, and once, I beg You, think,
Quit the Debauches of Lewd Pen and Ink.
The Doctor's Mother Thought, it is very plain
Amongst Her Childbed Pangs, and felt the Pain;
But Yours never Thought at all, I durst believe,
By the few signs of Thought Your Writings give.
To a Blustering Poet, who never Spoke or Wrote any thing that was taken notice
of before.
I Tell Thee Man, thy Charges I defy,
Stradle and Damn Thy self, why, what care I.
Put off the Fool, and he will put off his Rhimes,
For Fool's make Poets in our Senceless Times:
Be Wise in Daytime, and be Chaste at Night,
And That Is the way to make Him cease to Write.
An Epigram on T -- m B -- n.
HOW B -- n was born in Garret or in Cell,
Let those determine who can better tell;
Or for what Ends the vengeful Heavens designed
This Pestilence of Wit and human Kind:
But this I dare affirm, without a Lie,
His Epigrams are only born to die.
On the Same.
IF Artbur from a Ravished Parent came,
Thy Ballad's merry Birth is much the same;
For Thou (believe it Bard without Offense)
Writing, do still commit a Rape on Sense.
An Epigram flung away on a certain Ballad-making Senator.
WHere N -- n lives I cannot tell,
If never so fain I would;
But N -- n this I know full well,
Wherever the Maggot makes you dwell,
You Will never do much good.
Notes on the two Celebrated Copies in the Commendatory Verses, to let the
Reader know the difference between the faithfulness of their Epitome and our
Copies; taken verbatim from their own Words, without the omission of one Line.
BY Nature meant, by Want a Pedant made,
Bl -- re at first set up the Whipping-Trade,
Had Thou been whipped Thou never would Schools upbraid.
Grown fond of Buttocks he would lash no more,
But kindly cured the A -- se he galled before:
And prithee where is the Sin to cure a Sore?
So Quack commenced; thence fierce with Pride he swore
That Toothache, Gripes, and Corns, should be no more:
Had he said Fops, thoud'st call his Mother Whore.
In vain his Drugs, as well as Birch he tried,
His Boys grew Block-heads, and his Patients died,
Then Thou have got the Block-heads on thy Side.
Next he turned Bard and mounted on a Cart;
Whose hideous Rumbling made Apollo start;
Doubtless thy Coachman drives with Ease and Art.
Burlesqu'd the bravest, wisest Son of Mars,
In Ballad-Rhimes and all the Pomp of Farce.
A Commendation fit to wipe his A -- se.
Still he changed Callingo, and at length has hit
On Business, for his matchless Talent fit
To give us Drenches for the Plague of Wit.
Thou need'st no Drench take Bl -- re' s Word for it.
Bold thy Attempt in these hard Times to raise
In our unfriendly Clime the tender Bays,
But bolder thine thy Country to dispraise.
While Northern Blasts drive from the neighboring Flood,
And nip the springing Laurel in the Bud;
That thine ever sprung I never understood.
On such bleak Paths our present Poets tread,
The very Garland withers on each Head,
When thou have none to wither, as it is said.
In vain the Critics strive to Purge the Soil,
Fertile in Weeds it mock's their busy Toil,
And D -- ke' s shoot up to be a C -- er' s Foyl.
Spontaneous Crops of Job's and Arthur's rise,
Whose towering Nonsense braves the very Skies,
While poor Herodotus unprinted lies.
Like Paper-Kites the empty Volumes fly,
And by mere force of Wind are raised on high;
Thy Works would do the same if T -- ke would buy.
While we did these with stupid Patience spare,
And from Apollo's Plants withdrew our Care;
The Plants fared never the worse I durst to swear.
The Muses Garden did small Product yield,
And Hemp and Hemlock overran the Field;
I warrant 'twas because thou laid'st concealed.
'Till skilful Garth with Salutary Hand,
Taught us to Weed and Cure Poetic Land;
But thou never learnd'st the Cure I understand.
Grubb'd up the Brakes and Thistles which (...)
And sowed with Verse and Wit the sacred Ground,
Not Verse and Wit like thine, which cannot wound.
But now the Riches of that Soil appear,
Which four fair Harvests yield in half a Year;
Four more than thy Translation ever will bear.
No more let Critics of the Want complain,
Of Mantuan Verse or the Maeonian Strain:
For those two Books are in the Press again.
Above 'em Garth does on their Shoulders rise,
And, what our Language wants, his Wit supplies;
Who says the same of Thine by Heaven lies.
Famed Poets after him shall stretch their Throats,
And unfledged Muses chirp their Infant Notes;
Unfledged I guess because they have no Coats.
Yes Garth; thy Enemies confess thy Store,
They burst with Envy, yet they long for more,
A sort of Envy never known before.
Even we, thy Friends, in doubt thy Kindness call,
To see thy Stock so large and Gift so small;
Some Folks had liked him, if no Gift at all.
But Jewels in small Cabinets are laid,
And richest Wines in little Casks conveyed;
Thou seldom drink'st those Wines I am afraid.
Let lumpish Bl -- re his dull Hackney Feight,
And break his Back with heavy Folio's Weight,
For which if I were He, I Would break thy Pate.
His Pegasus is of the Flanders Breed,
And Limbed for Draught or Burden, not for Speed;
A Sign his Strength of Thought does thine exceed
With Cart-Horse Trot he sweats beneath the Pack
Of Rhiming Prose, and Knighthood on his Back;
A Burden thou wilt never have, malicious Quack.
Made for a Drudge even let him beat the Road,
And tug of senseless Reams the Heroic Load;
Thou have Reams by thee cannot get abroad.
'Till overstrain'd, the Jade is set, and tires,
And sinking in the Mud with Groans expires:
Who say thy Muse can sink are errant Liars.
Then Bl -- re shall this Favor owe to Thee;
That thou perpetuatest his Memory;
Collier has done the very same by Thee.
Bavius and Maevius so their Works survive,
And in one single Line of Virgil's live;
A Gift which all Thy Lines can never give.
FINIS.

