AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST LAY-PREACHING, OR THE PREACHERS PLEA.

In a Discourse answering such Objections, which were given to a conscientious
friend; who for his satisfaction requested a resolution. In which Discourse is
proved, that preaching of the Word is a peculiar Calling, to be undertaken by
none without a special Call: and that more is required in such who undertake
it, than abilities: in which likewise other incidentall Questions and Cases,
concerning the Profession of Preachers, are discussed.

The Lord gave the Word: great was the company of those that published it,

Psalm. 68. 11. No man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called
of God, as was Aaron,

Heb. 5. 4. LONDON, Printed for Andrew Crook, Anno 1642.

The VVriting occasioning the ensuing Discourse.
THe places of Scripture underwritten, which some do bring to prove That a man
who has the gift of the spirit, and can preach, may preach the Gospel of what
calling soever he be.

To prove it lawful, they quote 2 Acts 17, 18. from which place they
understand, that not only they that have been at the University, and have
gotten learning, that they only should be Teachers; but they also to whom is
given the gift: Ergo if I can teach and edify my breathren, and my brethren
can teach to edify me, it is lawful although we be but Tradesmen; for the
Apostle did labor with his hands, and yet a Teacher; and many others besides,
2 These. 3. 8.

By way of Reason, thus.

1. A Teacher is known to be called of God by those qualifications and gifts
which he has received: but many of Gods people have the gift to teach and
resolve doubts; Ergo they are called, and therefore bound to teach.

2. Every man who has a gift which is spiritual, it is his talent; and he who
uses not his talent, God will take it from him, and cloth him with shame and
a curse: Ergo men are bound to use their gifts.

And this is the way which we have prescribed.

2. Joel. 28. 44 Isaiah 3. 1 Cor. 14. 29. 1 Cor. 14. 31, and 33 ver. The Reason
is given, God is not the author of confusion, but of peace; which does prove,
as they understand, that when men can prophecy, and do not, it causes
confusion, and not peace.

11 Numb. 29. Would God all could prophecy. 8 Acts 1. compared with the third
and fourth verses of that Chapter.

From which places they understand, that any one poor or rich, weak or strong,
if they could teach, they became Dispensers.

The same times are now for the want of public means; they were scattered, so
are we.

Therefore if God enable us, we will take a course in private. If men send us
to prison, God will send prison-comforts.

1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. As every man has received a gift, so let them administer
the same one to another.

In this thing I desire to be resolved, being of my self but weak, and not
able fully to answer it.

An Answer to the former VVriting.
I Have seriously pondered the paper; and according to your desire have
returned an Answer, to help you to a satisfaction in those things, wherein some
have sought to scruple you. All which (by the assistance of God) I have
thoroughly sifted, and I hope shall discover what bran was presented by the
Objectors in stead of the pure manchet of Gods word.

The maine assertion in the paper is this.

A man that has the gift of the Spirit, and can preach, may preach the Gospel,
of what calling soever we be.

The proofs alleged seem to prove two things.

First, That any, of any Profession, may preach, being enabled. And Secondly,
That such ought to do so, especially in the want of public means.

I conceive, that the Affirmers of these things do not understand by this word
Preaching, and Teaching: preaching, as it is largely taken for any kind of
notifying, and making known the Gospel of Christ, or the Oracles of God: for
then what need this controversy, since it is well known, that there are many
ways thus to do? 18 Acts 26.
as namely, by Conference, so Aquila and Priscilla expounded to Apollos the way
of God more perfectly. 1 Luke 4.
Or by Catechizing; so Theophilus was instructed, that thou might know the
certainty of those things, (...).
wherein thou have been catechized; so is the original, though in our English
transion it is rendered, instructed Or by Writing, in which respect Solomon is
called a Preacher, 1 Eccles* 1.
because by his writings he published those truths wherewith the Spirit
inspired him. Or by reading; and so the Prophecy of Jeremiah, and the mind of
the Lord was made known to the Jews by Barucks reading. Ierem 36.
Yea any other means by which the truth is made known, may in a sense be
called Preaching: but I think they mean not this general kind of Preaching;
but by Preaching they mean (as it is in a restricted sense taken) An
expounding of Scripture by doctrinall deducing of instructions, and
conscientiall applications of them to the Hearers by way of dilating or
enlargement. Or more briefly: by Preaching they mean A speaking unto men for
exhortation, edification, and comfort. I believe they mean this, 1 Cor. 14. 3.
by the word Preaching; for so their proofs seem to prove. And therefore I
will propose against their fancy, of the lawfulness for any (of any calling
being able) to preach, five Propositions, as an Antidote: which when I have
discussed, I will punctually answer the paper.

The Propositions considerable are these.

1 Preaching or dispensing of the word is a peculiar calling distinct from
other callings. 2 Not any of another calling ought to dispense the word
(preachingly) till they are thereunto called. 3 In the Call to preach, more
things are required than endowments to preach: without which things no man has
a Call to that function. 4 Men of other Professions, though enabled with
spiritual gifts, yet are not to undertake preaching, till they are thereunto
lawfully called. 5 Such as take on them that calling, after lawful Call
thereunto, ought not to entangle themselves in worldly emploiments, and follow
their wordly calling.
Of all these I will say something; and then come to answer the paper.

CHAP. I.
The first Proposition.
Preaching of the word (that is, an expounding or interpreting it, thence
drawing out Doctrines of instruction, and applying them to several sorts of
Hearers gathered together to hear) is a peculiar calling, distinct from other
callings.

A Calling is a certain kind of life, Perkins in his Treatise of Callings.
ordained and imposed on man by God, for the common good. Now it is certain,
that God has constituted, and appointed some men to spend their days in
finding out acceptable words, 12 Eccles. 10, 11.
even the words of truth; that they may the better publish the word of God, and
fasten it as Masters of the assemblies, according to the command given from one
shepherd: 28 Match, 19.
Go and teach all Nations.

This truth is evident from two Scriptures, to name no more.

The first place is, 10 Romans 14. How shall they hear without a Preacher? And
how shall they preach, except they be sent? The Apostles gradation is
remarkable: as faith must be before invocation; and hearing of the word, before
faith; and preaching, before hearing what is preached: so divine Call or
mission to preach precedes preaching; intimating that none can savingly, with a
good conscience, and with hope of success, preach, unless they be divinely
sent and appointed thereunto.

The second place is 4 Ephesians. 11, 12. when Christ ascended, he gave some to be*
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ: and S. Paul she was what this work is, 26
Acts 18. By this place in the Ephesians we see that the calling of Preachers is
ordained, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3, 5, 6.
and the end of it is very profitable. In one Scripture it is called a teaching
Priesthood, without which the people were miserable: 29 Prove. 18.
in another it is called vision, without which the people perish. ^ Colos. 17.
S. Paul calls it the ministry, and likewise teaching, 1 Timothy 1. 12.
and shows that it is a distinct calling from others, 12. Romans 7.

I will shut up this Proposition with an observation not to be despised. In the
2 Numb. 2. God commands, that every tribe of the Israelites should be ranked
into several orders, and that they should all keep to their own standers.
After this in Numb. chapter 3. he commands that the Levites should be appointed
to their office. Israel was now in the wilderness, journeying to Canaan, a
type of the Church of Christ thorough many tribulations and afflictions
traveling to heaven. In the camp of Israel the several orders and ranks
assigned, were to be kept, and none were to usurp the Priests office; and the
Israelitish camp was never so comely as when every one in it kept within order.
Even so it is with Christ's people, 24 Numb. 5.
they are ranked into two sorts, 6 Gal. 6.
him that is taught, and him that teaches: And both sorts are to attend to the
proper and peculiar services, 12 Romans 6, s, 3.
according to the rank into which God has put them. And none of Christ's people
(unless called) must usurp the sacred and most honored calling, 5 Heb. 4.
ordained for men, in things pertaining unto God. And the Church of Christ
never flourishes so stately against her adversaries, as when every one in it
(as it were in an Army) keeps him to his own function; for then the Church (as
Christ describes it) is terrible like an Army with banners. 9 Cant. 3.
In one word, as there are several and distinct effices in an Army; so are
there in the Church militant. One is a teacher, another is taught: and as the
Lord saw it necessary for Israel in the wilderness, to have the Levites a
distinct order among them; even so he sees it is necessary for his people on
earth to have Preachers among them, a distinct calling from others: and
therefore he has erected a ministry in his Church, by whose foolishness of
preaching he pleases to save them that believe. All this makes it evident,
that preaching of the word is a peculiar calling distinct from other callings.

CHAP. II.
The second Proposition.
Not any of another calling ought to dispense the word Preachingly, (that is,
as we have before explained the word Preaching) till they are thereunto called.

THe Reasons proving this, shall be only two; because prolixity is to be
avoided in a matter well known to every one, who is conversant in holy
Scriptures.

First Reason is, Because God disapproves, yea detests, and complains against
such, who undertake preaching without a call. ser^ 23 21.
I sent not (says he) these Prophets, and they have run; I spoke not to
them, and they have prophesied. Yea the Lord makes it a character of a false
Teacher, to teach, Verse 32.
being uncalled to that office. I sent them not, nor commanded them (says
God,) therefore they shall not profit this people at all. And our blessed
Savior intimates no less, in bidding us beware of false Prophets, Mat. 7. 15.
which come (says he) unto you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are
ravening wolves. These words are very remarkable, and describe such as are
false and dangerous Teachers by two decypherings.

1. They are such as Come unto you. The true Prophets are sent, but these come
(to wit) of their own accord, being unsent of God. The phrase of coming to
any, when it is in the new Testament applied to forbidden Teachers, intimates
both their presumptuous rashness, and sacrilegious boldness to teach, being
not sent thereunto. And therefore our Savior says, Ioh. 10. 8.
All that have come before me, are thieves and robbers: all that have come;
not all that were sent. Moses and the Prophets were before Christ; but these
were sent to the people of God: others there were who (though unsent) would
undertake to prophecy, and teach, and these our blessed Savior brands with
the name of Thieves; because they usurped another calling: and with the name
of robbers, that is, (as the word signifies) such as make a prey of others.
This is their first description.

2 They come unto you (says our Savior) in sheeps clothing. In every thing
outwardly they seem sheep: they have a form of godliness; 2 Timothy 3. 5.
they pretend Scripture, and use many goodwords; Rom 10 18.
In these they glory; and by these they work dece it fully, 2 Cor. 11. 12, 13.
transforming themselves into the Ministers of Christ; 2 Timothy 3. 6.
they use smooth insinuations, creeping into houses; they are full of
flattering and enticing language: 1 Pet 2. 3.
Thus outwardly they seem sheep. Yet their allurements to withdraw Christ's
flock from hearing Christ's voice in the Pastors set over them, are an evident
manifestation of them to be no other than ravenous wolves, though their
pretenses and outward shows seem otherwise; for they are no other but such
who intend to prey upon Christ's flock, having once divicted them, and
withdrawn them from the shepherds tents: Therefore one Apostle tells us, That
through cove to rcusnesse, 2 Pet. 2. 3.
they with fained words will make merchandise of us: And another exhorts, To
mark such, and avoid them; for they are such as serve not our Lord Jesus
Christ, Romans 16. 17, 8.
but their own belly; and by good words and fair speeches, they deceive the
hearts of the simple. This is another description of the usurpers of sacred
Preaching. The sum of this Reason is; God and Christ detests, that any of
other callings should undertake Preaching, uncalled thereunto: yea, and bids us
beware of such; Therefore such ought not to dispense the word Preachingly, or
by way of Preaching.

Second Reason is; Because we cannot read, either in the Old or New Testament,
of any Godly Preacher who taught others, by Preaching, before he was thereunto
divinely called. This is apparent from the enumeration of particulars. 1.
Enoch, the seventh from Adam, is said to have Prophesied, Jude 14.
but not without Gods call thereunto; For in old time, 2 Pet. 1. 21.
holy men of God (Such an one was Enoch, who before his translation had this
testimony, that he pleased God, Heb. 11. 5.) spoke as they were moved by the
holy Ghost. 2. 2 Pet. 2. 5.
Noah is called a Preacher of righteousness, but not without Gods warrant; for
he did according to all that God commanded him: Genesis 6. 12.
namely, he built the Ark, and forewarned the world of Gods judgment; every
stroke he gave, and every nail also which he drove in the building, was a
real Sermon of Repentance. Genesis 20. 7.
3. Abraham is called a Prophet, but the Lord assigned him his work. Genesis 18.
19.
4. The Levites were Instructors; Heb. 5. 4.
but God appointed them to that function. 5. Let us descend to the Prophets,
every one of them mentions his Call. Isa. 6. 8.
Isaiah says, I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and
who will go for us? then said I, Here I am send me. And he said, Go and tell
this people, etc. Jeremiah tells us of his Commission; ler. 1. 5.
and Ezekiel of his; yea, Ezekiel. 3. 4.
and all the rest were sent of God. Amos professes, that he was of another
calling, Luke 1. 70.
before the Lord called him to prophecy: Amos 7. 14.
I was (says he) no Prophet, nor the son of a Prophet, but I was an herdman
and a gatherer of Sycomore fruit: And the Lord took me as I followed the
flock, and the Lord said to me, Go prophecy unto my people Israel.

Pass we from the Old Testament to the New. 1. John Baptist came and preached
repentance; Mat. 3 1, 2.
but not without command from God: Ioh. 1. 6.
There was a man sent from God whose name was John. Mat. 10. 40.
2. Our blessed Savior himself did not preach without a call thereunto; He
was sent to do so. And this sending Christ to preach, was fore-prophesied in
Isaiah 48. 16. and Isa. 61. 1. etc. Which last Scripture, our Savior says,
Luke 4. 18.
was then fulfilled, when he took up a book and read, and expounded. 3. The
Apostles were immediately called to this work by Christ, Mat 10. 40.
and so S. Paul was called to be an Apostle. Romans 1. 1.
4. The Apostles set Elders to teach the Churches and Congregations which were
obedient to the faith, Acts 14 23.
and so did S. Paul and Barnabas. And we read of the Elders of Ephesus, Acts
20. 28.
whom S. Paul exhorts to take heed to the flock over which the holy Ghost had
made them overseers. And S. Peter exhorts all Elders to the like: 1 Pet. 5. 2.
These you see had an Apostolical call to preach the Gospel. 5. The Apostles
appointed certain to ordain others to preach, that the preaching of the
Gospel might continue (after their departure) in an order of men, thereunto
lawfully ordained. And as they themselves were immediately called to preach, by
Christ; so likewise all such, who, according to command Apostolical, are
ordained, are called by Christ to preach, but mediately; namely, by such, who,
under Christ, are appointed to be over certain places to ordain Preachers.
S. Paul tells Titus, Tit. 1. 5.
that, For this cause he left him in (reet, that he should set in order the
things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as he had appointed
him. And he commands Timothy, that, The things which he had heard of him, 2.
Tim. 2. 2.
among many witnesses, the same he should commit to faithful men, who shall
be able to teach others also. Now these faithful men (to whom the Apostles
committed the power of Ordination) did ordain others, and by this means the
order of Preachers is successively to continue, till Christ's second coming. So
then they (whom Christ calls to preach) are ordained thereunto by men, whose
Authority has been derived unto them from the Apostles; and the Authority
Apostolical to ordain such, who should have power to ordain others, was from
God; and accordingly, Christ promises to be with them always, Mat. 28. 19, 20.
to the end of the world: namely, in blessing the Ministry, which, according to
your appointment from me, is settled in my Church. I will be with them (in the
gifts and assistance of the Spirit) who (by ordination Apostolical) are sent
to teach all Nations, and baptize them; while they teach them to observe
whatsoever I commanded you. The sum of this historical narration is this:
We cannot read in the Old or New Testament of any pious man (being of another
calling) who took on him to preach the word, till he was called: Therefore I
conclude, that it is an unlawful act, without any holy president, as this
second Reason shows; and likewise, because it is without any precept, as the
first Reason sufficiently declared. The second Proposition is thereforetrue;
namely, Not any of another calling ought to dispense the word Preachingly, till
they be thereunto called.

CHAP. III.
The third Proposition.
In the call to Preach, more things are required than endowments to Preach,
without which things no man has a call to that function. Or more briefly thus:
More is required in the call to Preach, than abilities thereunto.

THe very relating of the sundry requisites to this calling evidences the truth
of this Proposition: they are in all three. 1. Divine Position into the
Function. 2. Personal Qualifications for the discharge of it. 3.
Ecclesiastical Authorization for its fulfillance. That all these are requisite
in the call to preach, we may two ways collect.

1. The Church of Christ is considerable both as it is a communion and society
of the faithful, whose government (so considered) is spiritual: it is ruled
by the Spirit of Christ; therefore it is requisite, that whosoever is set over
the flock of Christ, should have his designation thereunto, from Christ. Divine
Position into this calling, is therefore needful. Hence our Ministry, among
other reasons, is called, the Ministry of the Spirit; 2 Cor. 3. 8.
because, as it is in spiritual things, so it is from the Spirit of Christ,
working in the heart of some, according to his ordinance, to undertake this
calling. Again, the Church of Christ is also considerable, as it is an
external society; and so (according to the large circuit. of it) it has
several companies, which are to be governed by the word of Christ, and by the
sword of those Magistrates (Gods Vice. gerents) who rule over such several
companies: Therefore, accordingly, such personal qualifications (as the word
has appointed) are required to be in such, who execute the Ministry in these
several Christan societies; and likewise public authorizing them so to do,
from such who are appointed to be over these societies, is very requisite.

2. The necessity of the three forenamed Requisites, is also thus to be
gathered. Christ is the King of the Church: he has the Keys, and therefore
he must open the door of gifts and abilities, and endue such whom he
appoints to this work. Again, he has also committed the Keys to his Church;
and therefore the power delegate under Christ, of such who are to see
thereunto, is requisite, that they may open the door of entrance for such who
are truly qualified to discharge this function.

So that it is apparent, that abilities to preach is not all that which is
required in the entrance into this sacred function. Yet to make all this more
evident, I will punctually explicate these Requisites severally.

1. The first Requisite is Divine Position into this function. 1 Timothy 1. 12.
This S. Paul mentions in his Call; He counted me faithful, putting me into
the Ministry. And this is requisite in every ones call to it; because God is
the Lord of the harvest, and must be prayed unto, to thrust out laborers into
the harvest: Mat. 9 3^.
The word signifies to cast them out, as it were by a strong hand. So then, God
must put them into this work, and thrust them into it. And this Divine Position
into the Ministerial calling is styled in Scripture, The opening of the door.
Now God opens two doors to every one, whom he puts into the office of teaching.

1. 2 Cor. 3. 5, 6.
He opens the door of gifts: We are not sufficient of our selves to think any
thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God, who also has made us
able Ministers of the New Testament. Luke 21. 15.
This Ability, by our Savior is called a mouth of wisdom: Colos. 1. 3.
and by S. Paul, a door of utterance. By opening the door of utterance we are
to understand not only opportunities to preach, 1 Cor. 16. 9.
as it is sometimes taken; but likewise abilities and endowments to prech: an
internal faculty fitting for the Ministry. God first furnishes the mind with
knowledge of divine things, he first gives abilities to manifest them, before
one have opportunity; therefore he is said to commit to us the Ministry of
reconciliation: 2 Cor. 5. 18.
he first teaches what we shall say, before he sends us on his message: Till
God has opened the door of gifts, there is no sending from him on his Embassage

2. He opens the door of the heart to desire this office, and to be willing to
spend its gifts, and be sent in it: every one truly called by God to preach,
has a work of God on his spirit, bending and framing it to addict it self to
this call. 1 Cor. 16. 15.
Such a work had the house of Stephanas on them; and such a work was wrought on
Isaiah, Isa. 6. 7, 8.
his tongue was touched, God gave him gifts, and then made him exceeding
willing to employ them; Romans 1. 15*
and such a work was on S. Paul, whereby so much as in him was, he was ready
to preach the Gospel: and such a work is wrought on all their hearts, whom God
sirs up to feed his flock willingly. So that when God has bent the strong
delights of the mind on such kind of learning, which are most proper and
conducent to the Ministry; and when a man finds his gifts and parts more
suitable to this than any other learned calling; and when the desire of his soul
is to serve in the Church, then doubtless God has called such an one to
preach; because hereunto he has opened his heart: which opening contains the
desires of the soul to enter into this calling, and also the willingness of
the heart to embrace the work of it.

They then are by God put into the Ministry, to whom he has given both
ability and an heart to teach. Many have gifts, but no heart; these God does
not call; for he first gives the preparations of the heart. Pro 16. 1.
Again, many affect this calling, but want gifts: neither are they hereunto
called by God; Hos. 4 6.
for he rejects such from teaching: But such are undoubtedly put into the
Ministry by God, in whom ability to teach, and a will to teach concurres. A man
who (as Elihu) is full of matter, Job 32. 18.
has abilities, and the spirit within him constraines him: whose spirit the
Lord has stirred up, Hag. 1. 14.
as he did the Temples Builders, he surely is a spiritual Builder, one who
is called by God to preach. This is the first Requisite

2. The second Requisite is Personal Qualifications: He is not a Teacher sent
of God, who wants the essential qualities of a Teacher. And these are two. 1.
Abilities to teach; 2. Fidelity in that function: Both these the Apostle
mentions in one verse, The things which thou have heard also among many
witnesses, 2 Timothy 2. 2.
the same commit to faithful men, who shall be able to teach. Ability then and
fidelity is required. The key of knowledge is committed to them who are called
to preach; Luke 11. 52.
that they may faithfully open the whole council of God to his people. Acts
20. 27.


First, Ability and skill above ordinary believers must be in a Preacher. 2 Timothy 3. 16.
The man of God must be thoroughly furnished unto every good work: and
particularly he must have

1. Ability to expound Scripture: being a workman who needs not to be
ashamed, 2 Timothy 2. 15.
rightly dividing the word of truth; like Apollos, Acts 18. 24.
being one eloquent and mighty in Scripture: Therefore he is called an
Interpreter. Job 33. 23.
He must be one (like John) who has taken Gods book, Revel. 10. 8.
and in some measure has eaten it. He must also have

2. Ability to instruct. He must be a storehouse of knowledge: Mal. 2. 7.
The Priests lips shall keep knowledge, and they shall seek the law at his
mouth; for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hoasts. Every Scribe (says our
blessed Savior) which is instructed unto the Kingdom of God, Mat. 13. 52.
is like an householder which brings forth out of his treasury things old and
new. He must have

3. Ability seasonably to apply the truth. He must have the tongue of the
Learned, Isa. 50. 4.
that he may know how to speak a word in season to him who is weary. He must
be Gods Steward, Luke 12. 42.
knowing how to give a portion of meat in due season to his household: Heb. 5.
13, 14.
ministering milk to babes, and strong meat to riper Christians: Ioh. 21. 15,
16, 17,
He must have skill to feed Christ's lambs, and Christ's sheep. He must have

4. Ability to refute and convince the adversaries of sacred truth. Tit. 1. 9.
These abilities, at least in some competency above ordinary Christians, are
requisite in a Teacher: All which requires store of learning, both humane and
divine; that the man of God may have dexterity both in diving into the
Scripture, and in refuting the adversaries. And therefore,

They are very bold intruders into the calling of teaching others, who both are
unlearned themselves, and likewise have given no attendance to reading; 1 Timothy
4. 13.
especially to such kinds of learning which are subservient to the Ministry,
and without which one of necessity can be but meanly qualified for that
calling, and will be very lame in the discharge of it.

Secondly, Fidelity is another essential quality required in a Teacher: 1 Cor.
4. 1, 2.
Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the
mysteries of God: Moreover, it is required in Stewards that a man may be found
faithful. A Teacher is a Dispenser of the precious blood of Christ, of the
precious promises of the Gospel, of the word of God, and of the unsearchable
riches of Christ; and therefore he must faithfully dispense these: concealing
no necessary truths: Acts 20. 27.
being no way negligent, but instant in season, 2 Timothy 4. 2, 5.
and out of season, to exhort, rebuke, instruct, to do the work of an
Evangelist, and to make full proof of his Ministry. These are the personal
endowments required in a Preacher: And this is the second Requisite.

Thirdly; The third Requisite is Ecclesiastical Authorization. As God opens
the door of gifts, and of the heart, which is the invisible opening of the door
to the good Shepherd, Ioh. 10.
or his invisible Call to the work: so for the execution of it, he must have a
visible Call by those who are delegated under Christ to ordain such, who are to
fulfill the work of the Ministry. This visible Call, I name Ecclesiastical
Authorization, which is not only a solemn declaration, that such and such are
chosen of God to this work; but likewise it is a committing of the Ministry of
Christ to them. And this has two parts, which whosoever wants, he ought not
to do those acts on which the edification of Christ's people publicly depends.

1. Ordination: Which is the consecrating and setting apart for that work of
the Ministry, with Imposition of hands and Prayer, such who are deemed, upon
trial of gifts and life, fit for it. Thus S. Paul ordained Elders, Tit. 1. 5.
and left Titus in Crete to do so: That Blessed Apostle glories that he was
separated to preach the Gospel: Romans 1. 1.
Separated, namely, as by God in his counsel and decree, G^l. 1. 15.
so also (according to Gods own appointment) he was hereunto separated by the
Church. Acts 13. 2.
He then who is called according to Gods own appointment, must be separated
or set apart by the Church Governors (I mean Bishops) to give himself wholly
to teach. Which separation being done solemnly, 1 Timothy 5. 22.
by Prayer, and Imposition of hands, 1 Timothy 4. 14.
is called Ordination.

2. Derivation of actual power to fulfill the Ministry, is the other branch of
Ecclesiastical Authorization: and this is after the trial of gifts and life.
Let these also (says the Apostle) first be proved, 1 Timothy 3. 10.
and then let them minister, being found blameless: The words import, that
both Ministers and Deacons must be proved; and being found fit, then they
should be permitted to execute their office. This admission to execute their
office, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
is called Gods allowing them to preach. This is the third Requisite,
Ecclesiastical Authorization, which consists in the ordaining and allowing, by
the Churches Overseers, such, who shall teach: and without this,
notwithstanding there be competency of gifts for that work, yet none can have a
complete Call to preach.

To conclude therefore this Proposition: Since to the entrance into the
Ministerial Calling there is required both Gods putting one into it, and
Authorities ordaining and setting one apart thereunto, together with its
deriving actual power, to such who undertake it, to fulfill it, as well as
personal gifts for its discharge; Therefore I take this third Proposition is
undeniably true; namely, In the Call to preach, more things are required than
endowments to preach, without which things no man has a Call to that Function.

CHAP. IV.
The fourth Proposition.
Men of other Professions, though enabled with spiritual gifts, yet are not to
undertake preaching, till they are thereunto lawfully called.

THough the Arguments proving the second Proposition will also sufficiently
confirm this; yet these two shall likewise serve to evince it.

First Reason: Because every man is bound to abide in his own Calling. This is
proved from two Scriptures: One is this; 1 Cor. 7. 20.
Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called. These words
are very emphaticall. 1. Exempting none (though proving afterward well
qualified and endued with gifts and graces) from their personal Calling. 2.
Enjoining to every one continuance in their particualr Function; Let him abide,
or make his Mansion in it, (...).
even dwell on it. 3. Intimating that the state of Christianity frees none from
the Calling in which God has set them. And there is good Reason for it;
Because Christianity as it is a Profession of true Autarchy, or
self-contentednesse with ones own station or condition; so likewise it is a
Religion abhorring all Ataxy, or disorderly enormities; and particularly, the
confounding (in one person by presumptuous usurpation) such Callings which God
has disjoined. Another Scripture proving that every one ought to abide in
their own Calling, is this, Study to be quiet, and to do your own business, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.
and to work with your own hands, as we commanded you. Which words, 1. Commend
a calm conversation, opposite to tumultuous turbulency and restless
intermedling with things which concern us not; Study to be quiet. 2. They
confine our employments within the limits of our own Calling; do your own
business, or those things which are personally and properly yours. 3. They
command Mechanics, or manual Crafts men to work with their own hands:
Whereupon it will follow, that therefore they ought not (uncalled) to undertake
Preaching, seeing they are not freed from their manual works, from which every
Dispenser of spiritual things is freed; that he might sow spirituals; 1 Cor.
9. 11.
and for his maintenance he is to reap the carnal things of others. Seeing
then every man is bound to abide in his own calling, therefore such who are of
other Professions, though they be enabled with spiritual gifts, yet are not
(being uncalled thereunto) to undertake Preaching.

Second Reason is, Because Holy Writ affords no president of any who did so,
but rather the contrary: For as we cannot read of any holy man undertaking
(without Call thereunto) the office of Preaching, as the second Reason of the
second Proposition proved; so we may read of such, whose gifts being very
suitable to that Function, yet without Call would not undertake it, nor leave
their Callings. Two examples shall serve in stead of many. 1 Samuel 13. 14.
David, though a man after Gods own heart, and one who had more under standing
than all his teachers, Psalm ^19. 99.
yet forsook not either his Calling of feeding sheep, Psalm 78. 70, 71, 72.
or of governing the people, to become a Preacher: And though he was a
Prophet, and extraordinarily inspired and fitted to preach, yet we read not
that he did so in any Synagogue or Assembly; but still he abode in his
Calling, and taught publicly no otherwise (if my observation fail not) than by
his writings: in which, though dead, he yet speaks, and preaches to the
Churches, as often as any thing of David's is read in them. The other example is
our blessed Savior, who was (it seems) in Profession a Carpenter; Mar. 6. 3.
and though he had gifts beyond Angelical and humane conception, Colos. 1. 19.
all fullness dwelt in him; yet till about thirty years of age he did not (so
far as we read) preach or leave his Calling. Luke 3. 23.
And when he began to preach he was thereunto first called, as in the second
Reason of the second Proposition has formerly been manifested. So then, both
from precept and example, I conclude, that the fourth Proposition is an
unshaken verity: namely, Men of other Professions, though enabled with
spiritual gifts, yet are not to undertake preaching, till they are thereunto
lawfully called.

CHAP. V.
The fifth Proposition.
Such as take on them that Calling, after lawful call thereunto, ought not to
entangle themselves in worldly employments, and follow their worldly Calling.

THe Reason of this is; Because such are wholly to intend the work of this
Calling which they have undertaken. The Apostles, though some of them had been
Fishers, and some of other Professions, yet affirm jointly, that they would
give themselves continually to prayer, Acts 6. 4.
and to the Ministry of the word: neither would they meddle with a business
which in its own nature might well have stood with their Ministerial Function;
because of some inconveniences in it: Verse 2.
It is no reason (say they) that we should leave the word of God and serve
tables. S. Paul would have Timothy, and in him all Ministers, wholly to inure
themselves to the pains, and whatsoever other hardship accompanies or follows
their Ministry, and not be busy in secular negotiations. He takes a
similitude from a Soldier, who having undertaken military service, does wholly
addict himself to his Commanders service: even so such who undertake Christ's
service must seek to please Christ, by doing his work; and therefore must not
frame themselves to those employments in which they were enwrapt before Christ
chose them to his pecular service. 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4.
The words are very plain; Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier
of Christ: And again, No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs
of this life, that he may please him who has chosen him to be a soldier. And
there is good reason why Ministers should wholly intend the Ministerial
employment and no other; both because other employments make them unfit to
discharge this freely and fully. He who enters into this Calling and will
secularly be employed, is unfit for this Calling, even as he who lays his
hand on the Plough, ^u^. 9. 52.
and looks back, is unfit for the kingdom of God: and likewise, because any
one work which is enjoined the Ministry, is sufficient alone to take up the
whole man, and his whole time. As to name but that one mentioned by S Paul; he
is to give attendance to reading and meditation, and to give himself wholly to
these, 1 Timothy 4. 13, 14, 15.
that his profiting may appear unto all. Now this is work enough for a man: yea
it is set out in Scripture, to be a toylsome and tiresome work; much study is
a weariness to the flesh. God compares it to the work of Husbandmen, Eccles.
12. 12.
who are in continual employment, either breaking up the fallow, or sowing, or
harrowing, or manuring, or reaping, or gathering into barnes, and then renewing
again their labors. And he compares the service of the Ministry to Fishing: a
trade in which is no loitering but laboring; not meanly but toughly, Mar. 4.
19.
sometimes all day, often all night, and many times for nothing. Luke 5. 5.
Such, yea greater is a Ministers work, it is a constant continual labor: he
prays he reads, he marks, he meditates, he writes, he utters the
meditation of his heart; and when he has done, he must return to his daily
task, and weekly spending, being every moment employed, save at the times of
due intermission, till he has fully finished his course, and the time of
departure approaches. Preaching is a toylfull work, and greater than to speak
by an hour-glasse. Again, it is set out in Scripture to be an enfeebling work:
So the Prophet found it, Isa. 49. 4.
I have (says he) spent my strength for naught, and in vain. And so our
blessed Savior found it, who in the prime of his years, little past thirty,
was reckoned by the Jews to be toward fifty. Ioh. 8. 57.
It is supposed by Divines, and probably too, that he so spent himself in
preaching, and winning souls, that he seemed to the Jews to be much elder
than he was. The Ministerial work well followed makes one weak in strength,
and old in youth: it consumes the lungs, wastes the spirits both animal and
natural, parches the radical moisture, draines the blood, looses the joints,
rivells the face, and wears the brain. They who speak other men's labors, 2
Cor. 10. 12, 13, 14, 15.
(and such it seems there were in the Apostles times) count Preaching nothing,
because they know not experimentally what it means; 1. Tim. 5. 17.
but such who labor in the word and doctrine (as the Apostle did) will with
him acknowledge, 2 Cor. 12. 15.
that in Preaching they spend and are spent, Phil. 2. 17.
and that they sacrifice themselves for their people.

Lay all this together: and seeing the Ministerial Calling has in it
employment for the whole man, and for his whole time; and seeing other Callings
will distract in fulfilling the Ministry, therefore it must be granted, That
they who undertake this Calling, ought not (save in the cases mentioned in the
Answers) to divert from the employments of this Calling, CHAP. 7.
being busy in worldly employments; and so I conclude this fifth Proposition
to be very true: namely, Such who take on them that Calling; after lawful call
thereunto, ought not to entangle themselves in worldly employments, and follow
their worldly Calling.

CHAP. VI.
I Now come to discuss the Contents in the Paper. Wherein, To prove that a
man, who has the Gift of the Spirit, may preach the Gospel, of what Calling
soever he be, is quoted Acts 2. 17, 18. The words are these: It shall come to
pass in the last days, says God, I will pour out my Spirit on all flesh,
and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, and your young men shall
see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams: And on my servants, and on
my handmaids I will pour out in those days of my Spirit, and they shall
prophefie.

From which place they understand, That not only they that have been at
University, and have gotten learning, that they only should Teach; but they
also to whom is given the Gift. Therefore: If I can teach and edify my
Brethren, and my brethren can teach to edify Me, It is lawful, although we
be but Tradesmen; For the Apostle did labor with his hands, and yet a Teacher;
and many others besides. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 8.

I answer to all This. Though the distinction of learning gotten, and learning
given; or (as Scholars speak) touching learning obtained by study, pains,
industry, and investigation either at University, or any other place; and
learning conferred by inspiration, or by any other immediate way of divine
donation may be admitted; yet the inference thereupon (that any of any Calling
whatsoever having given learning may preach) is unsound: Because, the very
having of learning, either acquiredly or inspiredly, is not sufficient to
authorize preaching without a special Call. Which as I have proved, so this
History in the second of Acts confirms: for they of whom it speaks had
abilities to preach, they had been with Christ, Ioh. 20. 22.
and he had breathed on them the holy Ghost; yet would they not preach till
they had a special Call, and were authorized thereunto by power from on high,
Luke 24. 49.
according to Christ's command. The pouring out of the Spirit on them (as the
History relates) was a special and public declaration of their Call, that God
had chosen them to teach the whole council of God, to plant the Gospel in all
Nations; and therefore God accordingly endued them, extraordinarily, with all
languages, and all infallible sacred knowledge.

Such then, who propose these as a president for Layteachers, should do well
to consider these Particulars.

1 That inspiration Apostolical served only for the planting of the Gospel:
since, God inspires so none; and therefore the pretense of having learning
given, not gotten, is a boast of things without their measure; 2 Cor. 10. 12, 13
and a vaunt of the distribution of gifts on them, which God never granted to
any but to the first Planters of his Church.

2 That they should consider, That though any were endued with abilities
Apostolical (which I suppose none will arrogate to themselves, but such who
have no other knowledge than that which puffs up;) yet such ought not to assume
the divine Function, until he have also (with these here) the Apostolical
Call. If he should without that Call do so, he were but an intruder, and a
false Apostle. And therefore. Though Thou be able to teach thy Brother, and thy
Brother Thee; yet neither of you ought Ministerially to do so, till thereunto
you have (as these Apostles) a special Call. So then this History gives no
countenance to any, though gifted, to undertake Preaching, uncalled.

3 They should ponder, That these Apostolic men did nothing in a corner. They
had no private undertakings; for the whole multitude came together, saw and
heard; therefore such who resolve on a private, close course of Preaching in
secret, cannot justify themselves by these Apostles here. Neither yet follow
they our Saviors example who spoke openly to the world, and ever taught in the
Synagogue, and in the Temple, whither the Jews always resort, Ioh. 8. 20.
and in secret said nothing.

4 They should consider, That these Apostolical men, having (by this
extraordinary pouring out of the Spirit on them) their complete Commission to
preach, gave themselves wholly to Prayer, Acts 6. 4.
and to the Ministry of the word: And therefore, hence cannot be raised a
justification for any Laymen (continuing so) to preach the word. The History
affords these irrefutable collections.

Butthe Objectors inference no ways results out of the quoted words; namely,
That any of any Calling who has gifts may preach. My reason is; Because they
mention the gifts of the Spirit poured on some, whom God prohibits to preach,
as on women: Your daughters and my handmaids (says the Text) shall prophecy;
and yet God permits not such to teach. 1 Timothy 2. 12.
Therefore for the clearing of this place from the absurd collection, 1. Cor
14. 34* 35.
we must explain these words, And they shall prophecy. Know then:

These were Joels words; but are here alleged by S. Peter to satisfy the
multitude, who were confounded, seeing the cloven tongues like fire sitting on
the Disciples heads, and hearing them speak in their own tongues, the
wonderful works of God: He tells them, that now Joels Prophecy is fulfilled;
namely, I will pour out etc. After he tells them, that, Jesus Christ being
exalted to Gods right hand, has shed forth this which they now saw and heard:
which they saw in the tongues, and their speaking of Gods wonderful works.
This is the brief relation of the Story, which makes much for the
understanding of the quoted Scripture: Wherein we may observe,

1. That in the day of Pentecost God poured out of his Spirit in great measure
both on men and women, who were with one accord in one place.

2. That these were thereby enabled to prophefie. And

3. Their prophesying was, no more but, both a clear understanding of former
Prophesies, as appears by S. Peter's applying this and two more, and also a
praising Gods, as his and the others speaking of Gods wonderful works shows,

So then these words (Your sons and your daughters shall prophecy; and again,
My servants and my handmaids shall prophecy;) imply only thus much: These your
sons and your daughters which are my servants and my handmaids, shall have of
my Spirit bestowed on them, whereby they shall understand the former
Prophesies, touching the Kingdom of God, and the Mystery of Salvation: Which
in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, Ephesians. 3. 5.
as it is now revealed unto his holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit. I
take this Paraphrase is the genuine meaning both of Joel and Peter, and best
shows how both the sons and daughters of God are said to prophecy in the last
days. It would be therefore showed plainly, and without wresting the words,
how the conceit (that any of any Calling, having gifts, may preach) can be
grounded on them. The words speak of such a kind of prophesying, wherein both
men and women may have a part; and that is no other than either a clear
understanding of Gods mysteries, formerly veiled in dark Prophesies, but now
explained and known since the Spirits descent, according to these Prophesies of
the Gospels time, Isai. 11. 9 Jerem. 31. 34. Joh. 6. 45. or else it is a
lauding and praising of God for his wonderful works. One of these, or rather
both, is the prophesying meant in this place: and so both sons and daughters
may prophecy. But that kind of prophesying which consists in interpreting
Scripture, thence deducing Doctrinall and Practical Conclusions for the
instruction of others, (I am sure) cannot be meant in this place; because in
that kind of prophesying the daughters of God have no part nor fellowship with
the sons of God; for God has excluded them, as has been showed. Let this
suffice for answer to the quotation in Acts 2. 17. 18.

CHAP. VII.
TO that which is added, That Trade smen may preach, because the Apostle did
labor with his hands, and yet a Teacher; and many others besides. 2 These. 3. 8.

I answer. 1. It follows not, because the Apostle or any other, having a Call
to teach, did in some cases labor with their hands, therefore that such who
are Tradesmen, having no calling thereunto, should preach, I think this
consequence cannot possibly be made good.

2 I answer. All which can be collected, for imitation, from the Apostles
laboring with his hands is, That a Minister, in some cases, (there being
thereby no impediment to his preaching, or other Ministerial duties) may
voluntarily use any lawful Art or Calling, manual or mental, to supply his
necessities.

The causes why S. Paul labored with his hands, are recorded in Scripture to
be these.

First, He would not be burdensome. The penury of the Thessalonians was such
(they being poor Artificers) that they could not conveniently contribute
toward S. Paul's relief: Besides, that little which they had was liable to be
preyed upon by their Persecuters; therefore the Apostle, in compassion,
remitted his right, and rather than he would burden them he wrought with his
hands. ^ These 3. ^.
And for this cause the Ministers of the Waldenses did work to sustain
themselves; So they profess in their answer Ad l^teram Augustini Olmucensis,
Anno 1508. Edit.
because they found that the exacting of due maintenance (which yet they might
have took) was burdensome to the Church, being for their poverty termed the
poor men of Lions: which men yet professed, that they were sorry that they had
not sufficient stayed livings for their Ministers, whereby they might have more
time to their studies, and greater opportunity to instruct them with necessary
doctrine and knowledge.

Secondly, S. Paul wrought with his hands, because he would avoid appearing
scandal. 1. In respect of some Corinthians, who, being covetous, would have
detested the faith, if they had found it any way chargeable: being like the
Gadarens, who would rather part with the Ministry of Christ, than forgo their
Swine. Lest the Corinthians should hereupon reject the Gospel, S. Paul forbears
his right, and so far a based himself, to work with his own hands. Ambros.
in 1 Cor. 9. Forma vult este caeteris, ut ubi vident non exped^re, et am (...)
non utantur.
Herein, being an example to others, not to use their lawful liberties,
unless wherein they see an expediency. 2. In respect of false Apostles among
the Corinthians, to stop their mouth. They, likely, would have accused him for
making advantage of the Gospel, and would, perhaps, have reported that he only
taught for gain; therefore the Apostle to cut off all occasions of such
thoughts from them, would not challenge any thing from the Corinthians, 2 Cor.
11. 12.
but wrought with his hands. Doubtless, in like case and condition, a Minister
may take on him another Calling, what he likes; so it be not an hinderance of
his preaching, nor any offense of men.

Thirdly, S. Paul wrought with his hands, to gain thereby authority and
credence to his Doctrine touching labor: he had taught, at Thessalonica and
Ephesus, a necessity of working; therefore to shame them from their loitering
and idleing, he so far abased himself below his Apostolical function, Acts
18. 3.
as to work in Tent-making. He tells the Thessalonians, that he did not eat
any man's bread for naught, 2 These. ^. 8. 9.
but wrought with labor and travel night and day, that he might not be
chargeable to any of them. Not because he had not power, but to make himself
an ensample for them to follow him. Acts 20. 34.
And he tells the Ephesians, You your selves know, that these hands have
ministered unto my necessities, and to them that werewith me. And again, I have
showed you all things, sic how that so laboring, ye ought to support the
weak, and to remember the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, how he said, It is
more blessed to give than to receive. And questionless it is lawful for a
Minister (being of excellent parts and abilities, abundantly sufficient to
discharge his Calling) for the provocation of others to double diligence in
their Callings, to undertake (if he please) either such a Calling which is
subservient, or subordinately conducent to his Theological Profession; as
teaching, 1 Samuel 19. 20.
or tutoring of Youth; for so Samuel, a Prophet, had a school of young Prophets
at Ramah, 2 King. 4. 38.
and Elisha at Gilgal: or he may employ himself in any manual work; yet
still remembering the caution, That it hinder not his pastoral function, nor be
any offense to others.

Fourthly, S. Paul did labor with his hands, because the profane Corinthians
forced him partly to it: they would not give him needful relief, though he
might (if he had pleased) justly have commanded it. Even unto this present
hour (says he) we both hunger and thirst and are naked, 1 Cor 4. 11, 12.
and are buffetted, and have no certain dwelling place, And labor, working
with our own hands: being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it:
being defamed, we entreat, Verse. 14.
etc. And then he concludes, I write not these things to shame you, but as my
beloved sons I warn you. It seems he had but hard entertainment, and
therefore was forced to relieve himself by his labors, till the Brethren of
Macedonia supplied what was lacking unto him. 2 Cor. 11. 9.
A Minister may be driven to great exigency, and though he have power and
authority to claim maintenance, yet from a way ward people he cannot (it may
be) have it: They will disobey Gods command in Gal. 6. 6. the wickedness of
their covetous hearts sets them to devise means of muzling the Ox that
treads out (for their good) the spitituall corn. 1 Timothy 5. 18.
Now in this case a Minister may undertake Callings lawful, though unbefitting
his person and function. The case of learned Musculus was lamentable; Melchior.
A^amus in vita Musculi.
he was a man learned and godly, yet after much pains in his public
Ministry, was so ill used, that he was glad to get into a Weavers house, and
learn weave, thereby to get bread for himself and his family: at last, the
Weaver thrust him out of his house, and then was worthy Musculus forced to go
to the common ditch of the town, and work with his spade to get his living.
This may well be recorded, that posterity may shun such Corinthian humors,
as to suffer their Paul's to be miserably needy, 1 Cor. 4. 14.
and not relieve them; but force them rather to manual labors. These were the
causes of S. Paul's working with his hands, which sufficiently warranteth
Ministers, in like cases, to do the like; but no ways justifies any Tradesmen
to usurp teaching.

Thus did S. Paul, and thus did Barnabas, both Ministers; but of more Ministers
who did so, I read not. I am sure the Apostle peremptorily says, I only and
Barnabas, have not we power to forbear working? 1 Cor. 9. 6.
And that any of other Professions, uncalled, did Ministerially preach, much
less many others besides, I suppose the Objectors will never read it in Gods
book.

CHAP. VIII.
THe first Reason brought by the Objectors, is this: A Teacher is known to be
called of God, by these qualifications and gifts which he has received: But
many of Gods people have the gift to teach and resolve doubts; Ergo, They are
called, and therefore bound to preach.

Answer. This Reason proves not, That every Layman, having abilities, is
called and bound to teach, which yet should have been concluded, if the
Objectors would, by Reason, have made good that selfsame fancy of theirs. But
passing by the just exception which might be taken against this Reason, both in
assuming one thing, and faisly concluding another, as also other defects of
Art, which a Scholar may easily espy in it; let this Answer suffice to it, as
it is: namely, If by these words in it [many of Gods people] be meant such, who
are Ministerially called to teach, then the whole is true; for these have gifts
to teach, and resolve doubts; and they likewise are called of God and the
Church to teach, and are therefore bound to do so. But though these, many of
Gods people, have gifts, and a Call to teach; will it therefore follow, that
others of Gods people, having no Call may do so? the consequence is too
irrational to be defended. But if by these words [many of Gods people] be
understood Many among Gods people which are Laymen; Then I answer, That though
it be true, that some of them have personal gifts and abilities; yet in as
much as they want the other qualifications of a Teacher, mentioned in the
exposition of the third Proposition; therefore they are neither bound
Ministerially to teach, nor are they called to teach; neither ought they to be
known or acknowledged for such whom God has called to teach. If they desire to
employ their gifts Ministerially, then they should in modesty tender themselves
and their abilities to be tried by such, who can authorize them to exercise
them: and being approved, they may Minister. 1 Timothy 3. 10.
But if such in Authority admit not, then ought they to think, that
(notwithstanding their gifts) God has not designed them to this function. Once
for all; Know, that gifts to teach and resolve doubts cannot justify any in
their undertakings to preach, unless, withal, they have the other
qualifications required hereunto. Till the Objectors prove the contrary, they
say nothing to the purpose.

CHAP. IX.
The second Reason of the Objectors is this: Every man who has a gift which is
spiritual, it is his talent; and he who uses not his talent, God will take
it from him, and cloth him with shame and a curse: Ergo, Men are bound to use
their gifts.

Answer. It is true, that every Spiritual gift is a talent, and must be used,
lest shame, confusion, and a just ablation of it otherwise succeed: and yet it
is as true, that talents are no otherwise to be used, than according to the
Call to use them. Some have talents conferred on them, to be publicly employed
for the good of others, and accordingly these talents must be improved: Others
have talents given them only for their own private use, and the private use of
some others, and accordingly such must employ their talents, If any Layman
have abilities to preach, he must use that ability, only, according to those
ends for which God gave him such a talent: First, thereby to teach his wife, 1
Cor. 14. 34.
and bring up his children and family in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord. Ephesians. 6. 4.
Secondly, That thereby with greater prudence he may discern what is
publicly taught by his Pastor, and so retain that which is good, 1 These. 5. 21.
and that which will arm him against a time of trial and affliction;
wherewith, perhaps, God intends to exercise him more than others of his rank
and vocation, and accordingly aforehand fits him by extraordinary abilities,
giving him for the better preparation against extraordinary troubles in his own
Calling, but not for ostentation of parts, by an extravagant intrusion into
another Calling. Such therefore need not fear clothing with shame and a
curse, for not using their talent Ministerially; it is sufficient to free them
from fear of both, if, without arrogance, they only employ it to their own,
and their families good. If this satisfy not, I am then sure that the
Objectors are deluded; And so thought blessed Martin Luther before me, who
(upon that Verse in the Psalmist, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings have
thou ordained strength, or, perfected praise,) answers the objection, and his
words shall be the conclusion of my answer. His words are these: Huc pettinent
and illi qui sibi conscii magnae doctrinae suae, periculum (...) m^^iant long
maxim ur, si non alios doceant; cansantes ses^ talentum sibi a tum in terra
defodere, and cum servo do mi^^ duram sententiam Domini expectare, adeo
ridiculis nugis Diabolus ludit horum phantasias. Qu^s hoc versa instructos
oportet scire no^ non esse qui docemus, nec verbum nostrum docendum, sed solum
os nostrum posse verbo ejus servire, si ipse voluerit and vocaverit. Tu,
inquit, perfecisti laudem, non illi, non nos. Sic in Evangelio, tradi^it quidem
Dominus talenta servis, sed non nisi vocatis: expecta igitur and tu, done^
voceris. Interea ne ambias, ne te ingeras, non enim te rumpet scientia tua.
Currebant (inquit Dominus apud Prophetam) and ego non loquebariis. Multos haec
(...) misere vexat, ut eos instituti sui pigeat and poeniteat. Diabolus haec
facit, ut inquietot eos qui been caeperunt, and ^an ^em taedio consumat. Igitur
qui vocatur, praebeatos, and recipiat verbum; sit o gano^, and non author. Quib
non vocatut, (...) Dominum messi^, ut mittat opera^ios, and perficiat virtutem
ex ore infantum. Luther in com. Psalm 8.
Hitherto also they belong, who conscious to themselves of their great learning
may dream of some great danger to themselves, if they instruct not others;
alleging that they hide in the earth the talent given them, and do expect
with the evil servant the heavy doom of the Lord; Satan does so delude their
fancies with ridiculous trifles. Who, by this verse instructed, ought to know,
that it is not we who teach, neither is it our word which is taught, but only
our mouth may do service unto his word if he will, and call. Thou (he says)
have perfected praise: not they, not we. And so in the Gospel, the Lord truly
delivered talents to his servants, but they were first called: therefore do
thou also expect till thou be called. In the mean time, thou may not desire
it, thou may not voluntarily press into it, thy knowledge will not burst
thee. They ran (says the Lord in the Prophet) but I spoke not by them. This
temptation miserably vexes many, that it grieves and repents them of their
vocation. The Devil does this to disquiet them who have begus well, and at
length consume them with irkesomnesse. Therefore he who is called, let him
offer his mouth, receive his word; let him be an Instrument, not the Author.
He who is not called, let him pray to the Lord of the harvest, that he may
send Laborers, and perfect strength one of the mouth of infants.

CHAP. X.
THe Objectors say, that this is the way which is prescribed: And they allege
sundry Scriptures for proof.

Their first allegation is in Joel 2. 28. The words are, I will pour out of my
Spirit on all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, etc.

Answer. These words of Joel prescribe nothing; they only declare what God will
do in the last times: He will (say they) pour out of his Spirit on all
flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy. That is, They shall
apply the ancient prophesies, seeing plainly that they are testimonies of Jesus
Christ and his Kingdom; Revel. 19. 10.
and they shall speak of Gods mavelous works. This God shall do says Joel,
and this they did, says the story, in the second of Acts; and this is the
prophecy which these words speak of: but I think it passes the skill of an
understanding and judicious Divine, to espy in them an injunction that Laymen
should preach Ministerially. Till I see proofs, naturally concluding, that
there is in these words such a prescription, I shall repute the assertion of it
to be but a groundless fancy.

The second Proof is in Isaiah 44. 2. The words are these, I will pour water
upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my
Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine of spring.

Answer. These words prescribe nothing; they only promise an effusion of the
word of Grace, and the comforts of Grace, and of the Spirit of Grace, and
blessing upon the Churches children, both Jew and Gentile. But I conceive it is
a very hard task for the Objectors to prove, that they prescribe Laymen,
uncalled, to teach* For though the Lord be pleased upon the Gentiles (who were
as a thirsty and dry ground) to pour out his water, that is, make them
partakers of the word of Grace, according to the comparison by Moses; Deuteronomy. 32.
2.
and of the floods, that is, of the comforts of Grace, these living springs, as
our Savior calls them; Ioh. 7. 39.
yet it is ridiculous to say, That therefore Laymen, uncalled, may prophecy:
and as inconsequentiall it is, to say, That because God will pour his Spirit
on the seed of the Church, and his blessing on her offspring, therefore Laymen
may preach. Though God pour his Spirit on the seed, yet the seed is not bound
to pour out; but must stay till God have sent, and given a commission to go
and drop the word, Ezekiel. 21. 2.
as he did to the Prophet. Besides, the very next Verse in Isaiah 44. shows,
That the pouring of water, and floods, and the Spirit on the seed, is not a
pouring that the seed should pour, but that the seed should grow and increase:
namely, in piety, and in the exercise of the several graces of the Spirit,
This place therefore proves not the Objectors fancy.

Another Proof they produce out of 1 Cor. 14. 29. Let the Prophets speak two
or three, and let the other judge. And verse 31. Ye may all prophecy one by
one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted. And the Reason is given,
Verse 33. For God is not the Author of confusion, but of peace. Which does
prove, as they understand, That when men can prophecy and do not, it causes
confusion and not peace.

Answer. This allegation proves not, that Laymen may preach. Here, indeed, the
Prophets are commanded to dispense the word orderly; but such who are no
Prophets have hence no command for its dispensation. The Apostle would have but
two or three of the Prophets to speak in their meetings or Congregations. A
course much like to that in the Synagogues, wherein one read Moses, and another
(as it is thought) read in the Prophets; Acts 13. 15.
and when these had done, another expounded and spoke a word of exhortation.
This course the Apostle enjoynes, and shows in the 31. verse the convenience
of it; Because hereby ye may (says he) all prophecy. He means not all the
promiscuous company of the godly, for he accounts it an absurdity to think all
are Prophets; but he means, 1 Cor. 12. ^9.
all who are Prophets may prophecy. And from the twelfth Chapter we may
gather, that three things must concur in the prophesying of which he speaks
in this place. 1. The operation, that is, the act of prophesying. 2. The
administration, that is, the office or calling to prophecy. 3. The gift, or
the enablement; so the Apostles meaning here is, All, that is, All who have not
only the gift, but likewise the calling from those Prophets, to whom the spirit
of the Prophets are subject, may exercise themselves in prophesying by course,
or in their several turns. And he gives the reason of this course which he
prescribes; because it is of Divine institution from God, for two ends: both
that there may be no confusion in their meetings; and likewise, that peace may
be maintained in them. And he further tells the Corinthians, that, This course
is observed in all the Churches of the Saints. this then is that which the
Apostle prescribes, That the Prophets should exercise their gift of prophesying
orderly; but here he enjoynes no Laymen to become Prophets or Preachers.

I therefore exceedingly wonder, how the Objectors can affirm, and understand,
that these words prove, That when men can prophecy and do not, it causes
confusion and not peace! That which may be proved from them is, That men in
their own Callings, and particularly, Preachers in theirs, doing all thins
orderly, shall avoid confusion, and obtain peace in so doing. But it is an idle
conceit, That these words teach, that men able to preach, and actually not
doing so, cause confusion. Did our blessed Savior (being able, never any abler
to preach, yet not doing so for thirty years,) cause any confusion in the
Jewish Church all that time? I think the Objectors dare not utter so
blasphemous an affirmation. Even so Gods people, though able to preach, yet
cause no confusion, though they are not Actors in so holy an employment.
Confusion would then be caused, if what the Objectors plead for, were admitted;
because an eversion of the distinction of Callings must needs succeed; for the
sacred would hereby be blended with others, and every one (upon his own
selfe-conceiteidnesse of parts and abilities) might appoint himself a Teacher:
Which any may discern is near to confusion, who have read both that God has
appointed Stewards over his household, Watchmen and Leaders over his flock,
Laborers in his harvest, diverse Administrations, as well for the preservation
of peace in the Church, as for the edification of it; and likewise, That none
takes this honor on him, but such who are thereunto called. This quotation
therefore will nothing advantage the Objectors.

The next place alleged, is, Numb. 11. 29. Would God all could prophecy.

Answer. This Scripture does not prove that Laymen may preach.

1. Because the prophesying here mentioned, is not a Salvificall teaching
others, but a Political discoursing unto others: it is an uttering wise and
grave Apothegmes or Counsels, (as Moses did) concerning the public affairs of
Israel. The Spirit of prophecy, put on the Seventy, was, Numb. 11. 17.
that they with Moses should bear the burden of the people, that is, rule
them: and their prophesying, therefore, was no more but a prudentiall speaking
of things appertaining to rule. Moses his wish therefore is not, That all were
able to preach, but that all were able to rule; and so proves nothing for the
Objectors.

2. Moses his wish is, That all could prophecy, that is, That they were called
to prophecy, and enabled thereunto, as these Seventy in the history were
called, in that their names were writ to enter into the Tabernacle, v. 26. and
they were enabled from God, he put his Spirit on them; therefore this wish
does not justify the intrusion of any into another Office, who is either
uncalled, or ungifted. So that Moses his wish that all were Prophets, yet
imports also, That till they are Prophets, as well by Calling as enablement,
they must not prophecy.

3. Moses does not absolutely wish, that all the people could prophecy; but
hereby he only intimates, that it would be no impeachment to him and his
Authority, though all the Camp (if God thought fit) could prophecy; that is,
be able to govern. His words are an answer to Joshuahs jealousy, lest the
prophesying of Eldad and Medad, in the Camp, should derogate from Moses his
Authority; Moses tells him, that for his sake he would have none prohibited
from prophesying; that is, from ruling; but he wishes that all the people were
fellowshelpers, and able Assistants to him in governing. This is the very true
meaning of his wish. Which teaches pious men, not to envy at the gifts and
calling of others in the same Vocation with themselves; but it no way
prescribes men of other Callings, to undertake, without call thereunto, the
Office and Function of others. Therefore from hence, Laymen can have no
warrant for their undertaking to preach.

Another place alleged, is Acts 8. 1. At that time there was a great
persecution against the Church, that was at Jerusalem, and they were all
scattered abroad thorowout the regions of Judea and Samaria, except the
Apostles. Compared (say the Objectors) with verse 3. and 4. As for Saul he
made havoc of the Church, entering into every house, and haling men and women,
committed them to prisor. Therefore they that were scattered abroad, went every
where preaching the word.

From which place, the Objectors understand, That any, poor or rich, weak or
strong, if they could teach, they became Dispensers. The same times (say they)
are now; for the want of public means, they were scattered, so are we;
Therefore, if God enable us, we will take a course in private: if men send us
(say they) to prison, God will send prison-comforts.

I perceive that the Objectors collect hence three things, 1. That any, of what
condition soever may preach, though they be no Ministers. This I conceive they
prove from verse 1. All were scattered thorowout the regions of Judea and
Samaria, except the Apostles, compared with verse 4. Therefore they who were
scattered abroad, went everywhere preaching the word.

2. That the agreement of our times with these Primitive times, in dissipation
or scattering, warrantizeth any, though no Ministers, to preach privately.

3. That if trouble should befall them for this their attempt, they should find
like comfort in prison to that which these Primitive Christians found, being
committed to prison.

Answer. These three collections will find no defense from this Scripture, as
shall be made apparent by our answer particularly to every one of them: And
therefore,

I answer to the first, That this quotation proves not that any, rich or poor,
weak or strong, being of other Callings, did Ministerially dispense the word.
It is only an history what was done upon the persecution of Jerusalem: as, 1.
It says, That all were scattered, except the Apostles, that is, Many, or the
most of believers: for we must not think that none (but the Apostles) who
professed the name of Jesus abode there, seeing we read, that devout men
carried Stephen to his burial, verse 2. and that the Apostles (during this
persecution) sent Barnabas as far as Antioh, Acts 11. 12.
to the Gentiles, who had turned to the Lord. And secondly, The history
relates, that all who were scattered did preach.

The Objectors supposing that some of these were Laymen, hence imagine, that
Laymen may preach.

Answer. Though it be granted that some of the scattered were Laymen, and that
they did preach, yet I dare confidently affirm, That not one of them who were
Laymen did Ministerially dispense the word. This will be evident, if we find
what kind of preaching These used. The text (according to the Original) says,
they all who were scattered did Evangelize, that is, did show the glad tidings
of the word, or, did bring the word of glad tidings: All did thus. And if we
look further into the history, we shall find, according to the two ranks of
the Scattered, two kinds of Evangelizing by them. Such of them who were
Ministers did ministerially Evangelize; but such who were Laymen did
Evangelize only discoursively. In the thirteenth verse it is said, That the
Samaritans believed Philip Evangelizing; it is rendered Preaching: And the fifth
verse tells how, and in what manner he Evangelized, (...), he preached (as an
Ambassador) Christ. Again, some of those who were scattered, were men of
Cyprus and Cyrene, and these also according to the quotation did Evangelize;
and yet the Holy Ghost tells us how, and in what manner they did so; Acts 11*
19, 20.
(...), they talked, or, discoursed of the glad tidings of Christ Jesus; first,
only to the Jews, and then also to the Greeks. So then, this Evangelizing or
Preaching was but their discoursing and telling the Jews and Greeks the good
tidings of Christ, which any may do. And this discourse is a kind of
Preaching; but yet it is not the Preaching which is properly so called. And it
is to be noted, that their talking and discoursing was available to the
conversion of others.

If any reply, that the Holy Ghost uses the same word touching Peter and John's
preaching at Samaria, Acts 8. 25. and therefore it is likely these men of
Cyprus and Cyrene did ministerially preach.

I answer; Peter and John did two ways preach at Samaria: First, by their
discourse they testified the truth of that which Philip had taught; and so may
any godly man do. But secondly, They did Evangelize* in many Villages of the
Samaritans, which I believe was as Philip before had done, by speaking as
Ambassadors from Christ; which only Ministers (as they were) may do. The men
of Cyprus and Cyrene did discoursively preach, as Peter and John did; but they
preached not ministerially, as John and Peter. And I the rather think so,
because the Holy Ghost, speaking of their preaching, uses a word signifying an
ordinary talking, (...). Plut in Alcib.
but no artificial speaking; whereas in describing Philips preaching, he
uses a word signifying his uttering as an Ambassador* and deciphering Peter
and John's preaching, he uses not barely the word of ordinary conference, but
joins with it another of witnessing and evangelizing; thereby showing there
was more than an ordinary discourse. And lastly, in setting down Barnabas his
preaching, when he came to Antioch, he tells us, It was by public
exhortation: giving us in all to note a difference of Ministerial preaching
from that manner of divulging by discourse, divine things, which is permitted
to Laymen.

Their second collection from this Scripture in Acts 8. is, That the agreement
of our times with these Primitive, in point of dissipation, warrants any
Layman to preach privately.

For they suppose, that upon the persecution, there was a Prohibition, or a
Non-permitting the word to be publicly taught at Jerusalem. And then they
imagine that there was private preaching in houses by those who were no
Ministers. And hence they conclude, That if God enable them, they will take a
course in private.

Answer. Though we grant that the public dispensing of the word was
interrupted by the persecution, and thereupon likewise, that the Christians met
in private houses, where together they enjoyed the ordinances of the word and
Sacraments; yet still it is to be denied, that the word was preached among
them in any private house, by any Layman. Acts 5. 42.
I believe (as most congruous to Scripture) that when they met in houses,
either an Apostle, or some other Minister among them did only teach. The
Objectors must first prove, that any Laymen in these Primitive times did at
all, either in private or in public, Ministerially preach, before they
conclude hence the lawfulness of Lay-preaching. I have already showed the
contrary, and till it be as clearly disproved, neither I, nor others have
reason to believe their bare affirming it.

And to their resolution I say, This Scripture will not warrant it.

1. Because it relates nothing what these Primitive Christians did in private;
and therefore they cannot be brought as a president of that, which is not
recorded.

2. That which this Scripture teaches for imitation, is, That if the Church of
God should be scattered through persecution, then the scattered may do what
they can to plant a Church elsewhere: Even as Philip preached to the Samaritans,
and Barnabas to them of Antioch; so Ministers at such times may dispense the
word (if they can) in Popish, and unbelieving Countries. And as the men of
Cyprus and Cyrene did by discourse win many to the faith; so may Laymen (in
those barbarous Countries whither they shall come,) assay by discourse and
conference to gain souls to the acknowledgement of Christ. This Scripture
therefore allows no private undertakings of Laymen.

The third Collection (which I suppose by their words they make) is, That if
trouble should befall them for attempting a private course of preaching, they
then shall find like comforts, in prison, to that which these Primitive
Christians found, being committed to prison.

Answer. If Authority shall commit any private Undertakers to prison, for their
clancular and private preaching, surely there is no cause for such to expect or
claim comfort from God in prison; because the cause of their sufferings is not
good. The Primitive Christians suffered for their Faith, for true Religion, for
Righteousness sake, and so found prison-comforts; but these Undertakers will
suffer for their own fancy, for a groundless opinion, for their unrighteous
usurpation of another Function, and so may be sure they have no ground of
comfort. S. Peter prohibits Christians to suffer as a busie-body in other men's
matters; ^ Pet. 4* 15.
the word is, (...), as a Bishop in another Circuit or Diocese. If any
uncalled will needs play the Bishop, in ordaining himself a Teacher, and take
on him a Function, not committed to him, and shall for this presumption either
be imprisoned, or otherwise suffer, he (in S. Peter's opinion) shall not suffer
as a Christian, but as an evill-doer. And therefore such must not look for
prison-comforts, if men send them to prison. Let this suffice to this
allegation.

The last Proof is 1 Pet. 4. 10. As every man has received the gift, even so
minister the same one to another.

Answer. The words of S. Peter exhort every man to help one another, according
to those abilities which God has given; but they are no command of Laymen to
turn Preachers.

The Objectors, supposing that many Laymen have Ministerial abilities,
imagine that these words prescribe them Ministerially to dispense them.

Answer. Such a collection cannot be made hence, without wrong to the Text. S.
Peter allows all to minister their gifts; but withal gives the limitation, or
rather the direction how to minister them; namely, As they have received them.
Such then who have received gifts Ministerial, and publicly to be dispensed
to others, (according to the Text) must so dispense them; but such who have no
such receiving of their gifts to be so employed, can from this Text have no
warrant for the Ministerial dispensation of their gifts, it only commanding
so to minister them, as every man has received. Some have gifts given, yet
they themselves are not given; and therefore they must not ministerially
dispense their gifts without Call. Others (namely such who are Ministers) have
both gifts, and themselves are also given, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for the
edifying of the body of Christ. And therefore they are accordingly bound to
dispense themselves, and their gifts. This Text only enjoynes in the general,
how the gifts of every one in their several Callings are to be employed; but
it no way enjoynes a dispending of personal gifts, in a Calling not personally
our own. In one word, Though some Laymen may be supposed to have Ministerial
abilities, or gifts, yet seeing they want Ministerial faculties, or allowance,
(being neither by God, nor his Church thereunto called) they are not bound
Ministerially to employ their gifts. And I believe it will be a hard work for
the Objectors to make it evidently apparent, that these words of S. Peter
enjoyne Laymen to preach.

According to your desire, I have endeavored fully to resolve you. These
Meditations (as you desired) were penned at spare times, (which were but few)
for the justification of a precious truth against a vain fancy; and for the
defense of Gods wisdom, in distinguishing the holy and other Callings from
some men's folly, who by their presumptuous conceit would bring in a confusion.
The Lord bless to you, and to every Reader what is writ, and deliver you all
from the leaven of presumption. So says your friend, the servant of Jesus
Christ, and of his servants which are in Bengeo.

John Bewick.

Thanks be to God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 57.
FINIS.
The Author to the Printer.
I Understand that you have a perfect Copy of a Treatise, Entitled, An
Antidote against Lay-Preaching: or, The Preachers Plea. It was intended for the
satisfaction of a private friend, and of such to whom he pleased to
communicate it. The importunity of some who have seen it, has prevailed with
me, not to be against its Printing. Do therefore your duty, if you conceive
(either by your self, or some others) that thereby some abler Penman may be
awaked, the Ministry encouraged, the contrary minded better instructed, the
Churches peace and Gods glory more promoted.

Your friend, I. B.


