Imprimatur,

Joh. Garthwait, Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, ac Dom. Dom. Richardo
Archiepis. Eboracensi, a Sacris Domesticis.

Datum Episcopo. Thorpae, Sept. 11. 1668.


Reverendus in Christo Pater, ac Dom. Dom. Thomas Dunelmensis Episcopus.

Obiit Anno
Aetatis 95. Episcopatus 44. Salutis 1659.
THE LIFE OF Dr. THOMAS MORTON, Late Bishop of DURESME.

Begun by R. B. Secretary to his Lordship. AND Finished by J. N. D. D. his
Lordships Chaplain.

YORK, Printed by Stephen Bulkley, and are to be sold by Francis Mawbarne,
1669.

To the Christian Reader.
I Am not altogether ignorant that the Life of this Reverend, truely-religious,
and learned Prelate (my dear Master Doctor Thomas Morton, late Bishop of
Duresme, has been Written by a Reverend Divine Dr. John Barwick (by the most
gracious favor of King Charles our present Sovereign) promoted first to the
Deanary of Durham; and after of Saint Paul's London, lately defunct (having been
his Lordships Chaplain) together with a pious Sermon thereunto annexed, which
he Preached at the Funerals of the said Bishop: And I much rejoiced that he
had taken the pains to Publish it in Print. But here I must make bold to
manifest, That albeit he had been his Lordships, Chaplain; yet was it in his
devex old Age, when he had been reduced to a Private Life, being cast out of
that plentiful Estate of the Bishopric of Duresme, to which he had been
advanced by that glorious Martyr King Charles the First.

Whereupon I, who had been his Servant and Secretary for the space of 50. years
(and quod excurrit) being quite outed of such Offices and employment, as I had
under his Lordship, by these late woeful and destructive Times; did think with
my self, that I could not better bestow some part of my still-decaying old
Age, then in recollecting and laying together some such memorable particulars,
as I had observed (of his Life) during my attendance on his Lordship; which
thing I then undertook, and having finished it, after my rude Style; I sent it
up to his Lordship, (then, though unwillingly, sojourning in Hartfordshire) for
that I would attempt nothing in that kind, without his liking and approbation.
And to his Lordship it was committed, and with him left; but by him the less
minded, for that his thoughts were upwards, and Heavenly fixed. And here (as it
seems) Dr. Barwick, who then and there attended on his Lordship, as Chaplain,
did furnish himself with such passages, as (after) he had use of in the
Writing of his Life, whereof he could not be better Informed.

And because my Narration extended not further then till (about) the late
unhappy and miserable breach between our late most gracious and Sacred
Sovereign, and that most wretched, (so called) Parliament, (which fell out to
His Majesty's eternal Honor, and their perpetual shame:) I therefore
consulted with a Learned and Reverend Doctor Doctor Joseph Naylor, Prebendary
of Durham, and Rector of Sedgfield very lately deceased.
, who then gave attendance on his Lordship (lodging in Durham-House in the
Strand London) being one of his Lordships Chaplains, and requested him to set
Pen to Paper, and to Write what he had further Observed (upon thi^ Subject) in
those most difficult and funebrious times* Unto which Motion, h^ most willingly
condescended, (such was the Lov^ and Honor which he bor^ to his late Master
an^ liberal Patron) as wi^ plainly appear by hi^ Narrative hereunto, i^ the
end adjoined. And herewith I thought good to acquaint thee, Christian Reader:
And so Farewell.

R. B.

Errata.
PAge 24. l. 12. for Dialact, r. Dialect. p. 28 l. 6. for grada, r. gra^u. p.
31. l. 17. for Marshes, r. Marches. p. 68 l 5. for ^usa^, r. ausus. p. 80. l.
13. for flesh, r. flesh. p. 92. l. 12. for absteniousness, r. abstemiousness.

The Life of THOMAS MORTON late Bishop of DURESME.
IF the natalicious and Birth-places of most Noble and Victorious Princes, or
the Cities where they put off their Princely Ornaments, submitting their
Mortal Bodies to the Earth, their common Mother, may be accounted an Honor to
such Places; Then may this Observation justly add some reputation unto him,
whose Life (in part) I undertake to Publish: For he was Borne in Where
Septinius Severus expired his last, and the place of his Sepulture is known, at
this day, by the Name of Severhill, near York: And long after him, that
virtuous Prince Constantius, surnamed Chlorus, (both of them Roman Emperors)
likewise dyed: And where also Constantine the Great, his Son, was borne; and
after his Fathers death had the Purple Robe cast upon him, and Proclaimed
Emperor. And here Bellena, the Heathen Goddess of War had a Temple: Where
also Probus Papinia^us, that famous Oracle of the Law. Prefissed, etc. as
learned Authors, both Ancient and Modern, do consent.
YORK, that ancient City, on Tuesday the seventeenth day of March, in the year
of our Lord 1564. Mr. Richard Morton, a Religious, Wise, and well-governed
Gentleman (Mercer, and Alderman of that City) in the most happy and prosperous
Reign of Queen ELIZABETH of famous, and never dying memory.

He was put to School to Learn the English Elements, in the same City, (so
soon as his tender age permitted) where, as I have heard him say, were his
School-fellows Mr. Thomas Cheek (after Knighted by King JAMES) Grandchild to
that famous Scholar Who was Schoolmaster unto that Religious Prince King
Edward VI. This Sir John Cheek was the honor of St. John's College in
Cambridge, (as was his great Grandchild Mr. Henry Molle, Fellow of Kings
College, lately deceased) both of them in their times, Public Orators in that
University. And this Mr. Henry Molle was Son unto Mr. John Molle, who dyed
Prisoner in the Inquisition at Rome, after two and thirty years durance, for
the Testimony of the true Protestant Religion. Quos honoris causa memoro.
Sir John Cheek) and Guy Faux, who afterward proved that famous and fatal
incendiary in that never to be forgotten GVN - POWDER - TREASON, which God
Almighty, through King JAMES His singular and Divine Wisdom, most happily
prevented and subverted.

After a small time, he was sent to the Free School of Hallifax, in that
County, under one Mr. Maud, then Schoolmaster there: And after a competent
time, he was found fit for the University; and was accordingly placed a Student
in St. John's College in Cambridge, whereof (then) was Master that incomparably
learned Doctor William Whittakers, (whom but to Name is enough) unto whom, in a
short time, he became known, and by him was encouraged in his Studies. He had
two learned Tutors, successively, Mr. Anthony Higgons, (long after Deane of the
Collegiate Church of Rippon in Yorkshire:) And Mr. Henry Nelson, afterward
Rector of Hougham, an un wearied Preacher of Gods Word there, where he lived to
see this his Pupil to be Bishop of Duresine.

Now, after he had suffiently performed such Acts and Exercises, as by the
Statutes of the House were required; he orderly took the degrees, first of
Bachelor, next of Master of Arts in the University, and was after that Elected
Fellow of the College, (Doctor Whittakers being his worthy Fautor, and
Promotor) and not long after he became Logic Lecturer of the University, which
Office he discharged to his exceeding commendation.

Being now of mature years (his own inclination being promoved by the holy
Spirit of God) he was admitted unto the Scared Order of Deacon, and the next
year of Priest, by the right Reverend Father Richard Bishop of Peterborow, in
the year of our Lord, 1592. and 1593. And having continued in the University
about five years longer, he was (by Gods All-seeing Providence) called into his
native Country, for his provident Father had (at that time) sought out and
procured a good Parsonage for him, called Long Marston, where he spent his time
(as a good Pastor) in the diligent Preaching of Gods Word, unto his
Parishioners there, and sometimes in other neighboring places, especially
where they most stood in need of Spiritual comfort and instruction.

In which Place, whiles he was Incumbent, he brought thither two learned, and
hopeful Seholers* Mr. John Price; and after him, Mr. Matthew Levet, sometimes
his Pupills in St. John's: the later afterward, Prebendary and sub-Deane of the
Collegiate Church of Rippon, a most painful and learned Preacher, and a
careful Overseer of that Church and Flock committed to his Charge and
Government, upon whom afterward, he collated a good Prebend in the Church of
Durham, when afterward Bishop there.

At this time, viz. 1598 Morton was called upon to take the Degree o^ Bachelor
in Divinity i^ St. John's College in Cambridge, when both by Preaching and
Disputing in the Schools ( pro gradu) he performed his task s^ Learnedly (to
his great commendation) that h^ was not only held worthy of that Degree, but of
an higher, which in due time followed.

In the year 1602. he 1602.
was made choice of by the right Honorable Ralph Lord Eure, (who by Queen
Elizabeth was selected Lord Ambassador to the Emperor, and King of Denmark)
to attend on him for one of his Chaplains, Mr. Richard Crakanthorp, that
exquisite Divine, was the other, (who long afterward proceeded Professor of
Divinity in Oxon, and among other learned Books which he Published, the last
was, his Vere Cygnaea Cantio, that laborious and elaborate Answer to the
Archbishop of Spalato (then a renegado in Religion) his Consilium Reditus,
which he indigitated Defensio Ecclesiae Anglican^. In this travail, Master
Morton having leave to pass further into high Germany, there he saw and saluted
some of the Jesuits Colleges, and amongst sundry others, that at Mentz, where
one Mulhusinius, a learned Jesuit, and he, fell into acquaintance, and had
conference together in certain Points of Religion: Which Jesuit then gave him
a little Printed Tract, with an Inscription under his own Hand, To Mr. Morton,
which I have seen: And at Colen he also was known to, and conferred with
another learned Jesuit, called Nicolaus Serarius, who afterward Though he did
it obliquely, because he had mis-named Baronius the Cardinal a Jesuit, as
though that were a disparagement unto him; albeit, Tolet and Bellarmine, (both
of them Jesuits) were dispensed with by the Popes pleniporencie, to be
translated into Cardinals, how strict soever the Rules of their Society were
against it.
made mention of Mr. Morton in a book which he writ and Published, calling it
Minerval, against that miracle of Learning Josephus Scaliger.

In this Voyage, an^ chiefly at Franckford upon the Moene, he furnishe^
himself with such variet^ of learned books (whereo^ many were Pontifican
Writers) as upon his retur^ home became very useful to him for his Study, an^
in the exaration of suc^ Learned Works, (in Controversies agitated betwix us,
and the Papists) which in succeeding time, he Writ and Published, even almost
during Life.

Being returned into England, he became Chaplain to the right Honorable and
noble Lord Roger Earl of Rutland, on whom he sometimes attended at Belvoir
Castle, where (upon occasion) he Writ a Paper of Verses, which (as I remember)
concluded thus:

Bella, precor, (^^lvoir) nomen quia
Bella-videri* Bella nisi fausto cum omin^ ne videas.
Quem Le^ terruerit (quid eni^^ nisi vota?) precamur,
Hunc beet ( o Belvoir) qua Rosa nostra domum.
In the year 1603. fell 1603.
that great and funebriou^ sickness of the Plague at York, whereof some
thousands dyed; but the poore^ sort of the Infected, were turned out of the
City, an^ had Booths Erected for them on Hobmoor^, near unto the City: For
whos^ comfort and relief, in tha^ fatal extremity, Mr. Morton often repaired
unt^ them from Marston to preac^ unto them the Word o^ God, and to Minister
consolation to their languishing souls; having witha^ provisions of meat
carrie^ with him in Sacks, to relieve the poorest sort withal. But, as often
as he went thither, he suffered not any servant to attend him, but himself
sadled and unsadled his Horse, and had a private door-stead made through the
wall of his study (being the utmost part of the house) for prevention, lest he
might bring the contagion with him, and endanger his whole Family. This was one
of the works of mercy and charity.

About this time he was made choice of by the right Honorable the Lord
Sheffield, then Lord President of York, to confe^^ and dispute, in points of
Religion, with one Mr. Young a Popish Priest (then Prisoner in York Castle,)
and one Mr. Stillington a Gentleman of that persuasion; which Conference was
held before his Honor, and the Learned Counsel, in the Manor house of York,
where were also present many of the Knights and Gentry in the County. The main
Point which was controverted, and disputed of, was, The Popes Infallability of
judging: In the handling whereof, his Adversaries were so gravelled and
confounded, that Mr. Morton won the reputation of an able Divine, and acute
Disputant. This Disputation was never hitherto Published, but is in their hands
who may let it see the light now (especially) that both parties are defunct.

In the year 1604. he 1604.
he look his Journey to London, where, by the incou^agement of the right
Reverend and vigilant Bishop* of London, Dr. (...) (who about this time w^^
translated thence to t^^ Archbishopric of Cante^bury, he Published his fi^
labor, entitled, Apolog^ Catholicae, Pars I. and De^^cated it to the said
Arc^ Bishop his noble Patro^^ And about this time, t^^ most Reverend Father God
Whom Campian the Je^uite thus mentio^^th, Qui nu^c dominatur in concionibus,
(...). 5.
Toby Matthew Lo^ Archbishop of York, the famous Preacher, confe^^^ on him a
good Prebend that Metropolitical Chur^^ for his greater advanceme^^ and
furtherance in Divi^^ Studies.

And now intending to go forward with the second Part of his Apologiae, he was
for a time constrained to supercede; for in the nick of this time, fell out
that most horrible and execrable GUN-POWDER-TREASON, which yet (by the mercy of
Almighty God) was even miraculously quashed, and overthrown. Whereupon Mr.
Morton Published a little Tract, which he instiled, Dangerous Positions and
Practices for Rebellion; proving, (out of the Jesuits, and other Pontifician
Authors, that they forged and maintained those Positions of the now Church of
Rome, which were the grand work o^ Treason and Rebellion against all Princes of
Sovereign Powers, who had renounced and shaken off the Romish yoke.

This being past, he Published 1606
the second Part o^ his Apologiae Catholicae, A^ ^his tim^ ^e lo^ged ^^ the
h^u^e of his h^nou^^d Kinsma^ S^r ^homas Vavisor Kni^ht-Ma^shall of ^is
Ma^esti^s most honorable household.
Anno 1606. dedicating the same to King James of ever happy memory, a Prince o^
incomparable knowledge in all kind of good Learning But having now raised a
nest of pernicious hornets about his ears, by the Publishing of this Tractate
(who manifested their pernicious malice and gall against our Church, by those
virulent and stingie Pamphlets which they thrust out and dispersed:) This
caused Mr. Morton, not long after, to write and Publish, His Full satisfaction
concerning a double Romish iniquity, viz. Heinous Rebellion, and more then
Heathenish Aequivocation: which Book was written in Answer to their Moderate
Answer, (as they called it) whereof Mr. Robert Parsons the Jesuit was the
supposed Author. And this Book likewise, Mr. Morton dedicated unto King James,
at which time, His Majesty was pleased to let him know, how that his adversary
Mr. Parsons, was dead, and gain to the Divill, as then was his Scottish
Dialect.

In the year 1606. he took the Degree of Dr* in Divinity in Cambridge, where
then disputed against him in the Schools, that learned, mellifluous, and
dexterou^ Disputant Dr. Thomas Playfer, the Lady Margarets Professor in that
famous University, where Dr. Morton so learnedly and worthily carried, and
demeaned himself, in that Disputation, That the Professor perorated in his
just praise, these words, Laudent te Libri in portis, etc. In this
Commencement, Doctor Morton Preached in St. Mary's (pro gradu) upon that place
of holy Scripture, Genesis 4. 16. Then Cain went out from the presence of the
Lord, etc. At the same time, Dr. John Overall, the Reverend Deane of St. Paul's
London, the Kings Professor of Divinity adorned him with the Scarlet Habit and
Ring, which are used on those solemnities for completing the degree of Dr. in
Divinity.

Not long after, the Deanary of Gloucester fell void by death, which (upon
Archbishop Bancrosts commendation to the King) was conferred upon Doctor
Morton. About which season, traveling toward Gloucester by Oxon (the Act there
being then kept) he was welcomed, and highly esteemed by that thrice learned
and famous Doctor John Raynolds, President of Corpus Christi College, and with
much Academicall Honor, incorporated Doctor in that famous University; where
he was likewise much honored by many other Learned Doctors there, as, Dr. John
King Deane of Christ Church, that most powerful Preacher, (his ancient friend)
afterward the most worthy Bishop of London; Dr. Ayrey, the Learned Provost of
Queens College; Dr. Aiglionbee, head of Hearts hall, and with many other
Learned and Religious Doctors.

At which time there disputed ( pro gradu Magistri) that hopeful Scholar Mr.
Daniel Featley Fellow of Corpus Christi College, who carried himself so
quickly, and learnedly in his disputing, that he was very much admired and
applauded (among others) by Dr. Morton, for his singular ability in the
performance of that exercise, as he most justly deserved. And indeed
(afterward) he became a most able Divine, and singular disputant, as was well
known to many that were able to judge; yea, and Dr. Smith (who by the Popes
negative bounty, was after made the titular Bishop of Chalcedon) felt the
weight of his arm, and of those great abilities wherewith God had enabled him,
when as Dr. Featley (being Chaplain to Sir Th^mas Edmonds Knight, His
Majesty's Ambassador Legier to Henry IV* the French King) he disputed in Paris
(before a select Company of English, and diverse others) with the said Dr. Smith
in sundry Points of Religion, to the overthrow, and confusion of his Adversary.
This Dr. Featley was ever after in high favor and esteem with Dr. Morton, who
was his great Benefactor. But since, alas! is dead that learned Divine; but
when, and where, posterity may with just grief For notwithstanding bis true
and known worth, he was exuted (in those late destructive times) of his
Ecclesiastical preform nis, and amongst many others, imprisoned in the Lord
Peter's House in Aldersgate London, where falling very sick; at last, he had
leave to take fresh Air in the Country, where after a short time. be expired.
record. Yet in testimony of his singular love, and the Reverend Affection
which he bare to Dr. Morton, he wrote and Published (among many other elaborate
Pieces) a learned book, which he dedicated to Dr. Morton, then Bishop of Durham.

Whilst Dr. Morton was Deane of Gloucester, it pleased the Right Honorable the
Lord Eure, Lord President of Wales, to nominate and assume him to be one of his
Majesty's Council for the Mar^hes of Wales; which dignity he enjoyed, whilst
Deane there; in which Deanary succeeded him, that most Learned Divine and
Writer Dr. Richard Field.

Now within three years, viz. 1609. was vacant the Deanary of Winton, by the
preferment of Dr. George Abbot from that Deanary, to the Bishopric of Coventry
and Leichfeild. To the which Deanary he was designed by the Kings most gracious
favor, with the congratulation and furtherance of his best friends in Court,
especially of that incomparably Learned Prelate Dr. Lancelot Andrews, then
Bishop of Elie, His Majesty's great Almoner. And about this very season Dr.
Sibrandus Lubbertus, Professor of Divinity at Franckar in West Friesland, writ
a learned Tractate in Latin against the Arminian Faction, then much prevailing
in the Netherlands; which Book he inscribed to Dr. Morton Deane of Winton: for
which honor, the Deane returned him many thanks in a Latin Epistle, wherein he
refuted those heterodox Opinions, which we^^ then on foot.

About this time, he wri^ that elaborate and learned work, which he entitled
The Appeal; And almost at the same time, was vented by Mr. Brierley Priest his
Book called, The Protessants Apology; but know^ it was, that he had plowe^
with Deane Morton's Heife^ (or Book) then in the Press at London: yet was he as
quickly answered by the Deane, (at the same time) so much as especially
concerned the doctrinall Part thereof.

This task, of Writing this last Book, was imposed on him by that vigilant
Prelate Arch Bishop Bancroft; and the examination of the testimonies of the
Authors quoted in his Appeal, was committed unto Mr. Thomas James, (that
indesa^igable and laborious Keeper of the public and famous Library in Oxon)
and to sundry other Learned Divines of that University: but was afterward
finished in his private Library in the Deanary house of St. Paul's London, where
he then re^ided, Dr. Overall his reve^end friend being Deane there. At which
time, he was sought out and acquainted with that truly noble and bountiful
Knight Sir George Morton of Dorcetshire, (his faithful friend and Couzin)
descended of the most venerable Family of Arch Bishop Morton, who was in his
time famous for the happy uniting of the two Royal Houses of York and
Lancaster.

Near unto this year 1609.
1609. Dr. Sntcliffe the Dean of Exceter begun the founding of a College near
Chelsey in Middlesex, which was to consist of a certain number of Fellows to be
employed (chiefly for the answering of such Books as the Popish Priests should
disperse, for the impugning of the Orthodox, and true Religion established in
the Church of England.) Of which Fellows, the first named were, Dr. John
Overall Dean of St. Paul's London, Dr. Thomas Morton Dean of Winton, Dr. Richard
Field Dean of Gloucester, etc. with other learned and religious Divines Which
College was to be endowed by his Majesty with good Lands in Chelsey (then in
reversion) after a few years; and with four^ Farms in Devon, which Dr.
Sutcliffe gave, to the value of 300 li. per Annum besides other indowments
conferred thereupon by the said Dean Sutcliffe, for that Religious use. Yet for
the advancement of that pious work, it was further held necessary, to obtain
His Majesty's gracious favor for the deriving and conducting of a Stream of
Water forth of the River of Lee, unto the Eastern Parts of the City of London,
for the behoof of the Inhabitants there dwelling, and for the benefit and
furtherance of that pious work. Whereupon those Fellows agreed on Dr. Morton,
to make a Latin Oration to His Majesty, Wherein (among other things, as I
remember) he alluded unto that ^lace* Genesis 1. Quando Deus sundavit terram super
aquas.
which he performed at Theobalds in the Privy Chamber there. Which Speech
being ended, to Hi^ Majesty's great content; he was graciously pleased to grant
their most humble request; and rising up from his Chair, he openly declared,
That that College should go^ forwards, etc. such then was the Judgment and
resolution of that pious and judicious King.

Near unto this season, 1610*
Anno 1610. was held the Convocation at St. Paul's London of the chief Divines
in the Province of Canterbury, when, and where, Deane Morton was chosen to
Preach the Concio ad Clerum in St. Paul's Church, whose Text was, Mat. 15. 13.
Vos estis salterrae: by the Preaching whereof, he obtained such favor and
estimation, that the Proloeutors place in the ensuing Synod, was by common
suffrage cast upon him. But he modestly declined it (on purpose) that a
reverend friend of his might be adorned with that dignity.

And about the same time, there was a great fear fell upon the Inhabitants
dwelling under the South side of the Cathedral Church of St. Paul^ London,
which was to be repaired a fundamentis; and that therefore (upon King James his
command) all their houses were to be pulled down from the East unto the West
end of the said Church; which motion did so amaze and terrify the Trunk
makers, and other Tradesmen, whose mee^ livelihood consisted in their Trades
and Houses that (in that woeful case) they repaired unto Dea^ Morton, then
lodging in the Deanary of St. Paul's, and earnestly besought him to take their
lamentable condition into his Christian thoughts, and to be a means unto His
Majesty to revers that woeful doom. Whereupon the Dean took the boldness on
him to address a Letter to His sacred Majesty, wherein he most humbly beseeched
Him to take their miserable estates into His Majesty's most pious and Princely
consideration, who were the living Temples of the holy Ghost. What effect that
Letter took, I know not; this I am assured of, that those Houses stood unmoved;
yet the repairs of that Cathedral advanced; until the late irreparable fire
Anno Dom. 1665. which destroyed, and consumed that ancient City of Londdon,
together with that venerable Pile, the Cathedral Church there.

A little before this time came out of France that lamp of learning, both
divine and humane, Monsieur Isaac Causabon, who at his first arrival was
lodged in the Deanary of St. Paul, (where Dean Morton then sojourned) with
whom was contracted that firm friendship, and community of Studies betwixt him
and Dean Morton, which (during life) was never interrupted. This Phoenix of
learning, being after deceased; his true friend Dr. Morton (being then Bishop
of Duresme) did at his own charge, (in memory of one so dear, learned, and
loving a friend) erect that Marble Monument over his place of Sepulture in the
South Isle of St. Peter's Church in Westminster, with Verses thereon affixed on
the Tomb, which were composed by Dr. Thomas Goad, that most learned and famous
Divine.

And here I must make mention of Dr. Abrahamus Scultetus, who ( Anno Dom.
1612.) England, Chaplain to the most Illustrious Prince and Palsgrave
Frederick Elector; and also Monsieur Deodati, the learned Professor of Divinity
at Genevah, and Mousieur Peter du Mouline, that famous Preacher and Writer
(whom His Majesty made Canon of Canterbury) with sundry others, who much
rejoiced in Dean^ Morton's acquaintance, betwixt whom was maintained a friendly
correspondence (during life) respectively.

About this time, by King James his appointment, Dr. Morton answered a book
which was Written by Cardinal Bellarmine, dedicated to the Prince of Poland,
and Entitled, De Officio Principis Christiani: which Answer Dean Morton
dedicated to our most noble Prince Charles, Entitled, Causa Regia; and (for
the Princes use) it was consigned into the hands of Mr. Murray his Highness
Tutor, who promised it should be the Princes Task, to read over in then
ensuing progress.

During the time of his continuance in this Deanary of Winton, he was (amongst
many others) most intimate with, and beloved of Dr. Arthur Lake, Master of St.
Cross near Winchester, a reverend and religious Divine, (afterward Bishop of
Bath and Wells,) Dr. John Harmar the learned Warden of Winchester College, Dr.
Nicholas Love, then Schoolmaster, after Warden there; and other worthy Divines.

At his coming from Winton, he Preached a Sermon in the Preached a Sermon in
the Cathedral Church there (when he took his leave of that Learned and Pious
Assembly) upon those words of Samuel, (1 S^. 12. 3.) Whose Ox have I taken? or
whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or
o^^ whose hand have I taken any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith?

And having now continued about nine year^ Dean of Winton, it pleased His
sacred Majesty, to make choice of him to Govern^ the Sea and Bishopric o^
Chester, (Anno Dom. 1610.) being at that time much infested by perverse
Nonconformist^ Ministers. Bu^ this designation and nomination of him came by a^
(...), (as he called i^) in a Letter which he wri^ to one he then favored, in
these very words; I see it has pleased God by his providence, not to suffer m^
to remain in the Dale, wherein I could willingly have spent my days (had there
not been an (...) in it,) and to set me upon an Hill, (I pray God) as a true
light for the good of souls, etc. For as in his former dignities, he was most
free from ^mbitious prolling and seeking; so was he as innocent from the touch
of expecting, or so much as desiring those preferments which after followed,
and were most freely conferred on him by those two most gracious Princes, King
James, and King Charles hi^ Son.

But when he stood designed Bp. of Chester, agreat O^^ (who shall here be
nameless) cast an undeserved ^ spersion upon Dean Mori^ unto the King, viz.
Th^^ he was not fit to be a Bishop for that he had spoiled one ^^ the best
Deanaries in England, etc. Which false c^lumny, was cast as a block in the way
of his advancement to a Bishopric: wherewith being made acquainted, he was of
necessity to clear himself of so foul, and undeserved an aspersion; which he
did, by communicating the same unto his Brethren of the Chapter of Winton; who
unanimously testified under their Hands and Seals, That Doctor Morton had been
the best Dean that ever had been in their times: And some of them were very old
men, and had long enjoyed their Dignities in that Cathedral Church; as Mr.
Brown, Mr. Barlow, Mr. Harward, etc.

So then this black cloud of Obloquy being dispelled, he was Consecrated Bishop
of Chester at Lambeth in the Province o^ Canterbury, by delegation from the
Archbishop of York, in whose Province Chester is; where were present many
Noble Men, and Gentlemen of the Court but chiefly, a Noble Man of Poland, who
had the education of Prince Rodzivils Son (thither invited) who very much
admired the solemnity of the Ordination of the Bishops in England, and the
receiving of the blessed Sacrament, (whereof they then were partakers) as it
was Administered according to the Form of the Church of England.

And not long after, being recovered of a violent Fever, which took him at
Clayhall in Essex, the House of that Honorable Knight Sir Christopher Hatton
(his most loving and dear friend) he prepared for his Journey into Cheshire,
and advanced with his own retinew toward that Country, but was encountered and
met on the way to the City of Chester, by so grand a number of the best Knights
and Gentlemen of that County Palatine, with their attendants, and that
multitude of Plebeyans, thronging and rejoicing at the receipt of their new
Bishop, that the like has scarce been seen there, and perhaps in few places
else where.

After a small time of his settlement there, like a true Bishop, (and one
mindful of what he was sent for) he convented the Nonconformist Ministers,
and called on them to show the Reasons of their dissenting from the Orders and
Discipline of the Church; and told them, That his purpose was, to conferr with
them publicly, to reduce them to conformity with the Church of England. At
which time those Ministers insisted on those three Points: First, Cross Or
rather after Baptism, as indeed it is.
in Baptize. Secondly, Kneeling at the receiving of the Lords Supper. Thirdly,
The Surplice, etc. In which conference he argued with them very zealously, and
endeavored by many Arguments to reduce the^ to conformity with the Church of
England; but i^ the end, fell short of hi^ pious expectation. Yet no prevailing
with those refractory Ministers; not withstanding, he wrought great work, by
Gods mo^^ gracious hand and ass^stance, (yea, near the ve^^ same time) by
reclaimin^ and reducing many of t^^ Lancashire Recusants, and in bringing them
home to the true Church, through his industrious vigilance.

And not long after, he Writ and Published a Relation of that Conference, which
was inscribed, The three innocent Ceremonies; which Book long after (he being
Bishop of Coventry and Leichfeild) was impugned by one Mr. Ames, (as was
conceived) but most learnedly answered and defended by Dr. John Burges Parson
of Sutton Cobfeild in War*. after that Doctor Morton had been many years
Bishop of Coventry and Leichfeild.

About this time viz. Anno 1617.) the Kings Majesty returned out of his
Progress from Scotland, and passed through Lancashire, where he was Petitioned
by the Plebeyans of that County, for Recreation to be allowed on the Lords day;
which was accordingly graciously granted by His Majesty. Whereupon, they
growing insolent, and being encouraged and heartened by some Gentlemen who were
Popish Recusants, they made ill use of the Kings gracious clemency; and
thereupon Bishop Morton made his humble address unto His Majesty, and
acquainted him with sundry particulars of their abuse of His wellmeant gracious
favor: Whereupon it pleased His Majesty, to command the Bishop, to add what
cautions and restrictions he thought fit to be inserted into His Majesty's
Declaration for that purpose, which was accordingly done, viz. That they should
have no liberty for recreation till after Evening Prayer: That they should have
no Beare-baiting nor any such unlawful sports: And that no Recusant, who came
not to Morning and Evening Prayers, should be capable of such His Royal
indulgence at all, etc.

Having now resided toward three years in that Bishopric, it pleased the
Royal Majesty of King James, to cause him to be translated to the Sea of
Coventry and Leichfeild, where he succeeded that profound Doctor John Overall,
who was newly removed thence to the Bishopric of Norwich, in the year of our
Lord 1618.

And in the Bishopric of Chester succeeded him, Dr. John Bridgeman, one of the
famous Preachers of his time; the more to be honored, because it pleased God to
bless him with a Son, Sir Orlando Bridgeman Knight, now Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal of England; which High Place may he long enjoy for the good of this
Kingdom, and honor of the Married Clergy.

In the time of his Incumbence in the Bishopric of Coventry and Leichfeild, he
was acquinted with that grave and learned Scholar Marcus Antonius de Dominis,
late Archbishop of Spalato in Dalmatia, Saint Hierome's Countryman, (as he
often used to call himself) who had renounced Popery, and passed over into
England, to draw the fresh and pure Air of Christ's true Religion: which yet
some few years after, The most infamous Eccbolius of our times; whose Corpse
were afterward burned at Rome for a Relaps.
he most wretchedly deserted in hope of higher preferment at Rome, upon the
assurance which he built of his Quondam Schoolfellows Election to the Papacy,
by the name of Gregory the fifteenth. But this Pope was quickly rid out of the
way, and another Pharaoh succeeded, who knew not this Joseph. But his change of
Religion was the more to be wondered at, for that by His Majesty's gracious
bounty he had been These, though competent Preferments, could not allay, or
quench his sacred thirst: for I have seen the Copy of a Letter, (which was
showed unto me by D^. Bal^anquall, his successor in the Savoy,) in which it
appeared, That he became a Suit^r unto King. James for the Archbishopric of
York, then rumored to be void, by the death of Doctor Toby Matthew the
Archbishop there; though be happily outlived tha^ (...).
preferred to the Deanary of Windsor, and the Mastership of the Savoy, with the
Rectory of Ilsworth, and was yearly presented by many of the Nobility, and
Bishops of this Kingdom, with sundry rich gifts in Plate, and other costly
accoutrements. All which not withstanding, in the end he deserted the Church of
England: Yet upon a specious pretense, forsooth, (as he gave it out) of
Reconciling the Church of England, with the Church of Rome.

Whereupon, about the same time, and on this very occasion, fell out the
following passage betwixt him, and Bishop Morton: For being asked by the said
Bishop thus: Domine, quid tibi in animo est, convertere Papam? Etiam, Conclave
Papale? Spal. Quidni, an existimas eos esse Diabolos, ut non possint converti?
Episc. Coven. Minime Domine, ne^ puto Dominum Spalatensem esse De^m, qui hoc
prestare possit. Nostine Domine, Canones istos Conc'. Tridentini^ Spalat. Imo
novi, and aus^^ sum tibi dicere, Millies mill esse in Italia, qui fidem nullam
huic Concilio adhibent. This passage is worth the translating: The Bishop of
Leichfeild asked him, What my Lord, is it your purpose to convert the Pope?
Yea, and the Papal Conclave to, Spal. And why not? do you think them to be
Devils, that they cannot be converted? Bishop Leichfeild, No, my Lord, nor do
I think my Lord of Spalato to be a God, who is abl^ to perform so much. Do
you know, my Lord, those Canons in the Council of Trent? Spal. Yea, I know them
well, and I dare boldly say, that there be many thousands of Italy who give no
Faith to this Council, etc. However this passed, away he went, and since gone,
he would be gone: he was formerly banished, and commanded away out of England
by the Kings strict command. But being arived at Rome, the case was altered,
the foriner Pope, his friend, being dead; and because he did not, or rather,
could not answer the Books, or rather the authorities therein, quoted out of
the ancient Fathers, which he had Published and Printed at London, De Repub.
Christiana, and others, he found the just guerdon of his revolt: for it was
adjudged in the Holy Office, (as they call the Inquisition) that his Corpse,
being first strangled in the Castle of St. Ang^^^* should be burned in Campo
Flori: yet had he been fairly premonished and minded hereof by our Bishop, who
writ a large and learned Epistle Now ready for the Pross* after long and great
desiring the^eof*
unto him in Latin a little before his departure, which was consigned into his
hands by the Writer hereof; wherein, as a true Prophet, he warned him of that
which came after to pass, viz. His Treatment at Rome: Yet notwithstanding,
upon the receipt of that Letter, the Archbishop testified his friendly
respects unto our Bishop at the farewell of the bearer, in these very words,
Salutes millies mill di^ as Domino t^o nomine meo. It was often in h^^ mouth,
Ego* moriar Archiepiscopus Spala^ens^s*


During the time of his Government of this large Dioces of Coventry and
Leiehfeild, there happened a Boy of the Village of Bilson near Wolverhampton in
the County of Stafford, called George Purie, who was seduced by the Popish
Priests to become a Demoniack (which thing he did, as they tutored him) whom
after a small season, they a Gods name must dispossess. But yet all their
working, and fine devises, were to very small, or no purpose; for the Devil
had so wrought with the The Devil had steeled his heart. I^ was ^i^ own wor^
and expression in his Confession after* wards.
Boy, that he accused a Woman, and she a Papist, for bewitching him: whereupon,
she was committed to the County Goal at Stafford, and this Boy was brought to
the Assizes to confront her: where, before the Judges of Assize, this Boy,
albeit hoodwinckt, would seem to know of the woman Prisoner her coming to the
Bar, which he did, as afterward he confessed, by the jingling of her Chains,
and diverse strange prancks he there played, in the face of the country as a
Demoniack, or person possessed, so that at the last, he was committed, and
recommended by the learned Judges of Assize unto Dr. Morton, Bishop of the
Diocese, (being then one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace) who brought
him unto Eccleshal Castle, where he then resided; and after a competent time,
found him to be a cunning Imposter. Which things, and many more, were laid open
to Public view, in a Book Entitled, The Boy of Bilson. But afterward, he
much detested, and loathed the former cousening cheats, and was bound
Apprentice in Bristol.

How this Bishop spent his time in that Bishopric of Coventry and Leichfeild,
his continual Labors testify, viz. chiefly in Preaching the Word of God;
partly in Writing Books profitable to the Church of God; partly in Conference
with Recusants, and Catechizing of his own Family weekly, etc. But for his free
Hospitality, both at Eccleshall and Leichfeild, and his continual relieving of
the poor; let them testify who were eyewitnesses, of which many are fallen
asleep, and perhaps, some remain to this day.

Whiles he was Bishop here, he had sundry learned men for his Chaplains,
especially that Reverend and Pious man of God Doctor Ralph Brownrigg, on whom
he collated the Arch-deaconry of Coventry (when Bishop of Leichfeild) and
afterward a good Prebend in the Cathedral Church of Durham; which dignities
His Royal Majesty King Charles did Crown with the Bishopric of Exeter, Mr.
Stephen Haxbie, and Mr. George Gippes, both fellows of St. John's in Cambridge,
and Mr. Isaac Basire, with some others, on whom he freely bestowed such
spiritual preferments as fell in his Patronage.

Here I must not forget that blessed Saint of God, Mr. George Canner, a blind
young man (for blind he came into the world) borne in the County of Lancaster,
whom (with his Uncle, who had the tuition of him) this Bishop maintained both
at the Grammar School in Chester, when Bishop there, and after in the
University, till he became Bachelor of Arts in the University of Cambridge,
where he proved an excellent proficient: And after Orders taken, he placed him
Curate at Clifton Canvile in Staffordshire, (when he was Bishop of Leichfeild)
where he discharged that sacred Function, by his diligent Preaching, even unto
admiration; for the book of Common Prayer (as the Church of England requires
and enjoyneth) he could repeat by heart, and understand the Rubric
sufficiently. As for the Chapters in the Old and New Testament, (which were to
be Read to the Congregation) he had them perfectly by heart, by his Unckles
twice Reading them over unto him: For the Administration of the blessed
Sacrament of Baptism, and the Lords Supper, he meddled not therewith, but had
them discharged by another neighboring Minister. As for his Diet, it was
course, small, and not costly, for he never exceeded bread, butter, and cheese;
no kind of flesh meat would go down with him, nor could he indeed, digest it.
His conversation was innocent, modest, chaste, and spotless, whom Almighty God
translated hence (being but young in years, about 26.) unto his heavenly
Kingdom of glory. His dying words were these, Lord take from me these rags of
mortality, and cloth me with thy robes of immortality.

From this Bishopric of Coventry and Leichfeild (Anno 1633.) Charles the
first, to prefer him to the dignity of the Episcopal See of Duresme, to which
Bishopric (before the Conquest) was united the Prerogative of a County
Palatine. And here with what Integrity, Justice, Temperance, and other
Christian virtues, (especially his liberal and free composition with his
Tenants, whereof many instances might be given, if need were) I had rather the
late memory of him should speak, who is yet living in a private and contented
estate (after the Apostles diet, Having mea^ and drink, etc.) and after his
late injurious ejection out of that plentiful Bishopric in a very old age,
(...) s^ he was then aged: but he dy^d, Anno 1659. Aetatis 95.
which is 93. in this present year of our Lord, 1657. and was never Married,
but has led a single, and painful life.

He has had, being Bishop of Duresme, sundry eminent Scholars for his
domestic Chaplains, as Dr. Joseph Nayler (whom God has newly translated) on
whom he collated the rich Rectory of Sedgefeild, and a Prebend in the
Cathedral Church of Duresme: Mr. John Johnson, a Londoner borne, a godly,
learned, and faithful Preacher of the Word of God (with whom he lives in
eternal blessedness) whom he constituted to the Rectory of Bishop Weremouth;
and also Mr. William Flathers, long since departed; Dr. Fern, Lately Master of
T^ini^y College in Cambridge: Deane of Ely; and ^^^^ly, Bishop of C^ester, by
King Charles ^1. his (...). Since (...) to God.
a reverend and learned Divine, as his excellent Treatises Writ and Published
in these late sad times do sufficiently speak him; Mr. Evers Gower, since
departed, on whom he collated the Rectory of Stanhopp, and Archdeaconry of
Northumberland; as also, the aforementioned Dr. Isaac Basier, whom he Ordained
Deacon, and after that Priest, when Bishop of Leichfeild; and being translated
to Duresme, he collated on him the forenamed Rectory of Stanhopp, with a good
Prebend in the Cathedral Church of Duresme, and the Archdeaconry of
Northumberland. Of this learned Gentleman much might be said, who is living
still, though far remote, for in these late heavy and dolorous times, he was
forced to sit down, yet with honor, (after more then his Vlissian Travails in
three parts of the known world) Professor of Divinity at Alba Julia in
Transylvania But now, after 16. years peregrination, he is returned home, in
the halcyon days of King Charles II. his auspicious and happy reign, enjoying
his former preferments.
As also Mr. Richard Wrench Bachelor in Divinity, sometimes Fellow of St. John's
in Cambridge: And lastly, Dr. John Barwick, first Dean of Durham, after that,
of St. Paul's London, lately deceased.

This Bishop was such an indefatigable Student, and such a constant Heluo
librorum, that whether he passed by Water, or rid on Horseback (as he used in
his private estate) or traveling in his Coach, (after that he had obtained
greater preferments) he had always some choice and useful book, which he
either read himself, or else caused a Chaplain, or his Amanuensis to read
unto him, who attended on him Journying. And very seldom, or never, did he go
to his bed, but his devotions ended in public with his Family, and afterward
more privately by himself; his bedchamber servants, who had been usually
University Scholars, continued their tasks in reading some other pious books,
or some Church History unto him, till such time as acceptable sleep stole upon
him, and so relieved and discharged them of that duty. And when he did sleep,
it was very moderate, or rather small, for (as I have said) he either continued
reading himself, or others reading unto him, till late at night, and after some
few hours repose, he was always ready to fall on his Study afresh with early
Aurora.

For an example of his Piety, and general care which he took in his Diocese,
for the fuller instructing of Children in the Grounds of Religion, he caused
many thousands of Catechismes (according to that form which is prescribed in
the Book of Common Prayer) to be Printed at his own charge, and to be dispersed
in the several Deanaries and Archdeaconries of the Diocesses where he had been
Bishop, which he commanded his (respective) Chancellors, Registers, and other
Ecclesiastical Officers, in their places, to distribute in every Parish; and
like wise admonished the several Ministers, to be diligent and careful in the
due Catechizing of their youth, according to that Form.

For his manner of Lodging, Diet, and Study-garments, they might have been (if
you will) of another Anthony, for the never could endure a soft, much less a
down bed, but either a Matress, or a single Quilt, which was his usual
lodging. His Study* gown was sometimes of a course black hairy rugg: and his
constant Diet (when not visited by strangers) was one meal a day through
almost the whole course of his life; which in his middle age, and before he was
Bishop, was usually a Supper; in his declining age, and after he was Bishop,
usually a Dinner, and that but a bare and slender one to himself, though
bountiful, and plentiful to all others his Commensals. He very seldom, or
never drunk strong drink; and wine most rarely, and that in a very small
quantity, as perhaps might warm his mouth, but scarcely his stomach, for his
health being constantly good, and his bodily Sa^^ that ^h^n ^e was Bishop of
Chester ^e was ^i^c^ed with the ^^i^ of the Stone, v^yding one, and but (...)*
^^^ at that time his sister Mistress Joan Rose prepa^^^ him a distilled drink*
which gave him present ease, (...) (by ^ods blessing) did remedy that Ma^a^y,
so the ^ster, ^e was scarce ever troubled therewith.
infirmities few or little, (indeed his abstemiousness was very great) and (I
believe) this later was a great preserver of the former.

I might further tell you, That he never Purchased one foot of Land (what (...)
he sold) nor other temporal Possession in all his long life, notwithstanding
his plentiful incomes; but as his Revenues increased, so were they expended
(as I have formerly noted) in Hospitable, charitable, and other Christian uses;
which thing may partly appear by his being so bare, and unprovided at the
beginning of the late turbulent and traiterous times; so that when he was
committed under the black Rodd (for protesting against those uncivil tumults
then on foot) he had scarcely wherewith to defrey the Fees and Charges of his
Confinement, which is the less to be wondered at, that he was not so plentiful
in his Purse, and the rather, considering the great and extraordinary charges
which he was put to, by the frequent entertainment of Scottish Lords, and
others who Posted too and fro, especially about the time of the Scottish
Insurrection, Durham being in their Northern Road, Ah! nimium vicina Scotis
Dunelmia.

He never Ordained any for Priests and Deacons, (which he commonly did at the
four Ordinations) but such as were Graduates in the University (or otherwise
well qualified in good Learning:) And for a trial of their Parts, he always
appointed a set time to examine them in University Learning; but chiefly in
Points of Divinity; and in this he was very exact, by making them answer
Syllogistically, according to their abilities. And he trusted not his own
Chaplains in this sacred business, though otherwise, very able and learned
Divines.

He never conferred any Benefice, or Spiritual Preferment, chiefly whiles he
was Bishop of Duresme, (being a most free and bountiful Patron) but on his own
learned Chaplains, except three only, which were commended unto him by King
Charles I. his sacred Majesty, viz. Mr. John Weemes, that learned Writer in
Moral Divinity, Mr. Anthony Maxton, both which were made Prebendaries of the
Cathedral Church of Duresme, and Mr. Clappurton, being three Scotch men, and
able Scholars.

For his Judgment of the due deserts of Learning, take one instance; when he
was Deane of Gloucester, and Mr. John Done had cast himself into a Sea of
misery, by the marriage of the Daughter of Sir George Moore Knight, whereby he
was exuted of his Secretaries place under the Lord Chancellor Egerton, and had
spent most of his own means in the pursuit of his said marriage, whereby he was
brought to a low ebb and debility in his Estate; and knowing no ways, or means
whereby he could subsist, Children especially increasing yearly; then did Deane
Morton earnestly and seriously move him to take the holy Ministry on him,
whereby the better to support and maintain that Charge; and for his better
encouragement, he willingly and freely offered to resign unto him the Rectory
of Long Marston in Yorkshire, being of the yearly value (plus minus) of two
hundred pounds per Annum; yet to this friendly motion he would not (then) give
his assent, but put it by, in hope (as it should seem) of some other
preferment, for which he thought himself more fit.

And long after, the said Mr. Done, having grapled with many extremities at
home, he passed over into France, where he gave himself to the Study of the
Laws: And from Amiens, (as I remember) he writ a Letter to his always true
friend Deane Morton, wherein he requested his advice, Whether taking the Degree
of a Doctor in that Profession of the Laws, it might not be conducible and
advantageous unto him to Practice at home in the Arches London. Unto whom the
Deane then returned him answer, That in his Judgment, he thought the Ministry
in the Church of God would be safer, and fitter for him: Whereupon he desisted
from further prosecution of those Studies.

For doubtless the holy Spirit had the greatest stroke and power to incline,
and draw him to that sacred Profession: For my self have long since seen his
Picture in a dear friends Chamber of his in Lincolnes Inn, all envelloped with
a darkish shadow, his face and feature hardly discernable, with this
ejaculation and wish written thereon; Domine illumina tenebras meas: which long
after was really accomplished, when (by King James his weighty and powerful
persuasions) he took holy Orders at the hands of the right Reverend Father John
Lord Bishop of London, and so became a learned and assiduous Preacher.
Whereupon His gracious Majesty King James bestowed the Deanary of St. Paul's
London upon him: where what profitable pains he took, and else where, the large
Book of his Sermons, and other Learned Labors, (which are Published, both
before, and after he had been Dean) do most sufficiently attest and demonstrate.

For a Close, concerning this Learned Gentleman, I will add one instance of his
ripe and sudden wit, For at one time when Bishop Morton gave him a good
quantity of Gold (then a useful token) saying, Here Mr. Done, take this, Gold
is restorative: He presently answered, Sir, I doubt I shall never restore it
back again: and I am assured that he never did.

This Bishop Morton was a great benefactor to Saint John's College in Cambridge,
(where sometimes he had been Fellow) and bestowed many hundreds of pounds in
Books for the adorning and augmenting of that their fair Library, which Dr.
Williams Bishop of Lincoln, and Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England,
sometimes Fellow there, had Founded. He built also out of an old decayed
Chapel at Bishop Auckland, a fair Grammar School, and endowed the Master
thereof with 24. pounds per Annum for ever: Other things he purposed to have
done, as the enlarging of the old Market Place; and the erecting a new Market
Cross in the Pavement at York, (near to which he was born,) but was prevented
by the late woeful and destructive times: but God would accept of his small
offerings, as he did the poor Widows Mite.

He converted sundry Persons (in his time) from the Popish Religion, and by
Gods grace, brought them to the true Church of England; amongst which was the
Lady Cholmeley, Wife to Sir Henry Cholmeley Knight When he was Bishop of
Chester, he ^^r^ed ^er.
: So Mr. Redmaine a Popish Priest, afterward Viccar and Preacher at Congleton
in Cheshire: So Mr. Theophilus Higgons, who after was a learned Preacher, and
Rector of Hunton in Kent. Mr. Toby Swinburn^, then lately returned from the
English College at Rome, afterward created Doctor of the Laws at Oxon, and in
these late unhappy times, deprived of his life, whose death was chiefly
effected by their cruel imprisonment of him, after that he had received many
deep, and desperate wounds in the battle at Newbery for the affection and
loyalty which he did bear to His late Majesty Charles I. Also a Reverend Bishop
now living, (but here shall be nameless:) Also Mr. Thomas Hulse Gentleman: Mr.
Matthew, and sundry others.

He was always very beneficial and bountiful to the poor, wheresoever he
lived or came; so that as it pleased God to divest him of those ample means,
which sometimes he had to dispose of, and to do good on all occasions; so took
he timely order (during almost his whole life) to erogate and bestow the mean^
which God lent him, to the best ends, which was, for the maintenance of the
poor of all sorts, viz, (...) the place where he resided, or by the way where
(...) traveled, or poor Scholars in the University, to many of whom he gave
yearly Stipends; poor strangers and Travelers, to whom his Purse was always
open. And in the Bishopprick of Duresme, he gave, (besides his daily Alms to
the poor at the Castlegate) so many Gowns of blew Cloth to certain poor men, as
he had been Bishop of Durham, with their diet in the Hall four days in the
week.

For example of his liberal mind, and the contempt of worldly wealth (besides
that single instance above rehe^rsed; when he was leaving the Deanary of
Winton) he forgave unto one Mis. Place of Hurworth near the River of Teise
(whose husband unhappily made a way himself (as they spoke) his whole Estate
(being forfeited to the Bishop as Count Palatine) which was valued at 2000li.
and took only of her for a^ acknowledgement of the right of the County
Palatin^ (that which he bestowed among his domestical Servants) the sum of
50li. Likewise in his first Visitation of the Bishopric, being at Barwick upon
Tweede, he ^orgave unto one Mr. Edward Moore of Tweedmouth near Barwick, 300li.
in which sum he was fi^ed (for a Ryott at the Assizes before, at Durham)
which the Bishop was the rather moved to do upon his humble supplication then
made. More examples of his bounty and beneficencies might be produced, which I
forbear to recite, intending only a brief recital of some such special
things as fell under my knowledge and observation, whereof now an end.

But now shall begin a piece Limned by a curiou^ Pencil.

R. B.

^a^ca quae ^d rem pertine^t memo^^vi, ^^li^^^ ^j^^ f^^^ ^arrabit, fine ^^b^o
m^^or^ were. Ruffin. de St. Athanasio.
A further Narrative of such things as befell the said Bishop before, and
toward his Death, in these late woeful and Traitorous Combustions, in Church,
and Commonweal.
IF for no other cause, or reason at all, yet that Posterity may not altogether
be ignorant what kind of Superintendents of chief choice, and Cooperators our
Lord Jesus had in his English Vineyard, even then, when His Divine Majesty was
pleased (for the stupendous ingratitude of a non-proficient, and besorted
people) to permit the Wild bore out of the Forest to root it up, and the wild
beasts of the field to desolate, devour, and lay it wast; when the same God
was pleased, in his just, though secret judgment, Isa. 34. 11.
To stretch out the line of confusion, and the stones of emptiness, (as the
holy Prophet phraseth it) even for this very cause (if for no other) the life
of this eminently gifted, this Orthodox, learned, and exemplary-lived and
laborious Prelate Dr. Thomas Morton shall appear unto the world in this plain
and naked Narrative following: Of the which I may plainly averr, what holy
Nazianzen did in his Funeral Oration for his Sister Gorgonia, viz. (...)* etc.
Adeo nihil ^ereo^, ^e ultra veritst ^^ ^e^^^ transillam, sed illud contra ^e
inf^a veritatem subsi^^am; ac ^roud a rei dignita^e remotus laudatione ^ea
^^oriam ipsius diminuam.
I am so far from fearing to hyperbolize, or transgress the bounds of modesty,
(the common fault of Funeral Orations) that I am sure I (...) fall much short
in many particulars of the line of verity* For in drawing the Pictur^ of this
most excellent Prelate, by so rude a Pencill, know and acknowledge that there
will be indee^ so much of the shadow, a^ will darken and obscu^^ that native
beauty and heavenly ornaments, which all they that knew him thoroughly and
fully, can not but attest was lodged his Person.

Here therefore shall be^^n a more particular and (...) Narration of both ^e
Personal and Episco^ll qualities of this Reve^nd Prelate, (especially of (...)
holy and heavenly de^^rtment in these woeful and destructive times.) And ^^st,
in the Acquisition of (...) preferments, his mode^^y was no whit less then ^is
deserts; from all tin^^re of prowling ambition, ^walking exactly in the ^^eps
of that (...) Theolog^^,) Gregory Nazianzen* whose record of himself, as to
that particular, you may please to take in his own words, (...)* etc. Vi^^te
qua^ ^e^e quam^^e jus^e inter ^^r^mque ^imorem nego^ium transigam, ut nec
mi^ime ob^a^am praefecturam appetam, nec ob^a^am ^^pudiem: (...) etc.
Consider how rightly and evenly I carried my self between those two Rocks
equally to be feared; neither ambitiously to progg and seek for Church
Dignities, not free proferred; nor when freely proferred, suddenly and
Cynically to refuse and contemn them. For as he further says, Illud est
hominum temerariorum, hoc in obedientium, utrumque imperitorum. 1. The one
argue^ a bold Man: The other, a Disobedient, both indiscreet. And therefore
betwixt these two extremes, did this holy Father Bishop Morton walk according
to the forenamed Pattern of Gregory Nazianzen, in a middle way betwixt the
too bold, and too timorous. (...) etc. His, (...) ad omnes ^^aef^ct^^^
pro^^^un^* (...), and iis ^ur^us, qui omnes fugiunt* ^uda^^^r.
Neither (as he says) so impotently ambitious, as to be in at all preferments;
nor so weakly Cynicall as to decline those which were fairly and freely
conferred on him, and wherein he conceived he might do God and his Church good
service: Which how our Bishop has performed, as (I hope) his works of Piety,
Charity, and Erudition, which he shall leave behind him, and take with him,
(for the works of the righteous Apoe. 14. 13.
follow them into Heaven) will quit me of the labor of particular enumeration,
at least for the present.

And as his Modesty was singular, in not courting or reaching at those
preferments which Divine Providence cast upon him; so was his Piety and
Humility no less, in not only not doting upon, but (indeed) scarcely owning of
that outward splendour, and those rich accoutrements, which were the Appendices
of those great Places: Not Antisthenes, nor Crates, nor Diogenes himself: nay,
(what should I say) nor their holy St. Francis, (as they depaint him) was a
greater undervaluer, and contemner of the world, and worldly riches then was
this good Bishop; yea, and without their vanity or ostentation. Resembling in
that likewise (as in many other Episcopal qualities) the forenamed famous
Bishop Nazianzen, who being advanced to a great and rich Bishopric (as that
likewise of Durham has been, and is accounted) he scarcely enriched himself
with pence or pounds, when he might easily have hoarded up hundreds and
thousands, had he been so minded. Yea, and what I find further recorded of that
gracious Bishop Nazianzen, I am sure is most true in this heavenly Bishop of
Durham: Qui amplissimae Ecclesiae praeful institutus, ne ^nic^ quidem drachm^
facultates suas auxit, cum tamen maxima^ talentorum copiam, si ita voluntas
ejus ^ulisset, colligere potuisser.
He was so abstracted from the world, and so wholly wedded to his book, LUt
aegre reddituum and Administrationis rationem ab Oeconomis repetivit:] that he
would scarcely allow himself so much time (from his affairs Ecclesiastical)
as to take an account of his affairs Oeconomicall. How it fared with Bishop
Nazianzen, in that particular, I find it not recorded; but this I know, Bishop
Morton's good hap was to have an an able and faithful Steward, for the
managing and husbanding of his temporal Estate. And had this our egregiously
((...)) Lord and Money - scorning Prelate been himself as sparing a Promus, as
his Steward was a careful Condus, he might have reserved a sufficient portion,
wherewith to have lived plentifully (yea even in these dog-dayes for Orthodox
Churchmen) though not in that bountiful and hospitable way, in which he
formerly lived, (especially when Bishop of Durham) yet in a more free and
plentiful way, then that wherewithal (during the time of his sequestration)
he was both cheerfully and thankfully contented.

But our heavenly-minded Prelate (whom I cannot remember without veneration)
chose rather to embrace that blessed counsel of his great Lord and Master
Christ Jesus, and stored up those riches, which his Steward gathered for him,
in such treasures, as he knew full well would be above the reach of Plunderers,
or Sequestrators, viz. the backs and bellies of the poor, those heavenly
repositories, where neither the rust of this Iron age could possibly corrupt
them, nor the Moaths and Caterpillars of this peeled Commonwealth, devour and
destroy them.

Of which his bounty and liberallity, the Inhabitants of those Bishoprics
wherein he lived, and especially the poor, on whom he did fow those seeds of
eleemosyness (whereof he shall ^cape the happy harvest) they may be the fittest
and most proper Trumpeters. shall only add this Elogi^m (as to this point of
his ^ommendations) which I and reported of that memorable Bishop of Orleans,
Gabriel Albaspineus, (and I ^m sure may be as truly ^erified of, and ascribed
to ^his our Bishop of Durham) That he only Stewarded that great and rich
Bishopric for ^he good of others. For that which a Jesuit sometimes said of
the great Cardinal Richelieu, (I am sure adulatoriously, and I think also
falsely, for he left his Nephew one of the greatest Dukes and Peers of France)
Quod in tantis fortunae copiis nihil duxit suum, nisi quod dederit; may, I am
sure, be applied without flattery or falsitie to this our good Bishop, who
never esteemed any thing properly his own, but what he either gave in private
to poor indigent persons, or else in Public to pious Uses.

Such likewise was his Gandor and ingenuity, that he never willingly injuried
any man, but benefitted many undeservedly; yea, some (I may say) almost against
their wills; many (I may say) besides their deserts. For indeed, he was a man
much what of that holy and heavenly temper, as was that quondam renowned Atlas
of our English Church Arch Bishop Whitgift, (the want of whose prudence,
patience, and moderation, these ruthful times do too sadly ^e^^^he) of whom it
is writ by Sir George Paul (in his life) that the way to obtain from him some
special courtesy, was first to do him some special injury For, this Arch
Bishops Mo^to was, Vincit qui patitu^: ^^e. H^ who suffers, over coms.
. And even so it was with this good Bishop; it being the glory of these great
Lights, these leading Saints, to take out the hardest Lessons of Christianity,
thereby to imitate their Lord and Master, Who sends Rain, and makes his Sun
to shine both upon the just and unjust.

Once, I am well assured, the very contrary may be affirmed of this good Bishop
what is said by some (per^aps too Satyrically) of our Countryman (...), then
Professor at (...); Quod in tam longa (...), nec vera scribere, nec ben^ (...),
nec cast sentire de aliis (...): That during his long (...), he neither learnt
to write (...), or speak honestly, or to ^hink sincerely of any others:
^leaning (I suppose) of ^rotestants of our Religion. ^ut this pious and candid
^relate (of whom we now ^reak) was not a greater ^^ver and defender of the
^^ith, then an hater of such as used to speak, or think evil of any; yea,
though their very enemies. Neither did he want any of Cato's gravity, which yet
he so tempered with Caesar's affability, as thereby he preserved both his Person
and Place (as Nazianzen reports that glorious Martyr St. Cyprian to have done)
free from two extremes, Pride and Contempt, so as neither was he envied by the
Great ones, nor undervalued by the Vulgar.

But amongst all his Episcopal qualities (of which more hereafter) I for my
own part admired none more then his admirable Constancy, his undistracted and
undisturbed spirit, even in these days of destruction and perturbation: He
mourned, indeed, much both in private and public, for the hideous and high
crying sins of the Nation (not exempting himself, such was his humility, no not
from the number of the chiefest sinners,) but he much, I say, bewailed the bold
Crimson sins, which forced Gods patience, and hailed such heavy and unheard of
Judgments upon both Church and State. For as Erasmus said of Luther, Deus
dedit postremae huic aetati, propter morborum magnitudinem, tam acrent medicum:
i. e. God gave such a tart and smart Physician, as was suitable to the many and
^esperate diseases of that evil and last age. And as Charles the fifth, upon
the very same occasion, used to say of the Monks and Frya^s: Si frugi fuissent,
prout decuit, Sacrificuli, nullo indig^^ssent Luthero: i. e. If the Monks and
Friars had been such as they ought to have been, they had needed no reforming
Martin Luther. And so may we surely say, as this undejected (because
heaven-supported Prelate) always said, and thought; had the practice of
thousands and ten thousands among us, both Clergy and Laity, been in any
measure answerable unto the professions of the truly (so called) Protestant
Religion; we had needed neither Presbyterian, nor Independent Reformation. But
as our (now) transcendently C. R.
glorious King Divinely observed, in that his Seraphicall Piece (which is both
the shame and glory of our Nation) Our sins being ripe ( Magis siccae ad ignem,
quam albae ad messin.
nay rotten upon the ground) unto the Harvest, there was no preventing of
either the Fire or Sickle of Gods Justice, from reaping that glory in our
Calamities, which we robbed him of in our prosperity.

Nevertheless, our holy Prelare, adoring and approving the unsearchable ways
and judgments of God, stood fast and unmovable, when the foundations were
moved, yea and removed, In pavidum feriere Ipsum ruinae. And for the better
undergoing and over-passing of these many and great destructive alterations,
which happened in these times, he made that most excellent and incomparable
Bishop Saint Augustine his pattern and exemplar, who in his book (that full
Learned book) De Civitate Dei, thus writes of himself; in the depopulation of
the Affricane Churches and Cities, by the Goths and Vandels, he much more
bewailed their Spiritual sufferings, then their Temporal. Indeed, the razing
of their Cities, the ruining of their Temples, the ravishing of their Wives,
the defiling of their Virgins, the Plundering of their houses of whatsoever was
either for profit or pleasure, These he confessed were great Temptations;
neither did he know how to rest his perplexed soul, but only by admiring,
adoring, and approving Gods Righteous Judgments, condoling and condemning
their own wickedness; Sed supra haec omnia male eum habuit, etc. Above and
beyond all these, was the sad reflection and cutting consideration, that after
he had, by Forty years continual Preaching and Writing, happily quashed and
sopited so many blasphemous and damnable Heresies, as had long infested and
infected Gods Church: He feared a resurrection of them all again, and that a
Sluice and inlett would be opened for their re-entry and tolleration: In that
regard, he desired much rather to be dissolved, then to live and to behold the
extermination of Gods true Religion, and the introduction of a great many false
ones.

And this (even this in these unhappy times) was the case and condition of this
our learned, laborious, and Orthodox Prelate, who of all those Iliads of
evils, and mountains of miseries, which have fallen upon these fate-blasted
and starstricken Kingdoms, esteemed none equal, nor any whit comparable to
their spiritual infatuation, their being [(...)] stricken by God with a
vertibility and vertigo in Religion, none of all Gods Judgments, not Sword,
not Plague, not Famine, (no nor all put together) being of equal
consideration, with the extirpation or suppression of the true Religion,
together with an indulgence and tolleration of false, where every man is left,
(like another Micah) and may Judge^ 17. 5.
without impunity make unto himself both Gods and Priests, nay Religions and
Worships, as many, or as mean, or cheap as himself pleases.

We know that an Englishman, in former times, was wont to be drawn beyond Seas
(by way of a jeare) to show his inconstancy and sickleness in his apparel,
with a bundle of Cloth upon the one Shoulder, and a pair of Tailors Sheares
hanging on the other, to cut out a new fashion for himself every month, or
week, as his fancy should lead him, for the clothing and apparrelling of his
body. But now alas! he may be Pictured more scornfully, and yet (God knows)
more properly and truly, in respect to his Religion, (which is, or ought to
be, the apparel of the soul) with a sheet of blanck Paper in the one hand,
and a Pen full of Ink in the other, to Write every day what Religion he most
fantieth, Papist or Protestant, Presbyterian or Independent, Quaker or Dipper,
Arrian or ^theist, Anabaptist or Adamite, or what is most in fashion, or sway
with the times. These wretched times having dealt with that quondam darling of
Heaven (the truly so called Protestant Religion) as many hot-spuris and
importunate Suitors dealt Plutarch.
with a fair, but unfortunate Lady (because she was so fair;) for because no
one of them could engross or enjoy her wholly to himself, they most barbarously
resolved to cut her in pieces, and to enjoy her piece meal, amongst them. And
thus, even thus have the Schismatics and Sectaries of these broken times,
handled the Orthodox Protestant Religion, and her chiefest nourcing Mother the
Church of England (not long since, the glory, or envy, now the scorn of all
her neighbor Sisters) they having sliced and slit her into so many Sects,
Heresies, and Schisms, as there are Points in the Compass, or Moons in the
Year, that so they may have (as Saint Hilary said the Arians had) their
Menstruam fidem, their Monthly Religion; and (in conclusion) none at all. For,
as among the Heathens, the plurality of Deities, and making of many Gods did
mar the true one; so among Christians, the multiplication of many Religions
will be found, in the end, the ready way to destroy all Religion; and e^e men
are well aware, to huisher in Atheism and pro^anation.

And this was indeed that great and chief sitfast that did pierce and perplex
our Orthodox Prelates righteous soul, to see the regularly (yea, and why not
completely reformed) English Church, whose Doctrine and Discipline he had
vindicated and defended, both by Preaching, Conference, and Writing, against
the Papist and Pu^itan, and other Sectaries, by the space of sixty and odd
years together; to see her expire, and breath out her last, and that not
without as much infamy and disgrace, as some of her unnatural brats could
possibly lay upon her: And for a close of all her miseries, to behold her dead
Corpse tantum-non buried, as Jehoakin's was, with the burial of an Ass;
Sepulturd insepulta (as Tully terms it;) this, this was in truth the very
Cordolium which did sting him to the quick: For as the external and
adventitious accruments wherewith some former pious Princes have nobly and
royally endowed and enriched the Church; others less pious, or rather impious,
had ignobly dispoiled her of their Predecessors bounty: And others again most
pious and provident, endeavored the securing of what was left, with the hazard
of no less then their own ruin: (All which are demonstrations, that the
Churches Temporalties are no less then Anathema's, things highly prized with
all good men) yet, these compared with her Spiritualties, that is, the purity
of Religion and Orthodox worship, (for the loss of the one is in no wise
comparable to the loss of the other) the dilacerations and distractions of the
Church by Heresies and Schisms in her Spiritualls; much more discomposed and
divided the meek spirit of this holy man, then did the devastation of all his
own Temporalls (though they not mean ones) by Plunder and Sequestration. And of
the truth of this, I can give a signal testification upon my own knowledge.

For when he was advertized (at Durham house in the Strand, London) by a Member
of Parliament, old Sir H. V. that the sail of Bishops Lands, as well as Deans
and Chapters, was that day resolved and concluded by both Houses; and was
therefore advised by that Gent'. to Petition in due time for his livelihood to
be granted unto him some other way then by that 800. per Annum formerly Voted
unto him, (which yet all he never enjoyed) how did he behave himself upon this
no welcome information? did he be wray any discomposure, or passionate
perturbation? did he, like good old Eli, upon the sudden news of the Arks
Captivity, and the sudden departure of the Glory from Israel? did he sink or
fall down, and suffer a total deliquium of Spirit? No, I my self can witness,
he did not; but like that invincible man of Vz, (who had not his parallel on
the face of the earth) like that heroic and heavenly Soul, he gathered up his
spirit (in dispite of that cutting and affl^ctive message) and with heart, and
hand, and eyes lift up to Heaven, he three times repeated that Seraphicall
ejaculation of holy Job; The Lord has given, and the has taken away; The Lord
has given, and the Lord has taken away, The Lord has given, and the Lord
has taken away: Blessed, Blessed, Blessed, be the Name of the Lord; and so
returned again in quiet (from whence he came) to his Study and Devotions. This
was then observed, and can be witnessed by a Person of credit Dr. J. N.
late living, who did at that present providentially attend on him.

He lived a chaste and unblemished life, in a Caelibate and single condition;
and albeit that Coelibatus and (...) (simply considered) is only to be
reckoned inter (...), or things indifferent; ^et (...), or the gift of
Continence, is to be esteemed as a special Privilige, and favor
extraordinary, indulged by God to some choice and especial favorites,
especially where it is improved (as it was in this Prelate) to the highest
pitch of elevation; for he was not only free (all his life long, and long
life) from any open crime, but even from the least secret malicious suspicion*
And indeed (excepting only those Primi motus, as I think the School calls
them) from the which no flesh living, or that ever did live (save that only
ONE) was totally exempted (and therefore only HE) but for any carnal
knowledge of that Female Sex, or act of uncleaness with any woman living, or
dead, I dare and must be, thus far his Compurgator, that he went as pure a
Virgin to the womb of the Earth, as erst he came from the womb of his Mother.
I could wish that all the votaries of the Romish Church, or at least some of
them, who do so proudly and presumptuously (to say no worse) condemn and
decry that state in Clergymen, which yet the great Apostle judged Honorable
He^. 1^. ^*
amongst all men; I wish, I say, a many of them would say as much, and withal
as truly for the honor of their Church before men, and for their own
justification.

This Bishop was, for his own person, in many particulars, very much resembling
that second honor of Genevah Monsieur Theodore Beza, whom I have read thus
Characterized and Described; Statur^ corporis quadrata, vultu decoro,
valetudine firma (ade ut quid esset capite dolere, se propemodum nescire saepe
dixit) vivido ingento, judicio acuto, memoria felici, studio indefesso,
comitate and affabilitate nemini secundus. And such was this Preiate, (whom we
are now deciphering) of Stature little and clean, and strong body, an
exquisite constitution, comely countenance, constant and seldom interrupted
health, quick wit, and solid Judgment, happy memory and indefatigably
studious, and in courtesy and condiscention second unto none. Adeo ut (as was
further said of Beza) propter has suas utriusque varias dotes, adjunct^ utique
tant^ longevitate, etc. So as for their both various and great endowments,
accompanied with such health and length of days (for Mr. Beza, as I Read,
lived eighty six years, and Then living when t^^ was wr^^.
Bishop Morton, yet living, has already attained to such a vast extension of
days) as (if I be not mistaken) not any of the Ancient Greek or Latin
Fathers, nor Controversall Modern Writers, either Protestant or Papist, no nor
any of the blessed Apostles themselves (St. John only excepted, and of his Age
Historians much differ) not any one of these did attain unto in their
Generations: and considering all this longevity and furlongs of time
laboriously laid out for the glory of God, and good of his Church (I hope) that
I may style him, in this consideration (without injury or offense of any person
living or dead) as I find Beza styled upon the selte some score, Aetatis su^
P^oenix: The Phoenix of the Age in which be lived.

And here I shall beg leave, by way of Parenthesis, not a little to wonder,
how those Romish raylers, and Remish Balatrones can expedite themselves (I
mean) by objecting against Calvin died in the ^4. yea^e of his ^^^; D^.
Whitakers in the 47. Mr. Perkins 44.
Calvin, Whittaker, Perkins, and some other Protestant Writers, their
contracted Lives, and immature Deaths, as tokens of Gods anger and displeasure
against the Protestant Religion; notwithstanding (if need were) we are able to
produce many other Protestant Writers, of this very last Age, and all
Englishmen, who have equalled, or outstripped, both for quantity of days, and
qualities of Learning, the most (if not all) their coetaneous Pontificians. In
such a Catalogue, I must begin with that great and quick Wit, the last
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the late famous Bishop of Winchester Doctor
Andrews, continue it with the mention of rhat incomparable second Juell, and
Dr. Davenant Bishops of Sarum, the great Learned Dr. White, Bishop of Elie, Dr.
Mountague Bishop of Norwich; Dr. Prideaux the Learned Bishop of Wigorn; and to
these, add the two famous Professors of the University of Cambridge, Doctor
Ward, and Doctor Collins, (and many more, which for brevities sake I forbear
to Name) none of all which, but attained at least their Climactericall, and
some of them exceeded (their seventy) the date of man's Life allotted by the
Psalmist King David, Psalm. 90. 10.

And for the close of this Catalogue, I may fairly add the two great lights,
lately translated from their ^ading and extinguished Miters here on Earth, unto
their abiding and ever flourishing Crowns in Heaven, the famous Primate of
Ireland Dr Usher, late Arch Bishop of Armah, Aged seventy and six; and that
pious and fluent English Bernard Doctor Hall Bishop of Norwich, Aged eighty
two: And for a Coronis unto them all (in this fair Catalogue of English
Writers) I must not sure forget him, whom I have in present task, the eldest,
and first begotten Brother of them all, the most Learned and Religious Doctor
Morton Bishop of Durham, still sojourning and sweating in the Church Militant,
drawing to his ninety fourth year at the Writing hereof.

Therefore how the forenamed Objectors of the Romish Church can expedite
themselves from this vain expostulation of some eminent Protestant Writers [not
dimidiating their lives] I, for my part, cannot imagine, unless they will do
(as their manner is) to play fast and loose for their own advantage, and make
the self same thing a mark of Gods love and favor, in one case; and in
another, a syptome of his anger and indignation; whereas wise men know, that
the favor and disfavour of Almighty God, is not to be measured by any
externalls whatsoever.

Now as (never too often quoted) Gregory Nazianzen says, in his Oration of
that renowned Athanasius, the invincible Archbishop of Alexandria; so may I,
and must I say, of this worthy Prelate (never enough admired and reverenced of
me) (...), etc) Quid vobis praescribere attinet, quem Paulus ante veteres
depinxit, partim cum Pontificem il um mox depraedicat, qui coelos penetravit
(huc enim usque progredi non dubitabit oration, cum Scriptura eos, qui Heb. ^.
secundum Christum pro Christo agnoseat) partim cum Timotheo leges imponit, 1 Timothy 3. 12. 13. eum, qui Ecclesiae futurus est Antistes, sermon fingens at que
informans, etc. Why should I either trouble you, or my self, to super-rogate
unto you the dilineation or description of a man, whom Saint Paul has
beforehand so completely deciphered, partly in the person of that great High
Priest, who is entered into the highest of Heavens, Heb. 4. ( for thus the
Scriptures will warrant my presumption, says the holy Father) to entitle them
to Christ, who lived and dyed unto Christ: And partly in his first Epistle unto
Timothy Chap. 3. where he does most exactly and completely describe and
Characterize a Bishop, or man of God, with all his properties and
qualifications.

And now, if we shall compare these Episcopal Characters, set down by the
Apostles, with our present instance, I trow we shall find little variation, or
none at all; but in each particular such a plenary correspondence and
conspiration; A Bishop (says that blessed Apostle) who surely knew perfectly
what belonged to a Bishop, if ever any; and had himself the most right to that
proud usurped Title, of Oecumenicall Bishop, for he had daily care of all the
Churches, 2 Cor. 11. 8. A Bishop (says he) must be blameless, the Husband of
one Wife, (if any at all) vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to
hospitality, apt to teach. Not given to Wine, no striker, not given to filthy
lucre, but patient, not a brawler, not covetous. One that rules his own house
well, having Children (that is, if he have any, otherwise his servants) in
subjection with gravity. Not a novice, least being lifted up by pride, he fall
into the condemnation of the Devil. Moreover, he must have a good report of
them that are without, 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.

Lo! here the Effiges or Picture of a Bishop, drawn by an Apelles that could
not err: And lo! here a Transcript, or Copy of that Picture in the Person of
this Prelate, so lively resembling and representing the Original, that I dare
boldly challenge the most envenomed and foulemouthed Adversary that ever Writ
against him, (even Parsons himself, were he now in vivis) to instance in all
the aforenamed Episcopal qualifications, positive or privative, wherein this
Reverend Prelate Bishop Morton (humane frailties excepted) was justly culpable
or defective, so laudably and approvedly did he run his race; so happily and so
blessedly finish his course, [Et in vilde multa nec minus bona senectute cursum
consummans,] Closing his Pilgrimage in a very great, and no less good old age:
like another Isaac, He gave up the Ghost being old and full of days, and was
gathered to his Fathers, Genesis 35. 29. That is, (as Nazianzen says of
Athanasins) Patriarchis, Prophetis, Apostolis, Martyribus, and Confessoribus
feliciter adjungitur, qui pro veritate tam patiendo, quam faciendo fortiter
dimicavit: That is, He is associated and enrolled with those glorious Saints
the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, etc who have done and
suffered so much for Gods truth. [Quin porro Angelorum consortio fruitur in
Coelis, quorum vitam diu vixt in terris;] as Baronius his expression is of
Saint Ambrose; yea, and moreover, He enjoyes the blessed society of the Angels
in Heaven, whose imitator and companion be was whiles he lived on Earth, having
only changed (by this his translation, for Death I will not call it) his
place, not his Dr. Priideaux late Bishop of Wigor^*
company, (as a late Divine of this Kingdom is recorded to have said upon his
death bed,) Et ut semel dicam, beatus quod scripserit legenda, and scribenda
secerit; leatior quod ad veram pietatem, and regnum caelorum multos erudierit;
beatissimus quod in Domino mortuns a laboribus requiescit, and aeter^um cum
Christo and gloriose vivit. Happy in Writing things worthy to be Read, and
likewise acting things worthy to be Written; happier in Teaching and
Instructing many, both by Books and Sermons in the right way to Heaven; and
most happy in Living and Dying in the Lord, and now resting from his Labors,
and enjoying the Lord Jesus in everlasting glory.

What Monument his Friends will be able to erect to his Memory, I cannot say;
but for his own Coffers, I fear they are too much a Kin unto Arch - Bishop
Warham's, wherein was found only twenty Marks, when he lay upon his death bed,
(as Eras. praef. ante opera Hierom.
Erasmus witnesses) which yet the good old man piously said, Was (satis
viatici) enough to bring him to his journies end; and for more he took not late
care: with which profession, this our Religious Prelate may bid his friends and
the world Adien; for he dyed much what as poor as Saint Augustine, who (as
Possidius reports) left only his Library, and diverse imperfect Copies of his
intended works, which his death prevented the Publishing of. And for his
Chaplains and Allies, which were neither few, nor meanly provided; yet all of
them lying under the same burden of the Times which pressed their Lord and
Master, (not one of them al proving a Vertumnus, or Ecebolian time-server) it
may well be feared, they will be as unable as himself to perpetuate his memory
by any earthly Monument, as he has done to that Mirror of Learning In
Westminster Abbey Church.
Mr. Isaac Casaubon; but however it less matters for those earthly
Circumstantialls, because I well know they were much both Praeter and Infra,
besides and below his heavenly speculations. And withal considering that what
Gregory Nyssene reports of his Sister Macrina, may be truly affirmed of this
pious Prelate, viz. Pure and integre vivendo paravit sibi Monumentum quod and
vitans ipsius decoraret and sepulturam (...)
. i. e. That by a pure and holy life she had prepared for her self a lasting
Ornament, and a living Monument after Death. And that is a good Name For Bp.
Morton his Ditto always was. Mors vitam aufert and affert.
, which is a better preservative of the just man's memory, then all the
Pyramides and Polinctures of Egypt, or the stateliest Mausoleums of Asia. So
as none of his Friends, or nearest Alliances shall need to bewail the want of
Children, or his not-superviving in his not-superviving in his Posterity: For
to any such Objection, he may justly reply, as did that Thebane Hercules
Epaminondas, (to some that lamented his Orbity) he told them, That he had left
two Daughters, His Victories at Leuctra, and Mantinaea, which should eternize
his Name to all Posterity. So much more am I assured this our Christian
Hercules, may say, That he has left twelve Daughters, (yea, more then twelve
Daughters the Laborious Issues of his Brain, which will continue his Name and
Memory, till they and the world take end together.

And now to draw to an end of this unpolished Piece, which in that regard may
seem to some too tedious and prolix: perhaps to others too short and scant, (as
I confess it is, for such an excellent Subject,) howsoever I shall cloze it, as
that before mentioned Gregory Nazianzon does his Anniversary Oration for that
famous Archbishop and Martyr St. Cyprian; Haec sunt quae dicenda habuimus, at
que haud scio an plura dicere necesse, neque enim si Orationem in longum
produxerimus, quicquam tamen afferre queamus, quod illius virtutibus and
existimationi, quam de eo unusquisque concepit, ulla ex part respondeat. This
is part of that I had to say, neither do I know whether it will be needful or
expedient to say more, for though I should extend (this Tractate) to the
utmost, (and weary perhaps both the Reader and my Self) yet should I not be
able to produce any thing answerable to the worth of this Prelate, and of those
many excellent merits which all good men knew, and willingly acknowledge (to
end as I began) were lodged in his Person.

If I shall live to hear of his transmigration from this life to a better,
(which indeed I am loath to style a Death, because I know, whenever that day
and hour shall come) he may comfortably say unto his Friends, as Miconius writ
to Luther, Decumbere se quidem; sed vitaliter, non laetaliter aegrotare: That
sick he was indeed; but it was a vital, not a mortal sickness; (or) a
sickness unto Life, rather then unto Death. I say, whenever I shall hear of
that his This blessed man died at Es^on-Manduit, the house of that honorable
Baronnet Sir Henry Yelver^on, on St. Michaels day, 1659. and of his age, 95.
and of his consecration 54. so near he lived to the happy return of his sacred
Majesty Charles the Second into England.
Translation from Earth to Heaven, though I shall not perhaps use those words
of the Prophet Elisha, which Melancthon did use, when News was first brought
him of Luthers Death, Occidit currus, and auriga Israel: The Chariot and
Chariettier of Israel are fallen: Yet reflecting on him, and those Religious
Prelates J. U. Archbishop of Armagh; and J. H. Bishop of Norwich
, the Primate of Ireland, and the Bernard of England lately deceased, (and not
to mention diverse others Translated likewise from these calamitous and
troublesome times.) I shall make bold to use the words of another Prophet, even
the Prophet Isaiah, Justus perit, and nemo requirit, etc. The Righteous perish,
and no man lays it to heart: and merciful men are taken away, few (I doubt)
considering that the Righteous are taken away from the evil to come: Isay 57.
1. That is, from the evil of Gods eminent Judgments; which if they should be
meeted to these sinful Nations, by the hand of Divine Justice, in a
commensuration unto our sins, what can we expect but a (...), a second
desolation and destruction of our Jerusalem. Which God of his infinite mercy
avert, if it may stand with his holy counsels; and either translate these
Judgments from us, us from them; and enable all those Persons, upon whom they
shall fall, with unshaken Faith, and invinciple patience to endur^ and overcome
them: Ever^ more Praying, Praising, an^ confessing, with good N^hemiah, unto
Almight^ God; Thou, O Lord, ar^ just in all that is brough^ upon us, for thou
have done right, but we have do^^ wickedly, Nehem. 9. 33.

Unto that merciful^ and glorious God, Trini^^ in Unity, and Unity i^ Trinity,
be ascribed of all Creatures both in Heaven and Earth, All Honor, Glory,
Might, Majesty, and Dominion for Evermore.

Amen. Amen.
J. N. D. D.

FINIS.

