TWO ARGUMENTS In PARLIAMENT, THE FIRST CONCERNING THE CANNONS, THE SECOND
CONCERNING THE PREMVNIRE Upon those CANNONS.

By EDWARD BAGSHAWE Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller, M.DC.XLI.

THE FIRST ARGUMENT CONCERNING THE CANNONS.
Mr. SPEAKER,
THE order this day is to debate the legality of the Cannons only and not the
Praemunire, which diverse have argued that the Clergy have encurred by making and
publishing these Cannons; but of that of the Praemunire I shall not now speak,
but when an order is made thereof I shall declare my opinion.

I hold three illegallities, 1. In the Cannons, Primae Classis.

2. In the Oath contained in the sixth Cannon.

3. In the Cannons, Secundae Classis.

1. In that they are against Clergy and Laity without their common consent.

2. That they were not well created by any of the Kings Writs or Commissions to
enable them to make Cannons, which were not made in a Convocation, or in a new
Synod derived out of an old Convocation, as was wittily observed by a noble
Lord, but they were made in a mere convention of the Clergy, who had no
warrant or authority to do as they did.

3. The matters contained in the said Cannons are against the fundamental Laws
and Statutes of the Realm: In prooving all which, I will not insist upon any
thing that has bin said before, as fearing that I shall otherwise trouble you
too long.

The first point that I shall endeavor to prove, is, that the Clergy neither
since nor before the Sta. of 25. Hen. 8. cap. 19. could ever make Cannons and
Constitutions that should bind the Clergy and Laiety without their common
consent. For the prooving whereof I must make use of a Rule put in the 1. Book
of the Pandects of Justinian, Tit. De origin iuris. Inconveniens est, omissis
principijs and origin non repetita illotis manibus materiam tractare, He does
not handle, but slubbers a question, who deduceth it not from the fountain.

And therefore I will cast the whole Clergy, into five Stages of time, from
CHRIST to this very day, and in them all I shall prove this point, it being
the maine thing and of the greatest concernement to the liberty of the people.

Constantine, above three hundred years after CHRIST, in all which time there
was no distinction, betwixt causes civil and Ecclesiastical, but both were
tried before the temporal Judges of Emperors and Kings, as appears plainly
in the Imperial constitutions, neither will any Civilian deny it; for to
speak properly no causes that come in Judgment are spiritual or temporal in
respect of themselves: For what reason can any man give me, why murder tried
at this day by the temporal Judge should be less spiritual then Adultery
tried by the spiritual Judge, when the truth is that Adultery is far more
carnal and sensual then murder is; But the true reason of the difference is
from the grant of Emperors and Kings, who have given Conusans of this to the
Ecclesiastical Judge, and of the former to the Temporal.

And the true Reason why Emperors and Kings in this first age had the Conusans
of all causes whatsoever, as belonging to their temporal Courts is; For that
in those times, there was no difference betwixt Bishops and Priests in point of
Jurisdiction, but they were all one, and had then no more to do then to order
the Churches by diligent and godly preaching, administering the Sacraments,
beating down Heresies and Schisms, etc.

And that this may not seem strange, because I say it, though I could back it
with a multitude of Authorities, both old and new: Yet because I am loath to
spend time, I will only cite two which are of good credit with the Clergy.

Gratian, distinct. 95. cap. olim.

Rubricke. Presbiter idem est qui: Episcopus: ac sola consuetudine praesunt
Episcopi Presbiteris. TEXT, Olim idem erat Presbiter qui and Episcopus and
antequam Diaboli instinctu studia vel schismata in Religione fierent and
disceretur in populis ego sum Pauli: ego sum Apollo: ego autem Cephae: communi
Presbiterorum concilio Ecclesiae gubernabantur, postquam autem decretum est in
toto orb, ut unus de Presbiteris supponerctur, ut schismatum semina
tollerentur. Sicut ergo Presbiteri sciunt se ex Ecclesiae consuetudins esse
subiectos: Ita Episcopi noverint se magis consuetudine quam dispensationis
Dominicae veritate Presbiteris esse maiores and in communi debere Ecclesiam
regere. Jewel in the defense of his Apology, approoved by both Houses of
Parliament, and commanded to be in Churches, 2 Par. ca. 3. Divis. 5.

In St. Jeroms time (says he) there were Metropolitans, Archbishops,
Archdeacons and others, but CHRIST appointed not these distinctions of orders
from the beginning; Epist. a^l Tit c. 3.
these names are not found in all the Scriptures, This is the thing that we
defend, St. Jerome says, Let Bishops understand that they are in authority
over Priests more by custom then by order of GODS Truth; These be St. Ieromes
words truly translated. And Part. 6. cap. 9. Divis. 1, 2. he has these words.

I grant there be many special privileges granted upon great and just
considerations of the mere favor of the Prince: That a Priest being found
negligent or otherwise offending in his Ministry should be convented and
punished, not by the Temporal or Civil Magistrate, but by the discretion of
the Bishop, yet you must remember (Mr. Harding) that all these and other like
privileges passed unto the Clergy from the Prince, and not from GOD, and
proceeded only of special favor and not of right; for from the beginning you
know it was not so.

Constantines days until the Conquest, in which time the Emperors of Rome,
and the Kings here in England gave to Bishops diverse Jurisdictions and
Privileges over the Priests, which they had not before, as you may see in the
Code and Novels of Justinian. They had likewise Conusans granted to them of
all causes concerning Matrimony and Testaments, which I could tell you by what
means they first obtained these two, were it directly pertinent to this Point.
But the Power and Right of making Ecclesiastical Laws were ever reserved to
Emperors and Kings with the assent of the people, and not to the Bishops and
Clergy.

To omit the Imperial Constitutions of Constantine, Theodesius, Put out by
Lambert.
Justinian, and other Emperors, it appears plainly in our Saxon Laws made
long before the Conquest, by these several Kings, Ina, Alfred, Edgar, Canutus,
Edward the Confessor, etc. that all Ecclesiastical Laws, both concerning
Doctrine and Discipline were made by them, Cum consensu Aldermannorum and
populi, in their Michel: Gimot, or great Assembly, which is all one with our
Parliament. Nay, to their very Councels and Synods, the Laiety did come if any
matter was there handled which concerned them. Of this I could give likewise
many instances, I will only name one, the Council or Synod at Winchester
called in the 5t. year of King Canutus, it is there said, Personaliter
existentibus in eodem concilio duobus Archiepiscopis and alys Episcopis cum
^orundem suffraganijs, septem ducibus cum tot comitibus non-nullis, Abatibus
cum quam plurimis gregarijs militibus ac cum populi multitudine copiosa in
eodem existentibus, votis regis unanimiter consentientibus praeceptum and
Decretum est, etc. And this was no other then was usual in other places, for
the Layty to be at Councels, and Princes to send their Ambassadors to be there
and to assent for them, if they could not be present themselves.

Edward the first, in all which time there was a great conflict betwixt the
Common Law and the Popes Cannon Law: For the Conqueror coming in under the
Popes Banner, and under it winning that battle of Hastings in Sussex, wherein
he obtained the Kingdom, did suffer the Popes Cannon Law to be brought into
the Land, which caused the Common Law until the days of Edw. 1. to suffer the
fits of an ague; for in the reign of a stout and valiant King the Common Law
prevailed, but in the Reign of a weak King the Cannon Law prevailed. In the
Conquerours time, though he admitted the Popes Law, yet, says Roger of
Chester, Nullam Pontificis authoritatem in hoc regno admitti voluit nisi
quatenus ipse assensum praeberet and nil de rebus Ecclesiasticis discerni
voluit, nisi ipse non solum interesset sed praefuisset.

In K. William Rufus time, the Cannon Law prevailed more, for that K. making
Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury (whom the Archbishop that now is, and other
of the Clergy call S. Anselme, though the Records of that time make him a
Traitor) He calls a Synod at London, takes away the investure of Bishops from
the Crown, and brings in a Canonical Institution and Confirmation of them from
the Pope, takes away the marriage of Priests, ipse (says Matthew Paris)
sacerdotibus uxores prohibuit antea non prohibitas, Vide Antiquit' Britan. p.
116, 117, 1^8, etc.
and makes other constitutions much prejudicial to the Crown and people. And
no marvel, for this proud Prelate at his first being Archbishop of
Canterbury, thus thanks the King for that favor, Domino Papae debeo
obedientiam tibi consilium

King Hen. 1. his Successor, though he strugled long with Anselme, and wrote
sharply to Pope Pascall, yet he could not prevail all the days of Anselme,
to undo those decrees at that Synod, but yet after the death of Anselme, to
manifest his claim to the Investure of Bishops, given to him by the Cannon
Law, he gave the Arch-bishopricke of Canterbury, to Rodolph Bishop of London;
Et illum per annulum and Pastoralem Baculum investivit, contra novi concilij
statuta, says Mat. Paris. King Hen. 2. to the end he might revive the ancient
Laws and customs of the Kingdom, called his common Council of all his
Nobility and Bishops, at Claringdon in Wiltshiere, where he made diverse
Constitutions, in Reversall of those made by Anselme, these ( Tho. Becket, whom
this King had made Archbishop of Canterbury, from the mean son of a Jew)
traitorously opposed, which bred great dissension in the Kingdom; All the
Barons of that council crying out against Becket, in these words, says
Hovenden, quo progrederis proditor, expecta and audi judicium tuum. But that
valiant King, by the unhappy killing of Becket, was quite defeated and stripped
of the fruit and benefit of that Council, and himself put to a miserable
penance, as it is at large described by Mat. Paris, and briefly touched in the
case of praemunire in the Irish reports, Paris Rep. so. 91, 192
and Becket shortly after Canonized by the Pope for a Saint. viz. 19. Hen. 2.

In all King John's time the son of Hen. 2. the waters of strife betwixt the
King and his Clergy grew to a full sea, his Kingdom interdited by the Pope,
and himself at length forced to surrender his Kingdom to the Pope, and his
own Clergy joining with the Pope against him: So that all his Reign, the
Common Law was under hatches.

But in Hen. 3. time his son, came the good Statute of Magna Charta, and then
those waters mightily abated, and the Clergy were glad to receive all their
liberties and Jurisdictions from the Crown, as by grant from that act of
Parliament; as appears in the first Chapter of that Stat. 9 H. 3. c. 1.
Concessimus Deo and hac praesenti charta confirmavimus pro nobis and
haeredibus nostris in perpetuum quod Ecclesia Anglicana libera sit, and habeat
omnia jura sua integra and libertates suas illaesas. And though it is penned in
form of a Charter, as the manner of penning Acts of Parliament was in those
times, yet it was a Statute of the Realm made in full Parliament, by the
consent of the Lords and Commons.

And although the Clergy of England were again nibling in the 20th. year of
Hen. 3. against the Common Law, Sta^. Merton. 20 H. 3. cap. 9.
and would fain have brought in that part of the Canon Law, concerning the
legitimation of children borne out of wedlock, telling the Peers of the
Realm in the Parliament of Merton; that, Quantum ad successionem haereditariam
Ecclesia tales habet pro legitimis, yet the Earls and Barons would not hearken
to them, but, as says that Statute, Omnes Comites and Barons una voce
responderunt, quod nolunt leges Angliae mutare, quae hucusque usitatae sunt and
approbatae.

In the latter end of the Reign of this King the Clergy by help of the Pope,
got head again, and the Popes exactions upon the Crown and the peoples
liberties (for they always go together) were grown intolerable, and diverse
Legantine Constitutions of Otho and Othobon, burdensome to the people were
introduced, insomuch that Matthew. Paris a poor Monk that lived in those days
and the Popes Creature, yet by reason of the great oppressions which he then
saw upon this Kingdom, called it Balaams Ass. Mat. Paris
And when all the Peers and Barons of the Realm, persuaded this King to
resist those incrochments upon him and his people, he out of the poverty and
weakness of his spirit, makes them this answer; Nec volo nec audeo domino
Papae in aliquibus contradicere.

The 4th. stage or tract of time is from the days of Edw. 1. 4. Time.
to the 25th. year of Hen. 8. in which time the common Law began to Recover
and get strength; in all which time the Clergy could make no Laws, Cannons or
Constitutions, but what the common Law did allow.

King Edw. 1. by the many confirmations which he made of M. Chart. and the many
liberties which he granted to his people by the Statutes of 25. Edw. 1.33. Edw.
1. and 34. Edw. 1. as likewise by the sharp Laws which he made against the
Popes exactions by the Statute of Carliel. 35. of his Reign, he was for all
these rightly styled, vindex Anglicanae libertatis, in doing thus he
strengthened mightily his Prerogative: for Prerogative and liberty are
inseparable, 3. Caroli. Petition of Right.
as King CHARLES truly observes in his answer to the Petition of Right, that
the Prerogative is to maintain the peoples liberty, and their liberty
strengthens the Prerogative. In his Parliament speech, 1607.
And King James his father, declaring that Kings were given for the welfare of
their people has this passage. If you be rich, I can never be poor, and if
you be happy, I cannot choose but he fortunate, etc. And these observations
proved true, and were fulfilled in this King: For never any Prince, either
before or after him was more victorious and successful then himself, through
the riches and welfare of his people; who upon all occasions aided him in his
wars with their purses and fought his battles in their persons.

Till the 13th. year of this King, the Clergy had no jurisdiction in
Ecclesiastical causes properly allowed to them, but in causes of Matrimony and
Testament, as may appear by Fitz. Not. Bre. Fo. 41. and by diverse Records,
which I have seen about the beginning of this Kings time. But in the 13th. year
of this King came the statute of Circumspecte agatis, wherein they had Conusans
of many more things, as may appear by that Law, and though before this time
they did attempt to put in ure their own Constitutions, yet the Judges being
at that time stout and resolute, always sent out Prohibitions, as may appear
by the Preamble of the Statute. Rex talibus Judicibus salutem, circumspecte
agatis de negotijs tangent: Episcopum Norwici and eius Clerum non puniendo eos
si placitum tenuerint in Curia Christianitatis de his quae sunt mere
spiritualia vix, etc. and there reckons the particular things they shall hold
plea of, and of no more, and although it mentions only the Bishop of Norwich,
who was in those days the most pragmaticall Bishop for the power of the
Church, yet does that Statute extend to all the Bishops of the land, and is so
resolved in Plats case, Plo. Com. fol. 36. b. And although this be set down in
Lindwoods Provincials, to be only an ordinance of the Church; which was the
cause, that the Gentleman under the Gallery said it was only an ordinance of
the Church; yet the truth is it was an Act of Parliament, as may appear by the
Statute of 2. Edw. 6. Cap. 13. Where it is expressly called a Statute, and so
it is likewise resolved in the 4. rep. Palmers case, and in the 5. report,
Jefferies case.

In Edw. 2. time, the Clergy by petition to the King (but not otherwise) got
jurisdiction in many other Causes not specified in the Statute of Circumspecte
agatis, as you may see in the Statute of Articuli Cleri. made 9^. Edw. 2. too
long to remember. These two Statutes were so precious with the Clergy, that
they are inserted verbatim in the Provincial Constitutions of Lindwood as the
maine part of the Church law, as in truth it is.

In King Edward. 3. time, the Clergy got further Jurisdiction in 9. particular
points not formerly granted to them, as may appear by the Parliament of 25.
Edw. 3. called Statutum pro Clero, a Statute which I have some cause to
remember. It appears in the Parliament roll of that Statute, upon what ground
they demanded those privileges which the King then granted to them, not out
of right, but by an humble supplication to the King, in these words mentioned
in the Roll being in French, That pur breverence de dien and de St. Esglis and
de sa benignity, he would grant them all those liberties they petitioned for.

In Henry 4th. time, the Clergy got some power with that King, and made a
Constitution, called constitutio Tho. Arundel contra Hereticos, but this
Constitution they never durst put in ure, till they had colored it with that
bloody Statute of 2. H. 4. Cap. 15. called Statutum ex officio, which in truth
was no Statute, as may appear by the Parliament Roll which I have, 2. Hen. 4.
tit. 48. being styled; petitio Cleri contra Hereticos. And where it is said in
the Act praelati: and clerus supradicti, ac etiam comunitates dicti regni
supplicarunt, these words ac etiam comunitutes dicti regni, are not in the
Parliament Roll, and so was the truth, that the Commons did never assent to
that Act, as may appear likewise by the Latin Act printed in Linwood. For
whereas the Act runs in this form of words; Qui quidem dominus Rex ex
assensu Magnatum and aliorum Procerum ejusdem regni; etc. concessit and
statuis, etc. there is no mention at all of the Commons, and therefore to help
this, the words of aliorum procerum are thus rendered in the English Statute now
in print (and other discreet men of the kingdom) whereby are employed the
Commons, and whereby hundreds of Martyrs were cruelly put to death by mistaken
law, Vide N. Br. de Heret. Comburend fo. 170.
of which greevance the Commons from time to time complained in sundry
Parliaments, and never rested till that bloody Statute was hereupon quite
revoked by the Stat. of 25. Hen. 8. cap. 14. and the oath ex officio, which had
his original from that cruel Statute quite taken away.

In the days of Hen. 8. in that famous case of Dr. Horsey and George Hunne,
mentioned in 7. Hen. 8. Kelwayes rep. 182. It was resolved by a kind of
Committee of both houses of Parliament at Blackfriars, at which the King and
all his spiritual and temporal Council were present (as it seems by that
book) where it was resolved that no Ecclesiastical laws did bind the people,
but what they assented unto.

viz. 25. Hen. 8. until this very time. The Stat. of 25. Hen. 8. cap. 19. I
hold to be nothing else but a declaration of what the Common law was before, and
not introductive of a new law, which is the reason, as I conceive, that the
Statute is penned in negative words, that they shall not make Constitutions and
Cannons without the Kings assent, which may be interpreted his assent in
Parliament, as well as his assent and confirmation by his letters Pattents.

2. That they shall not make Cannons contrary to the Kings Prerogative, the
Laws, Customs and Statutes of the land, now what can they tell what is the
Kings Prerogative, the Laws and Customs of the Realm, unless the Laity who
have more skill then they, to judge of those things, do give their assent. And
that this seems to be the meaning of that Act, that the Parliament should have
a power in establishing the Canons of the Clergy, it appears by that Act in
the appointing of the 32. Commissioners for the making of Canons; whereof 16.
were to be taken from the Temporalitie out of the upper and nether House of
Parliament: and 16. more were to be taken from the Clergy. So that the Clergy
had not that power to do it alone, without the Laity, though they had the Kings
Royal assent thereunto.

And that the practice was always so, that the Acts and Constitutions of the
Clergy had their determination and conclusion in Parliament, appears by these
examples.

The 6 Articles mentioned in the Stat. 31. Hen. 8. cap. 14.
31. H. 8. cap. 14. were debated in the Synod or Convocation of the Clergy, but
were not binding to the people without confirmation in Parliament, as appears
clearly by that Act. 32. Hen. 8. cap. 26.


The institution of a Christian man compiled in a book by all the Clergy of
England, containing matter of doctrine, as likewise the Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church were not binding to the people without the approbation and
confirmation of the Parliament of 32. H. 8. c. 26. as appears by that Statute.

And whereas it was said under the Gallery, that the Laietie have nothing to do
to meddle with matter of Religion. If he had pleased to have cast his eyes upon
the Stat. of 1. Ed. 6. ca. 1. he would have found there a notable debate and
dispute in Parliament by the Laity only against Transubstantiation, m l. 5 In
S Th. Cottons library.
and Communion in one kind, as may appear in that Statute. Besides I have
seen the Diary of King Ed. 6. written with his own hand, wherein he has this
passage, This day there was a notable debate in the Lower House of Parliament
against the Communion in one kind.

So the Statutes of 2. E. 6. cap. 21. and 5. E. 6. cap. 12. concerning marriage
of Priests, gave a final determination to that point, by a binding Law upon a
debate had first in the Convocation. The Canons and Constitutions made by the
32. Commissioners upon the Statutes of 27. H. 8. cap. 15.35. H. 8. cap. 16. and
3. Ed. 6. c. 11. were compiled 6. E. 6. and afterward printed and published,
and all the Commissioners names I have seen under king E. 6. own hand: and
although they be singular good Laws, and written in excellent language, yet
because they have not had the allowance of Parliament, are not received as
binding Laws at this day.

Lastly, the 39. Articles of Religion, made in the Convocation 1562. were not
binding Laws to the whole Kingdom, till they had their approbation and
confirmation, by the Stat. of 13. Eliz. cap. 12. Thus have I as briefly as I
could, run over the practice of all ages in making Ecclesiastical Laws, and
the reasons of their practice are briefly these,

A comparatis, by an argument a minori ad majus, If property of goods cannot be
taken from me without my assent in Parliament, which is the fundamental Law of
the land, and so declared in the petition of right, why then property and
liberty of Conscience which is much greater, as much as bona animi are above
bona fortunae, cannot be taken from me without my assent.

magna Charta, M Chapter cap. 29.
granted to me as mine Inheritance, cap. 29. Nullus liber homo imprisonetur
aut disseisetur de libertatibus vel liberis consuetudinibus suis, And liberty
of Conscience is the greatest liberty.

Imprisonetur: for put the Case that the Clergy make Cannons to which I never
assented, and I break these Cannons, whereupon I am excommunicated, and upon a
significavit by the Bishop, my body is taken and imprisoned by a writ de
excommunicato capiendo, now shall I lie in prison all the days of my life, and
shall never be delivered by a Cautione admittenda, unless I will come in, and
parere mandatis Ecclesiae, which are point blank against my conscience.

And thus have I proved the first and chiefest point, that no Cannons can bind
the Laiety and Clergy, without consent in Parliament: and therefore these
Cannons made against the Laiety, as well as the Clergy, without their assent,
cannot bind.

Hen. 8. cap. 19. I think they had not.

The words of the Statute by which the Clergy have power to make Cannons, 25.
Hen. 8. cap. 19.
are penned in the negative: That they shall not enact, promulge or execute any
Cannons or Constitutions, etc. in their Convocations, and which always shall
be assembled by authority of the Kings writ, unless the same Clergy may have
the Kings most royal assent, to make, promulge and execute such Cannons upon,
pain of imprisonment, and to make fine at the Kings will.

By which it plainly appears, that the Clergy have no power to make Cannons
but in their Convocation, and that to the making of these Cannons, there must
be the Kings royal assent.

Whether this were so or no, comes now to be examined, wherein is to be
observed, the several writs and Commissions which they had for the making of
these Cannons.

The first writ that issued forth, About the first of Feb. 1639.
was the Parliament writ, directed to every Bishop, for calling them and their
Clergy, which had this clause in the latter end, Ad consentiendum ijs quae tunc
ibidem de communi concilio regni nostri divina favente clementia contigerint
ordinari.

The 20. of February following went forth two Writs more, called the
Convocation Writs, directed to the several Archbishops of Canterbury and
York, for the election of Clerks to the several Convocations, which had these
words in the writs, Ad tractandum, consentiendum and concludendum super
praemissis and alijs quae sibi clarius exponentur tunc ex part nostra.

The Parliament began the 13th. of April following, and on the 15. of April
issued out a Commission to the Archbishop of Canterbury, to alter, amend and
change the old Canons, and to make new during the Parliament; the like went to
the Archbishop of York.

On the fifth of May following, the Parliament was dissolved, whereby, as I
conceive the Law to be the Convocation was likewise dissolved and determined,
which being so, and no Cannons made by them all this time, then could there be
no Cannons made in the Convocation, according to the words of the Statute. And
therefore the 12. of May following there went forth another Commission to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, to make Cannons, etc. during the Kings will and
pleasure, with a proviso contained in the said Commission, that the said
Cannons should not be repugnant to the Rubricks in the book of Common Prayer,
the 39. Articles, nor to the Doctrine, order and Ceremonies of the Church, The
like Commission went to the Archbishop of York. In which Commission of 12.
May, there was an express Revocation and making void of the Commission of 15o.
Aprilis.

So that the Commission of 15. Aprilis being determined in Law by the
Parliament, to which it referred, as likewise by the Commission of 12. May,
which absolutely revoked it. All the Cannons that were made, and now printed
were made out of Parliament, and so consequently out of Convocation, and merely
by the Commission of 12. May.

The 30. June following, comes the Kings Letters Patents of Confirmation of
these Canons made by the Commission of 12. Maij, in which Letters Patents, he
does in express words both give his Royal assent to the Cannons, and ratifies
and confirms them according to that form of the said Statute or Act of
Parliament of 25. Hen. 8. Now that Statute does only give power to the King to
assent unto and confirm Cannons made in Convocation, and therefore there being
no Cannons made in Convocation but afterward, the assent and confirmation of
things not then in being must needs be void; for in our Law, confirmare is
firmum facere, which presupposes an entity or being of the thing that is to be
made firm; for ex nihilo non fit quid, says the Philosopher. And therefore
the foundation failing, on which the confirmation should work, does cause it
thereby to be absolutely void; according to that rule of Law, Sublato fundamento
destruitur opus. And so I conclude this second point also, that the Authority
which should give life and being to these Cannons is void in Law.

The third and last point is this, Point.
admitting that the Clergy had power and lawful authority to make these
Cannons, whether the said Cannons be not void in Law for the matter contained
in them, and I think they are in that they are against the Laws and Statutes
of the Realm, and so contrary to the laid proviso in the Statute of 25. Hen. 8.

In the debate whereof I will first consider of the Cannons, primae Classis.

2. Of the Oath contained in the sixth Cannon.

3. Of the Benevolence granted by the Clergy, and contained in the second book
of Cannons, all which I shall hold to be against the Laws and Statutes of the
Realm.

viz, 1, 12, and 13. Cannons.

For the first Cannon in making determinations concerning Royal power and
property of goods, they have done against Law, and have meddled with things of
which they have no Conusans, for the exposition of them belongs to the Judges
of the Land, and they have no more right to expound them, then the Judges have
to expound Texts of Scripture. And therefore it was aptly spoken by the
Attorney general in Harrisons case, who was indicted in the King's Bench, Trin.
14. Car. for calling Judge Hutton Traitor, who there said that it was his
opinion, and the opinion of all Orthodox Divines, that if the King thought he
might with a safe conscience take my goods, I was to let him have them, and it
was high Treason in me to deny him or make resistance; To whom the Attorney
general replied in these words, that the Prerogative of the King, and liberty
of the Subject were given and defended by the Laws of the Realm, and that the
Judges were the expounders of that Prerogative: And though the Clergy of
England do seem in this Cannon to maintain this absolute power, yet we must
know that the Kings of England never made Title to govern by it: For though
king James in his book of free Monarchies dives further in this point then any
before him; yet he determines it thus, that this absolute power is only
between God and him, not in relation to his people in point of their
government; for the same King says in another place, that a Subject of England
may challenge the King in the same language, as the poor widow challenged
Philip of Macedon, Fac iustitiam aut ne sis Rex; Par speech An. 1609. A book
condemned to the fire by both houses of Parliament 7 lac.
and then adds this, That those Kings are either Tyrants or perjured, that
govern not according to their Law; and those that persuade them otherwise are
vipers and pests, both to the King and Commonwealth: And I have now in my hand
that Kings Proclamation for the suppressing Dr. Cowels book, called The
interpreter for advancing his absolute power to the overthrow of all
Parliaments.

Concerning the 12. and 13. Cannons, touching the freeing and discharging of
Chancellours and Officials from executing any Excommunication in his own person
or any censure against the Clergy, because they are Laymen, I say that in
doing and enacting this, Stat 29 H 8. c 17.
they have done quite contrary to an Act of Parliament still in force, in
taking from them this power of exercising the censures of the Church, which
that Statute gives them, which I did look when some Civilians now in the house
should have maintained: And although it were to be wished that only Clergy men
should have this power of Excommunication, and other Censures of the Church;
yet seeing an Act of Parliament has given this power to Laymen: It is a high
presumption in them to make Cannons against it.



1. Whether the Clergy can impose a new Oath? I think they cannot; For I hold
it for a ground in Law, that no Oath can be imposed upon the Subject, but what
is warranted either by the custom of the Realm, which is no other then the
common Law, or else by some Act of Parliament to warrant it: And herein the
Clergy has done more then the King does at this day by his Prerogative Royal,
by which he governes his people, and is part of the common Law, and differs no
more from it, then pars a toto, called by Bracton privilegium Regis, by the
Sta. of West. 1. Droit du Roy, by the Register, Jus regium Coronae. Now the
King does not by his Prerogative in any of his Commissions or Letters patents,
which are of greater force then Cannons, impose an Oath without some Act of
Parliament to warrant it; As for example, by the Commission of Sewers there is
power to give an Oath, but that is warranted by the Sta. of 23. Hen. 8. The
Commission of Bankrupts gives an Oath, but that is backed by the Statutes of
13. Elizab. Cap. 13. and 21. Jaco.

So the Commission of Charitable uses is warranted to give Oaths by the Stat.
of 43. Eliz. many more instances might be given, which I omit.

Nay the Oaths we take to the King, concerning his Supremacy, and our own
allegiance, to which we are tied by a bond of nature, as his Liege people, yet
for the imposing of these two Oaths, there are two Acts of Parliament
provided, viz. 1. Eliz. c. 1. and 3. Jaco. c. 4.

Besides, the Clergy have no power by the Sta. of 25. Hen. 8. which gives them
power to make Cannons and Constititutions to impose Oaths; for an Oath is no
Cannon or Constitution, but a mere Collateral thing; just as if they should
have enjoined a man to have entered into a bond of a 1000. pound to have
observed their Cannons, this had been void, and a prohibition had lain at the
common Law for it, because this is a Collateral thing, and a charge upon my
goods, and so is an Oath upon my conscience, and therefore in pressing an Oath
by virtue of their 6 Cannon, they have exceeded their authority.





1. Exception is in these words, That I will not endeavor by my self or any
other to bring in any Popish Doctrine, contrary to that which is so
established, now That, and So, being words of Relation do refer to the next
Antecedent, being (Popish Doctrine) not mentioned in any part of the Oath
before: So that, reddendo singula singulis, it runs thus in sense and in
Construction, I will not endeavor my self to bring in any Popish Doctrine,
contrary to that Popish Doctrine which is so established, Ergo, some Popish
Doctrine is established by the Church of England. This construction was so
evident and plain to them, that for the curing thereof, though this Oath with
the word (Popish) in it, and the rest of the Cannons were confirmed by the
Kings letters Patents 30. Iunij 16. Car. yet 5to. Julij after, they got a
Commission from the King, to give this Oath, leaving out the word Popish,
whereby they have made the remedy worse then the disease, by giving an Oath
which was never confirmed by the King.

2. The second Exception is in these words, Nor will I ever give my consent to
alter the government of this Church by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes and
Archdeacons, etc. which I may fitly call a Covenant against the Kings
supremacy, which I thus make good.

It is a part of my Oath of Supremacy, Stat. 1o. Eliz. c. 1.
that I shall assist the King in all preheminences and jurisdictions belonging
to his Crown. Now it is a part of his jurisdiction to alter this government by
his Parliament, and to appoint and establish another, which if he shall be so
minded to do, I am by this Oath not to assist him in it, I am not so much as
to give my assent; whereby I do unavoidably fall upon this Rock, that for the
saving of my oath, I must deny my obedience to the King, Azor. de juramento.
or by obeying the King I must fall upon perjury: For though it be true, as the
Cannonists say, that when a Law is changed to which I am bound by oath: Though,
I am thereby materially discharged; yet formally I am bound in respect of my
will: For if ever I actually assent to the alteration, I am really perjured.

3. The third Exception is in these words, I will not consent to alter the
government of this Church, by Archbishops, etc. as it stands now established,
and as by right it ought to stand; now to speak properly, there is no
government of this Church of England by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes,
Archdeacons, etc. but only by the King, and they govern only by and under
him. And why the King should be quite left out, seems a thing strange to me,
unless they will say he is comprehended within the etc. which is a most
unworthy place for so great a Majesty.

And that the Clergy had some ill meaning in this omission of the King out of
this Oath, I have some reason more then to suspect, when I cast my eye upon
some dangerous passages that are in their writings about the Kings Supremacy,
advancing it higher then the King himself would have them, touching the
Subjects property of goods, but depressing it too low concerning his
Ecclesiastical power. And this appeared lately before us by a very dangerous
speech of Dr. V^d. D. Cowels book verbo Par. liament suppr^ssed by K Iams
Proclamario^ and lately printed without authority.
Cosins, who said that the King ought not to be called Supreme head of the
Church, and seemed to color it by Bishop Jewels opinion, which is most false.
For the Act of 1o. Eliz. Revives all the Statutes of Hen. 8. touching Supreme
head of the Church: So that the King may as well be called Supreme head of the
Church on Earth (for so are the words of the Statute of 26. Hen. 8. cap. 1. and
37. Hen. 8. cap. 17.) as supreme governor. Besides the distinction that he
used in this place, That Bishops had their jurisdiction from God, ratione
officij, but ratione exercitij, they had it from the King, which is both absurd
and erroneous.

It is absurd, for he will not allow that Bishops and Ministers should be all
one, but by this distinction they should, for neither of them can exercise
their functions, but by permission from the King.

It is erroneous, for I do not only say it, but will prove it, that Bishops
have no jurisdiction here, but from the King; for it is a known distinction
among the Cannonists (as that learned Civilian that spoke last does well know)
That in a Bishop there is a double power Potestas ordinis. Potestas
Jurisdictionis.


1. Potestas ordinis, to preach, to baptize, to administer the Sacraments, etc.
this power is iure divino, agreeable with all other Ministers.

2. Potestas Jurisdictionis, as to admit, institute, and give mandates, to
induct into Church Livings, to keep Ecclesiastical Courts, to call Sinods, to
visit Churches: For which two latter we pay Sinodals and procurations to this
day, and which if the ancient form were observed, would be of excellent use at
this day, for the depriving of Arminians, D Bois Deane of Cant: in a vi^tation
Sermon.
Socinians and other Heretics; but as a learned Prelate writes, they are now
become, Nummorum non morum visitationes.

This power of Jurisdiction, say the Cannonists, is, de iure humano, and from
the Pope, for so is their rule, Episcopi descendunt a Papa tanquam membra a
capite; we in our Law say, that their jurisdiction is wholly from the King, and
so it is acknowledged by themselves in express words in the Act of Parliament
of 37. Hen. 8. cap. 17. an act in force at this day; That Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. and all other Ecclesiastical persons have no manner of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, but by, from and under the King.

Nay this power in Bishops to excommunicate is a power of jurisdiction and
derived to them from the Pope say the Canonists, Azorua Lanelot. Instit Iuris
can.
We say in our Law that they have this power from the King, for though Kings
cannot excommunicate ministerialiter, by reason they are Lay-persons, as says
Bracton, l. 1. c. 8. yet they may do it authoritative, by reason of their
office by Commission from them, Otherwise let any man tell me how Judges
Delegate do at this day excommunicate but by Commission from the King grounded
upon the Statutes of 24. H. 8. cap. 12. and 25. H. 8. cap; 19. O^ how does the
high Commission at this day excommunicate, but by the like authority grounded
upon the Statute of 1. Eliz.

And therefore I do conclude this third exception that ^^^ing the Clergy do
seem by this Oath to derive their (...) ^on by any other right then from the
King, they have hereby mightily entrenched upon the Kings Prerogative.

4. The fourth and last exception to the Oath i^ in these words, Nor shall you
ever subject it (meaning the Church of England) to the usurpations and
superstitions of the Sea of Rome, and does not say the Church of Rome, whereby
it contains a negative Pregnant; That is to say, you may not subject the
Church of England to the superstitions and usurpations of the Sea of Rome; but
you may subject it to the usurpations and superstitions of the Church of Rome:
Now there is as much difference betwixt the Sea of Rome, and the Church of
Rome, as betwixt Treason and Trespass; and this appears plainly by the Statute
of 23o. Eliza. cap. 1. where it is said, that to be reconciled to the Sea of
Rome is Treason, but to be reconciled to the Church of Rome is not Treason, for
then every Papist in England should be a Traitor, being a member of that
Church, and therefore reconciled to it. Now the Sea of Rome is nothing else but
the Papacy or Supremacy of the Pope, whereby by virtue of the Cannon, unam
sanctam, made by Pope Boneface the 8th. he challenges a superiority of
Jurisdiction and correction over all Kings and Princes upon Earth; and those
persons which take the Iuramentum fidei, contained in the end of some of the
editions, that I have seen of the Council of Trent, which acknowledges this
Supremacy, are said to be reconciled to the Sea of Rome.

The Church of Rome is nothing else but a number of men within the Popes
dominions, or else where, professing the religion of Popery; and that the
Clergy had an ill meaning in leaving this clause in the Oath thus loose, I have
some reason to imagine, when I find in their late books, that they say the
Church of Rome is a true Church, and Salvation is to be had in it.

the Clergy, I will speak but a word, because I have troubled you too long: It
is not a Subsidy, for then it should have bin by the Convocation during
Parliament, as the books are, 1. Hen. 7.21. Edw. 4. and 28. Hen. 8. and as the
use is at this day to pass in the Acts of Subsidy.

But it is called a Benevolence or free gift, and yet if any refuse to pay it,
he shall be deprived, which is a very Bull; for if men be compelled to pay it,
how can it be said to be a free gift: Besides the King was not well dealt with,
as I conceive in passing his letters Patents of confirmation of this
Benevolence, dated 3o. August. 16. Carol. For upon a signification of his
Majesty's pleasure by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Docket is to this
effect drawn up, May it please your Majesty, this does contain your acceptance
of this benevolence, and your confirmation of the same; and yet there is a
clause in the letters Patents not mentioned to the King in the Docket, Vid. the
Dock.
whereby the Clergy have power to make Cannons and decrees, compelling the
payment of the same upon pain of deprivation, and so they did against all Law
to annex deprivation to offenses of such a nature, De Minist. Ecclesitit. 8.
when as by the late excellent Laws of Reformation, leg. Ecclesiast. tit. de
Deprivatione, Ministers are not to be deprived, but propter horrenda flagitia,
and so says Duarenus an excellent Civilian.

And so M. Speaker, I have done with the Cannons, and conclude that they are
illegal. 1. In point of original Jurisdiction. 2. In point of Derivative
authority. 3. In the matter and form of them, or more briefly in the language
of the Schools, they are illegal and void, in toto and in qualibet part.

FINIS.
THE SECOND ARGUMENT CONCERNING THE PREMVNIRE. March 2. 1640.

Mr. SPEAKER,
I Am by the order of the House to speak this day of the penalty which the
Clergy by making their late Cannons in their late convention, rather then Synod
have forfeited and encurred: The time before I debated the illegallity of those
Cannons, that was de culpa; this dispute is de pana.

Illegal faults draw after them legal punishments: For there are no venial
sins at the common Law; I was long in the debate of the Cannons, and I fear
that the weightinesse of this dispute concerning the pu^ishment, will make me
run into the same error. I was doubtful at first what punishment I should
fix upon the Clergy: but considering the vote of this House, that the late
Cannons were against the Kings Prerogative royal, the Fundamental Laws of
the Land, the liberty of the Subject, and diverse Acts of Parliament, I settled
my resolutions. There is a rule in the Schools, that potentes potenter
punientan, great offenders shall receive great punishments; The English in
short is this, I hold they have encurred a Praemunire, viz. All Arch-hishops,
Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, etc. which consented to the making of them;
which that I may distinctly and clearly prove, I will divide all that I have to
say upon this matter into 4. parts.

1. What a Praemunire is.

2. The original ground and cause of a Praemunire.

3. The grounds and reasons in Law why the Clergy have in this case incurred a
Praemunire.

4. An Answer to the Objections that are made against a Praemunire; especially
by three Civilians now in print.

1. Concerning the first, it is a rule taken by that excellent Orator, Cic. 1.
offic.
that omnis rei institutio a definitione proficiscitur, he that would handle a
thing fully must define it truly.

Now a Praemunire takes its name from the words of the Writ called Premu: V.
N^br. 152.
facias, about the end of the Writ, videlicet, Praecipimus tibi, quod per bonos
and legales homines de balliva tua premu: facias, J. D. and Abettores suos,
etc. quoth. sint coram nobis a die pasche in quindecim dies, etc. ad respondend.
nobis de contemptu, etc. in exhaeredationis Coronae nostrae periculum
manifestum, which is in sense and meaning, though not so strong and significant
as praemonere facias; For the expounders of the Civil and Cannon Laws
confound both words according to the Proverb, premoniti sunt premuniti.

But this Writ of praemu. is better understood by the Statutes on which the
same is founded, viz. 25. Edw. 3. c. 22. and 27. Edw. 3. cap. 1. de
provisoribus, 16 Rich. 2. cap. 5. which Statutes were made for the correction
of the incroachment of the Pope and his Clergy upon the Crown and Laws of
England, Upon all which Statutes and books of Law, I thus define a praemu.

A praemu. Definition
is a defense of the Crown and Laws of the Land from the tyrrany and oppression
of spiritual Jurisdiction, either foreign in the Pope, taken away by the
Stat. of 1. Eliz. or at home by the Clergy in the Ecclesiastical Courts,
whereby is incurred this penalty of being put out of the Kings Protection, loss
of lands and goods, and perpetual imprisonment.

This may seem a sharp and severe punishment to be inflicted on Clergy men,
but when the reasons and grounds of Law are considered, and how the Kings of
England were necessitated to it, the sharpnes of the punishment will not seem
strange to any, which is the second head of my division, and which I now come
unto.

2. Concerning the original cause and ground of the praemu. it arises from
the opposition and Antipathy betwixt the Common and the Cannon Law, or the Law
of God, and the Law of the Pope; the Common Law being derived from the one, and
the Cannon Law from the other, which makes the opposition as great, as betwixt
CHRIST and Antichrist, which has in all ages (as I could show you) caused a
hatred of our Law, and of the professors thereof, from the Clergy and
professors of the Cannon Law.

And that this may not seem strange, I will very briefly in honor to the
Common Law, prove and maintain that it is derived from the Law of GOD, and is
the nearest unto it of any Law in the world, which King James has largely
prooved in a Parliament Speech of his, 1607. but yet I will give 2, or 3.
instances more.

It is thus said by Priset chief Justice of the Common Pleas, 34 H. 6. f. 40.
ley denglitre est foundu sur le ley de dieu, which being translated out of our
Law-French into better English is thus, the Law of England is founded upon the
Law of God.

Ley de tree and ley de dieu sont, 7. H. 8.191 Kell.
tout un per Fineux chief Justice of England, that is, the Law of God, and the
Law of the Land are all one.

Pollard to the same purpose: But it will be said, 12. H. 8 f. 2
that this was only the opinion of Lawyers, and every one will be ready to
commend his own profession, and therefore I shall go much higher.

In the year of CHRIST about 169. Lucius a King of England was the first
Christian King, and the first anointed in all the world, and presently after
he was converted to the Faith, sought how to govern his people by good Laws,
and finding that the Roman Laws were then the most famous in all the world,
sent by his Letter to Elutherius then Bishop of Rome, for a copy of those
Laws; that godly Bishop (for so the Bishops of Rome then were, and long after)
wrote an answer of his Letter to this effect, Petistis a nobis leges Romanas
vobis transmitti, etc. leges Romanas reprobare possumus, legem Dei nequaquam,
etc. Habetis penes vos in regno utramque paginam, ex illis sum legem, and per
illam rege vestrum Brittanniae Regnum, vicarius enim Dei estis in regno, etc.
as may appear more at large in the Laws of St. Ed. cap. 17. compiled by
Lambert, where the letters are set down at large; and therefore King James had
good cause to say, That the Laws of England were framed as near as could be
to the Judicial Laws of Moses.

And this affinity which our Law has to the Law of GOD, has been the cause
(as I conceive) of that contention betwixt our Law and the Canon Law, which
has been like to that of Hagar contending with her Mistress, and has received
diverse times the same doom, Cast out the bondwoman and her son, as I could
prove by many presidents, which for brevity I omit. And as the contention and
opposition increased, so did the punishment, as may appear in these four
particulars.









1. For the first, It is observable that the first news of the Canon Law here
in England, was, Anno 1150. xvj. Steph. Reg. compiled by Gratian, and called
the Popes Decrees, but came to us here in England by a wile, under another
name, called Rogationes, and entreated to be received of us under the pretext
of Holiness, because of the fasting and Ember-dayes, tending to fasting and
prayer, which those Laws seemingly contained, and hence the Ember before
Whit-suntide is called the Rogation week from that name: But King Stephen
finding them pernicious to the native Laws of England, gave them this welcome
and entertainment, for faith Roger Bacon, Rex Stephanus allatis legibus Italiae
(meaning the Cannon Laws) publico edicto prohibuit ne ab aliquo retinerentur.

2. When this prohibition would do no good, but other Cannon Laws were thrust
upon us in the time of Hen. 2. as the Decretall Epistles, under Pope Gregory
the ninth, from which that flaming Law of burning Heretics was first hatched,
a sharper punishment was devised by Hen. 3.19. of his reign against the Civil
and Cannon Laws, prohibiting the use of them here in England under a severe
pain, as Laws that were derogatory to the supreme Majesty and independancy of
the Crown of England.

3. After these Decretals, the Extravigants of Boneface the 8th. were brought
into this Kingdom, which were so injurious to the Sovereignty of Kings, that
whosoever shall but read one of those Laws, called unam Sanctam, will say
that either a King of England must lay down his Crown, or quite abandon those
Laws: Whereupon Edw. 1. taking care to preserve the Crown and the liberties
of his people, did in the third and sixth year of his Reign issue out diverse
Inquisitions, to enquire of the Jurisdiction of the Clergy, Fitz. N. B. 40.
which at that time was limited chiefly to matters of Matrimony and Testament,
until the Stat. of 13. Edw. 1. called Circumspecte agatis, enlarged their
power and Jurisdiction in many more particulars.

One of those Inquisitions, Ao. 6. Edw. 1. I will only mention instead of many,
which was taken at Lawneston in Cornwall before Roger Loveday and Walter de
Wyburne; These two were to enquire of Walter Bishop of Exeter, for drawing the
Kings Subjects into his Court, and holding plea, de debitis and catallis quae
non sunt de Testamento and Matrimonio, and for making them enter into bond and
a new Oath, quod sibi in omnibus adharebunt and per omnia (such another new
fangled Oath as was in the late Cannons) and this is in the Record alleged to
be in lasionem Coronae, exhaeredationem and depauperationem manifestam quae
ulterius sustinere nolumus nec debemus, and it was adjudged that the Bishop
should for this offense, make satisfaction to the King.

21. Edw. 1. Par. Rolls pl. 17. m. 3. indors. Jo: Archbishop of York,
excommunicated two of the Bishops of Durhams servants, named William Willicon
and John Rowman, for keeping possession of some of the lands of the Bishops of
Durham, to which the Archbishop pretended a title. This being a high offense
against the Stat. of Circumspecte agatis, newly granted to the Clergy but a
little before, received this Judgment in Parliament.

First, That the Bishop should be imprisoned.

Secondly, Should make a submission to the King, and

Thirdly, Should pay 4000. Marks fine, which was a mighty sum, whenas in
those days, the price of an Ox was but 5. sh. as appears in the end of the
25. cap. of the Stat. of Westm'. 2. made 13. Edw. 1. tit. assize.

Fourthly, When the Clergy would take warning by none of these examples, the
Kings of England were forced to make these sharp Laws of Praemunire that I
mentioned before, and to say to them in the language of Solomon to railing
Shimei, (for so was the Cannon Law to the Kings of England:) 2 Kin. 2.
keep at home in your own place, if once you pass over the brook Kidron,
your blood be upon your own head. So the Kings of England spoke by their Laws
to the Clergy, Keep within your own bounds, given you by the Laws of
England: if once you pass those bounds, and trench upon the prerogative of the
Crown, and liberties of the people, your blood be upon your own heads. For
that was the price of a praemunire in those days; for until 5o. Eliz. it was
lawful for any man to kill one that was attainted in a Praemunire: as it was to
kill a Wolf or a wild Dog: for says our Law, a man attainted in a Praemunire;
did caput gerere lupinum: but now by that merciful Stat. of 5. Eliz. cap. 1.
it is unlawful for any to kill a man attainted in a Praemunire, and so I
conclude the second part of the division.



First Ground is this, Clergymen which only by Law have a spiritual
Jurisdiction, if they shall exercise a Jurisdiction within the Kingdom, which
only belongs to the Kings temporal Courts and not to their ecclesiastical
Courts, they do an act herein against the Kings Supremacy and Royal
Prerogative, and so incur a Praemunire. The Books in our Law to prove this
ground are many, which for brevity sake, I will only quote the authorities of
Law, without putting the Cases at large, because I have much more to say: V. N.
Br. 152.5. Edw. 4. fob. 6.11o. Hen. 7. Bro. pram 12.44o. Ed. 3. fo. 36o. 15o.
Hen. 7. per Fineux. 9. Edw. 4. D. and St. lib. 2. cap. 24. and cap. 32.

The Reasons of this ground are three.

Edw. 4. fol. 6. against the Common Law, wherein is to be noted, that there is
a mutual dependence between the Kings Prerogative and the Common Law, that to
violate the Common Law, is to do an act against the Kings prerogative, and to
violate the Prerogative, is to do an act against the Common Law: with this
agrees King James, in an excellent Parliament speech of his, Anno 1609. Wherein
he takes an occasion to magnify the Common Law, as most beneficial to his
Prerogative, and to despise it says he, is to despise the Crown.

2. Reason is given by D. St. lib. 2. cap. 32, that when debts and trespasses,
and such other temporal matters are handled in the spiritual Courts, the King
loses his fines and amercements, and such other duties due to him upon
original writs of Debt, Trespass^, etc.

3. Reason is given by the Stat. of 25. Edw. 1. cap. 4.34. Ean. 1. cap. 6. by
which Stat. Magna Charta is appointed to be read in all Cathedral Churches
twice every year, and excommunications are then solemnly to be denounced
against all infringers of the same, now there is no such infringment of
liberty, as to draw the subject into the Spiritual Courts by Cannons made by
them, contrary to Law and the liberty of the Subject, granted to them by that
great Charter. But the Rule is, longum iter per praecepta, breve per exempla. I
will therefore give you some examples and presidents, Three against Bishops,
and two against Convocations themselves in the point of Praemuniries.

Hill. 25. Hen. 8. Rot. 15. Cor. Rege Richard. Nix his Case, the blind Bishop
of Norwich, who for citing ex officio Richard Cockerall Major of Thetford into
his Court, for taking a presentment of a Jury in the Majors Court, who found
that by an ancient custom and usage, none ought to be sued out of the Deanary
of Thetford for any ecclesiastical matter, and that if any did sue any
Citations elsewhere, he was to pay a noble, For receiving this presentment, the
Major was sued in the Bishops Court: for which Hales then the Kings Attorney
did prosecute the Bishop in a praemunire, of which he was attainted, part of
whose fine did go to the glasing of the windows of the Kings College
Chapel in Cambridge.

2. President is, Trin. 36. Hen. 8. Rot. 9. Cor' Rege, Anthony Buckley Bishop
of Bangor, was prosecuted in a Praemunire by Whorewood the Kings Attorney
general, for holding plea of right of Patronage, and of the sale of Corn and
grain sold to Rice Ween, John ap Hugh and Tho. ap Hoell, and diverse others,
for 21lb. upon several specialties, which are matters only triable in the
Kings Temporal Courts, did likewise incur a Praemunire, and was thereupon
attainted, and his lands and goods forfeited.

3. President was likewise in the Case of another Bishop of Norwich, called
William Bateman, who merely for visiting the Abbey of S. Edmundsbury,
discharged anciently by diverse Charters of Episcopal visitations (the Abbot
thereof being mitratus Abbas) was for this offense fined to the King in 30.
talents of gold, which amounted to the sum of 3000lb. and here by the way,
being upon the president of a Bishop of Norwich, I crave leave before I go to
other presidents to observe this one note, I do find that in all ages, the
Bishops of Norwich, above all other Bishops in the Kingdom, were most active
and pragmaticall, in advancing the ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and
persecuting the Ministers of GOD: To give you one instance instead of many, it
was a Bishop of Norwich that was the first author of spilling the blood of the
first Martyr we had here in England, named William Sawtree, that was burnt to
death by the Writ de Heretico cumburendo, mentioned in the Register, in Fitz.
N. B. fo. 170. Where the very Name of William Sawtree is expressed in the Writ,
who was Parson of S. Margarets in Linne, in the Diocese of Norwich, and was
convicted before the Bishop for the Doctrine of CHRIST, which was then counted
Heresy, and by him delivered over to Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury,
who caused him to be burnt to ashes, and if the Bishops of Norwich do think
this any praise to them, let them rejoice in it: I shall only say this for the
honor of that William Sawtree, and of Pembrook-Hall in Cambridge, above any
College either in Oxford or Cambridge, that Martyrum primus, which was this
William Sawtree, Martyrum doctissimus, which was Bishop Ridley, and Martyrum
pijssimus, which was John Bradford, were all of Pembrook Hall.

I come now to give presidents, wherein the whole Convocation were attainted in
a Praemunire, which are two,

Hen. 8. Kell. Rep. fo. 181. The Abbot of Winscombs case, which has been so
often cited in this House, but I shall only urge it to this one point, That the
Convocation for mere citing ex officio, Dr. Standish for maintaining the Kings
Prerogative and the Laws of the land, that Priests ought to answer before
temporal Judges, contrary to the tenent of the Clergy and the Abbots Sermon at
Paules-Crosse, The whole Convocation for this very act incurred a Praemunire by
the resolution of all the Judges of England assembled together by the King for
their opinions in that Case.

Woolsey, which I first cited in Doctor Cosens his Case, and is full to this
point, it is Mich. 21. Hen. 8. B. Roy. and the maine point of the Praemunire was
this, Quia ipse intendebat antiquissimas Ang. leges penitus subvertere and
enervare, universumque regnum Angl. legibus Civilibus, and earundum legum
Canonibus in perpetuum subjugare. This was found against him, and he was
attainted in a Praemunire, though he had the Kings Commission for what he did,
and the King made means to the Pope to make him a Cardinal, and gave way that
two Crosses should be carried before him, one as Cardinal, and the other as
Archbishop of York. These Leges Civiles mentioned in that Record, were the
Legantine Constitutions exercised by the Cardinal and all the Bishops of
England, in all their several Diocese, which though it had the countenance of
the Kings Commission to warrant, yet that was found no excuse for so unjust an
act, for both Cardinal and all the Bishops of the land, were adjudged to have
incurred a Praemunire, and therefore all the Bishops did for their pardon of the
said Praemunire, in their Convocation being then assembled and in time of
Parliament, pay the King a huge mass of money, namely the Province of
Canterbury paid the King 100000lb. the Province of York, 18840lb. and the
Cardinal himself forfeited to the King, all his goods and Chattles, and all
his lands and tenements, as Whitehall, Hampton Court, Christ College in
Oxford, etc.

This case does justly agree with this Case before us, for here the Convocation
have made Cannons, and added severe punishments to them, contrary to the Kings
Prerogative, and the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, which I made appear in
my Argument concerning the Cannons, and therefore I will not speak of them
now, but will give you two instances which I did not mention then.

were Mich. 9. Car. in which are contained all things wherein the Commissioners
were to meddle. And therefore it was impossible that these new Cannons, being
made not a year ago, should be comprehended in those Letters Pattents, of
which the Framers thereof could not possibly take notice, unless they had the
Spirit of prophecy, which is not to be imagined, and therefore it was a bold
attempt upon the Kings Prerogative, to order men to be punished by virtue of
his Comimssion which gave them no such authority.

etc. with this clause added, omni appellatione semota, that is, without any
manner of appeal to be allowed, which is a flat denial of the Kings Subjects
to have the benefit of Law, for in their own Law appeals are to be allowed
from the Ordinaries Court to the Metropolitan, from the Metropolitan to the
Pope, and such authority in appeals as the Pope had, is now given to the King
and his Judges Deligats by the Statutes of 24. Hen. 8. cap. 12.25. Hen. 8. cap.
19. But in this case all appeals to the King are denied, and his Subjects must
not only be excommunicated, but deprived of their free holds, and denied all
benefit of appeal to help them, which is a high point of Usurpation upon the
Crown and the Laws of the land, and an exercising of an Arbitrary power of
their own, above and against Law.

The Second ground of Law, 2 Ground
why the Clergy in the Convocation have incurred a Praemunire, is this, If the
King by his Commission gives power to spiritual Judges to do such and such
acts, qualified by a proviso to be done in such and such a manner, and with
such restrictions and limitations as are contained in that proviso, and those
Judges will by color of such Commission, do acts contrary to such provisoes
and limitations, they do hereby incur a Praemunire.

As for example, the King by his Letters Pattents, appoints one to be a Bishop,
and limits the Deane and Chapter to Choose, and the Archbishop to consecrate
him within 12. days and they do contrary to this limitation, they do hereby
incur a Praemunire, as may appear by the Stat. of 25. Hen. 8. ca. 20.

So by the Stat: of 1. Edw. 6. cap. 2. before the Stat. of 1. Queen Mary, which
repealed that Sta. of Edw. 6. all Bishops were to keep their Courts by
Commission from the King, and not in their own names, and the acts of the
Court, to be under the Kings seal, and not under the Bishops, and if they did
the contrary they were to incur fine and imprisonment in nature of a
Praemunire.

To apply this to our case, the Kings Commission for the Clergy to make Cannons
in their pretended Synod, did bear date 12. May last paste, being seven days
after the dissolving of the last Parliament, in which Commission there was an
express proviso, that no Cannons should be made,

1. Contrary to the Rubric.

2. Contrary to the 39. Articles of Religion.

3. Contrary to the Orders and Ceremonies already established, and yet as if
they would do things purposely against the Kings Commission, the Cannons that
they made were contrary to all these.

First, They were contrary to the Rubric, of which, because I will not be
over-tedious, I will give but one instance, viz. the Rubric before the
Communion, confirmed by Act of Parliament; where it is expressly said, that
the Communion Table shall stand in the body of the Church or Chancell, and the
Priest shall officiate at the North-side of the Table, by these Cannons, viz.
the 7. Cannon, the Table is to be at the East end of the Chancell, to stand
Altar-wise, and the sides of the Table are to stand East and West, and not
North and South, and it is there called Altar and not Table, and men are
enjoined to kneel at the Table, so removed, all contrary to the said Rubric;
and though this may seem but a light matter, yet when I shall open to you the
Reasons of this upon the first Reformation, it will appear to be a matter of
great weight and consequence; for the people were in the time of Edw. 6. who
began our Reformation of Religion, addicted to gross Idolatry, by holding the
opinion of transubstantiation, and by upholding that abominable Idol of the
Mass, in the Adoration of the Host, and the way then devised to reduce them
from Idolatry, was by this means.

Edw. 6. did by his injunction cause all Altars to be pulled down, and
moveable Tables of wood to be in their Rooms.

Edw. 6. Cap. 1.

Edw. 6. to the end that the people might forget their adoration at the place
where it stood before.

Edw. 6. which because it has given satisfaction to the Consciences of many
hundreds, and is now left out of our Common Prayer Books, I will take the
boldness to read it to you word for word, as I find it in that Rubric,
because it is of singular use.

Although no order can be so perfectly devised, but it may be of some, either
for their ignorance and infirmity, or else of malice and obstinacy misconstrued,
depraved and interpreted in a wrong part, and yet because brotherly charity
wills, that so much as conveniently may be, offenses should be taken away,
therefore we willing to do the same: Whereas it is ordained in the Book of
Common Prayer, in the administration of the Lords Supper, that the Communicants
kneeling should receive the holy Communion; which thing being well meant for a
signification of the humble and grateful acknowledging of the benefits of
CHRIST given unto the worthy receiver, and to avoid the profanation and
disorder, which about the holy Communion might else ensue, least the same
kneeling might be thought or taken otherwise, we do declare that it is not
meant thereby, that any adoration is done, or ought to be done, either unto the
Sacramental Bread and Wine, there bodily received, or unto any real and
essential presence there being of CHRIST'S natural flesh and blood; for as
concerning the Sacramental Bread and Wine, they remain still in their very
natural substances, and therefore may not be adored, for that were Idolatry to
be abhorred of all faithful Christians, and as concerning the natural Body
and Blood of our Savior CHRIST, they are in Heaven and not here, for it is
against the Truth of CHRIST'S true natural Body to be in more places then in one
at one time.

Eliz. cap. 12. which I prove in this manner, the 35. Article does maintain
the Books of Homilies to contain good and wholesome doctrine; now the seventh
Cannon approoving of the bowing in Churches and at Communion Tables is expressly
against 3 Homilies of the Church of Eng. viz. 1. The Homily of the right use of
the Church.

2. The Homily of repairing the Church.

3. And the second and third Homilies of the peril of Idolatry; In all which
Homilies you shall find these passages,

1. That Images and I dols are all one.

2. That Altars and Images are one.

3. That Idolatry is to Images in Temples an inseparable accident.

4. That in time of Common Prayer, private devotion is not to be used.

5. That the true ornaments of the Church, consist in preaching, prayer, due
administration of the Sacraments, etc. and not by any outward Ceremonies, or
costly and glorious decking of the House of GOD with gold, etc. occasioning men
thereby to commit most horrible Idolatry.

6. That the Church is called holy, not of it self, but because GODS people
resorting thereunto are holy, with diverse more passages in those Homilies to
that purpose, whereupon I infer, that in as much as the 7. Cannon and other
Cannons are opposite to these passages, they have made Cannons against the 35.
Article of Religion, and so have done contrary to the Proviso in the Commission.

Thirdly, By the 7. Cannon, and other their new Cannons they have done against
their Commission, in that they are against the Ceremonies of the Church of
England now established since the Reformation. For by the 82. Cannon in the
Cannons 1. Jaco. the Table is to stand in the body of the Church or Chancell,
to the end that the greater number may communicate at the Table, and the
Minister may be the better heard and seen: But by the setting of the Table at
the East end of the Chancell, the greater number cannot communicate, and the
Minister in diverse places cannot be heard or scarcely seen, whereupon I
conclude this second ground of Law, that because the Clergy have done so
directly against their Commission from the King, they have thereby incurred a
Praemunire.

The third Ground of Law wherewith I will conclude the third part of my
division is this. 3 Ground


The Common Law of England, which as King James says, is in its own
principalls the justest Law in the world, should not in our case be just (the
Clergy themselves being Judges) if they of the Convocation should not incur a
Praemunire.

As it is a rule in Art, Contrariorum contrariaest ratio, in respect of the
Subject, so there is another rule in Art, Contrariorum eadem est ratio, in
respect of the Analogy and proportion; for do but observe what they do
against us in the Provinc. Constitut. cap. de sententia excom. (which is good
Law with the Clergy) you shall find these words, Excommunicantur omnes illi qui
literas impetrant a quacunque curia laicali ad impediend. processum Ecclesiast.
Judicum in causis qua per sacros Canones ad forum Eccles. pertinent. Nay so
high they go in their advancement of their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, that
in the said Constitutions, capite de panis, it does appear, that if the King
do by writ or other command call a Bishop to answer in his temporal Court, and
the Sheriff^ execute those writs by distress or attachment, etc. The King
indeed is in point of good manners admonished by them, 1, 2, 3. according to
form, but if he will not then desist, but in sua duritia perseverare (for such
rebellious words they have) the King, his Officers and Ministers, his Manors,
Castles, Cities, Burrows, etc. are hereby exposed to excommunication and
interdiction, which how terrible it was to the Kingdom of England may appear
in the example of King John, who was excommunicated, and his Kingdom
interdicted by his own Bishops, all the Church doors in the Realm locked up,
and marriages, christnings and burialls denied to all his people.

To apply this to our case, If the King and his people are thus used by the
Clergy for the maintenance of their own Laws as to exclude them from Heaven,
from the Church, and from Salvation, for so are excommunicated persons, tanquam
Ethnici and publicani, it is then most just for the King, to exclude the Clergy
from the protection and benefit of his Laws, when they so incroach and entrench
upon them, according to that ancient rule of Law, Frustra legis auxilium
invocat qui in legem committit: And so Mr. SPEAKER, I have done with the third
and maine part of my Division and come to the fourth and last, which is the
answer of Objections moved principally by three learned Civilians (for so I
must account them) Doct. Cowell in his Interpreter verbo praemunire, a book
suppressed by Parliament, and King James Proclamation, but of late reprinted,
Doct. Cosins Deane of the Arches in the time of Queen Elizabeth in his Apology
for Ecclesiastical proceedings, and Doct. Ridley vicar general in the time of
King James, in his view of the Civil and Cannon Laws.

The Objections are six. Fourth part.
Civilians, does not impute Praemunire to any spiritual Judge, dealing in a
temporal matter, but only prohibition.

ex ignoratione Elenchi, as Logitians call it, that is a mere mistake of the
Question, for the difference in our Law, is this; where the spiritual Court
has jurisdiction and where not, as for example, The spiritual Court has
jurisdiction of Tithes, and yet if it hold plea, de grossis arboribus, that is
of Timber Trees above 20. years growth, contrary to the Stat. of silva caedua,
45. Edw. 3. cap. 3. there a prohibition only does lie, because the Court has
jurisdiction of Tithes; but when the spiritual Court has no jurisdiction at
all, as in debt, trespass, etc. there a praemunire does lie. So is Dr. and St.
which I quoted before, and 24. Hen. 8. B. Prem. 16. and diverse other
authorities in Law.

Curia Romana aut alibi, mentioned in the Statutes of Premunires, which I cited
before, must not be meant of any Courts here in England, but of the Popes
Courts, which he kept sometimes at Rome, sometimes at Avignion in France, and
sometimes at Bonony in Italy, and therefore must be meant of those Courts, which
the Pope kept beyond Sea, and not at Rome.

alibi does not refer to the place, but to the Court; for whersoever the Pope
is, let him be at Rome, at Avignion, at Bonony or in England, etc. There is
Curia Romana whersoever he is, and therefore alibi must needs be meant of some
other Ecclesiastical Court then the Popes Court, and so is it expounded in old
N. B. fol. 152. and 5. Edw. 4. fol. 6. and diverse other books of Law; and
therefore in some of the Records which I cited before, the word alibi is thus
interpreted, In Curia Romana aut aliqua alia Curia Christianitatis, and that is
certainly the meaning of the word alibi, as may appear by the pleading in the
old book of Entries 430. Praedict. I. R. machinans Dominum Regem nunc coronam
and dignitatem suam exhaeredare, and cognitionem quae ad curiam Domini Regis
pertinet ad aliud examen trahere: for that indeed was the only mischief to draw
the Kings Subjects for temporal matters to a trial in the Ecclesiastical
Courts of which they had no cognizance.

worse then an inferior Court Baron, for there no Praemunire does lie, if the
Lord does hold plea of actions above 40s.

petitio principij, a begging of the question, for old Not. B. fo. 153. is to
the contrary.

2. Besides, if the Law were otherwise, yet a Court Baron is a Court of Common
Law and ancient, and the spiritual Court is a Court of the Cannon Law and not
ancient.

Eliz. Cap. 1. as other Courts in Westminster Hall, and therefore the King
cannot have a Praemunire against himself.

Eliz. did not give the King any new power, but only restored the old which he
had before: and this answer did Chancellor Audley give to Stephen Gardener
Bishop of Winchester, who made this objection; telling him withal, that the
Praemunire was a Rod that the Common Law had to keep the Bishops in awe, and to
reduce them to good order, otherwise men would have no quiet for them.

Edw. 6. cap. 2. is repealed, and of no force at this day, and that Bishops may
keep Courts in their own names.

Maij last, and therefore they had a warrant for what they did.

from excusing, that it aggravates their offense, for hereby the King, which by
Law can do no wrong to his people, is by this Commission made by them an
instrument of injury to his people. Divines say, simulata sanctitas duplex
iniquitas, because to the outward breach of the Law, there is added an inward
hypocrisy of the heart, which doubles the sin. So in acts of Injustice
countenanced by Law, there is added to the Injustice a deceit to the King,
which doubles the offense. Many examples may be given in this kind, I will only
name three,

1. Cardinal Woolsey had a Commission from the King, for keeping his Legantine
Courts, but yet this Commission was no excuse to preserve him from an attainder
in a Praemunire, as I said before.

2. Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, in his letter to the Lord Protector,
mentioned in the first Edition of the Acts and Monuments of the Church, (but
left out in the latter) does cite the Lord Tiptofts case, who had a Commission
from the King, to execute diverse things, which being found in the execution to
be against Law, he lost both his head and his Commission at Tower Hill.

3. The third and last example is Sr. Anthony Mildmayes case, 14o, Jacob. in
the Kings Bench, who was a Commissioner of the Sewers, which Commission is
grounded upon the Statute of 23o. Hen. 8. who by virtue of his Commission, did
cause one to be distrained for a fine imposed upon him by virtue of the
Commission of Sewers, who brought an action of trespass against the party
that distrained him, and had judgment to recover, Sr. Anthony Mildmay by an
order from the Sewers, caused him to be imprisoned till he had released the
judgment, for which offense, Sr. Anthony Mildmay was sued in a Praemunire in
the Kings Bench, to which he pleaded, and was feign to procure a pardon from
the King for his discharge.

Exceter, and diverse Divines more, hold that the Jurisdiction of Bishops is
jure divino, whereupon it folowes, that neither prohibition nor Praemunire, can
restrain that Jurisdiction which derives from the Law of GOD.

jure humano, so are the Statutes of 35. Edw. 1. called the Statute of Carliel,
25o. Edw. 3.25o. Hen. 8.26. Hen. 8.37. Hen. 8. 1o. Eliz. etc. and Co. 5. Rep.
Cawdries case.

The Common Law does agree with these Statutes, for the Canonists as heretofore
I have told you, do observe a double power to be in a Bishop,

Potestas ordinis, common with other Ministers, as to Preach, Baptize, etc. and

Potestas Jurisdictionis, as to admit, institute, deprive, excommunicate, etc.
The former they say, is de jure divino, the latter is, de jure Canonnico or
positivo, which is agreeable to the Statutes I cited before, but what do I
speak of the Common Law, for the very Church of England seems to be of this
opinion, for in our Book of Common prayer, no more is allowed to Bishops, in
point of divine right, then what is common with Pastors, Ministers and Curats,
for there are but three prayers for Bishops in all the Book of Common prayer,
and they all run to the same purpose.

that it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Pastors and Ministers of
the Church, with true knowledge and understanding of thy word, that both by
their preaching and living, they may set it forth and show it accordingly,
wherein nothing is mentioned but their knowledge of GODS word, their good life
and doctrine.

That God would send down upon all our Bishops and Curats, and all
Congregations committed to their charge, the helpefull spirit of his grace,
that they may truly please him, etc. where the taking care of the cure of
souls in Congregations committed to them, is the maine thing which we pray for
them on their behalf.

The last is in the prayer for the militant Church, in these words, Give grace
(O heavenly Father,) to all Bishops, Pastors and Curats, that they may both by
their life and doctrine, set forth thy true and lively word, and rightly and
duly administer thy holy Sacraments, where there is not so much as a word
mentioned of their Jurisdiction, but of their true preaching, good living, and
due administration of the Sacraments.

And so Mr. Speaker, do I conclude my whole Argument, touching the penalty
incurred by the Clergy for their illegal Cannons, made in their Synod at
Paul's, concerning which, I will end all in these two Verses, which may be
better applied to this Synod, then the Arminians applied them to the Synod at
Dort, Paulinae Synodus nodus Chorus, integer aeger,
Conventus ventus, Sessio stramen, Amen.


FINIS.

