TWO SERMONS: VIZ.

I. The Diseases that make a stoppage to ENGLANDS Mercies discovered, and
attended with their remedies. IN A Sermon delivered at Margarets on
Fishstreet-hill, LONDON:

By WILLIAM BRIDGE, Preacher of Gods Word.

Thy destruction is of thy self, but thy salvation is of me.
Except ye Repent, ye shall all likewise perish,
LUKE 13. II. A preparation for suffering in these Plundering Times.

IT is Ordered by the Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament,
concerning Printing, that this Book be printed. John White.

London, Printed for BENJAMIN ALLEN, and are to be sold at his shop in
Pope's Head Alley. 1642.

To the Reader.
IT is Gods wont to warn before he smite a people, thereby walking himself
after his own rule, Deuteronomy. 20.10, 13. who would have no City to be destroyed
till peace has first been offered to it; the sword of the Lord is ever drawn,
his bow bent, his arows prepared, his instruments of death made ready, his cup
mingled, yet he does not use to power down his plagues, until he have rained a
shower of mercy before them, he does not surprise men at unawares, God never
discharges his murdering pieces, till he have first discharged his warning
ones, pax domini Luke 10. peace to this house was sounded at every door where
the Apostles came. All Ages and Nations will bear witness to this truth, the
old world, Sodom, Pharaoh, etc. but no Nation or Age can better subscribe to
Gods goodness, and fair dealing in this then we, who have been warned
sometimes by prodigious signs, as by the appearance of that wonderful Comet
An. 1618. as importing some strange changes which we have seen and heard since,
and as if its last influence might seem to end in this Island, when it blazed
over England, it was seen no more, And Herlicius Stargardensis (a noted
Astrologer) held, that its influence was like to continue between twenty and
thirty years: sometimes by his Ministers, by his administration of Justice, and
dealing with other Nations; how long has the sword walked circuit in Germany,
and in Ireland? sometimes by lesser and lighter judgments; how long has the
plague continued in this City without intermission? sometime by taking many
godly out of the world, and the removing many others out of the Kingdom, who
were wont to stand in the gap; sometime by a general withdrawing himself,
pulling down his hangings, not assisting his ordinances, etc. And unless we
will wilfully shut our eyes, how has the goodness, patience, bounty,
merciful, and powerful dealings of God toward us, and for us of late, been
as an hand put forth to lead us home unto him? to cause us to meet him, and
take warning that we might prevent these wasting calamities that are gathered
together in a black cloud, as though they meant to empty themselves in a shower
of blood upon our heads? But we are so far from taking warning, that we study
to hasten our own ruin, almost every one instead of bringing his bucket of
water to quench the fire that is already flaming about our ears, bring their
bellows in their hands to blow up these coals of dissension in all places, so
that now not only is there a Kingdom divided, but the head and the members
divided, and the members among themselves, Cities and Towns divided, yea
families divided, Parents against children, brother against brother, and
familiar friends become bitter enemies one to another, the most sure symptom
and presage of a fearful desolation to fall upon all, unless some speedy
remedy be applied to this desperate disease, and the great God himself become
our Physician and heal our distempers. I shall desire to commend these two
Sermons to thy sexious consideration; in the one thou shall see there is a
stoppage made of Gods mercies (who was coming to heal us but we would not be
healed) the causes are discovered, and the remedies prescribed, that could we
so go to work to open these stoppings, and bring God again into the way of his
mercies; could we see our sins removed, and God returned, I might then truly
say that there would be yet hope for England. The other Sermon is a preparative
to bear that cross that so many have already on their backs, viz. of being
turned out of all our earthly comforts; a sad calamity indeed, but now too
usual, and when so many of our neighbors houses are on fire, why should we
think to escape scotfree, that are as deep in sin as they? being therefore
forewarned, let us be forearm'd, and get into God and his favor, as that one
necessary thing for us all to look after, as the only means to keep us from
sinking under the waves that flow in upon all, especially on Gods people;
experience showing, that if we will live in the power of godliness, and not
walk in the same excess of riot with the world, we shall make our selves a
prey, and had need to have our helmets on to latch the blows that fall upon
us, and resolve to sit loose from the world, that we may suffer the spoiling of
our goods with joy, and be able to say with that noble Spartan; who being told
of the death of his children, Answered; I know well they were all begot
mortal. 2. That his goods were confiscate, I knew what was but for mine use,
was not mine. 3. That his honor was gone, I knew no glory could be everlasting
on this miserable earth. 4. That his sentence was to dye, that is nothing,
Nature has given the like sentence both of my condemners and of me; Now should
we get a stock of faith and learn how to use it, to live by it when our lands,
our stocks, our trades, our friends, our wit, our shifts (as the ordinary means
of our livelihood) shall fail us. That we may live not only above our fears,
and troubles, and doubts, but above the world, above our selves, in God and in
Christ, in whom we may see supply to all our wants, satisfaction to all our
desires, and have recompense for all our losses, and every thing that may make
for our good and welfare; light in our darkness, life in our death, strength
in our weakness, riches in our poverty, and comfort our selves, that we serve
a Master that will one day right all our wrongs, reckoning the injuries that be
done to his, as done to himself; so that we should not think much to part with
our Country, our Children, our Possessions, our life if the world will take
them from us, for Christ and his Gospels sake. All these, and much better than
these shall be restored to us one day, and we may say thus to our selves; yet
I am not miserable so long as my Redeemer is happy, he lives, and I shall live
with him, men may take from me my goods, but they cannot rob me of my grace,
they may banish me from my Country, but not from Heaven, take from me my life,
but not my happiness; no, my faith, my heaven, my soul, my happiness is in his
keeping, that will safely preserve them for me, and me for them. But I fear I
have held thee too long in the porch, I shall now open thee the door and let
thee in, praying God to make those lessons as profitable to thee, as the
Authors desire was they might both in his preaching them, and his
willingness to have them published for public good.

I. A.

The Diseases that make a stoppage to Englands Mercies discovered; and attended
with their remedies. Delivered in a SERMON at Margarets on Fishstreet-hill,
London.
JOSH. 7.4. So there went up thither of the people about three thousand men,
and they fled before the men of Ai.


IN this Chapter you have a Treatise concerning Achans sin, branching it self
into three parts, one concerning the commission of the sin, the second
concerning the discovery of it, and the third concerning the punishment
thereof. As for the sin it self, the commission thereof, what it was, you read
in the first verse, that the children of Israel had committed a trespass; God
had commanded that all the spoil of Jericho should be consecrated unto himself,
and that the first fruits of all should be his; Jericho being the first City
that they took in, in the land of Canaan, by right it did belong unto God, all
the treasure, silver and gold, wealth and goods that was therein, properly it
did belong unto God; now Achan be plays the thief, and does appropriate some
of Gods goods, and wealth unto himself; this was charged upon him as a sin, and
so upon all Israel, as at the first verse; keeping from God any thing that does
belong unto him, is a sin. Now in the second place this sin was discovered by
occasion of the defeat that was before the town of Ai; they passing on from
Jericho (at the second verse) unto the town of Ai, they laid siege to it; but
their siege was broken up, and three thousand men fled, and thirty six men were
slain, verse 4, 5. Sins committed in one City, will follow us unto another, and
overtake us there. Oh what unexpected ways and means has God for to bring out
men's sin to light? Three thousand men flee before the men of Ai, and thirty six
men are slain, and this was made the means of discovery of Achans sin, who
would have thought that there should have been such a discovery as this?

The work was hindered by this defeat, and that sets them on work to search out
the cause; and shows,

1. That afflictions should set us on work, to search out our sins, and the
cause of them.

2. That sins shall not always be pocketed up, but shall be discovered, though
never so secret.

3. That God has strange ways to discover man's sins.

Ai? and why must one man's sin be punished upon all? surely the children of
Israel were in covenant one with another, and so being in covenant together,
the sin of the one not being punished by the rest, was charged upon all the
rest. As for England, either we are in covenant one with another, or else we
are not: Either there is a national covenant, or else there is not: If there
be not a National covenant, as was among the Jews, why do we not rather say,
the Churches of England then the Church? And if there be a National covenant,
the sin of one is made the sin of the rest, what sins do we bring upon our
selves? But they must flee before the men of Ai, why? Because that the men of
Ai were to be destroyed with a great destruction, therefore God does first
suffer them to prevail, the more to imbitter and stir up the spirits of Israel
against them, this did provoke them.

Whence I take up these two Observations: The first is this:





Canaan, but in the way they sin, Achan plays the thief, mark what a stopage
this made in the way of mercy; So you have it in Joshua 24.20. Though God be
about to do you good, and have done you good, yet If you forsake the Lord, and
serve strange gods, he will turn from the good he is a doing, and do you hurt,
after he has done you good. So in Jer. 28.9. At what instant I shall say or
speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to build, and to plant it:
that is, At what time I shall give sensible testimony of good to a land or
nation; If it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then I will
repent of the good, etc. So that sins committed against God when he is in a way
of mercy, do make a stopage in those proceedings of mercy. There are these two
or three reasons for it:

work, you will leave off work, and work no more: now I say, when as God is in
a way of mercy, and you then sin against him, your sins do slight mercy, nay
then says God I will turn away, it will make a stoppage in this work.

he would drown the world no more, says the Prophet Isaiah; such a covenant as
he made with Noah, he makes with his people, that runs upon no condition; he
does not say, If the world goes on, and serve me, I will drown it no more: but
the promise runs upon no condition, and so the promise of grace runs upon no
condition: for if it runs upon a condition of faith, God promises to give
faith, God promises perseverance, upon the exercise of grace he promises to
give the exercise of grace, all spiritual promises run upon no condition. But
now outward promises run upon condition, and therefore if men do not keep the
condition, God takes himself free, and will turn himself out of the way of his
mercy. You have an expression to this purpose, Numb. 14.34. After the number
of the days in which ye searched the land, even forty days (each day for a
year) shall you bear your in quity, even forty years, and ye shall know my
breach of promise. Will God break his promise? As much as if he should have
said, I have promised to bring you into the land of Canaan, upon such and such
conditions; but now, if you do not perform the condition, I count my self free,
and you shall know my breach of promise, that I will not give you the thing
that I am about to give you.



But you will say we see the contrary: who have more blessings, and outward
mercies, then the Church of Rome? who more sinful? what adulteries, what
idolatries, sorceries, opposition of Saints and Ministers? and you know what
plenty is among them, and God goes on to give them mercy after mercy, outward
blessing after outward blessing, and therefore this is not true, we see it in
experience otherwise, that our sins do not make a stoppage in the proceedings
of mercy.

Isa. 1. Why should you be stricken any more; ye will revolt more and more: It
is the greatest stroke, not to be smitten, and the greatest affliction to be
denied affliction, when there is use and need of it: now though the people of
Rome, and that party flourish in the world, yet their souls are smitten, God
smites them with blindness, and with spiritual death, so that there is a
stoppage made in the proceedings of mercy.

2. But I rather answer it thus: When God is in a way of mercy toward his
people, toward his Church, then sin will make a stoppage: Those of Rome are no
true Church, the Church was in Babylon, but Babylon was not the Church; the
Church was in Egypt, but Egypt was not the Church; Lot was in Sodom, Sodom was
not in Lots family; Rome is called Babylon, Egypt, and Sodom; they are not the
Church of God; but if the Church of God sin when God is in a way of mercy, a
stoppage shall be made rather for them then for others, for these two or three
Reasons:



they are all so, what a scandal arises? And so, if two commit adultery, the
one a Professor, and the other not, the scandal arises from the Professor;
Profession is the ground of Scandal. And therefore, 2 Samuel 20.12. when as
Amasa was slain, and laid in his blood, the people made a stay, and went no
further, till they drew him out of the way, and cast a cloth over him; so when
a Professor falls, and lies in his blood, there is a stand made in peoples
duties, and conversations; and therefore just that there should be a stop made
in the proceedings of Gods mercy.



Achan commits but a small sin, and what a mighty stop is made in the way of
mercy? So, David numbers the people, it was no great matter, and a plague
breaks out presently; what is the reason, that for sins that are little and
small, such a stoppage should be made in the proceedings and mercy of the
great God?

it comes from the great God; and if you commit a sin, though never so little
in your own eyes, it is great, because committed against the great God; I may
boldly say thus much, that men sin a great sin, in saying their sin is small.

2. Secondly, sometimes what falls short in the greatness of sin, is made up
in the number of sin: Great sins do go alone, smaller sins do go by companies:
as with creatures, so with sins; you shall observe it so in the heavens, and in
the air, and in the water, and in the earth: In the heavens, but one great Sun,
many less Stars; In the air, you have but few great and kingly birds, the
Eagle she flies alone, but your Pigeons that are lesser, fly by flights; In
the water, your great Whale goes alone, but your lesser Herring go by sholes;
On the earth, the great Elephant goes alone, your lesser sheep go by flocks,
and your Hogs by herds; the lesser Sands infinite in number, Rocks fewer: And
so with men's sins; great sins they go alone, but lesser sins go by companies,
and oftentimes the number of your lesser sins do make up what is wanting in the
greatness of your sin. A man may be drunk but once or twice in his life, in
the gross act of it, but he may be so often in drunken company, and spend away
so many hours which shall amount to drunkenness; a man may commit adultery but
once in his life, but he may have as many unclean thoughts, as shall amount to
adultery: So, that what falls short in the greatness of sin, is made up in the
number; and therefore say not, why should God for a little sin turn out of the
way of mercy? it may be the number of your little sins amount to the greatest
sin.

3. Thirdly, Beloved, God will make good his Name to the utmost, and his name
is, A Jealous God; now a husbands jealousy arisech not, when he sees his wife
commit adultery, but if he do but see her playing and sporting with a stranger;
so Gods jealousy arises, not only when we commit the gross act of Idolatry,
when we bow before an Idol, but if we be sporting and playing with
Superstition; for God is a jealous God: And though the husband do not see cause
enough to turn away his wife, because of her sporting and playing, and
dallying, he may see cause enough to deny such a courtesy; so God, though he
does not give a Bill of Divorce for such a sin which you count lesser, yet he
may see cause enough to make a stoppage in his proceedings of mercy. Thus the
Doctrine stands firm, when God is in a way of mercy toward his people, if
they do sin against him, their sins may make a stoppage in his proceedings. By
way of Application;

England mercies. This last year God has done great things for England, as
ever England saw, and that man that sees it not, I shall think that Scripture
has taken hold upon him, which you have in Jer. 27.5, 6. Cursed be the man
that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from
the Lord, for he shall be like the heath in the desert, and shall not see when
good comes, whether out of envy or malice, but when good comes upon a people,
he shall not see it: but who does not see, what a black cloud is drawn over us
again? When the waters swell and stand up, you say surely there is a stop made;
the waters do not run down as before, not long since Justice and Judgment did
run down like a mighty stream; but now, how the waters swell, gather, and stand
up again? wicked men lie in prison, and those not censured: Priests and Jesuits
lie condemned, and chose not executed: the Plague is begun, and that is not
quenched: The Sword has begun to drink deep in our Brethrens blood, and that
is not sheathed: The wrath of our King is enkindled: Diverse of our
Parliamentary Worthies accused of high Treason: certainly there is a stoppage
made in the proceedings of Englands mercies; oh Beloved, this our sin has done.

England?

Saul, and was about to settle the kingdom upon him and his posterity for ever;
but he sinned, and the Lord turned away from Saul, and turned away from him for
ever, there was a final stoppage of mercy made. Now though there be a stop
made in the way of Gods mercy toward England, I conceive there is not a
final stoppage. And my Reasons are these:

1. Because that though many difficulties and mountains do arise, yet we see
how one after another they do melt.

2. And because God has raised up instrements that are unwearyed in his
service, working night and day, and are unwearyed in the work of the Lord.

3. As also because that the type of this work does speak as much. The children
of Isreal's coming out of Babylon, and building the Temple, is a type of our
coming out of Antichristian bondage, and the great Reformation that is now
begun: Now then though there were many lets and hindrances by Tobiah, and
Sanballat, and others, they could never hinder it fully, but it recovered its
self, and was driven on: so in this building and work of reformation, though
the Tobiahs and Sanballats of the times may cause the work to cease for a time,
the building shall get up, and shall not fully cease, but the work of
Reformation shall be driven on in the despite of all the enemies. Therefore it
is not a final stop now made in Englands mercies. But there is a present stop,
as when the plague broke out in David's time; and such a stoppage is made now.



Judge. when the Angel came with a message unto the people, and told them that
the Canaanites should be as thorns in their sides, and a snare unto them, they
lift up their voice and wept, and they called the name of the place Bochim: you
shall be brought into Canaan the promised land, but the natives shall be so
mixed amongst you, as they shall be thorns in your sides, hereupon they lift up
their voice and wept: and so though the work of Reformation be carried on, the
Canaanites may be left to be as thorns in your sides, until Christ come. Oh
that we could lift up our voice and weep, that the place might be called Bochim.

2. When God breaks off the way of his mercy, then his wrath breaks out; he
does not turn out of the way of his mercy, but he turns into the way of his
judgment. Why to a loving child this is a very cutting word, your father is
angry with you. I may speak this to you, there is a stop made in Englands
mercy, and your father is angry, this is much.

3. If there be a stoppage made in Englands mercy though but present, there is
an obstruction in all your comforts: you are sensible of the obstructions of
your body, will you not be sensible of State obstructions, of Church
obstructions? Suppose you were in Ireland begirt with the enemy, and were in
danger to have your convoy cut off, that should bring you victual and supply,
would it not make you fear? Beloved, we have been begirt with enemies a long
time, and God has raised us up a convoy to bring us victual; we do not know
whether our convoy shall be taken away, though but for the present. Certainly
there is a theife in our candle that does make our comforts smeare out.

Englands mercy, what are those sins (for it is a day of humiliation) that have
made a stoppage in Englands mercy?



1. An unwillingnesse and backwardness to the great work of Reformation, to
the great work that God is now about, is one thing that does make a stoppage in
the proceedings of Englands mercy. When the children of Israel were in Egypt,
they groaned unto the Lord, God sent a deliverer to them, Moses, and they being
vexed by their taskmasters, after he came they murmured, and for anguishof soul,
hearkened not unto Moses, God bare with that, till he got them on the other side
of the water, carried them through the red sea, when they came there, tho they
did sin and murmr, God did not swear they should not enter into Canaan, but
at the last they made them a captain, and they would return back to Egypt,
says God, seeing you are there, I swear in my wrath you shall never enter into
my rest, but your carcases shall fall here; you shall neither go backward nor
forward; We have a long time, the Lord look upon us, set under Egyptian
darkness, and the Lord has sent his Messengers to you to draw you out, and
you would not, or for anguish of soul you hearkened not; Well, but now there is
a tender of Reformation made, and has been lately: if people shall say now,
What need this Reformation? Were not things well before? This provokes the
Lord, and causes him to say, Your carcases shall fall. And yet, Oh how has
this been among us, what ado is here says one? What need this work? Were not
things well before? 2 King. 10.32. In those days the Lord began to cut Israel
short, What days were those? They were in a way of Reformation, and they cut
short the Reformation; and in those days the Lord began to cut them short of
mercy. At the 18. verse, he got together the Worshippers of Baal by craft; at
the 25. verse, he slayes them; at the 29. they break down the Images in the
house of Baal: Howbeit at the 29. verse, From the sins of Jeroboam the son of
Nebat who made Israel to sin, Jehu departed not, etc. Then at the 32. verse,
when they thus cut short Reformation, the Lord began to cut them short. You
know what our Savior Christ says, Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I
have gathered you, and you would not; behold your house is left unto you
desolate. Beloved, when Christ comes to gather us, as certainly there is a time
when Christ comes a gathering, and if people will not be gathered, then behold
thy house is left desolate. God has made a tender of Reformation lately among
you, this is one sin that has made a stoppage in the proceedings of your
mercy, people have been backward and unwilling unto this great work of
Reformation.

2. A tempting of God does also stop and hinder the proceeding of mercy. They
tempted the Lord, and the Lords mercy was stopped.

You find in Scripture, people are said to tempt God; 1. either when they
doubt of Gods presence, after God has especially appeared to them: they
tempted God, and said, is God amongst us? after God had appeared to them.

2. Again, when a man does not rely, and live upon Gods All Sufficiency, when
God has appeared in that way. It is said of the Israelites they tempted God,
and said, can God provide a table in the wilderness? As Musculus observes
well, the Israelites were not so silly, as to think God was not able; they knew
God opened the rock, and brought them through the red sea, but this was the
language of their conversation, can God provide a table in the Wilderness?

3. A man is said to tempt God, when as he does tie and limit God unto ordinary
means, when God is in an extraordinory way. And so it is said of Ahaz that he
tempted God, and would not take a sign; what is the meaning of that? that is,
that he would go in an ordinary way; why (says he) should I tempt God, and
require a sign, and go in an extraordinary way? I will go in an ordinary way:
when as God is in an extraordinary way of mercy toward his people, to tie God
to ordinary means, is a tempting of God. Now I appeal to you, whether or no, we
have not tempted God, God has appeared gloriously, oh yet we have said is God
among us? how few live upon Gods All-sufficiencie, notwithstanding he has
appeared so gloriously? and we see no way and means for such a Reformation as
is spoken of, tying and limiting of God unto an ordinary way, when God is
working extraordinarily. This is a second sin that has made a stoppage in
Englands mercy, this tempting of God.

3. Abusing of Gods instruments which he raises up for to do his work by,
does exceedingly provoke, and makes a stoppage in the mercy of God. There are
two ways whereby his instruments are abused; either idolizing and deifying of
them, or wronging, scorning, and jearing of them, falfly accusing and
condemning of them. The first way the Jews sinned, when they cried the temple
of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, and deifyed that; well says Christ, there
shall not be one stone left upon another. God raised up the King of Sweden,
people idolized him, he was taken away, and a stoppage was made in that way of
mercy: on the other side scouning and evil speaking of the instruments of
Reformation, and falsely accusing them that God does set up, this makes a
stoppage in mercy, Numb. 12. Moses was appointed by God to bring them into
Canaan, mark how they speak against him, verse. 2. And they said has the Lord
indeed spoken only by Moses? has he not also spoken by us? she what follows
9.10. ver. And the anger of the Lord was kindled against them, and he departed.
And the cloud drparted from off the Tabernacle, and behold Miriam became
leprous, etc. mark what a stop is made, verse. 15. Miriam was shut out of the
Camp seven days, and the people journied not, only because they opened their
mouths against this instrument of Go that was employed in this work. So Numb.
16.1. Kerah, Dathan, and Ahiram rise up against Mosex and Aaron instruments
that God employed in his service, you may see what became of it in the
following part of the Chapter, the Lord would have consumed the whole
Congregation, And Moses said to Aaron, take a Censer, and put fire therein from
off the Altar, and put on incense, and go quickly unto the Congregation, and
make an atonement for them, for there is wrath gone out from the Lord. verse.
45.46. Oh my beloved, I would to God we were not guilty here; the Lord has
raised up a blessed and happy Parliament, and has made them instruments of
much good unto this Kingdom; some idolize and deisie them, others again have
accused them as traitors, the great Senators and Judges of our Kingdom, no
less than traitors: thus have the Instruments of the Lord been abused, and how
can this but make a stoppage in our mercy?



Numb. 16. it is said Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, and two hundred and fifty
Princes, men of renown, rose up against Moses, but wrath breaks out upon the
whole Congregation, and the Lord would have consumed them all, why? because
they were not humbled. And if upon all this evil that has been done to the
instruments of God, we have not been humbled, the wrath of God may break out
upon us all, and justly it should be, that a stop should be made in Englands
mercy.

4. Carrying on the work of Reformation, and the great affairs of the Church,
upon the shoulders of humane prudence, will make a stoppage in the way of
mercy. You know that when David broughr back the Ark, they were very cheerful,
and went along withal, nothing fearing, at last Uzza lays his hand upon the
Ark, and is smitten, a cloud arises, David is dismayed, a stop is made in the
business, what is the matter? the Text tells us, they carried the Arc upon
the Cart, and it should have been carried upon men's shoulders. So when God is
bringing back the Arc, men set it upon a Cart, and upon the shoulder of humane
wisdom; oh says one, there is no government appointed in the Church, it is a
matter of humane prudence, and so will you cart the Ark of God? look that God
will make a stoppage in mercy. And this is another sin that provokes God to
make a stoppage in our Englands mercy.

5. In the fifth place. As prayer and humiliation does exceedingly further the
work of God in the hands of his people; so the falling and slacking of the
hands in those two works, does make a stop in mercy, and has done in our
mercy. In the 2 Kings 23. we read there, that good King Josiah went a great way
in the work of Reformation; the Law is brought out, his heart trembles, the
images are pulled down, he executes justice upon Baals Priests; yet
notwithstanding all he had done, the Lord turned not from the fierceness of
his wrath, wherewith his unger was kindled against Judah, verse. 26. and verse.
29.30. he went out to battle with Pharaoh Nechoh, and Pharaoh Nechoh slew good
King Josiah; oh what a stoppage was made in Judas mercy? what is the matter?
let us enquire into that, here are two causes; at the 26 verse. you have mention
made of Manassehs sin, the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great
wrath, wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the
provocations that Manasseh had provoked him withal; the people were not
thoroughly humbled for their fathers sins: and good King Josiah goes up to war,
and did not seek the Lord before as he should have done. So that want of
humiliation, and flacking in the work of prayer made this stop. On the
contrary, you shall read a notable place, Ezra 8.21, 22, 23. when the Jews came
out of Babylon to build the Temple, they were way-layd by their enemies, and in
the midst of the field Ezra proclaims a Fast; a strange kind of fasting and
praying to be in the field, so it was then, in the field by the rivers side
they go to fasting and prayer: but Ezra might have had a guard from the King,
why had he not? verse 22. For I was ashamed to ask of the King a band of
Soldiers and horsemen, to help us against the enemy in the way, because we
had spoken unto the King, saying; The hand of our God is upon all them for good
that seek him, but his power and his wrath is against all them that forsake
him: so we fasted and besought our God for this, and he was entreated of us.
Mark, fasting and prayer was their convoy; oh beloved, what will not fasting
and prayer do, when we are beset with diverse enemies? there must be these two,
the slacking of these make a stop. As for prayer, first, you know how it was
with the Israelites when they fought against Amalek, when Moses held up his
hand, Israel prevailed, when he let fall his hand, Amalek prevailed; slacking
in prayer made a stop. And so likewise for humiliation; there are two things
that are opposite to that which makes a stop; spiritual pride, and also nice
curiosity concerning the means of grace. Spiritual pride makes a stop. Paul
was caught up into the third heaven, and had great revelations; but lest he
should be proud, and a stop should be made in that mercy, a messenger of Satan
is sent to buffet him. It is recorded of a Frenchman, having read excellent
Lectures of Divinity, some of his auditors came to him, and desired him that he
would print them, he was so puffed up withal, as he broke out into this
blasphemy: Lord Jesus, how art thou beholden to me? if I had turned my wits
against thee, how much hurt could I have done thee? whereupon he was stricken
with such blindness, ignorance, and dullness, as he was two year after
learning the Lords Prayer: this I speak, to show what a stoppage spiritual
pride will make.

And for curious niceness about the means of grace, 1 Samuel 6. The Arc being
in the hands and Country of the Philistims, they sent it back, and so the Arc
returning, God was returning; but at the 19 verse, the Lord smote of the people
fifty thousand threescore and ten men, why? because they had looked into the
Ark of the Lord; their foolish niceness and curiosity about the Arc, what a
stoppage it made in the way of mercy? It is recorded by Historians, that before
the great massacre in France, the Protestants were grown so curious about
preaching, that no preaching would down with them, but acute sententious
preaching. Beloved, both these are opposite to humiliation; and where these
two, humiliation falls, and prayer slacks, there is a stoppage made, then will
the Lord say to Mercy, stand, go no farther. For the present, God be thanked
there is a day of humiliation, and a spirit of prayer up in the field, but when
of late the enemies began to fall, how did men leave off prayer, and began to
insult over the enemies, the Lord saw this, and therefore a stoppage was made
in Englands mercy.

6. In the sixth place. An unthankful receiving of the mercies that God has
given us, and a slight beholding of the great works he has done before us now
lately, is another sin that has made a stoppage in our mercy, Psalm. 106.7. It
is said concerning the Isralites, Our fathers understood not thy wonders in
Egypt, they remembered not the multitude of thy mercies, but provoked him at the
sea, even the red sea; there lies the emphasis at the sea, even the red sea
that God carried them through. So you have a notable place for this purpose,
Hosea 9.14, 15. Give them a miscarrying womb and dry breasts, they shall
conceive, mercy shall be begun, but it shall not bring forth, why? at the 15.
ver. All their wickedness is in Gilgal: why, how was all their wickedness in
Gilgal? they had much wickedness in other places: but the meaning is, Gilgal
was the first place they came into when they went into Canaan, and there they
were circumcised, and there the Lord roaled away their reproach, and therefore
it was called Gilgal; now to sin in Gilgal, in that place where the Lord bad
done so much for them, though they sinned in other places, yet the sin there
was so great, as if all the sin were there, because that was a place of
special mercy; for there I hated them, for the wickedness of their doings I
will drive them out of mine house, I will love them no more; there is a
stoppage made in mercy, when sin is in Gilgal, in the place of such and such
mercy. So my beloved, you all know what great things the Lord has done for
this place, you were brought exceeding low into great straights, oh poor
afflicted distressed England; but in the midst of all your troubles and fears,
the Lord created a Parliament for you, and delivered you with great
deliverances; and if after all this you will go on in the way of sin, and
thanklesly regard all that God has done, this provokes God to make a stop.
Mark how Ezra reasons for this purpose, Ezra 9. they had committed a great sin
in taking of the daughters of the Country to themselves to wife, ver. 10. And
now, oh our God, what shall we say after this? for we have forsaken thy
Commandments, Ez. 13. and after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds,
and for our trespass; seeing that thou our God have punished us less than our
iniquities deserve, and have given us such deliverance as this: see where the
emphasis lies, not deliverance only, but such deliverance: should we again
break thy Commandments, and join in affinity with the people of these
abominations? would thou not be angry with us, till thou had confumed us,
so that there should be no remnant nor escaping? Now my beloved, you see where
he sets the emphasis, and truly have not we this word, (such) written upon our
deliverances; you were oppressed in your estates, and you are delivered from
those manifold oppressions; you were oppressed in your consciences by the
inventions of men, and you are delivered from those heavy oppressions in a
great measure; you were in great danger to have layn in blood you and your
children, and you were delivered from that bloody War with Scotland; and your
Parliament worthies of late, delivered from a hellish conspiracy, I had almost
said as bad as that of the Powder Plot: and now I say after such deliverances,
if you will go on still in the way of sinning, how just is it with God to say,
oh England, I thought to have don thee good, and to have built thee, but
because he that was a drunkard before, is a drunkard still; he that was a
swearer before, is a swearer still; he that was a Sabbath breaker before, a
liar, and unclean person before, is so still; therefore I will now unkingdome
thee, and unchurch thee, if after such mercies and such deliverances you shall
go on in a way of sin, I will make a stop in mercy, and in all the good I
thought to do; this has made a stop in our Englands mercies.

7. The last sin that makes a stop in Englands mercy, is a worldly disposition,
whereby a man hangs back unto the great work of God, and the glorious
reformation that is now a doing. You know that when they came out of Babylon
and were to build the temple, the people were for their fieled houses, and the
temple went not on so long as they stack to their fieled houses, but when once
they were brought off from their fieled houses, the temple was built, and they
settled. So now the Lord is about to rebuild you, and build a temple among you;
if our hearts be after our fieled houses, how just is it with God to say, I
thought to do you good, but you will not be at the cost; I know you would have
your brethren in Ireland delivered, but you will not be at the cost, you that
are rich will not lend twenty, or thirty, or a hundred pounds toward it; I
thought to have gone on and purged the whole Kingdom, but you will not be at the
cost, you would have the pictures out of your windows, but you are loath to be
at the cost to buy new glass; you would have Preaching Ministers in every
Congregation, but you are loath to be at the charge; this makes a stop in our
Englands mercy. Thus I have to my poor abilty showed you the seven sins that
make a stop in the Lords proceedings of mercy; the Lord grant we may lay them
to heart, and be humbled for them.

Englands mercy, and the Lord is gone out of the way of mercy, and is angry;
how shall we open a way to Englands mercy? how shall we bring God back again?
and how may the Lords anger be appeased?



Secondly, It must be done, and that quickly.

Thirdly, Show you what you shall do that you may do it.

1. For the first therefore; It is an exceeding hard thing and very difficult
to appease Gods anger. 1. Gods anger is compared to a stream; Tophet is
prepared of old for the King (says the text) and out of his mouth goes a
stream of fire. It is hard to turn a stream, you may easily turn the water when
it is in the gutter before it comes into the stream, but when it is gotten into
the river, it is hard turning of it; Gods wrath is a stream, it is hard
turning of it.

2. When you do solicit God to turn out of the way of his wrath, and turn into
a way of mercy, you solicit him to that which is not for his ease, that is a
burden to him. Though you think you have great interest in a man, if you
solicit him to that which is not for his ease, you will hardly obtain: now God
says in Scripture, it is an ease to him to be avenged on his adversaries; ah,
I will ease my self of my adversaries: when you turn him from wrath, you turn
him from ease.

3. Again; there are but few to do it. If the sea breaks over the banks, and
there are but few to stop it, it is hard to do; If fire has taken two or three
houses in a street; and but few to quench it, it is hard to do: the fire of
Gods anger is broken out, and there are but few to quench it; it is a hard
thing therefore.

4. Again, God seems to be engaged in the way of his wrath. God walks according
to his Word; now says God, you would have me return again to the way of my
mercy, and leave off mine anger, and for this purpose you tell me you do pray,
and humble your selves, and reform; but was it not so in Iosiahs time? his
heart melted, and he prayed, and broke down the images and pictures, and the
offenders Baals Priests were punished; nevertheless I turned not from the
fierceness of my wrath; why should I turn from mine anger now for your sakes,
more than in Iosiahs time? oh, it is a hard thing to turn God from his anger.

2. But it must be done, and done quickly; if a fire be broken out and not
quenched quickly, it is more hard to quench: if the sea breaks in at a place,
and be not stopped quickly, it is more hard to stop. Run in and make an atonement
quickly, says Moses to Aaron, it must be done quickly.

3. What then shall we do? do as Joshua did: There are six things that Joshua
did here, when they fled before the men of Ai. First, he was very sensible of
Gods stroke that was given to them; for he says, Lord, would we had been
contented in the wilderness. 2. He was humbled under Gods hand, for it is said
he rent his clothes, and fell down upon the earth. 3. And he prayed, and cried
mightily unto God, as you read in the chapter. 4. And he put away the evil of
their doings. 5. And he punished Achan the offender. 6. He made an holy
resignation. And there must be a concurrence of all these six things, if we
would bring God back into the way of his mercy toward England.

1. We must be sensible of Gods stroke. Though men be greatly afflicted, yet if
they be not sensible of their affliction, and of the stroke that God gives
them, says God, I have spent one rod upon them, and they do not feel it, I will
lay on till blood come; God will make men sensible of their afflictions, and of
the afflictions of the Church, else he lays on more.

2. Again, though a man be very sensible of Gods stroke and hand, yet
notwithstanding, if he be not humbled under the hand of the Lord, God will not
exalt him; for says the Lord, I have promised indeed, that if men humble
themselves under my mighty hand, they shall be exalted; and I have said, if the
people upon whom my name is called, humble themselves, I will hear. He humbled
himself much. This will mortify your sins as your sins mortified and took
captive your duties, and this must be don thoroughly, and to move us to it, 1.
Take notice of the general darkness that is in the land, how sew know what they
would have in a way of Reformation, what is agreeable to Gods way, Ezekiel.
43.10.11. The way to see stars in the day, is to go to the bottom of a well.
But now here is a company are not humbled, what fashion have they left since?
wherein does it appear that you are more humbled? this must be; that is the
second.

3. Though that a man be humbled, yet notwithstanding if he does not pray, and
cry mightily to God, he cannot fetch God back again, for says God I am
engaged to my word, and I walk by rule; when I threatened Nineveh, the King went
from his throne and went in sackcloth and ashes, and they cried mightily unto
me, and do you think if you do not cry mightily that I will return in mercy
to you? oh says God I have given you more then Nineveh, you know more and you
must do more, they cried mightily, and shall not you cry mightily? we must
pray more then ordinary, so did Moses, and for motives to it: 1. It is all that
some of you can do, you cannot help otherwise by building God an house,
lending money, etc. but you may pray. 2. If you be idle you will envy those
that do pray; for it is a sure rule, those that stand by will envy the workmen,
and what that will do, you may in Cain to Abel, when his sacrifice was
rejected. 3. The scales may seem to hang even, it may be your grain of prayer,
may turn them to mercy. 4. The Lord seems to be going, he is rising; when the
Judge sits still, the malefactor does not lift up his voice and cry after him;
but when the malefactor is condemned, and the Judge rises and goes off the
bench, then the poor malefactor lifts up his voice, and cries, good my Lord,
good my Lord. So when God is rising and going off the bench, shall not men cry,
and cry mightily unto him, pray, and pray mightily unto him? Beloved, the Lord
seems to be going off the bench, oh you that never prayed, now pray; you that
have despised prayer, and praying meetings, now pray; you that have a heart to
pray, pray now, and cry mightily unto the Lord your God.

4. Though a man does pray, and cry mightily unto God, yet notwithstanding if
he does not turn from the evil of his doings, all is nothing; yet says the
Lord I am constant to my rule, and I have promised, Isa. 56.9. If thou take
away from the midst of thee the yoke, the putting forth of the singer and
speaking vanity; if you put away the evil of your doings, what then? then
shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer presently; thou shall cry, and he
answer sensibly, and say there am I. And so Judge. 10.14. they having come and
cried to the Lord, the Lord gives them this answer, Go and cry unto the gods
which you have chosen, let them deliver you in the time of your tribulation.
And the children of Israel said to the Lord, we have sind, do thou unto us
whatsoever seems good unto thee; deliver us only we pray thee this day: and
they put away the strange gods from among them, and feared the Lord: they cried
before, but now they prayed and put away their strange Gods, and his soul was
grieved for the misery of Israel. So now will the Lord do, when people are
sensible of his hand, and are humbled, and cry, and cry much unto him, and put
away the evil of their doings. this will prevail. Wherefore beloved in the
Lord, let us now join together in this work, and for the Lords sake put away
the evil of your doings. All you that hear me this day, are of three sorts,
either such as do live upon your Lands: or such as live upon your trades: or
such as live by keeping Taverns and Alehouses. If you be such as live upon your
Lands, then think and say with your selves, I see there is a stoppage made in
Englands mercy, come oh my soul, it may be it is my sin has done it; may be I
have lived so much upon my Lands, as I have lived little or nothing upon
Christ, I will learn to live more upon Christ, and less upon my Lands. If you
be such as live upon your Trades, say, husband, wife, children, servants, it
may be it is our sin that has made this stop, our lying, our false dealing,
our breaking of the Sabbath, selling upon the Sabbath for gain, it may be it is
our poor family that has made the stop, let us put away the evil of our
doings. If you be such as keep Taverns and Alehouses, say it may be it is the
drunkenness that I have suffered in my house, the thousands of oaths that are
sworn in my family, for my part I will never have Irelands blood lie at my
door; therefore servants, children, friends, I charge you no more lying, no
more swearing, no more Sabbath breaking, for the Lords sake, and for our poor
brethrens sake in Ireland, let us put away the evil of our doings, you that
have been drunkards, swearers, or adulterers, put away the evil of your
doings, it may be this will bring God back again.

5. But though there be this, yet unless the troubles of England, the Achans
be brought forth to punishment and thrown overboard, the Sea cannot be
appeased, the storm will not down. For says the Lord I am the same God that I
was when wrath brake out upon Israel, then stood up Phineas and flow Zimri and
Cosbi, and my wrath was stayed: when wrath broke out in Joshuas time, Achan was
brought forth and punished, and so my wrath was stayed: do you think that I
will take less at your hands? Therefore let us pray that the Achans may be
brought forth, and when they are brought forth justify the Worthies of the
Lord, own them, guard them, and stand by them: And when the work is done,
rejoice with fear and trembling, wash your feet in the blood of the wicked, and
give glory to God, and say blessed be the Lord who only does great things,
marvelous are thy works Lord God Almighty, who would not fear thee?

6. He made an holy resignation of himself to be at Gods disposing, so we may
see Araunah did: 1. Ch: 21.23. Then Ornan said to David take it to thee etc. He
gave up his Threshing-floor and his Oxen, and his Threshing instruments, those
things that were his livelihood: so should we offer up our shops, our trades,
yea our selves and all we have to God.

Thus you have heard when God is in a way of mercy, sin does make a stoppage in
his proceedings, you acknowledge there is a stoppage made in our mercy: you
have heard that those sins are as thieves in our candle that does smeare out
our comforts: you have heard what a hard thing it is to bring God back to mercy
again: you have heard the work must be done: and you have heard what to do.
Wherefore let every man as in the sight of God go home, and think, and say,
and resolve with himself, I have not been much affected with Irelands
condition, I confess it, the Lord forgive me, but I will look more into it
then ever I have done, I have not been much humbled for my own sin, and the
sins of the time, but the Lord pardon it, and I will be more humbled, I have
not cried unto the Lord, but from this day following I will cry mightily unto
the Lord my God, it may be he will return: and I will put away the evil of my
doings, I have been an unclean person, I have been a Sabbath breaker, and have
been proud of this Coat and that gold lace, I will be proud no more, farewell
all bad company: and I will pray that justice may be done upon all Achans and
Troublers of Israel, and when it is done I will rejoice with trembling. And
thus I have done the first Doctrine, when God is in a way of mercy toward his
people, there sin makes a stoppage in his proceedings.

FINIS.

