Brutum Fulmen: OR THE BULL OF Pope Pius V. Concerning the Damnation,
Excommunication, and Deposition OF Q. ELIZABETH, As also the Absolution of her
Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance, with a Peremptory Injunction, upon Pain
of an Anathema, never to obey any of Her Laws or Commands.

With some Observations and Animadversions upon it.

By THOMAS Lord Bishop of Lincoln.

Whereunto is Annexed the Bull of Pope Paul the Third, containing the
Damnation, Excommunication, etc. of King Henry the Eighth.

Come out of her my People, that ye partake not of her Sins and Plagues. Rev.
XVIII. 4. LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in
St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXXI.

The Right Hon.ble Algernon Capell, Earl of Essex, Viscount Maldon, and Baron
Capell of Hadham: (...).



THE EIPSTLE TO THE READER.
Reader,
WHoever thou art ( Protestant or Papist, Courteous or Censorious) having made
these Papers public, thou have a liberty to read, and a right to judge; and
that thou may do it impartially, (not out of hate or kindness to me, but upon
a serious and just Consideration of the Cause) I shall neither importune thy
Favor, nor deprecate (when it is just) thy severest Censure. For, 1. It Is
truth, I have impartially desired, and not indiligently sought; and if (by the
blessing of God) I have found it, Magna est veritas and praevalebit, it will
prevail, in despite of all Enemies and Opposition; (...), not super, non
immersabilis undis. Truth we know (especially Divine Truth, which concerns our
Souls and their salvation) ever had, and, so long as there are Devils and
wicked Men, will have in this World many Enemies; who will endeavor (what they
cannot do) to suppress it; premi potest veritas, opprimi non potest. They may
dipp, and (for some time) keep it under water, but they cannot drown it. If
these Papers contain truth, (as I hope they do) then I am sure that every
Intelligent Reader, and pious lover of Truth, will be its Patron; and (though
in this Epistle I do not solicit him) ready to vindicate it from the
Objections of its Adversaries. But (on the other side) if my Reader relate to
Rome, and be possessed with strong delusion to believe (against Reason and
Divine Revelation) his Catholic Cause, the Papal Monarchy and Infallibility,
it will be in vain for me, in this Epistle, to desire ( what I believe I The
reason why I cannot expect the favor or assent of my Adversaries, (especially
of the Jesuits) is, because Maldonate tells us, That Luther and Calvin
(Arch-Hereticks) are not to be followed, though they speak things consonant to
Scripture -- Cum sacris literis consent ancadocent, Non Sequendi. Nay
Calvinists and Lutherans, Even When They Speak Truth, are no more to be
hearkened to, Then To the Devil. Lutherani and Calvinistae a Deo, and Ecclesia
tanquam perniciosissimi Haeretici declarati, non magis, Etiam Cum Vera Dicunt,
Audiendi sunt, Quam Diabolus, Maldonat. Comment. in Matthew. 16. verse. 6. p. 336.
C. Nor is this Maldona^'s peculiar Opinion; for the Censor Librorum, who
approves his Commentaries on Matthew, tells us, That Omnia in illis juxta
Orthodoxam Apostolicae ac Romanae Ecclesiae Doctrinam Summa Cum Eruditione
exponi. Ita Joh. Clavius De villo. Libr. Censor.
cannot have) his Favor. However, he shall have my Pity and Prayers, That God
Almighty would be graciously pleased to open his Eyes, and bless him with the
Knowledge and Love of the Truth.

2. We know it is true, what the great Roman Orator long since said -- Humanum
est errare, labi, decipi, etc. The wisest men have their mistakes; Bernardus
non videt Omnia, and quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus. Since Adam fell, the
best men have their Infirmities, and sometimes err, even when they desire and
seek Truth. Since the Prophets, our blessed Savior and his Apostles, left the
world, I know no man Infallible; nor any, save the Pope, who (against evident
Reason and the sense of Christendom) pretends to it. For my own part, I do
humbly acknowledge my many and great Infirmities; and for these Papers --
Hominem pagina nostra sapit, there may be mistakes and errors in them; yet it
is my hope and (not ungrounded) belief, that there are none such as may prove
pernicious, or (in the main) dangerous -- Non hic Centauros, non Gorgonas,
Harpyasve invenies. No such prodigious and pernicious errors, as our Popish
Adversaries maintain, and (so far as they are able) vindicate: such I mean as
their stupid Doctrine of Transubstantiation (contradictory to Natural Reason,
Divine Revelation, and all our Senses) their Idolatrous Adoration of a piece of
Bread, with Divine Nullus dubitand^ Locus, quin Cultus Latriae qui Vero Deo
debetur, sic huic Sacramento exhibendus. Council. Trid. Sess. 13. De Encharista.
cap. 5.
Worship due to God only) their Sacrilegious robbing the Laity of half the
Sacrament in the Eucharist, contrary to our blessed Savior's express Matthew.
26. 27. And they obeyed, and did all drink. and Marc. 14. 23.
Command, and the practice of the Christian Cardinal Bona, De Rebus Liturgicis,
l. 2. c. 18. page 491: 492: Paris. 1672. Lindanus Panopliae, l. 4. c. 56. p.
342. Colon. 1575.
World (even of the Church of Rome her self) for above a thousand years (as
their own great and learned Writers confess) etc. I say, such errors as these,
I do (and have reason to) believe, the Reader will not find in these Papers.
Though it be certain and confessed, that every one, even the best and most
learned Writers are fallible; yet so long as they rationally build their
Conclusions upon the clear Principles of Nature, Scripture, or Universal
Tradition, They may be sure enough, (and so may their Reader too) that they are
not actually false, nor what they so write erroneous. However if the Reader
find any errors of what nature soever, and can make it appear, that they are
indeed errors, I shall not (as I said before) deprecate his severest Censure,
but concur with him, and Censure them my self, as much as he; and do hereby
promise publicly to retract them, and heartily thank him for the discovery.
For in this Case my Reader and I shall both be Gainers, and (in a several way)
Conquerors -- Vid. Hieronym. adversus Luciferianos, in sine. Tom. Operum. 1. p.
230. Col. 2. G.
Vicimus uterque nostrum, palmam Tu refers mei, Ego Erroris; my Reader has
overcome me, by manifesting my mistakes, and I (by his help) have overcome
those errors; otherwise, in Cyprian's opinion and language, Cyprian Epist. 71.
ad Quintum fratrem, p. 140. in Editione Rigaltij, Paris. 1648.
Non vincimur cum offeruntur nobis meliora, sed instruimur. He, who by his
Adversaries help and concluding Arguments, gains the knowledge of Truth, is (in
that good Father's opinion) not conquered, but instructed. But if the
Intelligent Reader discover any error in these Papers, and can, and will really
make it appear to be so, let him call it what he will, Victory or Instruction,
I shall thankfully submit, and both love that truth, and him for the discovery
of it.

3. I know that this Tract of mine (as every one of the like nature) is already
prohibited and damned at Rome; for the Rules Extant dictae Regulae Indici
Tridentino praesixae, in Calce Concilij Tridentini. Antv. 1633.
presix'd to the Index Librorum Prohibitorum, contrived by the Authority of the
Trent Council, declare all Books of Libri Vulgari Idiemate de Controverstis
inter Catholicos and Haereticos nostri temporis disserentes, non passim
permittantur, sed de iis idem servetir quod de Bibliis Vulgari Lingua scriptis
Statutum est. Ibidem Reg. 6.
Controversies between Catholics and Heretics (Protestants and Papists) in
any Vulgar Tongue, prohibited and damned; neither to be Legentes, aut habentes,
poenas in Sacris Canonibus, Constitutionibus Apostolicis, and Indicibus
Librorum prohibitorum contentas, incurrere volumus, Ita Bulla Creg. 15. Data
Romans 30. December. 1622.
had nor read by any Papist, under pain of Excommunication, and many other
Penalties contained in their Canons, Papal Constitutions, and their Expurgatory
Indices. So that although our blessed Savior, by his holy 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. and
1. Joh. 4. ^.
Spirit, in the Gospel, Command all (even the Common people, for to those he
writes) to Examine and try all things, to use that understanding and discretion
God has given us, to distinguish truth from error (for that is evidently the
meaning of those words, (...) prove all things, as Omnia probate, i. e. Per
Discretionem dijudicate. Dr. Hen. Holden in Locum.
scher and learned Papists confess) and when we have done so, then we must hold
fast that which is good. I say, in this Case, in the choice of our Religion,
wherein the Eternal weal or woe of our Souls is concerned; though Christian
prudence require it, and our blessed Savior, (by his Apostle) Command, that we
should not believe every Spirit, but try before we trust, and diligently examine
Things till we be assured of truth: yet his pretended Vicar, with an
Antichristian Pride and Impiety, Contradicts this, and Commands the contrary.
He forbids all Examination; Those under his Tyranny (at least the unlearned and
Common people) must believe as the Church believes; that is, all that he
proposes, though it be Transubstantiation, or any thing evidently repugnant to
their Reason and Senses too. They must Sublato Omni Proprio Judicio, paratus
semper sit Animus, ad Obediendum Ecclesiae. Vide Exercitia spiritualia Ign.
Loyolae. Tolosae, 1593. p. 172. Reg. 1.
renounce their own Reason, and if he say that is white, which they see black,
they Si quod Oculis nostris apparet Album, Ecclesia Nigrum definierit, debemus
quod nigrum sit pronunciare. Ibid. Reg. 13. p. 176.
are to believe what he says, and not their own Senses. All means for the
People to examine, whether it be truth or error, which the Pope and his Church
proposes, is prohibited, and denied them; nor is it only the Books of
Protestants which write of Religion, but the Bible and Sacred Scripture too;
even the whole Law of God, and the Gospel of Jesus Christ (in any vulgar
Language, which the People can understand) come amongst prohibited Books, and
damned at Rome; and the reason they give of such prohibition is impious and
blasphemous. For they say (horresco referens) the reading of the Holy Scripture
by the People, in any vulgar Tongue, is more Si Sacra B^^lia vulgari ^ingua,
passim sine discrimine permittantur, Plus Inde, ob hominum temeritatem,
Detrimenti, cu^m Vtilitatis Oriri. Ita Reg. 4. Indici Tridentino praesixa.
pernicious then profitable, and brings more loss then benefit to the Reader.
Although this Doctrine be (as I said) impious, and (against God and his Holy
Word) blasphemous; yet it is publicly owned amongst those Rules for prohibited
Books, contrived by a Vid. Praefat. ad Indicem Librorum Prohib. Confectum a
Deputatione Synodi Tridentinae; Author. Praef. erat Francisc. Forerius
Deputationi Secretarius.
Deputation (or Committee) of the Trent Fathers, according to the Decree of
that Council; and afterward approved and confirmed by Pius the Fourth, Sixtus
the Fifth, and Clemens the Eighth, as Index Libr. Prohib. ex Council. Trid.
praescripto; Authoritate Pij. 4. primo Editus, postea a Sixto. 5. auctus; demum
Clement. 8. Juss^ recognitus.
the Title of the Trent Index assures us. After them (that we may be sure they
continue their Antichristian Tyranny, to prohibit and damn the Bible and all
Books which make against them) Greg. 15. Bulla data Romans 30. December. An. 1622.
in Calce Indicis Trid. Antv. Ann. 1633.
Gregory the Fifteenth, and Constit. 114. Urbani. 8. dat. Romans 2. April. 1631.
Urban the Eighth do further approve and confirm the Impious Rules and Doctrine
afore-mentioned; and both of them expressly declare, and in the same words;

1. That it is known that the Reading prohibited Books, (the Bible is one of
them) brings Cum Librorum Prohibitorum Lectio, Magno sincere Fidei cultoribus
Detrimento esse noscatur, etc. Those be their words in both their Bulls.
great detriment to the Professors of the sincere Faith. (Roman Errors and
Popery they mean, which they miscall sincere Faith). And what they say, is most
certain; for there is no Book under Heaven so destructive of their Popish
Superstition and Idolatry (which they call sincere Faith) as the Bible, as it
has been truly explained and preached by Protestants, since Luther' s time.
Which is evident in this, that so many Kingdoms and Provinces, by the help of
Scriptures and Knowledge of the Gospel, have clearly seen the Errors of Rome,
and justly abhorring her and them, are come out of Babylon.

2. All Licenses to read any prohibited Omnes and singulas licentias legendi
aut habendi Libros quoscunque prohibitos, quibuscunque Personis, cujuscunque
gradus, etiamper literas Apostolicas, a Nobis aut Praedecessoribus nostris
concessas, revocamus, cassamus, anullamus. So both of them declare in the same
words.
Books, whosoever gave them, and to whomsoever they were given) they recall,
cassate, and declare null.

3. Then they Command (under severest Qui Libros prohibitos habuerint, eos ad
Episcopum ant Inquisitorem, qui illos quantocius Comburere debeat, defer
teneantur. Ibidem.
punishments) that all those who have any prohibited Books, (the Bible is one,
if it be in any Vulgar Tongue) they are to bring them to the Bishop or
Inquisitor, and they are presently to Burn them.

4. And then they declare, Neque de caetero similes Licentiae, nisi a
Congregatione Sancti Officij, quae singulis hebdomadis coram Nobis habetur, vel
ab aliis per Nos, in eadem Congregatione deputandis concedantur. Urban. 8.
dictae Bullae.. 3.
That no man shall have any License for the future, to read or have any
prohibited Book, ( no Bible or Protestant Book concerning Religion, in any
Vulgar Tongue) save only from the Congregation of the Sacred Office, ( the
supreme Office of the Inquisitors) which sits every week before the Pope at
Rome.

By the Premises, I think it is certain, that these Papers of mine are (in
Antecessum, and) already prohibited and damned at Rome; and if their Papal
Constitutions be obligatory and obeyed, not to be read or had by any Papist,
save only such as have a faculty and license from the Congregation of the
Sacred Office, (as they call it) the Roman Inquisitors; and we may be sure,
that those watchful Fathers who guard the Capitol, and industriously study to
preserve and promote the Papal Greatness and Interest, (on which their own
depends) will give license to none to read such Protestant Writings, save to
those, who (for fidelity to their Catholic Cause and Learning) they judge able
and willing to Answer and Confute them: That is, None shall have License to
read such (to them) dangerous and damned Books, save such as have Hanc
Catholicam fidem, extra quam nemo salvus esse potest, quam in praesenti
Profiteor, and veraciter Yeneo, eandemque Integram, usque ad extremum vitae
spiritum, constantissime retinere, and confiteri, and a meis subditis, vel
illis qu^rum cura ad m^ spectat, Teneri, and Praedicari, quantum in me ^rit,
curaturum, Ego idem N. Spondeo, Voveo, ac Juro. Ita in Bulla Pij Papae 4. super
forma Juramenti Professionis fidei, in Council. Trident. Sess. 24. De Refor'. c.
12. p. 4 52. Editionis Anverp. 1633.
solemnly Promised, Vowed and Sworn firmly to believe and constantly to hold
and profess to their last breath (and, to the utmost of their Power, endeavor
that others, under them do so too) their new Trent-Creed, and so the whole Mass
of their Popish Errors and Idolatries contained and commanded in it. The Case
being evidently this; that (if their Papal Constitutions be obligatory and
obeyed) none are to read or have these Papers, save such as have promised,
vowed, and sworn never to believe them; as I have little reason to desire or
hope for their favor, so (be it known unto them) I do as little fear their
Confutation, or (what I am like enough to have) their Calumnies.

4. Although I well know (to say nothing of others) that all our English
Papists (both in their Words and Writings) do constantly call themselves
Catholics, and Roman Catholics; yet they must pardon me, if in these Papers,
I neither do, nor justly can call them so: Papists I do call them, and (I hope)
they will not be offended, or take it ill, that I do so. For Recentiores
Haeretici Catholicos homines Papistas vocant; and certe nullo sublimiore
Gloriae Titulo Exornare potuissent. Sint ideo nobis viventibus, haec semper
Praeconia La^dum, and post mortem, Tituli Sepulchrales, ut sic Semper Dicamur
Papistae. Baronius Notat. ad Martyrologium Romans Oct. 16. B. p. 707. Col. Agrip.
1610.
Baronius (their great Cardinal and Annalist) having said, That the Heretics
(we know whom he means) called them Papists; he adds, That we could not honor
them with a more glorious Title then that of Papists, and therefore he desires
that they may have the honor of that Title while they live, and that (after
death) it may be writ upon their Tombs and Sepulchral Monuments. For my part,
so long as they believe and profess their new Trent-Creed, and the Popes
Monarchical Supremacy, I shall (according to the Cardinal's desire) call them
Papists, and if it be so honorable a Title (as he says it is) let them have
it, I shall not envy them that honor, but pity their error, who glory in that
which is indeed their sin and shame: For the other Title of Catholic, which
our Adversaries, (without and against reason) appropriate to themselves; we
grant, and know, that anciently it was, and (when rightly used) is a word of a
good sound and signification, when it was applied to persons, (as a Catholic
Bishop, or Catholic Doctor, etc.) it signified such persons as were, 1. In
respect of their Faith, Orthodox; who entirely believed and professed the true
Christian Faith, rejecting all pernicious and dangerous errors, and so were no
Heretics. 2. In respect of their Charity, such as were in Communion with the
Church of Christ, without any uncharitable Separation from it, and so no
Schismatics. Now that our Adversaries of Rome are (as they pretend) such
Catholics, is absolutely denied; not only by Protestants, but (except
themselves) by all Christians in the World, and that upon evident and great
reason; Considering, 1. Their many and monstrous Concerning the Errors,
Superstition and Idolatry of the Church of Rome, (with which I charge them) I
do not here name the Particulars, much less the proofs of them. It is not the
business of this Epistle. But many of our learned Writers have long since
effectually done it. Such I mean, as Bishop Jewel, Bp. Morton, Davenant, John
White, Chillingworth and Dr. Crakanthorp, and (to omit many more) lately, my
learned Friend Dr. Stillingfleet Dean of Paul's. The Reader (if he please) may
consult these and find satisfaction. Some thing also is said to that purpose,
in the following Papers. But if my Popish Adversaries (who are not easily, if
at all to be satisfied) require me particularly to make good my Charge; I shall
undertake it; and hope (by the blessing of God, and the help of the Writings of
those learned Persons I have named) to say that which might (though may be it
will not) satisfy my Adversaries.
Errors (contradictory to sacred Scripture, and the sense and belief of the
Christian World for a thousand years after Christ our blessed Savior) which
they approve and publicly receive as Articles of their Faith, in their new
Creed, the Trent-Council, and Roman Catechism; Considering also their many
Superstitions and stupid Idolatry, professed and practiced by them in their
sacred Offices (their Missal, Breviary, Horae B. Virginis, their Ritual and
Pontifical, etc.) I say, these things impartially considered, they may be (and
really are) Idolatrous Heretics; but it is impossible they should be, (what
they against greatest evidence pretend to) true Catholics. 2. Considering the
unchristian (indeed Antichristian) Pride and Tyranny of the Pope and his Party,
Excommunicating, Cursing and Damning all Christians, save themselves, (without
and against that Charity which the Gospel requires) and so Schismatically
cutting off from the Body of Christ whole Kingdoms at a Clap (as Pius the Fifth
does, Declaramus praedictam Elizabetham Haereticam, eique Adhaerentes
Anathematis Sententiam inc^rrisse, esseque a Christi Corporis Vnitate
Praecisos. In dicta Pij. 5. Bulla.. 3.
in the following Bull) which are things inconsistent with the Christian Temper
and Charity of a true Catholic; I say these things considered, and that the
Pope and his Party are really guilty of such uncharitable Actions, dividing and
violating the Union of the Church; it evidently follows, that they are so far
from being true Catholics that they are great and formal Schismatics; And
therefore they must pardon me, if in these Papers, I do not call them (what
really they are not) Catholics; and for the same Reason, I do not call them
Roman Catholics. For, as it is neither reason nor sense to call him an English
Gentleman, who is no Gentleman at all; or him a Sorbon Doctor, who never saw
Paris, or ever had or desired that Degree; so it is alike irrational to call
him a Roman Catholic, who really is an Erring Schismatic, and no Catholic at
all.

5. I know some (otherwise learned and pious) Writers, who say that those words
Roman Catholic are inconsistent, and imply a Contradiction, as signifying a
particular Universal. But this (I confess) is a manifest mistake. For not only
particular Persons, (of which before) but particular Churches, in this or that
City (be it great or little) have anciently and usually been called Catholic
Churches, without any Contradiction or Impropriety. In an Epistle of a Synodus
innumerabilium fere Episcoporum ( as Valesius renders it) apud Eusebius. Hist. l.
7. c. 29. page 278. D.
great Council at Antioch, we find the (...) homo professionis Catholicae. Even
Paulus Samosatenus, till he was discovered to be an Heretic, was called a
Catholic. Ibid. c. 30. p. 282. B.
Bishop of that City called a Catholic, and that particular Church a (...).
speaking of the Church of Antioch, Eusebius. Ibid. p. 282. 6.
Catholic Church. So in the Subscriptions to Nazianzen's last Will and
Testament, Optimus Bp. of Antioch, subscribes thus; Optimus Bp. of the
Catholic (...): Testam. Nazian. cum Invert. contra Julian. Graece Aetonae
1610. p. 126. and apud Leunclavium, Juris Graeco-Rom. Tom. 2. p. 203. vide
Epiphan. Edit. D. Petav. Paris. 162. 2. Tom. 2. p. 2.
Church at Antioch; and the rest of the Bishops who subscribe that Testament,
(and they are six or seven) use the same Form. So Nazianzen subscribes himself
Bishop of the Catholic Church in Constantinople; Amphilochius Bishop of the
Catholic Church in Iconium; and so all the rest. In the Appendix to the
Theodosian Code, Pope Vigilius begins his Encyclical Epistle thus -- Vigilius
Vid. App. Cod. Theod. per Sirmondu^ p. 218.
Episcopus Ecclesiae Catholicae Urbis Romae: Bishop of the Catholic Church of
the City of Rome. So Pope Leo Papa Ecclesiae Catholicae Urbis Romae. Conc.
Chalcedon. part. 1. number. 10. 12. and Act. 8.
Leo the Great (and The Reader may have a very large Catalogue of such
Subscriptions, by John Launoy. Epist. part. 1. In Epist. ad Franc s. Bonum.
many more Bishops of Rome) uses the very same form. The Popes styled
themselves Catholicae Ecclesiae (non Orbis, sed) Urbis Romae Episcopos. The
Antichristian style of Universal Bishop, (as Pope Pope Gregory damns that proud
Title, twelve several times; the places are particularly cited by Joh. Launoy
(and he no Lu^heran) in the Epist^e ad Bonum before-nam'd*
Gregory the Great calls it) was not yet usurped at Rome. The Bishops of Rome
then, and their Church, were Catholic, and so was every Orthodox Bishop and
his Church, as well and as much as they. Constantinople, Iconium, Antioch, etc.
and their Bishops, were as truly Catholic as St. Peter's Successor, or Rome it
self: The truth is evidently this; the Pope and his Party are in this, nec
Christi, nec Petri, sed Donati Successores; they do not follow Peter or our
blessed Savior, (as they vainly bragg) but that impious Heretic Donatus,
whose damnable Schism and Heresy they have espoused. St. Augustine (who well
knew it) tells us, in Vide Augustinum Breviculi Collat. cum Donatistis, Collat.
3. Diei. Tom. 7. p. 568. Edit. Basil. 1569. and Epist. 67. ad Alipium. Tom. 2.
p. 323.
several places, That the Donatists assumed to themselves the Name of
Catholic, said that their Sect was the only true Church, and so damned all
other Christians; and upon this Heretical Opinion, they Schismatically
separated from the whole Catholic Church. The Pope and his Party (with as
little reason and charity) do the very same thing; they (as the Donatists
anciently) Heretically affirm, That they, and they only, are truly Catholics,
and the only Members of the true Christian and Catholic Church: and then
Schismatically Separate from, Excommunicate and Damn all other Christians.

6. And further (that I may freely speak, what I really believe) I am so far
from believing the Pope and his Party to be (what they vainly pretend) the only
true Christian and Catholic Church; that I do believe them (and so did
thousands before Luther, and many whole Kingdoms and Provinces since) to be
Ecclesia Malignantium an Antichristian Sect and Synagogue (in side) highly
erroneous, and (in facto) as highly impious. And the Pope so far from being
Peter's Successor, and our B. Savior's Vicar General, that he is 2 Thessalonians. 2.
3. 4. See Bishop Jewel on this Chapter, and this fourth Verse. Sir Christoph.
Sibthorp's Advertisement to the Catholics in Ireland. Dublin 1622. part. 3. c.
2. p. 280. 281. 282. etc. Andr. Rivet. contra Silvestrum Petrasanctam c. 28. p.
537. 538. etc. vid. Georg. Dounamum, Dia^r de Antichristo, l. 3. and 4. Land.
1620.
that man of Sin, (...), That Adversary of our blessed Savior, and the great
Antichrist, the Apostle speaks of, who Exalts himself ((...)) above all Kings
and Emperors. This (I hope) will in part appear by what is said in the
following Papers. At present, I shall desire the Impartial Reader (who possibly
may read this short Epistle, and trouble himself no further, to read what
follows) to consider, That the Pope really and professedly does Exalt himself
above all Kings and Emperors, and so has this Mark of the Beast, and Indelible
Character of Antichrist. That he does so Exalt himself, will evidently appear,
thus, 1. Pope Innocent the Third tells the Vide Cap. Solitae. 6. Extra de
Major. and Obedientia; and the Lemma to that Chap. which is this -- Imperium
Sacerdotio subest, and ei Obedire Tenetur.
Emperor of Constantinople (and with prodigious Error and Impudence, endeavors
to prove it out of 1 Pet. 2. 13. (which place evidently proves the contrary)
Jer. 1. 10. Genesis 1. 16. Joh. 21. 16. Matthew. 16. 19.
Scripture) That the Quanta est inter Solemn and Lunam, tanta inter Pontifices
and Reges differentia cognoscitur. Dicto Cap. Solitae. 6.
Pope is as much greater Then the Emperor, as The Sun is greater Then the Moon.
So Innocent the third; and (that we may be sure his Successors liked it well)
Gregory the Ninth approves, and refers it into the Body of Canon Law: And Bulla
Romae data 1580. Juri Can. pr^efixa.
Greg. the Thirteenth approves it too; and (with the other Decretals) confirms
it for Law; and it is continued in all Editions of that Law, ever since. It is
then certain and confessed, That the Pope Exalts himself above all that is
called God, above all Kings and Emperors; and that he is far greater then they:
And if you inquire of the Proportion, how much he is greater? I say, 2. That
their approved and received Glosses on their Law, (with some difference of
Opinion) calculate how many times the Sun is greater then the Moon, and then
infer the Pope's Greatness above the Emperor. And here

1. The Author of the Gloss, ( Bernardus de Botono was the man) a good Lawyer,
but (sure I am) no good Astronomer, tells us, (ignorantly and ridiculously) --
That the Sun is greater than the Moon, (and consequently the Pope greater than
the Emperor) Cum igitur terra sic septies major Luna, Sol autem octies major
terra: restat ergo, ut Pontificalis Dignitas Quadragesies septies su major
Regali. Glossa verbo. Inter Solemn and Lunam. Cap. Solitae. 6. Extra. de Major.
and Obedientia. I quote the Edition of the Canon Law at Paris, 1612.
Forty seven times. This is pretty well, but much short of that Magnitude the
Pope meant, (if he knew what he said) when he affirmed, That he was as much
greater then the Emperor, as the Sun was greater than the Moon.

2. And therefore another Alias quinquagies septics. Ita Nota in Margin, ad
dictum Cap. Solitae verbo, Inter Solemn and Lunam. Ibid.
Canonist, would have the Sun greater than the Moon (and so the Pope greater
than the Emperor) Fifty seven times.

3. But this (as too little) does not please the Pope's Party and Parasites;
and therefore Laurentius (another Canonist) says, That it is Manifestum est,
quod magnitudo Solis continet magnitudinem terrae Centies quadragies septies
and duas medietates. Vid. Additionem ad Glossam. verbo. Inter Solemn and Lunam.
Cap. Solitae. 6.
manifest, that the Sun is greater than the Moon (so the Pope than the Emperor)
an hundred forty seven times. I omit the fractions; for if the Pope be. 147.
times greater than the Emperor, me thinks it might satisfy his Ambition, so
that he needed not stand upon the fraction, or little overplus.

4. But this also comes far short of that Magnitude, which they ascribe to the
Sun above the Moon, (and so to the Pope above the Emperor) for they tell us,
Palam est, quod magnitudo Solis continet magnitudem Lunae septies millies
septingenties and quadragies quater, and insuper ejus medietatem. Ibidem in
dicta additione ad dictam Glossam.
That the Sun is greater than the Moon (7744) seven thousand seven hundred,
forty four times, and one half more. To such a Prodigious greatness, does the
Bishop of Rome exalt himself. So that if St. Paul say true, (That he is
Antichrist, who exalts himself above all Kings and Emperors) then it will
evidently follow, that the Pope is Antichrist; for never man did, or (without
Antichristian Pride and Impiety) can so exalt himself. They sometimes tell us
in their Law, -- Aurum non tam pretiosius est plumbo, quam Regia Dignitate sit
Altior Dignitas Sacerdotalis. Gratian. Can. Duo sunt. 10. Distinct. 96.
That the Papal Dignity is to be preferred to the Imperial, more then Gold is to
Lead; and if Gratian saytrue) it was the Pope who said so. And the Gloss gives
the reason of this Papal Quia Colla Regum and Principum submittuntur Genibus
Sacerdotum. (By Sacerdotes here, the Popes are principally meant, as is evident
both by the Text and the Gloss) Glossa ad dictum Can. verbo. Duo sunt.
Greatness above all Kings; Because Kings and Princes are to submit their Necks
to the Popes Knees; (he might have said, and their Papa excipit Imperatorem ad
osculum pedisut primum videt Papam, detecto Capite, illum, gen^^ terram
tangens, venera^u, -- and Poutificis pedes Devote osculatur. Lib. Sacrarum
Ceremoniarum, Romans 1560. l. 1. Tit. 5. p. 22. Col. 2. 3.
Mouths to the Popes Feet, which the Emperor is bound to kiss). That this is
Impious and Antichristian Doctrine, I think evident; and I have some reason to
believe, that intelligent and impartial Judges will think so too, and yet it
has heretofore, and still is approved, and (as Catholic) received at Rome.
For, 1. That Decretal of Pope Innocent the Third, was by Gregory the Ninth made
a Law, and (amongst other Decretals) by him commanded to be received as Law, in
all Volentes ut hac tantum Compilatione utantur Vniversi in Judiciis and in
Scholis, etc. Greg. 9. in Literis Acad. Bononiensi, dat. 1230. Juri Canonico
Praefixis. Edit. Lugduni. 1661.
Universities and Papal Consistories, abont 450. years ago, and so continues to
this day. 2. For the Glosses beforementioned, they are not only in the Edit.
Paris. 1520. cum Glossis.
old Editions of their Law, but were approved and confirmed afterward by Vide
Bullam Greg. 13. datam Romae, Anno 1580. Corpori Juris Canonici praefixam.
Gregory the Thirteenth (and so stand approved and confirmed to this day) who
expressly tells us, That the Law being by his Nulli liceat Libris Canonici
Juris, de manda^o nostro Correctis, Recognitis, and Expurgatis quicquam addere,
detrahere, vel immutare, etc. Ibid. dicta Greg. 13. Bulla.
command received, corrected and purged; no man (for the future) should dare to
add, detract, or change any thing in it.

In short, whether the Champions of the Church of Rome and Catholic Cause, (as
they call it) will think what is said in these Papers, worthy of any Answer, or
no, I know not. But in case they do, I shall make them (if I mistake not) a
very fair offer, which (if accepted) will much lessen their pains and labor,
yet so, as (if they perform the Condition annexed) they may (as to my self)
effectually do their business, and make me their Proselyte: The thing I mean is
this; If they can from Scripture, (by any one Cogent and Concluding Argument)
prove any one of these following Propositions (and unless they be all proved,
their Papal Monarchy cannot stand) I will grant the rest, and give them the
Cause. I say then, if they can make it appear,

1. That our blessed Savior before his Ascension, did constitute Peter his
Vicar, and gave him such a Monarchical Supremacy and Jurisdiction (as is They
tell us, that it was our blessed Savior himself, who Constituted Peter and his
Successors, Supreme Monarchs of the Catholic Church. Christus Catholicam
Ecclesi^m, Vni Soli in Terris Petro, Petrique Successori Romans Pontifici, in
Potestatis Plenitudine, tradidit Gubernandam. So Pius the Fifth in this Bull of
Excommunication of Eliz. In Principio. And Bellarmine says -- Successio ex
Christi Instituto, and Jure Divino est, quia Ipse Christus Instituit in Petro
Pontificatum, ideo quicumque Petro succedit, a Christo accipit Pontificatum. De
Romans Pont. l 2. c. 12. ut autem. Cum Papa in Petri Cathedra Sedeat, summum in
eo Dignitatis gradum, nonnullis Humanis Constitutionibus, sed Divinitus datum
agnoscit. Catechis. Trident. Part. 2. c 7. De Ordinis Sacramento. 28. vide Can.
Sacrosancta. 2. Did. 22. and Glossam and Turrecrematam. Idem.
now contended for) over the Apostles and the whole Church. For if Peter had no
such Power he could not transfer it to his Successors; it being impossible,
that they should have that Power (Jure Successionis) which their Predecessor
never had.

2. If they can prove, that St. Peter, while he lived, did exercise such Power
and Supreme Jurisdiction, even over the Apostles, etc. By their own Baronius*
says, that Peter suffered Martyrdom Anno Christi. 69. and therefore 34. or 35.
years after our blessed Saviors Passion. Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 69.. 1.
Computation, St. Peter lived 34. or 35. years after the Ascension of our
blessed Savior, and was (as they say) Bishop of Antioch, 7. and of Rome, 25.
years. Now if it neither do, nor can appear, that in all that time he exercised
any such Monarchical Power or Jurisdiction; we may safely conclude, either that
he had no such Power (which is most true) or betrayed his trust in not making
use of it, for his Masters Glory, and his Churches good; which (I suppose) our
Adversaries will not say. In this Case, Idem est non esse and non apparere; and
therefore our Adversaries must pardon us, if we do not believe (what they
cannot prove) St. Peter's Monarchy.

3. But let it be supposed (which neither has been, nor can be proved) that
Peter had, and executed such Power; let them make it appear that it was not
Personal and Temporary, to cease with his Person, (as the Apostleship did) but
to be transferred to some Bellarmine says, tha it is evident in Scripture that
Peter's Supremacy was to descend to a Successor -- Aliquem Petro Succedere,
deducitur Evidenter ex Scripturis. De Romans Pont. l. 2. c. 12. Observandum
Tertio.
Successor. For if it was temporary, and ceased with St. Peter's Person, then
whoever (after Peter's death) pretends to that Power, is not bonae fidei
possessor, but an Impious and Antichristian Usurper.

4. But let all those Particulars be supposed, (which being untrue, cannot
possibly be proved) that Peter had and executed such Power, and that it was to
be transmitted to his Successor; Let them make it appear that the Bishop of
Rome was that Bellarmine tells us, that it is not expressly in Scripture, that
the Pope is Peter's Successor, but that must be proved by Apostolical
Tradition. Romans Pontificem succedere Petro, non habetur express in Scripturis,
sed habetur ex traditione Apostolica. Bellarm. Loco dicto.
Successor, that Peter was (as they say) 25. years Bishop of Rome, or 25. days,
or that he ever was at Rome: For, if it be so far from truth that Peter was 25.
years Bishop of Rome, that it cannot appear from Scripture, that he was ever
Bishop there at all, or that he ever was at Rome. It will evidently follow,
that the Pope is not St. Peter's Successor, and so can have no Title (Jure
Successionis) to that Supremacy, they say, Peter had: It being impossible that
the Pope should succeed Peter, if he never preceeded him in the Bishopric of
Rome.

5. Let them make it appear, that our blessed Savior, while on Earth, either
exercised or had such a Temporal Monarchy, as the They constantly tell us, the
Pope has two Swords; and of the Temporal Sword they say -- Figurat Pontisicalis
hic gladius potestatem summam Temporal^m, a Christo ejus Vicario collatam;
juxta illud, data est mihi omnis Potestas in C^elo and in Terra, and alibi,
dominabitur a Mari usque ad Mare, and a Flumine, usque ad Terminos Orbie
Terrarum. Liber Sacrarum Ceremoniorum Ecclesiae Romans Romae. 1560. Lib. 1. Tit.
7. De Ense benedicendo, p. 36. Col. 1.
Pope now challenges as his Vicar. For unless this appear, all their pretenses
to such Power, (as Vicars of our B. Savior) will be vain and irrational; it
being impossible that the Pope or Peter should derive from him that power which
he himself neither had, nor ever here on Earth exercised.

These are the Foundations upon which the Papal Monarchy (Spiritual and
Temporal) is built; and if these fail, the whole Fabric will and must fall;
and therefore they are concerned, by some real and rational proof, to make them
good. Now if our Adversaries can and will make it appear, from Sacred
Scripture, that Peter ever had or exercised such a Power, as is pretended;
that* it was not personal in him, but to be transmitted to his Successor; that
he was 25. years Bishop of Rome, and actually transferred that Power to his
Successor there; or that our blessed Savior ever had or exercised such a
terrene and temporal power, as they pretend the Pope (as his Vicar) has from
him: I say, let them make all, or any one of these Pariculars appear from
Scripture, and I will confess, and retract my error. Nor is the Condition
unjust or unequal, when I require Scripture proof. For they themselves
constantly affirm that the Pope has Right to his Monarchical Supremacy Jure
Divino; by the Constitution of our blessed Savior, and Divine Right; and this
their Popes, Canonists and Divines (with great noise and confidence, but no
reason) endeavor to prove from Scripture, miserably mistaken and misapplied. I
know, that their late Vide Methodum Veronianam, seu modum, quo quilibet
Catholicus potest Solis Bibliis, Religionis praetensae Ministrum evidenter
mutum reddere, etc. Authore Francisco Verono Parisiensi, Societatis Jesu
Theolog. Colon. Agrip. 1610. Vide Jac. Masenij meditatam Concordiam
Protestantium cum Catholics, ex verbo Dei. Edit. Colon. 1661.
Jesuitical Methodists (so much Francis. Veroni Scientiam, e doctissima
Societate Jesu prodeuntem, veneramur, sententiam libenter sequimur, and
labores, optimo successu a Deo donatos, honoramus. Adrian. and Petrus
Walenburch in Exam Princip. fidei, etc. Exam. 3.. 1. number. 3. p. 111.
magnified by their Party) require of Protestants to confute their Popish
Doctrines (Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Mass, Purgatory, etc.) by
express words of Scripture) not admitting of Consequences, however deduced from
plain Texts as Premises. This method of theirs (being irrational and Vide
Dispute. de fidei ex scripturis demonstratione, contra novam nonnullorum
Methodu^ Per Joh. Dallaeum. 8^* Genevae, 1610.
demonstrated so to be) I shall not tie them too: But if they can prove any of
the aforesaid Positions by the express words of Scripture, or by good
Consequences deduced from it, or (what they pretend to) Universal and
Apostolical Tradition; I shall admit the proof. Nay, I shall make our Popish
Adversaries two further, and (if that be possible) fairer offers.

1. Let them prove by any just and concluding reason whatsoever, that any
Christian Church in the World acknowledged, or the Church of Rome her self
assumed and publicly pleaded for such a Papal Supremacy, as They do now
pretend to potestatem Summain Temporalem; as the Book of their Sacred
Ceremonies (a little before cited) tells us. That our blessed Savior gave
Peter, (and in him the Pope) Coelestis and Terreni Imperij Jura. Can. Omnes. 1.
did. 22. Power to depose Kings and Emperors, absolve their Subjects from Oaths
of Allegiance, and dispose of their Dominions. Plat. in vita Greg. 7. Conc.
Lateran. sub. Innocent. 3. Can. de Haeret. 3. Hence it was, that Bonif. 8.
(that Prodigy of Antichristian Pride and Impiety) in the Solemn Jubilee showed
himself to the People the first day in his Pontificalibus, and the next day,
Imperiali habitu, Intula Caesarea Insignis, gladium ante se nudatum jussit
deferri and sedens alta voce ^^statur; Ecce duo gladij. Vide Paralip. ad Chron.
Urspergen: ad An. 1294. p. 344.
now they pretend to, for 1000. years after our B. Savior; and (for my own
part) I will confess and retract my Error.

2. Let them prove, by any such concluding reason, that any Church in the World
(Eastern or Western, Greek or Latin) did acknowledge (what now the Pope and his
Party so earnestly and vainly contend for) the Popes Infallibility, and his
Supremacy over all General Councils, for 1500. years after our blessed Savior;
and for my part, Cedat Julus Agris, manus dabimus captivas, I will retract what
here I have affirmed, and be (what I hope I never shall be) their Proselyte.

To Conclude, I have no more to say, (my Adversaries will think I have said too
much) save only to desire the Readers, who sincerely and impartially desire
truth and satisfaction, to read and consider the Margent as well as the Text.
In this, they have my Positions, and the proofs of them, in plain English: In
the Margent, the Authorities and Authors I rely upon, in their own words, and
the Language in which they writ: and I have (for the Readers ease, not my own)
cited not only the Authors and their Books, but the Chapter, Paragraph, Page,
and mostly the Editions of them: That so the Reader may with more ease, find
the places quoted, and judge whether I have cited and translated them aright.
It is notoriously known, that our Popish Adversaries have published many forged
Canons and Councils, many spurious It is notoriously known how many Decretal
Epistles have been forged, and fathered upon the ancient Bishops. I shall only
instance in the fifth Epistle of that pious Pope and Martyr, Clemens the first;
in which he pleads for a community of all things in the world, even of Wives.
Communis usus Omnium, quae sunt in hoc mundo, Omnibus esse Debuit. In Omnibus
Sunt Sine Dubio, and Conjuges. Joh. Sichardus and James Merlin have that
Epistle, and those very words; and Gratian has referred them into the Canon Law.
Can. dilectissimis. 2. Cause. 12. Quaest. 1. and there they are still, in all
the Editions of that Law, even that corrected and approved by Pope Gregory the
Thirteenth.
Decretals, and supposititious Tracts, under the names of Primitive Fathers,
and ancient Bishops; that they have shamefully corrupted the Canons of
Legitimate I shall instance only in one, the 28. Canon of the Council of
Chalcedon, as it is shamefully corrupted in Gratian. Can. Renovant. 6. Did.
22. where, 1. It is in the Original, (...), definimus, statuimus; for which
Gratian has, Petimus. 2. In the Original Canon, it is (...), Senior Roma; but
Gratian has Superior Roma. 3. In the Original, it is, (...),/ Aequalia
Privilegia; But Gratian has Similia privilegia: as being unwilling that
Constantinople should have equal privileges with Rome. 4. In the Original
Canon, it is -- (...), etc. That Constantinople should be equal to Rome, in
Ecclesiastical Matters, etiam in Ecclesiasticis. But Gratian (in contradiction
to the Canon) says, Non tamen in Ecclesiasticis, etc. So it was in Gratian, in
the old Editions; only in the Later Editions of Gratian (An. 1612. 1618. 1661.
and.) this last corruption is acknowledged, and (which is not usual) mended.
But other corruptions remain still, in their last and best Editions of Gratian.
Councils, and thousands of other Authors; making them (by adding and
substracting words or Sentences) say what they never meant, or not to say what
indeed they did both mean and say: and this they themselves have (without shame
or honesty) publicly owned, in their Expurgatory Indices; and after all this
fraud and falsification of Records, these Apocryphal Books and supposititious
Authors, are continually produced by them (for proofs of their Errors) against
Protestants who well know, and (as many sober men of their own Communion)
justly condemn such impious Roman Arts -- Nec tali auxilio, nec defensoribus
istis Christus eget. Truth needs no such forged and false; Medium's to maintain
it; nor will any honest man use them. Sure I am, I have not, in this Discourse,
built the truth of my Positions upon the Testimonies of our own Protestant
Authors, (knowing that our Adversaries would with scorn reject their Testimony)
nor of any supposititious or spurious ones. The Testimonies and Proofs I have
quoted, and rely upon, are drawn from Scripture, the genuine Works of the
ancient Fathers and Councils, or (which ad hominem, must be valid) from their
own Councils, the Popes Bulls, their Canon Law, their Casuists, Schoolmen,
Summists, the Trent Catechism, the Book of the Sacred Ceremonies of the Romans
Church, their approved and received Public Offices, (such as their Missal,
Breviary, Ritual, Pontifical, etc.) which Authorities (if I do not misquote, or
mistake their meaning) are, and (to them) must be just proofs of those
Positions for which I have produced them. But let the Evidence of the
Testimonies, and the Authority of the Authors quoted, be what it will; I have
little hope, that they will gain any assent from our Adversaries; so long as
they believe the Infallibility of their Pope and Church, and their Learned Men
are solemnly sworn, firmly to believe their new Trent Creed, (the whole Body of
Popish Errors) to their last breath, and to Anathematize and Damn what Doctrine
soever contradicts it. For while they are possessed with these Principles, it
may be truly said of them, what was said of the Luciferian Heretics in St.
Hierome -- Facilius cos Vinci posse, quam persuaderi, you may sooner bassle,
then persuade them: They will (in despite of Premises) hold the Conclusion;
nor shall the clearest demonstration overcome their blind Zeal and Affection to
their Catholic Cause. However, that God Almighty would be graciously pleased
to bless us and them, with a clear knowledge of Sacred Truth, with a firm
belief, and (in dangerous times) upon undanted and pious profession of it, is
and shall be the Prayer of

Oct. 3. 1680. Thy Friend and Servant in Christ, T. L.

The Damnation and Excommunication of Elizabeth Queen of England, and her
Adherents, with an Addition of other Punishments.
Pius Bishop, Servant to God's Servants, for a perpetual memorial of the matter.
HE that reigns on High, to whom is given all Power in Heaven and in Earth,
committed one Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church (out of which there is no
Salvation) to one alone upon Earth, namely, to Peter the Prince of the
Apostles, and to Peter's Successor the Bishop of Rome, to be governed in
fullness of Power. Him alone he made Prince over all People, and all Kingdoms,
to pluck up, destroy, scatter, consume, plant and build, that he may contain
the faithful that are knit together with the band of Charity in the Unity of
the Spirit, and present them spotless, and umblameable to their Savior.

Sect. 1. In discharge of which Function, we which are by God's goodness called
to the Government of the aforesaid Church, do spare no pains, laboring with
all earnestness, that Unity, and the Catholic Religion (which the Author
thereof has for the trial of his Children's Faith, and for our amendment,
suffered to be punished with so great Afflictions) might be preserved
incorrupt: But the number of the ungodly has gotten such power, there is now
no place left in the whole World, which they have not assayed to corrupt with
their most wicked Doctrines: Amongst others, Elizabeth, the pretended Queen of
England, a Slave of Wickedness, lending thereunto her helping hand, with whom,
as in a Sanctuary, the most pernicious of all men have found a Refuge. This
very Woman having seized on the Kingdom, and monstrously usurping the place of
Supreme Head of the Church in all England, and the chief Authority and
Jurisdiction thereof, has again brought back the said Kingdom into miserable
destruction, which was then newly reduced to the most Catholic Faith and good
Fruits.

Sect. 2. For having by strong hand inhibited the exercise of the true
Religion, which Mary lawful Queen of famous memory, had by the help of this See
restored, after it had been formerly overthrown by Henry the Eighth, a Revolter
therefrom; and following and embracing the Errors of Heretics, she has
removed the Royal Council consisting of the English Nobility, and filled it
with obscure men, being Heretics, oppressed the Embracers of the Catholic
Faith, placed impious Preachers, Ministers of Iniquity, abolished the Sacrifice
of the Mass, Prayers, Fastings, choice of Meats, unmarried Life, and the
Catholic Rites and Ceremonies. Commanded Books to be read in the whole Realm
containing manifest Heresy; and impious Mysteries and Institutions, by her
self entertained, and observed according to the Prescript of Calvin, to be
likewise observed by her Subjects; presumed to throw Bishops, Parsons of
Churches, and other Catholic Priests, out of their Churches and Benefices; and
to bestow them and other Church Livings upon Heretics, and to determine of
Church Causes, prohibited the Prelates, Clergy, and People to acknowledge the
Church of Rome, or obey the Precepts and Canonical Sanctions thereof, compelled
most of them to condescend to her wicked Laws, and to abjure the Authority and
Obedience of the Bishop of Rome, and to acknowledge her to besole Lady in
Temporal and Spiritual matters, and this by Oath; imposed Penalties and
Punishments upon those which obeyed not, and exacted them of those which
persevered in the Unity of the Faith, and their Obedience aforesaid, cast the
Catholic Prelates and Rectors of Churches in Prison, where many of them, being
spent with long languishing and sorrow, miserably ended their lives. All which
things, seeing they are manifest and notorious to all Nations, and by the
gravest Testimony of very many so substantially proved, that there is no place
at all left for Excuse, Defense, or Evasion.

Sect. 3. We seeing that impieties and wicked actions are multiplied one upon
another; and moreover, that the persecution of the faithful, and affliction for
Religion, grows every day heavier and heavier, through the instigation and
means of the said Elizabeth; because we understand her Mind to be so hardened
and indurate, that she has not only contemned the godly Requests and
Admonitions of Catholic Princes, concerning her healing and conversion, but
also has not so much as permitted the Nuncios of this See, to cross the Seas
into England; are strained of necessity to betake our selves to the Weapons of
Justice against her, not being able to mitigate our sorrow, that we are drawn
to take punishment upon one, to whose Ancestors the whole State of Christendom
has been so much bounden. Being therefore supported with his Authority, whose
pleasure it was to place Us (though unable for so great a burden) in this
Supreme Throne of Justice, we do out of the fullness of our Apostolic power,
declare the aforesaid Elizabeth, being an Heretic, and a favourer of
Heretics, and her Adherents in the matters aforesaid, to have incurred the
sentence of Anathema, and to be cut off from the Unity of the Body of Christ.

Sect. 4. And moreover, we do declare Her to be deprived of her pretended Title
to the Kingdom aforesaid, and of all Dominion, Dignity, and Privilege
whatsoever.

Sect. 5. And also the Nobility, Subjects, and People of the said Kingdom, and
all others, which have in any sort sworn unto her, to be forever absolved from
any such Oath, and all manner of Duty, of Dominion, Allegiance, and Obedience;
As we also do by Authority of these presents absolve them, and do deprive the
same Elizabeth of her pretended Title to the Kingdom, and all other things
abovesaid. And we do Command and Interdict all and every the Noblemen,
Subjects, people, and others aforesaid, that they presume not to obey her, or
her Monitions, Mandates, and Laws: And those which shall do the contrary, We do
innodate with the like Sentence of Anathema.

Sect. 6. And because it were a matter of too much difficulty, to convey these
presents to all places wheresoever it shall be needful; our will is, that the
Copies thereof, under a public Notaries hand, and sealed with the Seal of an
Ecclesiastical Prelate, or of his Court, shall carry altogether the same credit
with all people Judicial and Extrajudicial, as these presents should do, if
they were exhibited or showed. Given at Rome, at St. Peter's, in the Year of the
Incarnation of our Lord, 1570. the Fifth of the Calends of May, and of our
Popedom the Fifth year.

Damnatio and Excommunicatio Elizabethae Reginae Angliae, eique Adhaerentium,
cum aliarum poenarum Adjectione.
Pius Episcopus, Servus Servorum Dei, ad perpetuam Rei memoriam.
REgrans in Excelsis, cui data est Omnis in Coelo and in Terra Potestas, unam
Sanctam, Catholicam and Apostolicam Ecclesiam (extra quam nulla est salus) soli
in terris, videlicet, Apostolorum Principi Petro, Petrique Successori Romano
Pontifici, in Potestatis plenitudine tradidit Gubernandam. Hunc unum super
omnes Gentes, and omnia Regna Principem constituit, qui evellat, destruat,
dissipet, disperdat, plantet, and aedisicet, ut fidelem populum, mutuae
Charitatis nexu constrictum, in unitate Spiritus contineat, salvumque and
incolumem suo exhibeat salvatori.

Sect. 1. Quo quidem in munere obeundo, Nos ad praedictae Ecclesiae gubernacula
Dei Benignitate vocati, nullum laborem intermittimus, omni opera contendentes,
ut ipsa Vnitas, and Catholica Religio (quam illius Auctor ad probandam suorum
fidem, and correctionem nostram, tantis procellis conslictari permisit) integra
conservetur. Sed Impiorum numerus tantum potentia invaluit, ut nullus jam in
Orb locus sit relictus, quem illi pessimis doctrinis corrumpere non tentarint,
adnitente inter caeteros flagitiorum serva Elizabeth, praetensa Angliae Regina
ad quam, veluti ad asylum, omnium infestissimi profugium invenerunt. Haec
eadem, Regno occupato, supremi Ecclesiae capitis locum, in omni Anglia, ejusque
praecipuam Auctoritatem atque Jurisdictionem monstruose sibi usurpans, regnum
ipsum jam tum ad Fidem Catholicam and bonam frugem reductum, rursus in exitium
miserum revocavit.

Sect. 2. Vsu namque verae Religionis, quam ab illius desertore Henrico VIII.
olim eversam, Clarae Mem. Maria Regina legitima, hujus Sedis Praesidio
reparaverat, potenti manu inhibito, secutisque and amplexis Haereticorum
erroribus, Regium Concilium ex Anglica Nobilitate confectum diremit, illudque
obscuris hominibus Haereticis complevit, Catholicae Fidei cultores oppressit,
improbos Concionatores, atque Impietatum Administros reposuit, Missae
Sacrificium, Preces, Jejunia, Ciborum delectum, Ritusque Catholicos abolevit.
Libros manifestam Heresim continentes, toto Regno proponi, impia Mysteria, and
Instituta ad Calvini Praescriptum a se suscepta, and observata, etiam a
subditis observari mandavit. Episcopos, Ecclesiarum Rectores, and alios
Sacerdotes Catholicos, suis Ecclesiis, and Beneficiis ejicere, ac de illis and
aliis Ecclesiasticis rebus, in haereticos homines disponere, d^que Ecclesiae
causis decernere ausa, Praelatis, Clero, and Populo, ne Romanam Ecclesiam
agnoscerent, n^ve ejus Praeceptis, Sanctionibusque Canonicis obtemperarent,
Interdixit; plerosque in nefarias leges suas venire, and Romani Pontisicis
Auctoritatem atque obedientiam abjurare; seque solam in Temporalibus and
Spiritualibus Dominam agnoscere jurejurando coegit; poenas and supplicia in eos
qui dicto non essent Audientes, Imposuit; easdemque ab iis, qui in unitate
sidei, and praedicta Obedientia perseverarunt, Exegit. Catholicos Antistites,
and Ecclesiarum Rectores in vincula conjecit, ubi multi diuturno Languore and
Tristitia Confecti, Extremum vitae diem misere siniverunt. Quae omnia cum apud
Omnes Nationes perspicua and notoria sunt, and gravissimo quamplurimorum
Testimonio, it a comprobata, ut nullus omnino locus Excusationis, Defensionis,
aut Tergiversationis relinquatur.

Sect. 3. Nos, multiplicantibus aliis atque aliis super alias Impietatibus, and
facinoribus, and praeterea fidelium persecutione, Religionisque afflictione,
impulsu and Operad. Elizabeth quotidie magis Ingravescente, quoniam illius
animum ita obsirmatum atque induratum Intelligimus, ut non modo pias
Catholicorum Principum de sanitate and conversione, preces, monitionesque
contempserit, sed ne hujus quidem sedis ad ipsam hac de causa Nuncios in
Angliam trajicere permiserit; ad Arma Justitiae contra eam de necessitate
conversi, dolorem lenire non possumus, quod Adducamur in unam animadvertere,
Cujus majores de Republica Christiana tantopere meruere. Illius itaque
Auctoritate suffulti, Qui Nos in hoc Supremo Justitiae Throno, (licet tanto
Oneri Impares) voluit Collocare, de Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine
declaramus praedictam Elizabeth Haereticam, haereticorumque fautricem, eique
adhaerentes in praedictis, Anathematis sententiam incurrisse, esseque a Christi
Corporis unitate praecisos.

Sect. 4. Quin etiam ipsam praetenso Regni praedicti jure, necnon omni and
quocunque Dominio, Dignitate, Privilegioque privatam.

Sect. 5. Et etiam Proceres, subditos, and populos dicti Regni, ac caeteros
omnes qui illi quomodocunque juraverunt. A Juramento hujusmodi, ac omni prorsus
Dominii, Fidelitatis, and obsequii debito, perpetuo absolutos, prout Nos illos
Praesentium Auctoritate absolvimus, and privamus eandem Elizabeth praetenso
Jure Regni, aliisque Omnibus supradictis. Praecipimusque and Interdicimus
Vniversis and singulis proceribus, subditis, populis, and aliis praedictis, ne
illi ejusve monitis, Mandatis, and Legibus audeant obedire. Qui secus egerint,
eos simili Anathematis Sententia innodamus.

Sect. 6. Quia vero dissicile nimis esset, Praesentes quocunque illis Opus erit
perferre, volumus, ut eorum exempla, Notarii publici manu, and Praelati
Ecclesiastici, ejusve Curiae Sigillo Obsignata eandem illam prorsus fidem in
Judicio, and extra illud, ubique Gentium faciant, quam ipsae Praesentes
facerent, si essent exhibitae vel ostensae. Dat' Romae, apud Sanctum Petrum,
Anno Incarnationis Dominicae 1570. 5. Call. Maij Pontisicat' nostri Anno 5.

SOME ANIMADVERSIONS AND OBSERVATIONS Upon the Impious Damnation and
Excommunication Extat haec Bulla in Bullario Romano. Romae 1638. Tom. 2. p. 229.
OF Q. Elizabeth
BY PIUS V. Anno 1570.
BEfore I come to a particular and distinct Examination of the several parts
and paragraphs of this Impious Popish Bull, I shall in general observe,

1. That Pius V. was not the first or only Pope, Observe. 1.
who usurped this Extravagant and Antichristian power over Kings and Emperors;
to damn, depose, and deprive them of all their Royal Rights and Imperial
Jurisdiction; for both his Predecessors and Successors approved, and with
prodigious pride and impiety, exercised such power. That this may appear, I
shall give the Reader some Instances, extant upon Record, in their own Popish
Annals and Histories.

1. Pope Carolus Sigonius de Regno Italiae, lib. 3. page 58.
Constantine in a Council of Italian Bishops (it was about the Year 711.)
Anathematises all who denied the worshipping of Images, and Omnium Consensu,
omnes qui Imaginibus venerationem negarem, damnati; and Philippicus ipse
Nominatim, Diro in eum composito Carmine, Poenis Inferorum devotus. Ibid.
particularly, and by name damns the Emperor Philippicus to the Torments of
Hell. So Carolus Sigonius tell us, and Martinus Polonus, and the Fasciculus
Temporum concur with him.

2. After Pope Constantine, Gregory the second, and Gregory the third, succeed
Car. Sigonius de Regno Italiae. l. 9. p. 219. Extabant praeclara Gregorii 2.
and 3. exempla, qui Leoni Isauro Imperatori, Sacris Interdicere, and Jurata
Italiae obedientia spoliare non dubitarant, uno ^o Crimine, quod Imaginibus se
Inimicum praebuisset.
; and both of them Excommunicate the Emperor Leo Isaurus, for this only Crime,
because he was against worshipping of Images; and though the Italians had sworn
Allegiance to him, yet they null that Oath: And the Historian commends these
Actions of those two Popes, as excellent Examples for Posterity. And Platina
says, that Gregory the third Gregorius 3. Leonem Imperio and Communione
fidelium private. Plat. in vita Greg. 3.
Excommunicated the Emperor Leo, and deprived him of his Empire.

3. To Gregory the third, succeeded Pope Zachary, and (if Gratian say true) he
Zacharias Papa Regem Francorum, non tam pro ejus Iniquitatibus, quamquod erat
inutilis deposuit: and Francigenas a juramento fidelitatis absolvit. Gratian.
Can. Alius. Cause. 15. Quaest. 6.
deposed Childericus King of France, and absolves his Subjects from their Oaths
of Allegiance, and gives his Kingdom to Pipin: And this he did, not for the
great crimes of Childeric, but because he was unprofitable, and unfit for the
Government; not that he was Insufficient (says the Non quod insufficiens sed
quod dissolutus erat cum mulieribus, and effoeminatus. Gloss. ibid. verbo
Inutilis.
Gloss) but because he was Effeminate, and dissolute with Women. And from this
Canon, Joh. Semeca (the Non quod Insufficiens sed quod dissolutus erat cum
Mulicribus, and Effoeminatus, Gloss. ibid. verbo Inutilis.
Glossator) infers, That the Pope may depose the Emperor; and proves it by
citing other Canons, And by the Authority of Pope Gloss. ibid. verbo Alius.
Gelasius, who tells Anastasius the Emperor, That he had power to Depose him,
and proves it from the Example of this Pope Zachary. I know, that what Gratian,
and the Canonist, say, of Pope Zachary's Deposing Childeric, is evidently
untrue, (and by many Vid. Joh. Launoium Epist. Tom. 7. p. 117, 118, etc. and p.
245, 246, etc. Hottomanni Franco-Galliam, cap. 13. p. 96, 97, 98.
demonstrated so to be) yet it stands uncensur'd in their last and best Vid.
Edit. Paris 1612. and 1618.
Edition of the Canon Law, which Pope Gregory XIII. Vid. Bullam Gregorij 13.
dat. Romae 1. Die Julij 1580.
approved and published, as most correct. And they further tell us, That
Clement VIII. published an Vide Indicem Librorum prohibitorum Lusitanicum
Olysipone, 1624. p. 350. in Carolo Molinaeo.
Exact Correction of all the Glosses and Additions to the Canon Law, and yet
this of Pope Zachary's deposing Childeric (and, what the Gloss says of it) is
neither left out, nor any way censured. Whence it is evident, that they approve
the Doctrine of deposing Kings, and (having no just reason for it) forge
Instances to prove it.

4. Pope Hildebrand, or Vide Bullarium Romanum Romae Anno 1638. Tom. 1. p. 49.
Gregory VII. deposes the Emperor Henry IV. by the Authority given Potestate a
Deo data Ligandi and Solvendi in Coelo, and in Terra. Ibid.
by God, (as he says) of binding and loosing both in Heaven and Earth: And then
he Omnes Christianos a vinculo Juramenti, quod sibi faciunt, aut facient,
absolvo, and ut nullus ci serviat, sicut Regi, interdico. Ibid.. 1.
absolves his Subjects from their Oath of Fidelity, and then prohibits them to
obey him. This Bull is dated at Rome, Anno Domini 1075. and five years after he
^xcommunicates, and Deposes him again 1080. And implores the Assistance of
Peter and Paul, in this his Excommunication and Deposition of the Emperor; that
the World may Vt Mundus Intelligat, quia si potestis in Coelo ligare and
solvere, potestis in Terra Imperia, Regna, Principatus, Marchias, Ducatus,
Comitatus, and Omnium Hominum possessiones, pro meritis tollere, Vnicuique and
Concedere. In dicto Bullario Roman, Bullae Excommunicationis. Hen. 4.. 10. p.
51. Col. 1.
know, that as they have power to bind and loose in Heaven; so they have power
on Earth to give and take away Empires, Kingdoms, Principalities, Dukedoms,
Earldoms, and (according as they shall deserve, and he is Sive Roman.
Pontificem Supremum in Ecclesia Dei Judicem. Ita Gregorius 13. in Bulla data
Romae, 8 Apr. 1575. In Ecloge Bullarum Lugduni. 1582. p. 359. Col. 2.
Judge of that) the possessions of all men. This power, he says, Peter had; and
so he, and the Bishops of Rome have it too, and that from God, as Vicars of
Christ, and Peter' s Successors. And so by this most Erroneous and Impious
Doctrine, the Popes have a Power (which neither Peter, nor any, nor all the
Apostles ever had) to dispose of all men's Temporal Estates in the World,
whether they be Supreme or Subjects.

5. After this, Pope Gregory IX. Vide Bullam. 13. Gregorij 9. datam Romae. Anno
1239. In Bullario Romano, Tom. 1. p. 89, 90.
Excommunicates the Emperor Friderick II. Absolves his Subjects from their
Oaths of Allegiance, lays an Interdict on all his Cities, Castles, and
Villages, Excommunicates all that favor him, or any way assist or obey him,
commands the German Bishops (upon pain of Excommunication) solemnly to publish
this Excommunication with all their Impious Solemnities, ringing of Bells,
lighting, and then extinguishing Candles, etc.

6. After this, Pope Vid. Constitutionem Ejus 3. dat. Lugduni 1245. In Bullario
Romano, Tom. 1. p. 94, 95.
Innocent IV. (in the like form) Excommunicates and Deposes the said Frederick.
The Lemma or Title prefixed to the Bull is thus Damnatio and Excommunicatio
Friderici. 2. Ibidem.
, The Damnation and Excommunication of Frederick II. etc. And least this might
be thought a rash and inconsiderate Act of the Pope, he himself tells us, That
Cum Fraribus and Sacro Concilio, deliberatione diligenti habita. Ib. dictae
Constitutionis.. 6. Bullarij dicti. p. 95. Col. 1. lin. ultima.
he did diligently deliberate about it, with his Brethren (the Cardinals he
means) and the Sacred Council, the General Council of Lions.) I know, that
Matthew Paris says, that he published that Excommunication in that Council, not
without the Non sine Omnium audientium and Circumstantium stupore and horrore.
Matthew. Paris in Hen. 3. ad Annum 1245. p. 668. lin. 33.
Horror and Amazement of all who heard it. But Platina tells us, That it was
done by the Fridericum Omnium Consensu Imperio and Regnis privavit. Platina in
vita Innocentij 4. p. 209. Col. 1. Edit. Col. Agripp. 1626.
general and concurrent consent of the Council. And Innocent himself expressly
says, That it was done ( Friderick Excommunicate) by the Quem (Fridericum)
Concilium Generale Lugdunense Cassaverat and Condemnaverat. Matthew. Paris in
Hen. 3. ad An. 1250. p. 773. lin. ultima.
Council it self; (and therefore the Major part must concur) and if it was not
so, that Pope was not only fallible, but actually false: And it is a
considerable Observation which Matthew Paris has, (and therefore I shall not
omit it) when he tells us -- That some did positively affirm, (and he believed
it) that A nonnullis affirmative dicebatur, quod Dominus Papa sitienter and
super Omnia desiderabat, Fridericum (quem magnum Draconem vocabat) pessundare,
ut ipso suppeditato and Conculcaeo, Reges Francorum and Angliae, aliosque
Christianitatis Reges, (quos omnes Regulos and Serpentulos esse dicebat)
facilius, Exemplo dicti Friderici perterritos, Conculcaret, and Bonis suis, ac
Praelatos eorum, ad Libitum spoliaret. Matthew. Paris in Hen. 3. ad dictum Annum
1250. p. 774. lin. 2. etc.
Innocent IV. did above all things earnestly desire to ruin the Emperor
Friderick, ( whom he called the great Dragon) that, he being trampled upon, the
King of France, England, and other Christian Kings, (whom he called diminutive
Kings, and little Serpents) affrighted with the sad Fate of Friderick, might
more easily be kept under, and they and their Prelates spoiled of their Goods,
and by him plundered. So that although he, and other Popes did pretend, (as
appears by their Bulls) that they deposed Kings for the Extirpation of Heresy,
the Preservation of the Catholic Faith, and Christian Religion; yet it is
evident to any intelligent and impartial Judge of their Actions, that it was
their prodigious ambition and covetousness, their inordinate and erroneous
desire of Dominion, of Rule and Riches, which made them usurp and exercise a
power to depose Kings and Emperors, which St. Peter (from whom they pretend to
have it) never had, nor pretended to.

7. Pope Paul III. Vide Bullam. 7. Pauli. 3. dat. Romae 3. Call. Sept. Anno.
1535. In Bullario Romano. Tom. 1. p. 514. Editionis Romae 1638.
Excommunicates, Curses, Deposes and Damns Henry VIII. of England, and all who
adhere to him, favor or obey him; absolves his Subjects from all Oaths of
Allegiance; commands them all, under pain of Excommunication, not to obey him,
or any Mandantes, ut ab Henrici Regis, suorumque Officialium, Judicum and
Magistratuum quorumcunque Obedienta penitus and omnino recedant, nec illas in
superiores recognoscant, neque eorum Mandatis Obtemperent. Dictae Bullae.. 10.
Magistrate or Officer under him; nor to acknowledge the King or any of his
Judges or Officers to be their Superiors. And further (with a strange Impiety
and Impudence) he declares King Henry and his Accomplices and Favorers, and
their Children and Descendents to be Infamous, incapable to be Witnesses, make
Wills, or be Heirs to any; Incapable to do any legal Act, and that in any Cause
Et Nulli ipsis, sed Ipsi aliis super quocunque debito, and negotio, tam Civili,
quam Criminali, de jure respondere teneantur. Ibid.. 11.
of Debt, or any other Cause Civil or Criminal, none should be bound to answer
them, and yet they bound to answer every body. And to omit the rest, (for I
shall at the end of these Observations, set down the whole Bull) he commands
the Praelatis quoque and Caeteris personis Ecclesiasticis mandat sub poenis in
Bulla Contentis, quatenus de Regno Angliae discedant, (...) revertantur, donec
dicti Excommunicati, privati, maledicti, and damnati meruerim absolutionis
Beneficium. Ibid.. 13. p. 516.
Ecclesiastics (Secular and Regular) to quit the Kingdom, and not to return,
till the Persons Excommunicate, deprived, cursed and damned (the King and all
his Loyal Subjects he means) be absolved from their Censures. This Bull, though
framed and ready to be published, yet the Execution of it was suspended for
three years, and then actually published in the Year 1538. which was the fifth
year of Pope Paul III. as appears by the Date of it, in the aforesaid Bullary.
And when it was published, as it was in itself highly Impious, so (to Hen. VIII
and his Loyal Subjects) it was ridiculous; and all the Effect it had was, that
it increased their hate and contempt of the Antichristian pride and folly of
its Author. It appeared (what indeed it was) Brutum fulmen, and that King had
too great a courage and understanding, to be frighted with an Ignis fatuus,
Papal Squibs and Wildfire, which could neither warm or burn him.

8. Lastly; as the Popes preceding Pius V. so those who followed approved and
(so far as they were able) put in practice that execrable Doctrine of Deposing
Kings. Pope Gregory XIII. did immediately succeed Pius V. and renues and
confirms his Bull for deposing Queen Elizabeth, and absolving her Subjects from
their Oaths of Allegiance (as is testified not only by Cambdens Elizabeth. lib.
3. p. 360, 361. ad Annum 1588.
Cambden, but by the Romish Priests themselves, (the Sea a Book with this Title
-- Important Considerations, etc. written by the Secular Priests here in
England, printed Anno. 1601. and reprinted with other Tracts, with this Title
-- A Collection of several Treatises concerning the Reasons and Occasion of
Penel Laws, etc. London 1675. In which Collection, page 76. the Secular Priests
tell us, that Pope Gregory. 13. did excommunicate Queen Elizabeth.
Seculars, who seemed most moderate) and in prosecution of that damnatory
Sentence, the said Pope Gregory did constitute Fitzgerald (an Irish Rebel
against the Queen) General of all the Irish Rebels; that so he and they by Fire
and Sword might Execute the Sentence of those two Popes, deposing that Queen.
This is expressly testified by Fitzgerald Gregorius. 13. in Ducem ac Generalem
hujus belli Capitaneum, Nos Elegit, ut ex ipsius Diplomate constat: Quod tanto
magis fecit, quia ejus Praedecessor Pius. 5. Elizabetham haeresium Patronam
Omni Regia Potestate privaverat. Vid. Edictum Illustriss. D. Jac. Geraldini, de
Justitia ejus belli, quod in Hibernia pro side gerit. It Is Extant in the
History of the Irish Rebellion. Land. 1680. in the Appendix, p. 8.
himself, in an Edict published by him, after he was General, declaring the
Justice of that Irish War, which (he says) was undertaken for the Catholic
Faith, and restoring it in Ireland. To Gregory. XIII. Sixtus Quintus
immediately succeeds, and confirms the damnatory Sentences of his two
Predecessors, and (as he who well knew, tells us) Excommunicates and Cambdens
Elizabeth. lib. 3. p. 360, 361.
deposes the Queen, Absolves her Subjects from their Oaths of Fidelity, and
published a Croisado, as against Turks and Insidels (indeed as afterward
evidently appeared against England and Queen Elizabeth) and gave (what he Never
had ^o give) plenary Indulgence to all who should assist in that War. Nor is
this all; Cardinal Allen Cambden ibid. lib. 3. p. 364.
writ a Traitorous and Seditious Book, to Exhort all the English and Irish
Papists, to join with the Spanish Forces (against their Queen and Country)
under the Prince of Parma: and Pope Sixtus V. sends Allen ( with that Book, and
his own Bull) into the Low Countries, and there a great number of those Books
and Bulls were printed at Antverpe, to be sent into England. Were it necessary,
many things now might be said, pertinent to this purpose; but (I suppose) the
Instances already given, will be sufficient to convince Intelligent and
Imp^^tial Persons, That Pope Pius. V. was neither the first nor last, who
usurped this Extravagant Power to Depose Princes; seeing several of his
Predecessors and Successors, for above. 600. years, have owned, approved, and
(as they had opportunity) put that Power in practice: This in General premised,
I come now to consider the Bull of Pius. V. wherein he damns and deposes Queen
Elizabeth; wherein two things occur very considerable; 1. The (...), or Title
prefixed to the Bull. 2. The Particulars contained in it.


For the first; Observe. 2.
the Title prefixed to the Bull is thus: -- The Damnation of Elizabeth, etc.
where, though Damnation may seem a very hard word (as indeed it is, in the
sense they use it, as shall by and by appear) yet it is not unusual; but occurs
in other Bulls of the like nature: So we find it in the Bull of Pope Innocent.
IV. wherein he Excommunicates the Emperor Friderick. II. For the Lemma or Title
of that Bull is thus -- Damnatio and Depositio Friderici. 2. Vid. Bullarium
Romanum, Romae 1638. Tom. 1. p. 94. Col. 7. Edita erat Bulla ista Anno 1245.
The Damnation and Deposition of Friderick. II. So in the Bull of Pope Paul
III. Excommunicating Henry. VIII. the Title prefixed to it is -- Damnatio Hen.
8, ejusque Fautorum, etc. In Bullario Romano. ibid. p. 514. Col. 2. Edita dicta
Bella, Anno 1535. and postea 1538.
The Damnation of Henry VIII. and his Favorers, etc. So that Pius. V. Damning
Queen Elizabeth, was not singular (though Impious) he had some of his
Predecessors; Forms to follow. I say, his Predecessors; for I do not find that
any Bishops in the World (save those of Rome) ever used such Unchristian, and
indeed Antichristian Forms of Excommunicating and Damning Kings and Emperors.
And it is observable, and well known to those who diligently read and consider
the Papal Bulls now extant, (of which there is a vast Vid. Bullarium Romanum
Lugduni. 1655. in. 4. Tomis in Folio, and Eclogen Bullarum and motu propriorum
Pii. 4. etc. Lugduni. 1582. 80. and Novam Collectionem, etc. Eman. Roder.
Turnoni. 1609. fol. where in that one Volume you have above. 500. Bulls, with
the Names of. 46. Popes, who published them.
number) that the Popes of later Ages, when they go about to justify some
extravagant Act of their unsurped Power; they usually cite Vid. Constitut. 22
Julij Papae. 2. In Bullario Romano Tom. 1. p. 378. and Constitut. 81. Gregorij.
13. In dicto Bullario Tom. 2. p. 348. vide Extravag. Communes, 1. 5. Tit. 9.
cap. Unigenitus 2.
the Bulls and Constitutions of their Predecessors, who had done the like; not
for matter of fact barely, but to prove a Right; that because their
Predecessors had done so formerly, therefore they (who succeeded in the same
Power) might do it too. Now, although to Argue thus, a Facto ad Jus, be
evidently inconsequent and irrational: (no better than this -- Peter ( de
facto) denied and forswore his Master: Ergo, His Successors ( de jure) may do
so to.) Yet, if their Principles were true, (as I suppose they may think them)
such Arguing would be more concluding. For, Pope Leo. X. expressly Docuissemus
cum (Lutherum) Luce clarius, Sanctos Romans Pontifices Praedecessores nostros, in
suis Canonibus seu Constitutionibus Nunquam Errasse. Vide Bullam Apostolicam
Leonis 10. contra Errores Lutheri, and sequacium. Dat: Romae 17 Call. Julij, An.
1520. and Pontificatus sui, 80. Apud Pet. Crab. Conc. Tom. 3. p. 715. etc. And
his Predecessor, Julius. 2. says as much for the Church of Rome, -- S. Sancta
Ecclesia Romana, Magistra fidei, Omnium Errorum Expers, unica, immaculata, etc.
Constitutio. 27. Julij. 2. data Anno. 1512. In Bullario Romano Tom. 1. p. 384.
affirms, and publicly declares, in one of their General Councils, that it is
more clear than light it self; That None of his Predecessors, Popes of Rome,
Did ever Err, in any of their Canons or Constitutions. Now if this were true,
(as it is evidently false, and his Asserting it, an Argument not only of his
Fallibility, but of his great Error and Folly) That none of his Predecessors
ever Erred, then they might with more Security follow them; for certainly, it
can be no great fault or danger to follow an unerring Guide. Especially if it
be true which they tell us.

For 1. In their Laws and Canons, approved by their Supreme Authority, and
retained in public use in their Church, we are told, Sic Omnes Apostolicae
Sedis Sanctiones accipiendae sunt, tanquam Ipsuss Divini Petri voce Firmatae
sint. Can. sic Omnes 2. did. 19. and Ibid. Can. 3. 4. etc.
That all their Papal Sanctions are so to be received, as if the Divine Voice
of Peter himself had Confirmed them: This (as Gratian there tells us) was Pope
Agatho' s Sentence, and is Received into the Body of their Canon Law, Revised,
Corrected, and Purged from all things Contrary to Catholic Verity: So Vide
Bullam Greg. 13. datam Romae. 1. Jul. 1580. Jur. Can. praefixam.
Gregory XIII. says, and confirms it. Whence it evidently follows; that (in
Pope Gregory's Judgment) This Sentence of Agatho is not repugnant to Catholic
Verity: And in the same place it is farther declared for Law, (Pope Stephen. I.
is cited as Author of that Sentence) That, Quicquid Statuit, Quicquid Ordinat
Romana Ecclesia, Ab Omnibus perpetno and Irrefragobiliter est Observandum.
Ibid. Can. Enimvero. 4. Did. 19
Whatever the Church of Rome does Ordain or Constitute, it is (without all
Contradiction) perpetually to be Observed.

2. Though this be (beyond all truth and reason) highly erroneous; yet the
Jesuits (of late) have gone much higher, and in their Claromont College at
Paris, publicly Christum ita Caput Ecclesiae Agnoscimus, ut illius regimen,
dum in Coelos abiit, primum Petro, dein successoribus commiserit, and eandem
quam habebat Ipse infallibilitatem, concesserit, quoties ex Cathedra
loqueretur. Datur, ergo, in Eccles. Romans Controversiarum fidei Judex
Infallibilis, etiam Extra Concilium generale, tum in Quaestionibus Juris and
Facti. Vid. Exposit. Theseos. in Coll. Claromontano propositae. 12. Dec. 1661.
maintained these two Positions. 1. That our Blessed Savior left Peter and his
Successors, the same Infallibility, he himself had, so often as they spoke e
Cathedra. 2. That (even out of a General Council) He is the Infallible Judge in
Controversies of Faith, both in Questions of Right and Fact. This (as to the
main of it, though Erroneous and Impious) is maintained by others, as well as
Jesuits. F. Gregory de Rives, a Capuchin Priest, tells us (and his Book is
approved by the General, and several others of his Order, and by Father D.
Roquet, a Dominican, and Doctor of Divinity, etc.) Si Christi Authoritas non
penderet a Concilio, si adhuc in terris viveret, sed Omni Concilio Major esset.
Eadem Ratione, and Pontificis Authoritas, quae ipsius Christi Vicaria est,
Concilio superior est -- Privilegium Infallibilis veritatis, non Concitio, sed
Pontisici a Christo Collatum est. Luc. 22. 32. Gr. de Rives Epitome Council. in
Principio, praelud. 5.
That as the Authority of Christ (our blessed Savior) if he were now on Earth,
were greater than all Councils, so by the Same Reason, the Authority of the
Pope (who is Christ's Vicar) is greater than all Councils too. That the
Privilege of Infallibility was given to the Pope, not to Councils; and then
Concludes; That the Ecclesia Romana est Judex Controversiarum in Rebus Fidei,
and Ipsius Determinationes Sunt De Fide. Ibid. Praelud. 9. Edit. Lugd. Anno.
1663.
Church of Rome (he means the Pope) is Judge of Controversies, and all her
Desinitions and Determinations are De Fide. Thus De Rives. And three or four
years before him, Lud. Bail (a Parisian Doctor and Propenitentiary) expressly
affirms, That the Verbum Dei, vel est Scriptum in Scripturis: vel non scriptum,
Traditiones: vel Explicatum, cum dubia in verbo Scripto aut Tradito
Explicantur. Quod fit Praesertim per Papam, sive Extra Concilia, seu in
Conciliis. Isque modus ultimus Magis probat us est, and Majori suavitate ei
Plures acquiescunt, ut nihil ulterius Contendendum existiment. Lud. Bail in
Print Apparatus ad summam Conc. De tripliciverbo Dei.
Word of God is threefold. 1. His written Word, in Scripture. 2. His unwritten
Word, in the Traditions of the Church. 3. The Word Declared or Explained; when
doubtful passages in Scripture or Tradition are explained, and their meaning
determined by the Pope, whether in, or out of Councils; and this (he says) is
the most approved way, in which men acquiesce, and think they need look no
further. And hence he Infers, That seeing this is so; we Quae cum it a sint,
nec Nos debemus vereri ejus ductum sequi, In Doctrina Fidei and Morum, ejus
Judicio Nos sistere, and scripta Omnia corrigenda submittere. Idem in Calce
praefationis ad Lectorem, Tom. 1. praefixam.
ought not to be afraid to follow the Pope's Guidance in Doctrines of Faith
and Manners, but acquiesce in his Judgment, and submit all our writings to be
Corrected by him. I neither will nor need Cite any more Authorities, to prove
the aforesaid Particulars; That Their Popes may Damn and Depose Kings and
Emperors (especially if they be Heretics) and think they have (as Christ's
Vicars) a just Prerogative and Power to do it. Sure I am, that these Positions
(though Erroneous and Impious) are generally maintained by the Jesuits,
Canonists, Vide Aquinatem. 2. 2. Quaest. 11. Art. 3. Vtrum Haeretici sint
tollerandi? negat. and ibid. Quest. 12. Art. 2. Vtrum Princeps propter
Apostasiam a fide, amittat Dominium in Subditos, ita quod ei obedire non
Tenentur? He affirms it, and says -- Ejus Subditi a Dominio ejus and Juramento
Fidelitatis (si sit Excommunicatus) Ipso facto liberantur.
Schoolmen, and their Followers (which are very many) received into the Body of
their Canon Law of their best, and (as they themselves say) their most Correct
Editions, and approved, and (when they had opportunity) practiced by (their
Supreme Powers) their Popes and General Councils. I would not be mistaken; I do
not say that all who now do, or for this Six hundred years last past, have
lived in the Communion of the Church of Rome, either do, or did approve such
Papal Positions or Practices. I know the Sorbon and University of Paris, and
many in other Countries, have publicly Declared their disbelief and dislike of
them; Especially in Vid. Johan. Aventinum Annal: Bojorum. Lib. 5. 6. 7. Carol.
Sigonium de Regno Italiae. Matthew. Paris. etc. Ad An. 1078. p. 10. 11. and p.
13. lin. 1. and p. 668. lin. 30. and 773. lin. 49. andp. 774. lin. 1. 2. and p.
875. where R. Grosthead (for his Tyrannical Usurpations) calls the Pope
Antichrist.
Germany, in the time of Hen. III. Hen. IV. Friderick II. etc. not only private
Persons, but some Synods declared the Papal Excommunications and Depositions of
their Emperors, not only Injust and Impious, but Antichristian. I grant also,
That Father Caron in his Remonstrantia Hibernorum (if some have rightly told
the Number) has cited Two hundred and fifty Popish Authors, who deny the Popes
Power to depose Kings: And though I know that many of his Citations are
Impertinent; yet I shall neither deny nor doubt, but that there are many
thousand honest Papists in the outward Communion of the Church of Rome, who
dislike this Doctrine. But this will neither Justify or Excuse the Church of
Rome, so long as her Governing and Ruling part publicly approves and maintains
it. For, 1. Father Remonstrant: Hibernorum, part. 1. Cap. 3. etc.
Caron himself tells us, that (notwithstanding his Book, and all his
Authorities for Loyalty to Kings) The Divines of Lovane, The Pope's Nuncio, the
Cardinals, four or five Popes, ( Paulus. V. Pius. V. Alexander. VII.
Innocentius. X. (he might easily have reckoned many more) did condemn his
Doctrine, The Inquisitors damned his Book, and his Superiors Excommunicate him.
2. It is confessed, That the Supreme Infallible Power of their Church, resides
either in the Pope, or Council, or both together; And it is also certain, That
their Popes, in their approved, and (in Volentes (verba sunt Gregorij Papae.
9.) ul hac Tantum Compilatione Vniversi ut antur, and in Judiciis and Scholis,
etc. Bulla Greg. 9. Decretal. praefixa.
public use) received Canon Law, in their Authentic Bulls, (published by
themselves) in their General Councils (and Innocent. 4. Excommunicates.
Friderick. 2. in the General Council at Lions, Omnium Consensu, etc. Platina in
vita Innocent. 4. And Pope Innocent himself said constantly that the Council of
Lions Excommunicated and Deposed that Emperor. Matthew. Paris in Hen. 3. Ad Ann.
1250. p. 773. lin. 58. 59. And Pope Pasch. 2. tells us, That he Excommunicated
the Emperor Hen. 4. Judicio Totius Ecclesiae. Carol. Sigonius de Regno Italiae.
l. 9. p. 237. lin. 18. Observe. 3.
with their Consent) have approved, and (for this Six hundred years last past)
many times practiced this Doctrine of Deposing Kings; nor has the Church of
Rome (I mean the Governing and Ruling part of it) by any Public Act or
Declaration disowned or censured it, as doubtless she would, had she indeed
disliked it. Quae non prohibet, cum possit, jubet. If any man think otherwise,
and can really show me, that their Popes and General Councils have not formerly
approved, or since have disowned and disapproved this Doctrine: I shall
willingly acknowledge my mistake, and be thankful to him for a Civility, which
(at present) I really believe I shall never receive. However, Grata
supervenient quae non sperantur.

3. Seeing it is Evident that Pope Pius. V. (and his Predecessors in the like
Cases) calls the Anathema and Curse contained in this Bull, The Damnation of Q.
Elizabeth; The next Query will be, What that hard word signifies, and what they
mean by it, in their Bulls? For the Solution of which doubt, and Satisfaction
to the Query: 1. I take it to be certain and confessed; That the word Damnum
(from whence Damnation comes) signifies a Damnum a demendo, quia damnum est Rei
diminutio unde Damna Lunae, apud Gellium. Noct. Atticarum lib. 20. Cap. 8. And
Varro; Damnum a demptione lib. 4. de Legibus. So Isiodore lib. 5. Orig. Cap. 22.
diminution, or Damnum est amissio eorum quae habueras. Quinctilianus Declamat.
120. And a good Lawyer tells me, that -- Damnare; est rem sine remedio
sublevandi tormentis seu Ignominiae sententialitor deputare. Panormitan. in
Cap. Damnamus. in. 2. Notab. de summa Trinit. and side Catholica.
loss of some good things, had and enjoyed before, or of a right to future good
things, and then Damnation (as to our present Case) will be a judicial
sentence, which (by way of punishment) imposes such loss and diminution. 2. As
the Damnum or loss may be either of Temporal things here (as loss of Honors,
Liberty, Lands or Life) or of Spiritual and Eternal things, (as Heaven and
Salvation) hereafter; so the Damnation also (according to the Nature of the
sentence, and the mischief intended by it) may be Temporal or Eternal, or both;
if it penally inflict the loss both of Goods Temporal and Eternal. 3. I say
then (and I hope to make it evident) that the mischief intended by this Papal
Bull, and Excommunication (so far as the malice and injustice of an Usurped
Power could) endeavored to be brought upon that good Queen, was not only
Temporal, but also Spiritual and Eternal. This the word Damnation, in the
(...), or Title of the Bull, (in their Popish Construction) intends and
signifies. For the Temporal mischiefs intended to be brought upon that Good
Queen, there is no question; they are all particularly named in the Bull it
self, as we shall see anon. For the Spiritual, that is, a seclusion out of
Heaven and Happiness, and Eternal Damnation of Body and Soul; that these also
were the intended and designed Effects of this Impious Bull and
Excommunication, is now to be proved. And here it is to be Considered,

1. That they constantly say, and (having strong Delusion) possibly may believe
it; That Heretics (and such the Queen is declared to be in the Bull) dying
Excommunicate, (as that Queen did, and all true Protestants do) are Eternally
Damned. For, 1. A very great Excommunicatus est Membrum Diaboli. Lindewood ad
Cap. Seculi Principes. verbo. Reconciliationis. De Immunit. Ecclesiae.
Canonist of our own Nation, (while Popish Superstition unhappily prevailed
here) tells us, That every Excommunicate Person is a Member of the Devil. And
for farther proof of this, he Cites Gratian. Can. Omnis Christianus. 32. Cause.
11. Quaest. 3.
Gratian and their Canon Law, (and he might have Cited other as pertinent
places in Gratian) who tells us, in another Canon Excommunicatio est Aeternae
Mortis Damnatio. Idem Gratian. Can. Nemo. 41. Cause. 11. Quaest. 3.
, That Excommunication is a Damnation to Eternal Death. And John Semeca the
Glossator gives us their meaning of it; That it is certainly true, when the Est
Perpetua Damnatio cum ab Excommunicato contemnitur. Gloss. ad dictum Can. verbo
mortis.
Person Excommunicate is incorrigible, and contemns the Excommunication, (as
for my part I really do contemn all their Excommunications, as Bruta fulmina,
which neither do, nor can hurt any honest Protestant) so that by their Injust
Law, and most uncharitable Divinity, not only Queen Elizabeth, but all
Protestants (who are every Year Excommunicated by the Pope, in their Bulla This
Bulla Coenae often (with some alterations) occurs in Bullario Romano. vid.
Constit. 25. Julii. 2. Tom. 1. page 382. Edit. Romae. 1638. and Constit. 63.
Pauli. 5. Tom. 3. p. 83. ubi reliqua, hujus Bullae Exemplaria dicto Bullario
comprehensa, indicantur.
Coenae Domini) are Eternally damned, and that e Cathedra. A Sentence Erroneous
and Impious; and (though it be the Popes, whom they miscall Infallible)
inconsistent with Truth, or Christian Charity.

2. But we have (both for Learning and Authority) a far greater Author than
Lindwood or Gratian, and (in our days) long after them; I mean Cardinal
Baronius; who tells us -- Non modo deponi, sed etiam Excommunicari, and in
Aeterno Examine Damnari Decrevit. Baronius Annal. Tom. 8. ad An. Christi. 593.
number. 86.
That Pope Gregory. VII. did not only depose the Emperor Hen. IV. but
Excommunicate, and Decree him to be Eternally Damned. And for this he Gregor.
7. lib. 4. Epist. 2. and 23. and lib. 8. Epist. 21.
Cites Pope Gregory's own Epistles, who surely best knew his own mind, and the
meaning of his own Decree.

3. But we have greater Authors and Authority for this, than Baronius; for Pope
Paschal. II. tells us, Henricus. 4. primum a Gregorio Papa, dein ab Vrbano,
Postremo a Nobis, Judicio Totius Ecclesiae, Perpetuo Anathemate Obligatus est.
Car. Sigonius de Regno Italiae. lib. 9. page 237.
That he had Excommunicated the Emperor Hen. IV. in a Council; and adds, That
by the Judgment of the whole Church, he lay bound under An Eternal Anathema.
And after this Pope Paul. III. Henricum, Ejusque fautores, Adhaerentes, etc.
Excommunicatos Decernimus, cosque Anathematis, Maledictionis, and Aeternae
Damnationis mucrone percutimus. In Bulla Damnationis Hen. 8. Dat. Romae. Call.
Sept. Ann. 1535.
Damns (that's the word) and Excommunicates our King Hen. VIII. and all his
Favorers and Adherents; And we smite them (says he) with the Sword of an
Anathema, Malediction, and Eternal Damnation. In the Year 1459. Pius. II. (
with the Unanimous Consent of his Council, at Mantua, Excommunicates and Damns
all those (even Si Imperiali, Regali, aut Pontificali Dignitate praefulgeant..
3. dictae Bullae.
Kings and Emperors) who shall Appeal from the Pope to a General Council, and
that they shall be punished as Poenis quae Loesae Majestatis and Haereticae
pravitatis reis Imponuntur. Ibidem.
Traitors and Heretics. Pope Julius. II. afterward confirms this Constitution
of his Predecessor, as to all the Punishments contained in it; Excommunicates
and Curses all Persons, Ecclesiastical and Secular, of what Dignity soever
(though Kings) who shall offend against that Constitution; and Decrees that
they shall have Decernentes eos pro Schismaticis, and de Catholica fide male
sentientibus, cum Dathan and Abiron partem and Damnationem habere: Constit. 22.
Pii. 2.. 6. vid. P. Crab. Council. Tom. 3. p. 690. Col. 2. and ibi forman -- sub
paena Maledictionis Aeternae.
their Portion and Damnation with Dathan and Abiron. The Damnation then
intended and threatened in this Impious Bull of Pius V. (as in other Papal Bulls
of the like nature) is not only some Temporal loss and damage (though that also
be included and expressed) but the Eternal Damnation of Body and Soul. Which
further appears by that Famous (or indeed Infamous, Erroneous and Ridiculous)
Constitution of Boniface VIII. wherein having said, That there is but one
Catholic Church, out of which, there is no Salvation; and that our Blessed
Savior made Peter and his Successors his Vicarij, Vicegerents, and Heads of
that Church; he adds, That Porro subesse Romans Pontifici Omni humanae Creaturae
declaramus, dicimus, definimus, and pronunciamus Omnino esse de Necessitate
Salutis. Constit. Bonifacii. 8. dat. Romae. Ann. 1301. Pont. Ann. 8. Cap. unam
sanctam. 1. De Major. and Obed. Extrav. Communes.
whoever are not of that Church, and in Subjection and Obedient to the Pope,
can have no Salvation. And Pius. V. in this very Bull, expressly says the same.
For, 1. He says, That out of the Apostolic Ecclesia Apostolica, extra quam
nulla est Salus. In Prin. Bullae. Pii. 5.
Church (he means evidently his own Roman Church) there is no Salvation. 2. He
Declares Queen Elizabeth an Declaramus Elizabetham Haereticam eique Adhaerentes
Anathematis sententiam, incurrisse, esseque a Christi Corporis Vnitate
Praecisos. Ibid.. 3.
Heretic, that she and all her Adherents had Incurred an Anathema and
Malediction, were Excommunicate, and cut off from the Body of Christ. So that
Queen Elizabeth, and all her Loyal Protestant Subjects, who never were, nor
could be, (as without great Error and Impiety they could not) subject to the
Pope, nor Members of his Apostolical Church, are (by this Bull) Eternally
Damned.

4. But this is not all; for we have greater Evidence, that by the word
Damnation in their Bulls, wherein all Heretics, (Protestants you may be sure,
who without Truth or Charity, they call so) are Cursed and Excommunicated, they
do and must mean Eternal Damnation. For, 1. Pope Leo. X. in the Lateran Cum de
necessitate Salutis sit, Omnes Christi fideles Romano Pontifici subesse, prout
Divinae Scripturae and Sanctorum Patrum Testimonio edocemur, and Constitutione
Bonifa^ii Papae. 8. quae incipit Vnam Sanctam, declaratur. -- Constitutionem
Ipsam Sacro praesenti Concilio Approbante Innovamus, and Approbamus. Conc.
Lateran. sub Leone. 10. Sess. 10. apud P. Crab. Conc. Tom. 3. p. 697. Col. 1.
Council, (which with them is General and Oecumenial) innovates and
establishes (with the Approbation and Consent of that Council) the aforesaid
Doctrine and Constitution of Pope Boniface. VIII. 2. The Trent Council does so
too, and absolutely Anathematizes and Damns all those who do not believe their
whole new Creed; (in which there is not one true Article, but all Erroneous,
many Superstitious and Impious) and tells us, It is the Catholic Contraria
Omnia and Haereses, ab Ecclesia Damnatas and Anathematizatas Ego pariter
Anathematizo. Hanc veram Catholicam fidem, Extra quam Nemo Salvus esse Potest,
quam veraciter teneo, and ad Extremum vitae Spiritum, Constantissime retinere,
spondeo, voveo, juro. Conc. Trident. Sess. 24. De Reformat. in Calce Cap. 12.
p. 452. Edit. Antverp. 1633.
Faith, without the belief of which, no man can be saved, and swear firmly to
believe it to their last breath, and Anathematize all who do not. And (which is
further very considerable and pertinent to confirm what is abovesaid) they do
in that Oath promise, vow, and swear to receive and embrace Omnia a Concilijs
Oecumenicis tradita, definita, and Declarata, Indubitant^r recipio, and
profiteor. Ibid. p. 452.
All Things delivered, defined, and declared in their General Councils, and All
Apostolicas Traditiones, reliqu^sque Ejusdem Ecclesiae Constitutiones
firmissime admitto and amplector. Ibid. p. 451.
the Constitutions of their Church; For these Particulars are parts of that new
Creed, to the Belief and Profession of which they are sworn. And the Trent
Council it self (as well as the Pope in that Creed) Conc. Trident. Sess. 24. De
Reformat. cap. 12. Proviside Beneficiis, etc. Teneantur fidei publicam sacere
professionem in Romans Ecclesiae Obedientia se Permansuros spondeant ac Jurent.
p. 432. dictae Editionis. And that we may know that the Faith they are to
profess and swear to, is the Creed of Pius. V. in the aforementioned Edition of
the Council of Trent, at Antverp. 1633. Pius. 5. his Creed, and the Forma
Juramenti Professionis Fidei, is placed immediately after that 12. Cap. Sess.
24. De Reformat. page 450.
requires that they make such a Profession. Whence it evidently follows, that
all their Bishops, all Regulars of what Order soever, who are provided of
Monasteries, Religious Houses, etc. All Canons and Dignitaries in their Church,
all who have any Cure of Souls, and all who profess and teach any of the
Liberal Arts, etc. (for all these are required to take that Oath) are sworn to
receive, believe, and profess all the Desinitions of the Lateran Council under
Leo. X. and the Constitution of Pope Boniface. VIII. which denounces Damnation
to all those who submit not to the Pope, and embrace not their Popish Religion;
and hence it further, and as evidently follows, that not only Queen Elizabeth,
but all good Protestants then, and ever since, (who neither did, nor without
great Error and Impiety, could so submit to their Popes, or believe their New
Creed) are, by their Papal and uncharitable Divinity, Eternally Damned. So that
it is not only some Temporal mischief or loss, but the Eternal Damnation of
Body and Soul, which is threatened, and Declared to be the Effect and Inevitable
Consequence of this against Queen Elizabeth, and such other Excommunications of
those whom they call Heretics.

4. In the beginning of this Impious Bull, Observe. 4.
we are told by the Pope, That our Blessed Savior committed the Government of
His Church (with all plenitude and fullness of Power) to Peter and his
Successors. And that we might know, how great the Power was over all Kings and
Kingdoms, he miserably misapplies a Text in Jer. 1. 10.
Jeremy; and says -- Petro and Successoribus, Ecclesiam, in plenitudine
Potestatis gubernandam tradidit. Hunc unum super Omnes Gentes, and Omnia Regna
Principem Constituit, qui Evellat, Destruat, Dissipet, Disperdat, plantet and
aedificet; ut fideles Salvos exhibeat Salvatori.
That our blessed Savior did Constitute Peter alone a Prince, over All
Nations, and All Kingdoms, to Pull up, and Throw down, to Dissipate and
Destroy, to Plant and Build (in Ordine ad Spiritualia) in Order to the
Salvation of his Faithful People; so that (if we may believe this Infallible
Expositor) the same Power which God gave Jeremy over all Nations and Kingdoms,
to pull up and destroy them; the very same did our blessed Savior give to
Peter and his Successors. Nor is Pius. V. the only Pope who makes use of that
Text to prove their extravagant Papal Power over Kings: Pope Alexander. III.
having told some of his Brethren, how the Cum Ascenderemus Palfredum nostrum,
Fridericus Imp. Stepham tenuit. etc. Constit. 8. Alexand. 3. In Bullario Romans
Tom. 1. p. 65. Col. 2.
Emperor held his Stirrup when he mounted his Palfrey; In his next
Constitution, (having said, That the Diligence of the Bishops and Pastors was
necessary to pull up, and cut off Heretics, and wicked men in the Church) he
Cites the place of Jeremy to prove it; and says, That the Power over Nations
and Kingdoms, to pull up, cast down, and destroy, was Given to Jeremy Deus
Jeremiam, and in illo Evangelicum Sacerdotem instruxit dicens; Ecce Constitui
Te super Gentes and Regna, ut Evellas, destruas, disperdas, etc. quae Potestas
imminet in Romano Antistite, qui a Christo, ut sit Caput Ecclesiae, accepit.
Ibid. Constit. 9. p. 65. Col. 2.
, and In Him, to the Evangelical Priest, to Peter and his Successors, as he
there expressly explains it. And Pope Paul. III. tells us; -- Ejus Vices
gerenics in terris, and in Sede Justitiae Constituti, Juxta Jeremiae
Vaticinium, etc. super Omnes Reges Vniversae Terrae. In Bulla Damnationis Hen.
8. data Romans 1535. and 1538.
That he was Vicar of Christ, our blessed Savior, and placed in the Throne of
Justice Above All Kings in the whole World, According to the Prophecy of
Jeremy; And then Cites the words of Jeremy before mentioned. And (to omit
others) Pope Boniface. VIII. Cites the same Text (though to as little purpose)
to the same end; to prove the Spiritualis Potestas terrenam judicare debet, si
bona non fuerit: sic Verificatur Vaticinium Jeremiae, Constitui Te super
Gentes, etc. Cap. unam Sanctam. 1. de major. and Obed. Extrav. Communes.
Popes power above Kings, so as to punish and depose them. And before him
Innocent. III. in his wild and irrational Epistle to the Emperor of
Constantinople Cap. Solicit. 6. Extra. De Major. and Obedientia.
, Cites the same Text of Jeremy, and another ( Genesis 1. 16.) more impertinent
(if that be possible) to prove the vast Power of Popes above all Deus Papam
Totius Orbis praecipuum ob^inere voluit Magistratum. Bonif. 8. in Bulla. 6.
Decretalium praesixa.
Kings and Emperors. By all which, Papal Bulls and Constitutions (as by many
others of the like nature) it may evidently appear, that they challenge a Power
to depose Kings, and that they bring the Text of Jeremy as a ground and proof
of it.

But although their Popes brag, That they have Dictum Bonif. 8. Cap. Licet
Romanus. De Constitut. in. 6. Romanus Pontifex jura Omnia in Scrinio pectoris
sui censetur habere.
all Laws in the Archives of their own breasts, and that they are Supreme and
Infallible Judges in all Controversies of Faith; yet their whole Discourse and
Deductions from the Text of the Prophet Jeremy, is inconsequent, and indeed
ridiculous, and no way concerns either Peter, or any of his pretended
Successors. For,

1. This Power which God gave to Jeremy, was Personal, to himself only, not
hereditary or after his death to be continued to any Successor; much less to
Peter, who came above Six hundred years after. That the Popes of this or former
Ages, were Successors to Peter, both the Popes themselves, and Popish Authors
universally affirm; but (as yet) I have found none (except the Pope and some
few of his Party) who say that either Peter, or any Pope, was Successor to
Jeremy. It Is true, Pope Alexander. III. (in the Place quoted a little before)
says; That that Power over Nations and Kingdoms, to pull up* dissipate, and
destroy, etc. was (by God) given to Jeremy, and in Him to Peter. So that (by
this wild Supposition) Peter succeeded into that Power, which before him,
Jeremy had. But (notwithstanding his Infallibility) this is gratis dictum
without any shadow or pretense of Reason: For he who succeeds into a Right
which another possessed before him, must do it either, 1. Per generationem and
Jure Sanguinis; as a Son succeeds his Father, or the next Heir, In jus
defuncti: and that Peter, or any Pope did this way succeed Jeremy, as none
(with any reason) can, I suppose none will say. 2. Per Consecrationem and Jure
Ordinis; so one Bishop succeeds another in the same Bishopric. Neither could
Peter succeed Jeremy this way; for Jeremy was never Bishop of Rome, or any
other place; and then it is impossible that they should succeed him in a Place
he never had, and be Successor to one who never was their Predecessor. 3. A man
may be said to succeed another, who has a new Commission given him, to Execute
an Office which (though intermitted) some had lo^ before him. So suppose the
King should give one a Commission to be High Constable of England, after the
Place had been long void; he who had such Commission, may be said to succeed
him, who had that Office last, though One or Two hundred years before. Now if
the Pope (or any for him) can show, that our blessed Savior gave Peter the
same Commission, which God gave Jeremy, and set him over Nations and Kingdoms,
to pull up, dissipate, and destroy, etc. (as Pope Pius. V. expressly says
Regnans in Excelsis ( i.e. Christus) Ecclesiam soli Petro and Successoribus
tradidit Gubernandam. And then it immediately follows -- Hunc Vnum (Petrum
scilicet) super Omnes Gentes, and Omnia Regna Principem Constituit, qui
evellat, destruat, dissipet, disperdat, plantet, etc. Bulla dicta in Principio.
he did, in this His Impious Bull against Q. Elizabeth) then I will Confess,
that in this Sense Peter may be called Jeremy's Successor. But that our blessed
Savior gave Peter any such Commission (though the Pope say it) is absolutely
untrue; not only without any foundation or ground of Reason for it in
Scripture, (and nothing else can prove it) but point blank aagainst it. As our
Savior's Kingdom was not of this World, no Temporal Power or Dominion; so he
neither exercised any such Power himself, nor gave Peter or his Apostles, (who,
all of them had Equal Power with Peter) any such Pope Nicol. 1. (and he as
Infallible as any of his Successors) tells us; That Ecclesia non habet Gladium
nisi Spiritualem, qui non occidit, sed vivisicat. Luitprandus in vita, Nicol.
1. Cap. 107. But he lived above. 800. years since, and though Gratian records
it for Law (Can. inter haec. 6. Cause. 33. Quaest. 2.) yet the Case is altered
since, and the Gloss upon that Canon ( verbo Gladium) tells us, that the
meaning is; that the Pope has not the Temporal Sword, Quoad Executionem only:
the Power of the Temporal Sword belongs to the Emperor, but the Pope makes him
Emperor, and gives him that Power: and this he proves out of a Decree of Pope
Innocent 3. Cap. Venerabil. 34. Extra. De Elect. and Electi Potestate.
Temporal Power over Nations and Kingdoms, to pull up, destroy, and dissipate,
etc. All the Power they had was Spiritual; they could punish no man (unless
miraculously, which the Pope pretends not to) in his person, by loss of Life,
or Liberty (by Imprisonment) nor in his purse, by imposing and exacting
Pecuniary Mulcts; as has been, and might be farther demonstrated, were it now
my business: Only (by the way) I crave leave to observe, That Pope Pius in this
Bull, makes that Commission, which he says, our blessed Savior gave Peter, far
larger than that which God gave Jeremy. For he tells us, 1. That our blessed
Savior did Hunc unum (Petrum scilicet) Principem Constituit, etc. Ibid. in
dicta Bulla.
Constitute Peter a Prince, to pull up, and destroy, etc. but there is no such
thing in Jeremy's Commission. 2. That Peter was Constituted a Prince over Super
Omnes Gentes, and Omnia Regna, Ibid.
All Nations, and All Kingdoms; but Jeremy had not such Universal Power, as is
evident from the Jer. 1. 10.
Text. But to make this further appear, it is to be Considered,

2. That Jeremy was a Priest, and a Prophet; so that if Peter and his
Successors succeeded him, it must be in one of those two Capacities. But, 1.
It Is certain, that neither Peter, nor any Christian Bishop did, or could
succeed him, as a Priest; he being a Priest of Aaron's Order, which absolutely
ceased at our Savior's death. 2. Nor did he succeed Jeremy as to his
Prophetical Office. 1. Because that was, Extraordinary, Temporary, and Expired
with his Person. The Prophetical Office was not Hereditary or Successive. It Is
true, some Prophets preceded in time, and some afterward followed: So Vide
Corn. A Lapide in Prin. Argument. Comment. sui in Jeremiam.
Jeremy was after Isaiah about One hundred sixty five years; Ezekiel after him
Four and thirty years; Daniel after him Twenty years. But each Prophet had a
new Call and Commission, and that for particular and different purposes, as is
evident by the Prophecies themselves. 2. Jeremy and those Prophets were (...),
Divinely Inspired, and that to an Infallibility, and their Prophecies (as
Divine, and the Word of God) referred into the Sacred Canon of Scripture; Now
although Peter, (not by Succession from Jeremy, but by a new Call and
Commission from our blessed Savior) was (...), and had such an Assistance of
the Holy Spirit, as made him Infallible, and his Doctrine Divine Truth; yet
such assistance being personal in him, (as it was in all Prophets before him)
his Successors cannot, without Impudence and Impiety pretend to it; though some
of the For proof of this, see the Quotations before Observe. 2.
Canonists, the Jesuits, and Papal Parasites, would have us believe (what the
Pope Honorius, and Pope Vigilius anciently condemned for Heretics in General
Councils; and of later times, the General Councils of Pisa, Constance, and
Basil condemned others.
World knows to be false) that they are Infallible.

3. But that I may (in short) come to the main scope and hinge of the Question;
the truth is Evident, That all these Popes in the Exposition and Application of
this Text in Jeremy, (notwithstanding their pretended Supremacy and
Infallibility) are miserably mistaken, and put a sense upon it, which, before
them, never any Father or Ancient Author did; no nor their own Learned Writers
of later times, even when Popery most prevailed; a sense (if I may call it so)
inconsistent with the true and certain meaning of Jeremy. For when it is in that
Text, I have set thee over the Nations and Kingdoms, to pull down, dissipate,
destroy, plant, and build; That which Vide Constitut. 9. Alexand. 3. In
Bullario Romans Tom. 1. p. 65. Col. 2.
Alexander. III. (and other Popes after him) Cite this Text for, is, to infer a
Power in Jeremy, (and from him, in them) so far, to pull down, dissipate, and
destroy, as to Depose Kings and Emperors, and Absolve their Subjects from all
Oaths of Allegiance: Though the Text mean nothing less; nor can any such
Impious Conclusion, by any (save possibly Popish) Logic, be deduced from it.
For when the (2) Jer. 1. 10.
Text says, I have set thee over the Nations, to pull down, and destroy, etc.
1. The meaning is not, that Jeremy (by this Commission) had Power and
Jurisdiction, ( per modum Imperantis) as a Prince and Superior, to pull down
and destroy any man, much less Kings and Emperors; nay so far was he from that,
that he quietly and patiently submitted to the Authority and Commands of Injust
and Impious Superiors, (as is evident in his Prophecy) and was several times He
is beaten by Pashur. Jer. 20, 1. Apprehended and Arraigned. Jer. 26. 8.
Imprisoned by Zedekiah. Chap. 32. 3. and beaten and imprisoned by the Princes.
Jer. 37. 15. by them put into a Dungeon. Jer. 38. 6.
Imprisoned and cast into Dungeons, with great danger of his Life, at Jerusalem;
and when carried Captive into Egypt, by some Rebellious Jews, who would not
obey the Word of God by him, he was more miserably used, and at last, by them A
suis Concivibus in Taphnis Aegypti, Lapidibus Obrut us, Martyr occubuit. Ita
Hieronymus, Tertull. Doroth. Epiphan. Isiodor. etc. Corn. A Lapide Comment. in
Jerem. in Argumento.
murdered and martyred. So far was Jeremy (after God had given him that The
Commission was given him, when he was a Child. Jer. 1. 6. 7. when he was 14. or
15. years old. So Corn. A Lapide in Prin. Argumenti Commentariis suis in
Jeremiam praefixi.
Commission) from pulling down, or destroying any man, that (on the contrary)
he patiently submitted to his Superiors, and was by them (though most injustly)
punished, pulled down, and at last destroyed. 2. But the meaning of that Text
evidently is, I have set thee oover Nations and Kingdoms, to pull down,
destroy, and dissipate, etc. Per modum Prophetantis, and Quid Judicio Justo
facturus esset Deus, praedicentis; As a Prophet, to foretell what God would do;
that (unless they repented) he would pull down, destroy, and dissipate those
Nations and Kingdoms, against which (by God's express Command) he Prophesied.
Jeremy had no Commission, no Power or Authority to pull down, or destroy any
one single Person, much less Kings and Emperors; nor did he ever do, or attempt
any such thing; he only Prophetied, and premonish'd them from God, that
Destruction would come upon them for their sins, but it was God only who could
and did execute that Sentence, and when they repented not, destroyed them. So
in Scripture, the Prophet is said to do that, which he foretells will be done.
Joseph in Prison, tells Pharaoh's Butler and Baker, That within three days the
one should be restored to his Place, and the other hanged. This coming to pass
(not by any Power of Joseph, for he was a Prisoner) yet the Genesis 41. 13.
Text says, That He restored the one, and that He hanged the other. And this,
those Popes, who so often urge this Text of Jeremy, might have easily and
certainly known, had they studied Scripture and Divinity as much as Human
Policy (as too It is a memorable Story we are told to this purpose; not by any
Lutheran, but a Learned Sorbon Doctor, an earwitness of it, who says, That when
Pope Innocent. X. was pressed to Determine the Controversy between the Jesuits
and Jansenists, He (who was bred a Lawyer) told them that he was No Divine,
that Divinity was not His Profession, nor had he studied Divinity. Monsieur de
St. Amor in his Journal Part. 3. Cap. 12. and p. 120.
many of them do not) For what I have said is expressly said in the very Text of
Jeremy's Prophetie; as he who compares and considers Vide Jer. 18. 7. 8. etc.
Jer. 25. 15. 16. 17. etc. and Cap. 42. 10. and 45. 4.
two or three Chapters in it, may evidently see. Sure I am, (to say nothing of
the Fathers and Ancient Writers of the Church) what I have said of the true
meaning of this place in Jeremy, is acknowledged even by the Jesuits and
Canonists (the greatest Flatterers of the Pope, and Sticklers for his pretended
Supremacy) who Expound the Text as I have done. I shall instance in One or Two.

1. Corn: A. Lapide (a Noted and Learned Jesuit Expounding this Place of
Jeremy, says thus -- Constitui Te ut Evellas, i. e. ut Intermineris Hostibus
meis, (quos Regionibus suis Plantavi) Me inde per Bella, etc. evulsurum, nisi
resipuerint. A Lapide. in Jer. 1. 70.
I have set thee over the Nations, that thou should pull up: That is (says he)
that thou should Threaten my Enemies, that unless they repent, I will pull
them out of the Countries, where I have placed them. And then he tells us
truly, that this is the Opinion of Hierome, Theodoret, Rabanus, Vatablus,
Lyranus, Dion-Carthusianus, and others. And then he adds -- Ita Deus Plant at
and Evellit Gentes: nam Jeremias reipsa nec plantavit nec Ev^lsit Gentes. Ergo,
ut Ev^^las and Plants; Idem est quod, ut has Gentes evellendas, illas
plantandas A Deo mineris ac Praedices. Idem Ibidem.
That it is God (not Jeremy) who Pulls up, and Plants the Nations. So that when
it is said -- I have set thee To pull up, and plant the Nations: it is all one
as^ if he had said -- I have set thee to Threaten and Preach that God would
Pull up and Plant those Nations. This is that we say and prove to be the
meaning of that Text in Jeremy, and the Jesuit fully Consents, and Acknowledges
it to be true.

2. Pope Innocent. III. in his Cap. Solitae. 6. Extra de Major. and Obedientia.
Epistle to the Emperor of Constantinople, (amongst several other places of
Scripture) brings this Text of Jeremy, to prove the Priest (especially Peter's
Successor the Pope) to be Ostendit S^cerdotium praeeminere R^gibus, dicto
Jeremiae Glossa ad dictum Cap. verbo. Solitae Benignitatis.
Superior to all Kings: and yet Bernardus de Botono (the Vide Corpus Juris Can.
Cum Glossis; Paris. 1612. In Nota, Titulum. Tom. 2. Immediate (seu pagina
proxima) sequente.
Author of the Gloss there) when he comes to Explain that Text -- I have set
thee over the Nations, to pull up, and plant; he has nothing of Deposing and
setting up Kings: but Conceives the meaning to be -- That Jeremy was set over
Constitui Te, ut Evellas] Vitia scilicet, and plantes] Virtutes, Glossa ad
dictum Cap. Solitae. verbo, Constitui Te, etc.
Nations, To pull up Vices, and plant Virtues. He truly Conceives, that Jeremy
was not Constituted a Prince, with Dominion and Jurisdiction over Kings and
Emperors; to set them up, or pull them down, at his pleasure; (to which purpose
many of the Popes produce it) but a Prophet, to foretell them, what God would
do. That is, He would plant them, if they were Penitent; if not, pull down and
destroy them. So the Author of the Gloss; and they tell us, that he Glossas
Eruditissumas Edidit. Vid. dictam Notam in Prin. Tom. 2. Juris Can. Paris 1612.
writ most Learned Glosses upon the Decretals of Gregory. IX. which Vid. Bullam
Greg. 13. Corp. Juris Can. praefixam.
afterward had the Approbation of Pope Gregory XIII. Be it concluded then, that
Pius. V. and those other Popes before mentioned (notwithstanding their
Infallibility) have miserably mistaken the true meaning of this place of
Jeremy. And indeed he who reads and seriously Considers the several Places of
Scripture, which the Popes of the last 600. years have explained in their Bulls
and Decretals, and produced as proofs of their extravagant and usurped
Supremacy; I say, he will have just reason to believe, that Popes are not the
best Expositors of Scripture. For Instance; (to omit others) I shall refer the
Reader to those 1. Peter 2. 13. 14. Jer. 1. 10. Genesis 1. 16. 17. etc. Joh. 21.
16. Matthew. 16. 18. 19. Luc. 22. 38. Romans 13. 1. 2. Genesis 1. 1. 1. Cor. 2. 15.
8. or 9. Places, which Pope Innoc. III. and Bonif. VIII. have Cited, and
Explained, in two of their Constitutions, both Extant in their That of Innocent
3. Cap. Solitae. 6. Extra de Majorit. and Obed. And that of Boniface. 8. Cap.
Unam Sanctam. 1. Eodem Tit. Extrav. Commun.
Canon Law, in the places before Cited, where the Expositions and Applications
of those places, by those Popes, are not only evidently Erroneous, but (being
repugnant to all good Sense and Reason) exceedingly ridiculous: such as may
give their Adversaries reason to believe that the Authors of such wild
Interpretations, Observe. 5.
are rather Fools than Infallible.

5. Pope Pius. V. here in the beginning of this his Bull, calls Christus
Ecclesiam Apostolorum Principi tradidit gubernandam; and hunc unum Super Omnes
Gentes and Omnia Regna Principem Constituit. Dictae Bullae principio.
Peter (as other Popes and their Parasites usually do) Prince of the Apostles;
and tells us, that our blessed Savior did set and constitute him a Prince over
all Nations and Kingdoms. From whence, they (Illogically and without any shadow
of Just Consequence) would Conclude, Peter's Supremacy, his Dominion and
Authority even over all the Apostles. For although Peter in the Gospel (when
the Names of the Twelve Apostles are numbered) is called Matthew. 10. 2.
(...), Primus; and amongst Latin Authors anciently ( Princeps Apostolorum) The
Prince of the Apostles; yet that Petrus Apostolorum Primus and Primas, poterat
Apostolis praecipere, and si in fide aut moribus errarent, Corrigere, etc.
Corn. A Lapide in Matthew. 10. 2.
Papal Supremacy, which the Popes and their Party generally attribute to him,
that they (as his Successors) might have it themselves, cannot thence be
concluded. So Caeteri Evangelistae Matthaeum praeponunt Thomae, Matthaeus
Thomam Praefert, Paulus ad Galat. 2. 9. Jacobum primo Loco recenset, ante
Petrum and Johannem, Existimat Hieronymus ( so Erasmus says) Ejus esse, Ordinem
Apostolotum distribuere, Qui illos Elegit: innuens, Authoritatem Apostolis
Omnibus Parem fuisse, quod ad Apostolici muneris functionem attinet. Erasmus in
Locum.
Erasmus tells us, (out of St. Hierome) That the Apostles in the other
Evangelists, are not reckoned in the Order they are in Matthew; lest any man
should think, that Peter were first of all the Apostles, because he is reckoned
in the first Place. Matthew reckons Thomas before himself; but Mark after him:
Matthew reckons Andrew before James and John, but Mark after them. So St. Paul
reckons James before Peter and John, though Matthew puts Peter first. And
Erasmus there says further, that Hierome intimates, That the Apostles were all
(as to their Apostolic Office) Equal. That which makes me believe, that what
Erasmus Observes out of Hierome, is true, is this; The Spanish Inquisitors have
damned it, and (in their Index Index Librorum Prohib. and Expurg. Madriti.
1667. p. 289. Col. 1.
Expurgatorius) Commanded it to be blotted out. But Erasmus adds further, --
Certe ex Ordine recensionis, non Efficaciter Colligitur Quis Cui sit
praeferendus; siquidem ubi multi numerantur, aliquis primus sit opportet.
Erasmus ibidem, in Matthew. 10. 2.
That it cannot Logically and firmly be concluded, from the Order wherein the
Apostles are numbered, which of them is to be preferred before the rest,
because where many are numbered, there is a necessity we begin with some one,
and it is not material which we begin with. And This the Inquisitors let pass,
without a Deleatur; they do not condemn it to be blotted out, and so seem to
approve it, otherwise it had not passed; so that (even by our Adversaries
consent) all that can be rationally Inferred, from that Text, where in
numbering the Apostles, Peter is called (...), first, is only So the word (...)
usually signifies; Eusebius calls Simon Magus, (...) primus Dux Haereseos,
scilice^ Primus Ordine Temporis, non Jurisdictionis. Eusebius. Hist Lib. 2. Cap.
13. p. 51. Edit. Valesii.
a Primacy of Order, (which we willingly grant) but no Primacy (much less a
Supremacy) of Authority, Dominion, and Jurisdiction over the rest of the
Apostles; which the Pope and his Party desire, and we justly deny. 2. And as
(...) or Primus; so Princeps, or Prince (amongst the best Latin Authors)
usually signifies Order Only, or some Excellent Quality in those who are called
Principes, without any So Homer and Virgil are called Poetarum Principes. So in
Tully, Patroni Principes, ^eminent Advocates. So Plato and Aristotle,
Philosophorum Principes, and yet no Dominion or Jurisdiction meant in these
Expressions.
Authority or Jurisdiction over those in relation to whom they are so called.
And that the Rest of the Apostles were called Principes as well as Peter, I
have Authentic warrant, even the Roman Breviary, restored according to the
Decree of the Council of Trent, published by Pius V. (The very Pope who
published this Impious Bull aagainst Queen Elizabeth) and then Revised by the
Authority of Clement. VIII. and Urban VIII. and Printed at Antverp. 1660. In
this Breviary, we have this Dicti^ Breviarij Part. aestiva, ad Diem. 29. Junij,
in Festo SS. Apostolorum Petri and Pauli. p. 476. and in Festo S. Andreae. Nov.
30. Ibidem page 780.
Hymn, in the Office for the Feast of St. Peter and Paul; Ecclesiarum Principes,
Belli Triumphales Duces,
Coelestis Aulae Milites,
Et vera Mundi Lumina, etc.
Now in this Hymn Peter and Paul too, are called Ecclesiarum Principes, Princes
of the Churches; For being a Hymn for the Feast of those two Apostles;
Ecclesiarum Principes cannot relate to less than two; nor Properly to any but
them two in that Place. Though elsewhere it Vide Commune Sanctorum in Calce
Partis Aestivae, dicti Breviarij, and in Communi Apostolorum and
Evangelistarum. page 4.
relates to all the Apostles; as in the Place cited in the Margent; when after
the Invitatory, (as they call it) Ad matutinum, Invitatorium. Regem Apostolorum
Dominum, Venite adoremus.
Come let us adore the Lord, King of the Apostles; it follows thus, Aeterna
Christi munera,
Apostolorum Gloria,
Palmas and Hymnos debitos,
Laetis canamus mentibus.
Ecclesiarum Vide Card. Cusan Opera. p. 836. and Gratian. Caul. 2. Quaest. 7.
Can. Beati. 37. and Theodoret in Gal. 2. p. 270. where Peter and Paul are
called (...). and in 2. Cor. 11. 6. p. 251. Principes Apostolorum alij praeter
Petrum. Vid. Bellarmin. de Romans Pontif l. 1. c. 12. p. 861. Potestas clavium
transtvit ad alios Apostolos, and ad Omnes Ecclesiae Principes, etc. These are
the words of Pope Leo (and he Infallible) cited there by Bellarmine.
Principes,
Belli Triumphales Duces,
Coelestis Aulae Milites,
Et vera Mundi Lumina, etc.
So that if we may believe their own Authentic Breviary, Published and
Carefully Revised by these Popes, according to the Decree of the Trent Council;
All the other Apostles (under our blessed Savior, and by his Authority) were
Princes of the Christian Church as well as Hoc erant utique and Caeteri
Apostoli, Quod suit Petrus, Pari Consortio praediti and Honoris and Potestatis.
Cyprian de Unitate Ecclesiae. p. 208. Edit. Rigaltij.
Peter. Now I desire to know, how these things will Consist? Ecclesiam suam Vni
Soli, Petro Commisit gubernandam; and hunc Vnum Super Omnes Gentes and Regna
Principem Constituit. Bulla dicta in Principio.
Pius. V. in this Bull against Queen Elizabeth, says, That our blessed Savior
Committed the Government of his Church to One Only, to Peter, and Constituted
him Only a Prince over all Nations and Kingdoms (so he in his Bull) and yet the
same Pope, in this Roman Breviary, (for it was Approved and Published by him)
and the Hymn here cited, says, That all the Apostles were Ecclesiarum
Principes; and if so, then Peter was not the Only Prince to whom the Government
of the Church was Committed; no, the Commission of every Apostle (given by our
blessed Savior) was as unlimited and as large as Peter's. This will appear in
all the Particulars of it, equally given to all, as they are expressly set down
in Scripture, from whence alone, we can surely know, what their Authority and
Commission was. Our blessed Savior tells them, and us, -- Joh. 20. 21.
1. As my Father sent me, so send I you. There we have the Author and Authority
of their Commission. The same blessed Savior of the World sends them all. 2.
Then he breathed upon them, and said, Ibidem. verse. 22.
Receive ye the Holy Ghost. There we have the Principle inabling them to
discharge that great Office and Trust reposed in them; It was that Holy Spirit,
which gave them, 1. Infallibility in their Doctrine. 2. Power to work Miracles
for Mark. 16. 20.
Confirmation of it. 3. Then he adds, Ibid. verse. 23.
whose sins ye retain, they are retained, etc. Here we have the great Spiritual
Power given them for the calling and governing the Church, which is elsewhere
called, Matthew. 16. 19.
The Power of the Keys; which Consists in binding and loosing, retaining and
remitting sins. For so it is Explained by our blessed Savior in the Place last
cited, and is (by our Adversaries) Ministri Ecclesiae ad Remmissionem peccati,
Per Virtutem Clavium Ministerialiter operantur. Lyran. in Joh. 20. 23. Vid.
Tirinum, Menochium, etc. in Matthew. 16. 19.
confessed. So that it is Evident that the Power of the Keys, the Power of
binding and loosing, of retaining and remitting sins, is Equally given to all
the Apostles, to every One as well as Peter. 4. He Assigns them their Place and
Province, where, and the way how they were to Exercise their Apostolical Power
-- Matthew. 28. 19. 20.
Go and Teach All Nations, baptizing them, and teaching them to observe all
things, whatsoever I have Commanded you. Their Diocese was the World -- Mark.
16. 15.
Go ye into All The World, and preach the Gospel to every Creature (every man.)
And the administering the Sacraments, and teaching men to believe and observe
the whole Go^pel, was the business they were to do in that their Diocese. 5.
And to encourage them to this great and difficult Work, he graciously promises
his Presence and Divine Assistance; Lo, I am Matthew. 28. 20.
with you Always, even to the End of the World.

These are the Powers and Promises given to the Apostles, and (which to me
seems Evident) without difference or distinction; Equally to all; to Simon the
Cannite, (for Simon, who Matthew. 10. 4. is called Simon the Cananite, in the
Syriack Version there, and Luke 6. 15. is called Simon (...), which is the
Greek word for Cannita, or Cinnaeus. For the Syriack (...) Canna signifies
(...). vid. Ang. Caminium, in Explicat. locorum. N. Test. p. 51.
so it should be writ) as well, and as much as to Simon Peter. If any think
otherwise, if he can, and will (by any Cogent Reason) make it appear either, 1.
That the foregoing Powers and Promises were not Equally given to all the
Apostles. 2. Or that some other Power or Promise was (in Scripture) given
peculiarly to Peter, whereby he had an Authority and Dominion over the other
Apostles and the whole Church, to make him Only a Prince over all Nations and
Kingdoms, (as Pope Pius. V. in this his wild Bull confidently affirms) I say,
he who can and will make both or either of these appear, shall have my hearty
thanks for the Discovery, and I shall (for the future) have a better Opinion of
Peter's Supremacy; which (at present) I take to be a groundless Error, without
any proof or probability. Objection.


I know that the Popes in their Vide Constitut. Bonif. 8. Cap. unam Sanctam. 1.
De Majorit. and Obed. Extravag. Communes. and Innocent. 3. Cap. Solicitae. 6.
Extra. de Major. and Obedientia.
Constitutions, and their Party usually urge that place in Matthew. 16. 18. 19.
Matthew to prove Peter's, (and thence their own) vast and Monarchical
Supremacy over the whole Church, (even the Apostles themselves not excepted)
the words These -- Thou art Peter, and upon This Rock, I will build my Church.
-- And I give unto thee, The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. From this Place,
(most irrationally, and without any Sense or Consequence) they infer, That
Promittit hic Christus Petro, quod ipse and Successor Ejus Omnis, sit Ecclesiae
Supremum Caput, Princeps and Monarcha. Jac. Tirinus in Math. 16. 18. 19.
Peter, and every Successor of his, was Constituted Supreme Head, Prince and
Monarch of the Universal Church. So that what Peter or his Quamvis mortalis
homo sit Petrus Ejusque Successor, tamen Coelesti praeditus Potestate, and quod
ille e Cathedra decreverit, habendum est tanquam ab Ipso Deo Decretum. Idem
Ibidem, ad verse. 19. Gratian. Can. 2. Sic Omnes. did. 19.
Successor shall (e Cathedra) Determine and Decree, is to be received, as if
God himself had decreed it. So Tirinus, and their Canon Law, in their most
Correct Editions. Though this be Erroneous, and evidently Impious, yet Tirinus,
Gratian, and their Canonists are not singular in this point, another Learned
Jesuit (in his Commentary on this Place) tells us, That when our blessed
Savior says, On this Rock will I build my Church; he speaks of De Petro ut
Fundamentali Petra loquitur Christus. Joh. Stephan. Menochius in Matthew. 16. 18.
Peter, as the Fundamental Rock, on which the Church is built. And he adds --
Christus est Fundamentalis Petra Praecipue, sed ei Successerunt Petrus and
reliqui summi Pontifices, ut Ejus Vicarij cum Summa Potestate. Menochius ibid.
p. 41. Col. 2. vid. Gratian. Can. In nono. Did. 21.
That though our blessed Savior was chiefly that Fundamental Rock, yet Peter
and the Popes of Rome succeeded him, as his Vicars, with Supreme Power, etc.
This place, they conceive; concerns no Apostle but Peter, and proves his, and
his Successors Supremacy.

To this, I say, 1. Responsio. 1.
That all they say, in this particular, is gratis dictum; for they only say it,
without any pretense of proof. If we will take their bare word, we may;
otherwise we may choose; for they bring no proof to prove their Exposition of
this Text, such as might command and necessitate our Assent. And then a bare
denial, is Answer enough to a bare Assertion. For (as St. Hierome says in the
like case) an unproved Position, eadem facilitate rejicitur, qua Affirmatur. 2.
When they say, our blessed Savior was the chief Fundamental Rock on which the
Church was built, and that St. Peter and the Popes succeeded him, with Supreme
Power. They consequently must say Two things; 1. That our blessed Savior left
his Place and Office of being the Fundamental Rock, to Peter, when he left this
World. For if he kept it, and still do keep it, neither the Pope nor Peter
could be his Successors. No man can be Successor and succeed into a Place till
his Predecessor leave it. Linus neither did, nor could succeed Peter in the
Bishopric of Rome, whilst Peter lived, and possessed it himself; so that by
this Erroneous and Impious Doctrine, they have displaced our blessed Savior
from being the Fundamental Rock, on which the Church is built, and instead of
him, have placed Peter first, and then particular Popes successively. And then
let the World judge, in what a miserable Condition the Church of Christ must
be. 1. When the Fundamental Rock on which it was built, was an Marcellinus
Pontifex ad Scrificia Gentium ductus, Deos alienos Adoravit. Plat. in vita
Marcel.
Idolater, as Marcellinus was. 2. Or an Heretic; as Cum Arianis sentiebat,
etc. Plat. in vit. Liber.
Liberius, Honorius Synod. 6. damnatur. Act. 18. vid. Theoph. Chronagraph. p.
299. 301. Anastas. Biblioth. in vitis Pontif. p. 54. Francis. Combesis in
Auctario Biblioth. Graec. Patrum. Tom. 2. p. 66. Synodus Nicena. 2. apud
Joverium. Part. 1. p. 106. Col. 2.
Honorius, Vid. Synod. 5. and Rich. Crakanthorp. in vigilio Dormitante. Ed.
Richerium in Hist. Council. Generalium. p. 302.
Vigilius, etc. were. 3. Or an Impudent whorish Woman, as Johannes Anglicus, or
Pope Vid. Plat. in vita Johan. 8. and Notas Car. Annibalis Fabroti, ad vitas
Pont. Anast. p. 290.
Joan certainly was. 4. Or when many Popes together, no less than Fifty (by the
Confession of their own Learned men) were Vid. Genebrardi Chronol. circa
Initium seculi. 10. l. 4. p. 807. ad Annum 901.
Apostatici potius quam Apostolici. 5. Or when the Popes were such Tunc
foedissima Romans Ecclesiae facies, cum Romae Dominarentur sordidissimae
Meretrices, quarum arbitrio, Intruderentur in Sedem Petri earum Amasij
Pseudopontifices; qui non nisi ad fignanda tempora, in Catalogo Romans Pontif.
scripti: Quis enim a scortis intrusos sine lege, legitimos dicere possit
Romanos fuisse Pontifices? Baronius Annal. Tom. 10. ad An. 912.. 14. p. 663.
vid. eundem an Ad. 897.. 8. p. 624. and ad An. 925.. 10. p. 688. Edit. Annal.
Antverp. 1618. vid. loca and hic add.
Monstrous Villains, as were put into, and out of St. Peter' s Chair by
Impudent Whores, made Popes by Violence and Simony, such (as even in Baronius
his Judgment) none should, or dared call true Popes, whose names were recorded
only to fill up the Catalogues of the Roman Bishops. 6. Or in the Vacancies,
when for Post Clem. 4. vacat Seeds. Ann. 3. m. 2. dies. 10. Post Nicolaum 3.
vacat Seeds. Ann. 3. Post Clement. 5. vacat Seeds. Ann. 2. m. 3. d. 17. Platina
in Ejus vita.
two or three years, and (if some Sunt qui scribunt, post mortem Nicolai. 1.
Sedem vacasse Ann. 8. Men's. 7. d. 9. Platina in Calce vitae Nicolai. 1.
Writers say true) sometime for Eight years, there was no Pope at all, and so
(by this Doctrine) the Church had no Fundamental Rock at all, for several years
together. 7. Lastly, Or when they had for near In that great Schism, commonly
reckoned for the 27. Schism in their Church; which begun about the Year 1378.
Vrbanus. 6. being Pope at Rome, and Clem. 7. at Avignion.
Fifty years together, two or three Popes at the same time; when it was
Impossible they should be all Legitimate, and true Successors of St. Peter, and
(what they pretend to) Vicars of Christ our blessed Savior; and which, or
whether any of them, were such indeed, none did, or could know: Nay, it is
certain, (and must by our Adversaries be confessed, (unless they will deny
their own received Principles) that sometimes, all of the Pretenders were
Impious Usurpers of the Papal Chair, without any Just Right or Title to it.
Then the first Council of Anno Dom. 1409. or as others. 1410.
Pisa met (and it was a General One, consisting of above. 600. Longus A
Coriolano. Summa Con. p. 857. Col. 2.
Fathers) there were Two Popes in being (such as they were) Gregory XII. and
Benedict. XIII. who were both In maxima Praelatorum Frequentia, uterque
Pontifex ab iis damnatus est, utroque tanquam Perjuro, Schismatico, Haeretico,
e Pontificatu dejecto. Idem Ibidem Col. 1.
Damned and Deposed, as Perjured Persons, Schismatics, and Heretics, etc. and
that by an unanimous Consent and Decree of that Great Council. At the Council
at Constance (four or five Council. Constanti^nse Anno 1414.
years after) there were three Popes; the two beforenamed, Gregory and
Benedict, (who would not sit down, though damned at Pisa, and John. XXIII. For
the two former, what Villains they were, the Council of Pisa has told us. For
John. XXIII. the Council of Constance gives him this Character -- Nobis
Legitime Constat. Johan. Papam. 23. a tempore quo fuit assumptus, usque nunc,
Papatum in Scandalum Ecclesiae notorium rexisse; vitaque sua Damnabili ejusque
Nephandis moribus, populis exemplum vitae Male praebuisse. Council. Constant,
Sess. 10.
That he was a Person (all the time he was Pope) notoriously Scandalous to the
Church, that his Life was damnable, and he in his Conversation guilty of
Impieties not to be named: And the Council adds, (in their Definitive Sentence
of his Deposition) Johan. 23. Schismatis nutritivum, a voto, promisso, and
Juramento per Ipsum Deo, Ecclesiae and huic Concilio praestitis dirimativum,
Simoniacum notorium, suis Inhonestis and Detestabilibus vita and moribus
Ecclesiam Dei and Populum Christianum notorie scandalizantem. Idem Council.
Sess. 12. in sententia contra Johan. 23. desinitiva.
That he had broke his Vow, his Oath, and Promise made to God, and his Church,
that he was Notoriously Simoniacal, and by his dishonest and detestable Life
and Manners notoriously Scandalous, etc. Now if these (and such other) Popes be
the Fundamental Rock upon which the Church is built, (and this they say, and
would have us believe it) She must of necessity be in a miserable Condition,
and the Gates of Hell must prevail against Her; when they evidently prevail
against the Rock, upon which (they say) she is built; for if the Rock and
Foundation fail, that which is built upon it, must evidently fall and come to
Ruin. This is the first Consequence of their Doctrine, manifestly Erroneous:
but this is not all; For there is a second Consequence of it, both Erroneous,
and indeed Blasphemous. For, 2. when they say, that our blessed Savior was the
Fundamental Rock on which the Church was built, and that Peter and the Popes
aft^r, did succeed him in that Place and Office, cum Potestatis plenitudine,
(says Pius. V. here) Cum Summa Potestate (as others Generally) Hence it
follows, That the present Pope has (and every one of his Predecessors had) the
same Power required to the being of a Fundamental Rock, which our blessed
Savior had. For if they succeed him in the same Place, and with a Supreme
Power, then they have the same Place and Power our blessed Savior had. His
Power neither was, nor could be greater then Potestas summa; (summo non datur
Superius, there can be nothing higher then the highest, nor superior to the
Supreme) and if Peter had, and every pitiful Pope has potestatem summam, Then
they have a Power as great, and equal to that our Blessed Savior had before he
Resigned it to his Successors: But I might have saved the Labor of proving
this; for it is Acknowledged and expressly Affirmed in their Roman Catechism ( ex
Decreto Concilij Tridentini, juslu Pii. V. Edito) in which they say, that Peter
was Catechismus Romanus. Part. 1. Cap. 10.. 11. 12.
Caput and Princeps Omnium Apostolorum. And then it there follows, Christus
Ibid.. 13. p. 117. Edit. Paris. 1635.
Petrum Vniversi Fidelium Generis Caput, ut Qui ei successit Eandem Plane
Totius Ecclesiae Potestatem habere voluerit. It was our blessed Savior's will,
That Peter should have The same Power our blessed Savior had. Sed Apage nugas
Impias and Blasphemas. The bare recitation of such wild Positions, should and
will be Confutation enough to all sober Christians, who are solicitous to
maintain our blessed Savior's Honor, and will never give that Place or Power
to the Pope or Peter, which is solely and eternally due to their Redeemer.

3. But further, when our Adversaries, upon that Place of Matthew [ Thou Matthew.
16. 19.
art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church] would have us believe,
That Peter was that Rock, while he lived, and his Successors after him; And
thence infer their Supremacy. They must pardon our Infidelity, if we believe it
not. For, 1. They do or might know, that not only Protestants, but the Fathers,
and Vid. Chrysostom. in. Matthew. 26. Hom. 82. page 702. Edit. 1607. Isiod.
Pelusiota. l. 1. Epist. 235. Aug. Retract. l. 1. c. 20. and De verbis Dom.
Sermon. 13. Tom. 18. Col. 58. ita Cyrillus and Anonymus in Catena Nicetae
Serrarum Episcopi ad Matthew. 16. 18. vide Catenam Graecam in Matthew. per Possinum
Jesuitam Cap. 16. 18. Hilarious Pictaniens. De Trinitate. l. 2. p. 25. Edit.
Erasmi. Theophylact. in Matthew. 16. 18.
Ancient Ecclesiastical Writers generally, by Rock in that Text, understand not
Peter's Person, but either the Profession of his Faith he there made, or our
blessed Savior. But our Adversaries like not this Doctrine; And therefore when
Hilary had truly said -- Vnum hoc est immobile fundamentum, Vna Haec est foelix
fidei Petra, Petri Ore Confessa; and Erasmus had put this Note in the Margent,
Petram Interpretatur Ipsam Fidei Professionem; and when the same Erasmus on
Matthew. XVI. 18. had cited Augustine for the same sense of the place, which
Hilary gives; And had put in the Margent -- Ecclesia non est fundata super
Petrum. The Index Librorum Prohibit: and Expurg. Madriti. 1667. In Desid.
Erasmo. p. 289. Col. 1.
Spanish Inquisitors command it to be blotted out of Erasmus his Text and
Margent; Although Hilary and Augustine; and many others (as they well knew) said
the same thing. 2. And this truth is so Evident, that not only the Fathers, and
Ancient Authors, but Sober and Learned men in the Church of Rome, even in
darkest times when Popery unhappily prevailed, were of the same Judgment; And
by the Rock in this Place of Matthew, [ upon this Rock I will build my Church]
understand not Peter, but that Confession of his Faith there made, to be meant.
So Super hanc Petram; i. e. super fidei Tuae soliditatem. Can. loquitur. 18.
Cause. 24. Quaest. 1. verbo. Petram, in Glossa.
John Semeca, Author of the Gloss upon Gratian, and Super hanc Petram, quam
Confessus es; i. e. Christum. Lyranus in Matthew. 16. 18.
Nic. Lyranus, and Ansel. Laudunensis, Author of the Super hanc Petram, i. e.
Christum in quem credis. Glossa Interlinearia in dictum Locum.
Interlineary Gloss, upon his Text of Matthew; by the Rock on which the Church
was built, understand Christ (our blessed Savior) and not Peter So Gregorius
Magnus in. 7. Psalmos Poenitential. Tom. 2. Operum Paris. 1619. page 908. D.
Christus est Petra, a qua Petrus Nomen Accepit, and Super Quam se aedificaturum
Ecclesiam dixit -- Quod Ecclesia nullis Persecutionibus sit superanda, Ipse
Super Quem aedificata est, Ostendit, cum ait, Portae Inferorum non praevalebunt
contra eam. So Strabo Fuldensis in his Ordin. Gloss. on Matthew. 16. 18. circa
Ann. 840. And after them Lyranus (in the Place cited) who though he was a
Franciscan Friar, and flourished almost Four hundred years ago, and in many
things (as those times were) Popish enough; yet he was not come so far, as to
make Peter, or any but Christ, the Rock on which the Church was built: And
again, on the 1. Cor. 3. 11. Solus Christus est Fundamentum Ecclesiae, quod ex
se firmitatem and stabilitatem habet. And the Gloss on their own Canon Law,
says, That Christ was the Rock; for Boniface. 8. in that famous Extravagant.
Cap. Unam Sanctam. 1. Endeavoring to prove the Papal Supremacy from several
Places in Scripture; he adds, That the Authority given to Peter and his
Successors by our blessed Savior, was not Human but Divine. Haec Authoritas,
licet homini data, non humana, sed potius Divina, ore divino Petro data and
Successoribu, etc. The Gloss on these words, Est autem haec Authoritas. p. 191.
says thus -- Haec Authoritas est Divina, quia firmata est in Petra firma, in
Christo, qui erat verus Deus: and quod sit Divina, quia fundata in eo; patet ex
Evangelio; quia Christus loquebatur cum dixit, super hanc Petram; id est, super
meipsum (qui sum Petra, and qui significor per Petram) aedificabo Ecclesiam
meam. Ita Gloss. verbo, Est autem haec Authoritas. Ad Cap. Unam Sanctam. 1.
Extrav. Commun.
. And a late Learned Sorbon Doctor (though he would seem to say, that Peter was
that Rock) yet acknowledges, that by that Rock, the Super hanc Petram, i. e.
Super Ipsum Petrum, seu Petram seu Cepham, vel Super Fidem Petri quae est
Catholica. Dr. Hen. Holden in Annotat. in Nov. Testam. Paris. 1660. ad Matthew.
16. 18. and ad. 7. Matthew. verse. 25.
Faith of Peter might be meant, and not his Person. Nay, which is more
considerable (and may seem strange to the Reader) the Fathers of the Trent
Council expressly say, That the Synodus Statuit, praemittendam esse Confessionem
Fidei -- Symbolum fidei; quo Romana Ecclesia utitur, tanquam Principium -- ac
Fundamentum firmum ac Vnicum, contra quod portae Inferi nunquam praevalebunt.
Conc. Trident. Sess. 3. Feb. 4. Ann. 1546.
Creed or Profession of Faith, which the Church of Rome uses, (the
Constantinopolitan Creed they mean, and there set it down), is The Firm and
Only Foundation, against which the Gates of Hell can never prevail; and our
present Matthew. 16. 18.
Text is in the Margent Cited for it, whence it evidently appears, that those
Fathers at Trent have Declared, That the Creed, or true Faith of Christ, is
that firm Rock, and The Only Foundation on which the Church is built, and
against which the Gates of Hell cannot prevail; and if that Faith be the only
Foundation of such firmness, then the Pope is not. For if there be another,
then that is not (what the Trent Fathers say it is) the Only Foundation. And
lastly, it is very considerable, what Per Petram, Confessionem Fidei
intelligunt Chrysostomus, Cyrillus, Hilarious, and Romans Pontifices, Leo magnus,
Agatho, Nicolaus, and Adrianus primus in suis Decretalibus, Stapleton, Princep.
Fidei Doct. Demonstr. Controvers. 2. l. 6. c. 2. p. 207. 208.
Stapleton (their Learned Professor at Doway, and great Champion of their
Church) confesses (and without great Impudence, he could not deny it) that not
only Chrysostom, Cyril, and Hilary; but four Popes, Leo, Agatho, Nicolas, and
Adrian (each of them the first of that name) have, in their Decretal Epistles,
declared, That the Rock on which the Church was built, was not Peter's Person,
but his Faith or Confession of it. This was the Opinion of those ancient Popes,
and they as infallible sure as any of their Successors. By the way, (that we
may observe the Contradiction amongst our Adversaries, notwithstanding the
pretended Infallibility of their Church) The Trent Catechism says -- Loquitur
Dominus ad Petrum; Ego dico Tibi, quia Tues Petrus, and Super hanc Petram
aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. Super Illum Vnum aedificat Ecclesiam. Catechis.
Trid. ex Decreto Conc. Trid. a Pio. 5. Editus. Part. 1. Cap. 10. de. 9. Symboli
Art.. 12. p. 115. Edit. Paris. 1635.
That Peter Only was the Rock on which our blessed Savior built his Church.
And this the Author (or Authors) of the Catechism pretends to prove out of
Cyprian, and some others there named. So that if the Trent Council say True:
the Creed, or the Confession of the Cathol. Faith, is the Only Foundation on
which the Church is built, but if the Trent Catechism be in the Right, Peter
Only is that Rock and Foundation. Now seeing it is impossible, that both these
Positions should be true, it Evidently follows, that there is an Error in the
Council or Catechism, or (which I rather believe) in both. That this may
further appear, I say,

4. That it is certain, and generally Confessed, That a Lively Faith, and a firm
belief of the Gospel, is a Rock and Foundation against which the Gates of Hell
cannot prevail. Our blessed Savior tells us, That he who Matthew. 7. 24. 25.
hears his sayings, and does them; (he who really and practically believes the
Gospel) builds upon a Rock. And St. John tell us, That such Faith is 1 John 5.
4. 5.
victorious, nay victory, and cannot be overcome. Hence it is, that in the
Liturgy of St. James, in the Administration of the Eucharist, they pray --
That God would bless the Sacred Elements, that they might be Effectual, to the
Orat Sacerdos, ut Sacra Symbola Omnibus cedant, (...). In Lit. Jac. Graec.
Paris. 1560. p. 20. vid. Fabr. Stapulensem in Matthew. 16. 18. So Pope Nicol. 2.
Ecclesia super Petram fidei fundata, Gratian. Can. Omnes. 1. Did. 22. And the
Apostle in his Canonical Epistle (Jude 20.) advises all, to build up
themselves on their most holy Faith.
Establishment of the Holy Catholic Church, which he had Founded and Built
upon the Rock of Faith. But though Faith and a firm belief of the Gospel, be a
Rock, yet it is not (as the Trent Fathers say) the Only Rock, on which the
Church is built. Peter was a Rock too; this our Adversaries Confess, and
earnestly Contend for. But neither was he the Only Rock (though the Trent
Catechism and Popish Writers commonly say so) nor such a Rock, as they (without
any Reason or Just Ground) would have him. That this may Appear, it is to be
Considered, (1.) That (by Evident Scripture) our blessed Savior is the Prime
and Chief Fundamental Rock on which the whole Church is built. Isa. 28. 16.
Behold (says God by Isay) I lay in Sion, for a Foundation a Stone, a precious
Corner Stone, a Sure Foundation, etc. I know that in the Vulgar Latin of Edit.
Romans 1590.
Sixtus. V. and Edit. Romans 1592.
Clemens. 8. it is untruly rendered -- Lapide^ pretiosum in Fundamento
Fundatum. Whence Bellarmine, in Praefat. ad Libr. de Pontif. Romans vid. R.
Crakanth. Contra Spalatens. Cap. 81.. 3. p. 612.
Bellarmine will have it meant of Peter, and so of the Pope; who (in his
Opinion) is Lapis pretiosus in Fundamento fundatus. But had the Cardinal
consulted the Hebrew Text, or the Version of the Septuagint, or Vid. Hieronym.
in Isaiae 28. verse. 16. Isiodor. Clarius in. 1. Cor. 3. 10. Fundatissimum
Fundamentum Christus.
Hieromes Version of both, and his Notes upon them; he might have seen his
Error: But though Bellarmine Expound this Place of Isay, to be meant of Peter;
yet 1 Pet. 2. 6. 7. 8. and Act. 4. 11.
Peter himself (who understood that Text as well as the Cardinal) refers it to
our blessed Savior, so does Romans 9. 33. and 10. 11. 1. Cor. 3. 11. and 1. Cor.
10. 4.
Paul too; and if this be not sufficient to Convince the Cardinal, and such
other Papal Parasites; our blessed Savior expounds it not of Peter, but
himself, and that after he had Matthew. 21. 42. But though Paul and Peter, and
our blessed Savior himself do expound the word Rock on which the Church is
built, not to be meant of Peter, but Christ the Messiah, (as appears by the
foregoing Texts) yet Maldonate the Jesuit (whose words I shall cite anon) says
-- That it is very far from sense so to expound it. Maldonate in Matthew. 16. 17.
p. 339. Col. 1. E. And yet Card. Cusanus says, That Christ was that Rock.
Operum p. 826. And so Cyrill in the Aurea Catena Graec. Patrum in Psalmos
David. 50. per Dan. Barbaram Patriarcham Aquileiensem; Venet. 1569. ad verse. 2.
Psalm. 39. (alias. 40. p. 400. 401. So Gregorius Magnus in 7. Psalm. Poenitent.
Tom. 2. p. 980. D. So Chrysostom, etc.
said to Peter -- Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church.
(2). This being granted (as of necessity it must) that our blessed Savior is
the first Immovable Rock, and most sure Foundation on which the Church is
built; It is also granted, and must be so, (Scripture expressly saying it) That
Peter is a Foundation too, on which the Church is built. But in a way far
different from that our Adversaries dream of; (for they do but dream, nor will
any Considering and Intelligent Person think them well awake when they writ
such things) For, 1. When we say, That Peter is a Foundation on which the
Church is built; our meaning is not, that he has by this, any Prerogative or
Superiority, much less (what our Adversaries pretend) any Monarchical Supremacy
over the rest of the Apostles, and the whole Church; for every one of the
Apostles is, as well and as much a Foundation of the Christian Church, as
Peter. The 1. Pet. 2. 5.
Apostle tells us, That the Church is a spiritual House, which is built upon
Ephesians. 2. 20.
The Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the Chief
Cornerstone. And St. John to the same purpose speaking of the Church, the New
Jerusalem, says -- Rev. 21. 14.
The City had Twelve Foundations, and in them the names of the Twelve Apostles
of the Lamb. In these Texts, all the Apostles ( James and Paul, as well as
Peter) are Foundations of the Church equally, and without any distinction or
difference; no Prerogative given to Peter above the rest; much less that vast
Monarchical Supremacy which is pretended to. Both the Greek and Latin Fathers
say, That the Gospel, the Christian Faith, or the Creed (which contains the Sum
of it) or Peter's Confession of our blessed Savior to be Christ the Son of the
Living God, (which is the Chief Fundamental Article of our Faith, I say, That
(in those Father's Judgment) this Faith is the Foundation on which the Church
is built; St. Augustine, Explaining the Creed to the Catechumens, has these
words -- Noveritis Symbolum hoc esse Fundamentum super quod aedificium
Ecclesiae surrexit. Ang. lib. 3. de Symbolo ad Catechumen. Tom. 9.
Know you (says he) that this Creed is the Foundation on which the Edifice or
Building of the Church is raised. To the same purpose Theophylact tells us --
(...) Theophylact. in Matthew. 16. 17. 18.
That the Faith which Peter Confessed, was to be the Foundation of the
faithful, that is of the Church. This is a Truth so evident, that a Learned
Jesuit, having Cited and approved Alcazar' s words are these -- Censco
Apostolos ideo fundatores Ecclesiae dici; quia fidei summam ediderunt, and eff
us^ Cruoris Testimonio, necnon praedicatione and Miraculi^ in hominum animis
inseverunt. Corn. A Lapide in Apocal. 21. 14. p. 112. Col. 2. C.
Alcazar, (a Zealous Roman Catholic) for this very same Opinion, does not only
receive and approve, but largely and undeniably prove it, out of Clemens
Romanus, Augustine, Hierome, Russin, the Council. Trident. Sess. 3. Apostolicum
Symbolum vocat firmum atque Vnicum Fundamentum, Contra quod portae Inferi non
praevalebunt. Idem, ibid. Col. 2. E:
Trent Council, and Tale Fundamentum a Paulo fuit Jactum. 1 Cor. 3. 10. in
Saptens Architectus Fundamenum posui. Idem, ibidem.
St. Paul: And then adds -- Idem dic^nt alia Concilia and Pa^res. Ibid.
That other Councils and Fathers say the same. Another Sunt inter veteres
Authors, qui Interpretantur super hanc Petram; i. e. Super Hanc Fidem; aut
Super hanc Fidei Confessionem qua me Filium esse Dei vivi dixisti: ut Hilarious,
Greg: Nyssenus, Chrysostomus, Cyrillus Alexandrinus, Ambrosius in Epistolas
Pauli, etc. Maldonat. in Matthew. 16. 17. p. 339. Col. 1. E.
Learned Jesuit confesses, that it was the opinion of many Ancient Fathers (yet
he endeavors to Confute it) that those words -- ( upon this Rock I will build
my Church);] are thus to be understood -- Upon this Faith, or Confession of
Faith which thou have made, ( That I am Christ the Son of the Living God) will
I build my Church; And then he Cites many Fathers to prove it; and immediately
quotes St. Augustine, and (with little respect or modesty) says -- That Longius
etiam a Sensu Reccdens Augustinus interpretatur, super hanc Petram, i. e. Super
meipsum, quia Petra erat Christus. Maldonat. ibid.
Augustine' s Opinion was further from sense, then those he there Cited;
because he made Christ the Rock on which the Church was built.

(3.) I take it then for Certain, and Confessed, (and so does a very Certum est
apud Omnes haec. 12. Fundamenta (Rev. 21. 14.) significare. 12. Apostolos;
ipsorum enim humeris quasi innixus Ecclesiae murus recumbit. Ideo enim eorum
nomina fundamentis Inscripta sunt, ut significetur Ipos esse fundamente and
fundatores (haec enim duo eodem recidunt) Ecclesiae. Corn. A Lapide in Apoc.
21. 14. p. 312. Col. 1. D.
Learned Jesuit too, that the Twelve Foundations, in that Place in the
Revelation before Cited ( Cap. 21. 14.) signifies the Twelve Apostles on whom
the Wall of the New Jerusalem, or the Church of Christ was built; and therefore
their Names (as St. John says) were written on those Foundations, to signify,
that the Apostles ( Paul as well as Peter) were Founders or Foundations of the
Christan Church. And that this may more distinctly appear, and from Scripture
it self, that every Apostle, (as well as Peter) is a Foundation of the
Christian Church; we are to Consider, First, That in Scripture the Church is
commonly called 1. Tim. 3. 15. 1. Cor. 3. 9. 16.
a House, the House of God; and every good Christian is a 1 Pet. 2. 5.
Lively Stone which goes to the building of that spiritual House. 2. Our
blessed Savior called and sent all his Apostles (as well as Peter) to Ephesians. 4.
11. 12.
build this House. He gave some Apostles -- for the Edifying ((...)) or
building the Body of Christ; That is, the Ephesians. 1. 22. 23. The Church which is
his Body.
Church. 3. The Apostles all of them, ( Paul 1 Cor. 3. 9. 10. And I ( says
Paul) as a Master Builder, etc.
as well as Peter) were Master Builders of this House. Evident it is (in the
Text Cited) that St. Paul was a Master Builder, and St. Peter was no more; nor
is he any where in Scripture, expressly said to be so much; though I believe,
and grant he was. 4. The Means by which these Master Builders edified and built
the Church, were these: Their diligent Preaching of the Gospel, (first, and
more Infallibly Communicated to them, then to any others) Their Pious and
Exemplary Conversation, which made their Preaching more Effectual, and gave
Reputation to it, and themselves; Their Confirming with Miracles, and Sealing
the Truth of it, with their Blood and Martyrdom. 5. Hence, the Gospel it self
and our Christian Faith, is called the Foundation of the Church; as may appear
by what is said before, and by St. Paul, who expressly Ye are Gods building, and
as a skilful Master Builder, I have laid The Foundation. 1. Cor. 3. 11: 12.
where (...) peritum, significat. (...). Hesychius.
calls it so. For that Foundation, which he there says he had laid at Corinth
(as may appear from the Context) was the Fundamentum posui; i. e. prima initia
fidei Annunciavi. Lyranus. Annunciavi vitae aeternae fundamentum, id est,
Christum. Fab. Stapulensis. (...). Theodor. vid. Cor. A Lapide in Apocal. 21.
14. p. 312. Col. 2. E. vid. Grotium in 1. Cor. 3. 10. Romans 15. 20. Hebr. 6. 1.
Ita etiam Lyranus and Glossa Interlinearia.
Gospel he had preached among them. So that (by the Authorities above Cited) I
think it may appear, that Divines (Ancient and Modern, Protestant and Papist)
seem to agree in this; That there is a double Foundation of the Church,
Doctrinal and Personal: The first is the Gospel, or those Holy Precepts, and
gracious Promises contained in it; On the belief and practice whereof, the
Church solely relyes for Grace here, and Glory hereafafter; And therefore, they
are Commonly and Justly called the Foundation on which the Church is built.
Whence it is very usual in Scripture, to say, that by Preaching the Gospel, the
Act. 9. 31. 1. Cor 14. 3. 5. 12. so St. Paul's Authority was given him for
Edification, or building the Church. 2. Cor. 10. 8.
Church is Edified or Built. And because our blessed Savior immediately called
all his Apostles, gave them Authority, and the Infallible Assistance of his
Spirit, and sent them to Preach the Gospel, and they (with great success) did
it, Converting Nations, building or founding Churches) therefore they were
called Master Builders, Founders, and Foundations of the Christian Church; as
our Ideo enim Apostolorum nomina Fundamentis Ecclesiae Inscripta sunt. Rev. 21.
14. ut significetur Ipsos esse Fundamenta and Fundatores (haec enim duo eodem
recidum) Ecclesiae. Corn. A. Lapide ubi supra, in Apoc. 21. 14. p. 312. Col. 1.
D.
Adversaries Confess. Now (as to this Particular) as the Apostles were Founders
or Foundations of the Christian Church; Peter had no Pre-eminence or
Prerogative above the other Apostles; He was no more Petra, a Founder or
Foundation of the Church, then the other Apostles. Nay in this (if any)
certainly St. Paul might challenge a Preference and Pre-eminence above Peter
himself, or any of the Rest. For he (with truth and modesty enough, 1. Cor. 15.
10. I labored More abundantly then They All. And 2. Cor. 11. 23.
tells us -- That in Preaching the Gospel he labored More then they All: (And
Plus reliquis; quia illi, ut plurimum, Judaeis praedicabant, quorum facilis
Catechizatio (cum legem and Prophetas admiserunt) Paulus Gentibus, qui
utra^sque negabant. Irenaeus Adversus Haereses lib. 4. cap. 41. p. 379. C.
Edit. Feu-Ardentij.
Irenaeus gives the Reason of it) His Sufferings were 2. Cor. 11. 23. Vid.
Originem contra Celsum, Graeco-Lat. p. 49.
more, He planted more Churches, He writ more Epistles, then they all; (his
being Fourteen, and all the rest but Seven, and they (in respect of his) short
ones too; which then were, and ever since have been, and (while the World
stands) will be Doctrinal Foundations of the Christian Church. But that which
makes more against Peter's Supremacy, and for St. Paul's Preference before him,
(at least his Independence upon Peter (as the Supreme Monarch of the Church)
is; That he tells the Corinthians, That the care of 2. Cor. 11. 28. (...).
All The Churches lay upon him. Nor that only, but that he made Orders and 1.
Cor. 7. 17. (...).
Constitutions for All those Churches, which they were bound to observe -- So I
Ordain (says he) in All the Churches. So our English truly renders it. I know
the Vulgar Latin (which the Trent Council. Trident. Sess. 4. In Decreto de Edit.
Sacrorum Liborum.
Fathers ridiculously declare Authentic) renders it otherwise -- So I teach in
all Churches: but the (...); Inde (...); Edictum, (...), Constitutio. Glossae
veteres in Calce Cyrilli, etc.
word there, signifies not to teach, but properly to (...). Phavorinus, verbo
(...).
Ordain and Legally Constitute, Define, and Command. So that thereupon
Obedience becomes due from those who are Concerned in such Constitution or
Ordinance. And this Theodoret took to be the true meaning of that Text; and
therefore he says, That Paul's Ordaining in all Churches, was giving them a
(...). Theodor. in. 1. Cor. 7. 17. Oecumenius and Theophylact say to the same
purpose, on the same place. Confer 1. Cor. 16. 1.
Law, which they were to obey. So that here are two things expressly said of
Paul in Scripture, and that by himself, who best knew, and was Testis idoneus,
and (...), a Witness beyond all Exception. 1. That the care of All the Churches
lay upon him. 2. That he made Ecclesiastical Laws and Constitutions for them
All: whereas (in Scripture) no such thing is said of Peter, or any other
Apostle. Upon consideration of the Premises, some of the Ancients have called
St. Paul, A Preacher to the whole World; So (...). Photius Epist. 117. page
158. and ibid. p. 109.
Photius and Nicolaus Methonensis Episcopus, speaking of several Apostles
Officiating at several places; as of James at Jerusalem, John in Asia, Peter
and Paul at Antioch, etc. He adds; concerning (...). Paulus autem peculiariter
Orbi Vniverso. Nicol. Methon. De Corp. and Sang. Christi in magna Bibl. Patrum.
Tom. 12. p. 519.
Paul -- That he did particularly Officiate to the whole World. And to the same
purpose Theodoret, Expounding the words of the Apostle -- That the care of All
the Churches lay upon him; He says, That the (...). Vniversi Orbis Terrarum
sollicitudinem mecum gero. Theodor. in. 2. Cor. 11. 28.
solicitude and care of the Whole World lay upon Paul. More than this cannot
be said of Peter, nor is there half so much said of him, as of St. Paul in
Scripture. Had Peter told us -- That the care of All the Churches lay upon him;
and that He made Orders and Constitutions, to be observed In All Churches,
(both which are expressly said of St. Paul) the Canonists and Popish Party,
would have had some pretense (who now have none) for Peter's Supremacy. I urge
not this, to Ascribe to Paul, that Supremacy we deny to Peter; (For neither had
they, nor any other Apostle, any such thing) but only to show, That St. Paul
(his Labo^s, Sufferings, the many Churches founded by him, and His Canonical
Writings considered) may be thought (not without reason) a more eminent Founder
of the Christian Church, then St. Peter. 2. But as it is, and must be confessed
by Divines, Ancient and Modern, Protestants and Papists, That the Gospel is the
Doctrinal Foundation, and that Petra, on which the Church is Built; So there is
also a Personal Foundation, evidently mentioned in Scripture. I mean Persons,
on whom the Christian Church is built: And they are 1. Our blessed Savior. 2.
His Apostles.


1. That our blessed Savior is a Rock, 1. Our blessed Savior.
and that (...), the most firm and immovable Rock on which the Church is
Built, is evident from the Vid. Matthew. 21. 40. Rem. 9. 33. and Romans 10, 11, and
1. Cor. 3. 11. and 1. Cor. 10. 4. and Act. 4. 11. and 1. Pet. 2. 6. 7. 8. and
Isai. 28. 16. The Septuagint Translate it thus -- (...). Vid. Hieronymum in
locum; and 1 Pet. 2. 6. 7. ubi Isaiam citat* and eadem pene verba habet, quae
apud. 70. Interpretes hodie Extant. vide Procopium in Isai. 44. p. 504. and
Fabr. Stapulensem in Matthew. 16. 18.
Scriptures before Cited. Such a Rock, as Peter neither was, nor could be, much
less any of those they call his Successors. For, 1. Our blessed Savior was,
and still is a Rock on Christus lapis summus Angularis Omnia sustinens, and in
unam fidem Abrahae Colligens eos, qui in Vtroque Testamento apti sunt in
aedificationem Dei. Irenaeus lib. 4. c. 42. p. 380. Edit. Feuardentij.
which (as Irenaeus tells us) the Universal Church, both before and since his
coming into the World, was built. He was Genesis 3. 15.
promised by God presently after the fall of Adam, and then successfully by
Act. 13. 18. 24. Luc. 1. 70. and Luc. 24. 27.
all the Prophets; His Death and Passion was a Propitiation, as well for the
Sins of those who Hebr. 9. 15.
lived before, as ours who live after it; and those Promises of the Messiah
were such, as all the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Pious men before Christ did
Hebr. 11. 13. vid. Eusebium Hist. lib. 1. cap. 2. page 6. B. Edit. Valesij.
(...). etc. Omnes ab origin Generis humani qui Justitiae laud floruerunt, ut
Abraham, Moses, and Quicunque postea Justi, Omnes Christum agnoverunt, eique
tanquam Dei Filio, debitum Cultum Exhibuerunt. Et Demonstrat. Evang. lib. 1.
Capp. 5. 6.
know and believe. Nay, (if we believe Eusebius) the Promises of the Messiah,
were (...). Christum distinct cognitum habuerunt. Enseb. Hist. lib. 1. c. 4.
p. 16. B.
clearly and distinctly revealed to the Ancient Patriarchs and Prophets (though
in a less degree and measure of clearness) and their Belief and suitable
Obedience such, that (though they had not the name, yet they might truly be
(...). Si non nomine, reipsa tamen Christianos. Idem plane habet Augustinus,
Retract. lib. 1. cap. 13.
called Christians before Christ. The Apostle tells us, That the Galat. 3. 8.
Gospel was preached to Abraham, and so it was to all the Ancient Church, by
the Luc. 24. 25. 26. 27. 44.
Prophets; who foretold them of the Incarnation, Passion, and Resurrection of
Christ. It was the Gospel St. Paul every where preached, and yet he says, that
He preached No Act. 26. 22. 23. and Act. 28. 23.
other Things, then those which The Prophets And Moses did say should come. And
this is a truth so manifest, that (to say no more of the Ancient Christian
Writers) Lombard. Sent. I. 3. Did. 25. vid. Johan. Martinez de Ripalda ad
dictam Distinctionem.
Peter Lombard, and the Popish Schoolmen, writing De fide Antiquorum, of the
Faith by which the Saints, before our blessed Savior, were saved; they all
say, that they then (as we now) were saved by Faith in Christ their Redeemer.
The difference was, 1. They believed in Christo Exhibendo, we in Christo Actu
Exhibito. 2. Their Faith before our blessed Savior's coming, was more
Imperfect and Implicit; Ours (since he is come, and the Gospel clearly
published) much more Perfect and Explicit. This I say, to prove that our
blessed Savior was the Rock, on which the Church under the Old Testament was
built, and (in this Particular) such a Rock and Foundation of the Church as
Peter never was, nor could be; it being impossible he should be a Foundation of
that Church which was founded almost Four thousand years before he was born. 2.
Our blessed Savior is a Rock and Foundation, on which the whole Christian
Church is built, even the Apostles themselves, as well as others: who (all of
them, Augustinus in Evang. secundum Matthew. Sermon. 13. Tom. 10. p. 58. D. Basil.
1569. Super hanc Petram quam confessus es, dicens; Tues Christus Filius Dei
vivi, aedijicabo Ecclesiam meam. Id est, Super Meipsum aedificabo Ecclesiam
meam. Super Me aedificabo Te; non Me super Te -- Non in Pauli, nec in Petri
Nomine baptizati sumus, sed Christi; ut Petrus aedificetur super Petram, non
Petra super Petrum. Ibid. page 59. A.
Peter^ as well as Paul) in respect of Christ (who is the great Immovable
Rock, which sustains the (...), etc. Omnium siquidem fundamentum est Christus,
qui sibi ad mota, fixa firmaque sustineat. Procopius in Cap. 44. Isaiae. p.
504. And a little after -- (...), etc. Ecclesiae idem fundamentum jesit, qui
Ipse Fundamentum est, super quod and nos, tanquam Lapides pretiosi,
superstruimur. Procopius ibid. page 519. Omnis Ecclesiae Compages innititur and
Incum^it, ut nunquam cadat, summo Angulari Lapide Christo Jesu. Augustine.
Enarrat. in Psalm. 86. Tom. 8. page 955. Operum Basil. 1569.
whole Building) are Superstructions; though otherwise, in respect of the
Christian World converted by their Preaching, they are called Foundations; yet
only Secundary Foundations, all of which are built upon the Principal and prime
Foundation Jesus Christ Fundamentum est solus Christus, vel fides Ipsius.
Object. Apoc. 21. 14. Apostoli sunt Fundamenta. Sol 1. Fundamentum proprie, est
illud quod habet firmitatem and stabilitatem in se; sic Solus Christus est
Fundamentum. 2. Improprie, illud quod adhaeret primo Fundamento; sicut sunt
Lapides primarij Fundamento inhaerentes: sic Apostoli dicuntur fundamenta qui
Primitus Adhaeserunt Christo. Lyranus in. 1. Cor. 3. 11. vid. Per. Lombard. in
locum. page 73. C. D. Christus primus Lapis and Angularis; super Christum
Apostoli and Prophetae, super illos, Nos aedificati sumus. Maldonatus in Matthew.
16 page 342. And again -- Multi in eodem Fundamento Lapides sunt; summus and
primus solus est Christus, and praeter illud, Fundamentum Aliud nemo potest
ponere; super illud autem, etiam alia sunt, quae eo nituntur, Fundamenta: nam
and Apostoli and Prophetae Fundamentum Appellantur, sed ipso summo Angulari
Lapide Christo Jesu. Ephesians. 2. 20. Maldonat. in Matthew. 7. 24. p. 178.
So in the like Instance, all the Apostles ( Peter as well as the rest) were
both Sheep and Shepherds. 1. Sheep, in respect of Christ, who is the (...).
Hebr. 13. 20.
great and (...) 1. Pet. 5. 4.
chief Shepherd. My John 10. 27.
Sheep hear my voice, (says our blessed Savior:) The Apostles did so; when he
called them, they heard and obeyed him. Again, I lay John 10. 15.
down my life for my Sheep; so he did for his Apostles, else they could not
have been saved; And therefore they also are his Sheep. 2. Yet they were
Shepherds too (sent by, and subordinate to the great and chief Shepherd Jesus
Christ) in respect of the Church and Christians, over which the Act. 20. 28.
Holy Ghost had set them. 3. Our blessed Savior is such a foundation and
Founder of his Church, as does not find, but make these Lively Stones, which
are the Materials with which he builds it. He gives his Spirit, and by it Grace
and a Lively Faith, which things alone make men Lively Stones, and fit for that
Building. This no Apostle, (not Peter, much less any succeeding Pope) ever did,
or could do; nor (without great folly and impiety) can pretend to. 4. Our
blessed Savior is such a Rock, such a Foundation and Founder of the Church, as
was and is Proprietary and the sole true Owner of it; it is his House, purchased
with his precious Blood; and he ever had, and still has a Magisterial and
Imperial power over it, to rule and govern it; He is Rev. 15. 3.
King of Saints. It Is true, the Prophets and Apostles are called Foundations
and Founders of the Church; Those of the Judaical Church, before our blessed
Savior's Incarnation; these of the Christian Church, after it. But the Power,
and the Authority, the Prophets or Apostles had, (even the greatest of them (
Moses, or Peter) was only Ministerial, the Authority of Servants, derived from
our blessed Savior, and Exercised under him. So the Apostle tells us -- Hebr.
3. 5. 6. (...), ut famulus: Christus (...), super domum, ut Filius and Dominus.
That Moses was faithful in all his House, (i. e. in the Judaical Church) As A
Servant; but Christ as a Son, over his Own House, whose House Are We, etc. So
in the Christian Church, the Apostles (All of them) were Prime and Principal
Ministers, from and under Christ, to call and build the Church. They were
Servants of Christ, and (for his 2. Cor. 4. 5.
sake) of the Church: they had Ministerium, but not Imperium. Neither Peter,
nor any other, had that vast Monarchical Supremacy over the whole Church, which
is (not without great Error and Impiety) pretended to; when they blasphemously
say -- That Peter Christus Petrum Vniversi fidelium Generis Caput Constituit --
ut qui Ei Successit, Eandem Plane Totius Ecclesiae Potestatem habere voluerit.
Catechismus Tridentinus Part. 1. cap. 10.. 11. 12. and praecipue.. 13. p. 117.
Edit. Paris. 1635. 2. The Apostles.
was our blessed Saviors Successor, and (by him) Constituted the Head of the
Universal Church, with the very same Power our blessed Savior had. But this
they say only, without any Proof or Probability; and so transeat cum caeteris
erroribus.

2. But although we say, (and have evident Reason and Authority for it) That
our blessed Savior was the one and only prime and chief foundation and founder
of the Church, and all the Apostles ( Peter as well as the Rest)
Superstructions in respect of him; yet we know and acknowledge, that (both in
Scripture and Antiquity) they are called Foundations and Founders of the
Christian Church in respect of the Churches, called, Converted, and Constituted
by them; but all Equally so; Peter was no more a foundation then Paul, or
James, or John. For, 1. They were all immediately called by our Matthew. 10. 1.
2. 3. etc. Mark. 3. 14. Luke 9. 1. etc.
blessed Savior, without any dependence Paulus Apostolus non ab hominibus nec
per hominem, Gal. 1. 1. (...), etc. Dominus eum vocavit voelitus, homine non
usus Administro. Theodoret in loc. Non Petro. Estius in locum.
upon Peter, or any body else, (as is Evident in the Text it self) And this is
generally Confessed by the Popish Commentators, even the Jesuits, such as
Tirinus, Menochius, etc. I say, all the Apostles had this immediate calling to
their Apostleship, from our blessed Savior, except Matthias; and he was not
chosen by Peter (who neither knew nor had any such Supremacy, as without all
reason, is now ascribed to him) but the Matthias a Collegio Apostolorum factus
est Apostolus; Ita Estius in Gal. 1. 1.
College of the Apostles, and consent of the faithful there present. And
though a Learned Jesuit, (zealous for Peter, and the Popes Supremacy) would
have Peter to be the Haec omnia factae sunt dirigente Petro, qui totius Operis
fuit Choraegus. A Lapide in cap. 1. Act. Apost. p. 57. Col. 1. C.
Directior in that business (the Election of Matthias) yet he cannot deny, but
it was done by the Common Apostoli caterique fideles Communi consensis
Nominarunt duos, etc. A. Lapide, ibidem.
Consent of the Apostles and Brethren. 2. As the Apostles all of them, (
Matthias excepted) had their call Immediately and Equally from our blessed
Savior, without any dependence upon St. Peter; so they had their Commission
immediately from him, and in it, the very same Power, equally given to all. The
same power given to any one, (even St. Peter) was given to every one. This is
Evident, 1. From those plain Texts where their Matthew. 10. 1. 2. 3. etc. Mark.
3. 13. 14. 15. Luke 9. 1.
Commission and Apostolical Power is given them by our blessed Savior, before
the Resurrection; when they were sent to the Matthew. 10. 5. 6.
Jews only; and the very same Power equally given to all. 2. And from those
other (as clear and plain) Texts, wherein (after the Resurrection) they had
Commission and Authority given them by our blessed Savior, to preach to Matthew.
28. 18. 19. Mark. 16. 15. 16. John. 20. 22. 23.
all Nations; where it is -- As my Father sent me, so I send you, and Go ye,
etc. All equally sent, no difference or distinction of the Persons, as to any
Privilege or Precedence, no Degrees of Power more or greater in one, then
every one. Their Commission and Authority given in it, was the very same, and
equally given to all the Apostles. These Truths are so evident in the Text,
that some sober Popish Writers do both profess and industriously prove them.
Franc: A Victoria, (prime Professor of Divinity at Salamanca in Spain, and (as
they esteemed and called him) an Francis. A Victoria. SS. Theol.
Salamanticensis Academiae, in primaria Cathedra Professore Eximio and
Incomparabili. Ita habet Libri sui Epigraphe seu Titulus.
Excellent and Incomparable Divine) Proposes and proves these two Conclusions.
1. All the Omnem Potestatem, quam Apostoli habuerunt, reciperunt Immediate a
Christo. Victoria Prelect. 2. De Potest. Eccles. Conc. 3. p. 84.
Power the Apostles had, was (by them) received Immediately from Christ. 2. All
the Apostoli Omnes habuerunt aequalem Potestatem cum Petro. Ibid. Conc. 4. p.
85.
Apostles had Equal Power with Peter: And then he Explains his meaning thus --
Quod sic Intelligo; quod quilibet Apostolus habuit Potestatem Ecclesiasticam in
toto Orb, and ad Omnes Actus ad quos Petrus habuit. Ibid.
That every Apostle had Ecclesiastical Power in the whole World, and to do
Every Act, which Peter had Power to do. But then (to please the Pope and his
Party) he Excepts those Acts which were proper and belonged Non loquor de illis
Actibus, qui spectant ad solum summum Pontisicem, ut Congregatio Generalis
Concilij. Ibidem.
peculiarly to the Pope; as Calling of a General Council. But this is gratis
dictum, without any pretense of proof, or probability from Scripture, and
evidently contradictory to the known Practice of the Christian World, after the
Emperors became Christians, who alone (and not the Pope) called all the Ancient
Councils; as is fully proved by a late and Learned Vid. Hist. Conc. Generalium,
per Ed. Richerium Doct. and Socium Sorbonicum. Colon. 1680. where he clearly
proves, the first Eight General Councils were called by the Emperors.
Sorbon Doctor.

5. But to proceed; That Place in Matthew. 16. 19.
Matthew is urged in the foregoing Objection, to prove the Monarchical
Supremacy of Peter -- I Give unto thee, the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, etc. Now that I
may give a short and distinct Answer to this place: I consider,

1. That this Text is generally urged (though most Impertinently) to prove
Peter's and the Popes Power over Kings and Emperors. So Cap. Solicit. 6. Extra
De Major. and Obedientia. vid. Baron. Tom* 11. ad Ann. 1076.. 25. 26.
Innocent. III. Cites it to prove, that the Emperor is subject to the Pope. To
the same purpose Pope Boniface VIII. produces it, in his Impious and (as to
the Nonsense and Inconsequence of it) ridiculous Cap. unam sanct. 1. De Major.
and Obedientia. Extravag. Com.
Extravagant; which Bellarm. de Pont. Romans l. 5. c. 7.. Item; and. sic enim.
Bellarmine approves, and Leo. X. and his Conc. Lateran. sub Leo. 10. Sess. 11.
apud Binium. Tom. 9. p. 153. A. B.
Lateran Council (which they call a General one) Innovates and Confirms; and
yet a late Honoratus Faber Societi^ Jesu, libro cui Titulus -- Una Fides, Unius
Ecclesiae Romans Delingae. 1567. cap. 19. Cujus Lemma est; Claves Regni Coelorum
Duntaxac Petro Datae fuerunt.
Jesuit, expressly tells us, (and you may be sure, with the Prodiit dictus
Liber, cum facultate Superiorum, and Privilegio Caesareo.
Approbation of his Superiors) That the Keys were given Only to Peter. These,
and many more, quote this Place to the same purpose.

2. It is certain (and Dabo ait, non do; promittit, non dat. Luc. Brugensis in
Matthew. 16. 19. Ita etiam Faber Stapulensis in dictum locum, ut and alij. Vide
Catenam Graecorum Patrum in Matthaeum a Niceta Serrarum Episcopo Collectam; and
a Balth: Corderio Jesuita Edita Tholos. 1647. and ibi Cyril. p. 548. ubi ait,
Christum Claves Petro promississe. Matthew. 16. 19. Sed non dedisse. Joh. 20. 22.
23. -- (...), etc.
Confessed) that our blessed Savior in this place of Matthew, does not
Actually give St. Peter the Power of the Keys (be what it will) but ( pro
futuro) promise that he will give it. For it is in that Text, (...) dabo, I
will give, not I have given, or do give; and therefore they must show some
other place in Scripture, where that Power is Actually given to Peter, and that
to him alone; else, (if it be given to the other Apostles as well as to him) it
will be Impossible to prove his Prerogative and Supremacy over the other
Apostles, from that Power, which they have as well as he.

3. But it is certain, that the Power of the Keys (b^ what it will) was (by our
blessed Savior) afterward given to all the Apostles, as well, and (...) much,
as to Peter. So it evidently Appears b^ St. Matthew. 18. 18.
Matthew, in the place Cited. Where ou^ blessed Savior speaking to all his
Disciples, a^ well as Peter, has these words -- Verily I say unt^ You, ('it is
all (...) etc. Petro dedit Claves cum Liga^di Potestate; eam vero Potestatem
tradidit and Discipulis Omnibus. Procop. in Isaiae Cap. 61. and p. 715. 716.
Potestatem tribuit Apostolis. Hieronym in Matthew. 18. 18. so even the Popish
Commentators upon that Place; Menochius. Luc. Brugensis, etc.
of them he speaks to) whatsoeve^ you shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in
Heaven and whatsoever you shall loose on Earth, shall loosed in Heaven. Here
his Promise made before to Peter, Chap. 16. 19. is made Good to him and the
Power of the Keys given him; but 't^^ manifest, that it is (in the same time
and Plac^ equally given to all the Apostles, as well as (...) Peter. Their own
Authentic Offices, no^ and heretofore in Public use in the Church Rome, do
attest this truth. In one of which they are taught to Invocate the Apostles in
the Form -- Processionale juxta Ritum Ecclesiae Romanae restitutum Paris. 1663.
p. 205. In Commendatione Animae.
Orate pro eo Omnes Sancti Aposto^^ Quibus a Domino data est Potestas Ligandi
and S^^vendi. The Power of Binding and Loosin^^ (and so the Power of the Keys)
was given to the Apostles, as well as to Peter. This the Manuale dictum.
Londini. 1554. p. 72.
Manual of the Church of Salisbury acknowledg^ that the Power of binding and
loosing, was given Paul as well as Peter; and further adds -- Quilibet Sacerdos
est Vicarius Petri and Pauli, etc. Ibid. p. 73.
The Every Priest is Vicar of Peter and Paul, and (...) Petri and Pauli ligat
and solvit) binds and loses their stead and place. The Missale dictum Ms. In
Formula Absolutionis. p. 111. 112.
Ancient MS. M^^sal belonging to the Abbots of Evesham, says the ^ry same
thing; So does Apud Eadmerum Hist. Novorum, per Seldenum lib. 1. page 27.
their St. Anselme: a^^ the Old Apud G. Ferrarium De Cath. Eccl. Divi nis
Officiis. Romae. 1591 p. 39. in Absolut. plurali and p. 40. In Absolut.
singulari. Col. 1. A. B.
Ordo Romanus expressly says; That the Power of the Keys, or the Power of
binding and loosing, was (by our blessed Savior) given to all the Apostles,
and (in them) to all their Successors. Vide Bandinum, Lombardum, etc. Sent.
lib. 4. Did. 18. 19. and the rest there. Their Trent Catechism (published by
Pope Pius. V. according to the Decree of the Trent Council) assures us, That
every Catechis. Roman. Paris. 1635. Part. 2. c. 11. De. 10. Symboli Artic.. 4.
6. Dominus Episcopis tantum and Sacerdotibus hanc Potestatem dedit. Et Idem
habemus. 9. Ibidem.
Bishop and Priest has the Power of the Keys given him by our blessed Savior.
Hence it is, that in their Roman Pontificale Romanum. Romae. 1611. p. 52. De
Ordinat. Presbyteri.
Pontifical, in their Ordination of a Priest, this Power of the Keys, of
remitting and retaining sins, is given to every one Ordained to that Office,
and (which may seem strange) in the very Joh. 20. 22. 23. Accipe Spiritum
Sanctum, quorum remisseris peccata, remitt antur eis; and quorum retinueris,
retenta sunt.
same words our blessed Savior used, when he gave that Power to Peter and the
other Apostles. Nor is this all; Their Ecumenical Council of Trent approves
and (by a Synodical Definition and Decree) confirms all this; And says further,
That our Christus Ascensurus in Coelos, Sacerdotes sui Ipsius Vicarios
reliquit, tanquam Praesides ac Judices, ad quos Omnia mortalia crimina
deferantur; quo, Pro Potestate Clavium, remissionis and retentionis Sententiam
pronuncient. Council. Trid. Sess. 14. De Poenitentia. c. 5.
blessed Savior, before his Ascension, left All Priests His Vicars, as
Presidents and Judges, who By the Power of the Keys, should Pronounce Sentence
of the Remission and retaining of Sins. And this they there prove out of this
very Place Matthew. 16. 19. Conc. Trident. Ibid. c. 6.
of Matthew, from which they would (and generally endeavor to) prove the Popes
Summam Absolutamque Potestatem, Supremum Caput, summumique Pastorem. Luc.
Brugensis. in locum Matthew. 16. 19.
Absolute Monarchical Supremacy, And Power to Depose Kings and Emperors. To
omit all other Instances (which are too many) sure I am, that Pope Innocent.
IV. builded his Power to Depose the Emperor Friderick upon this one Text -- Nos
Christi Vices tenentes, in terris, Nobisque in. Petri Persona, dictum sit,
Quodcunque Ligaveris, etc. Imperatonem Privamus, and Subditos a Juramento
fidelitatis absolvimus. Apud Binium. Conc. Tom. 7. Part. 2. p. 854.
We (says that Pope) being Christ's Vicar, and it being said to us, in the
Person of Peter, whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven,
etc. do Depose that Emperor, and Absolve all His Subjects from their Oaths of
Allegigance, etc. From the Premises, and Authorities above Cited, I think it is
Evident, 1. That in that Text Matthew. 16. 19. The Power of the Keys, was only
promised, but not Actually given to Peter. 2. When it was really and ( de
facto) given him, Matthew. 18. 18. It was as well, and as much given to all the
other Apostles as to him: as (besides what is aforesaid) is attested, and
expressly affirmed by Pope Vide Sacramentarium Gregorij Magni, per Hugonem
Menardu^ Paris. 1642. p. 113. In Vigilia 88. Petri and Pauli. Where they pray
thus -- Deus, qui Ligandi Solvendique Licentiam This Aposlolis Commisisti, etc.
Barlaam de Primatu Papae. lib. 2. Confesses that the Keys were given to Peter
-- (...), etc. Sed Non illi soli, sed Pari cum Ipso Dignitate, unicuique e
duodecem. And then he proves, it from Matthew. 18. 18. and Joh. 20. 22. 23. The
Learned Dan: Huetius cites this, In Notis ad Originem. Part. 2. p. 46. Col. 1.
but neither gives, nor pretends to give any Just Answer to it. Only he says --
Barlaamum corrupit (...). This was easily said, and Barlaam might as easily
have answered, Doct^ssimum Huetium corrupit (...).
Gregory the Great, in his Book of the Sacraments, published by Hugo Menardus,
a Learned Benedictine Monck; where Pope Gregory (and he as Wise and Learned,
and as Infallible as those who follow him) teaches them to pray thus; O God,
who have Committed the Power of Binding and Loosing To the Apostles, etc. He
knew not (it seems) any Supremacy given to Peter by our blessed Savior, when
he gave him Potestatem Clavium, The Power of the Keys; seeing the same Power
was given to other Apostles, who never claimed any such Supremacy. 3. Lastly, I
desire then to know, by what Logic they can prove St. Peter's Supremacy over
all the Apostles, for having a Power (the Power of the Keys) which every
Apostle had as well as He. 4. There is one place Joh. 20. 21. 22. 23.
more (and but one) wherein the Power of the Keys is Actually given to Peter;
The words are these -- As my Father sent me, so send I you; And he breathed on
them, and said; Receive the Holy Ghost; whose soever sins ye remit, they are
remitted, and whose sins ye retain, they are retained. Where, 1. It is certain
and confessed, That though the Power of the Keys, be not here expressly named,
yet to retain and remit here in John signifies the very same thing, That to
bind and loose in Matthew, where only the Power of the Keys is named. This the
Trent Catechism, and the Trent Fathers themselves must, and do acknowledge, (as
will manifestly appear by the Places cited in the Vide Catechism. Trident.
Part. 1. cap. 11.. 4. et. loca in Margin notata, in Edit. Paris. 1635. p. 129.
and Ibid.. 9. p. 132. and Part. 2. cap. 5. De Poenitent.. 12. p. 309. 310. and
Ibidem. 55. p. 339. 340. and Conc. Trid. Sess. 14. De Poenitentia. cap. 5. and
6.
Margent) and the most Learned Commentators on this Place in John, allow it,
and tell us truly, Remittuntur eis, vere and reipsa Judicio meo Patrisque
Coelestis, Soluta sunt in Coelo; quomodo loquitur Matthew. 16. 19. Luc. Brugensis
in Joh. 20. 23. Comment. Tom. 4. page 134. Vid. Catenam Graec. Patrum in Johan.
per Corderium, ad Joh. 20. 23. p. 459. And Ammonius there.
That remittere here in John, is the very same with solvere, to loose, in
Matthew; and so retinere here, the same with ligare in Matthew. 2. And it is as
certain, (from the express words of the Text) and the undoubted meaning of
them) that the Power of the Keys is here given Equally to all the Apostles, as
well as Peter; For so the words of their Commission, I send You (mine Apostles)
and he Breathed on Them; (his Apostles) whose sins Ye (my Apostles) retain,
etc. The Authority and Power here mentioned, is (without distinction or
difference of Degree) Equally given to all; to James, and John, and Jude, as
well as Peter. 3. Nay more; it is Ego, filius Dei, perfunctus Vicibus meis,
mitto Aequali Authoritate in Mundum Vniversum, vos, quos creavi Apostolos meos,
-- Ordino vos Successores meos -- Quod ait Euthymius, Chrysostomum secutus --
Apostoli tanquam Legati ac Vicarij Christi, sustinentes Personam ipsius
absentis. Luc. Brugensis in Joh. 20. 21. Commentariorum in. 4. Evangelia. Tom.
4. page 172.
Confessed, and positively and truly affirmed, by a very Learned Popish Author,
That all the Apostles (as well as Peter) are by this Commission Vicars and
Successors of Christ, and have the Power of the Keys (to bind and loose, retain
and remit sins) Equally given to them All. Now, if this be true, then it will
inevitably follow, That all the Arguments they usually bring to prove the
Pope's Monarchical Supremacy (even over Kings and Emperors) because he was
Christ's Vicar, and had the Power of the Keys given him; I say, All such
Arguments, from such Topics, will not only be inconsequent, but indeed
altogether impertinent and ridiculous. For if this Argument be good and
concluding, The Keys were given to Peter, and he is the Vicar of Christ: Ergo,
He is the sole Supreme Monarch of the whole Church. Then this will be as good
and concluding -- Every Apostle (as well as Peter) was the Vicar of Christ, and
had the Keys given him: Ergo, Every Apostle was sole Supreme Monarch of the
whole Church. And then (by this wild Logic) we shall have Twelve or Thirteen
Persons, and every one of them sole Supreme Monarch of the whole Church. That
the Power of the Keys, was by our blessed Savior, given to All the Apostles as
well as Peter, seems to me Evident by the Premises, and that all of them (as
much and as well as He) were Christi Vicarij, Christ's Vicars, may be as
Evident, and must be Confessed, even by our Adversaries; unless they will deny
the plain Truth of Scripture, and their own received Principles. For, 1. Our
blessed Savior tells us -- As my Joh. 20. 21.
Father sent me, so send I you. Christ was our great Hebr. 3. 1.
Apostle sent immediately by his Father, so that he was Legatus and Vicarius
Patris, his Father's Vicar and Ambassador (as St. Deus erat in Christo, quasi
in Vicario and Legato. Ambros. in. 2. Cor. 5. 19. Explicat. Ambros. Cap. 16.
Ambrose says) And our blessed Savior sends his Apostles, as his Vicars and
Ambassadors. So the same Father tells us, in the Deus pro Christo Vicarios
dedit Apostolos, ut Pro Ipso praedicarent reconciliationem. Idem ibidem.
same place; and St. Paul says as much of 2 Cor. 5. 19. 20.
himself and the other Apostles -- He has Committed to us the Word of
Reconciliation; now then We are Ambassadors, for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us; we pray you in Christs's stead. All the Apostles were (by
our blessed Savior) Commissioned and sent as his Ambassadors, what they did
was in Christ's stead and place. They were his Vicars, and what they did was as
his Deputies, Vice-Christi, supplying his place. Thus Obsecramus pro Christo;
i. e. Loco Christi, cujus sumus Ministri. Lyranus in locum. 2. Cor. 5. 20.
Lyranus, and the Interlinatory Ministerium reconciliationis dedit nobis; i. e.
Vicariis Apostolis; And again, Legatione fungimur pro Christo; i. e. Vice
Christi.
Glossator, (and they no Lutherans) Explain that place; so the Famous Bishop of
Paris, and Father of the Schoolmen, Peter Dedit quosdam Apostolos; i. e.
Vicarios Praedicationis suae. Lombard. in Ephesians. 4. page 171. and rursus in. 2.
Cor. 5. 19. 20. Dedit Ministerium reconciliationis nobis Apostolis, Vicariis
Christi. page 125. Col. E.
Lombard; so Pope Vide Johan. Lanoium Epist. Tom. 6. page 292.
Gregory the Great; nay the Jesuits ( Instituta Societat. Jesu. Tom. 3. page
262. 263. acknowledge their Superiors (though they be neither Popes nor
Apostles) to be Vicarios Christi, Christ's Vicars. And that I may neither
trouble the Reader, nor my self with more Testimonies; Their own Authentic
Offices, which have been; or are Approved, and publicly used in their Church,
expressly say the very same thing; That the Apostles (All of them as well as
Peter) were Christ's Vicars; particularly, the present Roman Vid. Missale
Roman. ex Decreto Concilij Trident. restitutum, Pij. 5. Jussu Editum. Clement.
8. Authoritate recognitum; Antv. 1619. Inter Praefationes Missae sine notis. p.
219. ubi in Praefat. De Apostolis, Sic Orant -- Aequum est Te Domine
suppliciter exorare, ut gregem tuum, Pastor aeterne, non deseras; sed per
Apostolos tuos, continua protectione Custodias; ut iisdem Rectoribus
gubernatur, quos operis Tui Vicarios eidem Contulisti praeesse Pastores. Hanc
Orationem iisdem plane verbis conceptam, habes in Missali secudum usum York,
inter Praefationes Missales, in Calce Tom. 1. and in Missali secundum usum
Ecclesiae Salisburiensis. Inter Praefationes Missales. And Guil: Estius the
Learned Professor and Chancellor of the University of Doway, expressly approves,
and confirms this; in his Comment. on the. 2. Cor. 5. 20. Postquam Sublatus est
Christus in Coelum, Nos (Apostoli) Illius Vices Gerimus in terra. Deus igitur
primus Author, Christus Minister principalis, Nos (Apostoli) Ministri
secundarij, at que Vicarij, A Deo and Christo Missi.
Missal, as does manifestly appear by the place quoted in the Margent. This
then being certain, and (by our Adversaries) Confessed, That every Apostle (as
well as Peter) was Christ's Vicar, and had the Power of the Keys given him by
our blessed Savior, at the same time, and in the very same Matthew. 18, 18. Joh.
20. 22. 23.
words when and wherein they were given to Peter: I say, this being granted (as
it is, and must) it will be absolutely impossible for them to prove any
Superiority in Peter (much less a Monarchical Supremacy) over the other
Apostles, from his Title of Christ's Vicar, or the Power of the Keys, both
which every Apostle had as well and as much as He, unless you will say, That
very Power which only makes Peter Equal to the rest, makes him their Monarch
and Superior. Sure I am, if this Argument be good (and they have no better)
Peter is Christ's Vicar, and has the Power of the Keys: Ergo, he is Superior to
John. Then this will be good too -- John is Christ's Vicar, and has the Power
of the Keys: Ergo, He is Superior to Peter. But enough (if not too much) of
this. For the Arguments they bring for the Popes Supremacy, drawn from his
being Christ's Vicar, and having the Power of the Keys, are such as rather
deserve pity, or scorn, then any serious Answer, were it not that their
greatest men (for Place and Learning, even So Pope. Bonif. 8. urges that Place,
Matthew. 16. 19. Quodcunque Ligaveris, etc. Cap. unam Sanctam. 1. De Major. and
Obed. Extrav. Commun. And Innocent. 4. Justifies his Deposing the Emperor, (as
is aforesaid) from those words -- Quodcunque Ligaveris, and the Power given to
Peter and the Pope by them. Binius Council. Tom. 7. Part. 2. page 854. Edit.
Paris. 1636. And Gregory. 7. cites the same Place, to the same purpose. Lib. 8.
Epist. 21. And the same Gregory grounds his Excommunication of the Emperor Hen.
4. upon the Power of the Keys. Mihi est Potestas data Ligandi in Coelo and
Terra. Hac Ideo Fiducia Fretus, Henrico totius Regni Teutonicorum and Italiae
gubernacula Contradico, and Omnes Christianos a vinculo Juramenti, quod sibi
fecere, ant facient, absolvo. Baronius Annal. Tom. 11. Ad Ann. 1076.. 25. 26.
their Infallible Popes in their Authentic Bulls) perpetually urge them, to
prove the Pope Superior to Kings and Emperors, and to have (what Pope Pius. V.
in This Impious Bull against Queen Elizabeth pretends to) Power to Depose them,
and Absolve Subjects from all Oaths of Allegiance and Fidelity. The Premises
considered, I think it is Evident, and (I doubt not but) Impartial and
Intelligent men think so too:

1. That every Apostle, as well as Peter, was Christ's Vicar, and had the Power
of the Keys Committed to him, by our blessed Savior, and that Immediately
without Any dependence on Peter, or any other; Sure I am, that Cardinal Cusanus
(though a zealous Assertor of the Pope's Supremacy) was convinced of this Truth
(as to St. Paul, and so he might for the Rest) and does in Terminis Acknowledge
it. He says, That both Peter and Paul were Petrus and Paulus ambo Principes.
Card. Cusanus. Epist. 2. De usu Communionis ad Bohemos. Operum. p. 836. Edit.
Basil. 1565.
Ecclesiae Principes, Princes of the Catholic Church; That they ( both of
them) had the Nec Mysterio caret, Romanum Pontificem. Authoritate Petri and
Pauli Ligare and Solvere. Idem ibid.
Power of the Keys, power to bind and loose; and both of them had it De
utriusque tam Petri inter Judaeos, quam Pauli inter Gentes Primatu, Immediate a
Christo Vtrique Collato. And this he proves, out of Ambrose on the Galat. 2. 7.
who says the same thing. Idem ibidem.
Immediately from our blessed Savior; That as Peter was Potuit uterque ubique
Ecclesias fundare, tam in Circumcisione, quam praeputio; Licet Principalis
Commissio cum Primatu, Petri fuerit in Circumcisione, and Pauli in Praeputio.
Idem ibidem.
Primate, as to the Jews; so Paul was Primate as to the Gentiles; and so, that
(in this Primacy) Peter was not subject to Paul, nor Nec in hoc Alter Alteri
Suberat, sed Ambo sub Christo Immediate. Idem ibidem.
Paul to Peter, but each of them had that Primacy Immediately from Christ,
without any dependence on each other. And this Cusanus there proves out of
Ambrose, Augustine and Hierome.

2. And as every Apostle, as well as Peter, was Vicar of Christ, and had the
Power of the Keys; so it appears by the Premises, and is Confessed by our
Adversaries (in the Places before Cited) that all of them transferred that
Title and Power to their Successors; so that every Bishop, and every Priest,
after the Apostles, is Christ's Cyprian says, That the Bishop is -- Judex Vice
Christi, and that the Bishops, Apostolis Vicaria Ordinatione succedunt. This
Rigaltius observes; And adds, Ecce Episcopos, avo jam Cypriani, Vicarios
Christi. Rigalt. Observat. in Epist. Cypr. p. 73. And a little after, --
Episcopus est Dei Sacerdos, and Vicarius Christi.
Vicar, and has the Power of the Keys. Whence it Evidently follows, that the
Bishops of Rome (notwithstanding their great Noise, and groundless pretense to
the contrary) are no more our blessed Savior's Vicars, nor have any more Power
of the Keys, then any, (I say again, then any) other Bishop in the World; The
Pope and Bishop of Rome no more, then the Bishops of Roan and Rochester. For
their own Ecumenical and (with them) Infallible Council of Trent, assures us
of two things. 1. That all Bishops are Synodus declarat Episcopos, qui in
Apostolorum locum successerunt. Conc. Trid. Sess. 23. De Sacramento Ordin. c. 4.
Apostolorum Successores, Successors of the Apostles. 2. That our blessed
Savior, when he was about to Ascend into Heaven, Christus Ascensurus,
Sacerdotes sui Ipsius Vicarios reliquit, etc. Con. Trid. Sess. 14. De Poenit.
c. 5. de Confessione.
left Sacerdotes (that Vid. Ibid. c. 6. De Minist. Sacramenti Poenitent. where
it is evident, that by Sacerdotes, c. 5. all Bishops and Priests are meant; And
that it should be sure that they are meant, in the Index of that Council these
words are expressly set down, -- Saoerdotes sunt Vicarij Christi. And refer to
the. 14. Sess. c. 5. before Cited. In Edit. Conc. Trid. Antv. 1633.
is Bishops and other Priests) his Vicars, and gave them the Power of the Keys,
to bind and loose, to remit and retain sins. To conclude this Point; If the
Pope and his Party, have no better ground in Scripture, (then the Places above
mentioned) to prove and support that vast Papal Supremacy, they most vainly and
irrationally pretend to; the whole Fabric must of necessity fall. It being
impossible that so vast a Superstruction as their Popish Monarchy should be so
sustained, by such Reasons which are so far from being Cogent, that they are
altogether Impertinent.

Well; Object.
but if these will not prove (what they are produced for) the Popes Supremacy;
other Texts they bring, with as much Noise and Confidence as they did the
former, and (if that be possible) with less Reason or Consequence. For
Instance, they Ci^e (to prove the Pope's Supremacy over the whole Church, even
over all the other Apostles) Joh. 21. 15. 16. 17. Pasce Oves meas, Feed my
Sheep. And tell us -- Christus in Coelum abiturus, hic suum creatum Vicarium
designat ac summum Pontificem creat Petrum; Promiserat Christus Id Ipsum Petro.
Matthew. 16. 18. Sed hoc loco praestat; eumque Principem and Pastorem Totius
Ecclesiae Constituit. Corn: A Lapide in Joh. 21. 15. page 546.
That our blessed Savior leaving the World, did create Peter his Vicar, and
highest Priest, and Prince of the Universal Church, which he had promised
before, Matthew. 16. 18, and now performed that promise. And again (they say) --
Ex hoc loco patet S. Petrum (and Ejus Successores Romans Pontifices) esse Caput
and Principem Ecclesiae, Omnesque fideles, and jam Apostolos ipsi Subjici, and
ab eo pasci and Regi debere. Idem ibid. page 547. Col. 2.
It appears from this place, That Peter ( and his Successors Popes of Rome) is
Head and Prince of the Church, and that all the Faithful, even the Apostles are
made Subjects to him, to be fed and ruled by him. This place is urged by Pope
Innocent the Third to the like (though God knows little) purpose: who would
have us understand by those words, Feed my Sheep; that our blessed Savior Ait
Christus Petro and Successoribus: Pasce Oves meas; non distinguens inter has
oves and alias: ut alienum a suo ovili demonstraret, qui Petrum and Successores
Ipsius, Magistros non recognosceret and Pastores. Cap. Solicit. 6. Extrav. de
Majorit. and Obedientia.
meant all his Sheep, all good Christians. That he might show, (says that Pope)
that they were none of our blessed Saviors Sheep, who would not Acknowledge
Peter and the Popes of Rome to be their Masters and Pastors. And (to name no
more) Pope Boniface. VIII. endeavors to prove, that our blessed Savior by
those words, Feed my Sheep, meant Universally all his Sheep Pasce Oves, inquit,
and generaliter non singulariter has vel illas: per quod Commisisse sibi
Intelligitur Vniversas. Cap. unam Sanctam. 1. De Major. and Obedientia. Extrav.
Commun. Ita. Tirinus Reliquique passim. in Joh. 21. 15.
-- because he does not say singularly these or those, but generally Feed my
Sheep: And from this Place so Expounded, they would prove Peter' s, and so the
Pope's Monarchical Supremacy over all Christians, even the Apostles, Kings, and
Emperors.

1. Were it not certain, Answer.
that there is no possibility that any man should bring a true and concluding
Reason to prove an erroneous and false Position; it would hardly be credible
that otherwise Learned men, furnished with great Parts of Art and Nature,
should bring such miserable Stuff, such misapplied and misunderstood Scripture,
to prove that great The Popes Supremacy consists in this, that he is, Petri
Successor, and Christi verus and legitimus in terris Vicarius. Catechis. Trid.
Part. 2. c. 7.. 28. p. 391. Edit. Paris. 1635. And this an Article of their
Creed, (I mean their new Creed) to which they swear (all who have any
Dignities, Cure of Souls, etc. Vide Bullam Pij Papae 4. Super forma
professionis fidei in Council. Trident. Sess. 24. De Reformat. post. cap. 12.
Edit. Antverp. 1633.
Article of their Popes Supremacy; which being a manifest Error, without any
Foundation in Scripture or Primitive Antiquity, I cannot blame them, for not
bringing (what they neither have, nor can have) better Arguments; but that they
bring any at all, to establish that, which they ought, and with evident and
cogent Reasons, might confute.

2. As Antiquity did, so we do grant (all that with any Reason or Just ground
they can desire) that Peter had a Primacy of Order (but not of Power or
Jurisdiction) amongst the Apostles. For the Evangelist naming the Apostles,
Matthew. 10. 2.
says -- The First was Peter. First in Order, or (if you will) first respectu
vocationis; as first called by our blessed Savior; not to be one of his
Disciples; for so Andrew was called before him (as is evident in the Joh. 1.
40. 41. 42.
Text) but in respect of his Call to be an Apostle. For when, out of his
Disciples he chose Twelve to be his Apostles, Matthew (in the Place Cited)
says; The first was Peter. So we grant to the Bishop of Rome (what anciently
was given him) a Primacy of Order, and Precedence, before all the Bishops in
the Roman Empire; But not Jure Divino, by Divine Right (which without all
Reason, Catechis. Trid. in the Place and Section last Cited, says -- Romanus
Pontifex est Episcoporum Maximus; Idque Jure Divino. That's the Lemma to that
Section. And then it is added, That the Supreme Jurisdiction of the Pope, Nullis
Synodicis, aut Humanis Constitutionibus, sed Divinitus data est.
they pretend to) but by the Consent of the Ancient Fathers and Councils. And
for this, we have the Synodical Definition and Declaration of Six hundred and
thirty Fathers in an Ancient and received General Council; who said -- (...).
etc. Etenim Antiquae Romae Throno, quod Vrbs illa Imperaret, Jure Patres
Privilegiadederunt. Conc. Chalcedon. Can. 28. Apud Bin. Tom. 3. p. 446.
That because old Rome was the Imperial City, therefore the Fathers had rightly
given Privileges to the Episcopal Seat of that City. Where it is evident, that
in the Judgment of that great and good Council, (and of the General Council of
Conc. Constable. 1. Can. 5. apud bin. Conc. Tom. 1. page 661. Episcopus
Constantinopolitanus habere debet. Primatus Honorem Post Romanum Episcopum,
quia Civitas illa est nova Roma.
Constantinople too, which they there Cite.) 1. That the Privilege and
Precedence the Bishop of Rome had, was not Conveyed to him by any Divine Right
(as they now pretend) non a Christo vel Petro, sed a Patribus; it was the
Fathers who gave them. 2. And the Reason why they gave him such Privilege, and
Precedence, was not because he was Christ's Vicar and St. Peter's Successor,
but because Rome was Vrbs Imperialis, the great Metropolis of the Roman Empire.
I know the Popes Legates in that Council, did what they could to hinder the
passing that Canon, and Pope Leo out of it, (when the Canon was passed) did
oppose it, as much as he was able, but in vain. For the Canon was Synodically
passed, by the Concurrent Consent of the whole Vid. Binium Conc. Tom. 3. Edit.
Paris. 1636. page 461. and page 464. (...), etc.
Council, (the Popes Legates excepted, which was acknowledged by the (...).
Binius ibidem. p. 463. E. F. and 464. D.
Judges, and then Vide Edictum Valentiniani and Marciani. Ibid. page 476. 477.
(...) etc. Universi ideo quae a Synodo Chalcedonensi Constituta sunt, Custodire
debent. Et vide ibid. p. 477 478. Edictum Marciani, de Confirmatione Synodi
Chalcedonensis.
Confirmed by the Emperor, and Received into the Codex Canonum Ecclesiae
Vniversae. That which troubled the Pope, was, that Constantinople should have
Equal Privileges with Rome (Precedence only expected) even in all
Ecclesiastical business; and that (by the Canon of that great Council, and
Confirmation of the Emperor) the Patriarch of Constantinople should have so
vast a Territory under his Jurisdiction, to wit, Three whole Dioceses, (
Thracica, Asiana, Pontica,) more then (by any Law of God or Man) the Pope ever
had under him. And it is here observeable, that although this Canon (giving
Equal Privileges to the Bishop of Constantinople, as to him of Old Rome
(Precedence only excepted) absolutely denied that Monarchical Supremacy and
Jurisdiction over all Patriarchs, (which the Popes were then nibling at, and
have since openly owned) yet Leo in his Epistles to the Binius ibid. Conc. Tom.
3. p. 480.
Emperor, Ibid. page 479.
Anatolius, Ibid. page 481.
Pulchoria Augusta, etc. wherein he writes fiercely against this Canon, never
pretended (as afterward, and now they do) That the Bishops of Rome had by
Divine So Pope Nicol. 1. tells us, That Primatus Sedis Romanae non a Patribus,
aut Imperiali Civitate, sed a Christo and Beato Petro. Vid. Binium Conc. Tom.
6. p. 508. Col. 2. F. Edit. Paris. 1636. and page 513. Col. 2. C. So the Trent.
Catechis. part. 2. cap. 7.. 28. Papa Romans Suprematum habet -- Non ullis
Synodicis, aut humanis Constitutionibus, sed Divinitus, etc. See the
Authorities they there urge for it. p. 391. Edit. Paris. 1635.
Right, (as Vicars of our blessed Savior) a Supreme Jurisdiction over all
Bishops and Patriarchs in the whole World: but complains of Anatolius Apud
Binium ubi supra. page 479. E.
his pride, (Catalina Cethegum) the Violation of the Nicene Canons, and the
wrong done to the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch. To talk of such a
Monarchical Supremacy then, as the Popes have since pretended to; Pope Leo
neither did, nor durst; it was a Doctrine unheard of in those purer times; and
had he challenged it then, as due to him by Divine Right, as he was Christ's
Vicar, he would have made himself Odious, and (having no ground for such a
Challenge) ridiculous to the Christian World. But when (notwithstanding all his
Legates could do in the Council, or he out of it) the Canon passed, by the
Unanimous Consent of the Council, and was Confirmed by the Imperial and Supreme
Power of the Emperor; (for the Pope does Petition and Clementiam vestram
Precor, and Sedula Suggestione Obsecro, etc. Ita Leo Papa in Epist. Marciano
Imperatori, Apud Binium. Conc. Tom. 3. p. 481. Col. 1. B.
Supplicate to him as his Superior) though the Pope in a Private Epistle to
Pulcheria Augusta (with great Insolence, and without any Ground) pretends to
Consensiones Episcoporum (even those in the General Council at Chalcedon he
means) in irritum mittimus, and per Authoritatem Beati Petri, Generali
Definitione Cassamus. Leo Papa in Epist. ad Pulcheriam, apud Binium. Tom. 3. p.
482. B.
Cassate and null that Canon by the Authority of St. Peter, (who never had any
such Authority to Null any Just Imperial or Synodical Constitutions) yet that
Canon was approved, received, and (as de Jure it ought) Obeyed by the Eastern
Churches, both then, and ever It was in terminis Confirmed in the sixth General
Council at Constantinople. Can. 36. And the second General Council at
Constantinople. Can. 5. give the same precedence to the Bishop of Byzantium,
which the Council of Chalcedon does.
after. When these Pretensions of the Pope and his Legates prevailed not, nor
were regarded by the Council, or Emperor, or the Eastern Church; other Arts
were used at Rome, to Conceal that Canon (which they could not Cassate) from
the knowledge of the Western Church. And to this end, 1. They Corrupt the Codex
Canonum Ecclesiae Vniversalis (the most Authentic Book, next to the Bible, the
Christian Church has, or ever had) Dionysius Exiguus Abbas-Romanus sub
Justiniano, Circa An. 540. as Trithemius, or. 520. as others.
Dionysius Exiguus a Roman-Abbot, begins that Impious Work; and in his Latin
Translation of that Code (amongst other things) leaves out that Eight and
twentieth Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, and So Isiodor. Jac. Merlinus.
Paris. 3535. Codex Canonum vetus Eccl. Romanae. Edit. 2. Mogunt. 1525. dein
Paris. 1619. Editio Latina prisca Canonum, Apud Justell. Biblioth. Tom. 1. p.
300. So Pet. Crabb. Joverius. Joh. Sichardus. Post Opera D. Clement. Paris.
1568. etc.
others of the Popish Party, follow him. 2. They Corrupt the Can Renovantes. 6.
Did. 22. Petimus, ut Constantinopolitana Seeds Similia Privilegia, quae
Superior Roma habet, accipiat; Non tamen in Ecclesiasticis rebus magnificetur
ut illa, etc. So Gratian in the Old Editions, as is Confessed. Vid. Corpus Jur.
Can. Cum Glossis. Paris. 1612. and sine Glossis. Paris. 1618. and ibi Notas ad
hunc Canonem.
Canon it self; and by putting in other words in their false Translation, they
make it contradict the Greek Canon, and the certain Sense of the Council that
made it. So in Gratian, the Corruptions of this Canon, are thus --

1. For (...) ( aequalia Privilegia) in the Original Greek; Gratian has Similia
Privilegia; like, but not equal Privileges.

2. For (...), ( Senior Roma) Gratian has Superior Roma -- Old Rome must be
Superior to New Rome, or Constantinople, if Forgery and Falsification of
Records can do it: for better Grounds they have none.

3. For, (...), etiam in Ecclesiasticis magnificetur ut illa. Gratian
impudently reads, Non Tamen in Ecclesiasticis, etc.

But notwithstanding all that Pope Leo or his Legates could do, and all their
other Indirect Arts afterward, this Eight and twentieth Canon of the Council
of Chalcedon was received in the Christian World, and long after Confirmed by
General Councils, not only by the Synodus 6. Generalis, which was held Anno
681. (of which a little before) But the Eighth General Council under Pope
Adrian. II. about the Year 870. gives that Definimus neminem Mundi Potentum,
quenquam qui Patriarchalibus praesunt Sedibus, in honorare praecipue
sanctissimum Papam Senioris Romae, deinceps autem Constantinopoleos
Patriarcham, deinde Alexandriae, etc. Ita Synodus. 8. habita sub Adriano Papa.
Can. 21. And this an approved Council at Rome.
Precedence to the Patriarch of Constantinople, which the Canon of Chalcedon
before gave him; And this acknowledged and referred into the Body of their
Gratian. Can. Definimus. 7. Did. 22. Vid. Glossam Ibid.
Canon Law, in the best Editions of it, Revised and Corrected by Pope Vid.
Bullam Greg. 13. dat. Romae. 1. Julij 1580. Juri Canonico praefixam. Edit.
Paris. 1612. and 1618.
Gregory. XIII. And it is to be observed, that this Synodus. 8. was Subscribed
by the Pope or his Legates there, and was then, and still is approved and
received at Rome: Nor need we wonder at it, For what it did, was carried
chiefly by the Popes Authority, who was by that Council, basely and servilly
flattered; they Calling him Most (...). In Epist. Synod. 8. ad Adrianum. Apud
Binium Conc. Tom. 7. Part. 1. p 984.
Holy and Ecumenical Pope, and Equal to the Angels, etc. This Title
Ecumenical, the Pope took kindly then, though his Predecessor Vid. Greg. Maj.
Regist. l. 4. Epist. 32. and 34. 36. 38. and l. 6. Epist. 30. and l. 7. Epist.
30. page 220.
Gregory the Great abhorred it, as Antichristian. But to return to the
Objection.

3. And here before I give a Particular and Distinct Answer to this Place of
John, (Feed my Sheep) on which they commonly (and vainly) build the Popes
Supremacy; I shall crave leave, a little to Explain, the nature and measure of
that Power which they give the Pope under the name of his Supremacy. And here
they say, That our blessed Savior gave His own Power to Peter, made him his
Vicar, Head and Pastor of all the Faithful in the World; and that in most ample
Words, when he bad him, Feed his Sheep, and that it was our blessed Saviors
Will, that all Peter' s Successors should have the very same Power, which Peter
had; (so the Trent Salvator Noster Petrum suae Potestatis Vicarium praefecit;
and Vniversi Fidelium generis Caput and Pastorem Constituit, cum illi Oves suas
pascendas, Verbis Amplissimis Commendavit; ut qui ei successit, Eandem plane
Totius Ecclesiae Regendae Potestatem habere volurit. Catechis. Trid. ex Decreto
Conc. Trid. a Pio. 5. Editus. Part. 1. c. 10.: 13. p. 117. Edit. Paris. 1634.
Vid. N. Rigaltij Observat. Galeatam, Notis suis in Cyprianum praefixam.
Catechism tells us) And this is that Plenitude of Power by which they
Erroneously and Impiously Depose Kings and Emperors, and (as Pius. V. does, in
this Bull, we are now speaking of, against Queen Elizabeth) absolve their
Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, and sworn or natural Fidelity. This
premised, I shall proceed to a direct (and I hope a full and satisfying) Answer
to that place in John, Feed my Sheep: etc. And here I consider,

1. That, if the Supremacy was first given to Peter, in those words -- John 21.
15. 16.
Pasce Oves, Feed my Sheep, (as is confessed, and by our Adversaries positively
affirmed in the Objection) which was after our blessed Saviors Resurrection:
then it is Evident he had it not before: It being impossible he should have it
before it was given him. And then it will as Evidently follow, that all those
Places in the Gospel, spoken of, or to Peter, before our blessed Savior's
Passion, are Impertinently urged to prove Peter's Supremacy, which he had not
till after the Resurrection. And yet Innocent. III. Boniface. VIII. and other
Popes in their Bulls and Papal Constitutions, the Canonists, Schoolmen, and
Commentators usually Cite many places in the Gospel (besides this, Pasce Oves)
to prove that Peter had the Supremacy before our blessed Savior's Passion;
which here they Confess was not given him till after the Resurrection. That
they do urge many such Places is known to all Learned men, versed in these
Controversies; but if any man doubt of it, and desire Satisfaction, I shall
refer him to what a Learned Popish Writer (and Capucine) has said in the Vide
Epitomen Canon. etc. per Greg. De Rives Capucinum. Lugd. 1603. Tract. de
Primatu, p. 3. 4. where for Peter's Supremacy, he cites Matthew. 16. 17. 18. 19.
Super hanc Petram: and dabo Tibi Claves: Matthew. 10. 2. Primus Petrus. Matthew.
17. 27. Christ paid Tribute only for himself and Peter. Joh. 1. 43. Thou shall
be called Cephas. Joh. 21. 7. 8. Peter alone cast himself into the Sea. Matthew.
14. 28. He calls Peter only to come to him; Et ita Vnicum se Christi Vicarium
designavit. Matthew. 18. 21. Matthew. 19. 27. Mark. 14. 37. He said only to Peter,
Simon sleep thou. Others Cite for Peter's Supremacy, Luke 22. 38. Here are
two Swords. So Pope Bonif. 8. Cap. Unam Sanctam. 1. Extrav. Commun. vide
Glossam. verbo, Coelestis. Can. Omnes. 1. Did. 22. Though their proofs from
all those Places, (and they have no better) are not only Inconsequent, and
Erroneous, but indeed Ridiculous. Vid. Tho. Campegium, Episc. Feltrensem, De
Potestate Romani Pontificis. Venet. 1555. Cap. 4. 5. Opus Paulo. 4. Papae
dedicat. ubi loca haec and plura, ad probandum Papae Suprematum, vane adducit,
and ridicule explicat. vid. etiam Bellarmin. De Romano Pontif. lib. 1. cap. 10.
11. 12. and inde ad cap. 24. Inclusive.
Margent, where he tells us, how many places are Cited for the Supremacy.

2. When our blessed Savior says, Pasce Oves, Feed my Sheep, and Feed my
Lambs; he uses two words -- (...) and (...). Both which words the Vulgar Latin
renders, Pasce, feed my Sheep and Lambs: Now their Commentators on this place,
(to very little purpose) make a great stir and pudder to show (what It Is
certain, and confessed, that (...) s^gnifies to rule. Kings are called (...),
populi pastores. So Menelaus and Agamemnon usually in Homer, and in Hesychius
(...). And (...). And the Gloss. veteres in Galce Cyrilli, (...) pecor, a pasco
and (...), Rego.
none denis) that (...) signifies to rule and govern. But let the word signify
what it will, in the Civil State, yet in the Ecclesiastical and Scripture Sense
of the Word, where our blessed Saviors Lambs and Sheep (that is the Faithful)
are to be fed, every Bishop and Presbyter (as well as Peter) are (...),
Pastores, and may and ought (...), to feed the ^lock of Christ. So, 1. St. Paul
tells us, Act. 20. 17. (...). The Presbyters of that Church.
who from Miletum, sends for the Presbyters of Ephesus, (I say Presbyters, for
Timothy, who was their first Bishop, was with Paul at Act. 20. 4. 6.
Miletum, and so was none of those he sent for) and when they came, he Exhorts
them to take heed unto themselves, and the Flock, Verse. 28. cap 20. (...) etc.
To feed the Church of God, etc. where St. Paul (when he bids the Presbyters
feed the Church) uses the very same word our blessed Savior does, when he
bids Peter feed his Sheep. 2. So 1. Pet. 5. 2. (...)
. Peter himself (who little dreamed of any Supremacy given him by those words,
Feed my Sheep) writing to the Asiatick Dispersion of the Jews, and Exhorting
the Jewish Elders, (or Presbyters) to a diligent care, in feeding the Flock; he
uses the very same word to them, our blessed Savior did to him, (...) (says
he) Feed the Flock; He thinks it their duty, as well as his, to feed our
blessed Savior's Sheep. And that which further, and ( ad hominem) more
strongly confirms what I have said (in this Particular) is; That our
Adversaries grant (though in Contradiction to the Sense many of them ^ive of
those words, Feed my Sheep, when they ^ould build the Popes Supremacy upon
them) that the word (...), both as it signifies to rule and feed, and so the
duty of ruling and feeding our blessed Saviors Sheep, is so far from being
Peculiar to Peter, or proving his Supremacy, that it is the Duty, not only of
Peter, but of every Bishop in the Christian World, both to rule and feed our
blessed Savior's Sheep. This the Episcopi ( says that Catechism) singulis
Episcopatibus praepos^i sunt, ^t Caeteros Ecclesiae Ministros, and fidelium
populum Regant, and eorum saluti summa Cura Prospiciant; unde in Sacris Literis
Pastores Ovium) saepe Appellantur. Catechis. Trid. part. 2. cap. 7.. 26. page
389. 390. Editionis Paris. 1635.
Trent Catechism expressly affirms, That all Bishops (as well as Peter) are
Pastores, Pastors to Rule as well as Feed the Flock and Sheep of our blessed
Savior; and to prove this, they Cite the Two very Act. 20. 28. 1. Pet. 5. 2. 3.
places which I (a little before) produced to the same purpose, whence it
manifestly appears, That even in our Adversaries Judgment, (when the Popes
Supremacy is a little out of their Head) the feeding our blessed Savior's
sheep, is not Peter' s Supreme Prerogative, but a Duty required of every Bishop
in the World.

3. But this (though enough) is not all; we have greater (and with them
Infallible, and therefore undeniable) Authority to confirm what I have said,
and Confute our Adversaries, as to their proof of Peter's, or the Pope's
Supremacy, from those words, Feed my Sheep. For their Trent Council (which if
the Pope say true, was Dominus Patres Tridentinos Divinitus Inspirare dignatus
est. Pius Papa. 4. in Bulla super forma Juramenti professionis Fidei.
Divinely Inspired, and therefore Infallible; and if he do not say true, he
himself was not only fallible but actually false) expressly tells us, That not
only every Bishop, but every one Praecepto Divino Mandatum est Omnibus, quibus
Animarum Cura Commissa est, Oves Agnoscere, pro iis Sacrificium offerre, verbi
praedicatione, Sacramentorum Administratione, ac bonorum operum Exemplo
pascere, pauperum curam paternam gerere, and in Caetera Munia Pastoralia
incumbere -- ideo Synodus eos admonet, ut praeceptorum divinorum memores, in
Judicio and veritate Pascant and Regant. Council. Trid. Sess. 21. De Reformat.
cap. 1. Edit. Antv^rp. 1633. page 284.
who had Cure of Souls, was bound by the Law of Christ in the Gospel, to rule
and feed his Sheep, by offering Sacrifices for them, by preaching the Word,
Administering the Sacraments, by good Example, by a Paternal Care of the Poor,
and All Other Pastoral Offices. And this is there proved by Texts, quoted in
the Margent; which (with some others) are the very same with those I have (a
little before) cited out of the Act. 20. 28.
Acts of the Apostles, and 1. Pet. 5. 2.
St. Peter's Epistle: Nor those only, but this very place of Joh. 21. 15. 16.
St. John (on which they would build Peter's Supremacy) is Cited in the
Margent, as containing a Precept obliging (not Peter only, but) All, who had
Cure of souls, to feed Christ's sheep. Now if those words, Feed my sheep,
contain Praeceptum, a Precept, Obliging all Pastors to a Pastoral Duty; then
they do not contain (what they pretend) Donum, a Donation of Supremacy.

4. But Pope Boniface. VIII. and Pope Innocent. III. in their before mentioned
That of Bonif. 8. Cap. Unam Sanctam. 1. De Major. and Obed. Extravag. Commun.
and that of Innocent. 3. cap. Solicitae. 6. extra eodem Titulo.
Constitutions, tell us; that by Oves meas, our blessed Savior means, All his
sheep, All Christians in the World* Because he does not speak singulariter of
these or those; but Generaliter of his sheep. Whence they, (and many after
them) conclude, Tha^ our blessed Savior Committed all his Sheep Universally to
Peter's Care, so that even the Apostles, (being his Sheep) were committed to
Peter's Care, and by Consequence, he became their Pastor and Superior.
Certainly they who reason at this rate, and so irrationally may possibly be fit
Pastors to feed Sheep and Oxen, and such other brutish Cattle, but surely not
to feed Men and Christians. For* 1. Feed my sheep, (as all know, unless they b^
such as those two Popes were) is an Indefinite Proposition: and then any Novice
or young^ Sophister in the University, could have truly told them, That
Propositio indefinita in materi^ Contingenti, (as this evidently is) aequivalet
particulari. When we say men are young or wise, or learned; we mean, not all,
but some are such. So he who says, Christ's sheep are to be fed by Peter; must
mean some of them are to be fed by him, pro loco and tempore, as he had place
and time to meet with them. It being impossible he should feed them Maldonut.
speaking of Matthew. 28. 19. where our blessed Savior gives Commission to all
his Apostles -- Go ye therefore into All the World, etc. He says thus -- Non
fieri poterat ut Singuli omnes terrae parts peragrarent, Gentesque Omnes
docerent; neque erat necessarium. Quid enim erat Opus, ut Omnes a singulis,
modo Omnes ab hominibus, aliae ab aliis docerentur. Maldonat. in Joh. 21. 15.
16. etc.. 65. p. 1889. E. This he says, and truly. But then he should have
considered, that if it was impossible for every one of the Apostles to teach
all the world; then it will be impossible for any one. Impossible for Peter to
feed all Christ's Sheep in the whole world: and yet this he endeavors to prove
-- Quicunque intra Ecclesiam erant, Petro pas^endos tradit. Dicit enim pasce
Oves, non has, aut illas, fed pasce Oves meas. Omniu^i ergo suarum Ovium curam
illi dedit. Ibid.. 62.
all. There were many thousands of our blessed Savior's Sheep, whom Peter
never did, nor could see, nor they hear him: And certainly his gracious Lord
and Master would not tie him to Impossibilities. 2. When they say, (which is
evidently untrue) that by those words -- Feed my sheep, all the Faithful are
meant, and are Committed to Peter's care and charge; and therefore the Ex hoc
loco ( Joh. 21. 15.) patet Sanctum Petrum (and Ejus Successores Romanos
Pontifices) esse Caput and Principem Ecclesiae, Omnesque fideles, etiam
Apostolos Ipsi Subjici, and ab eo Pasci and Regi debere. Corn. A Lapide, in
Joh. 21. 15. p. 547. Col. 2.
Apostles themselves (being our Savior's Sheep as well as others) are part of
his Charge; and under his Jurisdiction. This they say indeed usually, but
(miserably mistaken) only say it. For they neither have, nor can have any Just
Ground or Reason for it. For it is certain, 1. That our blessed Savior, is (to
his whole Church) the only Heb. 4. 14. (...).
High Priest, the 1. Pet. 5. 4. (...).
Prince of all the Pastors, and the Grand Heb. 13. 20. (...)
Shepherd of the sheep; and as King, has Imperial Power to Rule and Govern
them. 2. It is certain, the Apostles (from and under him) are Pastores and
Shepherds, as well as Peter, to feed the Flock. But their Power is Ministerial,
not Imperial. Even the Apostleship it self is Act. 1. 17. 25.
(...) a Ministry, and they Ministers of Christ, and his 2. Cor. 4. 5.
Church. Now though in respect of Christ the great Shepherd, they are Sheep,
even Peter himself: yet (on Earth) they are Shepherds only, not Sheep, neither
in respect of the Church, over which our blessed Savior has set them to be
Shepherds; nor in relation one to another. Paul, or James, or John, are no more
Sheep in Respect of Peter, to be fed and ruled by him, then he to be fed and
ruled by them* And therefore to say (as our Adversaries vainly do) that in
those words, Feed my sheep; Peter is Commanded to feed and rule the rest of the
Apostles, as his Charge, (who were Shepherds only, and Sheep to no Superior
Pastor, except our blessed Savior; And by their Apostolical Commission Hoc
erant Caeteri Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus; Pari Consortio praediti and Honoris,
and Potestatis, Cyprian. de Unit. Eccles. p. 208. Edit. Rigaltij. Pastores sunt
Omnes Apostoli, sed Grex Vnus, qui ab Omnibus unanimi Consensione Pascatur.
Pasce Oves meas, belonged equally to all the Apostles, as well as to Peter, in
Cyprian' s Opinion, as shall appear anon.
Equal to himself) is irrational; without any ground in Scripture, or purer
Antiquity. There is another Metaphor concerning the Apostles, and their Feeding
and Building the Church, which may illustrate this business, All the Apostles
(as well and as much as Peter) are in Scripture called Foundations (...) the
Church, converted, fed, and confirmed by them. In respect of Christ, our
blessed Savior (who is the only prime and principal firm^ Rock on which the
Church is built) they are ( all of them) Superstructions; but in respect of the
Christian Church, Foundations; and that without any dependence upon Peter; he
is not the Foundation on which they are built, but but both he and they
immediately upon the Prime Rock and Foundation, Jesus Christ: So that as the
Apostles are Superstructures in the House of God (the Church) in Respect of
Christ, the Prime firm Foundation; and none of them Superstructures, in respect
of Peter: being neither built upon him, nor made Superstructions by him, by his
Feeding or Ruling them: So they (and Peter too) are Sheep in Respect of our
blessed Savior, the great Shepherd of the Sheep; but not in respect of Peter;
they are Shepherds as well as he, and never Committed to his Care or Cure, that
(as his Sheep) he should feed and govern them: And as all the other Apostles
(in Respect of Peter) were Foundations and Shepherds of the Church, coordinate
with, and equal to him: So all other Bishops, the Apostles Successors, were
Equal to Peter's pretended Successor (the Bishop of Rome) and no way bound to
give any Reason of their Administration to him, as to their Superior; much less
as to a Supreme Prince and Monarch of the Christian World, as the Canonists,
Jesuits, and the Popish Party, do now Erroneously and Impiously miscall him.
This was Cyprian's Opinion, in the Place but now Cited; And Rigaltius (a
Learned Roman Catholic) though he Nicol. Regaltius in Observatione Galeata,
Notis suis ad Cypriani Opera praesixa.
seem to say much for Peter's and the Popes Supremacy; yet he Confesses, (as
upon a serious Consideration of several Passages in Vid. Cypr. Epist. 67. p.
128. 129. Edit. Rigaltii: and Epist. 72. Ibid. p. 142. in Cal^e dictae
Epistolae, etc. and Epist. 55. p. 95.
Cyprian, and the African Councils, well he might) That Cyprian's Singulis
Pastoribus Episcopis portionem gregis esse adscriptam, quam regat unusquisque;
Actus sui, sive Administrationis suae rationem redditurus; Non Romae, sed in
Coelis; Non Cornelio, sed Christo -- Negat ( Cyprianus) Ecclesiae Romanae Vllas
ess^ Parts in Causa Novatiani, peracta jam in Africa Cognitione damn^ti. (
There lay no Appeal to the Pope, as Superior to the Bishops of Africa).
Rigalti^s in Notis ad (...) ^^stolam 55. p. 95. and Notarum p. 77. 78.
Opinion was, That all Bishops were equal, and were bound to give an Account of
their Administration to our blessed Savior Only, and not to any Superior
Bishop, no not to Peter' s Successor, the Pope. Nor is it any way probable,
that a Person so Excellent and Knowing as Cyprian, should think otherwise;
seeing in his time (as is notorious and well known to all who know Antiquity)
there was no Patriarch or Archbishop Superior (by any Law of God or Man) to the
Ordinary Bishops, (as may, and when there is an Opportunity, shall be made
Good.) It is true, Cyprian (if it be he, and not the Interpolator of that
Tract) says, That the Primacy Cyprian De Unitate Ecclesiae, page 208. apud
Rigaltium. Hoc ^rant Caeteri Apostoli, quod fuit Potrus, Pari Consortio
praediti honoris and Potestatis; sed Primatus Petro datur.
was given to Peter; and that the Church of Rome was The Cyprian. Epist. 55. ad
Cornelium, page 95. Ad Petri Cathedram, and ad Ecclesiam Principalem, unde
unitas exorta est.
Principal Church. Now this Primacy, and Principality Cyprian speaks of, is, by
me before, and now freely granted. A Primacy of Order and Precedence, not of
Jurisdiction, or that Monarchical Authority, which (Anciently was not pretended
to by themselves) they now contend for. And this Primacy, which anciently was
allowed to the Bishop of Rome, was not from our blessed Savior's gift, but the
greatness of that Imperial City; Non a (...) etc. Quia Vrbs illa Imperaret,
Patres dederunt Privilegia. Conc. Chalcedonense. Can. 28.
Petro, sed a Patribus, (as the Canon of Chalcedon tells us.) And that which
makes it more probable, that I have given the true Sense of Cyprian, is; That
Rigaltius (a Learned Roman Catholic) in his Dissertations, and Notes on
Cyprian, Explains Cyprian's meaning just as I have done, reducing the Primacy
and Principality of the Roman Church, not from any Prerogative given to that
Bishop or Church by our blessed Savior, but from the greatness of that Ad
Ecclesiam Principalem] Id est, in Vrbe Principali Constitutam. Rigaltius ad
Epist. Cyprian. 55. p. 78. Notarum
Imperial City: And then Cites the Canon of the General Council of Chalcedon,
which in Terminis, and (when Translated) in plain English, says the very same
thing I have done. And indeed that Canon, made by Six hundred and thirty
Fathers Synodically met, in a legitimate General Council, confirmed by
Justiniani Constit. Novel. 115. Cap. 3.. 14. Graeco-Lat. Lugd. 1571. p. 745.
and Novel. Constable. 131. cap. 1. ibid. p. 1056. where the Emperor says -- (...)
etc. dictarum quatuor Synodorum dogmata, sicut Sanctas Scripturas accipimus,
and Canones sicut Leges Observamus.
Imperial Edicts, and received into the Codex Canonum Ecclesiae Vniversae, does
Authentickly and utterly overthrow that vast Monarchical Supremacy, which the
Pope and his Party for some Ages last past (without any just ground) contend
for. If any of our Adversaries think otherwise, (as possibly they may) I shall
make them this fair offer; Let them bring me any Canon, of any General Council
(of equal Authority and Antiquity with this of Chalcedon) by which they can
prove the Popes pretended Supremacy, (or any one Article of their own new Trent
Creed). And for the future, I shall acquiesce, and they shall have my Thanks
and Subscription.

6. Observe. 6.
Pius. V. in his Bull says further -- Christus Catholicam Ecclesiam uni soli in
terris, Apostolorum Principi Petro, Petrique Successori Romans Ponti^ici, in
Potestatis plenitudine tradidit gubernandam. Ita Bulla dicta in principio.
That our blessed Savior Committed the Care and Charge of the Universal
Church, with a plenitude of Power to govern it, to one only, that is to Peter
the Prince of the Apostles, And His Successors. Here I consider,

1. That although it be certain, (from Scripture, and evident Testimonies of
pure and primitive Antiquity) that Peter never had, nor Executed any such
Monarchical Supremacy over the other Apostles, and the whole Christian Church,
as is now vainly pretended to; yet it is as certain, that the Pope (and his
Party) cry up, and magnify St. Peter's Power, that he (as his Heir and
Successor) may possess the same Power. For this they say, (and without any just
proof, say it only) That it was our blessed Savior's will, that Peter' s
Successor should have Christus Petrum universi fidelium generis Caput and
Pastorem Constituit, cum illi Oves suas pascendas commendavit, ut qui ei
Successisset* Eandem Plane totius Ecclesiae regendae Potestatem habere
voluerit. Catechis. Trid. Part. 1. De. 9. Symboli Art.. 13. p. 117. Paris. 1635.
The Very same Power Peter had; and this because he was Cum in Petri Cathedra
sedeat, ut Petri Successor, Christique Vicarius in terris, Universally Ecclesiae
Praesidet. Ibid. Part. 2. cap. 7.. 28. p. 391.
Christ's Vicar, (though every Bishop in the World, (as shall, God willing,
appear anon) be Christ's Vicar as well, and as much as he) and sat in Peter' s
Chair, as his lawful Successor.

2. But admit, ( dato non Concesso) which is absolutely untrue, That Peter had
such a Supremacy and Monarchical Power (as they Erroneously pretend to) yet it
might be Personal, to himself, and for his Life only, (as his Apostolical power
was; as to that part of it, which was properly Apostolical) and not Hereditary,
to be transferred to any Successor. So that the Hinge of the Controversy will
be here, and our Adversaries concerned to prove two Things. 1. That Peter's
Power (be what it will) was not Personal, but Hereditary, and to be Transmitted
to his Successor. 2. And that the Pope and Bishop of Rome was his Legal
Successor. For if they do not, upon just Grounds, make both these good, good
night to their pretended Supremacy.

For the First; That the greatest Power St. Peter and the Apostles had, was
Extraordinary and Personal, not to be Transmitted to any Successor (what Power
they did transmit, I shall anon show) will be Evident, in these Particulars.

1. Peter and the Apostles, had Vocationem a Christo Our blessed Matthew. 10. 1.
Mark. 3. 14. Luke 9. 1.
Savior called them all (except Matthias) Immediately; as is evident from the
Text. And, sure I am, that the Pope cannot pretend to such an Immediate Call.

2. The Apostles (every one as well as Peter) had a Power given them to do
Miracles, to Cast out Ibid. Matthew. 10. 1.
Devils, and heal all manner of Diseases, and Sicknesses. Nor can Peter's
Successor (whoever he be) pretend to this.

3. The Jurisdiction, which was by our blessed Savior given to every Apostle,
(to James and John, and Paul as well as Peter) was Universal; the whole World
was their Diocese. Not that every one could possibly be in every place, but
where ever any of them came, they had Authority to Preach, Administer the
Sacraments, Constitute and Govern Churches. So Paul did at It does not appear
in Scripture, that Peter ever was at Antioch, save once. Gal. 2. 11. But Paul
was many times, and long there, and constituted that Church. See Act. 11. 26.
Act. 14. 21. 28. Act. 15. 35. Act. 18. 22. 23.
Antioch and Rome, as much, and Paul was there two whole years, Act. 28. 30.
writ them a long and excellent Epistle; But it is certain, Peter never writ to
them, nor can it appear from Scripture that he was ever two weeks, much less
two years, at Rome. Where St. Paul is, by Origin, said to be (next Christ)
Primus Ecclesiarum Fundator. Origin Contra Celsum, lib. 1. page 49. Graeco-Lat.
more than Peter; though they pretend that Peter alone (and not Paul) was first
Bishop of both those Places. That every Apostle (as well as Peter) had
Universal Jurisdiction and Authority over the whole World, is in Scripture
Evident by the Commission our blessed Savior gave them -- Matthew 28. 19. 20.
Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe whatsoever I have Commanded you. And
again, -- Mark. 16. 15.
Go ye into all the World, and Preach the Gospel to every Creature. Here I
observe, 1. That the Apostles in their first Mission, were sent to the Matthew.
10. 5. 6.
Jews, and them only. But now their Commission is Enlarged; and they are
Equally sent (every one as much as any one) to all Nations (says Matthew) To
All the World, ((...), as Eusebius. 1. 3. Demonstrat. Evangelicae. p. 136. and he
has our blessed Savior's word for it. Matthew. 24. 14. (...),
Eusebius Explains it) says St. Mark; Jidem Jurisdictionis Apostolicae and
Orbis Termini; The whole World was their Diocese; every ones Jurisdiction
Extended so far, and Peter's could not extend no further. 2. For the Persons
they were to Preach to, they were Every Man in the World. It is (...), to every
Creature, (every Rational Creature, who (if Infancy and Infirmity hindered not)
was capable. They were to Convert Pagans, and make them our blessed Savior's
Disciples and Sheep, and then feed them, with the Word and Sacraments: (...),
(says Matthew) Convert, and make them Disciples, and then Baptize and Teach
them to observe whatever I have Commanded you. Those words, Feed my sheep (on
which without any just Reason, they would build Peter's Supremacy) contain only
an Indefinite Proposition, which (as every one who understands Logic, must
Confess) is only equivalent to a Particular; But here the Commission, given by
our blessed Savior, (to every Apostle as well as Peter) is expressly Universal;
Preach to every Creature: That is, Feed All my sheep. This is a Truth so
evident, that a Learned Franc. Victoria. Relect. Theol. Lugduni. 1587. Relect.
2. De Potestate Ecclesiae Concl. 4. p. 85. where he tells us, Apostoli Omnes
habuerunt Aequalem Potestatem cum Petro. Quod sic Intelligo; quod Quilibet
Apostolorum habuit Potestatem Ecclesiasticam in Toto Orb, and ad Omnes Actus
ad quos Petrus habuit. Non tamen loquor de illis Actibus, qui spectant ad solum
summum Pontificem, ut est Congregatio Generalis Concilij. And this he there
proves; as to their Power over the whole world; and to Acts; only (and he dared
do no otherwise) he excepts some few, to which no Pope, for many Ages,
pretended. In the present Roman Breviary the Universal Jurisdiction of Paul (as
well as Peter) is acknowledged; Paul an Apostle, Praedicator veritatis per
Vniversum Mundum. In Festo Cathedrae Petri Antiochiae. Febr. 22.
Roman Catholic Confesses and fully proves it. Only (to save the Popes and
his own Credit) he says, That to call General Councils belonged only to Peter
and the Pope, by their Supremacy, and not to any other, But this is, gratis
dictum, and an evident Untruth. For the Pope (by no Law of God or Man) has, or
ever had Power, to call any General Council: And for many Ages never pretended
to it; which I only say now, and (when there is a Convenient time) can and will
make it A Learned Papist, Doctor of the Sorbon (newly come to my hand) has
saved me the labor, and ex professo, and data opera proved, that all the Eight
first General Councils were called solely by the Emperors: The Popes did indeed
(as he evidently proves) sometimes Petition the Emperors, to call a Council at
such a time or place; but they were always both called and confirmed by the
Emperors. Vid. Edm. Richer. D. Sorb. in Hist. de Conc. General. Colon. 1680.
Good. In the mean time, I think it is certain, either, 1. That by those words,
Feed my sheep, (on which they build the Popes and Peter's Supremacy) our blessed
Savior gave Peter no supreme Power to call General Councils, that by them he
might feed his Sheep: Or, 2. That the Apostles and Primitive Christians in
their times, knew no such thing. For, 1. When a Controversy arose at Antioch,
about Circumcision, they send not to Peter, as supreme Head of the Church,
desiring him to call a Council; but to the Act. 15. 2.
Apostles and Elders. Had they known and believed, that Peter had been Invested
with such Power and Supremacy, as is now pretended; it had been Civility and
Duty in them, to have sent to him in the first place; But they send to the
Apostles and Elders; without any notice taken of (what they knew not) Peter's
Prerogative. 2. It neither does, nor can appear, that Peter called that
Council. 3. Nor did he (as Head and President of the Council) speak Act. 15. 7.
first; but the Question was much disputed, before Peter spoke any thing. 4.
Nor did Peter (after the Question was debated) give the Definitive Sentence;
For it is Evident Act. 15. 19. 20. 21.
in the Text, That James the Less, Son of Alphaeus, and Bishop of Jerusalem,
gave the Definitive Sentence, which both Peter and the whole Act. 15. 22.
Council acquiesc'd in. 5. Nor did Peter send his Legates to Antioch, to
signify what he, and the Council had done, but the Ibidem.
Apostles and the whole Church chose and sent their Messengers. 6. Nor are the
Letters sent in Peter's Name, or any notice taken of any Primacy or Prerogative
of his, above the other Apostles; No, the (...) is, Act. 15. 23. Vide dictum
Edmundum Richerium D. Sorbonicum, in Hist. Conc. Generalium, lib. 1. cap. 13..
5. page 401. Edit. Colon. 1680. Ubi ex Card. Alliaceno, and Concilio hoc
Apostolico Act. 15. demonstrat, Petrum Primatum (qualem Jesuitae vellent) non
habuisse, sed Primatum illum Monarchicum ab Hildebrando, seu Gregorio. 7.
retroductum. Ibid.. 2. 5.
The Apostles, Elders, and Brethren send Greeting. 7. Nor was that Decree
published To the Churches in Peter's Name, as made or Act. 16. 4.
confirmed by him, more than any other Apostle. 8. Nay, the Apostles send Peter
on a Act. 8. 14.
Message to Samaria (and he obeys and goes) which had been a strange piece of
Presumption, had either he or they known his (now pretended) Monarchical
Supremacy, 9. So far were those Primitive Christians, from knowing or
acknowledging the now pretended Monarchical Supremacy of Peter, that even in
the Apostles times and Presence, they question and Act. 11. 2. 3.
call him to an Account for his Actions. (...), disceptabant adversus illum
(says the Vulgar Latin) tanquam valde offensi expostulabant (says Chrysostom.)
And honest John Ferus (a Roman Catholic) tells us, Petrus Apostolorum Primus,
rationem reddere Ecclesiae Cogitur, nec indigne fert, quia non Dominum sed
Ministrum Ecclesiae se agere sciebat. Ferus in Act. 11. 2.
That he was Compelled to give a Reason of his Actions to the Church; nor was
Peter offended at it, because he knew that he was not a Lord, but Minister of
the Church. But now (as Impijautem Pontifices Nunc nec ab Ecclesia argui, aut
in Ordinem cogi volunt, quasi sint Domini non Ministri. Ibidem.
Ferus there goes on) the Case is altered; for wicked Popes, (as though they
were Lords and not Ministers) will not be Questioned for any thing, or
reproved. Had the Canon Law been then in force, (which his pretended Successors
have approved, and by their Supreme Authority published) he might have told
those who Questioned him, Si Papa innumerabiles populos sccum ducit, primo
mancipio Gehennae, etc. Hujus Culpas redarguere praesumat mortalium nullus:
quia Cunctos ipse judicaturus, a nemine est Judicandus; nisi sit a side deviss.
Can. si Papa. 6. Did. 40.
That he was to judge all men, and none him; nor was he to be reproved by any
mortal man, though by his Impiety and ill Example, he carried thousands to Hell
with him. 10. Nay, St. Paul does not only Gal. 2. 11. 12. 13. 14.
question St. Peter's Actions, but to his face, before the People publicly
condemn them, and that justly; for (he says) he was to be blamed: which he
neither would, nor indeed well could have done, had he known Peter to have been
so far his Superior as to have (by Divine Institution) a Monarchical
Jurisdiction and Power over him. 11. Lastly, St. Paul himself tells us, 2. Cor.
11. 5. and 12. verse. 11.
That he was in Nothing Inferior to the Chiefest Apostles; not to Peter, James,
or John, whom Gal. 2. 9.
elsewhere he reckons the chiefest. I know they say, That Paul was equal to
Peter as to his Apostolical Office, but Inferior to Peter, as he was Locus hic
non derogat praerogativae Petri, qui totius Ecclesiae rector and Pastor
Constitutus, etiam ipsis Apostolis Major and Superior fuit. Estius in 2. Cor.
12. 11.
Supreme Pastor over the Apostles, and the whole Church. But this is gratis
dictum, and indeed a begging of the Question, and taking that for granted,
which never was, nor ever will be proved. However, it is certain, 1. That every
Apostle (as well as Peter) had an Universal supreme Qui Apostolus est, Sammam
habet in Omnem Ecclesiam Potestatem, Bellarmin. De Romans Pontif. lib. 2. cap.
12. in Respons. 3. and Object. 2.
Authority and Jurisdiction, in any Part of the World, and over any Christians
wherever they came. 2. That this largeness of their Jurisdiction, was
Apostolical, and Personal to themselves, which they neither did, nor could
transmit to their Successors; whose Jurisdiction was limited to some City and
Territory, and that particular Place, the Care and Charge whereof was committed
unto them; as Ephesus was to Timothy, and Creet to Titus. 3. Our Adversaries
confess this, (as to all the other Apostles) but for Peter, they say, He
Successio ex Christi Instituto, and Jure Divino est, quia ipse Christus
Instituit in Petro Pontificatum, infinem Mundi duraturum, ac ideo quicunque
Petro succedit, a Christo accipit Pontificatum. Bellarmin. dicto lib. and cap..
ut autem.
transmitted his Supremacy and Universal Jurisdiction over the whole Church to
his Successor, and that by the Institution of our blessed Savior, and Divine
Right. If they could prove this, the Controversy were at an end; we would
acquiesce, and admit (what upon undeniable evidence we deny) the Popes
Supremacy. But this they neither do, nor is there any possibility they ever
should prove. For there is not one Syllable in Romanum Pontificem succedere
Petro, non habetur express in Scripturis, (no, nor Implicit neither) tamen
succedere aliquem Petro, deducitur evidenter ex Scripturis, illum autem esse
Romanum Pontificem, habetur ex traditione Apostolica. Bellarmin. dicto lib. and
cap.. Observandum Tertio.
Scripture, of Peter's Successor, or of what Power he received from him: and
nothing but Scripture can prove our blessed Savior's Institution, and Divine
Law, whereby Peter's Supremacy is transmitted to his Successor. The truth is,
that Pius. V. in the beginning of this his Impious Bull, and other Popes many
Vid. Cap. Solitae. 6. Extra. de Major. and Obedientia. and Cap. Per
venerabilem. 13. Extra. Qui filij sunt legit. and Cap. Ad Apostolicae. 2. De
Sent. and re judicata, in. 6. and Cap. pro Human. 1. De Homicidio, in. 6.
times in their Bulls, Breves, and Decretal Constitutions, and their Writers
generally, take it for granted, that our blessed Savior gave Peter the
Supremacy over the whole Church, and to his Successors after him: And when Vid.
Tho. Campegium Episc. Feltrensem, de Potestate Romans Pont. Capp. 13. 14. and
Bellarminum de Roman. Pontisice, lib. 2. c. 12. etc.
some of them, sometimes go about to prove it, the Reasons they bring, are so
far from Sense and Consequence, that they may deserve Pity and Contempt, rather
than a serious Answer. But when Reason will not Convince, they have other Roman
Arts to Cosen men into a Belief, that what was given to Peter, was likewise
given to the Pope his Successor; and that is (amongst other ways) by Corrupting
the Ancient Fathers with false Translations. So when Chrysostom had faid, That
the Power of the Keys, was not given to Peter only, but to the rest of the
Apostles: Pet. Possinus adds, Successors; and renders it thus -- The Power of
the Keys was not given only to Peter And His (...), etc Non id Petro uni
Successorbusque suis reservatum. Pet. Possinus Jesuita, Catena Graec. Patrum in
Matthew. Tom. 1. p. 232.
Successors, etc. where Chrysostom (whom he Translates) has nothing of Peter's
Successors: but truly and plainly says -- That the Power of the Keys was not
given only to Peter, but to the rest of the Apostles, when our blessed Joh. 20.
22. 23.
Savionr told them, whose sins ye remit they are remitted, and whose sins ye
retain, they are retained. So in the Epistle of Pope Vid. Pet. de Marca de
Concordia Sacerdotij and Imperij. Tom. 2. 1. 5. c. 10.. 2. p. 35. and Pet.
Crab. Conc. Tom. 1. page 945. Col. 2. The words are these; Vnde Sanctissimus
and Beatissimus Papa, Caput Vniversalis Ecclesiae, etc.
Leo to the Bishops of France, and of his Legate Paschasinus about the
Condemnation of Dioscorus, in the Council of Chalcedon, these Words occur in
the Latin Copies -- The most holy and most blessed Pope Leo, Head of the
Universal Church: Where these words -- Head of the Universal Church, are not in
the Greek Copies; (as that Learned Archbishop ingenuously and truly Absent a
Contextu Graeco, verba illa, Caput Vniversalis, etc. loco dicto, in margin.
Confesses) but (by Roman Arts) falsely and basely interserted, that so they
might by fraud (what by no Reason they can) maintain, the Pope's impiously
usurped Supremacy. And that we may know, how unpleasing the publishing of such
things (though evidently true) are to the Pope and his Party at Rome, (who are
resolved, in despite of truth) to maintain the Popes pretended Supremacy) this
Learned Work of that great Roman Catholic Archbishop Vide Indicem Librorum
Prohibitorum Alexand. 7. Jussu Editum, Romae, Ann. 1664. verbo, De Concordia
Sacerdotij, etc. p. 29. and p. 352. ubi extat Decretum Congrationis Jndicis, in
quo damnatur hic Petri de Marca Liber.
, is damned by the Inquisitors, not to be printed, read, or had by any. He who
seriously reads (and understands) the Latin Versions of the Greek Councils,
Fathers, and other Greek and Latin Writers, may find an hundred such Frauds, to
maintain (what they know, they have no just reason for) their Papal and
Antichristian Tyranny: And their Jndices Expurgatorij are Authentic Evidences,
to Convince them of these Unchristian Practices, to conceal truth, and cosen
the World into a belief of their pernicious Papal Errors. Nor is this all, (nor
the worst) for so desperately are they set upon it, that if their Interest and
the Papal Monarchy cannot otherwise be maintained (as it is impossible it should
by any just and lawful means) they speak impiously and blasphemously of our
blessed Savior. Thomas Campegius Episcopus Feltrensis, in his Book of the
Power of the Pope, to Paul. IV. says, -- Non fuisset Christus Diligens
Pater-familias, si non dimisisset in Terra aliquem qui Vice sua possit
subvenire necessitatibus Ecclesiae, etc. De Potestat. Romans Pontif. cap. 1.. 3.
page 2.
That our blessed Savior had not been a Diligent Father of the Family, to his
Church, unless he had left such a Monarch over his Church, as the Pope, of whom
he is there speaking: And the Cites Pope Innocent, and Aquinas to justify it.
Albertus Pighius is as high to the same impious purpose, and expressly says --
Christus Ecclesiae Defuissct, nec de Necessariis prospexisset, Nisi Monarcham
aliquem and Judicem Constituisset, etc. Vide Albert. Pighium Controvers. 3.
fol. 70. 71. 76.
That our blessed Savior had been wanting to his Church in things necessary,
if he had not Constituted and left such a Monarch and Judge of Controversies.
And a great Christus dum fuit in Mundo, de jure naturali, in Imperatorem and
Quoscunque Alios Deposnionis Sementias far potuisset, and Damnationis -- and
Eadem Ratione and Vicarius ejus potest. Nam non videretur Dominus Discretus
fuisse, nisi unicum post se Talem Vicarium reliquisset. Fuit autem iste
Vicarius Petrus: and idem dicendum est de Successoribus Petri. Ita Petrus
Bertrandus in Addit. ad Glossas ad Cap. Unam Sanctam. 1. De Major. and Obed.
Extrav. Commun.
Canonist (if that be possible) more blasphemously says -- That our blessed
Savior, while he was on Earth, had power to pronounce the Sentence of
Deposition, and Damnation against the Emperor, or any other; And by the same
Reason, His Vicar now can do it. And then he impiously adds -- That our blessed
Savior would not have seemed Discreet, unless he had left such a Vicar, as
could do all these things, etc. So if it be granted (which is most evident and
certainly true) that our blessed Savior left no such Monarchical Vicar, as the
Pope; then they are not afraid to accuse him of want of Diligence and
Discretion. And this impious Gloss is approved and confirmed by Pope Vide
Bullam Greg. 13. dat. Romans 1. Julij, Ann. 1580. praefixam. Corp. Juris Can.
Paris. 1612. and 1618.
Gregory. XIII. as (we may be sure) what makes for his Extravagant Power and
Papal Monarchy (how Erroneous and Impious soever) shall not want his
Approbation. And thus much of the third Privilege of the Apostles, their
Universal Jurisdiction; equally in them all, in James, and John, and Paul as
much as Peter; and this Jurisdiction Personal to all, and never transmitted to
any of their Successors.

4. Besides the Immediate call of the Apostles, their Power of doing Miracles,
and their Universal Jurisdiction over all the World; they were (all of them)
(...), Divinely Inspired by the Holy Ghost, so that they had Infallibility, so
far, as whatever they preached or writ was Divine, and the undoubted Word of
God. This Privilege also was Personal, nor ever was Communicated to any of
their Successors. I know that the Sic Omnes Apostolicae Sodis Sanctiones
accipiendae sunt, tanquam Ipsius divini Petri voce firmatae sint. Can. sic
Omnes. 2. Did. 19. And this the Gloss there endeavors to prove, from a
spurious and ridiculous, as well as impious Canon. Can. Non Nos. 1. Did. 40.
Canonists and The Jesuits in their Thesis proposed in the Claromont Coll. 12.
December. Ann. 1661. Impudently and Impiously say, Christus Ecclesiae regimen
primum Petro, dein Successoribus Commisit, and Eandem quam habebat Ipse,
Infallibilitatem, Concessit, quoties ex Cathedra loqueretur. And then. These.
20. tells us -- Datur Infallibilis Controversiarum Judex, etiam Extra Concilium
Generale, Tum in Quaestio ^ibus Juris, tum facti.
Jesuits, (in the last and worst of times) would make the World believe
(without any shadow of rational ground) that Peter transferred his
Infallibility to the Pope, and made him the Infallible Judge of all
Controversies of Faith, and Fact too. A thing so evidently false, and without
any possibility of proof, that it is a wonder, tha^ any should have the
Confidence to assert it, especially in Paris, the great Metropolis of (...)
Church which constantly does, and has deny^ the Popes Infallibility and
Superiority to a General Council. 2. But that which might for ever silence this
Irrational and Injust Claim (...) Infallibility in the Pope, is, that (for
Matter o^ Fact) none of them, (though they were some times nibling at a kind of
Supremacy) for above a Thousand Years after our blessed Savior, either did or
dared pretend to Infallibility; and if they had, they had made themselves
ridiculous. For, 3. It was notoriously known, that several of their Popes were
Heretics. For instance, Hieronymus de Scriptoribus Ecclesiast in Fortunatiano.
Liberius, Vid. Hist. Haeresis Monothlitarum, per Fran. de Combesis
Dominicanum. Paris. 1648. p. 65. etc. 121. etc. ubi contra Pighium, Baronium,
etc. probat evidenter Honorium Synodo. 6. damnatum.
Honorius, Vid. D. Rlch. Crakanthorp, in Vigilio dormitante.
Vigilius, etc. And for Heresy Condemned in General Councils, as is evident
from the Acts themselves. and has been demonstrated, not only by Protestants,
but by very Learned men of the Roman Communion. 4. And he who seriously reads,
and impartially considers their Papal Bulls, Breves, and Decretal Let any man
read those two Constitutions before named. 1. That of Innocent. 3. Cap.
Solicitae. 6. Extra de Major. and Obedient. and, 2. That of Bonif. 8. Cap. Unam
Sanctam. 1. eodem Titulo. Extravag. Commun. and if he have eyes, and will
Impartially use them, he will find what I say, true. Or he may (with the same
success) read the Bulls and Damnations of the Emperor Hen. 4. by Greg. 7. in
Bull. Romans 1638. Tom. 1. p. 49. 50. 51. And of Freder. 2. Ibid. p. 94. 95. by
Innoc. 4. And the Excommunications of the same Emperor, by Greg. 9. Ann. 1239.
Ibid. in dicto Bullario. Tom. 1. p. 89. 90.
Constitutions; and in them how ridiculously they reason, and profane (rather
than expound) Scripture; will have abundant reason to believe, that those Popes
were so far from Infallibility, that their own Writings Convince them guilty of
Gross Ignorance and Folly.

5. Lastly, All the Apostles were Fundamenta Ecclesiae, Domus Dei, Foundations
of the Church, or House of God, (as has before been evidently proved from
Scripture) and this was in all the Apostles Extraordinary, and a Personal
Apostolical Privilege, to which, (as it was in the Apostles) none of their
Successors (no not the Pope,) ever did, or (with any reason) could pretend. And
as this Apostolical Privilege, so the other four before mentioned (1.
Immediate Vocation. 2. Power to work Miracles. 3. Universality of Jurisdiction.
4. Infallibility in all things they preached or writ.) I say, all these
Privileges, were Extraordinary and Personal to the Apostles, and never were
transmitted to any of their Successors. And this being granted, (as of
necessity it ought and must) it will evidently follow, that Peter neither had,
nor could have, that Monarchical Supremacy over the Apostles and Universal
Church, to which the Pope and his Party vainly, and without any reason or
ground pretend. For that Papal Supremacy and Monarchy they pretend Peter had,
(according to their Hypothesis) consisted principally, in the Universality of
his Jurisdiction over the whole Church, and his Infallibility, as a Judge, to
determine Controversies of Faith; both which every Apostle had, as much and as
well as he) and therefore it was impossible, that (in these respects) he should
have any Superiority (much less Supremacy) over the other Apostles, more than
they over him; especially, seeing in Scripture, (to men who have good Eyes, and
will Impartially use them) there is not one Syllable looks that way. Nay,
seeing our blessed Savior has expressly determined the contrary. The Apostles
were disputing and reasoning amongst themselves, which of them should be
greatest: (they had their Infirmities and ambitious desires). But our Savior
tells them -- Matthew. 20. 26. 27.
Whosoever will be great among you (though Peter be the man) let him be their
Minister; and whosoever will be (...), Primus seu Princeps, (plus est quam esse
Magnum) aliis Omnibus Major (yet this the Pope would have). Luc. Burgensis. in
Matthew. 20. 27.
chief, let him be your Servant. And again, -- Matthew. 23. 8. 9. 10. 11.
Be not ye called Masters, for one is your Master, even Christ (not Peter) and
ye are Brethren; but he that will be greatest among you, shall be your Servant.
The Apostles had no Master under Heaven, but their blessed Savior; it was of
him, and him Only, that they learned the Gospel, and that Immediately; they had
it not from Gal. 1. 1.
any man, nor one from another. Our blessed Savior was their only Master and
Superior, and they his Scholars, subordinate to him, and coordinate amongst
themselves. He tells them, that they are Brethren; Condiscipuli,
School-fellows. Names which (in themselves, and in their Master's meaning)
import Equality; especially as to any Jurisdiction one over another. There may
be amongst Scholars of the same School, and Brethren, an inequality, (and so
there was amongst the Apostles) 1. In respect of Age; Some might be elder, some
younger. 2. In respect of their coming to that School; some might come before
others; So Andrew was first called to our blessed Saviors School, (before
Peter Joh. 1. 40, 41, etc.
). 3. In respect of Natural Parts and Abilities, some might have greater
Capacities then others. 4. In respect of their Masters Love and Kindness, he
might love one more then another, So amongst the Twelve, John was the belovod
Disciple. Such inequality there was amongst them, and we willingly grant it.
But to say, (as the Pope, and many of his Party most vainly do) that amongst
these Brethren, and School-fellows in our blessed Savior's School, Peter, (or
any other) had not only an Authority and Jurisdiction, but a Monarchical
Supremacy, over all the rest, this is so contradictory to our blessed Savior's
plain words, and the manifest and undoubted meaning of them; that were it not,
that we know men may be swayed with worldly Interests, and sometimes have
strong Delusions to believe a Lie; it were incredible that any Learned men
should (with so much Confidence, and no Reason, assert the Contrary. To pass by
all Testimonies of Ancient Fathers for many hundred years, and many sober
Papists before Luther, (who neither knew, nor believed Peter's Monarchy over
the Church and his fellow Apostles, his Equals) sure I am, 1. That Francis
Matthew. 23. 8. Omnes autem vos fratres estis. On which words, Luc. Brugensis
says thus -- Quia fratres sumus, Neminem in alios Magisterio fungi Concedit --
Fratres non Magistri Alii in Alios -- estis Condiscipuli, nemo in alium proprie
agere potest Magistrum. Nullus aliorum Magisterium mereatur, se habere vos
Omnes merito debeatis Condiscipulos. Christus Solus Omnium Magister
agnoscendus. Ita L. Brugensis Commentar. in. 4. Evang. ad. 23. Math. 8. p. 361.
vid. Hieronym. in Gal. 2. 1. ubi dicit Petrum, Paulum, and reliquos Apostolos
fuisse aequales.
Lucas Brugensis, a Roman Catholic (in our days) eminent in their Church for
Dignity and Learning, says the same thing I have done (and on the same Texts)
for the Equality of the Apostles, against Peter's pretended Monarchy. 2. And a
greater then he, (I mean, Sed quia Ecclesia regenda est juxta unitatem,
necessarium fuit, Institui ab Apostolis modum quendam Communionis inter
Episcopos, secundum Exemplum, A Christo datum in Institutione Collegij
Apostolici; quod Vniversum Ecclesiae Corpus repraesentabat: Ideoque
praescribenda ab iis fuit forma regiminis, Aristocratici nimirum, it a ut unus
Praesideret. Pet. de Marca de Concordia Sacerdotij and Imperij, lib. 6. cap.
1.. 2. page 58. Col. 1.
Petrus de Marca Archbishop of Paris) convinced with the Evidence of the former
Texts, and Truth, was of Opinion, and has published it to the World, That our
blessed Savior, at his Ascension, did not leave the Church established in
Peter, and a Monarchy; But in an Aristocratie, or the College of the Apostles.
In which College Peter was one, not Superior (much less a Monarch) to the
other Apostles; and the Apostles left the Government of the Church Established
in the Bishops, and Aristocratical; only he thinks, that both in the College
of the Apostles, and Councils of Bishops after them, there was (for Orders
sake) to be a President, (not a Monarch, for that was Inconsistent with
Aristocratie) And (if this will content them) we will grant it. Because we do
know, that the Ancient Church allowed the Pope the prime Place and Precedence
in Councils, (for Orders sake) and that not by any Divine Right, (which was not
in those days, so much as pretended to) but because Rome was the Conc.
Chalcedon. Can. 28. Conc. Constant. 1. Can. 5. apud P. Crabb. Conc. Tom. 1.
page 411.
Imperial City, and Metropolis of the Roman Empire; the greatness of the City
usually giving greatness and precedence to the Bishops; such were
Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, etc. I know the Inquisitors at Rome have
damned this Book of But it is not only Pet, de Marca, but even the Popish
General Councils of Pisa, Constance, and Basil, and the Gallican Church and
Sorbon, and the Ancient Church for a thousand years after our blessed Savior,
which maintained the same Doctrine Marca did; as is evidently proved by a
Learned Sorbon Doctor, Edm. Rechier. In Hist. Conc. General. l. 1. Edit. Colon.
Ann. 1680. The design of the whole Book is against the Popes Monarchical
Supremacy and Infallibility. Vide dicti lib. cap. 13. page 393. etc.
Petrus de Marca, but this is no Argument, that what he has said, is not true;
Grande aliquo^ bonum est, quod a Nerone (ab Inquisitoribus) damnatur. To
conclude this Point, if our Adversaries assent not to this manifest Truth, as
(being Contradictory to their worldly Interest and misconceived Infallible
Pretensions) it is probable they will not; I shall make them this (to all
unprejudiced Lovers of Truth) fair offer. Let them give me any one cogent
Argument from Scripture or Universal Tradition (and nothing else can do it)
whereby they can prove, the following Positions; I will thank God and them for
the discovery, and promise hereby to be their Proselyte.

1. If they can (by any such Argument) prove that Peter (by Divine Right) had
such a Monarchical Supremacy and Jurisdiction over the Apostles, and the whole
Church, (as is vainly pretended) I will yield the Cause. But if he had no such
Power, it is impossible he should transmit the Power (he never had) to his
Successors.

2. Let it be supposed, (which yet is evidently untrue) that St. Peter had such
a Monarchical Authority and Jurisdiction, even over the rest of the Apostles,
let them prove by any such Argument as is before mentioned; that it was not
only Temporal, and his only for his life; that it was not to have an end and
period with his Person. For if it was, then his Successor (whoever he be) can
have no pretense to it. For it is impossible, that any Successor, can have any
legal or just Claim to that Power, which vanished and ceased to be, with his
Predecessor, who possessed it only for his life.

3. Admit both these to be true, (which yet are equally and evidently false)
that Peter had such a Power, and that it was not Personal, but to be
transmitted to his Successor, seeing such transmission must either be done by
our blessed Savior immediately, or (by Power derived from him) by Peter. Let
our Adversaries make it appear, that either our blessed Savior himself, or
Peter (by Power derived from him) did actually transmit that Power to any
Successor, and I submit.

4. Lastly, Suppose all these to be (what not one of them is) true; yet unless
it do appear, that the Bishop of Rome (and not the Bishop of Antioch, (where
they say Peter was Bishop first) was that Successor of St. Peter, to whom such
Supremacy was transmitted; he can have no pretense to it. For in this Case,
Idem est non esse and non apparere. Let our Adversaries then make it appear,
that either our blessed Savior immediately by himself, or Peter (by Authority
from him) did I know that some of them (eminent for Learning and Dignity in
their Church) say; That our blessed Savior did give Peter power to transfer
his great Authority to his Successor, and only to him, not to any of the other
Apostles; But this they say only, without any pretense of proof. And I commend
their Prudence, not to attempt Impossibilities. Johan. Franciscus Bordinus
Archbishop of Avignion, has published his Opinion, in these words -- Christus
Universal Totius Ecclesiae Caput Petrum Constituit, qui suas Vices in Terris
ageret. Quo quidem in Munere, and si dum viveret, Aequales (mark that) habuit
caeteros Coapostolos, Nulli tamen Eorum, quod a Domino accipissent, jus per
Successionem in alios transferendi facult as fuit. Soli Petro Id Promissum,
Soli Petro Id Traditum, ut Petra esset, and post Christum Ecclesiae
fundamentum. Ita Johan. Fran. Bordinus Archiepiscopus Avenionensis, in Serie
and Gestis Roman. Pontif. ad Clement. Papam. 8. ad Annum Christ. 34. Tiberij.
18.
transmit the Supremacy to the Pope, and we shall be satisfied; and thankful
for the Discovery. And this brings me to the Second thing proposed before.

2. The thing next to be enquired after is, 2.
Whether, and how it may appear that the Bishop of Rome is Peter's Successor.
Our Adversaries say, (and vainly say it only) that Peter was Supreme Head
(after our blessed Savior's Ascension) and Monarch of the Church; and from
him, ( Jure Successionis) the Pope derives his Monarchical Power and Supremacy;
and that by the Institution and Petrus Romae Sedem suam, Jubente Domino,
Collocavit. Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. l. 2. c. 1.. 1.
Command of our blessed Savior, and so not by Humane, but Probatur, Roman.
Pontificem Petro Succedere, in Pontificatu Ecclesiae Vniversae Ex Divino Jure,
and Ratione Successionis, Bellarmin. Ibid. lib. 2. cap. 12.. Primum ergo. Papa
in Petri Cathedra Sedet, summum in eo dignitatis gradum, and Jurisdictionis
amplitudinem, non Humanis Constitutionibus, sed Divinitus datum agnoscit: est
Pater Vnixersalis Ecclesiae Petri Successor, and Christi Vicarius, etc.
Catechism. Trident. Part. 2. cap. 7.. 28. page 391. Edit. Paris. 1635.
Divine Right. This is a Position of greatest Consequence, and will require
good proof. Nor is it possible to prove the Bishop of Rome to be Peter's
Successor in that Bishopric, unless it first appear that Peter was his
Predecessor in that See. Linus, Clemens or Cletus cannot (with any Truth or
Sense) be said to succeed Peter, unless it appear first, that he preceeded
them. Our Adversaries (I confess) do constantly (with great noise and
confidence) affirm, That Peter did preceed in the Bishopric of Rome; but sure
I am, that hitherto, they have not brought any, so much as probable (much less
cogent and concluding) Reason to prove it: nor do I think it possible they
should bring (what they neither have, nor can have) any true and concluding
proof, to prove (what this is) an erroneous and false Position. And that this
may not be begged and gratis dictum, I shall offer to the Impartial Reader,
these Considerations.

1. When they Bellarm. Locis proxime citatis, (ut and alij passim). And Pope
Pius. 5. in this his Impious Bull.. 1. Christus Ecclesiam Catholicam uni soli
Petro Petrique Successori Romano Pontifici in Potestatis Plenitudine Tradidit
Gubernandam.
say, That Peter fixed his Episcopal Chair at Rome, Jubente Domino: Let them
show that Nullum Christi, ea dear, Decretum Extat. So A Lapide Confesses; in
Apoc. 17. verse. 17. page 268. Col. 2. A.
Command, and there will be an end of the Controversy; we will obey our
blessed Savior's Command, and the Pope too. But this they have neither done,
nor can: It being impossible, they should show that to be, which never was, nor
ever had any being.

2. That ever Peter was at Rome, (much less that he was Bishop there, for Five
and twenty years (as is vainly pretended) cannot be made appear out of
Scripture, or any Apostolical or Authentic Record; and therefore that he was
there at all, (where he might be, as he was in many other good Cities, and not
Bishop of any of them) must depend solely upon human and fallible Testimonies,
(I say, Testimonies certainly fallible, if not absolutely false; which many
Learned men have, and do believe). Now seeing the whole Papal Monarchy and
Infallibility, depend upon Peter's being Bishop of Rome, and the grounds we
have to assure us, that he ever was there, are fallible and dubious; and seeing
it is irrational (if not impossible) that any considering Person, should give a
firm and undoubted assent to any Conclusion, inferred only upon fallible and
dubious premises. Hence it evidently follows, That our Faith and belief of the
Papal Monarchy and Infallibility is, and (till they find better, and more
necessary premises) must be fallible and dubious. And here I desire to be
informed how it comes to be an Article of Faith, in their new Roman Creed; That
the Bishop of Rome is Vicar of Christ, and Romano Pontifici, Beati Petri
Apostolorum Principis, Successori, ac Christi Vicario, veram Obedientiam
spondeo ae juro. Vid. Bullam Pii. 4. super forma Juramenti Professionis fidei,
in Conc. Trident. Sess. 24. p. 452. Edit. Antv. 1633.
Peter' s Successor; which Article (with the rest in that Creed) they promise,
Hanc Catholicam fidem, extra quam nemo Salvus esse potest, quam in Praesenti
profiteor, and teneo, eandem usque ad ultimum vitae spiritum Constantissime
retinere, etc. Spondeo, Voveo, Juro. Ibidem.
swear and vow, to believe and profess most Constantly, to their last breath.
With what Conscience their Church can require, or they take such an Oath, Most
Constantly and firmly to believe, to their last breath, such things, for the
belief of which, they have no grounds (if any) save only fallible and very
dubious, Ipsi viderint.

3. I know, that the Assertors of the Papal Monarchy (according to their
Interest) are very desirous to prove out of Scripture, that Peter was at Rome;
and to that end produce those words in his first Epistle -- 1 Pet. 5. 13.
The Church which is at Babylon salutes you: And by Babylon, they say, the
Apostle meant Rome: And for this, they cite Papias in Primam Petri Epistolam
Romae Scriptam ((...)) aiunt, quam Petrus, (...) appellat. Eusebius Hist. l. 2.
c. 15. p. 53. B. Valesio.
Eusebius, That by Babylon, Rome is figuratively to be understood. So that (if
this be true) Peter writ that Epistle at Babylon; that is, at Rome, and so must
be at Rome when he writ it: And the proof of this depends upon the Authority of
Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, and those who follow him. Now how little Credit is
to be given to Papias in this, (or any thing else) will manifestly appear out
of the same Eusebius; who tells us, 1. That Papias was much given to Tradition;
Curiose sciscitabar ( said Papias) a Senioribus, quid Petrus, quid Jacobus,
dicere soli^i essent. Neque ex Bibliorum Lectione, tantam me utilitatem capere
posse Existimabam, quantam ex hominum viva voce. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 39. p. 111.
inquiring (of the Elders who had heard the Apostles) what Peter, or James, or
John, etc. had said: thinking he g^t^less benefit by reading Scriptures, then
by the talk of those who heard the Authors of them. 2. That he had by such
(...) Ex Traditione non scripta habuit novas quasdam Servatoris parabolas and
praedicationes, aliaque Fabulis propiora; inter quae Mill Annorum spatium post
resurrectionem, fore dicit. Eusebius. ibid. p. 112.
Tradition, strange Parables and Preachings of our blessed Savior, and other
things very Fabulous: Such as the Heresy of the Millenaries; which he believed
and propagated. That he thus erred, by Ita opinatus videtur Papias, ex male
Intellectis Apostolorum narrationibus. Fuit enim Mediocri Admodum Ingenio
Praeditus. Eusebius. ibidem. Lit. c.
Misunderstanding the Apostles Doctrine: For (as Eusebius goes on) he was a man
of very little understanding. 4. And yet (as the same Author says) he was the
occasion that, Plerisque tamen post Ipsum Ecclesiasticis Scriptoribus, Ejusdem
Erroris occasionem praebuit, hominis vetustate, Sententiam suam tuentibus.
Ibidem D. Ita etiam Nicephorus Hist. Lib. 3. cap. 20. page 252. D.
most of the Ecclesiastical Writers who followed him (Reverencing his
Antiquity) erred with him.

I know, Object.
that in Eusebius (both in the worst Edition of him, by Colon. Allobr. 1612.
Christopherson, (sometime a Popish Bishop of Chichester) and the best by
Paris. 1659.
Hen. Valesius) we have a high Commendation of Papias; Papias eadem aetate
Celebris fuit; Vir Imprimis disertus, and eruditus, ac Scripturarum peritus.
Eusebius. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 36. Edit. Valesij: Sed in Edit. Christopherson. Cap.
35. Grae. 30. Latinae Versionis.
At the same time (says Eusebius, as Valesius renders him) Papias was famous; a
man very Eloquent and Learned, and well skilled in Scripture. But
Christopherson (his other Translator) goes higher, (as usually he does when it
makes for the Catholic Cause) and in his Translation says more in Commendation
of Papias, then is in the Text: For he tells us, That Papias (besides his
knowledge of Scripture) was a man Omnium aliaruni Artium scientia vir plane
disertissimus. Ibidem.
certainly most learned in the Knowledge of All Other Arts. Now if this be
true, then that Character I have given him before, is not so; and then his
Antiquity (which was Papias was a friend and familiar of St. Polycarpe. Eusebius.
Hist. lib. 3. cap. 39. and Polycarpe suffered Martyrdom Anno Christ. 167.
Baronius Annotat. ad Martyrolog. Romanum, ad diem Jan. 26. p. 81. Col. 1.
great) and his great Learning (in all Arts and Sciences, as well as Scripture)
considered; his Testimony, that Babylon, whence St. Peter writ, was Rome, will
be more valid, and of greater Authority.

In Answer to this; Answer.
I say, 1. That all this Commendation of Papias before mentioned, is so far
from having any Authority from Eusebius, that it is a plain Forgery. Eusebius
(as to this passage) is evidently corrupted; and this Commendation of Papias
(by whose Ignorance or Knavery, I know not) shuffled into the Text, long after
Eusebius his death. For, 2. Ruffinus (who Translated Eusebius his History above
One thousand two hundred years ago) in the place above quoted, says only thus
-- About this time flourished Polycarpe Bishop of Smyrna, and Papias Bishop of
Hierapolis. So the Printed Edition of Quibus Temporibus floruit Polycarpus
Smyrnaeorum Episcopus, and Papias Similiter Apud Hierapolim Sacerdotium gerens.
Ruffin. l. 3. c. 35. in Excuso Rhenarci. Basil. 1528.
Ruffinus by B. Rhenanus; and a very Ancient and Complete MS. of Ruffinus (in
my Keeping and Possession) exactly In Cod. MS. Ruffini, est. Lib. 3. cap. 32.
agrees with it; and there is not one word of that Commendation of Papias, which
is now extant in Eusebius: And therefore we may Conclude, that Anciently it was
not there, but the Text of Eusebius (by fraud or folly) is since Corrupted: For
had it been in Eusebius when Ruffin Translated him, there had been no reason he
should have left it out. 3. And which is yet more considerable, Valesius (a
very Learned Roman Catholic) who last published Eusebius, Ingenuously
Confesses, that of three or four Greek MSS. of Eusebius, which he made use of
in his Edition, not any one of them Totum hoc Elogium Papiae deest in nostris
Codicibus. Valesius in Not. ad Lib. 3. Eusebij. c. 36. p. 55.
had that Commendation of Papias; and therefore he doubts not, but these words
were Non dubito, quin hae^ verba ab Imperito Scholiaste adjecta sunt, praeter
Eusebij mentem and Sementiam. Valesius Ibidem.
added by some Ignorant Scholiast, contrary to the Judgment and Sense of
Eusebius. For (says Quomodo fieri potest ut Eusebius Papiam hic appellet virum
doctissimum, and scripturarum peritissimum, cum in fine Libri affirmat diserte,
Papiam Mediocri Ingenio praeditum, Planeque Rudem ac Simplicem. Valesius Ibidem.
he) how is it possible that Eusebius should call Papias a Most Learned Man,
and Most Skilled in Scripture, who in the same Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 39.
Book says, he was A Rule and Simple Person, of Very Little Wit or Judgment.
And his Ignorance especially appears (as in other things) in that

1. He says that Philip, whose Daughters were Prophetesses, was Philip the
Eusebius. Hist. lib. 3. c. 39. p. 112. Valesij Edit. vide Nicephor. lib. 3. c. 20.
Apostle; when the Act. 21. 8. Vide Nicephor. Hist. lib. 3. page 252. C.
Text, (had he read or remembered it) expressly says, That it was Philip the
Deacon.

2. Papias said, (and in his Writings published his Opinion) That hearing Vide
Eusebius. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 39. Hieronym. de Illust. Doct. cap. 18. Nicephor. l.
3. c. 20.
Oral Traditions, was more profitable, then reading Scriptures). That is, to
hear the Stories and Tales of private and fallible Persons (and that in Matters
of Religion) was more profitable, then to read the Sacred Oracles of God,
penned by Divinely Inspired Infallible Persons. St. Joh. 20. 30. 31. and 21. 25.
John tells us, he had writ so many and such things, as were necessary and
sufficient to Salvation, yet left out thousands of things, which he thought not
necessary. But Papias (with great Ignorance and Impiety) prefers the unwritten
Tradition of those things concerning our blessed Savior, which the Apostles
had omitted, as not necessary, nor so useful as those things they had writ. And
so in Contradiction to the Holy Spirit and St. John (his Infallible Amanuensis)
calls the Tradition of those unwritten things more useful, which they had
omitted as not useful at all. And this his Ignorance and want of Judgment
further appears,

3. Because Eusebius tells us, That he had (amongst his Traditions) (...), etc.
Novas quasdam Servatoris parabolas ac praedicationes.
strange and novel Parables and Doctrines of our blessed Savior, and other
things more Fabulous; and amongst them his Millenary Heresy, of which he was
Father, and (to the Infecting many others) did propagate it: And he fell to
those wild Opinions chiefly by his Ignorance and Misunderstanding of Scripture;
as Eusebius and Nicephorus tell us. And yet this simple Person, and
Arch-Heretick, is the principal and prime Witness Rome has, to prove that
Babylon (in the Epistle of Peter) signifies Rome, and that Peter was there. For
other place in Scripture, they have none, and only Papias (and his Followers)
for that. By the Premises, I think it may appear to Impartial Persons, That
seeing Papias preferred Tradition (or some men's talk before the Scriptures)
that he was a man of very weak understanding, and erred by misunderstanding
Scripture, that he writ Fables rather than History, and maintained the
Millenary Opinion, which Rome now calls Heresy: I say these things Considered,
his Authority and Credit is, (if any at all) very little; and yet it is all our
Adversaries have (his Followers Testimonies being derived from, and depending
upon his) to prove out of Scripture, that Peter writ that Epistle at Rome, or
ever was there. This is a Truth so manifest, that not only Scaliger in Annotat.
in Joh. 18. 31. Petrus Romae nunquam fuit: sed praedicabat (...), Cujus
Metropolis erat Babylon, ex qua scribit Epistolam suam. Vid. Johan. Rainoldum
contra Hartum, etc.
Protestants, but most Learned Roman Tametsi Veteres Existimaverint Petrum
vocabulo Babylonis signisicasse Vrbem Romam, probabilis est Scaligeri
Conjectura; qui ex Ipsa Babylone scriptam a Petro putat Epistolam hanc ad
Judaeos dispersos, etc. Petrus de Marca* Archiepiscopus Parisiensis. De
Concordia Sacerd. and Imperij. l. 6. c. 1.. 4. p. 59. Tom. 2.
Catholics, say and prove; that Peter writ that Epistle, not at Rome, but
Babylon in Chaldea. And further; that he did not write it at Rome, will be
evident from Scripture, and what their own most Learned Author Confesses. For,
1. Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Annum Christi 45.. 16. 17.
Baronius tells us, It was writ, Anno Christi 45. 2. To make this probable,
both he, Petavius, and others, generally say; That Peter went to Rome in the
second year of Claudius; which was Anno Christi 44. 3. But this a very Learned
Roman Catholic evidently Haec Sententia refelli videtur ex Actis Apostolorum,
ex quibus constat Petrum, in Judaea ac Syria semper mansisse, usque ad ultimum
Annum Agrippae, etc. Hen. Valesius in Notis ad Cap. 16. l. 2. Hist. Eccles.
Eusebij page 33. 34.
Confutes from Scripture, and good Authorities; and plainly shows, that Peter
was always in Judea or Syria, till the death of Herod Agrippa, which was in the
fourth year of Claudius, and the Six and fortieth year of our blessed Savior.
And therefore it was impossible that Peter should write that Epistle at Rome,
in the Five and fortieth year of our blessed Savior, who never came thither
till the year Forty six, unless they will say (and they do say things as
impossible) that he writ an Epistle at Rome when he was not there. 4. Nay, it is
certain from what Luke says in the Act. 15. etc.
Acts of the Apostles, that Peter continued in Judaea till the Council met at
Jerusalem about the Question concerning Circumcision, and the Ceremonial Law.
Sure it is, that he was present at that Council; which was Anno Christi 51.
says Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 51.. 6.
Baronius, Bellarmine, and others; the Learned In Chronico Alexandrino
Concilium Hierosolymitanum refertur Anno Claudij. 6. (Christi. 48.) melius
dixisset. 7^. sic enim cuncta egregie convenient, etc. Hen. Valesius in Notis
ad Cap. 18. l. 2. Hist. Eccles. Eusebius. p. 37. Col. 2. A.
Valesius thinks (and gives his reason for it, (more probable to me, then any
brought for the Contrary Opinions) that the Council was held, Anno Claudij. 7.
and Christi. 49. take which Computation you please, if St. Peter wrote that
Epistle at Rome, Anno Christi 45. he must have writ there, several years before
he came thither. 5. Nay, it is further Evident, (let that Council be when they
will) that Peter was not at Rome, in the year. 51. which Baronius mentions, but
at Jerusalem. For St. Gal. 1. 18.
Paul tells us, that three years after his Conversion, (which was about the
year. 37.) he went to Jerusalem to see Peter, and found him there: And then
Gal. 2. 1. 8. 9.
fourteen years after, (which was about the year. 51.) he went to Jerusalem
again, and then found Peter there. According to our Adversaries Computation, in
the year. 51. Peter had sat Bishop in Rome about They say, he sat at Rome.
25. years, and that he was martyred Neronis. 13. or Anno Christi. 68. so that
those 25. years must begin Anno Christi. 43. And then Anno Christi. 51. he had
sat at Rome eight years.
eight years; and yet St. Paul neither found, nor sought him at Rome (where he
was not) but at Jerusalem, where he was, with the Jews, who were Committed to
his Charge and Cure. 6. Lastly, It Is Evident, St. Peter writ that first Epistle
to the Asiatick 1 Pet. 1. 1.
Dispersion of the Jews, of which Babylon was the Metropolis: And sure it is,
that when he says, The Church of Babylon salutes you; he intended (as all men
do, who write Epistles of that Nature) that they should know where he was, and
who they were who saluted them; which was Impossible for them to do, if by
Babylon he meant Rome. For at that time, Rome neither was, nor could be known
to any by the name of Babylon; no Author (Sacred or Civil) having ever called
it so. It Is true, St. John above The First Epistle of Peter was writ Anno
Christi. 45. So Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 45.. 16. And the same Baronius
Annal. Tom. 1. ad Annum Christ. 97.. 1. tells us, that the Revelation of St.
John was writ Anno Christi 97. that is, 52. years after.
Fifty years after, call^ Rome, Babylon. But he writing Mysterious Propheties,
spoke (to use Eusebius's word) (...) used many Types, Figures and Metaphors, to
express future things. But that Peter, (...) writ no such Mysterious
Prophetical Predict^ons, but the plain Duties, and Promises of the Gospel,
should use such Types or Figures, ha^^ neither truth nor any probability. By
the Premises, I hope it may appear, that it cannot be proved out of Scripture,
that ever Peter was at Rome.

4. But let it be granted, that it could be proved out of Scripture (which is
manifestly untrue) that Peter was at Rome, yet thence it will not follow that
ever he was Bishop there: much less for Five and twenty years, as is vainly
pretended. For, 1. That he was Bishop of Rome (or any place else) there is not
one syllable in Scripture; and so from thence there can be no proof of his
Roman Bishopric. And, 2. If it be granted (which is evidently untrue) that it
could (out of Scripture) be clearly proved, that he was at Rome a longer time,
yet hence it does not follow that he was Bishop there: For he was at Jerusalem,
Samaria, Joppa, etc. (as is evident in Scripture) and yet our Adversaries
neither do, nor (with any sense or reason) can say, that he was Bishop of all
those places. 3. Irenaeus (an ancient and an approved Author) expressly says,
Petrus and Paulus fundantes Ecclesiam Romanam, Lino Episcopatum tradiderunt.
Succedit ei Anacletus, post eum Tertio Loco ab Apostolis Clemens. Irenaeus.
lib. 3. cap. 3.
That Peter and Paul Constituted Linus first Bishop of Rome; That Anacletus
succeeded him, and that Clemens (after the Apostles) was the third Bishop
there. After him, Eusebius says the same thing; That after the (...) etc. Post
Pauli Petrique Martyrium, Primus Ecclesiae Romanae. Episcopatum suscepit Linus.
Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 2. vide Niceph. l. 3. cap. etiam. 2.
Martyrdom of Paul and Peter, Linus was the first Bishop of Rome. And again,
speaking of the Bishops of Rome, he says, That (...), Primus fuit Linus,
secundus Anencletus. Eusebius. Ibid. l. 3. c. 21.
Linus was the first, and Anencletus (or Anacletus, as he is usually called)
the second. And though Eusebius say, That Linus was Eusebius. Ibid. lib. 3. cap.
4. (...).
Primus post Petrum, the first Bishop of Rome after Peter; yet his meaning is
not, that Peter was Bishop of Rome before him, as is evident by what he says
afterward; That Clemens Clemens, (...). Tertius a Paulo and Petro Romae
Episcopus. Eusebius. loco dicto. cap. 21. vide Epiphanium adversus Haereses. lib.
1. Haeres. 27. Carpocratianorum. 6. page 107.
was the third Bishop of Rome, After the Apostles Paul and Peter; and by what
Irenaeus said before him, That Clemens was the third Bishop of Rome After the
Apostles. For if this be good consequence -- Linus was first Bishop of Rome
after Peter; Ergo, Peter was Bishop Rome too. Then this (in Irenaeus and
Eusebius, who both say it,) will be good Consequence also; Clemens was third
Bishop of Rome after Paul and Peter* Ergo, Paul and Peter, were both Bishops of
Rome. The truth is, that neither Consequence is good. Irenaeus and Eusebius did
indeed believe Paul and Peter Founders of the Roman Church, but neither of them
to be Bishops there; which a Learned Roman Catholic evidently saw, and
publicly Sciendum est Eusebium Apostolos Inordine Episcoporum minime N^merare.
Hen. Valesius in Annotat. ad Hist. Ecclesiasticam Eusebius. l. 3. c. 21. and
Notarum. page 50. Col. 2. B.
acknowledges. By the way, let me observe; That Eusebius in two places here
Lib. 3. Cap. 2. and Cap. 21.
cited, puts Paul before Peter: and not only Eusebius (a fallible Author) but
St. Paul himself puts James before Gal. 2. 9.
Peter. Now if Eusebius or St. Paul had known and believed St. Peter to have
been (what the Pope and his Party, without any ground vainly Imagine) the
Supreme Monarc^ over the whole Church and the Apostles themselves; it had been
a great Affront and Injury to St. Peter, and such an Incivility as St. Paul
would not have been guilty of. 4. And it is yet more Considerable, what St. Paul
says Gal. 2. 1. 7. 8. 9.
in the place last cited; For there we have these things certain in the Text,
1. That Peter was the Apostle of the Circumcision; the Jews were Committed to
him, as his Gal. 2. 7.
Charge and Cure, as the Gentiles to Paul. 2. It was our blessed Savior who
Vnus and idem mihi Evangelium praeputij, and Petro Circumcisionis credidit; me
misit ad Gentes, Illum posuit in Judea. Hieronymus in Cap. 2. ad Galatas. d.
Commissioned both of them, and appointed them those Provinces; for none else
could. He only could assign them their Provinces, who gave them the Apostolical
Power to govern them. Peter (as our Adversaries say) was Supreme Monarch of the
whole Church, had no Superior but our blessed Savior, and so none else to
Commission him, or Appoint him his Province. 3. Both of them till that time,
had diligently, and (with great Success) effectually labored in their Verse. 8.
several Provinces; Peter amongst the Jews, Paul amongst the Gentiles. 4. By a
mutual Agreement, they Verse. 9.
consent and promise, That Peter (as he had As is evident in the Acts of the
Apostles, and by his first Epistle writ (as Baronius says) Ann 45. Christi.
Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 45. Number. 16. vid. Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 1. where he
says, that Peter preached the Gospel long to the Asiatick Dispersion of the
Jews, before he came to Rome; and Nicephorus says so too.
before, so) for And it is certain, that after the year. 51. (of which we now
speak) he took the Jews for his Charge and Cure: as is evident from his two
Epistles writ to them, Ann. 68. And the Confession of Baronius, Annal. Tom. 1.
ad Ann. 68. Number. 3.
the future, He should go to the Jews, and make them his Charge and Cure, and
Paul to the Gentiles. 5. And this Agreement was about the year of our Lord. 51.
when (according to our Adversaries Computation) he was, and had been Bishop of
Rome Eight or Nine years. 6. I desire then to know, Whether Peter (after this
Consent and Agreement of the Apostles) continued Bishop of the Gentiles at
Rome, (as our Adversaries pretend he did) or not? If he did, he contradicted
his Commission, which our blessed Savior had given him, to be the Apostle of
the Circumcision, and Neglected the Jews, whom he had Gal. 2. 7. (...), etc.
Petro Concreditum est Evangelium praeputij.
Concredited to his care, and Committed to him, as his proper Charge. For to
take the charge of the Gentiles and Jews too, was not only against his
Commission, but against that Solemn Consent, and Agreement of the Apostles
before mentioned, wherein it was agreed and promised, That Peter should go (not
to Rome) but to the Circumcision, and Paul to the Gentiles. Nor can it be
credible that Peter would Act in Contradiction to his Commission, and his
Agreement so solemnly made with the Apostles. But if at the time of that
Agreement, (which was Anno Christi. 51.) he either was not, (which is most
true) Bishop of Rome, or then left it; then it evidently follows, That he
Continued not Bishop of Rome for Five and twenty years, as is by our
Adversaries, (with great confidence and no reason) asserted. 7. And this is
further manifest, from our Adversaries own Principles and Positions: Baronius
tells us, That Peter was Quod spectat ad Ecclesiam Antiochenam, hoc Anno
(Christi. 39.) Institutam a Petro, and septem Annis ab eodem administratam,
etc. Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Annum Christi. 39.. 9.
Bishop of Antioch seven years; and at Rome five and twenty years: And for this
he Cites Eusebius his Chronicon. By the way, (concerning what Baronius says of
Peter's being Bishop for so many years at Antioch and Rome) Observe, 1. That
Eusebius says indeed, that Peter Petrus Ecclesiam Antiochenam fundans, inde
Romam adiit. Eusebius. in Chron. ad Ann. Claud. 1. And they say he went to Rome,
Our blessed Savior Commanding him so to do. Cum. 7. Annos Antiochiae sedisset,
Postea Jubente Christo Romam vemit. Longus A Coriolano in summa Council. in
Principio, in serie Pontificum.
founded the Church of Antioch; and then, by our blessed Savior's Command, (as
they say) went to Rome. But so far is he from saying that he was seven years
Bishop there, that he expressly says, That Euodius was the First (...), etc.
Antiochenae Ecclesiae Episcopus Primus erat Enodius. Idem in Chronico, ad Annum
Claudij 2.
Bishop of Antioch. 2. When he Cites Eusebius his Baronius Ibidem; ad Ann. 39..
9.
Chronicon to prove that Peter was Five and twenty years Bishop of Rome, and
refers us, to what Eusebius All that Eusebius says, is only this -- (...). Ad
Ann. Claudij. 1.
says) ad Ann. 2. Claudij. The man (who understood no Greek) is miserably
mistaken; as Universally he is, when he meddles with Greek Authors, unless
their Translations be true) for Eusebius in his Greek Text, (as all know, and
may see) has no such The words Baronius Cites, as being Eusebius his words Ad
Annum. 2. Claudij, are indeed (part of them) Ad Annum. 1. Claudij: but the rest
(Peter's being five and twenty years Bishop of Rome) are neither at that, nor
any other year of Claudius.
thing, as Five and twenty years; nay, he does not so much as say, that he was
Bishop of Rome at all; much less that he was Five and twenty years Bishop
there. But the Latin Copies (Interpolated and Corrupted, as thousands others
are by Roman Arts) deceived him. But to let this pass; Baronius says, That
Peter was Seven years Bishop of Antioch, and Five and twenty of Rome. So that
(in the whole) he was Two and thirty years Bishop in Syria and Italy, and took
upon him the Charge and Cure of the Gentiles in those Provinces. Now our
blessed Savior's Passion and Ascension was Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann.
Christi, 34.. 1. and 2.
Anno Christi. 34. to which if 32. be added (the time wherein Peter was Bishop
of Antioch or Rome) the product will be. 66. So that from the Ascension of our
blessed Savior till the year. 66. Peter had taken the Episcopacy and
particular Charge of a Gentile-Church; and his Idem. Tom. 1. ad Ann. Christi.
69.. 9.
Martyrdom was. 13. Neronis, that is, Anno Christi, 68. or (as Baronius
Computes) 69. whence (by this their Account) it evidently follows, that during
all the time from our blessed Savior's Ascension to his Martyrdom (about two
years only excepted) Peter was the Apostle and Bishop of a Gentile-Church.
Which is, 1. Manifestly untrue, and inconsistent with what is said of Peter in
the Acts of the Apostles, with his Commission, in which the care of the
Circumcision was concredited to him by our blessed Savior, and with his Solemn
Agreement with the Apostles to go to the Circumcision, as Paul was to the
Gentiles. And, 2. It is without any the least ground in Scripture, by which, it
neither does, nor can appear that ever Peter was at Rome, so much as for one
Day, much less that he was Bishop there Five and twenty years. Nor can it
appear in Scripture, that ever he was at Antioch, save Gal. 2. 11. 12. 13. etc.
once; nor is there any mention of any thing he then did there; save that he
dissembled, and was justly reprehended for it, by St. Paul; whereas it is
evident in Scripture, that St. Paul was at Antioch for a whole Act. 11. 26.
year at one time, constituted the Church there, confirmed them Act. 14. 22.
afterward in the Faith, and Act. 14. 23.
ordained Elders to govern them, staid there a Act. 14. 26. 28.
long time; and Act. 15. 35. vid. Act. 18. 22. 23.
continued there preaching the Gospel; and yet (notwithstanding all this) if we
will believe them; Peter was Bishop there, and not Paul. The truth is; though
it be Evident that Paul, as Apostle, did all Episcopal Acts there; yet it is
certain, that neither he nor Peter, was particularly Bishop of that, or any
other place. 3. It is utterly incredible, that Peter the Supreme Head and
Monarch of the Church (as they pretend) should for Two and thirty years be
Bishop, and have the particular Charge and Cure of two of the greatest Cities
in the Roman Empire, and that while the Apostles lived; and yet none of them
(nor he himself) in any of their Writings, should say one Syllable of it, nor
mention so much as one single Episcopal Act done by him, in either of those
Cities, in those two and thirty years; no nor St. I confess Baronius, and
Hierom (whom he Cites, Commentariorum in Epist. ad Gal. lib. 1. cap. 2.) tell
us, That Peter was Bishop of Antioch; and are not well pleased that Luke left
it out of his History in the Acts of the Apostles. Nay they speak irreverently
of him, and say, That he left that, and many other things out of his History,
by a Liberty or License he took to himself. Hanc cum tacuit Lucas, and alia
Multa Historiographi Licentia Praetermisit. Primum Episcopum Antiochae Petrum
fuisse Accepimus (says Hierome there) quod Lucas penitus Omisit. But Hierom
(though an excellent Person) had his Passions and Errors, and in that very
place, endeavors to justify Peter, as not to be blamed, against the express
words of St. Paul, Gal. 1. 11. Luke writ by the direction of the Holy Ghost,
and if he writ not all that Hierome or Baronius would have him, yet they should
not Censure him. Vide Baronium ad Annum Christi. 39.. 8.
Luke in the Acts of the Apostles, nor St. Paul, who lived long in Antioch, and
longer in Rome, and had opportunity, nay (had it been true) a necessity to
mention it. He had need of a strong Faith, who can believe this; for my part,
Credat Judaeus Apella, etc. 4. And as for Peter's being Seven years Bishop of
Antioch, and Twenty five of Rome; it is further Considerable, That the greatest
Patrons of this Popish Position, although they agree in the Conclusion, that
Peter was so long Bishop at those two places; yet they Contradict each other,
and the Truth; and by their own Positions, (to save their Adversaries that
Labor) utterly Overthrow and Confute that Position they endeavor to prove.
This Evidently appears in this Case, as it is stated by Onuphrius, Baronius and
Bellarmine.

1. Onuph. Panvin. in Annotat ad Plat. in vitis Pont. ad vitam Petri.
Onuphrius tells us; That Peter remained constantly in Judea, for Nine Ex his.
9. primis Annis, usque ad Initium An. 2. Imper. Claudiij, Petrum Judaea nunquam
exessisse, ex quo and Paulo, apertissime Constat. Idem. ibidem.
years next after our blessed Savior's death, that is till the year of Christ.
43. after this, he was Bishop of Antioch Seven years; to the year of our
blessed Savior. 50. And then Five and twenty years he^ sat Bishop of Rome;
that is, (by his own Computation) till the year of Christ, 75. So that by this
Account, Peter was Bishop of Rome, Anno Christi. 75. And yet he there says,
That Peter Petrus Cruci Affix^^est, novissimo Neronis Anno, Christi vero 69.
Ibidem.
died, Anno Christi. 69. And then (by his Calculation) Peter was Bishop of Rome
Six years after his death. Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 39.. 8. 9. etc.


2. Baronius states the Question thus. Peter came to Antioch Anno Christi. 39.
and was Bishop there Baronius Ibidem.. 13.
Seven years; that is, till the year of Christ. 46. And then he says, that from
Antioch Peter went to Rome, and sat there Bishop Baronius Ibidem.. 9. Ann. 39.
Five and twenty years; that is, till the year. 71. And so (by his own account)
Peter must be Bishop of Rome two years after he was dead: For the same Baronius
tells Anno Christ. 69. Capitone and Rufo Coss. Petrus and Paulus Martyrium
subiere. Annal. Tom. 1. an Annum. 69.. 1. Neronis. 13.
us, that Peter died Anno Christi. 69. And though this Account of Peter's
Episcopacy at Rome, be not only Erroneous, but (to all Intelligent Persons)
Ridiculous; yet Vide Bellarm. de Script. Eccles. in Petro Aposto; and Chronol.
suae Part. 2. ad Annum 39. and 44.
Bellarmine maintains the same Opinion, not only in Contradiction to Onuphrius,
but to Eusebius, Hierome, Epiphanius, etc. Vide Baronium Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann.
69.. 2.
whose Opinions Baronius endeavors to confute. In short, as there is no ground
in Scripture, that Peter ever was at Rome; so that he was Twenty five years
Bishop there, neither Scripture nor purer Antiquity affords them any proof, or
probability: Eusebius his Greek Chronicon, basely Vide Jos. Scaligeri
Animadvers. in Chronologica Eusebij; Amstelod. 1658. page 189.
corrupted in a Latin Version of it, about Four hundred years after our blessed
Savior, being that they must rely upon.

5. Our Adversaries had ill luck, when they made Peter first Bishop of Rome,
attributed the Supremacy to him, and (that he might have it) made the Pope his
Successor. For had they chosen Paul in stead of Peter, they might have had far
more (though not enough) to prove (and that out of express Scripture) both
Paul's Supremacy, and the Popes Succession to him. For these following
Particulars (every one of them) may evidently be proved out of Scripture. 1.
That the Romans were Romans 1. 13.
Gentiles. 2. That Paul (by our blessed Savior's Act. 22. 21. Gal. 27. 8.
Appointment) was the Apostle of the Gentiles, Peter was not, but of the Ibidem.
Jews. 3. Paul was two whole Act. 28. 30. 31.
years at Rome, Converted, and Established a Church there; but it cannot appear
by Scripture, that Peter was ever there. 4. The Care ((...)) 2. Cor. 11. 28. 1.
Cor. 7. 17.
of all The Churches lay upon St. Paul; no such thing in Scripture ever said of
Peter. 5. St. Paul made Orders and Constitutions for the good government of
(...). (hinc (...), and (...), Edictum, Constitutio.) So I ordain in all
Churches. Versio vulg. frigide -- In Ecclesiis Omnibus doceo. 1. Cor. 7. 17.
vide Act. 18. 2.
All the Churches (without any Authority, Leave, or Commission from Peter) no
such thing ever said of Peter, either in Scripture, or primitive and pure
Antiquity. 6. St. Paul writ a Long and Excellent Epistle to the Romans, Peter
did no such thing. Had the Holy Ghost in Scripture expressly told us, 1. That
our blessed Savior had Appointed, and Commissioned Peter to be the Apostle of
the Gentiles (and such were the Romans), 2. That he was two whole years
residing at Rome, Converting and Establishing a Church there. 3. That the Care
and Cure of All the Churches lay upon him. 4. That he made Orders and
Constitutions for the Government of All The Churches. 5. That he had writ an
Epistle to the Romans, to Confirm them in that Faith he had preached amongst
them: I say, had all these things been in Scripture expressly said of Peter, our
Adversaries with great noise and confidence would (and with far more reason and
probability might) have asserted Peter's Supremacy, and his Roman Episcopacy,
and that the Pope was, and is his Successor. But seeing not one of all these is
said of Peter, and every one of them expressly said of Paul, it is Evident, that
there is far more reason and probability (and that grounded upon express
Scripture) that Paul was Bishop of Rome (and not Peter) and so the Pope might
be his Successor. And yet our Adversaries I confess Bellarmine would (out of
Irenaeus as he vainly thinks) persuade us, that both Peter and Paul were
Bishops of Rome. Irenaeus (says he) lib. 3. cap. 3. fixit Catalogum Romanorum
Episcoporum, and Primo Loco ponit Petrum and Paulum. De Romans Pontif. lib. 2.
cap. 4.. 6. Irenaeus.
reject Paul, and will have Peter their first Bishop (though some of them
impiously say, our Series and Successio Romans Pontif. sic est: Primus Jesus
Christus. Longus a Coriol. summa Council. in Prin. in Serie Romans Pontif. we have
the very same words in the Edition of Platina, De vi^^ Pont. Col. Agripp. 1626.
But Platina (basely corrupted since his death) has no such thing in the Old
Edition, 1485. But to make our blessed Savior the first Bishop of Rome, is not
only erroneous, but impious. 1. He never was at Rome. 2. He was not sent, save
to the lost Sheep of the Ho^^ of Israel, (not in Person sure, not to be a
Bishop of any Gentile Church). 3. There was no Christian Church at Rome while
he lived of which he could be Bishop. 4. Our blessed Savior remains a Priest
for ever, and cannot have any Successor. Heb. 5. 6. And therefore Bellarm.
justly denies ou^ B. Savior to have any Successor, because he is Pontifex
aeternus. Bellar. de Script. Eccles. in T. Aquia*
blessed Savior was their first Bishop) That St. Paul was not Bishop of Rome
(notwithstanding all the former things said of him, in Scripture) we believe
and know, and willingly grant. But on the other side, to say, that Peter was
Bishop of Rome, concerning whom no such things are said in Scripture, either in
express terms, (as they are of Paul) or by Equivalence or any just Consequence;
this we say, is very irrational. For in things Moral or Historical (and of such
we are now speaking) which are Incapable of Physical or Mathematical
Demonstration, the highest Prudential Motives and Probabilities will, and ought
to carry the Assent of all wise men: and therefore seeing it is denied (and
justly too) that Paul was ever Bishop of Rome, though the Probabilities,
grounded on Scripture, that he was so, be far greater then Peter can pretend
to; for our Adversaries to say, that Peter was Bishop of Rome, must be, and is,
evidently irrational. If the great probabilities we have that Paul was Bishop
of Rome deserve not our Assent, certainly we cannot rationally conclude from
far less Probabilities that Peter was so.

But when they would magnify the Pope's Power and Supremacy, Object.
(having no better Arguments) they make use of several Honorary Titles given to
the Bishop of Rome, and his See, and of some Privileges which they take (or
mistake rather) to be peculiar to the Popes, such as* these. 1. The Bishop of
Rome in many Stories and Canons, is called Apostolicus non nisi a Cardinalibus
inthronizaendus, Gratian. Did. 79. Part. 1. and ibidem. Can. 1. Aliter
inthronizatus non est Papa vel Apostolicus, sed Apostaticus and, Can. si Papa.
6. Did. 4. In ^emmate. Damnatur Apostolicus, suae and fraternae salutis
negligens.
Apostolicus. 2. His See is called Seeds Apostolica, and Cathedra Apostolica.
3. He is called Successor Petri. 4. Vicar of Christ. 5. That our blessed
Savior gave him the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, etc.

I confess that these, and many such Bellarmine gives us a Catalogue of fifteen
such Papal Titles; which are these -- Papa, Pater Patrum, Christianorum
Pontifex, summus Sacerdos, Princeps Sacerdotum, Vicarius Christi, Caput
Ecclesiae, Fundamentum Ecclesiae, Pastor Ovilis Domini, Pater and Doctor Omnium
Fidelium, Rector Domus Dei, Custos vineae Dei, Sponsus Ecclesiae Dei,
Apostolicae Sedis Praesul, Episcopus Vniversalis, ex quibus Omnibus and
Singulis Aperte Colligitur Ejus Primatus. De Romano Pont. lib. 2. cap. 31.
Particulars have been urged, and (as pertinent) stood upon by several Popes in
their Bulls, Answer.
their Decretal Constitutions and Epistles, and generally by all their Party;
especially the Clergy (Secular and Regular) whose great and principal Interest
it is, to maintain the Papal Supremacy: for if that fail, they irrecoverably
fall with it. In some Centuries past, while gross Ignorance and Tyranny,
benighted and overaw'd this Western Part of the World, such Arguments did their
Business; For few could, and (the danger being very great) few, or none, durst
Answer them. But after Luther arose, and Learning revived, all knowing and
impartial Persons did see and know, that all the Arguments they did (or could)
bring from such Topics, were not only Inconsequent, but indeed impertinent and
ridiculous. That this may not be gratis dictum, I shall endeavor to make it
Appear by plain Instances, (and I hope Effect it) that none of those Honorary
Titles or Privileges do, or can afford any just ground of that Supremacy, and
Papal Monarchy, they now so earnestly contend for; And here

1. It is to be observed, that the word Apostolicus, which (for some Ages last
past) the Pope has Assumed, and his Flatterers given him, as peculiar to
himself, was Anciently a Title given to all Archbishops. So Cum Episcopus
Civitatis fuerit demortuus, Eligitur alius, and veniunt ad Apostolicum cum
Electo, ut cis Consecret Episcopum. Alcuinus de Divinis Officiis. Cap. 36.
Alcuinus Flaccus tells us, That when a Bishop was Elected, they sent him, ad
Apostolicum, that he might Consecrate him. The Learned Archbishop Petrus de
Marca de Concordia Sacerdotij and Imperij. Tom. 2. lib. 6. cap. 3.. 3. page 67.
of Paris, tells me this; and also that this was the use of that word in the
Sixth Century, in the time of Gregorius Turonensis, who was made Bishop about
the Year. 572. but afterward, That Title was Sequens aetas abstinuit -- and
deinceps Apostolici Titulus Soli Summo Pontifici attributus est ab Authoribus.
Idem Ibidem.
appropriated to the Pope. Now I desire to know of our Adversaries, how The
Title, being Appropriated to the Pope, does make more for his Supremacy, then
it did for the Archbishops, when it was common to them all?

2. That Rome was Seeds Apostolica, and Cathedra Apostolica, we grant. Because
we are sure St. Paul (though not as Bishop) sat there. But that Peter ever was
there, neither we nor our Adversaries are, or can be sure. But it is, and (by
our Adversaries) must be granted too; That Jerusalem, Antioch, and other The
Archbishop of Paris next before cited, amonst the Apostolical Churches (besides
those I have named) reckons Alexandria, Ephesus, Ancyra, Corinth, Thessalonica;
and he might have added Philippi, etc. (De Concordia Sacred. and Imperij, lib.
7. cap. 4. 7. Tom. 2. p. 224.) for Tertullian adds it, in the Place next cited.
Churches (besides Rome) were Seeds Apostolicae, and Ecclesiae Apostolicae, and
eo Nomine, were of great Esteem in the Ancient Church. But the Bishops of none
of them then did, or could pretend to any Supremacy, much less to an
Ecclesiastical Monarchy: And why Rome should more then they, when our
Adversaries can, and will give (which as yet they never did) any Just and
Cogent Reason, I shall submit. Age jam qui voles Curiositatem melius exercere
in negotio salutis tuae, percurre Ecclesias Apostolicas, apud quas Ipsae adhuc
Cathedrae Apostolorum suis locis Praesidentur; apud quas Ipsae Authenticae
Literae eorum recitantur, sonantes vocem, and repraesentantes faciem
uniuscujusque. Proxima est Tibi Achaia, habes Corinthum: Si non long ^s a
Macedonia, habes Philippos, aut Thessalonicenses. Si potes in Afiam tendere,
habes Ephesum: si autem Italiae adjaces, habes Romam. etc. Tertullian. de
Praescript. cap. 36. page 338. Edit. Pamelij, 1662.
Tertullian also reckons the Apostolical Churches, such as Corinth, Ephesus,
Thessalonica, Philippi, Rome, etc. and tells us, That Cathedrae Apostolorum,
the Chairs of the Apostoles were then in those Apostolical Churches; That
Bishops presided in them; that if they had great Curiosity and Care of their
Salvation, they should make their Address to those Apostolical Chairs and
Churches. He sends them not all to Rome, and Peter's Chair there: But (says
he) if thou art near Macedonia, thou have Philippi and Thessalonica to go to;
If in Asia, Ephesus; If in Achaia, Corinth; If thou art near Italy, thou have
Rome to Address to. He knew no Supremacy or Infallibility annexed to Peter's
Chair at Rome, more then to Paul's at Corinth, or Philippi. He directs them to
that Apostolical Chair and Church which was next them, and Judged that
sufficient, without going to Rome. The Bishop of Rome in those days, pretended
to no more Supremacy or Infallibility in the Apostolical Church and Chair at
Rome, then the Bishop of Ephesus or Corinth, in the Apostolical Chairs and
Churches of those Cities. If Seeds Apostolica, and Cathedra Apostolica be a
sufficient ground to infer and prove Supremacy; then either all such Churches
must be Supreme, (which is impossible) or none at all, which is certainly true.

3. But they say; The Bishop of Rome is Peter' s Successor, and on this they
principally and generally ground his Supremacy; as derived to him, Ecclesiae
Romans specialius in Petro, Coeli Terraeque retine^ habenas. Gratian. Can. Si
Papa. 6. Did. 40.
Jure ^^^cessions, and Jus Successionis, Pontificum Romanorum in eofundatur;
quod Petrus Sedem suam, Jubente Domino, Romae Collocaverit. Bellarm. de Romans
Pont. l. 2. c. 1.. 1.
Jure Divino too; by Divine Right and Succession. Now if this be true; if
Succession to Peter carry Supremacy with it, Then seeing they constantly say,
1. That Peter was Ecclesia Antiocheia hos Anno (Christi. 39.) a Petro
Instituta, and 7. Annis ab eodem administrata. Baron. ad An. Christ. 39.. 9.
Tom. 1. p. 269. Edit. Antverp. 1612.
seven years Bishop of Antioch before he was of Rome. 2. And that Baron. ibid..
18. p. 272. and in their present Roman Breviary, Antverp. 1660. They have a
Holy Day for St. Peter's Installment at Antioch; In Cathedra Sancti Petri
Antiochiae, (so they call it) In part Breviarij Hiemali* ad diem. 22.
Februarij. And we are there told, that that Festival was called Cathedra Petri;
Quia Primus Apostolorum Petrus hodie Episcopatus Cathedram suscipisse
referatur. Ibid. Lect. 3. p. 760. Col. 2. And for this they cite St. Augustine
De Sanctis, Sermon. 15. n known supposititius and spurius scrap, unworthily
fathered on St. Augustine.
Euodius was his Successor there. I desire to know, why the Supremacy did not
descend to Euodius, his first and immediate Successor? For admit, that Peter
had such Supremacy, and that it was not Personal, but to be transmitted to some
Successor; (both which are manifestly untrue) yet seeing such Transmission of
his Supremacy, must be done either, 1. By some Act of our blessed Savior. Or,
2. By some Act of Peter, transmitting his Supremacy to his Successor at Rome,
and not to Euodius at Antioch: it will concern our Adversaries to show such Act
of our blessed Savior, or Peter. For if they can, we will submit, and give the
Cause; but if they cannot, then seeing, idem est non esse and non apparere;
they must pardon our unbelief, if we assent not to that, which they cannot
prove. I say, cannot prove; there being not one syllable in Scripture or
Antiquity for Six hundred years, (I might give more) either expressly affirming,
or from which it may (by good Consequence) be deduced, that either our blessed
Savior or Peter did transmit such a Monarchical Supremacy and Infallibility to
the Bishop of Rome, more then to the Bishop of Antioch. If any man think
otherwise, let him give us good proof of the contrary, and we will give him
thanks and the Cause. 2. But admit, that the Pope succeeds Peter, and really
sits in Cathedra Petri, as his Successor, (which is evidently untrue) yet this
will not prove his Monarchical Supremacy; if it do appear that any other
Apostle succeeded our blessed Savior (before Peter was Bishop any where) and
by his own Appointment, sat in our blessed Savior's Place and Episcopal Chair,
as his Successor; I say, if this appear, then as our blessed Savior is far
greater then Peter, so his Successor will be greater then the Pope, and have a
fairer pretense for the Supremacy, as our blessed Savior's immediate
Successor, then the Pope can possibly have, as Peter's. Now for this, let our
Adversaries consider, what Epiphanius says, Thus; (...). etc. Hic Primus
Episcopalem Cathedram caepit, cum ei Ante Coeteros Omnes, Suum ei in Terris
Thronum Dominus Tradisset. Epiphanius Adversus Haeres. lib. 3. Tom. 2. Haeres.
78.. 7. page 1039. B.
James the Brother of (...) Lord was the first Bishop, when our blessed Savio^r
concredited and resigned to him, before all others his Throne or Episcopal
Chair on Earth. And he^ let it be considered, 1. That in Scripture (...)
blessed Savior is called 1. Pet. 2. 25.
a Bishop, Vnivers^ Bishop of the whole Church; with Rev. 17. 14. and 19. 16.
Monarchi^cal and Kingly Power. 2. He was in a particula^ and peculiar way,
Bishop of the Jews; he (...) (...), a Peculiar Oversight and Cure (...) them.
He was sent (in Person) only to Matthew. 10. 6. and 15. 24. Romans 15. 8.
them: He Constituted a Church among^ them, Ordained Apostles, and Seventy
other Luke 10. 1. 2.
Inferior Ministers, whom he sent to Preac^ and do Miracles in Confirmation of
their Doctrine; he constantly preached the Gospel amongst them, and did all
those Acts a Bishop should do in his Diocese. 3. And Jerusalem being the
Metropolis of the Jews, Epiphanius tells us, that it was (on Earth) his Throne,
(Thronus suus) his Episcopal Seat, or Chair; where he usually was, preached and
did Miracles. 4. He says, That our blessed Savior chose James, before all the
Rest, even before Peter) and concredited and resigned to him, Thronum suum, his
Episcopal Seat, and that James was Bishop of Jerusalem, is attested by all
Antiquity. And this probably was the Reason, 1. Why Paul Gal. 2. 9.
names James (as Bishop of Jerusalem) before Peter. 2. Why in the Council of
the Apostles, James (and not Peter) gave the definitive Act. 15. 13. 19. 20.
Sentence. So that these things seem to me certain, 1. That our blessed
Savior, though Bishop of the Universal Church, yet he had a Particular
Episcopal Cure, and Charge of the Jews, As his Father was King of all the
World, yet Particularly of the Jews. God your King: (so Samuel tells them) and
so 1. Sam. 8. 7. and cap. 10. 19.
1. Sam. 12. 12. it was So Josephus and Philo call the Jewish Government, from
Moses to Saul. God was personally their King. 1. He himself Personally did give
them all their Laws. 2. He Personally sent his Viceroys, Moses, Joshua, and
all the Judges. 3. He received, and personally answered all their last Appeals,
which are evident Characters that he was their Supreme Power, their King.
(...). 2. That James was his Successor in that Cure. 3. And (if Epiphanius say
true) our blessed Savior himself appointed him his Successor. Let our
Adversaries (by so good Authority) show; that Peter was our blessed Savior's
Successor, either at Rome, (as some of them, before mentioned, only pretend) or
any where else; and (for my part) let them take the Cause. Otherwise, if they
cannot, then we may evidently conclude, That if James never did, nor could
pretend justly to a Monarchical Supremacy over the whole Church, though our
blessed Savior's Successor; much less may the Pope for succeeding Peter. Q. E.
D.

4. But the Pope (they say) is Christ's Vicar; and that he is, or should be so,
we grant. But we further say; that many thousands (besides him) are Christ's
Vicars as well, and as much as he. This has been manifestly proved before. I
shall only add; that the Trent Fathers (who, far they, Synodus a Spiritu
Sancto, qui est Spiritus Sapientiae and Intellectus Edocta declarat, etc.
Council. Trid. Sess. 21. de Communione, cap. 1. And yet what it declares there
is most evidently untrue.
were inspired by the Holy Ghost, and so surely Infallible) expressly say, and
Synodically define, That our blessed Savior before his Ascension, left all
Priests his Christus a Terris Ascensurus ad Coelos, Sacerdotes sui Ipsius
Vicarios reliquit tanquam Praesides ac Judices, ad quos Omnia Mortalia Crimina
deferantur. Conc. Trid. Sess. 14. De Poenitentia, cap. 5. De Confessione. vid.
Aquinat. part. 3. Quaest. 8. Art. 6. in Corpore.
own Vicars, to whom, as to Presidents and Judges, all Mortal sins were to be
Confessed. And Aquin. 2. 2. Quaest. 88. Art. 12. Praelatus gerit Vicem Christi.
Aquinas, (and their Schoolmen) say; That in the Church, the Bishop is Christ's
Vicar; and they prove it well, from the express and plain words of the 2. Cor.
2. 10.
Apostle; and they might have added also 2. Cor. 5. 20. And Henry Holden, a
Learned Sorbon Doctor, in his Annotations upon those Texts, says the same
thing. And now if to be Christ's Vicar, give any ground or pretense to
Supremacy, then all Bishops and Priests (who are Confessed to be Christ's
Vicars) may pretend to Supremacy as well as the Pope. And they being Christ's
Vicars as to the Power of Absolving and Retaining Sins, Si periculum mortis
immineat, approbatusque desit Confessarius, Quilibet Sacerdos Potest a
Quibuscunque Censuris and Pecatis absolvere. Rituale Romanum Pauli Papae. 5.
Jussu Editum Antverp. 1652. De Sacramento Poenitentiae page 61. and 65.
every poor Priest has as much power to absolve the Pope, as he him. So that
any Argument drawn from this Title, that he is Christ's Vicar, to prove the
Popes Supremacy, is not only Inconsequent, but Impertinent, and indeed
Ridiculous: And yet upon this ground, and another as Insignificant, Pope
Innocent the Fourth, in their General Council at Lions, Excommunicates and
Deposes the Emperor Friderick; Seeing (says the Pope there) we are Christ's Cum
Jesu Christi Vices teneamus in Terris, Nobisque in Petri persona dictum sit,
Quodcunque Ligaveris, etc. Memoratum Principem Omni Dignitate privatum
denunciamus, and Sententiando privamus; Omnesque ei Juramento Fidelitatis
astrictos, a juramento absolvimus; inhibentes ne quisquam de Coetero ei, ut
Imperatori pareat; and qui Ipsi favorem aut auxillum praestiterint, sint Ipso
facto Excommunicati. Cap. ad Apostolicae, 2. Extra de Sent. and re judicata.
vid. Cap. Quanto. 3. Extra de Translatione Episcopi.
Vicar on Earth; and it was in the Person of Peter said to us, Whatsoever thou
binds on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; we declare and denounce the said
Friderick deprived of all his Honor and Dignity, absolve his Subjects from all
Oaths of Allegiance, and Excommunicate all who show him any favor, or obey him
as Emperor. And to the same purpose their Trent Catechism tells us; Cum in
Petri Cathedra Sedeat, summum in eo Dignitatis gradum, non ullis humanis
Constitutionibus, sed divinitus datum agnoscit: Estque Moderator Vniversalis
Ecclesiae, ut Petri Successor, and in terris verus Christi Vicarius. Ita
Catechis. Trident. part. 2. cap. 7. de Ordinis Sacramento.. 28. vid. etiam
Bullarium Romanum, Tom. 1. page 347. Col. 1.. 6. where Alexand. Papa. 6. gives
all the West Indies to the King of Spain, as Vicar of Christ.
That the Pope has (by Divine Right, (not by any Human Constitutions) that
Supreme Degree of Dignity and Jurisdiction, over the Universal Church, as
Peter's Successor, sitting in his Chair, and as Vicar of Christ.

5. But that which they press with most Noise and Confidence, is, That our
blessed Savior gave Peter the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. They seem to be
in Love with these words, Dabo Tibi Claves, etc. For in their Vid. Breviarium
Romanum, in Cathedra S. Petri Antiochiae. Febr. 22. and in Festo Cathedrae S.
Petri qua Romae primum Sedet. Jan. 18. Breviarij part Hiemali.
Offices, for only two of St. Peter's Festivals, they are repeated almost
Twenty times. But how Impertinent this is, to prove any Supremacy (much less
their Papal Monarchy) will evidently appear, in that this Power of the Keys,
which they would appropriate to the Pope, was given to the rest of the
Apostles, as well as to Peter (as is proved before) nay to every Bishop and
Priest in the World. For, 1. So their own Roman Breviary, published by the
Authority of Pope Pius the Fifth, and afterward revised by Clement the Eighth,
and Urban the Eighth expressly says; for having told us, that our blessed
Savior gave the Keys to Peter: it follows; Petro dedit Claves; transivit
quidem etiam in Alios Apostolos vis potestatis illius, and in Omnes Ecclesiae
Principes. Breviar. Romans in Festo Cathedr. S. Petri Antioch. Febr. 22. Lect. 9.
Part. Hiemali. p. 762. Edit. Antverp. 1660.
That this Power did pass to the other Apostles and Princes of the Church. 2.
Their Trent Catechism, having Part. 1. cap. 11.. 4.
spoke of the Power of the Keys; afterward tells us, to whom our blessed
Savior gave and concredited that Power before he Ascended into Heaven; And it
was To the Eam Potestatem Episcopis and Presbyteris concessit. Ibid.. 9.
Bishops and Presbyters. So that Catechism, published according to the Decree
of the Council of Trent, by Pope Pius the Fifth. And, 3. Their Roman Pontifical
gives the Authentic Form how they Ordain a Priest; in which the Power of the
Keys is given to every Priest, in the very same Joh. 20. 22. 23.
words our blessed Savior did give it to the Apostles -- Pontificale Romanum
jussu Clement. 8. restitutum Romans 1611. p. 52. Accipe Spiritum Sanctum quorum
remiseritis peccata, remittuntur eis; and quorum retinueritis, retenta sunt.
Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins you remit, they are remitted; And whose
sins you retain, they are retained. 4. Lastly; The Trent Fathers are yet (if
that be possible) more express; For speaking of the Sacrament of Penance and
Absolution, They Declarat Synodus, falsas esse Doctrinas Omnes, quae ad alios
quosvis praeter Episcopos, and Presbyteros, Clavium Ministerium extendunt,
Putantes verba illa, Quodcunque Ligaveris, etc. and quorum remiseritis peccata,
remittentur, etc. ad Omnes fideles indifferenter dict^, etc. Conc. Trid. Sess.
14. De Poenitentia, cap. 6.
declare all their Opinions to be false and erroneous, who think that the
Exercise of the Ministry and Power of the Keys, belong to any, save The
Bishops and Presbyters; and who think those words -- Whatsoever you shall bind
on Earth, etc. And whose sins you remit shall be remitted, etc. to be spoken
indifferently to all the Faithful; and so think that any of the faithful may
bind and loose, remit and retain sins. In which words the Council does (I
suppose) Infallibly Declare (at least in our Adversaries Opinion) 1. That those
two Matthew. 16. 19. and Joh. 20. 23.
Texts (which are cited in the Margent of the Conc. Trid. Antv. 1633. p. 152.
Council) are to be understood of the Power of the Keys; though in one of them
(that of John) the Keys be not expressly named. 2. That the Exercise of that
Power of the Keys belongs To the Bishops and Presbyters, but to none else;
neither to Laymen nor any Inferior Orders.

By the Premises, I think it evident, (and confessed by our Adversaries) that
every Apostle had the Power of the Keys, as well as Peter, and (since they left
the World) every Bishop and Priest, as well as the Pope. Whence it further (and
manifestly) follows; That it is impossible that the Bishop of Rome, or any of
his party, should (as they vainly endeavor) prove his Supremacy from his Power
of the Keys; which is common, and really possessed by so many thousands beside
himself. For this is just as if Titius should brag, that he is far richer then
Sempronius, because he has Five hundred pounds per Annum; when Sempronius has
an equal Estate, and of the very same Value. Or as if Sejus should say he had
far greater Power then Cajus, when the Power given them by the Emperor was
equal and the same. And yet such is the vanity and folly of their pretended
Infallible Judges, that in their Bulls, and Papal Constitutions, received into
the Body of their Canon Law, Dabo Tibi Claves, this Power of the Keys, is laid
as a (Sandy and Insignificant) Foundation, on which they build the vast and
Insupportable Fabric of their Supremacy. I shall Instance only in two (though
I might in many more,) 1. In that famous Decretal of Innocent the Third (before
cited) wherein he impiously and ridiculously endeavors to prove, that the Papal
Dignity, is as much Vid. Cap. Solicit. 6. Extra de Major. and Obedientia. Where
the Lemma or Title prefixed to that Decretal is thus -- Imperium non praeest
Sacerdotio, sed subest, and ei Obedire Tenetur. This he endeavors to prove by
several ridiculous Instances; and then comes with Dabo Tibi Claves, and
quodcunque Ligaveris, as a most known ground of his Supremacy. Illud tanquam
Notissimum omittamus, quod Dominus dixit Petro and in Petro ad Successores
Ipsius; Quodcunque Ligaveris, erit ligatum in Coelis, etc. Nihil excipit, qui
dixit Quodcunque, etc. And a little before he tells the Emperor of
Constantinople, (to whom he writes) Quanta est Inter Solemn and Lunam, Tanta
inter Pontifices and Reges, Differentia Cognoscatur.
greater then the Imperial, as the Sun is greater than the Moon: And amongst
other wild and ridiculous Arguments to prove his equally wild and extravagant
Position, he comes at last, to this, Dabo Tibi Claves, to the Power of the
Keys, as the most known ground of his Supremacy. 2. The second Instance, is
that of Pope Innocent the Fourth, in his Impious Excommunication and Deposition
of the Emperor Frederick, (who had been before Excommunicated by his
Predecessor Gregory the Ninth) in the Council of Lions. It is Cap. ad. Apostol.
2. De Sent. and re Judicata. In. 6.
Extant in the Canon Law, and two things there prefixed to that most Impious
Decretal. 1. That he deposed Frederick in the Council, for a perpetual
Innocentius Sacro praesente Concilio in Memoriam Sempiternam.
memory of it. And so it stands for a perpetual memory of his Antichristian
Pride and Impiety. 2. That the Pope can Depose the Papa Imperatorem depo^ere
potest ex Causis Ligitimis.
Emperor for lawful Causes. And then, in that Impious Decretal, he grounds his
Power to Depose the Emperor principally upon the Power of Cum a Christo Nobis
in Petri Persona dictum sit; Quodcunque Ligaveris super Terram, Ligatum erit in
Coelis, etc. Memoratum Principem, suis Ligatum peccatis, Omni Dignitate
privatum denunciamus, sententiamus and privamus; Omnesque ei Juramento
astrictos, a Juramento perpetuo absolvimus; Inhibentes ne quisquam sibi de
Coetero, tanquam Imperatori pareat.
the Keys; which (he says) was given to him in Peter, when our blessed Savior
said, Whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, should be bound in Heaven, etc. so
he, (and his Predecessors and Successors generally for this Six hundred years
last past) applies that Power of the Keys (which is purely spiritual) to carnal
and temporal ends, and impious purposes. And here it seems to me, Considerable,
(and I believe will seem so, to pious and dis-interessed Persons) that in
former Vid. 1. Breviarium Romanum, by Card. Quignonius, approved and highly
commended by Clement the Seventh, and Paul the Third, and often printed at
Paris, An. 1536. Again, An. 1537. and at Lions, An. 1543. and at Lions, 1546.
and, 1548. and again at Lions, 1556. and at Antv. 1566. and though it be the
best Breviary Rome has had this Six hundred years; yet it is damned by Pius. 5.
Bulla Romae dat. 7. Idus Julij, 1568. 2. Breviarium Romanum, ex Decreto
Concilii Trident. Jussu Pij. 5. Antverp. Editum, 1568. and iterum, 1585.
Roman Breviaries (as also in our Portiforium or Portiforium Salis. Land. 1555.
Part. Hiemali. in Festo Cathedr. S. Petri, Febr. 22.
Breviary of Sarum; and in the Missale Secundum usum, Sarum, Paris. 1555. eodem
festo and die.
Missals of Salisbury and Missale secundum usum Hereford Rothomagi, 1520. eodem
Festo and die.
Hereford, we have this Prayer;

1. Deus qui Beato Petro Apostolo tuo, Collatis Clavibus Regni Coelestis,
Animas Ligandi atque Solvendi Pontisicium tradidisti; Concede, ut
Intercessionis ejus Auxilio, etc. O God, who by giving the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven to thy Apostle Peter, have concredited and delivered to him the
Pontifical Power of binding and loosing men's Souls, grant that by the help of
his Intercession, etc. Where it is evident that, (in the sense and plain
meaning of this Prayer and Scripture too) the Power of the Keys is spiritual,
to bind men's souls, (if Impenitent) and (if Contrite and truly Penitent) to
loose them. I say spiritual, for edification and saving men's souls, and not
temporal, for Deposing Kings and Emperors, and absolving their Subjects from
their Oaths of Allegiance.

2. But this Doctrine was not pleasing to the Pope and his Party; And therefore
in their late Breviarium Romans Antv. Ann. 1660. part Hiemali, in Festo
Cathedrae Petri Antioch. Febr. 22. p. 759. and part aestiva in Festo Cathedrae
Petri Romae, Jan. 18. Ibid. p. 698.
Breviaries and Missal. Romans Antv. 1619. In Festo Cathedrae Petri Romae, Jan.
18. p. 331. And they have the same again in Festo Cathedrae Petri Antiochiae,
Febr. 22.
Missals, they have left out the word Animas, Souls, and say only, that God had
given Peter Power of binding and loosing; not mentioning in that Prayer, what
it was he had Power to bind and loose.

3. But that we may better know their meaning and reason why they left out the
word Souls; it follows, a little after in those late Offices -- Dict. Brev.
Romans Antv. 1660. in Festo Cathedrae Petri Antiochiae, Febr. 22. In Resp. post
Lect. 4. p. 760. Partis Hiemalis. And that it might not be forgotten, (being a
Doctrine that makes so much for the Papal Interest) it is repeated again, in
Festo Petri and Pauli, Jan. 29. Partis aestivae, p. 482. and in Festo Petri ad
vincula. Ibidem p. 541.
Tu es Pastor ovium, Princeps Apostolorum; Tibi Though I find the word Animas,
left out in some of their Older Offices; yet these words Tibi Tradidit, etc. I
find in none till of late.
tradidit Deus Omnia Regna Mundi; and Ideo Tibi traditae sunt Claves Regni
Coelorum. They all agree, That the Power of binding and loosing is (as they
call it in that Prayer) Pontificium, the Pontifical or Papal Power; and having
told us, That God had given All the Kingdoms in the World, to Peter and his
Successors; they add, That Ideo, Therefore he gave him Pontificium, the Papal
Power of binding and loosing, superior to all Kingly The Popes Tribunal (they
say) is Supremus Justitiae Thronus. So Pius the Fifth in this his Bull, ^. 3.
Power; so that they might, by it, Depose Kings and Emperors, if they were not
Obedient to the Pope; for so their Popes (as appears before) have, in Thesi,
affirmed, and (in their Bulls, their Public and Authentic Constitutions
approved, and publicly maintained that Doctrine; and ( in Praxi) to the fatal
Mischief and Disquieting of the Western World, the ruin of many Princes, and
scandal of Christian Religion, impiously acted according to it, and put it in
practice; when they had advantage and opportunity.

By the Premises, I hope it may (and does) appear, that all those Honorary
Titles given to the Pope, or his See, ( Apostolicus, Seeds Apostolica, Cathedra
Apostolica, Peter's Successor, Christ's Vicar, the Power of the Keys, Prince of
the Apostles, etc. having been Anciently given to Thousands (beside the Pope)
who never had, nor dreamed of any Supremacy: Though in these late, and worst
Ages, they have been appropriated to the Bishop of Rome, and (though Old and
Innocent Titles) made use of, to amuse and deceive the Ignorant, to cover, and
give some Color and Credit to New Errors, and made Arguments to prove (what he
never had) the Popes Supremacy; yet it is Evident, that all such Arguments,
drawn from such Topics, are not only inconsequent, but (as I said before, and
still believe) Impertinent, and indeed ridiculous; and Conclude nothing, save
that surely they who bring so bad, had no better Arguments. Two other words
there are ( Papa and Summus Pontifex) now appropriate to the Bishop of Rome,
and as generally and impertinently used (as the former) to Insinuate (what they
can never prove) the Popes Supremacy. For many Learned men have evidently
proved (or confessed) that Anciently, every Bishop was called Vide Originem
Dialogo contra Marcionitas Graeco-Lat. per Rad. Westenium, p. 247. and Westenij
Notas, page 230. 231. Pet. Delalande Council. Antiquorum Galliae Supplemento, p.
35. 36. 39. Baronium in Notis ad Martyrologium Romans ad Diem, Jan. 10. c. p. 35.
Nomen Papae transit in Dignitatis Nomen, ut Clerici venerandi eo nomine
Appellarentur. Postea nomen illud capit esse peculiare Episcoporum, usque enim
ad Annum, 850. Nomen Commune fuit Omnibus Episcopis, inde peculiarius tribui
eonsuevisset Romans Pontifici, and sequitur, p. 36. Gregorius. Papa. 7. in
Concilio Romae habito, 1073. Statuit, ut Nomen Papae Vnicum esset in toto
Mundo, etc.
Papa, a Pope, and Summus Vid. Pet. de Marcade Concord. Sacerdotij and Imperij,
Lib. 6. c. 13.. 3. Tom. 2. p. 126. Col. 1. So Ruffinus calls Chromatius,
Pontisicem maximum. Vid. Russin. Opuscula, Paris. 1580. Epist. ad Chromatium,
Pontificem maximum, post p. 194. So Clemens Romanus (one of the best and
Ancientest Popes Rome ever had) calls every Bishop (...), Summus Sacerdos.
Clemens Romans Epist. ad Corinthios, per Patr. Junium, p. 53. Edit. Oxon. 1633.
Pontifex too. Baronius a most Zealous and Partial Assertor of the Popes
Supremacy and Monarchy over Kings and Emperors) has, in the Place quoted in the
Margent, confessed (what without great Impudence he could not deny) that
Anciently every venerable Presbyter was usually called Papa, or Pope.
Afterward (he says) the word Papa became common to all the Bishops, though
more particularly given to the Bishop of Rome; and he further adds, That the
name Papa continued common to All the Bishops, for Eight hundred and fifty
years; till Hildebrand ( Pope Gregory the Seventh) in a Council at Rome,) in
the Year, 1073. decreed, That there should be but one Pope (meaning himself) in
the whole World. Here we see, that Hildebrand (that Prodigy of Plerique tum
privatim tum public, Hildebrandum Antichristum praedicant, Titulo Christi,
negotium Antichristi agitat: in Babylonia in Templo Dei Sedet. Super Omne quod
Colitur, extollitur, quasi Deus sit, se errare non posse gloriatur, etc.
Aventinus Annal. Bojorum, Lib. 5. p. 352. and Lib. 7. p. 473.
. Antichristian Pride and Tyranny) appropriates the name Pope to himself and
See, which had for Eight hundred years (he might have said a thousand) been
commonly given to Bishops and Presbyters, as well as to the Pope. Now I desire
to know, how this, or any of the aforesaid Honorary Titles or Privileges,
(which were common to all Bishops, and usually given them, for many Ages, as
well as to the Bishop of Rome); can be an Argument or Ground of the Popes
Supremacy, which were confessedly no ground of any such Supremacy in other
Bishops, who had the very same Titles and Privileges, as well, and as much as
he? Suppose twenty Swans ( possibili posito in esse, nil absurdi sequitur) to
have equal whiteness, and the same Degree of that Quality; To say that any one
of those Swans was, by far, the whitest Swan in the World, when as nineteen
others were as white as that one: Or suppose twenty men of Equal Piety, all
having the same Degree of Goodness and Virtue; to say, that any one of them,
was, by far, the most Pious man in the World, when nineteen others were as
Pious as he; this were certainly irrational, and ridiculous. And yet our
Adversaries reason no better, when they say; The Pope being Christ's Vicar, and
having the Power of the Keys, has a Monarchical Supremacy over all the Bishops
in the World; when all those Bishops are Christ's Vicars, and have the Power of
the Keys, as well as he. But enough (if not too much) of this. For were it not
for the great noise, number, and confidence of our Adversaries, such miserable
inconsequent Reasonings, might deserve Pity and Contempt, rather than any
serious Answer.

7. Observe. 7.
Having made some Observations upon the (...), or Title and Preamble of this
Impious Bull; I come now to the Penal part of it, to observe what Punishments
and Curses are contained in it, and the Persons against whom they are
denounced. For although in the Title prefixed to the Bull, it is called, The
Damnation and Excommunication of Queen Elizabeth only; yet Thousands besides
the Queen, are concerned in those Curses, (as will appear anon). Here then, it
is to be Observed,

1. That in this Uncharitable Bull, the Pope Anathematizes and Excommunicates
the Queen, as a Slave of Flagitiorum Serva. Ita. 1. who they are who speak ill
of Dignities, (which the Archangel would not do of the Devil) St. Jude tells
us, in his Epistle, verse. 9.
Impiety, as an Apostolicae Potestatis plenitudine declaramus praedi^^m
Elizabeth Haereticam, and Haereticorum fautric^m, Anaethematis Sementiam
incurrisse, Esseque a Christi Corporis unitate praecisam.. 3.
Heretic, and a Favourer of Heretics, and Cuts her off from The Unity of
Christ's Body.

2. He deposes and deprives her (so far as the Plenitude of his Usurped Power
and Tyranny could) of her pretended Quin etiam ipsam Praetenso praedicti regni
jure, necnon Omni and quocunque Dominio, Dignitate, Privilegioque privatam.. 4.
And again; Dictam Elizabeth. Praetenso jure Regni privamus.. 5.
right to the Crown of England, and of all, and all manner of Dominion,
Dignity, and Privilege. By the way; what the Pope speaks here (notwithstanding
his Infallibility) is neither Reason, nor Sense; for if her Right to the Crown,
was only (as he calls it) Pretended; he could not possibly take it away, no not
by his Plenitude of Apostolical Power (if he really had it): For, 1.
(Notwithstanding all his Excommunications and Cursing) she might keep that
Right, and as strongly pretend a Right to the Crown after, as before his
Anathema's. 2. And if she had only a Pretended Right, then he could not deprive
her of any real Right; it being impossible to deprive her of a Right she had
not.

3. He Absolves all her Itemproceres, Subditos, and populos dicti Regni, ac
coeteros Omnes qui illi Quomodocunque juraverunt, a Juramento hujusmodi, ac
Omni prorsus Dominij, fidelitatis and Obsoquij dehito. Perpetuo absolutos,
prout nos Authoritate Praesentium absolvimus, Ibid.. 5.
Subjects, and All Others, who were bound to her by Any Oath, from their Oaths,
and all Debt of Fidelity and Obedience, and that For ever. Where observe, 1.
That it is not only her own Subjects he absolves from Oaths of Allegiance; but
All Others, who were bound to her, by Any Oath whatsoever. So that if any
Frenchman, Dutch, or Spaniard, any Pagan, Jew, or Turk had sworn to pay her
Ten thousand pounds, really (and by the Law of God and Man) due to her; he
absolves them from their Oaths; and so (if they had not more Honesty and
Conscience then he) she must loose her Money. The Pope, in the mean time, being
more kind to Turks, and Pagans, then to (a far better Christian then himself)
Queen Elizabeth. 2. He absolves them from all such Oaths For ever. So that, if
the Queen had Nay, such is (...) Antichristian (...) and barbarous (...) to
those they call (...); ticks; that when (...) are once actually (...)
judicially condemned* (...) though they turn good Catholics, and repent never
so sincerely; and though our blessed Savior Jesus would pardon Penitents, yet
Antichrist will not. For by the Popish Law, such Penitents are to be put into
Prison, and be immured there, and live and dye in a miserable condition. Si
dicat Haercticus se velle paenitere, ac Haereses abjurare, de misericordia
possit recipi, ut Haereticus poenitens, and Perpetuo Immurari. Nic. Eymericus,
Direct. Inquisitorum, part. 3. page 516. Col. 1. And Fran. Regne in his
Commentary upon Eymericus there. Comment. 46. p. 517. Col. 2. Number. 202.
turned Papist, none of her Subjects (if the Popes Absolution had been valid)
were, by an Oath, (unless they took a new one) bound to Obey her, as their
Sovereign.

4. Nor does he only Absolve all the before mentioned (Subjects and all others)
from all Oaths made to the Praecipimus and Interdicimus Vniversis and Singulis
Proceribus, Subditis, Populis and Aliis Praedictis, ne illi Ejusve Monitis,
Mandatis, and Legibus Audeam Obedire. Ibid.. 5.
Queen; but also severely interdicts and prohibits them all, to Obey any of her
Laws or Commands. That is; he forbids them to do that, to which (by the
Indispensable Law of God and Nature) they were absolutely bound.

5. And if any of the Persons mentioned in the aforesaid Particulars, did
Praecipimus Vniversis and Singulis Praedictis, ne Ejus Mandatis aut Legibus
audeant Obedire, Qui secus Egerint, eos Simili Anathematis Sententia Innodamus.
Ibidem,. 5.
otherwise, and obeyed any of her Laws or Commands; he pronounces the same
Excommunication and Anathema against them. So that, 1. If any French, Spanish,
or Italian Papists lived in England in Queen Elizabeth's days; (after the Bull
and Excommunication was published, (as many did, and do, either as Merchants or
Travelers) and obeyed the Laws of England; (as of necessity they must, and
ought to conform to the Civil Laws of the Country where they live) all these,
(by this wild Bull) did stand Excommunicate. Nor had they any way to Escape it,
but either by Leaving the Kingdom, and all their Trade and Interest in it, to
their great loss, and possibly the ruin of some: Or by staying here, and
disobeying the Queens Laws, (which never was, nor would be permitted) to
undergo all the Severity and Penalties of those Laws. 2. But (which is yet much
more strange) suppose any Jews, Turks, or Pagans in England in the Queens time;
he Excommunicates all those, if they obey the Queen; But surely this Rash and
Impious Sentence, was not pronounced e Cathedra; for (which is no good Sign of
his Infallibility) he does in this undertake a thing beyond all the Power he
did or could pretend to, an absolute Impossibility. For Excommunication being a
Selusion and Depriving a man of Ecclesiastical Communion, a turning out of the
Christian Church; it was absolutely Impossible that either Peter, or the Pope
his pretended Successor, should deprive those of a Communion they never had, or
turn them out of a Church in which they never were.

6. He Excommunicates all Papists, as well as Protestants, if they obeyed any
of the Queens Laws or Commands. So that their Case was this; If they obeyed the
Queen, their Sovereign, (to whom they ought a natural and sworn Allegiance) the
Pope Curses and Damns them; and if they did not obey her, (as St. Romans 13. 4.
Paul assures us) God himself would Condemn them. Certainly, all pious and
considering Persons will think this an easy choice; and that it is better
rather to Obey God then Men, and believe St. Paul rather then the Pope; and yet
such is the Power of Error and strong Delusion, that the generality of the
Papists, (I do not say all) choose to obey the Pope; as shall appear evidently
anon, by their many open Rebellions, and continual Plots and Conspiracies to
disquiet the Government, and their Endeavors (by Pistol or Poison) to
Assassinate and take away the Queens Life. 2. That all Papists who gave any
Obedience to the Queens Commands or Laws, were Excommunicate, as well as
Protestants, is evident by this: That the Popish Party Their Petition was, That
Their most holy Lord Gregory the Thirteenth, would give a Declaratory
Explication of Pius the Fifth's Bull, against Queen Elizabeth, and her
Adherents; that it might be understood so, as always to bind her and the
Heretics, but not the Catholics, as matters then stood; but hereafter, when
Public Execution of the Bull may be had. The Answer was, These Graces the
highest Bishop has granted to Rob. Parsons and Ed. Campian (who are now coming
into England) the Seventeenth day of April, 1580. in the Presence of Rather
Oliver Manark Assistant. Camden in his History of Elizabeth, ad Ann. 1580.
Elizabeth. 23. page 217. Edit. Angl. Land. 1635.
petion'd Pope Gregory the Thirteenth, Ann. 1580. Elizabeth. 13. That he would
declare, that the Bull of Pius the Fifth should always bind the Queen, and all
Heretics, but not the Roman Catholics, As Things then stood; but hereafter
only, when That Bull might be put in Execution. They were willing to Obey the
Pope, and Disobey their Queen, when they had an Opportunity; They Petition the
Pope to give them leave to do, what God (by Divine Law, Natural and Positive)
had Commanded them to do; that is, to obey their Lawful Sovereign, and that
they will Obey no longer, then till they have a Power and Ability, (with
Security to themselves and Estates) to Disobey.

7. It is a certain Rule of Law and Justice, that before any Judge can Legally
Condemn any; Two things are necessary to preceed; 1. Cognitio The necessity of
these things arises from the Infirmity and Fallibility of all Human Judges;
which is attested by Pope Innocent the Third, in the Canon Law; Judicium Dei
veritati, semper inititur, Judicium aut em Ecclesiae, nonnunquam opinionem
sequitur, quam and fallere Saepe contingit, and falli; propter quod contingit
interdum, ut Qui Ligatus est apud Deum, apud Ecclesiam sit solutus; and qui
liber est apud Deum, Ecclesiastica sit Sententia innodatus. Innocent. 3. Cap. A
Nobis. 28. Extra. De Sententia Excommunicationis. It is Pope Innocent the Third
who says this; and if he was Infallible, (as the Jesuits, Canonists, etc.
pretend) then the Church of Rome does ( Saepe) often err in her
Excommunications; and if he was not Infallible, then both he and his Successors
may err.
Causae, a Convenient Knowledge of the Cause; What Accusation the Actor or
Plaintiff brings; what Answer and Defense the Reus, or Defendant makes. 2. That
the Proofs and Evidence be such, as may be a just ground for a Damnatory
Sentence. If either of these be wanting, either the Judge or Sentence, (or
both) are unjust. Qui aliquid Statuit, part inaudita altera,
Aequum licet Statuerit, haud aequus fuit.
And hence it was that a Pagan Judge could truly say, It is Act. 25. 16.
not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to Dye, before he which is
Accused have the Accuser face to face, and have License to answer for himself.
Such was the Justice of Pagan Rome. But as Christian (or, I fear,
Antichristian) Rome, the Case is altered. Pius the Fifth, the pretended Vicar
of Christ (our blessed Savior) Anathematizes and Damns many hundred Thousands,
even Two whole Kingdoms at once, Causa indicta Genesis 18. 20. 21. The Cry of the
Sins of Sodom was great; but before God did destroy them, I will go down And
See, whether they have done Altogether according to the Cry of it, which is
come to me; and if not, I will know. Si Judicas Cognosce. God gives us an
example, that we ought to be sure of the sin, which deserves it, before we pass
Sentence to punish it. But the Pope here, Curses two Kingdoms, without any
Hearing or Cognizance of the Cause, or possibility to know (notwithstanding the
Cry which might come to Rome) that every one whom he Cursed, deserved it. 2.
God would have spared Sodom and Gomorrah for ten righteous men, Genesis 18. 32.
But the Pope Curses two Kingdoms, though he neither did, nor possibly could
know, but that there might be in them Ten thousand pious Persons who deserved
it not: Nay, he Excommunicates them for their Piety to God and their Prince, in
Obeying the Commands of both, to which by the Law of God and the Land, they
were indispensably obliged.
and inaudita. An Action so prodigiously Impious, as has no ground or pretense
for it in Nature or Scripture, or any Precedent amongst Pagans or Christians
for a Thousand years after Christ; till Hildebrand, one of the worst in the
Papal Catalogue (to the Scandal of Christianity, and fatal Disturbance of
Christendom) unhappily Introduced it, and his Successors since, have (with like
Antichristian Pride and Tyranny) impiously practiced it.

8. Seeing it appears by this Bull of Pope Pius the Fifth, Observe. 8.
(as by many more such, published by his Vide Bullarium Romanum Romae, 1638.
and ibi Excommunicat. Frideric. 2. a Gregor. 9. Constable. 13. Tom. 1. p. 89. and
Excommunicat. Hen. 8. a Paul. 3. Tom. 1. p. 514. etc.
Predecessors and Gregory the Thirteenth, and Sixtus the Fifth, renewed the Bull
of Pius the Fifth. Camden's History of Queen Elizabeth, Ad Ann. 1588. p. 360.
361. Edit. Anglicanae.
Successors) that the Bishops of Rome Usurp and Exercise such a vast
Extravagant Power, to Excommunicate Kings and Emperors, to Depose and Deprive
them of all their Dominions, Honor, and Dignity; to Absolve their Subjects
from their Oaths of Allegiance and Fidelity: To Inhibit and Interdict them
(against the Laws of God and Man) to give any Obedience to their Lawful
Sovereigns; and if they do, to Anathematize and Curse them for so doing; and
lastly, to Excommunicate whole Kingdoms at once ( Causa indicta and inaudita)
if they do their Duty, and give any Obedience to their Prince, when they forbid
them, etc. I say for this, (and many other Reasons) I believe the Bishop of
Rome has the fairest Plea, of any in the World, to be than Man of Sin, and the
great Antichrist spoken of in the Gospel. It is neither my intention or
business now, fully to dispute that Question. Whether the Pope be Antichrist?
(many have with great success, already, done it) I shall only (in short) give
the Reader two or three Arguments, or Motives, which (at present) induce me to
believe that the Pope is Antichrist; And those Motives, either grounded on
Scripture, the Confessions of our Adversaries, the Testimonies of many and
great men before, or the concurrent Consent of the Reformed Churches since
Luther. Here consider,

1. That it is not only See the Annotat. on 1. Pet. 5. 13. and Tirinus the
Jesuit says, (in his Commentary on the same Text) Vnanimiter ^sserunt Patres
and Doctores Orthodoxi, Citati apud Bellarminum, Riberam, Viegam, Pererium,
Aleazar. etc. per Babylonem, Romam Intelligi. And so Corn. A Lapide on the same
place: The same A Lapide upon Rev. 17. 16. on these words --. Hi odient
fornicaeriam, scilicet, Babylozem; i. e. Romam. Vide Hen. Valesium in Notis ad
Lib. 2. Eusebij Hist. Cap. 15. Notarum p. 33. Col. 2. Riberam in Apocal. 14.
8.. 25.
Confessed by our Adversaries (in their Commentaries on 1. Pet. 5. 13. The
Church of Babylon salutes you) but endeavored to be proved by many Arguments
they bring, That Rome is that Babylon, St. John speaks of, in the Revelation;
which he calls the Great Whore, Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the
Earth, and (in more plain Terms) The Rev. 17. 18.
Great City which reigns over the Kings of the Earth; which cannot possibly be
meant of any but Rome, that being then the only great City, which Reigned over
the Kings of the Earth. I know that some of them would have Pamelius Annot. ad
Lib. 3. Tertul. adversus Marcionem, number. 98. page 687.
Pagan Rome meant: but this evidently untrue; for, 1. It must be Apostatical
Rome; (as indeed it is) for the Apostle expressly tells us; That Antichrist will
not come, till an 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. vid. 1. Tim. 4. 1. (...), An Apostasy from
the Faith.
Apostasy and falling from the Faith come first: which cannot be meant of
Pagan Rome; it being impossible they should fall from the Faith, who never had
any. 2. It is meant of that Babylon, or Rome, which St. John calls the Rev. 17.
1. 5. And so Hierome calls her (alluding to this Place, Cum in Babylone
versarer (says he) and Purpuratae Meretricis esse^s Colonus, and Jure Quiritum
viverem, etc. in praefat. ad Didymum. Alexandrinum, de Sp. Sancto, Tom. 6. p.
217. And again, lib. 2. Adversus Jovinianum; Sed (Hierom. Tom. 2. p. 379. 380.
in calce Libri) ad Te loquor, qui scriptam in from blasphemiam, Christi
Confessione delisti. Vrbs Orbis Domina, Maledictionem, quam Tibi Salvator in
Apocalypsi Comminatus est, potes effugere per poenitentiam, etc. Marian.
Victorius in Notis ad dictum Librum and Locum, number. 68. says he means Pagan
Rome. But it is certain (which I only cite him for) that Babylon in the
Revelation (in Hierom's Opinion) is Rome: Sure I am, that Tertullian is of the
same judgment; (Libro adversus Judaeos, cap. 8. page 142. number. 106.) Sic and
Babylon apud Johannem, Romanae Vrbis figuram portat, proinde and Regno
superbae, and sanctorum debellatricis. And he has the same words again, (Lib.
3. Adversus Marcion. cap. 13. number. 98. p. 674.) where Pamelius in his Notes on
those places, 1. Would have Pagan Rome meant. However, by Babylon in the
Revelation (in Tertullian's Opinion, as well as Hieroms) Rome is meant. 2. He
would have those words, ( Babylon Roma) which were in the Margent of a former
Edition of Tertullian, blotted out; that men might not be put in mind that Rome
was the Mystical Babylon, more Romano, corrupting Records, and blotting out
whatever makes against them.
Great Whore, and Harlot: but in Scripture, none but Apostates from the Faith,
and true See Hos. 1. 2. etc. and Hos. 2. 2.
Religion, are called so; none but she who was once a Wife, and afterward
falls into Spiritual Whoredom; which of Pagan Rome neither is, nor can be true.
3. The Actings of Antichrist are called 2. These. 2. 7. Rev. 17. 5. 7.
Mysterium, a Mystery, things hard to be understood: but that Pagan Idolaters
should persecute and oppress Christians, and be drunk with the Blood of the
Saints, this is no Mystery. But that all this should be done in pretense of the
only True and Catholic Religion, in Honor of Christ, and by his Vicar; this
is indeed a Mystery, not easily understood. So that it is evident, and
confessed, that Rome is Babylon, (Mystical Babylon) called so, (as she is
called Rev. 11. 8.
Sodom and Egypt) in respect of that Analogy and Similitude between the Literal
and Mystical, the Pagan and Antichristian Babylon, (Babylon Chaldaeae and
Italiae.) Some of the Particulars wherein that Similitude consists, are here in
the The Similitude between the Pagan Babylon, in the Old, and the Antichristian
in the New Testament, may appear in this; 1. They were both very great Cities.
(Isai. 13. 19. Rev. 16. 19.) 2. They were both Impious and Idolatrous. (Isai.
46. 1. Rev. 9. 20.) 3. They were both Oppressors of the Church of God; the
Literal and Pagan Babylon, of the Jews, (Jer. 50. 11.) the Mystical Babylon of
Christian Church. (Rev. 17. 6.) 4. They both propagated their Impiety, and made
other Nations to sin with them. (Jer. 51. 7. Rev. 13. 16. etc. Rev. 17. 2.) 5.
In the Pagan Babylon God had some Saints and Servants, and they were Commanded
to come out of her. (Jer. 50. 8. and 51. 6.) And so in the Mystical Babylon,
(Rev. 18. 4.) 6. The destruction of both is denounced in the same words, of
Pagan Babylon, (Isai. 21. 9. Jer. 51. 8.) and of Mystical Babylon, (Rev. 14. 8.
and 18. 2.)
Margent; and he who considers what St. John says of the Mystical, and what
Isaie and Jeremy of the Literal Babylon, may find more. I take it then for a
manifest Truth, (and confessed by our Adversaries) that by Babylon in the
Revelation, Rome is meant, and that it is the Seat of Antichrist. The next
Query will be, Who that great Antichrist is, whose Seat is to be at Rome? And
this will best appear by the Description and Characters of him in Scripture.

2. One Characteristical Note and Mark of Antichrist, is given by 2 Thessalonians. 2.
4. (...).
St. Paul; That he is an Enemy, an Adversary to Christ (our blessed Savior) so
the word in St. Paul properly (...). Hesychius. (...), Adversarius. Glossae
veteres in Calce Cyrilli. Etymolog. Magnum, in verbo (...); which he renders
(...). and then adds; (...).
signifies; so their Authentic; Vulgar Latin Filius perditionis, qui
Adversatur.
translates it, and their Learned Corn. A Lapide in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
Commentators prove it. So that we are agreed on this; That Antichrist (whoever
he be) is an Adversary to our blessed Savior; and though he may pretend (as we
know he does) to be Christ's Vicar, and Act by his Authority, and for him; yet
he is really his Adversary, and acts in Opposition, and Contradiction to him.
Now if this be a true Character of Antichrist (and it is St. Paul's) then the
Pope has a fairer Plea to be that Beast, then any man in the World. For under
the Name and Notion of Christ's Vicar, and by a vainly pretended and usurped
Power from him, he acts contrary to Christ, and the express Commands of the
Gospel. I shall (of many) give two or three Instances, 1. Our blessed Savior,
at the Institution of the Eucharist, expressly Commands his Disciples (and so
all Christians, who are of Age and rightly qualified) Matthew. 26. 27.
Drink Ye All of this: And another Evangelist tells us, that they obeyed, and
Mark. 14. 23.
Did All Drink. But the Pope, in Contradiction to this, Concilium
Constantiense, Sess. 13.
absolutely forbids all (save the Priest who Consecrates) to drink the
Eucharistical Cup; and so (in Contradiction to our Savior's Command) deprives
them of half that Sacrament. And this they do with a blasphemous Impiety,
forbidding bidding all Laics to have the Communion in both kinds,
Notwithstanding the Licet Christus post coenam, Instituerit, and Discipulis sub
Vtraque Specie panis and vini administraverit: Hoc non Obstante, etc. Ibid.
Institution of Christ, and notwithstanding that in the Licet in Primitiva
Ecclesia hoc Sacramentum reciperetur a fidelibus sub Vtraque Specie, tamen
Consuetudo ab Ecclesia introducta, pro lege habenda est. Ibidem. By the way,
let the Intelligent and Impartial Reader consider, with what contradiction to
truth and right reason the Fathers at Constance, establish their half
Communion. They reject the uninterrupted perpetual Custom of the Universal
Church, (both Greek and Latin, Eastern and Western) for above One thousand two
hundred years, for receiving the Communion in both kinds: and yet tell us, That
a late Custom of the Roman Church only, and that in some places only (for it
was not a general Custom in the Roman Church to receive only in one kind, till
Ann. 1414. the Council of Constance met and defined it) must be a Law to oblige
all to receive only in one kind.
Primitive Church it was Received in both kinds: and they further declare them
Pertinaciter asseremes oppositum, tanquam Haeretici arc^ndi sunt and Graviter
puniendi. Ibidem.
Heretics, who think otherwise; and Command, that no Priest shall administer
it in both kinds to any Layman, under pain of Nullu^ Presbyter sub poena
Excommunicationis, Communicet populum sub utraque Specie. Ibidem.
Excommunication. By the way; it is observable, That it is Confessed by our
Adversaries Lindanus in Panoplia, Lib. 4. Cap. 56. page 342. Edit. Colon. 1575.
Lindanus, Cardinal Card. Bona de rebus Liturgicis. Lib. 2. Cap. 18. page 491.
492. Paris. 1672.
Bona, etc.) that the whole Church of God (Lay and Clergy) for about One
thousand two hundred years, Received in both kinds, even the Church of Rome her
self: And after that, in In Quibusdam Ecclesiis observatur, ut populo Sanguis
Sumendus non detur. Aquinas part. 3. Quaest. 8. Art. 12. in Corpore.
Aquinas his time, it was but in some Which was about the year of Christ, 1265.
Bellarmine de Script. Ecclesiasticis, in Tho. Aquinate.
Churches, that the Cup was denied to the Laity. The sum is this; He who acts
in Opposition and Contradiction to our blessed Savior's Commands in the
Gospel, abrogates them, (so much as in him lies) calls them Heretics, and
Excommunicates those who obey them, and Incourages those who disobey Christ,
and obey him; he (I say) is an Adversary to Christ and Antichrist. But (by the
Premises) it appears, that the Pope does all this, more signally in taking
away the Cup in the Eucharist then any (who pretends to be a Christian) in the
whole World; Ergo, he is Antichrist. 2. The next Instance whereby it may
appear, that the Pope is (...), an Adversary to our blessed Savior, and so has
one Character of Antichrist, is this; St. Paul in his Epistle to the 1. Cor. 14.
Corinthians, tells them, (and he says they are the Ibid. verse. 37. The things
I write unto you are the Commandments of the Lord.
Commandments of Christ he writes) 1. That it is the Commandment of our blessed
Savior, that in their Assemblies all things be done to Ibid. verse. 26. and
verse. 12.
Edification. 2. That speaking in an unknown Tongue, does not Ibid. verse. 17.
Edify or Ibid. verse. 6.
Profit the Church to which he speaks; Ibid. verse. 2. 9. 14. 15. 16.
because they understand not what he says. 3. He absolutely forbids all
speaking in their Assemblies (if there be none to Interpret) in any Ibid. verse.
28.
unknown Tongue. Now whether the Pope be not (...), an Adversary to Christ, let
the Reader Judge, by that which follows. Our blessed Savior expressly Commands,
that in the Assemblies of Christians all things should be in a Tongue
understood by the People, for their Edification, (and the Apostle thinks it
Ibid. verse. 23.
madness to do otherwise) that they might know his Precepts and gracious
Promises; and so their Duty, and Encouragements to do it. But the Pope (as all
know) in Contradiction to this, absolutely forbids what our blessed Savior
expressly Commands; and prohibits all Public Prayers in any Vulgar Tongue; nay,
the printing, reading, or having their own Cum quidam Missale Romanum, ad
Gallicam vi^^g arem linguam convertere tent averint: Nos Novitatem istam
Ecclestae decoris deformatricem, detestamur; and Missale praedictum Gallico
Idiomate conscriptum, damnamus, ac Interdicimus, sub poena Excommunicationis
latae Sententiae, Ipso Jure incurrendae. Mandantes, ut qui illud habuerint
tradant Ordinarijs, aut Inquisitoribus, qui sine Mora, Exemplaria igne
comburant. Bulla Alexand. 7. dat. Romae, 12. Jan. 1661. Pontificatus Ann. 6.
Roman Missal in French Vid. Bullam Cloment. 9. Romans 9. April, 1668. It was to
be burnt by the Bishop or Inquisitors, even their own Missal in French.
, into which it was faithfully Translated, (not by any Heretics, but by good
Roman Catholics). This evidently appears by the Authentic Bull of Pope
Alexander the Seventh, and some of his words cited in the Margent. And he there
tells us, That the Translators and Publishers of that Missal, were Studiers of
Novelties, to the Quidam Perditionis Filij in perniciem Animarum novitatibus
students, and Ecclesiasticas Sanctiones, and praxin Contemnentes, ad came nuper
Vesaniam pervenerint, ut Missale Romanum in Gallicam vulgarem linguam
convertere tentaverint. So it is in the said Bull.
ruin of Souls; Contemners of the Sanctions and Practice of the Church; and
that they were Sons of Perdition. But in this, I think his Holiness was not
well advised. For if the Apostles 2 Thessalonians. 2. verse. 3. 4.
Character of Antichrist be true, he himself has a better claim to that Title,
and really is (what he calls them) The Son of Perdition. What they say in
Answer to St. Paul, and the clear Texts against all praying to, or praising God
in an unknown Tongue, is most Irrational, and Indeed Impertinent. It is not my
Business or Intention (in this place and time) particularly to Examine it; but
refer the Reader to their Vide Corn. A Lapide in 1. Cor. 14. Costeri
Enchiridion. Cap. 17. De precibus. Latin Recitandis, page 502. etc. Johan.
Eckij Enchiridion adversus Lutherum, page 392. Colon. 1565. vide Azorium
Instit. Moral. Part. 1. lib. 8. cap. 26.
Learned Writers for their Latin Prayers, where he may see what they say; and
if he be Intelligent, and an Impartial Seeker, and Lover of Truth, he will find
that St. Paul Condemns all Prayers to, and Praises of God in an unknown Tongue.
Sure I am, a very Learned Sorbon Doctor in his Hen. Holden. Theologus
Parisiensis, in Annotat. ad i. Cor. 14. Paris. 1660.
Notes on that place in St. Paul (convinced with the Evidence of the Text and
Truth) does acknowledge it, and explains St. Paul as I have done. If they damn
and burn their own Offices in any Vulgar Tongue, (which deserve to be burnt for
many other better Reasons) we may easily guess (when they have power to do it,
which I pray and hope they never will) what they will do with ours. 3. But that
which is the highest and most evident Instance, that the Pope is (...), an
Adversary and Enemy to our blessed Savior Christ, and true Christianity, is;
That whereas the Gospel was writ to be read and studied (by all who had
ability) as the great means of their Salvation; and accordingly was Translated
into all Christian Languages, and all permitted to have and read it; that they
might (for their direction and comfort) know the holy Precepts, and gracious
Promises contained in it; and continued so to this Day in all Christian
Churches (except Rome) and in that too, for many hundred years after Christ,
while Latin was their Vulgar Tongue. But when the Impiety and Tyranny of the
Bishops of Rome unhappily prevailed, the Gospel it self, and the whole Book of
God, was reckoned amongst Damned Books* and Authors, and not permitted to be
Nulla conceditur facultas Legendi vel retinendi Biblia vulgaria, aut alias
Sacrae Scripturae parts, quavis Vulgari Lingua Editas, and Insuper Summaria
and Compendia etiam Historia Sacrae Scripturae, quocunque vulgari Idiomate
conscripta; quod Inviolate Observandum. Vid. Observat. ad Regul. 4. Indicis, in
Calce Concilij Trident. Antverp. 1633. and Indicem Expurg. Alexand. 7. Romans
1667. p. 14. verbo. Biblia, and Bibliorum.
read in any Vulgar Tongue; no not so much as any Summary or Historical
Compendium of it. And further, amongst the Rules of the Index Expurgatorius,
published by the Command of the Trent Council, we are told, (with great Impiety
and Blasphemy) that by permitting the Scripture to be commonly read in Vulgar
Tongues, there comes Plus inde ob hominum temeritatem, Detrimenti quam
Vtilitatis Oriri. Ibid. Reg. 4. In Indice Alexand. 7. p. 4.
more Mischief than Bene^it. Pope Urban the Eighth says Librorum prohibitorum
Lectio, magno sincerae fidei Cultoribus Detrimento esse noscitur. Urban. 8.
Constit. 114. Bullarij Romans Tom. 4.. 1. p. 119. Edit. Romans An. 1638.
the very same, (with as much Impiety as his Predecessors) and further adds;
That all who have any prohibited Books, (of which number it is Evident the
Bible in any Vulgar Language is one) they must bring them to the Bishop or
Inquisitor, and they must Burn them presently, by the hand of the Hangman, or
some such Officer, (for I suppose they are not to do it themselves). And we
have a late and further Instance of this Antichristi in Impiety, in a Bull of
Pope Clement the Ninth. The New Testament (as appears by the Bull) was
Translated into French, and Printed at Lions; The Pope (Animus meminisse
horret) Liber Versionis Gallicae Novi Testamenti, cui Titulus est -- Le Nouvean
Testament de nostre Seigneur Jesus Christ, etc. Nos Librum hujusmodi tanquam
temerariu, Damnosum, a vulgata Editione deformem Damnamus, and prohibemus: ita
ut nemo cujuscunque Conditionis sub poena Excommunicationis, illum legere aut
retinere audeat, sed Ordinariis aut Inqlisitoribus deferat. etc. Ita Clem. 9.
Bulla data Romans 20. Apr. An. 1668.
Damns and prohibits it, under the very Name, The New Testament of our Lord
Jesus Christ; and Excommunicates all, of what dignity soever, who shall print,
sell, read, or have it; and Commands (under pain of Excommunication) that they
who have it, bring it to the Ordinary or li qui Libros prohibitos habuerint,
cos ad Episcopum aut Inquisitores deserant, qui eos quantocyus Comburere
debeant. Ibid.. 3.
Inquisitors; and what they must do, with it, the Bull of Urban the Eighth,
(but now Cited) will tell you; they must burn it, and (as a damned Book)
abolish it. So Clement the Ninth Commands the In his Bull, 9. Apr. 1668.
Pontificatus sui Ann. 1. Damnamus -- mandantes, ut quicunque librum illum
Ritualem habuerint vel habebunt, locerum Ordinariis, vel Inquisitoribus statim
tradant, qui nulla interposita mora, igni comburant, aut comburi faciant, etc
Roman Ritual in French, to be burnt. But that which makes their Error and
Impiety more evident, is; That even then and there, where they absolutely
prohibit the Gospel in any Vulgar Tongue, and Damn it to the Fire, they permit
the Item Alboranus Mahometis in Lingua Vulgari, ex Concessione Inquisitorum
haberi possit. Index Librorum prohibitorum. Alexandr. 7. Edit. Romans 1664. page
3.
the Turkish Alcaron in a Vulgar Tongue, with leave had from the Inquisitors,
who yet could give no leave to any (as appears before by the Rules of their
Expurgatory Biblin quocunque I diomate Vulgari conscripta. Ita Index Librorum
prohibitorum, Alexand. 7. Jussu Editus Romae, 1667. verbo Biblia, p. 14.
Index) to have the Gospel, or any part of it, in any Vulgar Tongue. Prodigious
Impiety! The Turkish Alcoran (the contrivance of a Monstrous Impostor, and
Enemy to Christ and Christianity) is permitted; and the Gospel of our blessed
Savior is absolutely prohibited and damned. And though in doing this, they Act
very Impiously, yet (in their Generation and Circumstances) very wisely. For
neither the Alcoran, nor any Book in the World, is so fatal to their miscalled
Catholic Religion, as (when truly understood and believed) the Bible. That
Book evidently discovers, and condemns their Errors; and therefore they are
concerned to keep it from the People, least they should find (as by that Divine
Light they easily might) and forsake their Errors. The Premises considered,
let the Reader judge, Whether the Pope have not this Mark of the Beast, and
Character of Antichrist, that he is, (...) the Adversary of Christ, and that
Religion Established by him; who prohibits the having and reading (and so the
Understanding) of the Gospel, Damns it to the Fire, and burns it; and yet at
the same time permits the Alcaron.

3. Another Characteristical Note or Mark of Antichrist given by St. Paul, is;
That he Exalts himself above all that is called God, or Worshipped; So our
English Translation; so their Authentic Vulgar Extollitur super Omne quod
dicitur Deus, aut quod Colitur. Clem. 8. in Bibliis, 1592.
Latin; and their own Learned Corn. A Lapide in 2 Thessalonians. 4.. 27.
Commentators justify it. The word in the Text properly (...), Colo, veneror.
(...) (Suidae and Hesychio) (...), Colendum, venerandum, Id quod veneratur.
Athanasius Orat. Contra Gentes, (ex sapientia Sirach, c. 14. 17.) (...) ubi
(...) Numen, Deum significat. Sic Act. 17. 23. (...) Sacra Gentilia, quae
venerabantur, seu Numina, Altaria, Templa, etc. Hinc Caesares (...), Augusti;
Hesychio, (...).
signifying, Id quod Colitur, any thing or Person, which is the Object of
Honor and Veneration. So that thus far we are agreed, That Antichrist will
Exalt himself above all that is called God, (as all Magistrates Subordinate and
Supreme, Kings and Emperors in Scripture are) or worshipped. This then ( in
Thesi) being granted; we must next ( in Hypothesi) Inquire, Whether this
Characteristical Note and Mark of Antichrist, may be truly affirmed of the
Pope, and be really found in him? In Answer to which Query, I say; I hope it
may, and does appear by the Premises, That the Pope does Exalt himself, far
above all Kings and Emperors, more then any man in the World ever did, or
(Antichrist excepted) ever will; and therefore I shall only add two or three
things in Confirmation of the Premises. 1. Then, his Favorers and Flatterers
give him (and he approves and assumes it) The Sanctiss. Urban. 8. Vniversi
Imperator. Angelus Maria Cherubinus, in Calce. Tom. 4. Bullarij Romani, Romans
1638. page 120.
Title of Emperor of the Universe. Upon this account, That the Pope is Emperor
of the Universe, of the whole World; it follows, That all Kings and Emperors
are his Subjects, and he their Supreme Lord and Sovereign, and so, far greater
in Power, then any one, or all of them together. And least we should mistake,
and undervalue his Papal Greatness; Pope Innocent the Third told the Emperor of
Constantinople, (and has told us in the Body of their approved and received
Law) That the Pope is as much greater then the Emperor, as the Vid. Cap.
Solicit 6. Extra. De Major. and Obed. Quanta est inter Solemn and Lunam, tanta
inter Pontifices and Reges differentia cognoscatur.
Sun is greater then the Moon. And here the Author of the Gloss, ( Bernardus de
Botono, a great Lawyer, but no good Astronmer) tells us, That the Sun is 47.
times greater then the Moon; and so (by that Computation) the Pope is 47. times
greater then the Emperor. This is pretty well, and gives so vast a Magnitude to
the Pope above the Emperor, that a man would think it might satisfy his
Ambition, so that he needed not ask, nor his greatest Flatterers give him more.
Yet they do give much more. For in a Marginal Note on the said Chapter, (in
their most Vid. Corpus Juris Canon. cum Glossis. Paris. 1612.
Correct Editions of their Law) we are told, That the Sun is greater then the
Moon, Quinquagies Septies, 57. times; and so the Pope so much greater then the
Emperor. But this is not all. Laurentius (a Canonist) in the same Palam est,
quod magnitudo Solis continet magnitudinem* Lunae 7744. Vice Addit. ad Gloss.
verb. Inter Solemn. Ad dictum cap. 6.
place, tells us; That it is evident, that the Sun is 7744 greater then the
Moon; and so the Pope (omitting the Fraction) Seven thousand, seven hundred,
and forty four times greater then the Emperor. This is so prodigiously
erroneous and impious, as none, save their most Holy and Infallible Guide,
could be guilty of such Error and Impiety. But a Learned Roman Clavius Comment.
in Johan. de Sacro Bosco. p. 189.
Catholic (who understood Astronomy, and the Magnitude of the Sun, (much
better then the Pope, or his Parasites) seriously tells us, that the Sun is
greater then the Moon. 6539. times. And so by the Popes Logic and Decretal
Definition, and the Computation of his best Artists, he must be. 6539. times
greater then the Emperor. Monstrous Pride and Ignorance! which is so far from
proving him to be our blessed Saviors Vicar, that it evidently proves him, to
be that 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
Man of Sin, the great Antichrist, who exalts himself ((...)) above all Kings
and Emperors. Certainly Antichrist cannot exalt himself more, then to declare
to the World, (as the Pope here does) in his Public Laws and Constitutions,
that he is. 6539. times greater then any King or Emperor. So that although St.
Romans 13. 1.
Paul, and 1. Pet. 2. 13.
Peter too, acknowledged the Emperors Power Supreme, and required that all men
(even the Pope if he were a man) should conscienciously obey them; though St.
Paul Act. 25. 11.
appeal (not to Peter, but) to Caesar, as Supreme: Though Athanasius say, That
there lay no Athanasius in Apologia, ad Constantium Tom. 1. p. 680. D.
Appeal from the Emperor, but to God; and though Tertull. ad Scap. cap. 2. and
Apolog. c. 30.
Tertullian say, That the Emperor was, Solo Deo minor; and the Bishops of Rome,
for almost One thousand years after our blessed Savior, acknowledged the
Emperors their Sovereign Lords, yet Hildebrand and his Successors, have (as
above) exalted themselves far above all that is called God, and have that
indelible Character of Antichrist. Q. E. D. 2. And they further say, That this
Universal Monarchy is given him by God himself; and so he has it, (not by any
Human Right or Injust Usurpation, but Jure Divino) by the Law of God, and a
Right derived from him; and this is said, not once only, nor by any private Tu
es Pastor Ovium, Princeps Apostolorum; Tibi Tradidit Deus Omnia Regna Mundi:
Breviar. Roman. Antv. 1660. part. Hiemali, in Festo Cathedrae S. Petri
Antiochiae, in Resp. post Lect. 4. p. 760.
Person, (whose Authority might be questioned) but many times in their
Authentic Roman Ibid. part Hiemali in Festo Cathedrae Sti. Petri Romae, ad
diem Jan. 18. p. 700. Col. ^. and in dicti Breviarij Part. Aestiva, p. 482. In
Festo Petri and Pauli, Jun. 29. and ibidem rursus p. 541. In Festo S. Petriad
vincula.
Breviary, restored according to the The (...) or Title of that Breviary, is
thus -- Breviarium Romanum, ex Decreto Sacro-Sancti Concilij Tridentini
restitutum, ^ij. 5. Pont. Max. Jussu Editum, and Clement. 8. primum, nunc demum
Vrbani P. 8. Authoritate recognitum. Antv. 1660.
Decree of the Council of Trent, and revised and published by the Authority and
Command of Pius. 5. Clem. 8. Urban. 8. as above.
three Popes successively; so that we may be sure they approve it. That
Breviary has it thus, (speaking of Peter) -- Thou art Prince of the Apostles;
And God has Given Thee All the Kingdoms of the World. These are the words of
that Authentic Breviary, approved and confirmed by the Authority of those
three Popes before mentioned, (as appears by their Bull prefixed to the
Edition) and is now in public use in their Church. So that he Exalts himself,
as Universal Monarch, over all the Kings and Kingdoms in the World; and that
(as he impiously pretends) by a Divine Right, and the Donation of God himself;
And hence it is, That not only the Canonists (the constant and great Parasites
of the Pope) but even the Learned Divines of the Roman Church, give the Pope
(and he Approves and Assumes) such Extravagant and Blasphemous Titles, as none
but the Man of Sin, who Exalts himself above all that is called God, would
approve. To pass by many hundreds of the like nature, I shall Instance only in
one. Stapleton (an English man, and a very Learned Professor of Divinity at
Doway, in his Dedicatory Epistle to Pope Gregory the Thirteenth, calls that
Pope Stapleton, in Academia Duacena Theol. Professor, in Epist. Greg. 13.
Princip. Fidei Doctrine. Demonstrationi praefixa; Papam appellat, Catholicae
Ecclesiae Virticem Coruphaeotatum, Totius Orbis Magistrum and Supremum in
terris Numen.
-- The Highest Top and Prince of the Catholic Church, The Master of the whole
World, and on Earth The Supreme God or Deity. Certainly, ^he who approves and
admits such Titles to be given him, Exalts himself above all that is called
God, and so has the Character of Antichrist mentioned by the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians.
2. 4. And here (though I intended it not) I shall crave leave to add two or
three Passages more, which casually come in my way and memory, and are very
pertinent to our present purpose. 1. The Gloss on their Nec Deus es, nec Homo,
quasi neuteres, inter utrumque. Glossa ad Prooemium Clement. verbo, Papa.
Canon Law tells us, That the Pope is neither God nor Man, but something more
then Man. And though this Impious and Blasphemous Gloss was Vide Censuram in
Glossas Jur. Can. per Tho. Manrique, Colon. 1572. p. 13. 14.
Censured to be left out, by the Master of the Sacred Palace. Yet Vide Indicem
Expurgat. Olysipone, 1624. p. 350.
Clement the Eighth thought otherwise; and those words are still in the best
Edition of the Paris. 1612.
Canon Law; only with this Note in the Margent, Haec verba sunt sano modo
intelligenda, pr^lata enim sunt, ad Ostendendum Amplissimam Pontificis Romans
Potestatem. But this Gloss is something modest, though it make the Pope more
then Man; and being in Verse, may have some Poetical License allowed. 2. But
another Gloss in plain Prose expressly says, That it is Credere Dominum Deum
nostrum Papam non posse sic statuere, Haereticum Censetur. Glossa ad Cap. cum
inter. 4. verbo. Declaramus. De verborum signific. Extravag. Johan. 22.
our Lord God the Pope. For although in some Edit. Paris. 1519.
Old Editions of the Canon Law, it was only Our Lord the Pope; yet now in the
most Edit. Paris. 1612.
Correct Editions of that Law, confirmed by Gregory the Thirteenth, it is
(without any Qualification in the Margent) our Lord God the Pope. 3. And to
make the Blasphemy full, and evidently Antichristian, Ant. Puccius in an
Oration made by him in their General Lateran Council, speaking to Pope Leo the
Tenth, says, Diviniae Majestatistuae Conspectus, rutilanti cujus fulgore oculi
mei Caligant, etc. Crab. Council. Tom. 3. Conc. Lateran. Sess. 9. p. 648. Col. 2.
That the Rays of His Divine Majesty did dazzle his Eyes. Impious and
Antichristian Pride and Blasphemy! yet approved at Rome, and by themselves (to
their shame) published to the World. Nor is this all: He pretends to, and
assumes an Infallibility, and that of so high a Nature, that all his
Definitions and Determinations of Doubts (whether e Cathedra or not; whether in
a General Council, or out of it; to be the Word of God. So a Learned Popish
Verbum Dei est triplex: 1. Scriptum, scilicet Scriptura sacra. 2. Non scriptum,
Traditio. 3. Explicatum; Cum dubia in verbo scripto vel non scripto
Explicantur, and determinantur: and hoc sit praesertim per summum Pontificem,
sive Extra Concilium, s^u in Concilio. Lud. Bail: in Apparatu de triplici verbo
Dei, Tom. 1. Summae Council. Praefixo.
Author tells us; That the Word of God is threefold; 1. His written Word, the
Scriptures: 2. His unwritten Word, Traditions: 3. His explained or declared
Word; when Scripture or Traditions are declared and explained by the Pope;
whether in or out of a Council. And he says; Iste Modus ultimus (the Popes
determinations of doubts) Magis Probatus est, and cum majore suavitate ei
Plures acquiescunt. Ibidem in principio dicti Apparatus.
That this Last word of God, (the Popes Definitions and Explications) is the
most approved, and most men do with greater pleasure acquiesce in it. Though
this be much, yet not all. For the Pope does not only pretend to, and assume to
himself an Universal Monarchy, over all the Kingdoms of the World; but such an
Absolute Power to dispose of them; that he can ( part inconsulta) give away
Kingdoms ( pro Arbitrio) to whom he pleases. A Memorable, and (for Papal Pride
and Injustice) a Prodigious Instance we have of this, in Pope Alexander the
Sixth, who at one Clap, gave to De nostra mera Liberalitate, Omnes Insulas and
Terras firmas inventas and Inveniendas, versus Occidentem and Meridiem,
fabricando unam. Lineam a Polo Arctico ad Antarcticum, quae Linea distet a
qualibet Insularum quae Vulgariter dictae sunt, De (...) Azores y Cabo Vi^rde,
Centum Leucis versus occidentem, Cum Omnibus illarum dominijs, Ciritati^us,
Castris, Villis, Juribus, and Pertinentiis Vniversis, vobis, haeredibus and
successoribus in (...). Constit. 2. Alexand. 6.. 8. in Bullario Romans Tom. 1. p.
347.
Ferdinand and Elizabeth, (King and Queen of Castile) and their Heirs for ever,
All the West Indies, from Pole to Pole, and all the Isles about them (which lay
One hundred Leagues Westward from Cape Verd, and the Azores) with all their
Dominions, Cities, Castles, Villages, all the Rights and Jurisdictions
belonging to them. And this, he says, he gives, of his own mere Liberality, by
Power derived from Peter, and as Vicar of Christ. Then he Excommunicates all of
what degree soever, Kings and Ac Personis cujuscunque Dignitatis, etiam
Imperialis, Regalis, etc. sub Excommunicationis latae Sententiae poena,
districtius Inhibemus, ne ad Insulas aut terras dictas, pro mercibus habendis,
vel causa alia quavis, accedere praesumant, absque venia vestra, aut Haeredum
Speciali Licentia. Ibid.. 8.
Emperors ( by name) who shall dare to trade into the West Indies ( given to
Ferdinand by him) without the leave and license of the said Ferdinand. Here we
see, the Pope gives away almost half the World, from the true Owners, Causa
incognita, inaudita, indicta; the Persons and their Quality being utterly
unknown to him. If it be said, They were Pagan Idolaters: Grant that. Yet, 1.
What they all were, he neither did, nor could know. 2. If they really were
such, (as probably they were) yet dominium non fundatur in gratia; a Pagan and
Idolater may ( jure naturae) have as just a Temporal Right to his Estate, as a
Christian. Caesar was a Pagan in our blessed Saviors time; and yet he Commands
them to Matthew. 22. 21.
give to Caesar the things which were Caesar's. Some things were Caesar's in
which he had a propriety, and to which he had a right, and his Subjects an
Obligation to pay him tribute, and other things Romans 13. 7. The Apostle
commands the Romans to pay tribute to whom it was due, that is, to Caesar; for
to him only they were Subjects, and to him only Tribute was due from them. Our
blessed Savior (as man, born in the Roman Empire) was subject to Caesar, and
paid him Tribute. Matthew. 17. 25. And that (as Cajetan and Lucas Burgensis on
that place, truly say; That he paid that Tribute, not de facto only, but de
debito.
due to him. But I hope this will not be denied: For if none, but pious men, and
true Christians have any just Right to what they possess, it will (I fear) go
hard with his Holiness, and he will have no Propriety in St. Peter's Patrimony,
or any other thing he does possess. And therefore (if he Impartially consider
it) he may find some reason, if not for Truths sake (which with him is not
always a prevailing Motive) yet for his own, to be (in this) of my opinion: By
the Premises, I hope it may, and does appear, That the Pope Exalts himself
above all that is called God, or worshipped; and so really has the
Characteristical Note and Mark of the Beast, that Man of Sin, and is indeed
that great Antichrist described and foretold in Scripture.

4. Nor am I singular in this Opinion; many Excellent Persons (both for
Learning and Piety) have said as much: and some have given us a Catalogue of
their Vide Testimonia ex variis Authoribus Collecta Romam Babylona esse,
Ejusque Episcopum jure Antichristum dici; per Simon. Schardium, in calce
Epistolarum Petri de Vincis. Basil. ^566.
Testimonies. I shall say nothing of the Fathers; many of which make Rome
Babylon in the Revelation, some of them I have Cited before, and Schardius (in
the Place last Quoted) has more. Nor shall I say any thing of the poor
persecuted Waldenses and Wiclisists, or the Reformed Churches since Luther; who
both believed and constantly affirmed and proved the Pope to be Antichrist;
especially the Church of England, as appears, both by her ablest Writers, and
her Authentic See the third part of the Homily of Good Works; in the first
part of the Homilies, p. 38. and the sixth part of the Homily against
Rebellion, in the second part of the Homilies, p. 316. where the Pope is called
the Babylonical Beast of Rome.
Homilies, confirmed by the Kings Supreme Authority in Convocations and
Parliaments. Omitting all these (which yet were abundantly sufficient to show,
that I am not singular in this Opinion) I shall only (of very many more) give a
few Evident Instances and Testimonies of those who lived and died in the
Communion of the Church of Rome. And here

1. The Emperor Frederick the Second, in a Letter to the King of France,
complaining of the Prodigious Pride and Tyranny of the Pope, and his Impious
Practices to divide the Empire, and ruin him; he says, That he Endeavored to
build the Novissime ad Supplantationem nostram aspirans, ut adversus David,
turrem Construeret Babylonis, etc. Apud Pet. de. de Vincis, Epist. Lib. 1. cap.
13. page 129.
Tower of Babylon against him. And that we may know what and whom he meant by
Babylon, in another Epistle to the King and Nobility of France; he Complains of
the horrid Injuries and Injustice done him by the Pope and his Party; he calls
them Videte Orbis generale Scandalum, dissidia gentium, generale justitiae
doleatis Excidium, exeunte Nequitia A Senioribus Babylonis, qui populum
hactenus Regere videbantur, etc. Apud eundem, lib. 1. cap. 21. page 152.
the Elders of Babylon, etc.

2. A faithful Historian (speaking of Pope Hildebrand, or Gregory the Seventh,
and his Prodigious Tyranny and Impiety) tells us, Plerique tum privatim, tum
Public indignum facinus clamitant, Pro Concione Gregorio Maledicunt,
Hildebrando male precantur; ipsum Antichristum esse praedicaent, Titulo
Christi, negotium Antichristi agitat; in Babylonia, in Temple Dei Sedet; super
Omne id quod colitur, extollitur; quasi Deus sit, etc. Joh. Aventinus Annal.
Bojor. lib. 5. p. 352. Basil. 1615. vide plura Ibid. p. 363.
That in those times, Most Men, both Privately and Publicly, cursed
Hildebrand, called him Antichrist: that under the Name and Title of Christ, he
did the work of Antichrist; that he sat in Babylon, in the Temple of God; and
(as if he had been a God) Exalted himself above all that is worshipped, etc.
And much more to the same purpose; abundantly Testified by the Historians of
those times, who were neither Lutherans, nor (by the Roman Church) then reputed
Heretics. And afterward (speaking of the same Hildebrand) we are told --
Hildebrandus ante Annos. 170. primus specie Religionis Antichristi Imperij
fundamenta jecit. Hoc bellun nefandum primus auspicatus est, quod per
Successores huc usque continuatur -- Flamines illi ( Papas Romans Intelligit)
Babyloniae Soli regnare cupiunt: far parem non possunt, in Templo Dei
Sedeant, Extollantur supra omne id quod Colitur: Ingentia loquitur perditus
homo ille, quasi Deus esset, etc. Aventine Ibid. lib. 7. page 420. 421. Vide
plura ibidem page 444.
That he laid the Foundation of the Kingdom of Antichrist One hundred and
seaventy years before that time (when that was said) under a color and show of
Religion; He begun the War with the Emperor, which his Successors continued to
that Day, (till the time of Friderick the Second, and Pope Gregory the Ninth)
where we have many things more, concerning the Prodigious Pride, Impiety, and
Tyranny of the Pope, to prove that he was Antichrist. The same Historian also
tells us; That almost All Good, Just, and Plerique Omnes Boni, justi, ingenui,
simplices, tum Imperium Antichristi coepisse, quod ea quae Christus tot Annos
Ante nobis Cantavit, evenisse cernebant, memoriae Literarum prodidere. Joh.
Aventinus, Ibidem, lib. 5. page 363. Edit. 1615. and Edit. 1580. page 470. And
the Learned Marcus Ephesius in the Council of Florence, called Rome Babylon.
Binius Council. Tom. 8. page 980. Edit. Paris. 1636.
Honest Men did in their Writings publish to the World, that the Empire of
Antichrist begun about that time, (the time of Hildebrand he means) because
they Saw those things then come to pass, which were foretold long before.

3. But this is not all. We have further Testimonies of this Truth. 1. Robert
Grosthead, who (both for Learning and Piety) was Inferior to none in his Age:
He (on his Deathbed) having spoke of many horrid Enormities of Rome, and loss
of Souls by Papal Avarice; he adds -- Episcopus deleus de jactura Animarum per
Papalis Curiae Avaritiam, suspirans ait: Christus devenit, ut animas
Lucraretur. Ergo, qui animas perdere non formidas, nonne Antichristus merito
dicendus est? Matthew. Paris in Hen. 3. ad Ann. 1253. p. 875.
Is not such a one deservedly called Antichrist? Is not a Destroyer of Souls
(the Pope he means) an Nonne ergo Animarum destructor inimicus Dei and
Antichristus censetur? Ibidem.
Enemy of God and Antichrist? And after a long List of Papal Tyranny and
Impieties, he calls Rome Egypt; (so Saint John calls it Rev. 11. 8.
Spiritually Sodom and Egypt) and concludes that the Ibid. p. 876. Edit.
Watsij. Nec Liberabitur Ecclesia ab Aegyptia servitute, nisi in ore Gladij
Cruentati.
Church will never be delivered from that Egyptian Servitude, but by the Sword.
2. Nor is this all: we have great Councils of whole Nations, in their Public
Edicts and Constitutions, expressly declaring the Pope, to be that Antichrist,
who Exalts himself above all that is called God. We have a Public Edict,
published by Ludovicus Bavarus Emperor, and his Counsel; wherein Pope John the
Two and twentieth is called Quise Mystas Christi ferunt, sunt Nuncij
Antichristi -- Nec per hunc Antichristum, licet Christianis pac^m a Deo datam
servare. Joh. Aventinus Annal. Bojorum, lib. 7. page 469. Editionis Basil. 1615.
Antichrist, the Disturber of the Peace of Christendom, and the Bishops and
Clergy who adhered to him, Messingers of Antichrist. And not long after, the
same Emperor, in a Diet or Counsel of the Bishops and Nobility of Germany and
Italy too, and with their joint Consent, publishes an Edict, in the Year 1328.
wherein we have a long Catalogue of the Prodigious Impieties and Tyranny of the
Pope, and then and there they call him -- Sicuti Pastor est Personatus, ita
Mysticus est Antichristus. Ibidem, p. 473. vid. Epist. Ecclesiae Leodiensis ad
Paschal. 2. apud Binium, Tom. 7. part. 2. p. 518.
A Personated Pastor, (one who would seem to be a Pastor of the Church) but was
indeed, That Mystical Antichrist. And in the same great Counsel, they publish
another Imperial Decree or Constitution, wherein having set down that Character
of In Temlo Dei, hoc est, Ecclesia, quasi Deus, Sedebunt, and super Omne illud
quod usquam Gentium, aut Colitur, aut cultum est, extollentur. Dominationem,
Vrbi orbique Terrarum, rejecta Cruce Christi, arripient, etc.
Antichrist, That he should Exalt himself above all that is called God, or
worshipped, and assume a Power and Domination over the whole World: They add,
That by many Quae ideo vates veridici, Nobis ante Contarunt, verissima esse
experimentis animadvertimus; and nisi plane Asini simus, Sentimus, etc.
Experiments, they saw these Predictions, come to pass, and ( unless they were
as stupid as Asses) they must be sensible of them; And then Qui contra
obstrepere ausit, tanquam Reipubl. hostis, inimicus Pietaetis and Satelles
Antichristi, ultimo Supplicio Parricidium luet. Conditum est hoc Decretum. Ann.
1338. Extat apud Aventinum, Annal. Lib. 7. p. 479.
Declare, That all who adhere to, and follow the Pope, are Antichristians, and
He Antichrist. I know that the Roman The Portugal Index Expurgatorius.
Olysipone, 1624. page 29. damns Aventine, in General only. But the Spanish
Index Expurgat. Madriti, 1612. and p. 449. and at Madrid, 1667. p. 562. Col. 2.
sets down particularly, all the passages to be Expunged.
Inquisitors have called Aventine, Author damatus, an Author damned by them;
and have noted all these places, I have Cited, to be Expunged; (I have the
Inquisitors own Book, wherein all the Places in Aventine are to that purpose,
Vncis inclusi, and to be left out in all following Editions of Aventine). But
the World knows, that they have (with great Impieties and Impudence) corrupted
thousands of Authors, putting out whatever makes against their Errors, and
putting in, what makes the Author say, what he never meant. But their damnation
of what Aventine says, out of the Imperial Constitutions, is no refutation of
it; nor are those things untrue because they would have them Expunged: as the
Second Commandment is no less Divine, and a part of the Decalogue, because they
leave it out. But enough of this; The Case is too plain, to need more proof.

But some say, Dubium.
That Antichrist is not yet come; nor will come till toward the end of the
World. And Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. lib. 3. cap. 3.. 1.
Bellarmin says, That this is the Opinion of Catholics. And some Learned
Protestants (as Grotius and Doctor Hammond) say, That Antichrist is both come,
and gone, 1600. years ago. For Caius Caligula ( Grotius his Antichrist) died
Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 43.. 1.
Anno Christi, 43. And Simon Magus (who by Dr. Hammond is supposed to be
Antichrist) died Item Tom. 1. ad Ann. 68.. 16. 17.
Anno Christi, 68. So that both Caius and Simon Magus, (who are their supposed
Antichrists) are dead above a thousand six hundred years ago. Whence it will
follow, That the Pope neither is, nor ever was, or can be Antichrist. For if
either Caius the Emperor, or Simon Magus were then, when they lived,
Antichrist, then the Pope was not; (neither of them being Bishop of Rome) and
both of them being (so many Ages since) dead; the Pope neither is, nor ever can
be Antichrist, unless you will have two great Antichrists; which no man yet
ever did, or (with any Reason or Sense) can say.

In Answer to this, Sol. 1.
I shall say a few things: And, 1. For Bellarmine (who says, That the Catholic
Opinion is, That Antichrist is not yet come) I confess he, and all his Party
are highly concerned to say so. For if Antichrist be Actually come, then the
Pope must be that Man of Sin; He (and none in the World but he) having all the
Characters and Marks of Antichrist mentioned in Scripture, so plain, that he
who runs may read them. 2. Though Bellarmine say, It Is the Catholic Opinion,
that Antichrist is not yet come; yet it evidently appears (by the many
Authentic Testimonies before Cited, and the Authors were Papists) That
Antichrist is come Six hundred years ago, and that the Pope was he, Plerique
Omnes Boni, etc. (says the Historian before Cited) Most Good Men believed Rome
to be Babylon, and the Pope Antichrist. 3. Bellarmine Bellarm. de Romans Pontif.
Lib. 3. cap. 3.. Refert. B. Augustinus.
Cites one, (and he Bishop of Florence) whose Concilium Florentinum, Episcopornm
340. Praeside Paschal. 2. contra Fluentinum illius Loci Episcopum, qui Motus
Quotidianis Portentis, quae tunc Accidebant, dicebat jam tum natum esse
Antichristum. Genebrard. Chron. Lib. 4. ad Annum 1105. p. 355.
Opinion was, That Antichrist was then come, (almost Since that Council wherein
he was censured, (Ann. 1105.) are 574 years passed.
Six hundred years ago) and was severely rebuked for it by Pope Paschal the
Second, in a Synod called by him at Florence. But Bellarmine might have named
Five hundred more, (which he wisely concealed, because they were against him;
and he neither had, nor could have any just Answer to so many, and so evident
Testimonies) I shall only add (besides those before mentioned) one signal
Testimony more, to show, That even at Rome it self, it was believed, that
Antichrist should come in the end of the Tenth Century. I have seen (and the
Book, if any desire it, is still to be In Bodley's Library in Oxon. Cod. 76,
super D. Arts. The MS. was given to St. Peter's Church in Excester, in Edward
the Confessor's time, by Leofricke; first Bishop of Exon, as appears by his own
hand, in the beginning of that Manuscript.
seen) a very Ancient and Excellent MS. Missal, belonging anciently to the
Church and City of Rome, (for there are some particular Services in it, to be
said in some of the chief Churches in Rome) In this MS. Missal, in the
beginning of it, there is a Chronological Table, in which (amongst other
things) we are told, That a Christo ad Antichristum sunt Anni. 999. So that it
was believed then at Rome, that Antichrist should come in the last year of the
tenth Century: and if he did so, (and so it was believed then) Sylvester the
Second (a Prodigious Malis Artibus Pontificatum adeptus est -- Ambitione and
Diabolica dominandi cupiditate Impulsus, Archiepiscopatum Rhemensem, dein
Ravennatem, postremo Pontificatum, Adjuvante Diabolo, consecutus. And a little
before, Relicto Monasterio. Diabolum secutus, cui se Totum tradiderit, etc.
Plat. in vita Sylvest. 2. See the Hist. of Magic by Gabr. Nandaeus, c. 19.
page 255. and Johan. Stella de vitis Pontificum, (opus revisum and correctum
sub Julio. 2. as we are told in the last page save one) Basil. 1507. in vita
Silvestri. 2.
Villain was then Pope, who was a famous (or rather infamous) Magician, and
obtained the Popedom by the help of the Devil, as their own Platina, and Johan.
Stella tell us. I know their Writers and the Popes Parasites since Luther, do
(but without any just reason) question the truth of what Platina, Stella, and
others more ancient have said of this Sylvester; so In Annotat. ad vit.
Silvest. 2. apud Plat. Edit. 1626.
Onuphrius, Papirius In vita Silvest. 2.
Massonus, and others; who against Truth, and the Faith of all former
Historians, endeavor ( Aethiopen lavare) to quit Sylvester of all these
Crimes, and make him (what he was not) an Excellent Person.

2. For Grot. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. 5.
Grotius, who would have Caius Caligula to be Antichrist, and Dr. Hammond, who
thinks, that Simon Dr. Hammond on the same place, and more largely, contra D.
B^ondellum Dissert. 1. Prooemialis. De Antechristo.
Magus and his Gnostics better deserved that Name: I confess they were very
Learned and Worthy men, but men; and had (as the best have) their Errors.
Optimus ille non qui nullis, sed minimis urgetur. Certainly it is as lawful for
me (and not more immodestly) to contradict them, as it was for them to
contradict all (Ancient and Modern) who ever writ on those Passages in the
Second to the Thessalonians, conconcerning Antichrist. I had, and have great
respect and reverence for their Persons, and Memory, but more for Truth; and
therefore, the Apology of Aristotle (concerning the Errors of his Master Plato)
may, and shall be mine. Amicus Plato, (...). He (whoever he be) who out of
Reverence and Respect to any men (how great soever) either embraces, or (when
he knows them) conceals their Errors, wants Charity to himself, and others; who
possibly (if he had not concealed them) might have avoided those Errors, and
gained the knowledge of Truth. In short then, I consider

1. That it is evident in the Apostle, that Antichrist was not come when St.
Paul writ that Epistle; for he tells them, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 6. 7.
That an Apostasy must first come, and that which hindered the Appearing of
Antichrist, must be taken out of the way, (neither of which was done, when he
writ that Epistle) Grotius saw this, and therefore (unless he would Contradict
Truth and the Apostle) he could not make Caius Antichrist, unless the Epistle
were so dated, that it was writ before Caius appeared. For this purpose, he
tells us, That Paul writ the Epistle, Anno Secundum Computum Dionysij vulgat.
38. sed Ann. Christ. 40. secundum verum Computum. Collegi (inquit Grotius)
scriptam hanc Epistolam Anno Altero Caiani Principatus. Grotius in Prologo ad
2. ad These.
Christi, 38. or, 40. in the Second year of Caius Caligula; and (he says) that
although Caius was Emperor before St. Paul writ this Epistle, yet his Impiety
did not appear till afterward; He in the beginning of his Reign carrying
himself like a good Prince. So that the main Hinge on which Grotius his Opinion
turns, is this date of Paul's Epistle: For if it was not writ before Caius
appeared, (or the year, 40.) then it is evident that Caius cannot be Antichrist,
nor Grotius his Hypothesis true. Now that this Epistle was writ in the Second
year of Caius Caligula (which Grotius affirms) is so far from being true, that
(by the Judgment and Consent of the most Learned Chronologers (Papists and
Protestants) it was writ at least Seven or Eight years after Caius was dead.
Such, I mean, as the late Lord Primate of Ireland Dr. Usserius Annal. Part.
posteriori. Aetat. Mundi. 7. ad Ann. 54. p. 667. in which year he says, and
proves this Epistle to be writ.
Usher, Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. Christ. 53.. 1. p. 408. In which year
he says this Epistle was writ.
Baronius, Ed. Simpson Chronici Cathol. part. 7. ad Ann. 51. p. 36. hoc Ann. 2.
ad These. Epist. scriptam putat.
Simpson, Corn. A Lapide in Argumento ad. 2. ad These. and in Chronolaxi Actuum
Apostolorum ad Ann. Christ. 53. page 4. quo Ann. 2. ad These. Epist. esse
Scriptam asserit.
A Lapide, Calvisius ad Ann. Christ. 50. hoc Ann. 2. ad These. scriptain vult.
Calvisius, etc. all of which Authors (and many more) say, and prove, that it
could not be writ before the year of Christ, 50. and some of them, that it was
writ Anno Christi, 53. or, 54. So that the Learned Primate of Ireland (Second
to none in Exactness in Chronology) speaking of Grotius his date of this
Epistle, says, Annal. part. posteriori, Aetate Mund. 7. ad Ann. Christ. 54. p.
668. Toto Coelo erravit Grotius, cum hanc Epistolam sub Caio exaratam
existimabat.
That Grotius erred exceedingly, when he said this Epistle was writ in the time
of Caius Caligula. 2. But that it may evidently appear, that St. Paul did not
write this Second Epistle to the Thessalonians Anno Christi. 40. (as Grotius
says) but at least Ten or Eleven years after; let it be considered, 1. That it
is a received Truth, that Paul was Converted Anno Christi. 34. 2. It Is certain
in the Text, that Paul had been at 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5.
These alonica, before he writ his First Epistle to them. The Query then will
be, When he came to Thessalonica: For if he had not been there, before the year
40. Grotius his Hypothesis will be evidently untrue. And that he was not, will
appear from that Account Scripture gives of him, after his Conversion; Thus, 1.
He himself tells us, that immediately after his Conversion, he Gal. 1. 17.
went into Arabia, and returned to Damascus; And then Gal. 1. 18.
after three years, he went to Jerusalem (which was Anno Christ. 37. and Gal.
2. 1.
fourteen years after, he and Barnabas went up to Jerusalem ( Anno Christ. 51.)
2. He and Barnabas (sent from Antioch) went to Jerusalem, and were at the Act.
15. 2.
Council of the Apostles there; which Council was held, Anno Christ. 47. says
Chron. Catholici, part. 7. ad Ann. 47. p. 34.
Simpson; Ann. 48. as the Centur. 1. Lib. 2. cap. 9. p. 420.
Magdeburgenses think; Ann. 50. says Theatro Hist. ad dictum Annum.
Helvicus; Ann. 51. so Tom. 1. ad Ann. 51.. 6.
Baronius, Chronol ad dictu^ Annum. p. 93.
Funccius, In Chronotaxi, ad Ann 51.
A Lapide, In Chronot sua ad dictum Annum.
Bellarmine, etc. Anno Christ. 52. says Usserius Annal. Part. 2. ad Ann. 52.
page 660.
Archbishop Usher. Now let the Council be held which of these years you please,
it will utterly overthrow Grotius his Hypothesis. For, 3. It is evident in the
Text, that Paul at the time of that Synod, had not been at Thessalonica, and so
had writ no Epistle to them; seeing he says, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5.
that he had been with them before he writ his First Epistle. That he had not
been at Thessalonica at or before the time of the Council, appears by what Luke
says of him after the Synod: who tells us, that he went to Act. 15. 30.
Antioch; then through Ibid. verse. 41.
Syria and Cilicia; then to Act. 16. 1. 2.
Derbe and Lystra, Circumcised Timothy, and took him along with him. Then he
went through Ibid. verse. 6.
Phrigia, Galatia, and Mysia, and so to Troas. And (in a Vision) being called
to Ibid. verse. 11. 12.
Macedonia, he went to Neapolis and Philippi: and having passed through
Amphipolis and Apollonia, he came to Act. 17. 1.
Thessalonica (the first time he ever was there; but, as yet, had never writ to
them. Thence he went to Ibid. verse. 10.
Berea, Ibid. verse. 15.
Athens, and Act. 18. 1. Corinthians; At Corinth, Aquila and Priscilla (banished from Rome, as all Jews
were, by Claudius) came to him: and this was the Ninth year of Claudius, (that
is, Anno Christ. 51.) as Josephus, Orosius, Baronius, and all Chronologers
testify, as a very Learned Orosium secuti sunt Omnes deinceps Chronographi;
and Baronius, etc. Hen. Valesius in Notis ad Cap. 18. Lib. 2. Eusebij. p 37.
Historian tells me: And he himself confesses, that Paul came into Greece
Paulus Anno demum Claudij. 9. venit in Graeciam. Ibid. Col. 2. B.
Anno Claudij. 9. that is, Anno Christ. 51. And yet Paul had writ no Epistle to
the Thessalonians, till Timothy (whom he left at Thessalonica) came to him into
1. Thessal. 3. 2. 6. vide Hen. Holden Theolog. Parisiensem in Tabula Gestorum
Pauli, in Calce N. Test. a se, cum Arnotat. Edit. Paris. 1660. p. 883. 884. ubi
haec Omnia firmat.
Greece, (as he himself tells us) so that by the Premises, I think it may, and
does appear, that the First Epistle to the Thessalonians, was not only writ
after the Synod of the Apostles, Act. 15. but after Paul had passed through and
preached in all those Countries before mentioned, after he had been at
Thessalonica, left Timothy there, came into Greece, met Aquila and Priscilla
come from Rome, (which was Anno Christ. 51.) and Timothy was returned to him;
then (and not till then) he writ his First Epistle to the Thessalonians; and
therefore it is impossible Caius Caligula should be Antichrist; who was not
come (as 2 Thessalonians. 2. 6. 7.
St. Paul tells us) when he writ his Second Epistle, who yet was come and dead,
at least Seven or Eight years before he writ the first. 3. And Dr. Hammond
confirms what I have said; who grants, that the Second Epistle to the Dr.
Hammond in the Prologue to his Annotat. on the Second to the Thessalonians.
Thessalonians was writ Anno Christ. 51. which was at least Seven or Eight
years after Caius ( Grotius his Antichrist) was Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann.
Christ. 43.. 1. In which year it is certain Caius died.
dead and gone. So that (by Dr. Hammond Annot. p. 718. Col. 2. ex Professo
proves that Caius could not be Antichrist.
Dr. Hammond's Principles) Gretius his Hypothesis is utterly overthrown, and
Caius the Emperor cannot possibly be that Antichrist St. Paul speaks of; who
was not come, when he writ that Epistle.

2. And by the same. Principles, Dr. Hammond has evidently Confuted his own
Opinion, and Excluded Simon Magus from all possibility of being Antichrist. For
that Doctor expressly affirms two things; 1. That the Second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, was writ, in the year of our blessed Savior, 51. 2. That then
Antichrist (when that Epistle was writ) was not come or revealed: which two
things being granted, (as they must, for the Doctor says the one, and the
Apostle the other) it evidently follows, that Simon Magus neither was, nor
could be that Antichrist the Apostle speaks of in that Epistle. For it is
certain, that Simon Magus was come, and his Heresy and Prodigious Impiety
discovered many years before. For, 1. It is certain, that when Peter and John
were sent to Act. 8.
Samaria, they met Simon Magus there; who though he had been Ibid. verse. 13.
baptized by Philip the Deacon, was no better for it, and Impiously offered
Verse. 18.
Money to purchase Power to give the Holy Ghost; Peter (cursing both They Money
perish with thee, verse. 20.
him and his Money) told him, That he was in the Ibid. verse. 23.
Gall of Bitterness, and the Bond of Iniquity. 2. Now this was done, in the
year of our blessed Savior Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 35.. 9. Ita etiam
Hen. Holden, Dr. Theol. in Tabula Gestorum Petri, in Calce N. Test. cum Annot.
suis Edit. Paris. 1660. p. 881.
35. which was Fifteen or Sixteen years before, the Second Epistle to the
Thessalonians was writ, or Antichrist come and revealed, (according to Dr.
Hammond's own Computation) And therefore it is impossible that Simon Magus
should be that Antichrist, the Apostle speaks of. For that from the year. 35.
till after. 51. (for Sixteen years together) he should not discover, but
conceal his Impiety, (who was a Magician and an Impious Villain before, and
then declared by Peter, to be in the Gall of Bitterness, and Bond of Iniquity)
is utterly Incredible. Sure I am, that Magus cum inde recessissent Apostoli,
contra eos obniti, corumque Doctrinae adversari non dubitarct: and qui olim
Samaritas dementarat, Judaeos iisdem Artibus aggressus, quos Apostolis Insensos
videat, se esse Dei Filium, illis Suadere Conatus est. Baronius Annal. Tom. 1.
ad Ann. 35.. 20.
Baronius and (...) etc. Itaque hinc Simon Magus aemulatione percitus, contra
Apostolos, corumque Doctrinam se Armavit. Nicephor. Histor. Eccles. Lib. 2.
cap. 6. p. 141.
Nicephorus, (to name no more) tell us, That after the Apostles were gone from
Samaria, Simon Magus set himself against our blessed Savior and his Apostles,
(whom he thought only better Conjurers then himself) and by his Magic and
Diabolical Arts seduced many Samaritans and Jews, and made them believe that he
was the Son of God, etc. So far was he from Concealing his Impiety, till after
the writing of that Second Epistle to the Thessalonians, and the year. 51. That
by all the Magic and Malice he had, he publicly seduced both Jews and
Gentiles, long before that time; and so could not be that great Antichrist St.
Paul speaks of. 2. But I neither shall, nor need bring any further proof of
this Particular, (that Simon Magus had before the year. 51. discovered himself
to be an Adversary to our blessed Savior, and his Apostles and Christianity)
because Dr. Hammond himself (though in Contradiction and Evident Confutation of
his own Hypothesis) does both Confess, and ex professo, prove it. For he tells
us -- Dr. Hammond in his Annotat. on 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. Lit. E. p. 719. Col. 1.
That after he was baptized, Act. 8. he went on in his way of deceiving the
People by Sorceries, as appears, by his desiring to buy the Power of working
Miracles from the Apostles, and being denied that, Soon after he set up, and
opposed himself against Christ, and accordingly is here called (...), the
Adversary, etc. where Dr. Hammond tells us, That soon after Simon' s being with
the Apostles at Samaria, he discovered himself to be an Adversary to Christ,
our blessed Savior. Now it is certain, that his meeting the Apostles at
Samaria, was Anno Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. Christ. 35.. 9.
Christ. 35. and so (by Dr. Hammond's Computation, who says that Epistle (the
Second to the Thessalonians) was writ Ann. 51. that is, Fifteen or Sixteen
years before Antichrist came, and therefore it is impossible Simon should be
that Antichrist Paul speaks of, who was not come when he writ that Epistle,
unless you will say, (which is highly irrational) that Antichrist came Fifteen
or Sixteen years, before St. Paul says he was to come. 3. Nor is this all; for
the same Learned and Reverend Dr. Hammond Annotat. on 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. literad.
p. 718. Col. 2.
Doctor tells us, out of Eusebius Hist. Ecclesiast. lib. 2. cap. 12. In the
Latin; but, 13. in the Greek.
Eusebius; That Simon Magus came to Rome, in the Beginning of Claudius his
Reign; where he did such Miracles by the help of the Devil, that he was taken
for a God, and had a Statue erected for him. And almost all the Samiritans, and
some of other Nations confessed him to be the first and principal God, and
worshipped him with all sorts of Sacrifices, etc. These are his words; by which
it is Evident (in the Doctors Opinion) that Simon was at Rome, In the Beginning
of Claudius his Reign, and sufficiently revealed to be an Adversary to our
blessed Savior and the Gospel, and prevailed so far, that (as Hierome De
Scriptor. Eccles. in Petro.
Hierome tells us) Peter went to Rome, Anno Claudij. 2. (which was Anno Christ.
44.) to oppose Simon and defend the Gospel. Now all know, that Claudius began
his Reign, Anno Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 43.. 1.
Christ. 43. which was at least Seven or Eight years (in Dr. Hammond's own
Computation) before the Second Epistle to the Thessalonians was writ, or
Antichrist come; And therefore Simon Magus could not be that Antichrist Paul
speaks of, who was not come or revealed, when that Epistle was writ; whereas
Simon was both come and revealed some years before.

3. Many things are said of Antichrist in Scripture, which cannot be applied to
Caius, or Simon Magus, with any truth or probability. 1. Antichrist was (by
usurpation) to have a Supreme Power and Authority, (as our Vide Hen Holden. Dr.
Parisiens. in cap. 13. verse. 1. Apoc. vidi Bestiam; i. e. Antichristum,
habentem Cap. 7. i. e. Authoritatem Supremam, and Cornua. 10. id est,
potestatem Maximam. Vid. Grotium in dictum locum.
Adversaries confess) and should make war with, and persecute the Servants of
Christ, and (as to killing the Body) overcome Apoc. 13. 7.
them, till he was drunk Apoc. 17. 6.
^ith the Blood of the Saints. This neither Caius nor Simon Magus did. Caius
(though he had a Supreme Power) was no persecutor of Christians; much less so
far, as to be drunk with their Blood. Nero Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 25.
(...), etc. Nero Romans Imperat. primus Hostis, etc. Ita Tertullianus -- Neronem
primum in sectam nostram gladio ferocisse. Eusebius. in Chronico ad Ann. Christ.
70.
was the first Roman Emperor who persecuted Christians; three and twenty years
after Caius Caius died Anno Christ. 43. and the first Persecution under Nero
was Anno Christ. 66. Baronius Tom. 1. ad Ann. 43.. 1. and ad Ann. 66.. 9.
was deed: And as for Simon Magus (a despicable and beggarly Magician) he never
had any Power of the Sword, nor ever did, or could make War against the
Christians, much less overcome them, and be drunk with their blood. 2. But
(that I may not trouble the Reader, nor my self, with any more Particulars) I
say (and think it an Evident Truth) that there is nothing said in Scripture, or
in the Works of the Fathers, or in any Writings of Ecclesiastical Authors, for
Sixteen hundred years after our blessed Savior, from which it may but probably
be concluded, that Caius the Emperor, or Simon Magus, was that great Antichrist
mentioned by St. Paul and St. John; But (...) on the contrary, it does appear
both by Scripture and the Consent of Christendom, for Sixteen hundred years,
that neither of the two was, or possibly could be that great Antichrist. For,

1. It does appear (by what is above said) that what St. Paul says of
Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2. cannot be meant of Caius or Simon Magus; because St.
Paul in that place says expressly, that when he writ that Epistle, the Man of
Sin, and Son of Perdition was not come and revealed. And yet that Epistle being
writ (as Dr. Hammond Confesses) Anno Christ. 51. Caius was both come and dead
at least Seven or Eight years before the year. 51. and therefore could not
possibly be that Antichrist who was not come till after it. And for Simon
Magus, he was (as Dr. Hammond grants and proves) both come and revealed as many
years (as Caius was dead) before St. Paul writ that Epistle; and consequently
before Antichrist was come or revealed. And so he (who was come and revealed)
could not be that Antichrist, who (as St. Paul assures us) was not then come or
revealed.

2. St. Paul elsewhere gives us some Characters of Antichrist, and his
Adherents; as 1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. 3.
men giving heed to seducing spirits, speaking lies in Hypocrisy, forbidding
to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God had created to be
received, etc. Where I observe, 1. That in the former place, (but now 2 Thessalonians.
2. 3.
spoken of) he told the Thessalonians, that an Apostasy must precede the
coming of Antichrist; and he tells us, what kind of Apostasy it must be;
(...). 1. Tim. 4. 1.
A departing or falling from the Faith. 2. That these two Ma^ks of Antichrist
(forbidding marriage, and commanding to abstain from meats) are such as none
but the Pope can pretend to; who so severely forbids the marriage of the Clergy
(Secular and Regular) that it is a Gravius peccat Sacerdos, si matrimonium
contrahat, quam si fornicetur, and domi concubinam foveat. Vid. Costeri
Enchiridion, cap. 15. Propos. 9. p. 459. Edit. 1587.
greater sin (with them) for a Priest to marry (though God Approves and
Commands it) in such as otherwise have not the gift of Continence) then it is
for him to commit Fornication, and keep a Concubine. Nay they say, that a
Priests marriage is Haereticorum Ministri Sacerdotium Incestis Nuptiis foedant;
quae non sunt Nuptiae, sed Pejora Omnibus Adulteriis Sacrilegia. Idem ibid. p.
460.
Incestuous, Sacrilegious, and worse then All Adulteries. Nor is this
Abominable Doctrine, the Opinion of any private Doctor only, but is approved as
Orthodox, by See the Approbations of Coster's Enchiridion in the Beginning.
Edit. Colon. 1587. and Edit. Turnoni, 1591. Where we have, 1. The Approbation
of the University of Mentz; and they say, they had read it diligently;
Dignissimumque judicasse quod in publicum prodiret, manibusque Studiosorum
Assidue tereretur. 2. The University of Colon: Approbat, Omnibusque veritatis
amantibus Plurimum Profuturum testatur. 3. The University of Lovan: -- Dignum
judicat, quod adversus pestilentes nostri Temporis Sectariorum errores,
Catholicorum manibus teratur. 4. The Divines of Triers: -- Enchiridion Costeri,
quia and erudite and Orthodoxe Per Omnia Scriptum, Summa Cum Vtilitate legi
possit.
several Universities. So that in both these [ forbidding to marry, and
commanding to abstain from meats] what God in his Word expressly approves, the
Pope condemns; and what God Commands, he Impiously Contradicts; and so
evidently proves himself to be, That Man of Sin, who Exalts himself above all
that is called God. 3. What the Apostle in this Epistle speaks of the Apostasy
and Antichrist which followed, is not of things past or then in being, but of
things to come afterward. For he expressly says -- 1. Tim. 4. 1. (...).
That in the Latter Times some should depart from the Faith, etc. Neithe
Apostasy nor Antichrist were then come; but afterward, in the Latter times,
should come. 4. Now he writ this Epistle, as some So Ed. Simpson Chronol.
Cathol. Part. 7. ad Ann. 54. p. 37.
think, Anno Christ. 54. or as some So Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 57. Number.
189. so Ger. Mercator Atlant. Minoris Arnhemij, 1621. p. 676. In Itinerario
Pauli. And so Corn. A Lapide in Chronotaxi, ad Ann. 57.
others (and they far more) Ann. 57. or (as the most Exact Jac. Usserius
Armachanus Annal. Part. 2. ad Ann. Christ. 65. page 688.
Chronologer) Anno Christ. 65.

Now let my Adversaries choose which Computation they will, for the date and
time of writing this Epistle; let it be (if they please) the year 54. which is
furthest from Truth, yet most favorable to their Opinion. I say, admit that
this first Epistle to Timothy was writ by St. Paul, Ann. 54. yet it will appear
by the Premises, 1. That Antichrist was not then come, nor revealed, because
St. Paul says so. 2. And therefore, that neither Caius nor Simon Magus could be
Antichrist; Because Caius was both come and dead ten or eleven years before;
and Simon Magus was come, and his Heresy and Impieties revealed (as Dr.
Hammond grants and proves) long before that time.

3. After In his Second to Tim. 3. 1. 2. 3. etc. which Epistle was writ, says
Baronius, Ann. Christ. 59. Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 59. number. 19. And Archbishop
Usher says it was writ Anno Christ. 66. Annal. Part. 2. ad dictum Annum, p. 691.
this, St. Paul speaks of this Apostasy from the Faith; but still as of a thing
not yet come, but to come in future 2. Tim. 3. 1.
times; (...), in the last times; so that if St. Paul say true, that great
Apostasy (which was to 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.
preceed the coming of Antichrist, was not come when he writ that Epistle,
which was (as the Learned Primate of Ireland Dr. Usher thinks) Anno Christ. 66.
or (as Baronius) Anno Christ. 59. And therefore it is impossible that Caius or
Simon Magus should be Antichrist, both come, and their Villainies revealed long
before.

4. St. Peter writ his Second Epistle a little before his Martyrdom; for so he
himself says -- 2. Pet. 1. 14. (...), velox est deposito tabernaculi mei.
Versio Vulgata.
Knowing that I must shortly put off this Tabernacle, (or that my death
hastens) now an Exact Jac. Usserius Armach. Annal. Part. 2. ad Ann. 67. p. 691.
vide Lyranum in Glossa ad Prologum Hieron^m. in. 7. Epist. Canonicas, and
Hie^onymum, De Illust. Eccles. Doctoribus, c. 1.
Chronologer tells me (and proves) that he died Ann. 67. and writ this Idem
Usserius ibid. p. 691.
Epistle Anno Christ. 66. I do know that some Simpson Chron. Cathol. Part. 7. ad
Ann. 67. p. 44.
say he writ it Anno Christ. 67. and Baronius says Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad
Ann. 69.. 1.
he writ it Anno 69. But, 2. which of those years soever it was writ in, the
great Apostasy (which preceeded the coming of Antichrist) was future and
afterward to come. So he himself tell us, 2. Pet. 2. 1.
But there were false Prophets among the People, even so ((...)) there shall be
false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies, etc.
These false Prophets and the great Apostasy were (when he writ that Epistle)
future and to come. And therefore it is certain Caius or Simon Magus could not
be Antichrist. For if it was writ in the year. 66. Caius was come, dead and
gone three and twenty years before; and Simon Magus his Heresies and Impieties
publicly revealed and known, as is before proved, even by Dr. Hammond himself.

5. In the Revelation, St. John does more fully describe Antichrist; That Rev.
13. 1.
he rose out of the Sea, with seven Heads and ten Horns, and on his Horns ten
Crowns, etc. That he should make War Rev. 17. 6.
with the Saints, overcome them, and be drunk with their blood; That his Seat
should be Rev. 17. 18.
Rome, mystically, or Rev. 11. 8.
spiritually called Egypt, Sodom, and Babylon; That ten Rev. 17. 12. 13.
Kings should give their Power to that Beast, aid and assist him in his Tyranny
and Impieties; That those Kings should at last forsake him, and utterly destroy
Ibidem verse. 16. 17.
him, and burn and utterly destroy Rev. 18. 2. 21.
Babylon ( or Rome) his Seat, never to be inhabited any more: Which is such a
Description of the great Antichrist, as never can (with any truth or
probability) be attributed to Caius Caligula or Simon Magus. 2. But that which
here, I more particularly press, is, 1. That St. John in the Revelation speaks
of Antichrist, (not as past, or present, but) as future, and yet to come, when
he writ that Book (as is evident in the Text, and is, and must be confessed. 2.
And it is as certain, and generally agreed upon, that he writ the Revelation in
Rev. 1. 9.
Patmos (whither he was banished by Johannes Apocalypsin viderat, pene sub
nostro seculo, ad Finem Domitiani Imperij. Irenaeus advers. Haeres. l. 5. p.
259. Col. 2. Edit. Erasmi. So Eusebius Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 23. where he
cites Clemens Alexandr. for the same purpose. So the Acta Martyrij Timothei,
apud Photium Biblioth. Cod. 254. p. 1402. 1403. So Orosius Hist. l. 7. c. 10.
11. p. 598. And so Hierom, de Doct. Ecclesiae Illust. c. 9. ad Ann. 97.
Domitian) Anno Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 97.. 1.
Christ. 97. The Premises being granted, (as they ought and must; being built
upon better Authority, then any is, or can be for the contrary, 1. That
Antichrist was future and to come, when St. John writ the Revelation. 2. That
he writ it Anno Christ. 97. It will evidently follow, that it was impossible,
that either Caius the Emperor, or Simon Magus, should be that great The
Revelation was writ Anno Christ. 97. Caius died Ann. 43. (Baronius Annal. Tom.
1. ad An. 43.. 1.) and so was dead 54. years before Antichrist came.
Antichrist. Caius being dead four and fifty, and Simon Simon Magus died Anno
Christ. 68. (Ita Baronius, ex Eusebio, Epiphanio, etc. Tom. Annal. 1. ad Annum
Christ. 68.. 17. 18.) which was. 29. years before the Revelation was writ, or
Antichrist come, if St. John says true.
Magus nine and twenty years before St. John writ the Revelation, and so before
Antichrist was to come. I know that the Reverend Dr. Dr. Hammond in his
Premonition to his Annotat. on the Revelation, p. 906. and 907.
Hammond endeavors to prove, that John was in Patmos, and writ the Revelation
there in the time, and about the ninth year of Claudius, which was Anno Christ.
51. which was six and forty years before the time I have assigned for St. John's
being in Patmos, and writing the Revelation. Now for his Opinion, Dr. Hammond
neither has, nor pretends to any Testimony of Antiquity, save only that of
Epiphanius Haeresi. 51. 12. and 33.
Epiphanius; who in that particular is miserably mistaken, (as he is in many
more) as is Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Annum. 99.. 2. Dionysius Petavius in
Notis ad Epiphan. Haeresin. 51. Number. 33. and Baronius Ibid. ad An. 93.. 9. D.
Blondellus de Sybillis, lib. 2. cap. 2. Possevin. in Apparat. verbo Johannes
Apostolus, p. 814. etc
confessed and proved by Learned men, and they such, who have a due Reverence
for the Fathers, and particularly for Epiphanius. 2. That St. John should be
banished, and write the Revelation under Claudius, (which only Dr. Hammond and
Grot. in Apocalyp. 1. 9.
Grotius say (out of Epiphanius) to give some Color to their new and
contradictory Hypothesis) is evidently against the concurrent Sense and
Testimonies of Ancient and Modern Authors. For besides Irenaeus, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Eusebius, Acta Martyrij Timothei apud Photium, Hierome, and
Orosius (before Cited) Johan. Joh. Malela in Domitiano MS. in Bibliotheca
Bodleiana Oxon. page 161. alias 171.
Malela Antiochenus, Haimo Hist. lib. 3. cap. 15. page 55.
Haymo, Arethas in Apocalypse. cap. 1. 9.
Arethas, Ado Ado Viennensis in Chronico, ad Annum Christ. 84. apod Laurent. de
la Bar, p. 493.
Viennensis (and many more) constantly say; That John was banished into Patmos,
not by Claudius, but by Domitian, and writ his Revelation there. 3. But I shall
not go about any further proof of this; For Dr. Hammond has saved me the
Labor, and confessed it; For it is certain from the Text, that Antipas had
suffered Martyrdom, before John writ the Revelation; John himself telling us
Rev. 2. 13.
so, Thou have not denied my faith, when Antipas my faithful Martyr was slain
among you. So that it is Evident, Antipas had suffered Martyrdom before John
writ his Revelation. Now Antipas suffered, and was slain by Domitian, in the
Second Persecution of the Christians, which was Anno Domitiani. 10. Christi.
92. So the Old Roman Martyrologium Romanum ad diem Apr. 11.
Martyrology, and Baroni^s Annot. ad Martyrologium Roman. ad dictum diem April.
11. and Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. Christ. 93.. 9.
Baronius assures us; and Dr. Dr. Hammond in Annotat. ad Apocal. 2. 13. lit. 1.
page 927. Col. 1.
Hammond confesses it, That Antipas suffered Martyrdom under Domitian. Whence
it evidently follows, That St. John speaking of Antipas his Martyrdom, as a
thing past when he writ his Revelation (and that in Domitian's time) he could
not write it in Claudius his time, who was dead Moritur Claudius Ann. Christ.
55. seu 56. Baronius ad An. Christ. 56.. 42. and Domitianus Imperium adiit Anno
Christ. 84. Baronius ad dictum Annum.. 1. And hence it appears, that Claudius
died either 84 55 29 Twenty nine, or, 84 56 28 Twenty eight years before
Domitian came to the Empire.
eight or nine and twenty years before Domitian came to the Empire. So that
Antipas being put to death, in Domitian's time, (as Dr. Hammond affirms) and
St. John in the Revelation, mentioning his Martyrdom as a thing past, when he
writ; it is Evident, that he writ that Book after the death of Antipas, and so
in, or after Domitian's time, and not in the time of Claudius.

6. St. John in his first 1 John 2. 18. and cap. 4. 3.
Epistle, speaks of Antichrist as then to come, when he writ that Epistle. It
is the last time (says he) and as you have heard that Antichrist shall come,
even now there are many Antichrists, etc. Here two things (I conceive) are
Evident; 1. That (...), nunc, when St. John writ this Epistle; there were many
Antichrists; that is, many Nunc multisunt Antichristi (...) qui unum illum
praecedunt, it erque illi parant: (...). Oecumenius in 1. Johan. Epistol. (...)
p. 573. C. D. So Bid, Estius, etc. in. 1. Joh. 2. 18. 80 Gagnaeius. Ibid. etc.
false Prophets and Heretics forerunners of Antichrist, who made way for him.
2. And that the great Antichrist, (...) was to (...). Idem Ibidem. Nunc multi
sunt Antichristi; qui Omnes Maximo illi Antichristo In Finem Secul; Vanturo,
qu^si suo Capiti, Testimonium creddunt. Beda in. 1. Joh. 2. 18.
come, when St. John writ. This Oecumenius, Bid, Estius, and generally all
Commentators (Ancient and Modern, Protestant and Papist) which I have yet met
with, constantly affirm. It Is true, that when St. John says 1. Joh. 4. 3. (...).
afterward, that Antichrist was Now in the World already: they truly Explain
it, that the meaning is, That he is now in the World; Not Jam in Mund, est;
(...). Oecumenius Ibidem (...), p. 587. D.
personally, but in respect to his Forerunners (false Prophets and Heretics)
who make way for him. I take it then for a certain truth, that when St. John
writ this Epistle, (...) The Antichrist, or (as Venerable Bede calls him)
Maximus ille Antichristus, was future, and to come. And (which is something
strange) Grotius confirms what I have said (which makes much for mine, but
little for his purpose) For, 1. He grants, that this Text (1. Joh. 2. 18.)
speaks of Vide Grotium in 1. Joh. 2. 18.
Antichrist, as future, and to come. For though the word here (and cap. 4.
verse. 3.) be (...); in the Present Tense, yet Grotius confesses, that it must
be taken in the (...), est sono praesens, sensu futurum. Grotius in 1. Joh. 4.
3.
future; Veniet Antichristus, Antichrist will come. 2. He says, that amongst
those many Antichrists St. John here speaks of, there shall be one Inter
Antichristos, unus futurus erat Caeteris Eminentior, ad quem Locus. 1. Joh. 4.
3. pertinet, is vero non alius fuit quam Barchochebas. Grotius in 1. Joh. 2. 18.
more Eminent, which he says was Barcochebas, who appeared not (he says) till
the Emperor Adrian' s time (which was Apparuit Barchochebas Ann. Christ. 130.
Adrian. 11. apud Baronium, Annal. Tom. 2. ad Ann. 130. Number. 4. 5.
long after St. John writ this Epistle). And he further says, (in Confirmation
of what is aforesaid) Grotius in. 1. Joh. 4. 3. Talis Prophetia (he speaks of
the Propheties of false Christ's, and Prophets) viam struit Magno Ipsi and
Eximio Antichristo.
That the false Christ's, Heretics, and false Prophets, (which John calls
Antichrists) do make way for that Great and Eminent Antichrist.

I take it then for certain, (and confessed by Grotius) that the great
Antichrist was not come, when St. John writ this Epistle. The next thing to be
inquired after, is, When this Epistle was writ; for if it was writ after Caius
Caligula, and Simon Magus were dead, then it will be undeniably Evident, that
neither of them could be that great Antichrist, of whom St. John speaks; who
(when he writ this Epistle) was future, and to come. Now here it is to be
considered,

1. That it is a common and received Opinion amongst Learned men, that St. John
writ this Epistle Anno So Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Annum Christ. 99. Number. 7.
Bart. Gavantus Comment. in Rubricas, Breviarij Romans Sect. 5. p. 84.
Christ. 99. or at least after Johannes vero nullum post Evangelium and
Epistolas Scripsit; Scilicet post mortem Domitiani; quia reversus de Exilio
invenit Ecclesiam per Haereticos perturbatam, and tunc, Scripsit Evangelium and
Epistolas contra Ipsos. Lyranus in Glossa ad Prologum Hieronymi in septem
Epist. Canonicas.
the death of Domitian (which was Anno Christ. 95.) So Baronius, Gavantus,
Lyranus, (in the places cited) and many others. Now if this Computation be
true, (as in the Opinion of very many Learned men it is) then Grotius his
Antichrist (the Emperor Caius Caligula, who died Ann Christ. 42. was dead
seven and fifty years before John writ this Epistle; and therefore seven and
fifty years before Antichrist came; for St. John says, he was future, and to
come when he writ. And for Simon Magus (Dr. Hammond's Antichrist) it is
Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 68. Number. 16. 17. etc.
certain, he died Anno Christi 68. and so One and thirty years before
Antichrist was come.

2. But be this as it will; I shall not ( though I might) stand upon it; but
take the Computation which both ^uto Scriptam hanc Epistolam non multo ante
Excidium Hierosolymorum. Grotius Annot. in. 1. Johannis, In Principio.
Grotius, and Dr. This Epistle seems to have been writ A Little Before the
great destruction which befell the Jews, etc. Dr. Hammond in his Prologue to
his Annot. on the first of John.
Hammond approve; for they both agree in this, that St. John writ this Epistle
a little before the destruction of Jerusalem; and (in the places cited)
endeavor to prove it. 2. This being granted; it is further certain, that the
Excidium Hierosolymorum, was in the second year of Vespasian; that is, Anno
Christ. 72. That this is so, Josephus de Bello Judaico, lib. 7. cap. 47. p. 969.
Josephus, Eusebius in Chronico ad Ann. 72.
Eusebius, Usserius Annal. part. 2. p. 698.
Jac. Vsserius Armachanus, Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 72. Number. 20.
Baronius, etc. assure us. 3. And hence it evidently follows, That both Caius
Caligula and Simon Magus were dead before the year. 72. when Antichrist (as St.
John assures us) was not come. Caligula being dead thirty, and Simon Magus four
years before that time.

By the Premises (I believe) it may, and does appear, that in Scripture,
Antichrist (the great Antichrist) is never spoken of, but as future and to
come: and therefore it is impossible by Scripture, (and there is no other
Medium can do it) to prove that Antichrist was come, in any part of that time
in which Scripture was writ. 2. And as the Apostles believed and writ, that in
their times, (even in St. John's, who lived Hierom. de Illust. Eccles.
Doctoribus, c. ^. says St. John lived. 68. years after the Passion of our
blessed Savior, to which if we add. 34. (the year of the Passion) it will
appear that St. Joh. died Anno Christ. 102. Trajan. 2. vel. 3.
longest) Antichrist was not come. So the Fathers, and Ecclesiastical Writers
after them, for about a thousand years generally, (if not universally) speak of
Antichrist as still future, and (in their several times) to come. I know that
some Vid. Baronium Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. Christ. 70. Number. 3. 4. ex Augustino,
De Civitate Dei, lib. 20. c. 19. where he says, That by those words (2 Thessalonians.
2. 7.) Mysterium Iniquitatis jam operatur; Neronem voluerit Intelligi: cujus
jam facta velut Antichristi videbantur. So Athanasius tells us, that
Constantius (the Arian Emperor) acted all those things, which are spoken of
Antichrist, but was not that Antichrist spoken of in Scripture, (for he was
future, and to come, says Athanasius) Quid Igitur Hic (Constantius) Quod
Antichristi Est, Omisit? aut Quid Ille ubi Venerit, plus committere poterit?
Athanasius Epistola ad Solit. vitam Agentes. p. 236.
anciently (and wildly) thought, that Nero was Antichrist, and as much might be
said for him, as Grotius has said for Caligula) but they said, that he was to
rise again, and come Sub Seculi Finem, and Act as Antichrist. But I never yet
read or heard of any, besides the Learned Grotius and Dr. Hammond, who (in
Sixteen hundred years after our blessed Savior) ever seriously affirmed, that
Caligula, or Simon Magus was Antichrist: The two Learned Persons (before
mentioned) are the first, and they Contradict each other, themselves, the
received Opinion of the Christian World, and gratify Rome; whilst they
endeavor (which neither they, nor any body else can do) to free the Pope from
being the great Antichrist. For if either Caligula, or Simon Magus (who have
been dead this Sixteen hundred years and more) be that Antichrist, then (unless
you will have two or three such Antichrists) The Pope is secure, and (wronged
by those who call him so) miscalled Antichrist. Sed salva res est, there is
little danger from such extravagant Opinions; they will neither be beneficial
to the Pope, nor prejudicial to his Adversaries, to believe and prove him to be
Antichrist. That Caligula, or Simon Magus, was that great Antichrist, none, or
(if any) very few believe. The Reformed Churches say, that the Pope is
Antichrist, and have great reason to say so: many of the Propheties, and
Predictions of him in Scripture, being now actually fulfilled, and so the truth
of the Prediction made Evident, and easy to be understood by the Event. On the
other side the Popish Party say, that Antichrist is not yet come; and so
neither Party does believe Caligula or Simon Magus to be Antichrist; because it
is a Novel and Apocryphal Hypothesis (take which of the two you will) without
truth or probability. Sure I am, that the Reasons those two Learned Persons
bring for their Opinions, are evidently Illogical and Inconsequent. For, 1. If
Grotius his proofs for Caligula, be cogent and concluding, then Dr. Hammonds
for Simon Magus are Inconsequent; and if Dr. Hammonds be Good, those of Grotius
are not. Whence it is evident, that all the proofs of the one Party, (at least)
are Impertinent, and to prove his Position Insufficient. 2. But indeed all the
Reasons they both bring, to prove their several Positions, are (as I said)
Illogical and Inconsequent. That this may not be gratis dictum; I say,

1. That both their proofs are built and rely upon the same ground; they take
(not all, but) only some of the Characters and Marks of Antichrist which the
Apostles give him in Scripture.

2. They endeavor to accommodate and apply those Marks to Caligula, or Simon
Magus; and think they make it appear, that such Marks are really found in
Caligula or Simon Magus.

3. And hence they Argue and Conclude thus -- Such Marks of Antichrist are to
be found in Caligula, or Simon Magus: Ergo, They (the one of them at least) are
that Antichrist: Or (which is all one) Magus and Antichrist agree in some
things; Ergo, They are the same.

4. Now such Arguing is miserably Illogical and Inconsequent; and no better
then this -- A Duck and a Goose do agree in many things (each of them has one
Head, two Legs, two Eyes, a flat Bill or Beak, and sometimes Feathers of the
same color, etc.) Ergo, A Duck is a Goose. Or thus -- Sempronius and Titius
agree in many things (they have the same Father and Mother, Romans both, born
in the same Hour, (being Twins) bread at the same School, both good Scholars,
etc. Ergo, Titius is Sempronius. The Reasons those Learned men bring to prove
their several Antichrists, prove no more then those I have given; that is, just
nothing.

5. The reason of such Inconsequence, in such Arguments, is this; Young
Sophisters in the University can tell you, out (...). Porphyrius in Isagog. c.
2.. 38*
of Porphyrie, Aristotle, and their Scholiasts) That every individual person or
thing, is made up, and does consist of such Properties and Qualifications,
Quorum Collectio nunquam in aliquo alio Eadem esse potest. It is certain, that
a Collection of all the Properties and Qualifications which Constitute any
Individual person, cannot be in any other person whomsoever; though it is as
certain, that some of them may. Now had Grotius or Dr. Hammond taken a
Collection of all the Characters and Marks of Antichrist, given him in
Scripture, and made it appear, that all those Marks had been really found in
Caius Caligula, or Simon Magus, their proofs had been Logical and Consequent,
(This they neither did, nor could) But their accommodation and applying only
some of the Marks of the Beast, to Caius or Magus, and thence Concluding that
they were Antichrist, such deductions are evidently Illogical and Inconsequent.
And so much the more Inconsequent, because even those marks of Antichrist which
they endeavor to prove to be really in Caligula or Simon Magus, never were in
either of them, in that sense and extent, in which they were (and since his
coming are) to be found in Antichrist. If any man censure me (as may be some
will) for contradicting those two Learned Persons (Dr. Hammond and Grotius) all
the Apology I shall make, (for it needs none) is only this; It is as lawful for
me to contradict them, in defense of evident truth; as it was for them to
contradict each other, and the Christian World, in defense of a manifest Error.

9. Observe. 9.
The Pope in this his Impious and Lying Bull, declares the Queen to be ( what
he really was, and she was not) a Elizabetha praetensa Angliae Regina,
Flagitiorum Serva. Bulla.. 1.
Slave of Sin, a Declaramus praedictam Elizabeth Haereticam and Hereticorum
fautricem.. 3.
Heretic, and a favourer of Heretics: And then (with a prodigious
Antichristian Pride and Impiety) pronounces his Penal Sentence against her, of
Damnation, Excommunication, Deprivation, etc. And here it is further to be
observed;

1. What this Papal Power is (and whence he has it) which he pretends to enable
and authorize him, to sit Judge and pass such Damnatory Sentences against
Princes and Supreme Powers, for Heresy.

2. What that Heresy is, and who the Heretics, who (by the Pope) are so
severely damned for it.

3. What those punishments are, which they pretend they may, and actually do
Inflict upon such Heretics.

1. For the first, Pius the Fifth, in the beginning of this Impious Bull, tells
us; that this Papal Power is Divine. For he says -- Christus Soli Petro,
Petrique Successori, Romano Pontifici, in Potestatis, plenitudine Ecclesiam
tradidit Gubernandam. Hunc Vnum super Omnes Gentes and Omnia Regna Principem
Constituit, qui Evellat, Destruat, Dissipet, Disperdat, etc. In dictae Bullae
Principio.
That our blessed Savior did Constitute Peter and his Successors, the Popes of
Rome, Princes over all Nations, and Kingdoms, with a Plenitude of Power, to
Pull up, Dissipate, and Destroy, etc. Thus he, and so others, in their
Damnatory Bulls; but with some variation; and (if it were possible) in such
words as are more Extravagant, Erroneous, and Impious. I shall only Instance in
one; Paulus the Fourth, who was next Predecessor (save one) to Pius the Fifth,
who in his Bull Hereticorum, Schismaticorum corumque f^^torum poenae. That Is
the Title of the Bull.
against Heretics and Schismatics and their Favorers, expresses his power to
damn them, thus -- Romanus Portifex, qui Dei and Domini nostri Jesu Christi
Vices-gerit in terris, and super Gentes and Regna, plenitudinem Potestatis,
obtinet, Omnesque Judicat, a Nemine in Seculo Judicandus, etc. In Bulla. 19.
Paul. 4. Bullarij Romans Tom. 1. p. 602. Edit. Romans 1638.
The Pope of Rome here in Earth is Vicar, or Viceroy of God and our Lord Jesus
Christ, and has Plenitude of Power over Nations and Kingdoms, and is Judge of
All men, and not to be Judged by any Man in the World. And that you may see,
that they are not ashamed to pretend to, and usurp such an Antichristian Power
(for none but 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
Antichrist ever pretended to it). This Bull of Pope Paul the Fourth is
referred into the Corpus Juris Canonici per Pet. Matthaeum, Francofurti, Ann.
1599. Cap. Cum ex Apostolatus, 9. De Haeret. and Schismat. in 7.
Body of their Canon Law (almost One hundred years ago) dedicated to Cardinal
Cajetan; and lately published In Corpore Juris Canonici, Lugduni, 1661.
again, as a part of their Law, without any Contradiction (and therefore with
the approbation) of the Pope or his Party. That this their Opinion of the Papal
Power is far from truth or probability, I have endeavored to prove before; and
sic transeat cum caeteris erroribus.

2. As to the second point; What is Heresy, and who is the Heretic, who is to
be persecuted with such fearful Damnations and Excommunications? I say in short,

1. That it is agreed amongst their Haeresis est Error in Fide, Cum Pertinacia.
Card. Tolet. Instruct. Sacerd. lib. 1. cap. 29.. 2.
Casuists, and Gratian. Can. dixit Apostolos, 29. and Can. Qui in Ecclesia. 3.
Cause. 24. Quaest. 3. and Glossa (...).
Canonists, That Heresy is an Error against that Faith which they ought to
believe, joined with pertinacy; or it is a pertinacious Error in Points of
Faith; and he who so holds such an Opinion, is an Heretic.

2. And he is pertinacious, they say, who holds such an Est autem pertinacia,
quando homo scit, aut scire debuit and potuit, aliquid esse contrarium
Scripturae, aut ab Ecclesia damnatum. Cajetan. ibidem.
Opinion, which he does, or might, and ought to know to be against Scripture,
or the Church. By the way; I desire to be informed, how it is possible for
their Lay People and unlearned, to know (with any certainty, or assurance) what
Truths are approved, or Errors damned in Scripture; when they are Vide Regulas,
Indici librorum Prohibit. ex Decreto Conc. Trid. Confecto, praefixas; Reg. 4.
and Observat. Regulae dictae annexam.
prohibited (under pain of Excommunication) ever to read, or have Scripture in
any Tongue they understand? Nor are Bibles only, in any Vulgar Tongue
prohibited; but all Books of Controversy between Protestants and Papists, in
any Vulgar Tongue, are Libri Vulgari Idiomate, de Controversi^ i^ter Catholicos
and Haereticos nostri Temporis di^^erences, non passim permittantur; Sed Idem
de ipsis servetur, quod de Bibliis vulgari lingua scriptis, Statutum est. Ibid.
Reg. 6.
equally prohibited. So that they are absolutely deprived of the principal
means to know Truth and Error, what Doctrines are Evangelical, what Heretical.

3. And although they are pleased sometimes to mention Scripture in the
Definition of Heresy; yet it is not really by them meant. For (by their
received Principles) a man may hold a hundred Errors, which he Does, or Might
and Ought to know to be against Scripture and the Articles of Faith, and yet be
no Heretic. For thus Cardinal Tolet tells us -- Vnde multi Rustici, habentes
errores contra Articulos fidei, excusantur ab Haeresi; Quia Ignorant Articulos,
and sunt Parati Obedire Ecclesiae, etc. Card. Toletus Instruct. Sacerd. lib. 4.
cap. 3.. 7.
Many Rusticks or Country Clowns, having Errors against the Articles of Faith,
are excused from Heresy; because they are Ignorant of those Articles, and are
ready to Obey The Church. And a little before -- Siquis ^rret in his, quae
tenebatur scire, tamen sine pertinacia, Quia nescit esse contra Ecclesiam,
paratusque est credere, quod tenet Ecclesia, non est Haereticus. Idem ibidem.
If any man err in those things he is bound to know; yet so, as it is without
pertinacy, because he Knows it not to be against The Church, and is ready to
believe as the Church believes, he is no Heretic. So that (by their
Principles) let a man believe as many things as he will, contrary to Scripture;
yet if he have the Colliers faith, and implicitly believe, as the Church
believes, all is well; he is (by them) esteemed no Heretic.

4. And hence it is, that they have of late, left the word Non enim ut quisque
primum in fide peccaverit, Haereticus dicendus est. Sed qui Ecclesiae
Authoritate neglecta, impias opiniones pertinaci animo tuetur. Catechis. Trid.
ex Decreto Concilij Tridentini, Jussu Pij. 5. Edit. Paris. 1635. Part. 1. cap.
10. De 9. Symboli Articulo,. 1. p. 107.
Scripture out of their definition of Heresy; and they only pass for Heretics
at Rome, (not who hold Opinions contrary to Scripture, but) who receive not, or
contradict what is believed to be de fide, by the Pope and his Party. And
therefore they plainly tell us; That None can be an Heretic, who believes that
Article of our Creed, The Holy Catholic Church (you may be sure they mean
their own Popish Church, not only without, but against all reason) For so their
Fieri igitur non possit; ut aliquis se Haeresis Peste Commaculet, si iis fidem
adhibeat, quae in hoc nono fidei Articulo credenda proponuntur. Catechis.
Trident. loco dicto.
Trent-Catechism tells us; not only in the Text, but (least we should not take
notice of it) in the Margent too; where they say, Verus. 9. Articuli Professor
(that is, he who will believe what their Church believes) Nequit dici
Haereticus. That is, he who believes the Church of Rome, to be the Catholic
Church in the Creed, and that Church Infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost, he
shall not (we may be sure) be called an Heretic at Rome. Nay, so far are they
in Love with their most irrational Hypothesis; That to believe as the Church
believes, excuses their Laics and the Unlearned from Heresy; that they
expressly say, That such men may in some Cases, (not only Lawfully, but
Meritoriously) believe an Error contrary to Scripture, which (in another more
knowing Person, would be a real and formal Heresy. The Case is this, (as
Cardinal Tolet and Robert Holkott propose it, Rursus, si Rusticus circa
Articulos Credat suo Episcopo, proponenti aliquod Dogma Haereticum, in Credendo
Meretur, licet sit Error; quia Tenetur Credere, donec ei Constet esse contra
Ecclesiam. Tolet. Instruct. Sacerd. l. 4. c. 3.. 7. Idem habet Rob. Holcott,
in. 1. Sentent. Quaest. 1. in Replica. ad 6. Principale: where he tells us,
that simple people may err in many things, Dummodo velint Credere sicut
Ecclesia Catholica credit. And when he puts the case in an old simple woman,
and says -- Si audiat praelatum praedicantem Propositionem erroneam, quam ipsa
nescit esse erroneam, and ei credit: Non peccat, sed Tenetur Errare, quia
tenetur ei Credere; and Meretur volendo Credere Errorem; and concedo (Inquit)
quod ipsa potest adipisci Meritum Debitum Martyri, si ipsa Imerficitur pro tali
Err^re, quem credit Articulum fidei, etc.
If a Rustic or Ignorant Person, concerning Articles of Faith, do believe his
Bishop proposing some Heretical Opinion, he does Merit by believing, although
it be an Heretical Error; because he is Bound to believe, till it appear to him
to be against The Church. So that in the mean time he is no Heretic. For, 1.
He may lawfully do it. 2 He is Bound to do it, to believe his Bishop, and the
Doctrines proposed by him. 3. Nay, it is a Meritorious action to believe such
Heretical Errors, though it be contrary to Scripture and the word of our
gracious God. This is strange Doctrine, yet publicly maintained by Especially
the Jesuits; In the end of the Exercitia Spiritualia Ignatij Loyalae, Tolosae,
1593. there are Regulae Servandae, ut cum Ecclesia vere Sentiamus. The first of
which is, Sublato Proprio Omni Judicio, tenendus est Paratus Animus ad
Obediendum verae Ecclesiae. You may be sure they mean the Church of Rome. The
thirteenth Rule is this -- Si quid quod Oculis nostris Album apparet Ecclesia
Nigrum esse definierit, debemus itidem, quod nigrum sit pronunciare. And to the
same purpose Bellarmine tells us -- Fides Catholica docet, Omnem virtutem esse
bonam, and Omne vitium malum. Si autem Papa erraret, praecipiendo vitia and
prohibendo virtutes, Tenetur Ecclesia Credere vitia esse Bona, and virtutes
Malas -- Tenetur credere bonum esse quod ille praecipit, and malum quod ille
prohibet. Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. l. 4. c. 5.. ultima. Ita etiam V.
Erbermannus contra Amesium, Tom. 1. lib. 3. cap. 6.. 5. page 401. 402.
their Casuists and Schoolmen, and approved by their Church. For I do not find
it Condemned in any Index Expurgatorius, nor (in any public declaration)
disowned by their Church; and quae non prohibet peccare, aut errare cum possit,
Jubet. And here, in relation to the Premises, I shall further propose two
things, and leave them to the Judgment of the Impartial Reader.

1. That seeing it is their Received Doctrine, that an Implicit Faith in their
Church, and a profession and resolution to believe as she believes, is enough
to free a Papist from Heresy, and the punishment of it: though otherwise
(through Ignorance) he hold some heretical Errors, contrary to what his Church
believes: why may not a Protestants Implicit Faith in Scripture, with a
Profession and Resolution to believe every thing in it, as it comes to his
knowledge; free him from Heresy and the punishment of it; though otherwise (in
the mean time) he may believe some things contrary to Scripture? Certainly, if
an Implicit Faith in the Doctrines taught by the Pope and his Party, (for they
are the Roman Church) with a resolution to believe them all, when they come to
their knowledge, be sufficient to free a Papist from Heresy and the Punishment
of it; much more, will an Implicit Faith in the Doctrines taught by our
blessed Savior, and his Apostles in Scripture, with a Resolution to believe
them all, when they really come to their knowledge, be sufficient to free a
Protestant from Heresy and the punishment of it. Because the Doctrines taught
by our blessed Savior and his Apostles are Divine, and in such a measure and
degree Infallible, as the Doctrines taught by the Pope, and his Party, (without
great Error and Impudence) cannot pretend to.

2. Seeing it is their Received Doctrine (as may appear by the Premises) that
if any Bishop preach to his People, (the Laity and Unlearned Rusticks) some
Heretical Doctrine, they are bound to believe it, and may not only Lawfully,
but Meritoriously do so, till it appear that their Church is against it. Hence
it evidently follows; That if the Bishop preached this Doctrine, That it is
lawful to kill an Heretical King, who is actually Anathematized, and Deposed by
the Pope; they were bound to believe it, and might lawfully and meritoriously
do so; and then, if it was meritorious to believe such a Doctrine, then to put
it in Execution, and actually kill such a King, could not be unlawful and
vicious. So that we need not wonder, that those prodigious Popish Villains who
were hired to Assassinate our Gracious King in the late Conspiracy, undertook
such an Impious Employment, since besides great store of Gold given to
encourage them, their Religion and Learned Casuists afforded them such
Principles (which they were bound to believe) to warrant and justify their
Villainy, so that without scruple of Conscience they might do it. In short, they
are Heretics whom the Pope and his Party are pleased to call so; for (by their
Crimen Haeresis est Mere Ecclesiasticum. Innocent. 8. Constit. 10.. 2. In
Bullario Romano, Romae, 1638. Tom. 1. p. 337. Col. ^. vide Cap. Ad abolendum,
9. Extra de Haereticis. Qui aliter docent quam Ecclesia Romana, Excommunicantur.
Law and Canons) they are sole Judges of the Crime (what Heresy is,) and the
punishment due to it. It Is true, when they have passed Sentence upon any
Heretic, they deliver him to the Civil Magistrate; but he is only their
Executioner, to hang or burn according to their Sentence; but has no Power to
reverse their Sentence, nor so much as to Examine whether it be just or unjust;
but (right or wrong) must do as they determine. And here (to say nothing of the
Impiety and Injustice of the Roman Church, in Condemning those they call (or
rather miscall) Herericks; I shall take notice of a strange piece of their
Hypocrisy, used by them, when (after Condemnation) they deliver the Condemned
Person to the Civil Magistrate: when the Bishop or Inquisitor who delivers him,
thus bespeaks the Civil Magistrate -- Domine Judex, rogamus Vos cum Omni
affectu, quo possumus, ut Amore Dei, Pietatis, and Misericordiae Intuitu, and
nostrorum interventu precaminum, miscrimo huic nullum mortis, vel mutilationis
periculum Inferatis. Pontif. Roman. Romae, 1611. p. 456. and Hostiensis in
summa. l. 5. De Haereticis, page 424. Edit. Ludg. 1517.
Sir, We passionately desire you, that for The Love of God, and in reguard of
Piety, Mercy, and our Mediation, you would free this miserable Person, from All
Danger of Death or mutilation of Members. And it is there said, that the Bishop
may do this, Pontifex Essicaciter, and ex Cord, Omni Instantia intercedit,
etc. Ibidem in Rubrica.
Effectually and from his Heart. But notwithstanding all this seeming Piety and
Tenderness, when they have Sentenced an Heretic to death; they expect and
require the Magistrate to Execute that Sentence, within Infra. 6. dies, sine
aliqua Processuum Visione, Sententias latas prompte exequantur, sub
Excommunicationis poena, aliisque Censuris. Innocent. 8. Constit. 10. In
Bullar. Romans Tom. 1. p. 337.
six days, upon pain of Excommunication, Deprivation, and loss of Authority and
Offices. Hence it is, that Pope Alexander the Fourth, about the year. 1260.
gives Authority to the Inquisitors, to Facultas Cogendi Quoscunque Magistratus,
sub poena Excommunicationis and Interdicti, etc. Alexand. 4. Constable. 17. in
dicto Bullar. p. 117. Tom. 1. and Constit. 18. in Lemmate. Ibid.
Compel All Magistrates to Execute their Sentence, (be it what it will). And
Pope Innocent the Eighth says, they must neither Examine Sine Aliqua Processuum
Visione. Innocent. 8. dicta Constit. 10.
Nor see the Process against those they are to Execute. Nor is the matter
mended since the times of Innocent the Eighth, and Alexander the Fourth; their
Successors are for the same Compulsatory Power. The Council of Trent expressly
says -- Cogantur Omnes Principes Catholici Conservare Omnia Sancita quibus
Immunitas Ecclesiastica declaratur. Conc. Trid. Sess. 25. De Reformat. c. 20.
In Lemmate, Edit. Antverp. 1633.
That All Catholic Princes are to be Compelled to observe All the Sanctions
and Constitutions declaring their Ecclesiastical Immunities, amongst which this
of punishing Heretics is not the least, etc. By the Premises (I believe) it
may appear, that the Hypocrisy of the Popish Church is inexcusable, when she
takes God's Name in vain, and prays the Civil Magistrate, For the Love of God,
etc. to do that which she knows (if he were willing) he neither can nor dare
do; nor will she permit him to do, having under pain of Excommunication (and
many other Penalties) absolutely prohibited him to do it. I say, it is not only
the Bishop who so intercedes to the Civil Magistrate, but the Church of Rome
her self, by him. Pope Innocent the Third is my warrant for saying so; who (in
a Decretal Epistle to the Bishop of Paris) tells us; That when a Condemned
Person is delivered to the Secular Degradatus propter flagitium damnabile and
damnosum, traditur Curiae seculari; pro quo tamen debet Ecclesia efficaciter
Intercedere, ut contra mortis periculum, circa eum sententia moderetur. Cap.
Novimus. 27. Extra. De verb. significatione.
Judge, The Church must effectually interceed, that he moderate the Sentence
so, (which she knows he neither dare, nor by their Law can do) that the
Condemned Person may be in no danger of death. I know that Roffensis cotra
Lutherum, ad Art. 33. Operum p. 642. Dixit enim Lutherus, Eos dicta Orationis
formula non Orare, sed ludere.
Roffensis, (and other of the Popish Party) do endeavor, with many little
shifts, to palliate the Hypocrisy of their Church, but in vain. For Omnia cum
fecit, Thaida, Thais olet. Sure I am, that Ecclesia Haereticum Excommunicat,
and ulterius relinquit cum Judicio Seculari, a Mundo Exterminandum Per Mortem.
Aq^in. 2. 2. Quaest. 11. Art. 3. Respondeo. Si Judex Ecclesiasticus tradat
Curiae Seculari haereticum, non potest in aliquo cognoscere secularis;
scilicet, An Been vel Male fuerit judicatum, sed tenetur exequi omnino. Card.
Tuschus Conclus. Practicarum Juris. Tom. 4. Lit. H. Concl. 95.. 4. p. 166. vide
Turrecrematam summa de Ecclesia. Venet. 1561. part. 2. l. 4. p. 411. where he
cites Wicliff' s Opinion, That the Popish Bishops are like the Pharisees, who
having said, Non licet nobis quenquam occidere, Christum Seculari potestati
tradiderunt, erant tamen homicidae Pilato Graviores. And when the Gloss (verbo
deprehensi. Cap. Excommunicamus, 15. Extra de Haereticis) made some distinction
of Persons delivered to the Secular Magistrate, and that docentes erant ultimo
supplicio, officiendi; discentes vero december Libris auri, etc. There is this
Note in the (b) Margent -- Hodie nulla est talis distinctio, nam Magistratus
Secularis, Quemcunque Haereticum, sibi a Judicibus fidei traditum, debet Vltimo
Supplicio afficere. Cap. ut. Inquisitioni de Haereticis. Lib. 6. (b) In Corpore
Juris Canon. cum Glossis. Paris. 1612.
Aquinas (Bannes Bannes ibidem. Conclus. 3.
and others who Comment on that part of Aquinas) tells us, That the Condemned
Heretic is delivered over to the Secular Power, to this very end, that he may
be Put to Death, and taken out of the World; and a great and famous Sed
quicquid dicatur, Ad Hoc fit ista Traditio ut Puniatur morte. Vid. Panormitan.
ad Cap. Novimus. 27. Extra. De verb. significat.. 8.
Canonist (Hostiensis) says expressly, what I have done; that this Intercession
of their Church to the Secular Magistrate, in behalf of the Condemned Heretic,
is, (in the Common Opinion) barely a Color, and verbal Solet Communiter dici,
quod ista Intercessio est Potius Vocalis and Colorata quam Effectualis. Idem
Hostieusis, ibidem.
only, not real. For thus I find him cited in Panormitan on the Decretals --
Whatever (says he) may be said to the contrary; yet To this end, is He
Delivered to The Secular Power, That He may be punished with death. Upon these
Premises, I think it evident, that the Church of Rome, in this her
Intercession to the Secular Power, does (with strange Hypocrasie) seem
earnestly to desire that of the Magistrate, which she knows he dare not do;
nay, which she herself, by her public Laws, has Commanded him not to do. How
she will Answer God (who Infallibly knows all her Hypocrisy) or her
Adversaries, objecting it, I know not; ipsa viderit. In short; it is Omnes qui
ab Ecclesia Romans hactenus desciverant, pro Haereticis habiti fuerint. Honorat.
Fabri Contra Indifferentes; Dilingae, 1657. lib. 2. cap. 18. and Mart.
Bresserum. De Conscientia, lib. 1. cap. 25. page 113. 117. 118. Qui in Vno
rejiciunt Authoritatem Ecclesiae. page 117. Col. 1. Lin. ultima and penultima.
confessed, that all those who will not be Inslaved to Rome, and believe as she
believes, in every thing, are Heretics; and not only so, but damned, and while
they continue so, and do not entirely believe their New-Trent-Creed, they are
out of all Possibility of Salvation. So their In Ecclesia duntaxat Romana
homines salvari possunt. Honorat. Fabri, Loco citato. page 133. So Bresserus
and the rest of them not only of late, but above five hundred years ago; (yet
after the Devil was let loose, and Antichrist revealed) For an old Collector of
their Canons tell us (Ivo Cornotens. Decret. part. 1. De fide. c. 38.)
Firmissime tene, and nullatenus dubites, Omnes Paganos, Judaeos, Haereticos and
Schismaticos, qui Extra Ecclesiam Catholicam (Romanum Intelligit) finiunt
vitam, in Ignem Aeternum ituros, qui diabolo and Angulis ejus paratus est. This
is the Charity of Rome, to damn all but themselves.
Casuists perpetually affirm, and their Trent Council (in that Forma Juramenti
Professionis Fidei, in the Bull of Pope Pius the Fifth, Extant in the Conc.
Trid. Antv. 1633. Sess. 24. De Reform. p. 452.
Constitutions of that Council) requires all their Ecclesiastics, to promise,
vow, and swear to believe and maintain it to their death. For in the end of
that Creed, the words are -- Ibid. Haec est Fides Catholica Extra quam, Nemo
Salvus esse potest.
This is the Catholic Faith, out of which no man can be saved. And then, they
must Hanc fidem teneo and profiteor, in Praesenti, and Constantissime tenere ad
ultimum vitae spiritum spondeo, voveo, juro. Ibid.
promise, swear, and vow to believe and profess it, most constantly as long as
they live. So that although men's lives be exemplary and innocent, their
Doctrines which they believe, Ancient and Catholic, yet if they dissent from
Rome in any one thing, (and that too upon just grounds and evident reason) yet
they shall be called, and used as Heretics. A signal Instance we have of this
in the Waldenses anciently: and because many perhaps, (I speak not of the
Learned) may neither know what it is, nor where to find it; I shall here crave
leave to set it down. Reinerus contra Waldenses, Cap. 4. in Magna Bibliotheca
Patrum. Paris. 1654. Tom. 4. Part. 2. Col. 749. Sectae Haereticorum fuerant
plures quam. 70. quae Omnes deletae sunt. Cap. 4. Reineri.
Reinerus, a Dominican Friar, an Inquisitor, a severe Persecutor, who writ
against the Waldenses, does (to their great honor, and the shame of Rome) give
them this signal Testimony. He tells us of more then Seaventy ancient Heresies,
most of which (he says) in his time, were overcome and vanished; But (says he)
of all the Sects that were, or had been, Inter Omnes sectas quae adhuc sunt,
vel fuerunt, non est Perniciosior Ecclesiae, quam Leonistarum, and hoc tribus
de Causis. Ibidem.
None was so pernicious to The Church of Rome, as the Leonists, or Waldenses:
and that for three Reasons.

Prima est, quia est Diut urnior; aliqui enim dicunt quod duraverit, a tempore
Sylvestri; aliqui, A Tempore Apostolorum.
For the Antiquity and long Continuance of these Waldenses, from the time of
Pope Sylvester (who was made Pope, Anno Christ. 316.) as some said; or (as
others) from the time of the Apostles.

Quia est Generalior; Fere enim nulla est Terra, in qua haec Secta non sit.
Ibid. cap. 4.
For the Generality of that Sect; because there was Scarce any Country where
they were not.

Tertia, quia Cum Omnes aliae Sectae immanitate Blasphemiarum in Deum,
audientibus horrorem inducunt; Haec Leonistarum, Magnam Habet Speciem Pietatis;
eo quod coram hominibus Just Vivant; and Been Omnia De Deo Credant, and Omnes
Articulos Qui in Symbolo Continentur. Ibidem.
When all other Heretics (by reason of their Blasphemies against God) were
abborr'd by those who heard them: The Waldenses had A Great Appearance of
Piety; because they Lived Justly Before Men; Believed All Things well of God,
and All the Articles of the Creed. (The Twelve Articles of their New Trent
Creed, were neither then believed, nor known, no not at Rome). Well, if all
this be true, (and it is their Enemy, who gives them this ample Testimony) what
was it, that made this Sect of all others the most pernicious to the Church of
Rome? Certainly, the Antiquity or generality of this Sect, the Piety of their
Lives, their believing all things well of God, and all the Articles of the
Creed; none of these could be ^ernicious to any Truth, or any True Church. What
was it then? Why, he tells us, in the next words, that it was Solummodo
Romaenam Ecclesiam Blasphemant, and Clerum; cui Multitudo Laicorum Facilis est
ad Credendum. Ibid.
only this; They Blasphemed, (or spoke ill of) the Church and Clergy of Rome;
And (as he Confesses) The Multitude of the Laity easily believed them: which is
an evident Argument, that it was neither incredible nor altogether improbable,
which the Multitude of the Laiety so easily believed. Two things indeed those
poor persecuted Waldenses said, which were very true, and most pernicious to
the Church of Rome; (for nothing is more pernicious to darkness and error then
light and truth) 1. They said, That the Ecclesia Romana est Meretrix in
Apocalypsi. cap. 17. verse. 1. 2. etc. Reinerus loco citato. c. 5. De Sectis
Modernorum Haereticorum. Errore. 6. page 750.
Church of Rome was the Whore of Babylon in the Revelation. 2. That the Pope
was the Papa est Caput Omnium errorum, etc. Ibid. Errore. 8. they denied also
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, the Popes Supremacy. Vide
Card. Turrecrematam, in summa De Ecclesia. Part. 2. Lib. 4. cap. 35. page 407.
Edit. Venet. 1561.
Head of all the Errors in that Antichristian Church. And on this Account it
was, that the Church of Rome did call those poor Waldenses Heretics, and as
such, did (with Fire and Sword and the utmost Cruelty) persecute them. For (as
is aforesaid) he is an Heretic at Rome who contradicts or disbelieves the
Haeresis est, cum quis non sequutus Doctrinam Christi, vel Apostolorum, vel
Ecclesiae, Eligit sibi novam credulitatem. Card. Tuschas Conclus. Juris. Tom.
4. Lit. H. Concl. 91. verbo Haeresis. p. 164. Haereticus est, qui aliquid
credit, non obstante quod Ecclesia contrarium decreverit. Debet enim
Intellectum Captivare Sacrae Scripturae Sanctaeque Ecclesiae. (Cajet. in sum.
verbo Haeresis.) And by Holy Church you may be sure they do mean their own
Roman Church, for they acknowledge none else, but damn all other Christians, as
Heretics.
Canons and Constitutions of that Church; although he do not really disbelieve
any Divine Truth contained in the Canon of Scripture. Now as it was with the
poor Waldenses; so we are sure, it has been, is, and will be with all
Protestants (Princes and People, Supreme or Subjects) they are (at Rome)
declared Heretics, and liable to all the Punishments of that, which they are
pleased to call Heresy; and (when they have opportunity and ability) those
Punishments will certainly be Inflicted, without any Pity or Mercy. And this
brings me to the third Inquiry, What those Punishments are? And here, because
the Punishments of Heresy are very many, and very great, it is neither my
present business nor purpose, particularly to set them all down, and explain
them; Only I shall (in favor to the Ordinary Reader, for to the Learned they
are better known) name some Authors, where he may find a Distinct and full
Explication of the Nature of Heresy (according to the Popish Principles) and
the Number of its Punishments. And here,

1. The Gloss of their Canon Law reduces the Punishments of Heretics to Four
Heads, in the General: Heretics (says the Quadruplex Haereticorum poena
secundum Canones: scilicet, Excommunicatio, Depositio, Bonorum ablatio,
Militaris Persecutio. Gloss. ad Cap. ad Apostol. 2. De Sentent. and re
Judicata. In 6. verbo. Haeresis, In additione. Ita Hostiensis in summa. Lib. 5.
page 424. Edit. Lugd. 1517.
Glossator) are to be punished either, 1. By Excommunication. 2. Deposition. 3.
Loss of all their Goods. 4. By Military Persecution: that is, by Fire and
Sword, by War and armed Soldiers. This is Reynerius de Pisis, in summa De
Haeresi. cap. 4. and F. Reynerus contra Waldenses. cap. 10.
approved by several of their Learned Writers.

2. For the Body of the Canon Law, (to pass by Gratian and his Decretum) those
who have a mind and leisure, may consult the Titles De Haereticis, which occur
in the Decretal. Greg. 9. Lib. 5. and Tit. 7.
Decretals of Greg. 9. of De Haereticis. Lib. 5. Tit. 2. In Sexto.
Bonis. 8. in the Clement. Lib. 5. Tit. 3. De Haereticis.
Clementines, Extravagantes Extrav. Commun. Lib. 5. Tit. 3. De Haereticis.
Communes (and in the lately added Septimi Decret. Lib. 7. Tit. 3. De
Haereticis and Schismaticis. This seventh Book of the Decretals was first
Printed with the Body of the Canon Law, (dedicated to Card. Cajetan) at
Francfurt. 1590. and since at Lions, Anno 1661.
Seventh Book of the Decretals) with the Glosses, and Panormitan's large
Comment upon them.

3. For the Punishment of Heretics by the Civil Laws; they who have a mind to
know, may consult Justinians Code. Lib. 1. Tit. 5. De Haereticis and
Manichaeis, with the Gloss there. And especially the Theodosian Code, Lib. 16.
Tit. 5. De Haereticis, Manichaeis and Samaritanis, with the Larger and most
Learned Notes of Jacobus Gothofredus; in the Edition of the Codex Theodosianus
at Lions, 1665. Tom. 6. page 104. To these may be added the Severe Laws of the
Emperor Leges Frider. 2. extant in Corpore Jur. Civilis cum Gloss. Lugd. 1618.
in Calce lib. 2. Feudorum. Tom. 5. page 137. 138. etc.
Friderick the Second, made in pursuance of the Conc. Laterani fub Innocent. 3.
Ann. 1215. and praecipue Canonis. 3. De Haereticis.
Lateran Council, and (though he had little reason for it) to gratify the Pope
in his barbarous designs to ruin all those he called (generally miscalled)
Heretics: which Laws (as we may be sure they would) the Nos Honorius, Servus
Servorum Dei, has leges a Friderico, pro utilitate Omnium Christianorum (pro
Pernicie Waldensium) Editas, Laudamus, Approbamus, and Confirmamus, tanquam In
Aeternum valituras. Ita Honorius Papa. 3. in Calce dictarum Legum.
Pope and his Party did highly approve. And have referred them into the Body of
their Canon Law. 7. Decretalium. Lib. 5. Tit. 3. Capp. 1. 2. In Edit. Corporis
Juris Can. Lugduni, Anno 1661.

4. And for a full and particular Explication of those Laws, and the Quality of
the Punishments of Heretics Inflicted by them, their Casuists and Canonists
may be consulted: Amongst many others, such as these; Moral. Quaest. Tract. 32.
cap. 7. De Poenis Haereticorum.
Filliucius, Speculi. Lib. 4. part. 4. De Haereticis.
Durantus, Summae. part. 2. Tit. 12. Cap. 4. De Haeresi. and Haereticorum
Poenis.
Antonius Archiepiscopus Florentinus, Instit. Moral. Tom. 1. Lib. 8. Capp. 10.
11. 12.
Azorius, Paul Theol. Moral. Lib. 2. Tract. 1. c. 16. p. 202.
Layman, Summae. Tom. 1. De Haeresi. p. 1017. Venet. 1585.
Raynerius, Johan de Summae de Ecclesiae. part. 2. Lib. 4. cap. 1. etc.
Turrecremata, Cardinal Hostiensis in summae. Lib. 5. De Haereticis. p. 422.
Edit. Lugd. 1517.
Hostiensis, and Antonius Augustinus Archiepiscopus Terraconensis (a most
Learned Canonist, and a very useful Book) has given us a Catalogue of their
Epitome Juris Pontisicij Veteris. Lib. 34. Tit. 3. and lib. 38. and lib. 11.
Tit. 53. part. 1. and 2. etc.
Canons De poenis quae sunt Hoereticis Constitutae. In short, whoever has a
mind, opportunity and ability to Consult the aforementioned Authors, (or such
others) may easily find the Number and Nature of those Punishments, which (by
their Impious Papal Canons and Constitutions) are to be Inflicted on those
(better Christians then themselves) they are pleased to call Heretics.

10. Observe. 10.
Concerning this Impious Bull, containing the Damnation (as he calls it) and
Excommunication of Queen Elizabeth, by Pope Pius the Fifth; it is further to be
observed, That it is no new thing. For Queen Elizabeth was actually
Excommunicate before, 1. In their famous Vide Constit. 63. Paul. 5. In Bull.
Romano. Romans 1638. Tom. 3. page 183. Vbi Omnes Istiusmo di Bullae, quae dicto
Bullario occurrunt Notantur.
Bulla Coenae Domini (take famous in which sense you will, the worst is good
enough) wherein they do (at Rome) Anathematize and Anathematizamus Quoscunque
Hussitas, Wickliffistas, Lutheranos, Suinglianos, Calvinistas, Hugonottos,. 1.
dictae Bullae.
Curse all Protestants (both Kings and Subjects, Princes and Common People) It
is called Bulla Coenae Domini, because it is published every year on Maundy
Thursday, the Day in which our blessed Savior Instituted ( Coenam Domini) the
Sacrament of his last Supper. And here, (by the way) we may observe the
difference between Christ, and (his pretended Vicar) Antichrist. 1. On that Day
our blessed Savior Institutes that Sacrament, as a blessing and seal of the
mutual Love between him and his Church, and of the Communion and Charity of
Christians amongst themselves; but the Pope (far otherwise and unlike him,
whose Vicar he pretends to be) on the very same Day, (without and against
Christian Charity) Anathematizes and Curses the greatest part of Christians. 2.
Our blessed Savior was that Day ready to Dye for the Salvation of Sinners; but
his pretended Vicar is ready, (on the same Day) and (so far as he is able) does
actually Damn the greatest part of the Christian World, and has been drunk with
the blood of the Saints. 3. Nor did Queen Elizabeth stand Accursed (before Pius
the Fifth's Excommunication of her) only in that Bulla Coenae, but in several
other Papal Bulls. I shall only name one; and (because it is of signal
Consequence, and to our present purpose) give some short Account of the
Contents of it. The Bull I mean, is that of Pope Vid. Paul. 4. Constit. 19. In
dicto Bullar. Tom. 1. p. 602.
Paul the Fourth, next Predecessor, (save one) to Pius the Fifth, and is Bulla
Paul. 4. data Romae, 15. Call. Mart. Ann. 1559. Bulla autem Pij. 5. data Romans 5.
Call. Maij. 1570. Eliz. 13. In dicto Bullario. Tom. 2. p. 229
dated eleven years before that of Pope Pius the Fifth. Now concerning this
Bull, I observe

1. That it was no rash Act of that Pope, but (if he say true) made with Habita
deliberatione Matura, de Cardinalium Consiliis and unanimi assensu. Bullae
dictae.. 2.
Mature deliberation, by the Counsel and unanimous Consent of himself and the
Cardinals.

2. And it is further Bullam Paul. 4. etc. Renovamus Confirmamus, illamque
Inviolabiliter, and Ad Vnguem Observari volumus and Mandamus. Constit. Pij. 5.
22.. 3. dicti Bullar. Tom. 2. p. 151.
Confirmed by his Successor Pius the Fifth, who Approves and Commands it to be
Inviolably kept and observed. Nor is this all; but (that we may see how such
Doctrine is approved at Rome). This Bull of Paul the Fourth, and that of Pius
the Fifth, which so fairly confirms it, are now both of them referred into the
Body of their Vid. Cap. 9. 10. Decret. 7. De Haereticis and Schismaticis. In
Corpore Juris Canon. Ludg. 1661.
Canon Law.

Now in this Bull of Pope Paul the Fourth, thus confirmed, approved, and
received into the Body of their Law;

1. He does Omnes and singulas Excommunicationis, Privationis, etc. and Quasvis
alias Censuras and Poenas a Quibusvis Romans Pont. aut Pro Talibus Habitis, in
Constitut. contra Haereticos Quomodolibet Latis, Approbamus, Innovamus, ac
Perpetuo observari, ac in Viridi Observantia esse debere decernimus.. 2.
Approve, Innovate, and Confirm All the Censures and Punishments due to
Heretics and Schismatics, by any Constitution of any former Pope, or those
who were Reputed Popes, Howsoever those Constitutions were made and
promulgated, and Commands them to be kept in fresh Memory, and perpetually
Observed.

2. And then he Necnon Quoscunque qui hactenus a fide Catholica deviasse, aut
in Schisma aut Haeresin incidisse deprehensi sint, seu in Posterum incident,
cujuscunque Conditionis, Gradus, seu Praeeminentiae existunt, etiamsi Baronali,
Ducali, Regali, and Imperiali excellentia profulgeant, and eorum Quemlibet,
Censuras Poenas praedictas incurrere Volumus ac Decernimus. Ibidem.. 2.
declares (with as little Charity as Infallibility) that All Heretics which
are, or For the Future shall be, do Incurr All these Censures and Punishments,
and it is his express Will and Decree they should do so. And that we may not
mistake his meaning, as if All those Censures and Punishments were by him
Inflicted and Denounced only upon and against some Inferior Persons and
Heretics; he does seven or eight times expressly name Counts, Barons,
Marquesses, Dukes, Kings and Emperors: And further says; That as Heresy and
Schism in them is more Pernicious to others, so ought their Punishment to be
more severe; and then ( by his Constitution, which he declares to be Hac nostra
Constitutione in Perpetuum Valitura, sancimus, statuimus, definimus, etc.. 3.
perpetually and for ever Obligatory, he actually and totally Comitatibus,
Baroniis, Marchionatibus, Ducalibus, Regnis and Imperiis penitus, and, in Totum
Perpetuo Privati sint, etc. Ibidem.
Deprives them of their Counties, Baronies, Marquisats, Dukedoms, Kingdoms and
Empires, and leaves them to the Secular Power, to Secularis relinquantur
arbitrio Potestatis, animadversione Debita puniendi, habenturque Pro Relapsis.
Ibid.. 3.
receive Due Punishment, that is, Death; as is evident by the Consequents in
that Constitution). Nor is this all; He damns them to an Ad illa de Caetero
sint Inhabiles and Incapaces; nec Restitui aut Rehabilitari Possint. Ibidem.
Incapacity and Perpetual Inability of being restored to their Honors or
Possessions; No, not if they seriously and truly repent, and become good
Catholics. For in that case of their true Repentance and forsaking their
Heresy, they shall save their Lives; yet they must be Apparentibus vere
Poenitentiae Judiciis and Condignis fructibus, in loco aliquo Regulari, ad
Peragendum Perpetuam in Pane Doloris and Aqua Moestitiae poenitentiam,
Detrudendi sunt -- and evitari Omnique Humanitatis Solatio destitui debent.
Ibid.
Cast into Perpetual Prison, and there be fed with Bread of Sorrow, and Water
of Sadness, and to have no Comfort or Humanity showed them by any, no not by
Kings or Emperors. And though this be the height of Impious and Antichristian
Tyranny, yet Ex Ipsius Sanctae Sedis Benignitate and Clementia. Ibid.. 3. N.
Eymericus Directorio Inquisitorum, part. 3. page 516. Col. 1.
it must be Imputed (as he tells us) to the Popes Clemency and Benignity. By
the Premises it may evidently appear, That Queen Elizabeth was (by many Papal
Bulls and Damnatory Constitutions) actually Excommunicate, before this Bull of
Pius the Fifth. I desire then to know, Whether those Anathema's of former
Popes, (which they Declared and Commanded to be in force against all Heretics
For ever, and Perpetually Obligatory) were valid and did Actually and (as they
Intended) Effectually Exclude that Queen out of their Church, or not? If not;
then it is certain, the Pope has not that Supreme Power he pretends to. For when
so many Popes, in their Damnatory Bulls, (and that Ex Plenitudine Potestatis
Apostolicae) declare the Queen, and all such Heretics, Excommunicate, and (as
their Phrase is) cut Esseque a Christi Corporis unitate praecisam. In Bulla
Pij. 5.. 3. and Paul the Third in his Damnation of Hen. 8. and all his
Adherents, says, Eosque Anathematis, Maledictionis, and Damnationis Aeternae
Mucrone Percutimus. Bulla Paul. 3. 7.. 7. In Bullario Romans Tom. 1. p. 515. Col.
2. Edit. Romae, 1638.
off from the Unity of the Body of Christ, and Eternally damned: If this be not
Effectually done, then all those Bulls are Bruta Fulmina, Inefficacious, Null
and Insignificant. But if those Anathema's and Excommunications of former
Popes, were valid, and the Queen by them, Actually put out of the Church, (as
will, I suppose, and must (by them) be granted) then Pius the Fifth his
Excommunication is a nullity, and indeed a ridiculous Impossibility. It being
impossible, he should take from her, what she had not; and deprive her (by any
Excommunication) of that Ecclesiastical Communion, of which the stood Actually
deprived before by his Predecessors; especially by Pope Paul the Third, who
Excommunicates and Curses not only Henry the Eighth, but particularly all
Henrici Regis ex dicta Annanatos and nascituros, aliosque descendentes, usque
ad gradum in Jure Constitutum, nulla aetatis aut sexus ratione habita,
dignitatibus, Dominiis, etc. Privamus. and ad Similia obtinenda Inhabilitamus.
Ibid. dictae Bullae.. 9.
his Children, Male and Female, born or to be born of Ann Bolen (Mother of
Queen Elizabeth) declares them deprived of all Power and Dominion, and of all
their Goods and Patrimony, and Incapable of restitution to that Power and
Patrimony, and of Acquisition of any other for the future. And that we should
not doubt, that this was the Popes meaning, they have added a Marginal Note to
that Bull in the Roman Edition, which tells us; Filiosque eorum de
dignitatibus, Dominiis, etc. and bonis Omnibus Privatos, and Ad Alia de Caetero
Obtinenda Inhabiles esse declarat. Ibid. in Margin.
That the Pope (in that Bull) did deprive the Children of Henry the Eighth, and
his Adherents, of All their Goods and Dignities, and declared them Incapable of
any other for the future.

By the Premises, I think it may be, and is Evident, that Queen Elizabeth (by
most Papal Bulls and Constitutions) stood Actually Excommunicate and Deposed
before this Bull of Pius the Fifth. Sure I am, the Popish Party never owned her
as their lawful Sovereign, but called her an Usurper of the Crown, to which (as
a Declared and Excommunicate Heretic) she had no right at all. And it seems,
Pope Pius himself was of the same Opinion. For in this very Bull, he speaks of
her only as Elizabetha Praetensa Angliae Regina. Bullae. (...). 5.. 1.
Pretended Queen; and of her Ipsum Praetenso Regni Jure privatam. Ibidem.. 4
Pretended right to the Crown. And hence we may with Reason and good Logic
Infer, That when Pius the Fifth in this his Bull Excommunicates and Deposes
her; he does (notwithstanding his Plenitude of Power and Infallibility)
ridiculously undertake (what he could not do) an Impossibility. For as it is
impossible to turn Sempronius out of a House in which he never was; or deprive
him of a Dominion which he never had, (turning out of a House, necessarily
presupposing his being in it, and deprivation presupposing Right and
Possession) so it is a like Impossibility for the Pope, by any Excommunication,
to turn the Queen out of the Communion of the Popish Church, in which she never
was; (being born, baptized and always bred in the Protestant Church and
Religion) or deprive her of those Dignities and Dominions, which (according to
their own It is a Resolved Case in the Canon Law, (and Pope Gelasius is the
Casuist who Resolves it) Quicunque in Haeresin s^mel damnatam labitur, ejus
damnatione seipsum invaluit: Or (as it is in the Lemma prefixed to that Canon)
Ejus Damnationis participem se facit. Vid. Can. Achatius. 1. Cause. 24. Quaest.
1. And Can. Majores. 2. Idem Gelasius codem modo Statuit. And Pope Felix says,
Non ultra in eum procedere oportet, qui in haeresin damnatam incidit. Ibid.
Can. Achatius. 3.
Principles) she never had any right to, nor ever could have any; being (by
their Law, and many Papal Anathema's and Decretals) utterly disabled, and made
incapable of any such Dominions or Dignities.

11. It is evident that the Pope in this Impious Bull, Observe. II.
does (by his usurped Antichristian Power) Depose and Deprive Queen Elizabeth
of all her Royal Authority, Dominion and Dignity, and so puts her into the
Condition of a poor private Person, without any Power or Jurisdiction over all,
or any of her Subjects. Whence these damnable Doctrines and Impious Conclusions
evidently follow,

1. That if any Jesuit, any Villainous Raviliac, or through paced Papist had
killed, or with Poison or Pistol had taken away her Life, (as they often
Indeavor'd) it had been no Treason. For all know, that Treason is Crimen Vid.
Justinianum F. ad. Leg. Juliam Majestatis; and Statut. 25. Edvardi. 3. c. 2. in
the Statute of Purveyors, Anno Domini. 1350.
Majestatis, or Laesa Majestas; a Crime against Sacred Majesty; either
Immediately, against the Person, or Persons in whom Majesty resides; or
mediately against those who are his nearer Representatives, as the Lord
Chancellor, Treasurer and the Judges, when they are in Execution of their
Office. And though there be an Inferior Degree of Treason, (as of a Servant
against his Lord and Master, a Wife against her Husband) yet no Treason ever
was (either by the Imperial and Civil, or our National and Common Laws) but
against a Superior. And therefore the Queen being deposed by the Pope as an
Heretic, and actually deprived, not only of all her Royal Power and Majesty,
but of all Jurisdiction and Superiority over her Subjects (and they absolved
from their Oaths of Allegiance and Fidelity) and so a private Person only,
without any Power to command Obedience. I say, upon these Impious Popish
Principles, to kill the Queen could not possibly have had the Nature or Name of
Treason. Had they by open War, or privately by Poison or Pistols, taken away
her life (as they Intended, and often Indeavor'd, as we shall see anon) they
might have been Murderers, but not Traitors. So that the Pope and his Party
believing that the Queen was Actually deposed and deprived of all her Royal
Dignity and Dominion, as a Heretic; they must consequently believe, that the
Murdering of her, by any of her former Subjects, neither was, nor could be
Treason. But this is not all, For

2. Admit she had not been deposed, by any Papal Law, Bull or Decretal
Constitution; yet any of their Popish Clergy might have murdered her, and been
no way guilty of Treason, though they were English men, and born her Subjects;
nay, though they had actually taken the Oaths of Allegiance before they took
Popish Orders. The reason of this is evident, and a necessary Consequent, from
their Impious and Rebellious Principles. For they say, That the Clergy Clerici
Rebellio in Regem non est Crimen Laesae Majestatis, quia nen est Subditus Regi.
Eman. Sa Aphoris. Confess. verbo Clericus. p. 41.
Are no Subjects of any Prince; and therefore they themselves conclude (as well
they may) that if they Rebel and seek the Ruin of their Prince, yet (in them)
it is no Treason. This Emanuel Sa, the Jesuit expressly tells us, in a Book (not
surreptitiously sent into the World, but) published with his Colon. 1599.
Name to it, Dedicated to the Virgin Ad Beatiss. Dei Matrem. Accipe (Sapientiae
Divinae Sacr^rium) Libellum hu^c; tuoque Praesidio sic tuere and promove, ut ad
Multorum proficiat aeternam Salutem. Ibid. page 2.
Mary, approved, highly Commended, and Licensed by Hi Aphorismi Docti sunt and
Pij, Multamque utilitatem alaturi Confessariis Omnibus. Ibid. page 384.
Sylvester Pardo. Eccles. Antverp. Canonicas Librorumque Censor.
Public Authority. Thus is this Rebellious Doctrine approved, not only by the
Librorum Censor at Antverp; but in Heaven too; at least in the Opinion of the
Author, who otherwise would not have dedicated it to the Virgin Mary, and
desired her Patronage, and Promotion of it, for the good of Souls. Sure I am, I
do not find it Condemned in any of their Indices Expurgatorij (neither in the
Index Librorum Prohibit. Novissimus, Madriti. 1667. Eman. Sa non Omnino meminit.
Spanish Index, nor that of Index Librorum Prohibit. Olysipone. An. 1624. p.
543.
Portugal, nor that of Pope Index Librorum Prohibit. Alexandr. 7. Romae, 1667.
page 41.
Alexander the Seventh at Rome, etc. Nay, so far are the Inquisitors from
Condemning this Rebellious Doctrine of Emanuel Sa, that the Spanish Index does
not so much as name, much less censure him or his Aphorisms. But the Loco dicto.
Portugal Index, (in which both the Author and his Aphorisms are expressly
named) censures only two Propositions (one about Penance, the other about
Extreme Unction) which the Inquisitors (the Supreme Ii Aphorismorum Codices
deinceps permit tuntur, a quibus Expunctae sunt duae Sententiae, quas Ann.
1611. pridie Calend. Mart. Cavendas Rescripsit, Sanctae and universalis
Inquisitionis Congregatio, per Illustriss. Card. Arragonium. Index Olysipone.
1624. loco dicto.
Congregation of them at Rome) would have left out; and then approved and
permitted all the rest. And so that Erroneous and Impious Aphorism, That
Clergymen are not Subjects of Kings, and therefore not Capable of Committing
Treason, although they actually Rebel against and Murder them. But the late
Index of Pope Alexander the Seventh, speaks more fully and home to our present
purpose, and expressly, permits, and approves (for we may be sure they will not
permit what they do not approve) all Editions of those Emanuelis Sa Aphorismi
Confessariorum Hactenus Impressi, etiam Romae, ante Ann. 1602. post autem tale
Tempus Romae Editi de mandato Magistri Sacri Palatij Permittuntur. Index
Alexandri. 7. loco dicto.
Aphorisms, ( Even at Rome) before the year 1602. In all which this Rebellious
Aphorism, we are speaking of, was, and so was approved by them. This does
further and (if that be possible) more evidently appear out of these their
Approved and Authentic Expurgatory Indices, wherein this Proposition -- (
Priests Are By The Law of God Subject to Princes) is damned as Erroneous and
Heretical, both in the Ex Indice Joh. Chrysostom. Basil. 1558. Dele sequentia.
And then (amongst many other evident truths) this Proposition follows;
Sacerdotes Etiam Principibus Jure Divino Subditi. This must be Expunged. Index
Libr. Prohib. Madriti. 1667. page 703. Col. 1.
Spanish Index, and that of And the Index of Portugal, Edit. Olysipone, Ann.
1624. p. 753. Col. 1. damns the very same Position.
Portugal. For the Inquisitors finding it in the In Indice Operum Chrysostom.
Basil. 1558. ex Officina Frobeniana.
Index of Chrysostom, Command it to be expunged and blotted out; Although
Chrysostom (in the Text) says the very same thing. Hence it evidently follows;
That if this Proposition ( Priests (by the Law of God) Are Subject to Princes)
be erroneous and false, as the Pope and his Party say it is, (their Inquisitors
Commanding it to be Expunged, as Erroneous) then the Contradictory ( Priests
Are not by The Law of God Subject to Princes) must of necessity be true, and by
them approved and believed. Unless they will say, (which were highly irrational
and ridiculous) that Contradictory Propositions may be both false, and they
believe neither of them. But this they neither do, nor will say; for their
greatest Writers publicly say, and Endeavor to prove, That Priests Are not
Subject to Princes. Nay, Persona Cujuslibet Clerici est Sancta quoad hoc, quod
Non Potest Subjici Potestati Seculari. Cajetan. in. 2. 2. Quaest. 99.. Ad
Quintum Dubium mihi. p. 247. Col. 3. 4.
Cardinal Cajetan expressly says, That the Clergy are so Sacred, that it is
Impossible they should be Subject to Princes. When he says, It is impossible,
his meaning is, that it is (not naturally, but) morally impossible; because if
any Prince should use his Priests and Clergy as Subjects, it were a great Sin,
and (in his Opinion) Sacrilege; and therefore Impossible: Because, according
to the Rule of Law, Illud solum Possumus quod Jure Possumus. So we have that
great Roman Cardinal expressly approving that Rebellious Doctrine, That Priests
are not Subject to Princes. Nor (we may be sure) was it any private or singular
Opinion of his, which died with him; For when R. Patris Emanuelis Sa Aphorismi
Confessariorum. Coloniae 1599.
afterward, Emanuel Sa's Aphorisms (wherein the same Doctrine was maintained)
were published, as a Opusculum Theologis Omnibusque animarum Curam habentibus
Vtile ac Necessarium. Ibid. in Libri dicti (...).
Work Profitable and Necessary for Divines, and All who had Cure of Souls. An
Advocate of the Parliament of Paris (eminent for Law and Learning) tells us two
Things: 1. That those Aphorisms were Approved at Vide Librum cum hac (...), Les
Oevures de Maistre Jacques Leschasier, etc. Paris. 1652. p. 421. Libellus
Aphorismorum Romae Probatus.
Rome: 2. And then passes a just Censure upon them -- Quae Doctrina (that the
Clergy are not Subjects to Princes) est pestis and eversio Rerum publicarum --
Regia potestas vel suprema nihil aliud est, quam Constitutio Dei, quae Omnes
Mortales Jurisdictioni Regum subjiciuntur. Ibidem.
That such Doctrine was the Plague and Ruin of Commonwealths: Royal and Supreme
Powers being the Ordinance of God, by which All Men are made Subject to the
Jurisdiction of Kings; So that Learned Person. And (to pass by all others) an
Excellent Person) of great Judgment and Integrity, and a Roman Catholic, (I
mean Father Vide Historiam Interdict Veneti, per P. Sarpium, 1626. Edit. Latina.
Paul of Venice) tells us; that in the Quarrels between Pope Paul the Fifth,
and the Venetians, a World of Books were writ (by Jesuits and others) to
vindicate the Popes Cause, and they Omnes, in eo Concordes asserebant, Clericos
Non esse Principi Subditos, ne in Crimine quidem Laesae Majestatis. page 107.
dictae Historiae and page 13.
All Agreed in this, That the Clergy were Exempt from all Secular Jurisdiction,
and quoad Personas and Bona; Secular Princes had nothing to do with their
Persons or Purses; nor were They Subjects to Princes, no not in Cases of High
Treason. Nor was this Rebellious Doctrine maintained only by the Popes Party
and Parasites; but the Pope himself (whom the Jesuits and Canonists miscall
Infallible) approves and justifies it; and in December. 1605. tells the Venetian
Ambassador, That Ecclesiasticos non Comprehendi inter Subditos Principis, nec
ab eo posse poenis affici, etsi Rebels essent. They are the words of Pope
Paul the fifth to the Venetian Ambassador, in December. 1605. in the aforesaid
History, page 13. Gre^ser tells us -- Cl^rici non pertinent ad Regis
Jurisdictionem. Considerat. ad Theolog. Venetos. l. 2. page 137. Edit.
Ingolstadij, Ann. 1607. And there (besides Bellarmine and Baronius) he gives us
a List of Thirteen or Fourteen Authors, who writ for the Pope in his Quarrel
with the Venetians, of the same Opinion. Gretser Ibid. p. 380.
Ecclesiastics were not Comprehended in the number of A Princes Subjects, nor
could be Punished By him, though they were Rebels. A hundred such Passages (out
of their Schoolmen, Canonists, Casuists, (especially the Jesuits) and their
Canon Law) might easily be quoted; but these, to Impartial and Intelligent
Persons, will be sufficient to Evince, That the Pope and his Party do publicly
and expressly maintain this Rebellious Doctrine, and (when it makes for their
Catholic Cause, and they have Opportunity and Ability to put it in Execution)
do also practice it. The Sum of which Damnable Doctrine (repugnant to the clear
Principles of Nature and Scripture, and all Religions, save that of Rome) is
this; If any King be Excommunicate and Deposed by the Pope, then any of his
Subjects, Clergy or Laity, ( horresco referens) may take Arms and Rebel against
him, or Murder him, and yet (by this Impious Popish Doctrine) be neither Rebels
nor Traitors: And if their King be neither Excommunicate nor Deposed, but
stands rectus in Curia Romana, and be (as they call it) a good Catholic; yet
if any of his Ecclesiastics (Secular or Regular) Rebel or Murder him, it can
be no Treason or Rebellion in them; seeing (according to their Principles) they
are none of his Subjects, nor he their Superior; and Treason or Rebellion
against an Equal or Inferior, is (in propriety of Law) impossible. But this is
not all. For;

3. Let it be granted, (which is both Impious and Evidently untrue) That any
Popish Assassin or Roman Raviliac, had not been Guilty of any Treason, if he
had killed the Queen, after the Pope had Deposed her, as a Heretic; yet sure,
they must grant that it was Murder, and an Impious Act, to kill a Person
overwhom he had no Jurisdiction. No; this they deny: the approved and received
Principles of the Popish Church acquit such Prodigious Villains not only from
Rebellion and Treason, but from Murder too. He who had killed the Queen, after
Excommunication and Deposition by the Pope, had been no Traitor, nor (which is
less) so much as a Murderer. We are told in the Body of their Canon Law -- Nont
sunt Homicidae, qui adversus Excommunicatos Zelo Matris Ecclesiae, armantur.
Ita Lemma praesixum Can. Excommunicatorum. 47. Cause. 23. Quaest. 5. vide Lemma
hujus Can. apud Juonem. Decreti part. 10. cap. 54.
That they are no Murderers, who (out of Zeal to the Church) take Arms against
Excommunicate Persons. So the Title prefixed to the Canon cited in the Margent;
and the Text of the Canon says further; Those Soldiers so armed, Non eos
Homicidas Arbitramur, quos adversus Excommunicatos, Zelo Catholicae Matris
ardentes, aliquos little Trucidasse contigerit. Ibid. in Canone.
Are not Murderers, if out of a burning Zeal to their Catholic Mother (the
Church of Rome he means) they Kill any of such Excommunicate Heretics: Thus
the Case is deliberately determined by their Supreme Infallible Judge, Pope
Urban the Second, a little before the Ivo Carnotensis Episcopus; Decret. part.
30. cap. 54.
end of the Eleventh Century; and about Twenty years after (by Ivo Carnotensis)
referred into a Moritur Urban. 2. Anno Christ. 1099.
Collection of the Roman Canons: And Gratian (about Forty years after Ivo)
Registers it in his Decretum, which Pope Vide Bullam Gregor. 13. dat. Romae, 1.
Jul. 1580. Corpori Juris Canonici praesixam.
Gregory the Thirteenth approves and confirms for Law; and so it stands
confirmed, and received for Law, Vide Edit. Juris Canon. cum Glossis Paris.
1612. and Edit. sine Glossis, Paris. 1618. and Editionem Lugduni, 1661. etc.
in their last and best Editions of that Law, ever since. Whence it may (and
does) appear, that this Impious and Rebellious Doctrine, ( That Killing Kings
or Queens Excommunicate by the Pope, was no Murder) has been approved at Rome
(since Rev. 20. 2. 3.
the Devil was let loose, and Antichrist appeared) above Six hundred years.

I know that honest Father Remonstrant. Hibernorum part. 5. c. 13.. 10. page 34.
Caron (not so disloyal as most of his Party) endeavors to mollify this
Rebellious Constitution of Pope Urban the Second; and tells us, that the
meaning of that Canon is only this Si Contingenter trucidaverit, non esse
Homicidam Formalem, etc. Ibidem.
-- That if any man by Chance and Casually had killed an Excommunicated Person,
(si contigerit trucidasse) then he was not A Formal Murderer: So Pope Urban' s
Sentence was not to Vrbani ideo Sententia Non suit, Excommunicatos vel
Haereticos De Proposito interimi posse. Ibidem.
Excuse those from Murder, who Intended, and directly Purposed to kill
Heretics and Excommunicate Persons. For (says he) this were to Alioquin certe
veritatem Omnem and Fidem expugnasset. Ibidem.
Overthrow all Truth and Fidelity to Princes. The good man was (God forgive
him) a Roman Catholic, and believed (though. Erroneously) that the Supreme
Head of his Church, and St. Peter's Successor and Vicar of Christ, could not
approve and maintain such a Rebellious and Impious Position and Principle, That
men might lawfully be killed, because they were Heretics or Excommunicate
Persons: which he there truly calls -- Horrendum igitur Principium, Maledictum
and Execrabile est, Haereticos, vel Excommunicatos, eo ipso interimi posse,
etc. And again, Inter Damnabilia and Anathemata reponimus. Ibid.. 11. p. 35.
A Horrible, Cursed and Execrable Principle. That the Doctrine is Cursed and
Execrable, is easily believed, and (by me) willingly granted. But that Urban
the Second did not, in that Canon, approve it, (notwithstanding what Father
Caron has said to the contrary) I absolutely deny. Sure I am, 1. That Cardinal
Bellarmine (as is confessed by Father Caron in the place cited) expounds that
Canon as I have done. 2. So does Turrecremata ad Can. Excommunicator. 47. Cause.
23. Quaest. 5.
Cardinal Turrecremato too; who says, That Excommunicate Heretics may be
killed, not only Casually (as Father Caron mistakes the Text) but with an
Intentio requiritur, quia licet bonam habuerint voluntatem, potuerunt tamen
peccare Intention. Si Interfecerunt Haereticos, quia Infestabant Ecclesiam, in
hoc Bonam haberunt Voluntatem; peccaverunt tamen si Intendebant habere Bona
Haereticorum. Si ergo bono Z^lo and Mandato Ecclesiae aliquos Interfecerunt,
non sunt Homicidae Reatu, nec Vlla Poenitentia est Impenenda. Turrecremata loco
dicto.
Intention and Purpose to kill them; and yet they who intend and do kill them,
be no Murderers; but both the Intention and Act Just and Innocent. But then
their Intention must not be to get the Goods of those Heretics they kill, but
it must be Zelo Matris Ecclesiae, to secure the Church from the Mischievous
Designs of those Heretics. So that in the Opinion of this great Cardinal, and
Canonist, (who well knew the opinions and practice of their Church) killing of
Heretics was so far from being Murder, that it was no Crime at all; but sine
Reatu (as he says) without all guilt; and therefore ( nulla poenitentia erat
imponenda) it needed no Repentance. 3. Cardinal Peron in his Oration to the
Estates of France, does expressly Agnoscit Peronius, (Orat, ad Status, page
107.) Tyrannum Vsurpatione Licite interimi posse: at qui Rex Omnis semel a Papa
depositus, si postea administraverit, Rex Vsurpatione and Tyrannus est; quia
abs^ue Jure Jus Vsurpat. F. Caron. Remonstrant. Hibernorum. part. 4. c. 1.. 20.
p. 265.
affirm, That all Tyrants by Usurpation, may lawfully be killed; and such was
Queen Elizabeth, and all Protestant Kings and Princes now are, (in the Judgment
of the Pope and his Party) seeing they all did, and now do stand Excommunicate
(at Rome) and deprived of all Dominion; and therefore, their meddling with the
Government, after such Deprivation, is evidently Usurpation (in the Opinion of
our Adversaries) and then it follows on their Principles) that they may
lawfully be killed, and therefore the killing of them cannot be Murder; it
being impossible that a Crime against the Indispensable Law of Nature, should
be lawful. 4. But we have greater Evidence to prove, that (at Rome) the killing
of Protestant Princes, (as Excommunicate Heretics) is not Murder. For in the
year 1648. when the Parliament was, (or seemed to be) severe against Papists,
as believing and maintaining Principles Inconsistent with our Government: This
Question (amongst others) was proposed to some of our English Popish Divines --
An Pontifex Romanus Principes seu Magistratus Protestantium possit deponere,
vel Occidere, tanquam Excommunicatos? Vide F. Caron Remonstrant. Hibernorum
part. 1. cap. 4.. 3. p. 12.
Whether the Pope could Depose or Kill Protestant Princes or Magistrates, as
Excommunicate Persons? Some of those Divines met, and (whether out of Love of
Truth, or fear of the Parliament, I know not) Convenientibus ergo in hac Causa
Theologis Anglicanis, pro Negativa resolverunt. Ibid.. 3. number. 3.
Subscribed the Negative; That the Pope could not Depose or Kill such
Protestants. But when this was heard at His nunciis Romae receptis, sacra
Congregatio resolutionem illam negativam, tanquam Haereticam mox Condemnat,
citatisque Romam Authoribus, Carceres and Censurae parantur. Ibidem.
Rome, the Pope and his Sacred Congregation (as they call it) Condemned that
Negative Proposition, as Heretical, and Summoned the Subscribers to Rome, where
Prisons and Censures (as Father Caron tells us) were prepared for them. Whence
it is Evident, that to deny the Popes Power to Depose and Kill Protestant
Princes, is (at Rome) declared Heretical; and therefore, that he has a Power to
Depose and Kill, is a part of their Catholic Creed, and believed three. Whence
it further follows, that they do think such Killing of Protestants to be no
Murder, nor those who kill them, (out of Zeal to the Catholic Cause)
Murderers. 5. When Raymundus Floruit sub Greg. 11. circa Ann. 1311. Nicol.
Eymericus Direct. Inquisit. p. 255. Col. 2. D.
Lullus (a Possevin. Apparat. in Pet. Remundo.
man famous in his time and after it) had said, and in his Writings published,
That it was Interficientes Haereticos sunt Injuriosi and vitiosi in suo
Memorari, Intelligere, and Velle, etc. Eymericus Ibid. p. 260. Col. 2. A.
unlawful and impious to kill and murder Heretics; (for he had seen and heard,
of the bloody Persecutions of the Waldenses, and such as at Rome were called
Heretics, in, and before his time) Nic. Eymericus (Inquisitor of Arragon)
complains of him, and his Writings, to Pope Gregory the Eleventh; who (in full
Consistory with the Greg. 11. in Consistorio, etiam de Consilio Fratrum,
interdixit and condemnavit Doctrinam Raym. Lulli, etc. Eymericus loco dicto. p.
255.
Council of his Cardinals) damns the Doctrine of Raymundus Lullus; and declares
for the Lawfulness and Justice of Killing Heretics. 6. And Lastly, Pope Leo
the Tenth in his Ecumenical (so they call it) Lateran Council (Sacro
approbante Concilio) with the Consent and Approbation of that Council)
declares; That our blessed Savior Christus Petrum Ejusque Successores Vicarios
suos Instituit, quibus (ex Libri Regum Testimonio) Ita Obedire Necesse est, ut
qui non Obediret, Morte Moriatur. Binius Council. Tom. 9. page 151. Col. 2. E.
Edit. Paris. 1636.
Did Institute Peter and his Successors his Vicars; to whom (by the Testimony
of The Book of Kings) it was so necessary to yield Obedience, that Whosoever
would not (as no true Protestant ever would or could) was to be punished with
Death. The Pope was not pleased to tell us, what Book of Kings (for in their
Vulgar Latin Version, there are four Books of that name) nor what Chapter or
Verse he meant: and he did wisely to conceal what Place in those Books he
intended; for had he named any particular place, (though he pretended to
Infallibility) his folly would have much sooner appeared. It is indeed
ridiculous, for any man to think, that any thing said in those Books of Kings,
can prove, that our blessed Savior Constituted a Vicar General over his whole
Christian Church, with power to kill all who would not comply with him, and
that Peter and his Successors the Popes, were the men: seeing there is not one
Syllable of all, or any of this, in any of the four Books of Kings; Nor any
Text from which it may (with any sense or probability) be deduced. Nor have the
Publishers of that Lateran and other Councils ( Peter Crab, Surius, Binius,
Labbe, etc. supplied that defect, and told us, what place Pope Leo meant, and
from which he, or they could prove the Popes Power to kill all who complied not
with his Commands. I know that Pet. Crab. Council. Colon. Agrip. 1551. Tom. 3.
p. 694. Col. 2. So Turrecremata summa de Eccles. l. 2. cap. 114. Prop. 7.
Crab, Laur. Surius Council. Colon. Agripp. 1567. Tom. 4. p. 681. Col. 2.
Surius, and Binius Council. Latet. Paris. 1636. Tom. 9. page 151. Col. 2. B.
Binius (though Labbe has omitted it, as Impertinent) have, in their Editions
of the Councils, cited in their Margents, Deuteronomy. 17. for a proof of that
Erroneus and Impious Position, (it seems their Infallible Judge mistook Kings
for Deuteronomy, or that they could find nothing in any Book of Kings for the
Popes purpose.) But they name not the Verse; though (I believe) it is the
Twelfth Verse of that Seaventeenth Chapter they mean. Where it is said, That he
who will not hearken to the Priest or Judge, That Man shall Dye. This (I say)
is altogether impertinent, as to the proof of the Popes Position. For admit
(which is Vide Grotium and Ainsworth in Deuteronomy. 17. verse. 9. 12. etc. Vide 2 Chronicles. 19. 8. 9. etc.
manifestly untrue) that by Priest here, the High Priest only was meant: yet it
will neither be consequence nor sense to say, Whosoever disobeyed the Sentence
of the High Priest, in the Jewish Church, must be put to death: Ergo, Whoever
disobeys the Pope in the Christian Church, must be so too. This (I say) is
Inconsequent, for the Priests in the Jewish Church (not only the High Priest,
but other Priests and Levites) by the express Law of God, had as Judges in many
Cases, Power of Life and Death: but in the Gospel, our blessed Savior left no
such Power to his Apostles and their Successors; Excommunication is the highest
Punishment, Peter, or any, or all the Apostles could inflict, by any Authority
from our blessed Savior in the Christian Church, and this Power succeeded
Intersection or putting to death in the Judaical Church. So St. Non nunc Agit
in Ecclesia Excommunicatio, quod tunc (ante Christum in Synagoga) agebat
Intersectio. Aug. Quaest. super Deuteronomium, lib. 5. cap. 38. And elsewhere;
Phineas Sacerdos Adulteros simul Inventos ferro ultore confixit, Quod utique
Degradationibus and Excommunicationibus, significatum esse faciendum hoc
tempore. Idem. Aug. de Fide and Bonis Operibus. cap. 6.
Augustine expressly tells us, and to him I refer the Reader. By the Premises, I
think it may appear, that, if (after the Popes Damnation and Deposition of
Queen Elizabeth) any of her Popish Subjects, (Laity or Clergy, Regular or
Secular) had by taking Arms publicly, or by Poison or Pistol, Privately taken
away her life, (according to their approved Principles) it had been no
Rebellion, Treason or Murder, but (in their Opinion) an Action Just and
Innocent. But this (though too much) is not all; their Error and Impiety rises
higher. For,

4. Had any of Queen Elizabeth's Subjects (after the Popes Excommunication)
killed her, that Execrable Fact had been so far from being Murder, that (in
their opinion) it had been an Action not only Indifferent, or Morally good, but
Meritorious. In the year 1586. (which was the Nine and twentieth of Elizabeth)
in the College of Rhemes, Giffard, Dr. of Divinity, Gilbert Giffard and
Hodgson, Priests, had so possessed the English Seminaries, with a belief of
this Doctrine, That John Savage willingly and gladly vowed to kill the Queen.
The Story is in In the English Seminary at Rhemes, some there were, who
believed, Pius the fifth's Bull to be dictated by the Holy Ghost, and they
persuaded themselves and others, that it was meritorious to take away the lives
of Princes Excommunicate, and Martyrdom to spend a man's life in the Cause.
These things Giffard, Dr. of Divinity, Gilbert Giffard and Hodgson inculcated
so deeply into John Savage, that he willingly and gladly vowed to kill Queen
Elizabeth. Camb. Annals of Q. Eliz. l. 3. p. 301. 302. of the English Edition,
(I have not the Latin now by me) Land. 1635.
Cambden (an Historian of unquestionable truth and fidelity) After Ann. Christ.
1598. Eliz. 41. apud Cambdenum Annal. l. 4. p. 498. 499. dictae Editionis.
this, Walpoole, the English Jesuit, persuades Edward Squire, that it was a
Meritorious Act to take away the Queen; tells him, it might easily be done, by
Poisoning the Pomel of her Sadle; gives him the Poison; Squire undertakes it,
Walpoole blesses him, and promises him Eternal Salvation, and so (having sworn
him to Secrecy) sends him into England: where (notwithstanding all the Jesuits
blessings) he was taken, confessed all this, and was Executed in the year.
1598. And Camdben Ibid. p. 499.
there tells us, That a Pestilent Opinion (as he truly calls it) was got
amongst the Popish Party (even amongst their Priests) That to take away Kings
Excommunicate, was Nothing Else, but to Weed the Cockle out of the Lords Field.
It is true, none of those impious and damnable Designs, had their desired
Effect; God Almighty protecting that good Queen, (it being impossible that any
Power or Policy should prevail against his Providence) yet the Matter of Fact
(confessed by themselves, or evidently proved by Legal Witnesses) manifestly
shows, that they thought killing the Queen, (for the benefit of their Catholic
Cause) was a Meritorious Work, which they designed to do, and (had their
Ability been Equal to their Impiety) would have done. 2. Nor was this the
private opinion of some Priests and Jesuits only; but the definitive Sentence
of several Popes, (their All the Popes Sanctions (they say) are Divine (Can.
sic Omnes. 2. did. 19.) as if Peter himself had made them. And no wonder,
seeing they tell us, That God by his Holy Spirit, speaks in the mouth of the
Pope, Deus ipse, Spiritu suo, per Ora Pontificum loquitur. Pet. Matthaeus J. C.
Lugdun. Praefat. praefixa Corp. Juris Can. a se Edito, Francof. 1590.
Infallible and Supreme Judges) publicly declared, and (that we may be sure
they are obligatory at Rome) amongst other Papal Decrees referred into the Body
of their Canon Law, Jul. 2. Conc. Lateran. 5. Generali, approbante Concilio.
Sess. 5. apud Binium. Tom. 9. p. 48. Col. 1. F. 2. A.
confirmed by Gregory the Thirteenth, and by their General Councils (the fifth
Lateran, and that of Trent) Commanded to be obeyed, Tanquam Divina Inspiratione
Edita, and Tanquam Council. Trid. Sess. 25. De Reformat. c. 20. p. 624. Edit.
Antverp. 1633.
Dei Praecepta. Now the Papal Sentences or Decrees I mean, are 1. That of Pope
Can. Omnium. 46. Causa. 23. Quaest. 5.
Nicolas to the French Army: wherein the Pope tells them, That if any of them
were slain in that War against the Insidels, that is, (as Cardinal Turrecremata
ad dictum Canoncm.
Turrecremata explains it) against the Heretics, Heaven Regna illi Coel^stia
minime negabuntur.
should not be denied them: They should be sure of that. But the Lemma or
Summary prefixed to the Canon In Certamine quod Contra Infideles (Haereticos)
geritur quisquis moritur Coeleste Regum meretur.
says, That those Soldiers who faithfully fought against the Heretics, if any
one of them were slain in the sight, He should merit Heaven. Murdering
Heretics, was (in the Popes Opinion) a meritorious Work, and if the Soldiers
could kill them, and take away their Temporal Life here, they should (for that
good Service to the Pope) gain to themselves, an Eternal Life hereafter. 2.
Pope Can. Omni Timore. 9. Cause. 23. Quaest. 8.
Leo (to the same purpose, and almost in the same words) Incourages a French
Army to Omni timore Deposito contra inimicos Sanctae Ecclesiae viriliter ag^re
Studete, novit enim Omnipoteus, si quilibet vestrum morietur, quod pro veritate
fidei mortuus est, and Ideo Proemium Coeleste consequitur.
sight stoutly against the Enemies of the Faith, and of the Church, (you may be
sure he means the Roman Church) and tells them, that they need not be any way
afraid, to kill Heretics and the Churches Enemies, for God knew, that if any
of them died in that Service, it was for the true Faith, for which Heaven
should be their Reward. So the Pope in that Canon. And because some of those
Soldiers might fear (as there was great reason they should) that the
Persecuting those poor Christians, whom the Pope called Heretics, with Fire
and Sword, might rather deserve punishment then a Heavenly Reward; John Semeca
(the Glossator) tells us, That the Popes meaning was, Hortatur Papa, ut
viriliter pugnet contra Inimicos Ecclesiae; and si qui propter hoc moriatur,
Non Poenam, sed Coeleste Praemium Consequetur. Glossa Ibidem.
that (being secured from Punishment) Heaven should be their Reward.

These, and such other Principles, must (of necessity) be a great Encouragement
to the Popish Party, who believe (though without, and in contradiction to Truth
and Reason) the vast usurped Papal Power and Infallibility, to Execute the
Popes Damnatory Bulls and Excommunications, and kill all Heretics (even Kings
and Emperors) having Heaven promised for doing it. This is very much, but there
are more and greater Promises made by the Pope, for killing Heretics. For,

5. The Pope (out of his great Ability and Bounty) promises such Impious and
Bloody Murderers of Heretics, not Heaven only, but a higher Degree of Glory in
it, and many other great Privileges, to be enjoyed here, before they came to
Heaven; and this Promise the Pope makes, not singly by himself, but in, and
with the consent of the greatest General Council Rome ever had. Innocent the
Third is the Pope, and the Conc. Later. mag. number sub Innocentio. 3. Ann. 1215.
fourth Lateran is the Council I mean; in which Ita Abbas Ursperg. in Chronico
ad dictum Ann. 1215. Binius in Hist. Conc. Later. 4. praesixa.
there were, above Twelve hundred Fathers. By the Authority of this Can. 3. De
Haereticis.
Council, an Army was to be raised for the Ad Haereticorum Exterminium.
Destruction of Heretics (the poor Wabdenses) and they were to have the sum
Illa Indulgentia and Privilegio muniti sunt, quod Accedentibus ad terrae
Sanctae subsidium conceditur. Ibid. dicto Can. 3.
Privileges which were granted to those who fought against the Turks to
recover the Holy Land. What those Privileges were Pope Innocent (in his Constable.
Innocent. 3. 12. data Lateran. 19. Call. Jan. 1215.
Bull) tells us.

1. They were to be freed from A Collectis, Talliis, aliisque gravaminibus sunt
Immunes. Bullae dictae.. 10.
all Taxes, Impositions, and all Burdens whatsoever.

2. They were to be received into the Quorum Personas and Bonasua sub Beati
Petri and Nostra Protectione suscipimus. Ibidem.
Protection of St. Peter and the Pope; there is nothing of God's Protection
mentioned. The Pope (who sits in the Temple of God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
showing himself that he is God) thought (and would have them think so too)
that he was sufficient to protect them.

3. If they had borrowed any Money upon Use, and had solemnly sworn to pay it;
yet the Pope Commands that they shall be freed both from their Si ad
Praestandas usuras Juramento teneantur astricti, Creditores ut remittant
Juramentum and Vsuras Compelli praecipimus. Ibid.. 11.
Oath, and paying any Use.

4. If they went to kill and exterminate Heretics in Person, and at their own
Expenses, then A Full Plenam peccatorum Veniam Indulgemus, and Salutis Aeternae
pollicemur Augmentum. Ibidem. 17. In Bullario Romano, Romae, 1638. Tom. 1. p.
78. Col. 7. vide Matthew. Paris. ad Ann. 1213. In Johanne. page 241.
and Plenary Pardon of All their Sins here, and A Greater Degree of Glory
hereafter, is (by the Pope and that great General Council) promised them.

By the Premises I think it evident, that if any of Queen Elizabeth's Subjects
(after her Damnation and Excommunication by the Pope) had by raising Arms
against her publicly, or by Poison or Pistol privately taken away her Life, it
had neither been Rebellion, Treason, nor Murder, but an innocent Action; And
that not one of those which Aristotle calls (...), Naturae Mediae, and
Indifferent, which are morally neither good nor bad; but (in the Judgment of
the Church of Rome, and upon those her approved Principles) it had been an
Action Morally Good, nay, (which is far more) Meritorious: For which they
should have Remission of All their Sins here, and not only Heaven, but (in it)
A higher Degree of Glory hereafter: And if it happened, that any of them
miscarried in this their meritorious Act of killing Heretical Kings, and were
(according to their desert) hanged for Treason, then (with the Pope and his
Party) they pass for Martyrs, and as such, shall be honored, and highly
commended to Posterity. I wrong them not, Ribadeneira the Jesuit (to omit many
others) in a Catalogus Scriptorum Religionis Societatis Jesu; Auctore Pet.
Ribadeneira, Ejusdem Societ. Theol. Antverp. 1613.
Book Licenced by the Ferdinandus Lucero in Censura Libro praefixa, Madritif,
17. Sept. 1607.
Vice-Provincial of Toledo, approved by the Bishop of Lavin. Torrentius in Oda
ad Societatem Libr. praefixa.
Antverp, and Gravium doctorumque hominum Judicio Probatus. Ferd. Lucero
indicta Censura.
other Grave and Learned Men (as they are there called) I say, in this Book he
has a Dicti Libri. p. 357. 358. etc.
Century of Martyrs of his Society; and amongst them, reckons Ibid. p. 366.
Campian, Ibid. p. 371.
Walpoole, Ibid. p. 372.
Southwell, In supplemento addictam Cent^riam. page 375.
Garnett, Ibidem.
Oldcorne, etc. and calls them Martyrs; who were Legally Convict here, and
Justly Executed as Impious Traitors. God Almighty preserve our Gracious King
from the Traitorous and Pernicious Conspiracies of those men, who (by a strange
delusion) believe such Principles, and call Impious Traitors Holy Martyrs.

The Premises considered, there can be little reason to doubt, but the Popish
Party (as ever since the Reformation they constantly have, so they) always will
endeavor by secret Plots and Conspiracies, by Poison, Pistols, or (when they
have Ability) by open War, to ruin and utterly extirpate and destroy all the
Protestants of this Nation (King and Subjects) who are by the Pope Declared and
Excommunicated Heretics, seeing there are such exceeding great Rewards
(aforementioned) assured to them, for doing it; not only by private and
fallible persons, but by the Constitutions of their Popes, and the Canons of
their greatest and approved General Councils; their Supreme Judge and
Infallible Guide, which all Papists (by the Principles of their Religion) are
bound to obey, and act according to such Canons and Constitutions. And were
they indeed (what they pretend to) Infallible, it were great folly and midness
not to do so. For he is certainly a Fool, who (having a Journey to go, on which
the Eternal misery or felicity of his Soul depends) will not follow an
Infallible Guide. And (which is further very considerable) All their Omnes,
quas Cathedralibus and Superioribus Ecclesiis praefici, vel quibus de illarum
dignit atibus, Canonicatibus and alis, quibuscunque Beneficiis Ecclesiasticis,
Curam Animarum habentibus, providere Contingat, publicam Orthodoxae fidei
professionem facere, seque in Romans Ecclesiae Obedientia permansuros, Spondere
and Jurare teneantur. Vide Bullam Pij. 4. super forma Juramenti Professionis
fidei, in Concilio Trident. Sess. 24. De Reformat. Cap. 12. page 450. Edit.
Antverp. 1633.
Dignitaries in all Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, All who have Cure of
Souls, All who are provided for, and preferred to any Etiam per quoscunque
quibus de Monasteriis, Conventibus, Domibus, and aliis quibuscunque locis,
Regularium quorumcunque Ordinum, etiam Militiarum, quocunque nomine
providebitur, idem Servari. Idem. page 451. Extat etiam in Bullario Romano.
Edit. Romae, 1638. Tom. 2. page 97. Dat. Ibid. Novem. 1564. Pontificatus sui
Ann. 5.
Monastery, or Religious House whatsoever, be they of whatsoever Order of
Regulars. And not only these; but Nullus Doctor, Magister, Regens, vel alius
cujuscunque Artis and Facultatis Professor, sive Clericus, sive Laicus, ac
Secularis, vel cujusvis Ordinis Regularis, sit, in quibusvis Vniversitatibus
aut Gymnasiis publicis, aut Alibi Lectoris Cathedram obtinere, aut obtentam
retinere, seu alias Theologiam, Canonicam vel Civilem Censuram, Medicinam,
Philosophiam, Grammalicam vel alias Arts Liberales, public vel privatim
profiteri, nisi Juramento prius praestito. etc. Bulla Pij. 4. in Bullarij Romans
Tom. 2. p. 96. and cap. In Sacro Sancta. 2. De Magist. and Doctoribus in 7.
All Doctors, Masters, Regents, and Professors of any Art or Faculty, whether
they be of the Laity or Clergy, or Regulars of any Order whatsoever, in any
University, public School, or any where else, in Cities, Universities, Towns,
Churches or Monasteries; whether they profess Divinity, Canon or Civil Law,
Physic, Philosophy, Grammar, or any other Liberal Art, publicly or privately,
and all who take any Degrees in any University; All these (that is, almost all
the Learned men in the Papacy) by the Juxta dispositicnem Conc. Trid. in
Constit. 89. Pij. 4. Bullar. Romans Tom. 2. page 97.
Disposition and Appointment of the Pope and Council of Trent, are to Romano
Pontifici, Petri Apostolorum Principis Successori, and Christi Vicario veram
Obedientiam Spondeo, ac Juro. Caetera item Omnia a Sacris Canonibus and
Occumenicis Conciliis, Praecipue a Trident. Synodo tradita, definita ac
declarata, Indubitanter recipio and profiteor, and ad Vltimum vitae spiritum
Constantisstme retinere ac profiteri, and a meis subditis, illisque quorum Cura
ad me spectat, teneri, quantum in me est, Curaturum. Ego. N. Spondeo, Voveo,
Juro, etc. p. 98.. 2. dictae Bullae.
promise, vow, and swear to obey the Pope as Peter' s Successor and Christ's
Vicar, and to receive, and without All Doubting to Profess all Things
delivered, defined, and declared in the Sacred Canons, and General Councils,
Especially in the Council of Trent; and all this they swear to do most
constantly so long as they live, and to take care (to the utmost of their
Ability) that all under them, or committed to their Charge, shall do so too.
And the Pope there further tells us, Deus Omnipotens Patribus (Tridentinis)
Divinitus Inspirare Dignatus est. Ibidem, in dictae Bullae Initio.
That God Almighty did by the Holy Ghost Inspire the Trent Fathers to require,
That this Oath should be taken. Seeing then there are so many thousands in the
Church of Rome, who do and must take this cursed Oath, to Obey the Pope, and
receive, and without doubting believe all their Rebellious Canons before
mentioned, and (to the utmost of their Power) to persuade and induce all who
are under their Cure and Charge (that is, all the Laity in the whole Roman
Church, for all of them are under the Charge and Cure of some of those who take
that Oath) to receive and believe them too. Hence it manifestly follows, 1.
That the Church of Rome approves those impicus and rebellious Doctrines to
which so many thousands swear, by the Command of the Pope and Trent Council. 2.
That all their Ecclesiastics (Secular and Regular) who have any Cure of Souls
and Charge over others, are bound, not only by their Papal Constitutions and
Decrees of their General Councils; but by a Personal Promise, Vow, and Oath,
(in facinus Jurasse putes) to believe and profess, and (as there is
opportunity) to practice according to these Principles. 3. And hence it
appears, That Queen Elizabeth was (and all Protestant Kings and Princes are,
and in the like case, will be) in most eminent Danger of assassination by her
Popish Subjects, especially after Pope Pius the fifth had damned, and deposed
her, absolved all her Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, and Commanded
them (on pain of Excommunication) never to obey her, or any of her Laws or
Commands; it being also declared, by their Supreme Infallible Power, That the
killing the Queen, by open War publicly, or privately by Poison or Pistol, had
neither been Rebellion, Treason, nor Murder, but an Act morally good and
meritorious; by which they should merit, not only Heaven, but a higher Degree
of Glory in it, and be, as Glorious Martyrs (if they died in that Cause)
commended to Posterity; Nay, when their Ecclesiastics (both Secular and
Regular) who had any Cure of Souls, or Authority and Charge over others, had
promised, vowed, and solemnly sworn, That they would obey the Pope as Christ's
Vicar, etc. I say, those who had such great Promises to allure them, and their
Promise, Oath and vow to oblige them to it, would certainly endeavor (as
indeed they did, as will appear anon) the ruin and destruction of that good
Queen. Neither is this all. For

6. Lastly; the Pope and his Party have further Inducements, more efficacious
and powerful to persuade their Instruments to Assassinate Princes and Extirpate
Heretics, especially They are more afraid of Protestants, then of all others
they call Heretics, and there is good reason for it. For truth (which the
Protestants constantly maintain) is more destructive of their Popish Errors,
then any one Error can be of another. Extrema (Errores and vitia) facile
Coexistunt; Media (virtutes and veritates) Extrema destruunt. This appears, 1.
Because they will not permit their Italian Papists to live in any Protestant
County. Prohibentur Nunc Itali Catholici habitare, ciu Commorari extra Italiam
Occasion Mercimonij adsque Licentia Inquisitorum, si in illis partibus non
viget Libertas Religiones Catholicae. Vide Constable. 42. Clement. 8. in Bullario
Romans Tom. 3. page 42. 2. They permit no Heretics (Protestants you may be sure
especially) to inhabit in Italy, or the adjacent Isles, on pretense of
Merchandise, etc. Gregorius. 15. sub gravissimis poenis vetuit, Haereticos
quoscunque etiam sub praetextu Coinmercij habere domum apertam propriam, vel
Conductam in Italia, vel adjacientibus insulis. Gregorius. 15. in Constitut.
38. In dicto Bullario. Tom. 3. page 314. Edit. Romae. 1638. Vide Corp. Jur.
Canon. Lugduni. 1661. and ibi Annotationes in Calce Tom. 2. page 55. 3. Because
it is notoriously known, that they permit Jews, (who deny Jesus Christ, and the
whole Gospel) to live and have Houses, even in Rome it self, and yet they will
not permit Protestants. It is a less Crime (it seems) at Rome, to deny Jesus
Christ, then to deny (what all Protestants do) that the Pope is his Vicar, and
Monarchical Head of the whole Christian Church.
Protestants, the greatest Enemies of their Antichristian Tyranny, and Papal
Usurpations. For although to pious men, (who really desire, and use the just
means to obtain it) the promise of Eternal Joys in Heaven, is the greatest
Motive and Encouragement imaginable; yet to such Impious and Prodigious
Villains (who will undertake to kill Kings and murder Innocents) Heaven
signifies no more, then the Diamond did to Aesop's Cock in the Fable, who
preferred a Grain of Barley before it. And therefore, for such, (and none but
such will serve them in the Execution of such Execrable Villainies) they have
present and more prevailing Encouragements; I mean Money and great Sums of
Gold, or some vast Temporal Advantages to be enjoyed here; which prevails more
with such Persons, then the Promise of Heaven hereafter: I shall (out of many)
give two or three Instances. As,

1. In the year. 1594. Cambdens Eliz. l. 4. ad Ann. 1594. p. 430. 431. Edit.
Land. 1635.
Roderigo Lopez (a Jew and Physician) Stephen Ferriera Gama, and Emanuel Loisie
(two Portugals) by the Roman Arts and Impiety, were hired, and undertook to
Poison Queen Elizabeth. Lopez had a rich Jewel sent him, and was (by Contract)
to have Fifty thousand Ducats promised by the Popish Party, for Poisoning Q.
Elizabeth.
Fifty thousand Ducats; which evidently appeared (at their Trial) by their own
Confessions. And though Letters intercepted, and the Good Providence of God (by
whom King's Reign) their Villainy was detected, and they (as Traitors) justly
Executed; yet their Popish Desires and Endeavors were not less mischievous and
impious, because the Good Providence of God graciously prevented the Execution
of their Designs.

2. This, by the Mercy of God not taking Effect, (for there is no Power or
Policy can prevail against Divine Providence) a little after in the Cambdens
Eliz. l. 4. ad Ann. 1594. 1596. p. 440. vide Plura in Statuto de Ann. 3. Jac.
c. 2.
same year, Edmund York and Richard Williams, were (by the same Roman Arts and
Impiety) hired to Kill the Queen. York (at his Trial) confessed, That Holt the
Jesuit, Hugh Owen, Jacomo de Francisco, and others, had offered him an
Assignment of Forty thousand Ducats promised for killing Q. Elizabeth.
Forty thousand Ducats, if he would Kill the Queen himself, or assist Richard
Williams in Killing Her. This York confessed at his Trial; and that Holt the
Jesuit (in whose Hand the Assignment of Forty thousand Ducats was deposited)
kissing the Holy Host, swore that the Money should be paid so soon as the Queen
was killed; and bound York and Williams by an Oath, and the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, To Dispatch it.

In short, many others (besides these named) conspired the assassination and
death of the Queen. For Instance; (to omit others) 1. Dr. Cambdens Eliz. l. 2.
p. 144. 145.
Story, Ann. 1572. 2. Ibid. l. 3. p. 257.
Somervil, Ann. 1583. 3. Dr. Ibid. l. 3. p. 272.
Parry, Ann. 1585. by the Approbation and Encouragement of the Pope and
Cardinal Como. 4. John Ibid. l. 3. p. 302.
Savage, Ann. 1586. 5. Ant. Ibid. p. 303.
Babington; and five or six more with him are encouraged and persuaded to
Murder the Queen, in the same year, 1586. 6. Ibid. p. 336.
Moody, Ann. 1587. 7. Patrich Ibid. l. 4. p. 431.
Cullen, Ann. 1594. 8. Edward Ibid. l. 4. p. 498.
Squire, Ann. 1598. 9. Ibid. l. 4. p. 578.
Winter and Tesmond the Jesuit, Ann. 1602. etc. We see there were many (too
many) desperate Villains, who valued not their own, so that they might take
away the Queens life; and yet too few (Divine Providence preventing their
Impious Designs) to Effect and Compass that (more then Pagan) Popish
Conspiracy, which at (so vast an Expense of Money) the Pope and his Party
designed and earnestly desired, and endeavored to Execute.

3. When all this would not do; and the Pope and his Party plainly saw, that
they could not cut off the Queen by Pistol, Poison, or private Assassinations,
horrendum and majus machinantur scelus: they design by Fire and Sword, by open
War, utterly to destroy that good Queen, and all her Heretical (that is, Loyal)
Subjects. And to this end, (besides Plenary Indulgence and Pardon of all sins
here, and the Kingdom of Heaven hereafter) Pius the Fifth promises, and
immediately gives two whole Kingdoms ( England and Ireland) to Philip the
Second, King of Spain; as is notoriously known, and Pius. 5. In Depositione
Eliz. Jus Britanniae, Hiberniaeque ad Philip. 2. Hispaniae Regem transtulit; vi
cujus donationis, demandat us postea Sidonius fuit. Ann. 1588. Class Hispanica
Instructus, ut Regna Britanniae Possideret. F. R. Caron, Remonstrant.
Hibernorum. Part. c. 3.. 4. p. 7.
confessed by their own Popish Writers His Successors, Gregory the Thirteenth,
and Sixtus the Fifth, renew and confirm the Excommunication of Elizabeth, and
the donation of her Kingdoms; and accordingly (not with Gods, but) with the
Popes Sixtus the Fifth was Pope, and it was in the fourth year of his Popedom.
Vide Cambd. Eliz. l. 3. ad Ann. 1588. p. 360. 361.
Approbation and Blessing, in that memorable year 1588. the (vainly supposed)
Invincible Armado was sent to destroy the damned Heretics (the Queen and her
Loyal Subjects) and take Possession of her Kingdoms, which the Pope had given
him. The Pretenses the Pope had to give those Kingdoms, (for they were but
miserable Pretenses, void of all Reason and Justice) were Two. 1. King John's
Donation and Matthew. Paris. ad dictum Ann. 1213. page 236.
Resignation of his Crown to Pope Innocent the Third, about the year, 1213.
when that King and the whole Nation groaned under many Miseries and Papal
Oppressions. Which Act of King John was invalid and absolutely Null; he having
no just Power to give away his Kingdom. And even then declared to be Null; not
only by the English Barons and Nation, but by the King of Rex Francorum
respondet, Regnum Angliae Patrimonium Petri nunquam fuit; Nec est, Nec erit.
Nullus Rex potest dare Regnum suum, sine assensu Baronum suorum, Qui Regnum
tenantur defendere. Tunc Magnates Omnes Vno Oreclamabant, quod isto Articulo
starent usque ad mortem, non Rex vel Princeps per Sol^m voluntatem suam possit
Regnum dare, vel tributarium facere, unde nobiles regni essent servi. Matthew.
Paris in Johanne ad Ann. 1213.
France and his Nobility, as Matthew Paris tells us. 2. Nor is it only Matthew
Paris who says that the Kings of England and Ireland* are (since King John's
time) Tribuiaries to the Pope, (as they pretend) but their Historians,
Canonists, and the Popes themselves. So Matthew. Westmin. ad Ann. 1213. p. 271.
Johannes Rex est Papae Tributarius, seu Fe^datarius.
Matthew Westminster, Henry Hen. Knighton de Event. Angl. l. 2. c. 15. p. 2420.
Knighton, Cardinal Tuscus, etc. The Cardinal tells us, That the Pope is the
Supreme Card. Tuschus Pract. Conclus. Juris. Tom. 6. Conclus. 41.
Judge of All. That he can Depose the Papa potest deponere Imperatorem, Reges,
Duces, and Omnes qui de facto Superiorem non recognoscunt. Ibid.. 49.
Emperor, Kings, Dukes, and All who Acknowledge No Superior; and that the Kings
of England, and Sicilie are Rex Angliae and Siciliae sunt Tributarij Ecclesiae
Romanae. Ibid.. 34.
Tributaries to the Church of Rome. And he who denies this Papal Qui negat
potestatem Papae, Negat se Christianum. Ibid.. 37.
Power, is No Christian. And for Ireland; Pope John the Two and twentieth, in a
Bull to our King Edward the Second, tells him, That his Predecessor, Adrian the
Fourth, Gave the Kingdom of Ireland to Henry the Second, King of England, upon
certain Conditions, which Conditions our King had not kept. And this ridiculous
Bull we have in Matthew Paris, ad Ann. 1156. page 95. where he tells us, That
all the Islands in the World, which are Christian, belong to Peter, and so to
the Pope. See Archbishop Usher of the Religion professed by the Ancient Irish,
page 51. 92. 93. 94. etc. And upon these (and such like ridiculous) Pretenses,
the Pope required Edward the Third to do him Vid. Constable. 4. Johan. Papae, 22.
In Bullar. Romans Tom. 1. p. 172. Edit. Romans 1638.
Homage for the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the Arrears of One
thousand Marks per Annum. All the Popes pretenses were in a full Popish
Parliament declared vain and evidently null; as appears by my Lord My Lord
Cook* Inst. Part. 4. c. 1. p. 13.
Cook, and the Record before mentioned. Besides; it is certain that John was an
Usurper, and had only Possession of the Crown, but no just Right and Title to
it. For Elinor, Daughter to Jeffery his Elder Brother, was living, and was the
true Heir of the Crown; so that King John's Resignation of the Crown to the
Pope, was absolutely null; it being impossible he should give a Just Title to
another, who had none himself. His second Pretense was, that the Queen being an
Excommunicate and Deposed Heretic, (as he was pleased to miscall her) her
Kingdom was forfeited to him, by the Canon of their great Lateran Council.
Wherein it is Significetur Pontifici, ut Ipse Vasallos a fidelitate absolvat,
and Terram Exponat Catholicis occupandam. Conc. Lateran. 4. Can. 3. De
Haereticis. And it now goes for Law. Cap. 13. Extra. de Haereticis.
declared, That such obstinate Persons (as they call the Queen) when they stood
Excommunicate, and would not give Satisfaction, the Pope was to absolve their
Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, and give their Lands and Kingdoms to
Catholics: who by that Canon, were bound to Exterminate or Extirpate Qui
terram illam Exterminatis Haereticis absque ulla Contradictione possideant, and
in fidei puritate conservent. Ibidem.
all Heretics. Upon the aforesaid Sandy Foundations, the Popes successively
since King John's time, build their Right to the Crown of England; and believe,
(or at least say, and would have others believe) that the Imperial or Royal
Power of England and Ireland is in them; and our Kings only Beneficiarij and
Feudatarij (as the Civil Law calls them) Feudataries to the Pope, of whom (as
their Supreme Lord) they hold their Kingdoms. Whence it was, that Pope Innocent
the Third, in his Letter to Philip King of France, calls the King of England
his Papa Philippo Francorum Regi Literas mittit, in quibus rogat ut Regem
Angliae non Inquiet aret; sed ut Romanae Ecclesiae Vassallum protegeret. Mat.
Paris Hist. an Ann. 1216. p. 280. In Johanne.
Vassal. And his Successor, Pope Innocent the Fourth (with a Prodigious
Antichristian Pride and Impiety) calls our King ( Henry the Third was then
King) His Vassal, and (which is more) his Slave. What (says he) Papa non se
capiens prae ira and indignatione ( it was Grostheads Letter had angered him)
torvo aspectu, and superbo animo, ait: Nonne Rex Anglorum noster est Vasallus,
and ut plus dicam Mancipium? Mat. Paris Hist. in Hen. 3. ad Ann. Dom. 1253. p.
872. in Edit. G. Watsij. London. 1640.
Is not the King of England our Vassal? Nay, that I may say more, our Slave?
These are his words, and expressions, of such prodigious Pride, as is
absolutely Inconsistent with that great and exemplary Humility, which our
blessed Matthew. 20. 28. Luc. 22. 27.
Savior practiced in his own Person, and Commanded all (even Matthew. 20. 45.
46. 47. and Matthew. 23. 11. 12. Luc. 22. 24. 25. 26.
Peter and his Apostles) to imitate: But yet congruous enough, and consistent
with the Hypocrisy of him, who would be called Servus Servorum Dei, the
Servant of all Gods Servants; and yet as the Man of Sin (mentioned by the 2 Thessalonians. 2, 4.
Apostle) Exalts himself above all that is called God, and (with Pope Innocent
the Fourth, in the place now cited) calls Kings his Slaves and Vassals.

It Is true, we believe and know, that the Pope indeed had no Power to perform
those aforesaid Promises; and so in making them was (to all intelligent, sober,
and pious Persons) not only impious, but ridiculous; yet to those of his Popish
Party, who (having strong delusion to believe a Lie) were persuaded he had
Power to make good his Promises; that he was Christ's Vicar, Supreme Head and
Monarch of the Church; that he had the Power of the Keys, and so could shut and
open, keep out and let into Heaven whom he pleased, that he could by this Power
Depose Greg. 7. deposes Hen. 4. Emperor, by the Power of the Keys. Potestas
Ligandi and Solvendi in Coelo and Terra, mihi a Dco data. Hac ideo fiducia
fretus, Henrico totius Regni Teutonini and Italiae gubernacula Interdico, and
Omnes Christianos, a vincule Juramenti, quod sibi fecere, absolvo. Baronius
Annal Tom. 11. ad Ann. 1076.. 25. 26.
Kings, and was Infallible and Ecclesia Romans Nunquam Erravit, nec in perpetuum
(Scriptura testante) Errabit. Inter Dictatus Papae. Ibid. apud Bar.. 33. p.
479. Edit. Antv. 1608.
never Erred (for these Erroneous and Impious Positions are Dictatus seu
Sententiae Breviores Gregorij Papae, Qu^ Hactenus in ^cclesia Catholica usu
receptae, ut ex his reprimeretur audacia Schismaticorum Episcoporum and
Principum. Baron. Ibid.. 31. p. 479. And Pope Leo. 10. in their General Latera^
Council, 1513. and in his Bull in Bullario Romans Romae, 1638. Tom. 1. p. 451.
says the same thing, that the Church and Pope of Rome have never erred. Ibid.
in Constit. Leo. 10. 40.. 3. and 6.
approved and received at Rome) I say, such Promises, made by such a Person,
were very great. And (to such deluded Persons, who were persuaded of the truth
and reality of them) prevailing Encouragements, to make them desperately
endeavor to Assassinate and Murder Queen Elizabeth. Forty or Fifty thousand
Ducats promised, was great and intic^ing Wages for doing such a Work, and
actually prevailed with many to endeavor it. But when (what the Pope promised
Philip King of Spain) two whole Kingdoms here, and the Kingdom of Heaven
hereafter are promised for destroying the Heretics (the Queen and her Loyal
Subjects) this was such an offer, as could not be refused by any who desired
(as most do) Wealth or Honor here; or (as all should do) the Joys of Heaven
hereafter. These were the Impious Policies, and Bloody Practices of Rome, to
destroy Queen Elizabeth and her Protestant Subjects: and as their fear of the
Protestant Religion, (destructive of their Superstition and Idolatry)
continued, so their hate of it, and their desire and endeavors to destroy all
the Professors of it. For the Queen being dead, in the beginning of King James
his Reign (upon the aforementioned, or the like motives) they undertook the
Gunpowder Vide Stat. 3. Jac. Capp. 1. and 2. A Conspiracy undertaken by
Malignant and Devilish Jesuits and Priests. Ibid. Cap. ^* A Design so barbarous
and cruel, as the like was never before heard of. Ibidem. The most wicked
barbarous, execrable, and abominable Treason that ever entered into the heart
of the most wicked man. Ibid. cap. 2.
Conspiracy, (such a horrid and hellish Villainy, as no Turkish or Pagan Story
can parallel) wherein they endeavored, and (if the Powerful Providence of
Heaven had not hindered it) had Assassinated, not not the King only, but the
whole Kingdom, in its Representative. And further, (to omit the bloody and
barbarous Assassinations of Vid. Thuani Hist. Tom. 4. lib. 95. ad Ann. 1598.
Henry the Third of France, by Jaques Clement, and of Henry the Fourth, by
Raviliac, Vide Anticoton, by Peter Du Moulin. In that Pyramid erected in Paris
upon the Murder of Henry the Fourth, the Jesuits are noted as men, Malificae
Superstitionis, Quorum Instinctu, piacularis Adolescens (Raviliac) Dirum
facinus (the murder of the King) Instituerat.
encouraged to those Villainies by Jesuitical and Popish Principles and
Promises; for Raviliac confessed, That it was the Book of Mariana the Jesuit,
and the Traitorous Positions maintained in it, which induced him to that
Prodigious Villainy, the Murder of the King; for which Cause that Book (Damned
by the Sentence of the Parliament and Sorbon) was publicly burnt in Paris. I
say, to let these, and such Instances pass, it is too well known and believed,
that in the late Ann. 1678. and 1679.
horrid and hellish Conspiracy (continued and carried on, principally by the
Jesuits) to take away the Life of our Gracious King (whom God preserve) one of
the Assassins had Fifteen thousand pounds paid or promised, and another,
Thirty thousand Masses to be said for him, if he miscarried, to Encourage them
to that Monstrous Popish Villainy. Now their Impiety in this their Engagement,
was equal; both undertaking the Commission of the same Sin, the Murder of their
King: But their folly seemed unequal. For Fifteen thousand pounds might
possibly (in this World) have been some benefit to him who contracted for it:
But the 30000. Masses, were altogether Insignificant, and could be no way
beneficial or profitable to him to whom they were promised, either in this, or
the World to come. The poor Miscreant was cozened by his Party, with the noise
and number of their Masses. For they knew, and (had he not been a Fool as well
as Knave and Villain) so might he too; that those Masses could never do him any
good. For even by their own approved and received Principles, killing of
Heretics (especially an Excommnicated Prince) was such a meritorious Work, as
(without any Masses) deserved a Plenary Indulgence and pardon of all his Sins,
and an higher place in Heaven; and therefore he could not go to Cum poenae pro
culpis debitae delentur and remittuntur, tum crimina velentur and remittuntur.
Quo sensu Ecclesia per Indulgentias concedit peccatorum Omnium plenissimam
veniam, id est, Poenarum Omnium, quas peccando contraximus. -- Quia non est
Plene remissa Culpa, quamdiu peccator Reus est Solvendae Poenae. Melch. Canus
Locorum Theol. lib. 12. cap. 13.. Ex quo Ambrosij page 694. Edit. Colon. Agrip.
1605.
Purgatory (had there been any such Place) nor could the Devil or the Pope
punish him there, for such Sins as were absolutely pardoned, and all the
Punishment due to them remitted; I say, they could not justly do it: or admit
the Devil (had he power and permission) might be willing to punish an innocent
Soul, which had no Sin to punish; yet sure his Holiness (who as Christ's Vicar
has the Keys of Purgatory as well as Heaven) would not do, or at least not own
(for otherwise he does, and has done as Impious things) the doing of that,
which is so evidently injust. So that (if their own Principles be true) those
Thirty thousand Masses could no way be profitable to that miserable deluded
Person, in Purgatory, whither he was never to come; and I suppose, they will
not say, that their Masses here, are profitable to the glorified Saints and
Martyrs in Heaven.

12. Observe. 12.
And here, (for a more clear and distinct Explication of their Jesuitical and
Popish Assassinations) it will neither be Impertinent nor Improper to observe
further, That although since the time of Hildebrand or It was the saying of
this Gregory; Intelligant Omnes, Imperia, Regna, Principatus, and quicquid
habere mortales possunt, avferre and dare Nos Posse. Plat. in vita Greg. 7.
Edit. 1485. And Baronius tells us, that this, and such dictates of that Pope --
In Ecclesia Catholica Hactenus usurecepti sunt. Annal. Tom. 11. ad Ann. 1076..
31.
Gregory the Seventh, the Antichristian Pride or Tyranny of the Pope and his
Party, has been exceeding great, and pernicious to the Western Part of the
World; they both approving and practicing the Excommunications and Depositions
of Kings and Emperors, Absolutions of their Subjects from all Oaths of
Allegiance, with Injunctions (against the Law of Nature and Scripture) never to
Obey them: yet I do not find that the Popes or their Party approved or
practiced the Assassinations of Princes before Ignatius Loyola, and the unhappy
Approbation and Confirmation of his Society, Ann. 1540. Nay, I find it
Condemned, as Impious, Inhuman, and Barbarous; not only by their Learned men,
(even their Canonists) but by their Popes and Councils. That this may appear, I
desire it may be considered,

1. That Pope Innocent the Fourth, about the year 1245. or 1246. makes a
Constitutio illa extat, in Corpore Juris Can. de Homicidio. cap. pro humani. 1.
In. 6.
Constitution in the General Council at Lions, (and with the Sacri approbatione
Concilij Statuimus. Ibid.
approbation of that Council) wherein he calls Assassinations Qui Horrenda
Impietate Detestandaque Saevitia Mortem suiunt aliorum, ut Ipsos faciunt per
Assassinos occidi, non solum Corporum, sed mortem procurent Animarum --
Statuimus, ut quicunque Princeps vel Praelatus quempiam Christianorum per
praedictos Assassinos interfici fecerit, vel mandaverit (quanquam mors non
sequatur) Excommunicatus and Depositus a Dignitate, Honor, and Officio, Ipso
facto, sit bonis etiam Mundanis Omnibus a toto Christiano populo perpetuo
diffidatus. Ibid. and Conc. Tom. 11. Part. 1. p. 672. Edit. per Labbe Paris.
1671.
Horrid Inhumanity, and Detestable Cruelty, and an endeavor to kill Body and
Soul: and then adds, That if any Prince or Prelate, any Person Ecclesiastical
or Civil, shall procure any Assassin to kill any Christian, (though the Effect
do not follow) or receive, conceal, or any way favor such Assassin, then such
Person is (Ipso facto) Excommunicate, Deposed, and Deprived of all his Honor,
Dignity and Revenue. This was the Judgment of Pope Innocent the Fourth about
435. years since; and although for Antichristian Pride and Tyranny (as in other
things, so) in his Impious Excommunication and Deposition of the Emperor
Frederick, he was as bad as his Predecessors; yet neither they nor he, were (as
yet) arrived at the height of Impiety to approve Mohammedan and Turkish
Assassinations of Kings and Emperors.

2. About Eight and forty years after the making of his Constitution by
Innocent the Fourth, Boniface the Eighth (as Impious and Tyrannical as his
Predecessors, was made Pope, and approved this Constitution of Innocent against
Assassinations, and referred it into the Body of their Cap. pro humani. ^. De
Homicidio, In. 6. Decretalium.
Canon Law; where it still Vid. Edit. Juris Canonici, Paris. 1612. and 1618.
Lugduni. 1661. etc.
remains in all Editions of that Law, even to this Day: and that (to give Vt
hujus utilissimi and gravissimi Codicis non vacillaret Authoritas, placuit Pio.
4. dein Pio. 5. and Greg. 13. ut illi Corrigendo Summa opera daretur, etc. Ita
admonitio ad Lect. praefixa Corpori Juris Can. Paris. 1612. and Ludg. 1661.
Authority to it) with the Approbation and Confirmation of succeeding Popes;
particularly of Pius the Fourth, Pius the Fifth, and Gregory the Thirteenth.

3. And hence it is, that eminent Writers of the Church of Rome (except the
Jesuits and their Party) do, even to this Day, generally Condemn all such
Assassinations, as Impious, and to the Public Pernicious. This evidently
appears (to say nothing of the Gloss) by Cardinal Summa de Ecclesia, l. 25. 35.
and 36. as he is cited (for I have not the Book by me) in the Margent of the
Canon Law; ad Cap. 1. de Homicidio. in. 6.
Turrecremata, Cardinal In Summula. verbo Assassinus.
Cajetan, Cardinal Conclus. Pract. Juris, Lit. A. verbo Assassinus. Conclus.
531.
Tuschus, Henry Continuat. Annal. Baronij, ad Ann. 1231.. 3. 4. 5. etc.
Spondanus (Bishop of Pamiez in France,) Didacus Operum, Tom. 1. p. 528. De
Delict. and Conat.. 9.
Couvarruvias (Bishop of Segobia in Spain, etc.) And here it is further
observable, 1. That Pope Innocent the Fourth, in the aforesaid Decretal
Constitution, speaks only of those Ancient, and properly so called
Mahometan-Assassins; and though he censures their Assassinations as Impious,
yet he appoints not their Punishment. I know that the Author of the Gloss upon
that Constitution ( Joh. Andreas Boniensis, was the man) tells us; Papa volens
obviare hujusmodi malis, profert plures poenas in istos Assassinos, and illos
qui eis mandabant. Glossa ad dictum Cap. 1. De Homicidio. In. 6.
That the Punishments expressed there, are denounced against the Assassins, as
well as those who procured or hired them to Assassinate any Christians. But the
man is miserably mistaken; for it is Evident, and Non contraipsos Assassinos,
utpote Infideles; sed contra Mandantes per Ipsos aliquem occidi; Innocentius.
4. Excommunicationem promulgavit. Cajetan. in Summula. verbo Assassinus.
Confessed, That the Punishments contained in the Constitution, are denounced
only against those Christians who hire and employ those Impious Assassins.
Excommunication (and the Consequents of it) is the Punishment mentioned in that
Constitution; which neither did, nor possibly could concern those Mohammedan
Assassins. For although the said Author of the Gloss, elsewhere tells us, That
the Pope is Papa cum prius esset Purus Homo, nunc Vices Very Dei^gerit. Johan.
Andreas, in Glossa ad Prooemium. 6. Decret. verbo Bonifacius.
more then a pure man; and Gods Viceroy; yet certainly, he cannot do
Impossibilities, and Excommunicate Mahometans and Infidels; unless he can turn
those out of the Christian Church, who never were, nor would be in it; and
deprive them of that Communion, which they never had. But although Pope
Innocent the Fourth (in the afore-mentioned Constitution) speaks only of the
Infidel and Mohammedan Assassins, and of those Christians who procure or hire
them to Murder Princes, and has nothing of any other, who are not of that
Mohammedan Society; though they undertake and act the same Villainies; yet those
Great and Learned Canonists and Writers of the Popish Church (before-named)
upon proportion and parity of Reason, justly Condemn all Christians who shall
undertake and effect, or endeavor such Assassinations. Of these Christian
Assassins, Cardinal Cajetan says -- Et hi non comprehenduntur sub Censura
dicta, quamvis digni sunt and Morte Temporaeli and Aeterna. Cajetan. Ibidem.
That though they be not comprehended under the Censures of that Constitution,
yet they Deserve both a Temporal and Eternal Death. And to the same purpose
Covarruvias tells us, (and he says it is the Common Opinion) Qui cum quolibet
Christiano aut Infideli, pecuniae data vel promissa pactionem inierit, de
homine Christiano occidendo, in ipso Mandatario, si ad actum proximum
processerit, ut per eum minime steterit; quin scelus peregerit, notant
puniendum fore poena Ordinaria; id est, Morte. D. Covarruvias, Part. 2. Relect.
Clem. Si furiosus, de Homicidio, de delictis and Conat. number. 9. Operum. Tom. 1.
p. 258. Col. 1.
That whosoever he be (Christian or Mohammedan) who for Money given or promised,
undertakes the Assassination of any Christian; in this Case, both the Mandans
and Mandatarius, both he that hires, and he who is hired to do such Villainy,
are highly guilty, and under the Censures, and the Severity of them: though he
who is hired, do not actually effect the Assassination, if he really endeavor
it. Nor is it only these I have named, who Damn this Impious, Mohammedan: and
Turkish Doctrine of Assassinating Kings and Princes. I believe, and (from good
Authority) know, that many thousands more in the Communion of the Church of
Rome do equally abhor and detest it, especially in France, where their Divines
and Parliaments (famous for Learning and their General Defense of the Liberties
of the Gallican Church, against the Usurpations and Tyranny of Rome) in the
year 1594. publicly Condemned this Mohammedan and Jesuitical Doctrine, and
declared it to be (what indeed it is) Hen. Carter. Davila in his Hist. of the
Civil Wars of France* ad Ann. 1594. in Calce istius Anni.
Heretical, Prodigious, and Diabolical.

4. But all this notwithstanding, the Jesuits (and others of their Party and
Principles) did, and do approve and practice that Diabolical Doctrine; and when
they conceive Princes to be Enemies to their Interest, or the Catholic Cause,
(as they call it) endeavor (by Lying Calumnies) to disaffect the People, and
to raise Rebellions against those Princes; that so they may cut them off, by
Public War and Seditions; and when this succeeds not, by private
Assassinations. This is (by sad Experience) notoriously known to our Western
World; as may appear by the Premises, and further Testimonies of their own
Roman Catholic Historians (in this Case) of Indubitable Truth and Veracity.
Thuanus tell us, Accedent ad hoc Sacri ordinis favore and quorundam
Religiosorum non segni Opera, and Jesuitarum Patrum Imprimis, qui fascinatum
per scrupulosas in Arcanis Confessionibus quaestiones, lebem sensim a Principis
obsequio alienatam, Ad Defectionem Sollicitabant. Thuanus Hist. Tom. 3. lib.
75. p. 561. A. B. Edit. 1620. and Tom. 4. l. 86. p. 170. ad Ann. 1587. And the
same excellent person (Thuanus) gives us this account of the Society of the
Jesuits. Nata Magistratum convellere, nata Ministris Subtrahere obsequium,
praesulibusque suum. Et viles Regnantum animas, ipsosque Necandos Horrenda
Regis proditione docet; Servandamque fidem Negat, argutisque cavillis Detorquet
magni jussa severa Dei. Hi sunt Ampliss. Praesidis Thuani versus de Jesuitarum
Secta, in Elegia sua eleganti in Parricidas, sub finem Sacrae Poeseos.
That in those Bloody Wars in France, in the Reign of Henry the Third; it was
some of the Religious and Regulars, especially the Jesuits, who by an
Industrious, and (I add) Impious Diligence, did first Alienate the People from
their Obedience to their Prince, and then solicited them to Rebellion. I know
that those words ( Ac Jesuitarum Patrum Imprimis) are not to be found in those
Editions of Thuanus we have, being left out by the Arts and Frauds of those who
corrupt all Authors who have any thing against their Errors or Impieties; but
we are assured that those words were in the Vide Thuanum Restitutum
Amstoladami. Ann. 1663. p. 49.
Original Copy of Thuanus his History. But when this would not do, and they saw
the King could not be cut off by a Rebellious War, and publicly; they persuade
and encourage Jaques Clement (a Desperate Villain) to Assassinate his Prince;
who August the First, 1589. did the Execrable Act, and Murdered his King.
Thuanus tells us, Thuanus Hist. Tom. 4. l. 95. p. 454. A. Facundis
Concionatorum Declamationibus, and Novitiorum, Theologorum, ac praecipue
Jesuitarum disputationibus, qui Tyrannum Impune occidere Licere affirmabant,
Incitatus Clemens, etc.
That Friar Clement was encouraged to Commit that Prodigious Parricide by the
furious Sermons and Declamations of their New Divines, Vide Thuanum Restitutum.
p. 84.
Especially of the Jesuits, who publicly taught them, That it was lawful, nay
Non solum inoffensa Conscientia facere posse, sed multum apud Deum Meriturum.
Thuanus dicto Tom. 4. and p. 454.
Meritorious to kill a Tyrant, and if he outlived the Fact, he should be a
Cardinal at Hen. Cart. Davila, in his Hist. of the Civil Wars in France, Lib.
10. ad Ann. 1589.
Rome; and if he died, a Si in actu Ipso moriatur, proculdubio inter Beatorum
choros animam ejus Evolaturam. Thuan. dicto Tom. 4. and p. 454. and Davila, l.
10. ad Ann. 1589.
Saint in Heaven. And accordingly when he was dead (by a Death he deserved) his
Party caused his Historical Collections of the most Memorable Accidents, and
Tragical Massacres in France, under Hen. 2. Francis. 2. Charles. 9. Hen. 3. and
Hen. 4. ad Ann. 1589. in the beginning of Hen. 4. and Thuan. Tom. 4. ad dictum
Ann. p. 458.
Picture to be cut in Brass, adorned their Churches and Chambers with it,
counted him a Saint and Martyr, and (as such) made their Addresses and Prayers
to him. Horrid Superstition and Popish blindness, not to put a vast difference
between a Martyr of Jesus Christ, and an Impious Traitor and Murderer of his
King. 2. After this, in the year 1594. Johan. Chastell undertakes and
endeavors the Assassination of Henry the Fourth of France, struck him in the
Mouth, but (the good Providence of Heaven protecting that Prince) did not
effect his Impious Design. Now if you ask, How any who pretends to be a
Christian, could have a Conscience so seared, or a Soul possessed with so
Prodigious an Insensibility, as not to tremble at the very thought of
Committing such a horrid and inhuman Villainy? Hen. Carter. Davila, in his
History of the Civil wars of France, lib. 14. ad Ann. 1594. sub sinem istius
Anni. See to the same purpose the Author of the Civil Wars of France under Hen.
2. Fran. 2. Charl. 9. Hen. 3. and Hen. 4. In Henry the Fourth, ad Ann. 1594. a
little before the end of that year.
Davila will tell you, That he was a Disciple of the Jesuits; That he himself
freely confessed, that he was bred up in the Schools of the Jesuits, and had
often heard it discoursed, and disputed, That it was not Only Lawful, but
Meritorious to Kill Henry of Bourbon, a Relapsed Heretic, and Persecutor of
the Holy Church; That Father Gueret a Jesuit, was his Confessor, etc. so that
being possessed with their Impious Principles and Persuasions, he undertook
that prodigious and damnable Parricide. In short, it was notoriously known to
all France, that the Jesuits both approved and designed the Execrable
Assassination of their King. Whence it was, (as Davila goes on) that the
Parliament of Paris passed this Sentence -- That Father Guignard and Gueret
(Jesuits) should be Condemned to the Gallows; that the rest of the Jesuits
(professed or not professed) should be banished out of France, as Enemies to
the Crown and public Tranquillity, their Goods and Revenues Jeiz'd and
distributed to pious Uses, etc. And it had been well for France had they stood
banished still, and never returned. For about Sixteen years after, what Johan.
Chastell impiously endeavored, that bloody Villain Raviliac, May the
Fourteenth, 1610. effected; and with Monstrous Impiety, and a Cursed hand
Murdered his King, Henry the Fourth; And it was the Jesuits, and their
Traitorous Principles, which moved and encouraged him to Commit that Monstrous
Unchristian and Antichristian Parricide. For (after the Fact was done) Raviliac
freely and publicly confessed, That it was the Jesuit Mariana's Book which
moved and encouraged him to that Impious Design. I know that the Jesuits did
then endeavor to See Father Cotton, the Jesuits Declaration, with the Bishop
of Paris his Preface prefixed to it, to this purpose.
free themselves from the Odium of that Impious Fact; as if they had neither
approved nor encouraged that Monstrous and Mohammedan Assassination. Sed quid
verba audiam, cum facta videam? This See Anti-Cotton by Peter Du Moulia.
was only a ridiculous endeavor, Aethiopem Lavare, to wash a Blackamore, and do
Impossibilities. It is evident, That their approved Doctrine and Principles in
Mariana, (and many others) was the Motive which induced Raviliac to Murder his
Prince. Which Doctrine has never been Condemned by any Public Act of their
Society, nor by the Inquisitors in any Index Expurgatorius; now for them to
approve those Traitorous Principles, and deny the Consequents of them, is most
irrationally to approve and grant the Premises, and yet deny the Conclusion.

5. But this (though bad enough) is not all. For it is not only the Jesuits
and their Accomplices, but the Pope too, (their Supreme Judge, thom they
Christus Petro and Successoribus Ecclesiae regimen Commisit, and Eandem quam
habebat Ipse, Infallibilit atem Concessit, quoties e Cathedra Loquerentur.
Datur, Ergo, in Romans Ecclesia, Controversiarum Fidei Judex Infallibilis, etiam
extra Concilium Generale, tum in Quaestionibus Juris, tum Facti. Haec erat
Thesis in Coll. Claromontano a Jesuitis proposita and exposita December. 12. Ann.
1661.
believe to be Infallible, both in Matters of Faith and Fact) who approved
their Seditious and Traitorous Principles of Rebellion and Assassination of
Princes. Thuanus speaking of the Jesuits Practices to stir up the People to
Rebellion in the time of Henry the Third of France; he adds -- Quae Omnia
Conscio Pontifice gerebantur, crebro Commeantibus ad eum Emissariis, qui Brevia
and occulta Diplomata ad partiu^ Duces adferebant, and indies magis plebem ad
seditionem incendebant. Vid. Thuanum Restitutum. p. 49.
That these things were well known to the Pope, who sent Breves and Bulls
secretly to the Heads of those Rebels, whereby they were encouraged to Rebel.
Afterward, when that Prodigious Villain Jaques Clement had Murdered the said
King, Sixtus Papa. 5. Oratione praemeditata. 3. Idus Sept. in Consistorio
habita, factum Clementis Operi Assumptae a Domino Carnis, and Resurrectionis,
propter magnitudinem, and rei administrationem comparat. Tum virtutem hominis,
animi Robur, and ferventem Erga Deum Amorem, supra Eleazarum and Juditham,
Multis verbis, Extollit, etc. Thuan's Hist. Tom. 4. li^. 95. ad Ann. 1589. p.
458. Edit. 1620.
Sixtus the Fifth then Pope, did not only approve the Fact, but (in a
premediated Oration, publicly spoke in the Consistory) blasphemously compares
it (in respect of its greatness and amiableness) to our blessed Saviors
Incarnation and Resurrection: and then highly Commends the Murderer (for his
Virtue, Courage, and Zealous Love of God) above Eleazar and Judith, etc. And
(to omit the rest) pronounces the Murdered King Eternally Damned, as having
Committed the Peccato in Spiritum Sanctum admisso, quale erat Regis peccatum.
Ibid. p. 458. E.
Sin against the Holy Ghost. This the Historian (though a Papist) modestly and
justly Censures, as a Fact Thuanus ibidem. Sum Insolens, and Pastoris
moderatione indignum.
Extremely Insolent and Unworthy the Moderation of a Pastor, (especially the
Supreme Pastor of the Church, Christ's Vicar, and St. Peter's Successor, as they
call him). And then he tells us of Anti-Sixtus, (or the Answer to Pope Sixtus
his Oration) and says, 1. That it had been more for the Supprimi potius quam
publieari, famae Sixti and Sanctae Sedis Interfuit. Ibidem.
Credit of the Pope and the Holy Apostolic Sea, that his Oration had been
suppressed, then (as it was by those of the League) Published. 2. That
Anti-Sixtus (or the Answer to it) though it was something sharp and bitter,
Responsio acerbior, sed fali Oratione prorsus Digna, in qua Multa Absurda and
Impia not antur. Ibidem.
yet the Popes Oration abundantly deserved it, in which were Many Things Absurd
and Impious. This was the Judgment of that Faithful and Excellent Historian,
(though a Papist) concerning the Erroneous and Impious Principles of the Pope
and Jesuits.

6. Nor is this all; For although, only privately to approve and encourage
Rebellion and Assassination of Kings and Princes, be an Execrable Villainy, to
be abhorred by all men (especially Christians) as being repugnant to that clear
Light of Nature and Scripture, to common Reason and Religion; yet in Public
Writings to vindicate and justify such Actions, to persuade the World, that
they are not only morally good, but meritorious: This argues a higher degree of
Impiety and Impudence. We know (by sad Experience) that many Pagans and
Christians have blasphemed their Gods, committed Adulteries, Murders,
Perjuries, etc. yet we do not find, that any Christians, (the Jesuits and
their Accomplices excepted) or any sober Pagan (who acknowledged a God) did
ever justify Blasphemy, Adultery, Murder, or Perjury; but when they were
Apprehended, Convict and brought to Execution, they would confess the Crime,
pray for Pardon, and desire others to pray for them. But the Jesuits (and
those possessed with their Principles) though they be Convict, and Legally
Condemned for Rebellion and Assassination of Princes, yet they neither do, nor
can repent; believing such Actions not to be any Vices, but Virtues; and
themselves (if they suffer for them) not Traitors or Murderers, but Holy
Martyrs. That this is their approved and received Doctrine, which they
publicly defend, and industriously (in their Public Writings) endeavor to
justify, is evident to the Western World, and may appear by the Premises. Yet
being a thing of such great concern, (omitting Mariana, Emanuel Sa,
Sanctarellus, and others before mentioned) I shall only add Two or Three
Eminent Testimonies, in further confirmation of it. First then, Fran. Fran.
Suarez in Defens. Fidei Cathol. adversus Angl. Sectae Errores cum Respons^d
Apolog. Jacobi Regis, and (...), Agrip. 1614. l. 6. c. 4. page 814. etc.
Suarez, Public and Prime Professor of Divinity in the University of Conimbra
in Portugal, handling that Point, how, and in what Cases a Tyrant may, (by any
private Person) be Murdered: And having told us, that a Tyrant was either, 1.
Tyrannus Tyrannus tit^lo, qui vi, and injuste Regnu^^ occupat, qui Revera Rex
non est, sed locum illi^^ occupat. Ibid.. 1.
Titulo; one who, (without any just Title) usurped the Government, to the ruin
of the Commonweal. 2. Tyrannus Qui licet justo Titulo Regnum possideat, quoad
usum tamen and gubernationem, Tyrannice regnat. Ibid.
Administratione; one who having a just Title, ruled Tyrannically. And he there
tells us, That all Christian Inter Christianos, Maxim est numerandus in hoc
Ordine Princeps, qui Subditos suos in Haeresi^, aut aliud Apostasiae genus, aut
Schisma inducit. Ibid.. 2. p. 811. Col. 1.
Kings are such Tyrants, who induce their Subjects to Heresy, Apostasy, or
Schism. So that all Protestant Princes (we may be sure) are such Tyrants,
though he there name only King James of happy Memory. Having Premised this, he
gives the state of the Question: Thus,

1. He does (in the General) give us two Cases, wherein it is Lawful for a
Subject to kill his King. 1. In defense of his Si defensio sit propriae vitae,
quam Rex violenter auferre aggreditur, tunc quidem Ordinary licebit Subdito,
seipsum defendere, etiamsi Mors Principis sequatur, quia jus tuendae vitae est
Maximum, etc. Ibid. p. 815. B.
own Life. If a King invade Sempronius to kill him, he may, in defense of his
own life, take away the Kings. 2. In defense of the St Rex Actu aggrediatur
Civitatem, ut Cives perdat, etc. tunc certe licebit Principi resistere, Etiam
Occidere Illum, si aliter fieri defensio, etc. Ibid.. 6. C. Tunc enim Civitas
habet justum bellum defensivum, Contra Injustum Invasorem, Etiamsi Proprius Rex
sit. Ibidem. D.
Commonwealth. This in the General. But then

2. For a Tyrant in Title, he absolutely declares it, as a thing Communiter
asseritur Tyrannum quoad Titulum, Interfici posse, a Quacunque privata Persona,
quae sit Membrum Reipubl. quae Tyrannidem patitur, etc. Ibid.. 7. F.
commonly received amongst them; That such a Tyrant may be lawfully killed, by
Any Private Person, who is a Member of that Commonwealth, if there be no other
Means to free it from such a Tyranny. And least it should not be observed, it is
set in the Tyrannus in Titulo Licite Occiditur. Ibidem.. 7. Ma^gine.
Margent, That such a Tyrant may Lawfully be killed. So that the Case is (with
him) out of all doubt, That any private man may kill a Tyrant in Title; and the
Pope is Judge who is such a Tyrant. Whence it evidently follows, That no
Princes can have any Security (as to the Preservation of their Kingdoms or
Lives) longer then they please the Pope. For if he declare any of them Tyrants,
(as many times, with Execrable Pride and Impiety, he has done) Excommunicate
and Depose them; then by this Jesuitical and Papal Doctrine, any Private
Person, (any of their Subjects especially) may Assassinate and Murder them.

3. For those Princes who have a just Title to their Dominions, and are (as
they call them) Tyrants not in Title, but in their Injustice and Impious
Government: He tells us, 1. That Inter Christianos Maxim in hoc Ordine
(Tyrannorum ex Administratione Tyranniea) numerandus est Princeps, qui Subditos
in Haeresia aut aliud Apostaesiae Genus, aut publicum Schisma Inducit. Ibid. c.
4.. 1.
all Protestant Princes being Heretics are such Tyrants. 2. That being
Heretics, they are by their Rex Haereticus Statim per Haeresin ipso Facto
privatur, Aliquo Modo, proprietate and Dominio Regni sui. Ibid c. 4.. 14. p.
819.
Heresy, Ipso facto, and presently deprived (aliquo modo) in some manner, of
all Right to their Dominions. 3. That the Pope (as their In summo Pontisice est
haec potestas tanquam In Superiori habente Jurisdictionem ad Corripiendum
Reges, etiam Supremos, tanquam Sibi Subditos, etc. Ibidem.
Superior, to whom even Supreme Princes are Subjects) may totally and
absolutely depose and deprive them of all their Dominions and right to Govern.
4. When the Pope has passed such Sentence, and deprived them of their
Dominions; if afterward they meddle with the Government, they become every Si
Rex post depositionem Legitimam, in sua pertinacia perseverans, Regnum per vim
retineat, incipit esse Tyrannus in Titulo, quia non est Legitimus Rex, nec
justo Titulo Regnum possidet. Ibidem.
way Tyrants (both Titulo and Administratione). And then, 5. After such Ergo
Extunc poterit Rex tanquam Omnino Tyrannus Tractari; and Consequenter A
Quocunque Privato Poterit Interfici. Ibidem. p. 819. B.
Sentence passed by the Pope, such Kings or Supreme Princes may be dealt with,
as Altogether, and Every Way Tyrants, and Consequently may be killed by Any
Private Person.

4. And though these be Prodigious Errors, Unchristian, and indeed
Antichristian Impieties; such as neither ours, nor any Language can fully
express; yet this is not all: The Jesuit further declares, That though
Respubli^^^ prout inter Gentiles, and hunc inter Ethnicos) habet potestatem, se
defendendi a Rege Tyranno, and illum deponendi si necessarium fuerit, etc.
Ibid.. 17. p. 820. A.
Pagans anciently had, and still have Power, to Depose their Tyrannical Kings;
yet in Christian Commonwealths, they have such dependence upon the Regna
Christiana quoad hoc (scilicet depositionem Regum suorum) habent dependentiam
and subordinationem ad Pontificem Romanum; qui potest Regno praecipere, ut se
Inconsulto, Regem non deponat, nisi prius Causa and Ratione Ab Ipso Cognita
propter pericula, and Animarum dispendia, quae in his Tumultibus popularibus
Interveniunt. Ibid. A.
Pope, that without his Knowledge and Authority, they should not depose their
King: For he may Command and Prohibit the People to do it. And he gives
Instances, when People have consulted the Popes, and by their Counsel and
Consent Deposed their Kings. So (he says) Ibidem. p. 820. C.
Chilperick was Deposed in France, and Sancius Secundus in Portugal. And (to
make up their Errors and Impieties full) he further tells us, -- Pendet Regnum
Christianum a Pontifice in hoc, ut posset Pont. non solum Consulere, aut
Consentire, ut Regem sibi perniciosum deponat, sed etiam Praecipere, and Cogere
ut id faciat, praesertim cum ad vitandas Haereses and Schismata necessarium
esse Judicaverit. Suarez. Ibid. p. 820. B. C.
That all Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths do so far depend upon the Pope,
that he may not only Counsel the People, and Consent to their Deposition and
Assassination of their Tyrannical Princes; But he may Command and Compel them
to do it, when he shall think it sit, for avoiding Schisms and Heresies: That
is indeed, for the rooting out and ruin of the true Protestant Religion, and
establishing their Roman Superstition and Idolatry. And to conclude, he further
declares, That (in such Cases) the Popes Command (to Murder a Deposed King) is
so far from being any Crime, that it is Quia tale praeceptum in illo Casu
Justissimum est. Idem Ibidem.
Superlatively Just. I might here cite Cardinal Instruct. Sacerd. l. 5. c. 6..
17. p. 738.
Tolet, Guliel. G. Rossaeus de Justa Reipub Christiana in Impios, etc.
Authoritate. Cap. 3.
Rossaeus, and a hundred such others, who approve, and in their Publicks
Writings (Approved and Licenced, according to the Decree of their Conc.
Trident. Sess. 4. in Decreto de Editione and usu Sacrorum librorum.
Trent Council, by the Auhority of their Church) justify this Impious and
Antichristian Doctrine of Deposing and Assassinating Heretical Kings: but this
I conceive a needless work. For, 1. Suarez himself declares it to be the
received Doctrine of their Church, and cites many of their Eminent Writers to
prove it; which, any may see, who is not satisfied with those before cited. 2.
The Licencers of Suarez and his Book are (for Dignity in their Church and for
Learning) so great, and (for Number) so many, and the Commendations they give
Suarez and his Work so high, that there neither is, nor can be any just Reason
to doubt, but this Doctrine was approved at Rome, and by the Ruling part of
that Church (the Pope and his Party) believed and encouraged, as a Doctrine
asserting the Popes Extravagant, and (as they call it) Supernatural Firmis and
Inconcussis Argumentis Potestatem Summi Pontificis Supernaturalem tuetur. Ita
in Censura Illust. D. D. Alphon. A Mello, Epis. Lamecensis, Suaresij Libro
praefixa.
Power, and so their Common Interest. Let the Reader consult the Censures
prefixed to Suarez his Book, and he will find all these following to Approve
and License it. First, Three great Bishops, all of them Counselors to his
Catholic Majesty. 2. Two Provincials of the Society; one of the Jesuits in
Portugal, the other of those in Germany. 3. Academia, Complutensis, the
University of Alcala de Henares approves it too. 4. Last^^ the Facultas Supremi
Senatus S. Inquisitionis.
Supreme Senate (Court or Congregation) of the Inquisitors, do also approve and
license it, and this they do by Ex Commissione Illustrissimi Episcopi, D. Petri
de Castillo, Lusit aniae Proregis, and Supremi in rebus Fidei Inquisitoris. In
Censura Alphonsi a Castello, Episc. Conimbricensis, a Consiliis Catholicae
Majestati.
Commission from Peter de Castello, Viceroy of Portugal, and in Matters of
Faith Supreme inquisitor. The Premises impartially considered, I think we may
truly say, That it is not only Suarez, or some particular or private Persons,
but the Church of Rome, and her Ruling part, which approves this Impious and
Traiterous Doctrine: Which may further appear (besides their Approbations and
Licenses) from the great Commendations they give Suarez and his Book and
Doctrine. And here

1. For Suarez; They say, Humanarum rerum Religiosus Contemptor, and Vnius
Pietatis and Religionis fortissimus Defensor, and propter Eximiam Sapientiam,
Communis hujus aetatis Magister, and Alter Augustinus.
That he was a Contemner of Humane things, and a most Valiant Desender only of
Piety and Catholic Religion: And (for his Excellent Wisdom) the Common Master,
and another Augustine of that Age. -- That for his great Zeal for the Catholic
Faith, he was a most Famous Author, and a most Eminent Divine. That he was a
Religiosissimus juxta ac Gravissimus Auctor, cujus Ingenii monumenta, Orbis
Suspicit, Miratur, Amat.
Most Grave, and most Religious Writer; whose Works the World, ( the Popish
World) does Honor, Admire, and Love, etc.

2. And for his Book, and the Doctrine contained in it, They say, That all In
qua non Solum S. Scripturae Authoritati Omnia Religiose Consonant, Apostolicis
traditionibus Pic Correspondent, Oecumenicis Conciliis, summerum Pontificum
Decretis erudite consentium.
things in his Book, are Religiously Consonant to Sacred Scripture, to
Apostolical Traditions, General Councils, and Papal Decrees; (this last we
admit, and they profess it to be true). And hence, if they may be believed, who
expressly affirm it themselves, it evidently follows, That this Traitorous
Doctrine is approved by the Pope, and is Consonant to his Decrees. And those
Public Censors of Suarez his Book severally add; That they find Qua in
defensione Nihil Plane offendi, quod Fidem Offendat, quae vero defendant,
Inveni Multa. So it is in the Censure of Ferdinand Martinez Counselor to his
Catholic Majesty.
Nothing (and therefore not the Assassinations of Kings) in it, against the
Orthodox Faith, (the Roman Faith they mean) but many things which do defend the
Faith. The University of Alcala de Librum Suaresij quanta potuimus diligentia,
evolvimus, in quo opere Nihil veritate Catholicae fidei Alienum, Nihil devium,
Nihil dissonum deprehenditur: Nihil quod probari loudarique non debeat. Denique
Nihil a Nostro Omnium Sensu discordans, cum hac in re, sit Omnium nostrum Eadem
vox, Idem Animus, Eademque Sententia.
Henares (to omit the rest) more fully testifies -- That they read Suarez his
Book with all possible Diligence, and found Nothing in it repugnant to the
Catholic Faith; nor was there Any Thing in it which ought not to be Approved
and Commended. And then add, (that we may be sure they spoke cordially and
deliberately) That there was Nothing in that whole Work, which All of them did
not approve; so that they were All of the same Mind and Judgment. Nay, we are
further told, That he had Composed that Work, by Plusquam Humano Studio. In
Censura Alphon. A Castello, Epis. Conimbricensis.
More then Human Helps; and therefore they Judge it Dignissimum ut in Lucem
eat, ad Fidei Nostrae Victoriam De Haeresibus Insignem, and totius Orbis
Christiani Publicam and Communem utilitatem. In Censura Illustris. D. D.
Alphons. A Mello. Episc. Lamec. A Consiliis Cathol. Majestati.
Most Worthy to be Published, for the Public, and Common Benesit of the Whole
Christian World, and a Signal Victory of their Faith over Heresies. Such are
the Commendations of Suarez his Book and Doctrine; so that we may be sure that
it is Approved and Received at Rome.

And here let me further add, that when King James had Published his Apology
for the Oath of Allegiance, and Sir Henry Savil Translated it into Latin; the
Latin Copy was (by the Popish Party) immediately sent to Rome, and (by the
Pope) By Pope Paul. 5. who in his damnatory Breve, says -- Juramentum illud,
salva fide Catholica, and Salute Animarum, praestari non potest; cum Multa
Contineat, quae fidei saluti Aperte Adversantur. Vide Remonstrant. Hibernorum,
pe R. Caron. 1 p. 9.
Condemned there, as Impious and Heretical: From Rome it was sent to Suarez,
who (by the Popes Command) was to Confute and Answer it. He undertook and
finished the Answer, sent it to Rome, where it was highly approved, and
afterward Printed and Published with all those Approbations and Commendations
before mentioned. But these Positions need no further proof, that they are
owned and publicly approved by the Pope and his Party. I shall only add; When
King In Apolog. pro Juramento fidelitatis.
James had charged Bellarmine and the Church of Rome, with this Rebellious and
Impious Doctrine, of deposing Kings, absolving Subjects from all Oaths of
Allegiance and Fidelity, etc. In Commentario Exegetico contra Jac. Regem.
Ingolstadij, An. 1610.
Gretser in his Answer, has these memorable words -- Non diffitemur, sed Libere
Profitemur, quod Papa, suppetente legitima Causa possit, Principes
Excommunicare, Deponere, Subditos a Juramento Fidelitatis Exsolvere, etc.
Gretser Ibid. p. 255.
We do not deny, (says he) but freely Profess, that the Pope, upon just cause,
(and he is Judge of that) may Excommunicate and Depose Princes, and Absolve
their Subjects, from their Oath of Allegiance. And then he adds -- Subditi in
Conscientia tenentur stare Sententiae Pontificis. Ibidem.
That the Subjects are bound in Conscience to Obey the Popes Sentence; not only
in the Cases mentioned, But in Et si qui sint Alij Casus Hujus Generis. Ibid.
All other of the like Nature. And this impious and traitorous Doctrine of
Gretser, is not only approved by Ibidem. p. 11. Apolog. Jac. Gretseri, Romae, a
Deputatis ad id Theologis lectam and approbatam, ego quoque Theod. Bu^aeus
Approbo, etc.
the Provincial of the Jesuits in Germany, and the Rector and Vice Chancellor
of the University of Ingolstade; but his whole Book (and so those mentioned,
and many more such Rebellious and Impious Positions) Was Approved at Rome, by
the Suffrage of Most Learned Divines. This the said Provincial of the Jesuits,
and the Hunc Librum Jac. Gretseri, Doctissimorum Theologorum Suffragiis Romae
Approbatum, ego itidem Approbo, ut quamprimum, Antipharmaci loco, sparsis ex
Britannia Venenis, opponatur, opto ego Petrus Steuartius, Academiae
Ingolstadiensis Pro-Cancellarius, and hoc tempore Rector. Ibid. p. 12.
Rector of the University of Ingolstade expressly testify, in their Public and
Printed Approbations of Gretsers Book. The Premises, and Traitorous Popish
Principles considered, (which are received and believed at Rome) though men may
Rev. 13. 3.
wonder at the Beast, (the Pope and his Party) and that any, (who would not
only be thought Christians, but the only Catholics in the World) should
maintain, and publicly justify such Principles: yet we need not wonder, that
such Persons should practice and act according to such Principles, and
continually endeavor (especially after the Anathema of Pius the Fifth) by
Rebellions at home, and Invasions from abroad, to rob Queen Elizabeth of her
Crown and Kingdoms, and of her Life too, by Roman and Mohammedan Assassinations.
I say, we need not wonder at this. For let the aforesaid Doctrines (which they
approve and constantly contend for) be granted, ( That the Pope is Supreme
Judge and Monarch of the World (direct or indirecte) that all Kings and
Emperors are His Subjects, that he has Power to Depose and Deprive them of
their Kingdoms, that when he has Judicially deprived them, any Private Person
may Murder them; that he has Power to Absolve their Subjects from all
Obligations and Oaths of Allegiance, and to Command them, upon pain of an
Anathema never to obey any of their Princes Laws or Commands; that the People
may depose their King, with His Consent and Counsel; and that he may Command
and Compel them to do it; and this so Potest Pontifex non solum Consulere, aut
Consentire, ut Regnum Regem suum sibi perniciosum Deponat; sed etiam
Praecipere, and Cogere, ut id Faciat; quando Saluti Spirituali Regni, and
praesertim ad vitandas Haereses necessarium esse Papa Judicaverit. Suarez
dicto. l. 6. cap. 4. p. 820. B. C. This place is before cited, but that the
Reader may not be troubled to look back for it, I have again put it here. Where
in the Margent, (which I before omitted) Suarez cites others, (to show he was
not singular in this Opinion) Azorius, Tom. 3. l. 2. c. 7. Quaest. 30. A
Castro, lib. 2. De justa Haereticorum Punitione; cap. 14. vid. Hist.
Conciliorum General. per Ed. Richerium Doctorem Sorbonicum, lib. 1. cap. 13..
3. p. 398. Colon. 1680. where he acknowledges that Bellarmine, Suarez, Becanus,
and the Jesuits maintain this Doctrine of Deposing and killing Kings --
Jesuitae non modo docent, Papam habere potestatem Regum Abdicandorum verum
etiam and Capite Puniendorum in Officio Sacrae Inquisitionis, ut vocant, etc.
And the same Sorbon Doctor, Ibidem. cap. 8.. 13. page 191. tells us, that it is
the Jesuits Doctrine; Licere Pontifici Reges sibi immorigeros, hand aliter
Abdicare, quam Paster Canes, quos minus habet ad manus, Occidere. And that it
is their Practice, to accuse those Princes who do not please them, to the
People, of Tyranny, Schism or Heresy, Hacque via Illos tanquam arietes, aut
Canes Furiosos, Parricidis mactandos Exponere.
often as he shall Think it Good for the Spiritual Health of the Kingdom.
(Prodigious Error and Impiety! as if Rebellion, Assassinations and Murdering
their Kings, conduced to the Salvation of the Subjects.) I say, these Erroneous
and Impious Doctrines granted, and (as they are at Rome) believed, it is
certain, that (so far as they have opportunity and ability) they will (as they
ever have done) prosecute their Interest, and practice according to those
Principles; and all Christian Kings will be in perpetual danger to loose their
Crowns, their Kingdoms, and their Lives too; unless they can please the Pope,
and become his dutiful Servants, and indeed Slaves to his Antichristian
Tyranny. I say no Christian King, Tros Tyriusve, Papist or Protestant can be
out of eminent Danger, where such Doctrine is, by such Doctors maintained. We
have sad and certain Instances of this Truth: For, 1. Henry the Third and
Fourth of France were neither Calvinists nor Lutherans, but declared Sons of
the Roman Synagogue; yet because they did not Comply with the Popish Interest,
in that degree and measure, the Pope and his Party expected, they fatally fell
by the Traitorous and Prodigious Villainy of bloody Assassins, Ridente and
gaudente Roma; The Pope and his Jesuitical Party, (with an Ecstasy of Joy)
Approving and Commending the Treason, and (in their Writings and Pictures)
Canonizing the Traitors. 2. For Protestants, and (as they call them) Heretical
Princes, their danger (proportionable to Romes hatred of them) is greater. They
may (by the Power and Gracious Providence of God) want ability, but they
neither do, nor (unless they renounce their Erroneous and Impious Principles)
ever will want a desire and endeavor to ruin those they call Heretics,
either by open Hostility and Rebellions, or by Poison, Pistols, and private
Assassinations. Their many known Plots and Conspiracies against Queen
Elizabeth, King James, Charles the Martyr, and his Gracious Majesty now
Reigning, (whom God preserve) are undeniable Demonstrations of this Truth. The
Ark of God and Dagon, Light and Darkness, Truth and Error, the Bible and Popish
Bullary, Protestancy and Popery cannot possibly Consist, and be in Peace.
Nothing is (or can be) so destructive of Darkness and Error, as Truth and
Light; And it is evidently known to this Western World, That the Evangelical
Light and Truth, which the Protestants have haphily and clearly discovered, to
the long deluded Church of God, have awakened thousands, to a detestation of
that Superstition and Idolatry, under which they formerly lay, to the dishonor
of God, and ruin of their Souls, and to a shaking and great diminution of the
Papal Monarchy and Tyranny; so many Kingdoms forsaking Rome, and shaking off
the Heavy and Intolerable Yoke of Sin and Popish Servitude. Et hinc illae
Lacrymae; Hence it is, that the Pope, and his enraged Party, when they cannot,
by any probable pretense of Reason confute, what they call Heresy, (the
Protestant Religion) they endeavor to Confound and (by Fire and Sword) Consume
the Heretics -- Aeterna bella, pace sublata, gerunt, Jurant odium, nec prius
hosts esse desinunt, quam esse desinunt. They excite and encourage This is
evident (to omit others) by the Bull of Pope Paul the Third, wherein King Hen.
8. is Excommunicated and Deposed. For in that Bull having declared that King an
Heretic and deposed him; he commands all Christian Princes (Kings or Emperor)
to take Arms against K. Henry and his Adherents -- Insuper, tam Principes,
praedictos (quacunque etiam Imperiali aut Regali dignitate fulgentes.. 15.)
quam quoscunque alios, etiam ad stipendia quorumcunque Christi fidelium
militantes and alias quascunque personas, tam Per Mare quam Per Terras,
Armigeros habentes, eis Mandantes, ut contra Henricum Regem, eique adhaerentes,
dum in erroribus adversus Sedem praedictum permanserint, Armis Insurgant,
eosque and eorum singulos Persequantur, etc. And then (such is his liberality)
he gives those Soldiers all the Goods of those Anathematized Heretics,
wherever they can find them -- Eorumque Bona, Mobilia, and Immobilia,
Mercantias, Navigia, Credita, Res, and Animalia, etiam extra territorium
Henrici Regis, Vbi Libet Consistentia, Capiant, etc. Vide Pauli Papae. 3.
Constit. 7. datum Romae, December. 17. Ann. Dom. 1538. Pontificatus sui, Ann. 5.
In Bullario Romano, Romae 1638. Tom. 1. p. 516. Col. 2.. 16.
Princes of their Profession, to persecute and destroy all Protestants in their
Dominions; and their barbarous and bloody Poet has told us, how they desire it
to be done; Vtere Jure Tuo Caesar, Sectamque Lutheri
Ense, Rota, Ponto, Funibus, Igne neca.


Use thy Power Caesar, let Lutherans be slain,
By Fire, Rack, Halter, Sword, or drowned in the Maine.
DAMNATIO ET EXCOMMUNICATIO Henrici VIII. REGIS ANGLIAE EJUSQUE FAUTORUM, Cum
aliarum ADJECTIONE POENARUM.
Paulus Episcopus, Servus Servorum Dei. Aeditae. A. D. 1535. and 1538.

Ad futuram Rei Memoriam.
EJVS qui immobilis permanens, sua Providentia, Ordine mirabili dat cuncta
moveri, disponente Clementia, vices, licet immeriti gentes in Terris, and in
Sede Justitiae Constituti, juxta quoque Prophetae Hieremiae vaticinium Ecce Te
Constitui super Gentes, Exordium.
and Regna, ut evellas, and destruas, aedisices, plants, praecipuum super
Omnes Reges Vniversae Terrae, cunctosque populos obtinentes Principatum, ac
illum qui pius, and misericors est, and vindictam ei, qui illam praevenit
paratam temperat, nec quos Impoenitentes videt severa ultione Castigat, quin
prius Comminetur, in assidue autem peccantes, and in peccatis perseverantes,
cum Excessus Misericordiae sines praeteriunt, ut saltem metu poenae ad Cor
reverti cogantur, Justitiae vires Exercet, imitantes, and Incumbenti Nobis
Apostolicae solicitudinis studio perurgemur, ut cunctarum Personarum nostrae
Curae Coelitus Commissarum salubri Statui solertius Intendamus, ac Erroribus,
and Scandalis, quae hostis Antiqut versutia imminere conspicimus, propensius
obviemus, Excessusque, and Enormia, ac scandalosa Crimina congrua severitate
Coerceamus, and juxta Apostolum inobedientiam ovium promptius ulciscendo,
illorum perpetratores debita Correctione si Compescamus, quod eos Dei iram
provocasse poeniteat, and ex hoc aliis Exemplum Cautelae salutaris accedat.

Sect. Henticus postquam a Leone decimo Titulo Defensoris Fidei donatus fuit,
ex Causa hic expressa, a Catholica side deviavit, and multa enorm^a commisit.
1. Sane cum Superioribus Diebus nobis relatum fuisset, quod Angliae Rex, licet
Tempore Pontisicatus Fell. recor. Leonis Papae decimi Praedecessoris nostri
diversorum Haereticorum Errores saepe ab Apostolica Sede, and Sacris Conciliis
praeteritis Temporibus damnatos, and novissime Nostra Aetate per Perditionis
Alumnum Martinum Lutherum suscitatos, and innovatos, Zelo Catholicae Fidei, and
Erga dictam Sedem, devotionis servore inductus, non minus docte, quam pie per
quendam Librum per eum desuper Compositum and eidem Leoni Praedecessori, ut eum
Examinaret, approbaret, oblatum Confutasset, ob quod, ab eodem Leone
Predecessore, Vltra dicti Libri cum magna Ipsius Henrici Regis Laud and
Commendatione, approbationem, Titulum Defensoris Fidei reportaverit, a recta
Fide and Apostolico tramite devians, ac propriae salutis, famae and honoris
immemor, Postquam Carissima in Christo Filia nostra Catherina Angliae Regina,
Illustri sua Progeny Conjuge, cum qua public in facie Ecclesiae Matrimonium
Contraxerat, and per plures Annos Continuaverat, ac ex qua, dicto constante
Matrimonio prolem pluries susceperat, nulla Legitima subsistente Causa, and
contra Ecclesiae Prohibitionem dimissa, cum quadam Anna Bolena, Muliere
Anglica, dicta Catherina adhuc vivente, de facto Matrimonium Contraxerat, ad
deteriora prosiliens, quasdam Leges, seu Generales Constitutiones edere, non
erubuit, per quas, subditos suos ad quosdam Haereticos, and Schismaticos
Articulos tenendos; Inter quos and hoc erat, quod Romanus Pontifex Caput
Ecclesiae, and Christi Vicarius non erat, and quod ipse in Anglica Ecclesia
Supremum Caput Existebat, sub Gravibus etiam mortis poenis cogebat. Et his non
Contentus, Diabolo Sacrilegij Crimen suadente, quamplures Praelatos etiam
Episcopos, aliasque Personas Ecclesiasticas, etiam Regulares, necnon Seculares
sibi ut Haeretico, and Schismatico adhaerere, ac Articulos praedictos sanctorum
Patrum decretis, and sanctorum Conciliorum statutis, immo etiam Ipsi
Evangelicae veritati contrarios, tanquam tales alios damnaros approbare, and
sequi nolentes, and intrepide recusantes capi, and carceribus mancipari. Hisque
similiter non Contentus, mala malis accumulando, bonae mem. Jo. H. S. vitalis
Presbyter Cardinalis Roffen. quem ob Fidei Constantiam, and vitae sanctimoniam,
ad Cardinalatus Dignitatem promoveramus, cum dictis Haersibus and Erroribus
consentire nollet, horrenda immanite and deterstanda saevitia, public
Miserabili supplicio tradi, and decollari mandaverat, and secerat
Excommunicationis, and Anathematis, aliasque gravissimas sententias, censuras,
and poenas in Literis, ac Constitutionibus recolendae mem. Bonifacij Octavi,
Honorij Tertij, Roman. Pontificum Praedecessorum Nostrorum desuper Editis
Contentas, and alias in tales a jure latas damnabiliter incurrendo ac Regno
Angliae, and Dominiis, quae tenebat, necnon Regalis fastigiis Celstudine, ac
praefati Tituli praerogativa, and honor se Indignum reddendo.

Sect. ^^emen. 7. (ejus Constit. hic non habes) tandem illum Excommunicavit,
quin in Censuris insordescendo deterior evasit.
2. Nos licet ex eo, quod prout non Ignorabamus, Idem Henricus Rex in Certis
Censuris Ecclesiasticis quibus a Piae Memoriae Clemente Papa Septimi etiam
Praedecessore nestro, postquam humanissimis literis, and paternis
Exhortationibus, multisque Nunciis, and mediis, Primo and Postremo, etiam
Judicialiter, ut praefatam Annam a se dimitteret, and ad Praedictae Catherinae
suae verae Conjugis Consortium rediret srustra monitus fuerat, innodatus
Extiterat, Pharaonis duritiam imitando, per Longum Tempus in Clavium Contemptum
Insorduerat, and Insordescebat, quod ad Cor rediret vix sperare posse videremus
ob Paternam tamen Charitatem, qua in minoribus Constituti donec in Obedientia,
and Reverentia Sedis praedictae permansit, eum prosecuti sueramus, utque
clarius videre dear Possemus, an Clamor qui ad nos delatus fuerat (quam certe
etiam Ipsius Henerici Respectum falsum esse disiderabamus) verus esset,
statuimus ab ulteriori contra Ipsum Henricum Regem processu ad Tempus
abstinendo, hujus Rei veritatem diligentius Indagare.

Sect. Ideo Pont. Iste contra Regem, Accomplices, and Fautores decrevit,
procedere, ut hic.
3. Cum autem debitis diligentiis desuper factis clamorem ad Nos, ut
praefertur, delatum, verum esse, simulque, quod dolenter referimus, dictum
Henricum Regem ita in Profundum malorum descendisse, ut de Ejus Recipiscentia
nulla penitus videatur spes haberi posse, reperimus. Nos attendentes veteri
Lege Crimen Adulterij notatum, lapidari Mandatum, ac Auctores Schismatis hiatu
terrae absorptos, eorumque sequaces Coelesti Igne Consumptos, Elimamque Magum
viis Domini Resistentem per Apostolum Aeterna severitate damnatum suisse,
volentesque ne in districto Examine Ipsius Henrici Regis and Subditorum suorum,
quos secum in Perditione trahere videmus, Animarum Ratio a Nobis Exposcatur,
quantum Nobis ex alto conceditur providere contra Henricum Regem, Ejusque
Accomplices, Fautores, Adbaerentes and sequaces; and in Praemissis quomodolibet
culpabiles, contra quos, ex eo quod Excessus, and delicta praedicta adeo
manisesta sunt, notiora, ut nulla possint tergiversatione celari absque
ulteriori mora ad Executionem procedere Possemus, benignius agendo, decrevimus
infrascripto modo procedere.

Sect. Regem itaque hortatur, ut ab hujusmodi erroribus desistat.
4. Habita itaque super his cum venerabilibus Fatribus Nostris S. R. E.
Cardinalibus deliberatione matura, and de Illorum Consilio, and Assensu
praefatum Henricum Regem, Ejusque Accomplices, Fautores, Adhaerentes, Consultores
and Sequaces, ac quoscunque alios in Praemissis, seu eorum aliquo quoquomodo
Culpabiles, tam Laicos, quam Clericos, etiam Regulares, cujuscunque Dignitatis,
Status, Gradus, Ordinis, Conditionis, Praeeminentiae, and Excellentiae existant
(quorum Nomina, and Cognomina perinde ac si Praesentibus Intersererentur, pro
sufficienter expressis haberi volumus) per viscera Misericordiae Dei Nostri
hortamur, and requirimus in Domino, quatenus Henricus Rex a praedictis
Erroribus prorsus abstineat, and Constitutiones, seu Leges praedictas, sicut
defacto eas fecit, revocet, Casset, and annullet, and Coactione Subditorum
suorum ad eas Servandas, necnon Carceratione, Captura, and Punitione illorum,
qui ipsis Constitutionibus. seu Legibus Adhaerere, aut eas servare noluerint,
and ab aliis Erroribus praedictis penitus, and Omnino abstineat, and si quos
Praemissorum occasion Captivos habeat, relaxet.

Sect. Accomplices vero and Fautores monet ut abstineant Regi desuper favere, vel
adhaerere.
5. Accomplices vero, Fautores, Adhaerentes, and Sequaces dicti Henrici Regis in
praemissis, and circa ea Ipsi Henrico Regi super his de cetero non adsistant,
nec adhaereant, vel faveant, nec ei Consilium, Auxilium, vel Favorem, desuper
praestent.

Sect. Inobedientesque Majoris Excommunicationis sententia innodat.
6. Alias si Henricus Rex, ac Fautores, Adhaerentes, Consultores, and Sequaces
hortationibus, and requisitionibus hujusmodi modi non audiverint cum Effectu,
Henricum Regem, Fautores, Adhaerentes, Consultores and Sequaces, ac alios
Culpabiles praedictos, Authoritate Apostolica, ac ex certa nostra Scientia, and
de Apostolicae Potestatis Plenitudine tenore Praesentium in virtute Sanctae
Obedientiae, ac sub Majoris Excommunicationis Latae Setentiae, a qua etiam
praetextu cujuscunque Privilegij, vel facultatis, etiam in forma
Confessionalis, cum quibuscunque efficacissimis Clausulis a Nobis, and Sede
praedicta quomodolibet Concessis, etiam iteratis vicibus innovatis, ab alio
quam a Romano Pontifice, praeterquam in mortis Arliculo Constituti, ita tamen,
quod si aliquem absolvi contingat, qui postmodum Convaluerit, nisi post
Convalescentiam, Monitioni, and Mandatis nostris hujusmodi paruerit cum
Effectu, in eandem Excommunicationis Sententiam reincidat) absolvi non possint.

Sect. Rebellionis quoque, and Amissionis Regni poenam Imponit. Regemque and
Accomplices monet, uc infra, certum Terminum Compareat alioquin in poenas hic
expressas incidisse declarat.
7. Necnon Rebellionis, and quoad Henricum Regem, etiam Perditionis Regni, and
Dominiorum Praedictorum, and tam quoad eum, quam quoad alios Monitos
supradictos, supra and infra scriptis poenis, quas si dictis Monitione and
Mandatis, ut praefertur, non paruerint, eos, and eorum singulos, Ipso facto
respective incurrere volumus, per Praesentes Monemus; eisque, and eorum
cuilibet districte praecipiendo Mandamus, quatenus Henricus Rex per se, vel
Procuratorem Legitimum, and sufficienti Mandato suffultum, Infra Nonaginta,
Accomplices vero, Fautores, Adhaerentes, Consultores and Sequaces, ac alij in
Praemissis quomodolibet Culpabiles supradicti, Seculares and Ecclesiastici,
etiam Regulares, Personaliter, Infra Sexaginta dies Compareant Coram Nobis, ad
se super Praemissis legitime Excusandum, and Defendendum, alias videndum, and
Audiendum Contra eos, and eorum singulos etiam Nominatim, quos sic Monemus,
quatenus expediat, ad Omnes, and singulos Actus, etiam Sententiam Definitivam,
Declaratoriam, Condemnatoriam, and Privatoriam, ac Mandatum Excusativum
procedi. Quod si Henricus Rex, and alij Moniti Praedicti Intra dictos terminos
eis, ut praefertur, respective praesixos, non Comparuerint, ad Praedictam
Excommunicationis Sententiam per tres dies, post Lapsum dictorum Terminorum
Animo, quod absit, sustinuerint Indurato, Censuras Ipsas aggravamus, and
successive reaggravamus, Henricumque Regem Privationis Regni, and Dominicorum
praedictorum, and tam eum, quam alios Monitos Praedictos, et eorum singulos,
Omnes et singulas alias poenas praedictas Incurrisse, ab omnibusque Christi
Fidelibus, cum eorum bonis, perpetuo diffidatos esse. Et si Interim ab humanis
decedat, Ecclesiastica debere carere Sepultura, Auctoritate et Potestatis
Plenitudine praedictis decernimus, et Declaramus, eosque Anathematis,
Maledictionis, et Damnationis Aeternae mucrone percutimus.

Sect. Et quascunque Civitates Ecclesias and alica Loca, ad quae Ipsi
declinaverint, Interdicto Ecclesiastico supponit.
8. Necnon quae praefatus Rex Henricus quomodolibet, et ex quavis Causa tenet,
habet, aut possidet, quam diu Henricus Rex, et alij Moniti praedicti, and eorum
singuli in aliis per dictum Henricum Regem non tentis, habitis, aut possessis
permanserint, and Triduo post eorum inde recessum, and alia quaecunque, ad quae
Henricum Regem, and alios monitos praedictos post Lapsum dictorum Terminorum
declinare contigerit, Dominia, Civitates, Terras, Castra, Villas, Oppida,
Metropolitanasque, and alias Cathedrales, ceterasque Inferiores Ecclesias,
necnon Monasteria, Prioratus, Domos, Conventos, and Loca Raligiosa, vel Pia
Cujuscunque, etiam S. Benedicti, Cluniacen. Cistercien. Praemonstraten. ac
Praedicatorum, Minorum, Eremitarum. S. Augustini, Carmelitarum, and aliorum
Ordinum, ac Congregationum, and Militarium quarumcunque in Ipsis Dominiis,
Civitatihus, Terris, Castris, Villis, Oppidis, and Locis Existentia,
Ecclesiastico supponimus Interdicto; ita ut illo durante in illis etiam
praetextu cujuscunque Apostolici Indulti Ecclesiis, Monasteriis, Prioratibus,
Domibus, Conventibus, Locis, Ordinibus, aut Personis, etiam quacunque Dignitate
Fulgentibus Concessi, praeterquam in Casibus a jure permissis, ac etiam in
illis alias quam Clausis Januis, and Excommunicatis and Interdictis Exclusis,
nequeant Missae, aut alia Divina Officia Celebrari.

Sect. Filiosque eorum de dignitatibus, gratiis and privilegiis ac dominiis and
bonis omnibus privatos, and ad alia de cetero obtinenda inhabiles esse declarat.
9. Et Henrici Regis, Complicumque, Fautorum, Adhaerentium, Consultorum,
Sequacium, et Culpabilium praedictorum Filij, Poenarum ut hic in hoc Casu par
est, participes sint, Omnes et singulos ejusdem Henrici Regis ex dicta Anna, ac
singulorum aliorum praedictorum Filios natos, et nascituros, aliosque
descendentes, usque in eum gradum, ad quem Jura poenas in Casibus hujusmodi
extendunt (Nemine excepto, nullaque minoris aetatis, aut Sexus, vel
Ignorantiae, vel alterius cujusvis Causae habita ratione) Dignitatibus et
Honoribus in quibus quomodolibet Constituti Existunt, seu quibus gaudent,
utuntur, potiuntur, aut muniti sunt, necnon Privilegiis, Concessionibus,
Gratiis, Indulgentiis, Immunitatibus, Remissionibus, Libertatibus, et Indultis,
ac Dominiis, Civitatibus, Castris, Terris, Villis, Oppidis, et Locis, etiam
Commendatis, vel in Gubernium Concessis, et quae in seudum, emphyteusim, vel
alias a Romany, vel aliis Ecclesiis, Monasteriis, et Locis Ecclesiasticis, ac
Secularibus, Principibus, Dominiis Potentatibus, etiam Regibus et
Imperatoribus, aut aliis Privatis, vel publicis Personis quomodolibet habent,
tenent, aut Possident, Ceterisque Omnibus bonis, Mobilibus et immobilibus,
Juribus et Actionibus, eis quomodolibet Competentibus privatos, dicta bona
feudalia, vel emphyteutica, et alia quaecunque, ab aliis quomodolibet obtenta,
ad directos Dominos, ita ut de illis libere desponere possint, Respective
devoluta, et eos qui Ecclesiastici fuerint, etiamsi Religiosi existant,
Ecclesiis etiam Cathedralibus, et Metropolitanis, necnon Monasteriis et
Prioratibus, Praeposituris, Praepositatibus, Dignitatibus, Personatibus,
Officiis, Canonicatibus, et Praebendis, aliisque Beneficiis Ecclesiasticis per
eos quomodolibet obtentis, privatos, et ad alia, ac alia in posterum obtinenda
Inhabiles esse, simpliciter decernimus, et declaramus; eosque sic respective
Privatos, ad alia et alia quaecunque similia, ac dignitates, honores,
administrationes, et officia, jura, ac feuda in Posterum obtinenda, Auctoritate
et Scientia, ac Plenitudine similibus Inhabilitamus.

Sect. Subditosque a juramento fidelitatis and subjectione liberat. Et eisdem
mandat ut ab obedientia omnino recedant.
10. Ipsiusque Henrici Regis, ac Regni omniumque aliorum Dominiorum, Civitatum,
Terrarum, Castrorum, Villarum, Fortaliciorum, Arcium, Oppidorum, and Locorum
suorum, etiam de facto obtentorum, Magistratus, Judices, Castellanos, Custodes,
and Officiales quoscunque, necnon Communitates, Vniversitates, Collegia,
Feudatarios, Vassallos, Subditos, Cives, Incolas, and Inhabitatores etiam
Forenses, dicto Regi de facto Obedientes, tam Saeculares, quam si qui rationis
alicujus temporalitatis Ipsum Henricum Regem in Superiorem recognoscant, etiam
Ecclesiasticos, a Praefato Rege, seu Ejus Complicibus, Fautoribus,
Adhaerentibus, Consultoribus, and Sequacibus supradictis deputatis, a juramento
fidelitatis, jure vassilitico, and omni erga Regem, and alios praedictos
subjectione absolvimus, ac penitus liberamus, eis Nihilominus sub
Excommunicationis poena Mandantes, and ab ejusdem Henrici Regis, suorumque
Officialium, Judicum, and Magistratuum quorumcunque. Obedientia penitus, and
omnino recedant, nec illos in Superiores recognoscant, neque illorum Mandatis
obtemperent.

Sect. Henrico and Complicibus alias poenas hic Expressas Imponit.
11. Et ut alij eorum Exemplo perterriti, discant ab hujusmodi Excessibus
abstinere, eisdem Auctoritate, Scientia and Plenitudine, volumus, and
decernimus, quod Henricus Rex, and Accomplices, Fautores, Adhaerentes,
Consultores, Sequaces, and alij in praemissis Culpabiles, Postquam alias poenas
praedictas, ut praefertur respective incurrerint, necnon Praefati descendentes,
extunc Infames existant, and ad Testimonium non admittantur, Testamenta, and
Codicillos, aut alias dispositiones, etiam Inter vivos concedere, and facere
non possint, and ad alicujus Successionem ex Testamento, vel ab Intestato,
necnon ad Jurisdictionem, seu Judicandi Potestatem, and ad Notariatus Ossicium,
Omnesque Actus Legitimos quoscunque (ita ut eorum Processus, sive Instrumenta
atque alij Actus quicunque, nullius sint Roboris, vel momenti) Inhabiles
existant; and Nulli Ipsis, sed Ipsi aliis super quocunque debito, and Negotio,
tam Civili quam Criminali, de jure respondere teneantur.

Sect. 12. Christi fidelibus sub poenis hie expressis praecipit, ut Infidelium
Commercium evitent.
Et Nihilominus Omnes, and singulos Christi sideles, sub Excommunicationis, and
aliis Infrascriptis poenis, monemus, ut monitos, Excommunicatos, aggravatos,
interdictos, privatos, maledictos, and damnatos, praedictos evitent, and
quantum in eis est, ab aliis evilari faciant, nec cum eisdem, seu Praefati
Regis Civitatum, Dominiorum, Terrarum, Castrorum, Comitatuum, Villarum,
Fortaliciorum, Oppidorum, and Lecorum praedictorum Civibus, Incolis, vel
Habitatoribus, aut Subditis, and Vassallis, Emendo, Vendendo, Permutando, aut
quamcunque Mercaturam, seu Negotij Exercendo, Commercium, seu aliquam
Conversationem, seu Communionem habeant, aut vinum, granum, sal, seu alia
victualia, arma, pannos, merces, vel quasvis alias Mercantias, vel Res per Mare
in eorum Navibus, Triremibus, aut aliis Navigiis, sive per Terram cum Mulis,
vel aliis Animalibus defer, aut Conducere, seu deferri, aut Conduci facere,
vel delata per illos recipere, pulice vel occulte, aut talia facientibus
auxilium, consilium, vel favorem, public, vel occulte, vel indirecte quovis
quaesito color, per se, vel alium, seu alios quoquomodo praestare praesumant,
quod si fecerint, ultra Excommunicationis praedictae, etiam Nullitatis
Contractuum, quos inirent, necnon Perditionis Mercium, Victualium, and bonorum
omnium delatorum, quae Capientium fiant, poenas similiter eo Ipso Incurrant.

Sect. 13. Praelatis quoque and ceteris Personis Ecclesiasticis mandat sub
poenis hic contentis quatenus de Regno Angliae discedant, ut hic.
Ceterum quia Convenire non videtur, ut cum his qui Ecclesiam Contemnunt, dum
praesertim ex eorum pertinacia spes Corrigibilitatis non habetur, hi qui
Divinis Obsequiis vacant Conversentur, quod etiam illos tute facere non posse
dubitandum est, Omnium and singularum Metropolitan: and aliarum Cathedralium,
Ceterarumque Inferiorum Ecclesiarum, and Monasteriorum, Domorum, and Locorum
Religiosorum and Piorum quorumcunque, etiam S. Augustini, S. Benedicti,
Cluniacen. Cistercien. Praemonstraten. ac Praedicatorum, Minorum, Carmelitarum,
alorumque quorumcunque Ordinum, and Militiarum, etiam Hospitalis
Hierosolymitani, Praelatibus, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Praeceptoribus,
Praepositis, Ministris, Custodibus, Guardianis, Conventibus, Monachis, and
Canonicis, necnon Parochialium Ecclesiarum Rectoribus, aliisque quibuscunque
Personis Ecclesiasticis in Regno and Dominiis praedictis Commorantibus, sub
Excommunicationis, ac Privationis administrationum, and Regiminum Monasterirum,
Dignitatum, Personatuum, Administrationum, ac Officiorum, Cannonicatuumque, and
Praebendarum, Parochialium Ecclesiarum, and aliorum Beneficiorum
Ecclesiasticorum quorumcunque quomodolibet qualificatorum, per eos quomodolibet
obtentorum poenis Mandamus, quatenus Infra quinque dies post Omnes and singulos
Terminos praedictos Elapsos, de Ipsis Regno, and dominiis, dimissis tamen
aliquibus Presbyteris in Ecclesiis, quarum Curam habuerint pro administrando
Baptismate parvulis, and in Poenitentia decedentibus, ac aliis Sacramentis
Ecclesiasticis, Quae Tempore Interdicti Ministrari permittuntur, exeant, and
discedant, neque ad Regnum, and Dominia praedicta revertantur, donec Moniti,
and Excommunincati, aggravati, reaggravati, privati, maledicti, and damnati
praedicti Monitionibus, and Mandatis nostris hujusmodi obtemperaverint, and
meruerint a Censuris hujusmodi absolutionis Benesicium obtinere, seu
Interdictum in Regno, and dominiis praedictis fuerit sublatum.

Sect. 14. Ducesque and alios monet sub poenis supradictis, ut Henricum and
ejus Accomplices de Regno expellere and expelli procurent.
Praeterea si Praemissis non obstantibus Henricus Rex, Accomplices, Fautores,
Adhaerentes, Consultores, and Sequaces praedicti in eorum pertinacia
perseveraverint, nec Conscientiae stimulus eos ad Cor Reduxerit, in eorum forte
Potentia, and armis Considentes, Omnes and singalos Duces, Marchiones, Comites,
and alios quoscunque, tam Saeculares, quam Ecclesiasticos, etiam sorenses, de
facto dicto, Henrico Regi Obedientes, sub ejusdem Excommunicationis, ac
Perditionis bonorum suorum (quae, ut Infra dictus similiter Capientium siant)
poenis, requirimus, and monemus, quatenus Omni mora, and Excusatione
Postposita, eos and eorum singulos, ac Ipsorum Milites, and Stipendarios, tam
Equestres, quam Pedestres, aliosque quoscunque qui eis cum armis faverint, de
Regno and Dominiis praedictis, etiam vi armorum, si Opus suerit, expellant, ac
quod Henricus Rex, and ejus Accomplices, Fautores, Adhaerentes, Consultores, and
Sequaces Mandatis nostris non obtemperantes Praedicti de Civitatibus, Terris,
Castris, Villis, Oppidis, Fortalitiis, aut aliis Locis Regni, and Dominij
Praedictorum, se non Intromittant, procurent, Eis sub Omnibus and singulis
paenis praedictis Inhibentes, ne in favorem Henrici ejusque Complicum,
Fautorum, Adhaerentium, Consultorum and Sequacium, aliorumque Monitorum
Praedictorum Mandatis Nostris non obtemperantium, arma Cujusiibet Generis
offensiva, and defensiva, Machinas quoque bellicas, seu tormenta (artellarias
nuncupata) sumant, aut teneant, seu illis utantur, aut armatos aliquos, praeter
Consuetam familiam parent, aut ab Henrico Rege Complicibus, Fautoribus,
Adhaerentibus, Consultoribus, and Sequacibus, vel aliis in Regis Ipsius favorem
paratos, quomodolibet, quavis occasion vel Causa, per se, vel alium, seu alios
public vel occulte, direct vel indirecte teneant, vel receptent, aut dicto
Henrico Regi, seu Illius Complicibus, Fautoribus, Adhaerentibus, Consultoribus,
and Sequacibus Praedictis, Consilium, Auxilium, vel quomodolibet ex quavis
Causa, vel quovis quaesito Color sive Ingenio, public vel occulte, direct
vel indirecte, tacit vel express, per se vel alium seu alios Praemissis, vel
aliquo Praemissorum praestent, seu praestari faciant quoquomodo.

Sect. 15. Principum Christianorum Confoederationes, and Obligationes
Contractas cum Henrico nullas and invalidas declarat.
Praeterea ad dictum Henricum Regem facilius ad sanitatem, and praefatae Sedis
Obedientiam reducendum, Omnes and singulos, Christianos Principes, quacunque
etiam Imperiali and Regali Dignitate fulgentes, per viscera Misericordiae Dei
Nostri (Cujus Causa agitur) hortamur and in Domino Requirimus, eis Nihilominus,
qui Imperatore and Rege Inferiores fuerint, quos propter Excellentiam
Dignitatis a Censuris Excipimus, sub Excommunicationis poena Mandantes ne
Henrico Regi Ejusque Complicibus, Fautoribus, Adhaerentibus, Consultoribus, and
Sequacibus, vel eorum alicui per se vel alium seu alios, public vel occulte,
direct vel indirecte, tacit vel express, etiam sub praetextu
Confoederationum aut Obligationum quarumcunque, etiam Juramento, aut quavis
alia firmitate roboratarum, and saepius geminatarum, a quibus quidem
Obligationibus, and Juramentis Omnibus, nos eos, and eorum singulos eisdem
Auctoritate and Scientia, ac plenitudine per praesentes absolvimus, Ipsasque
Confoederationes and Obligationes tam factas, quam in Posteram faciendas, quas
tamen (in quantum Henricus Rex, and Accomplices, Fautores, Adhaerentes,
Consultores, and Sequaces praedicti circa praemissa, vel eorum aliquod se
direct vel indirecte Juvare possent sub eadem poena fieri prohibemus, nullius
Roboris vel Momenti, nullasque, irritas, Cassas, inanes, ac pro Infectis
habendas fore decernimus and declaramus, consilium, auxilium, vel favorem,
quomodolibet, praestent; quinimo si qui illis, aut eorum alicui ad praesens
quomodolibet assistant ab Ipsis omnino, and cum Effectu recedant. Quod si non
fecerint postquam Praesentes publicatae and Executioni demandatae fuerint, et
dicti Termini lapsi fuerint, Omnes and singulas Civitates, Terras, Oppida,
Castra, Villas, and alia Loca eis Subjecta, simili Ecclesiastico Interdicto
supponimus, volentes Ipsum Interdictum donec Ipsi Principes a Consilio, Auxilio
and Favore Henrico Regi and Complicibus, Fautoribus, Adhaerentibus,
Consultoribus, and Sequacibus praedictis praestando, destiterint, perdurare.

Sect. 16. Principibus and aliis Ma^dat, ut contra Henricum and Accomplices Arma
Capiant.
Insuper tam Principes praedictos, quam quoscunque alios, etiam ad Stipendia
quorumcunque Christi fidelium Militantes, and alias quascunque personas, tam
per Mare, quam per Terras, Armigeros habentes, similiter hortamur, and
requirimus, and nihilominus eis in virtute Sanctae Obedientiae Mandantes,
quatenus contra Henricum Regem, Accomplices, Fautores, Adhaerentes, Consultores,
and Sequaces praedictos, dum in Erroribus praedictis, ac adversus Sedem
praedictam, rebellione permanserint, Armis Insurgant, eosque and eorum
singulos, persequantur, ac ad Vnitatem Ecclesiae, and Obedientiam dictae Sedis
redire cogant, and compellant; and ram eos, quam Ipsorum Subditos, and
Vassallos, ac Civitatum, Terrarum, Castrorum, Oppidorum, Villarum, and Locorum
suorum Incolas, and habitatores, aliasque Omnes singulas Personas supradictis
Mandatis nostris, ut praefertur, non obtemperantes, and quae praefatum Henricum
Regem Postquam Censuras and Poenas praedictas incurrerit, in Dominum
quomodolibet etiam de facto recognoverint, vel ei quovis modo obtemperare
praesumpserint, aut qui eum, ac Accomplices, Fautores, Adhaerentes, Consultores,
Sequaces, ac alios non obtemperantes praedictos, ex Regno and Dominiis
praedictis, ut praefertur, expellere noluerint, ubicunque eos invenerint,
eorumque bona, mobilia and immobilia, mercantias, pecunias, navigia, credita,
res, and Animalia, etiam extra territorium, dicti Henrici Regis ubilibet
Consistentia, Capiant.

Sect. 17. Infideles and inobedientes capientium servos, and corundem bona
occupantium sieri decernit.
Nos enim bona, Mercantias, Pecunias Navigia, Res, and Animalia, praedicta sic
capta, In proprios eorum usus convertendi, eisdem Auctoritate, Scientia, and
Potestatis Plentudine, Plenariam Licentiam, Facultatem and Auctoritatem
concedimus, illa omnia ad eosdem Capientes plenarie pertinere, and spectare,
and Personas ex Regno, and Dominiis praedictis Originem trahentes, seu in illis
Domicilium habentes, aut quomodolibet habitantes, Mandatis nostris praedictis
non obtemperantes, ubicunque eos Capi Contigerit, Capientium servos fieri
decernentes, Praesentesque Literas, quoad hoc, ad omnes alios cujuscunque
Dignitatis, Gradus, Status, Ordinis, vel Conditionis fuerint, qui Ipsi Henrico
Regi, vel ejus, Complicibus, Fautoribus, Adhaerentibus, Consultoribus, and
Sequacibus, aut aliis Monitionibus, and Mandatis nostris hujusmodi, quoad
Commercium non obtemperantibus, vel eorum alicui victualia, arma, vel pecunias
subministrare, aut cum eis Commercium habere, seu Auxilium, Consilium, vel
Favorem per se vel alium, seu alios public vel occulte, direct vel indirecte,
quovis modo contra tenorem Praesentium praestare praesumpserint, extendentes.

Sect. 18. Praelatis and aliis Mandat sub poenis de quibus hic, ut in eorum
Ecclesiis Henricum and Accomplices qui supradictas poenas, and Censuras
Incurrerint, Excommunicatos public enuncient, and evitari faciant.
Et ut praemissa facilius iis quos concernunt innotescant, universis and
singulis Patriarchis, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, and Patriarchalium
Metropolitan. and aliarum Cathedralium, and Collegiatarum Ecclesiarum
Praelatis, Capitulis, aliisque Personis Ecclesiasticis Saecularibus ac
quorumvis Ordinum Regularibus, necnon Omnibus, and singulis etiam Mendicantium
Ordinum Professoribus Exemptis, and non Exemptis, ubilibet, Constitutis, per
easdem Praesentes, sub Excommunicationis, and Privationis Ecclesiarum,
Monasteriorum, ac aliorum Beneficiorum Ecclesiasticorum, Graduum quoque and
Officiorum, necnon Privilegiorum, and Indultorum quorumcunque etiam a Sede
praedicta quomodolibet Emanatorum poenis ipso facto Incurrendis, praecipimus,
and mandamus, quatenus Ipsi, ac eorum singuli, si, and Postquam vigore
Praesentium desuper requisiti fuerint, Infra tres dies Immediate sequentes
praefatum Henricum Regem, Omnesque alios and singulos, qui supradictas
Censuras, and poenas Incurrerint, in eorum Ecclesiis Dominicis, and aliis
Festivis diebus, dum Major Inibi populi Multitudo, ad divina Convenerit, cum
Crucis vexillo, pulsatis Campanis, and accensis, ac demum Extinctis, and in
Ter^am projectis, and Conculcatis Candelis, and aliis in similibus servari
solitis Caeremoniis servatis, Excommunicatos public nuncient, and ab aliis
nunciari, ac ab Omnibus Arctius evitari faciant, and mandent, necnon sub
supradictis* Censuris and Poenis, Praesentes Literas, vel earum transumptum,
sub forma Infrascripta Confectum, Infra Terminum trium Dierum, Postquam, ut
praefertur requisiti fuerint, in Ecclesiis, Monasteriis, Conventibus, et aliis
eorum Locis, publicari, et assigi faciant.

Sect. 19. Publicationem Isti^s Constable. Impedientib. easdem poenas Imponit.
Volentes, Omnes, et singulos cujuscunque Status, Gradus, Conditionis,
Praeeminentiae, Dignitatis, aut Excellentiae fuerint, qui quominus Praesentes
Literae, vel earum transumpta, Copiae seu Exemplaria, in suis Civitatibus,
Terris, Castris, Oppidis, Villis, et Locis Legi, et affigi, ac publicari
possint, per se, vel alium, seu alios, public vel occulte, direct vel
indirecte impediverint, easdem Censuras, et Paenas Ipso facto Incurrere. Et cum
fraus et dolus nemini debeant Patrocinari, ne quisquam ex his, qui alicui
Regimini, et Administrationi deputati sunt Infra Tempus sui Regiminis, seu
Administrationis, Praedictas Sententias, Censuras, et Poenas sustineat, quasi
p^st dictum Tempus Sententiis, Censuris et Poenis praedictis amplius Ligatus
non existat, quemcunque qui dum in Regimine, et Administratione existens,
monitioni, et mandato nostris, quoad praemissa, vel aliquid eorum obtemperare
noluerit, etiam deposito Regimine, et Administratione hujusmodi, nisi paruerit,
eisdem Censuris, et Poenis subjicere decernimus.

Sect. 20. Publicari Mandat hanc Constable. in Locis hic Expressis. Sed haec forma
immutata est, ut hic in fine.
Et ne Henricus, Ejusque Accomplices, et Fautores, Adhaerentes, Consultores, et
Sequaces, aliique quos praemissa Concernunt, Ignorantiam eorundem Praesentium
Literarum, et in eis Contentorum praetendere valiant, Literas ipsas (in quibus
Omnes et singulos, tam juris, quam facti, etiam solemnitatum, et Processuum,
Citationumque Omissarum defectus, etiamsi Tales sint, de quibus Specialis, et
expressa mentio facienda esset, propter Notorietatem facti, Auctoritate,
Scientia, et Potestatis plenitudine similibus, supplemus) in Basilicae
Principis Apostolorum, et Cancellariae Apostolicae de urbe, et in partibus in
Collegiatae Beatae Mariae Brugen. Tornacen. et Parochialis de Dunkercae,
Oppidorum Moriensis Dioecesis, Ecclesiarum valvis Affigi; et Publicari
Mandamus, decernentes quod earundem Literarum Publicatio sic facta, Henricum
Regem, Ejusque Accomplices, Fautores, Adhaerentes, Consultores et Sequaces
Omnesque alios, et singulos, quos Literae Ipsae quomodolibet Concernunt,
perinde eos arctent, ac si Literae Ipsae eis Personaliter Lectae, et Intimatae
fuissent, cum non sit verisimile, quod ea, quae tam patenter fiunt, debeant
apud eos incognita remanere.

Sect. 21. Transumptis credi jubet.
Ceterum quia difficile foret Praesentes Literas ad singula quaeque Loca, ad
quae necessarium esset deferri, volumus, et dicta Auctoritate decernimus, quod
earum transumptis manu publici Notarij Confectis, vel in Alma Vrbe Impressis,
ac Sigillo alicujus Personae in Dignitate Ecclesiastica Constitutae munitis,
ubique eadem fides adhibeatur quae Originalibus adhiberetur si essent exhibitae
vel ostensae.

Sect. 22. Sanctionem poenalem Imponit.
Nulli ergo Omnino hominum liceat hanc paginam Nostrae Monitionis,
Aggravationes, Reaggravationis, Declarationis, Percussionis, Suppositionis,
Inhabilitationis, Absolutionis, Liberationis, Requisitionis, Inhibitionis,
Hortationis, Exceptionis, Prohibitionis, Concessionis Extensionis,
Suppletionis, Mandatorum, Voluntatis, et Decretorum Infringere, vel ei ausu
Temerario contraire. Si quis autem hoc attentare Praesumpserit, Indignationem
Omnipotentis Dei, ac Beatorum Petri, et Pauli Apostolorum ejus se noverit
Incursurum.

Dat. Romae apud S. Marcum, D. P. An. 1. Die 30. Aug.
Anno Incarnationis Dom. 1435. 3. Kal. September. Pont. Nostri Anno Primo.
FINIS.
A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
I. THE Bull of Pope Pius the Fifth (containing the Damnation and
Excommunication of Queen Elizabeth) in Latin and English. P. 1. II. The first
Observation, that Pius V. was neither the first nor last Pope, who
Excommunicated and damned Kings and Emperors. For, 1. before him Pope
Constantine, Gregory the Second, Greg. the Third, Greg. the Seventh, Gregory
the Ninth, Innocent the Fourth, Paul the Third, etc. did the same thing: And,
2. Gregory the Thirteenth, and Sixtus the Fifth, after him. p. 7. III. The
second Observation, concerning the (...) or Title prefixed to Pius the Fifth
his Bull; that it is Damnatio and Excommunicatio Elizabethae. Where it is
proved, 1. That not only Pius the Fifth, but other Popes (not short of him in
time or impiety) use the same hard word ( Damnation) in the Titles prefixed to
their damnatory Bulls, wherein they Excommunicate Kings and Emperors. 2. The
uncharitable Error, and Invalidity of their reasons they do, or can pretend for
doing so. p. 15. IV. The third Observation, wherein, 1. The notion and
significations of the word Damnation are explained. 2. That by the word
Damnation in their Anathema's and Damnatory Bulls, not only some temporal loss
or punishment (as to their Bodies or Estates) but eternal Damnation of Body and
Soul, is meant, by the Pope and his Party; together with the invalidity of
their reasons and pretenses to justify them in this particular. p. 20. V. The
fourth Observation, wherein we have, 1. The grounds on which Pius the Fifth,
and other Popes, build their Power to Excommunicate and Depose Kings; and that
in the Supremacy and Plenitude of Power, which (they pretend) our blessed
Savior gave to Peter, and in him to all his Successors. So that Peter (and so
every Successor of his) was constituted a Prince over all Nations and Kingdoms,
to pull up, and throw down, to dissipate and destroy, to plant and build, etc.
2. That such Power was (by our blessed Savior) given to Peter and his
Successors, they endeavor to prove out of Scripture, (and in their Bulls, cite
the places) Genesis 1. 16. and Jer. 1. 10. 3. The ridiculous inconsequence and
impertinence of such Papal reasoning, which shows them rather to be Fools, then
Infallible. p. 26. VI. The fifth Observation, against the Pope's pretended
Supremacy. 1. That Peter's Supremacy (much less the Popes) cannot be proved
from Matthew. 10. 2. where he is called (...), primus (or as in the Latin
Fathers) Princeps Apostolorum. 2. Nor from that place, Matthew. 16. 18. 19. 3.
That St. Paul in Scripture, has a far better pretense to the Supremacy and the
Bishopric of Rome, then St. Peter; and yet neither he, nor any for him, ever
pretended to any Papal Supremacy. 4. How our blessed Savior and the Apostles
(yet Peter no more then the rest) are in Scripture, said to be Foundations of
the Church. 5. That the Power of the Keys was given to every Apostle, as well
and as much as to Peter. Nay, 6. To every Bishop and Priest, as is expressly
affirmed in the Authentic Offices of the Roman Church, and in their Trent
Council and Catechism. 7. That every Apostle was Christ's Vicar as well as
Peter; that the Jesuits profess, (and in their Institutions do publish it)
that their Superiors are Christ's Vicars. 8. That Pasce Oves, Joh. 21. 15. 16.
17. (though usually) is most impertinently urged to prove Peter's Supremacy. 9.
That the 28. Canon of the Council of Chalcedon (which utterly overthrows the
Popes Supremacy) is basely corrupted by Gratian and the Canonists, and (that it
might not appear) left out of their old Editions of the Councils. p. 36. 37.
etc. VII. The sixth Observation, In which a further examination and confutation
of the Popish pretended grounds for the Popes Supremacy. That they neither do,
nor can prove that Peter ever had any such Monarchical Supremacy over the
Apostles and all Christians, with the reasons why they cannot. 2. If it were
granted (which is evidently untrue) that he had such a Power, yet it neither
does, nor can appear (by Scripture, or any just Medium) that it was hereditary,
and to pass to his Successor, but might be personal, and (as his Apostleship
did) dye with him. 3. And if it were granted (which neither is, nor ever can be
proved) that that Power was hereditary, and to be transferred to his Successor,
yet they neither have, nor can have any just grounds to prove, that the Bishop
of Rome is that Successor, and not the Bishop of Antioch, where (they say) St.
Peter first sat. 4. That it is certain from Scripture, that Peter neither was
nor could be (as they pretend) 25. years Bishop of Rome. 5. Nor can it (by
Scripture) appear that ever he was at Rome, nor can Rome be meant by Babylon,
1. Pet. 5. 13. 6. Nor can it appear by any just Testimonies of Antiquity, that
ever he was at Rome. Papias is the ground and Author on whom they rely for that
Fable; and he an ignorant Person, and Arch-Heretick. 7. That to get credit to
Papias, they have impiously corrupted Eusebius. 8. If it were granted, that he
was at Rome, yet they have no ground or probability for it, that he was Bishop
there; seeing there are far greater probabilities grounded on Scripture, that
Paul was Bishop there, than Peter (or any for him) can pretend to; and yet they
do not say, nor (without contradiction to their own Principles) can say, that
he was Bishop there. 9. That those other honorary Titles or Epithites, which
their Authors every where use as proper to the Pope, and marks of his
Supremacy, or (at least) superiority over all Bishops (such as Apostolicus
Pontifex Summus, Papa, Seeds Apostolica, Vicarius Christi, Cathedra Apostolica,
Successor Petri, etc.) are impertinently made use of, without any proof or
probability. p. 91. 92. etc. VIII. The seventh Observation, concerning the
Censures, Punishments and Curses contained in this Bull; and the Antichristian
impiety of them. 1. He miscalls the Queen, an Heretic, a favourer of
Heretics, a Slave of Impiety, and then Anathematizes her, and cuts her off
from the Unity of Christ's Body. 2. He deposes and deprives her of her
pretended Right to the Crown, and of all manner of Dignity, Dominion and
Privilege. 3. He absolves her Subjects, and all others, who are bound to her
by any Oath, from all their Oaths, and all debt of Fidelity and Obedience, and
that for ever. 4. He severely prohibits them all, to obey any of her Laws or
Commands. 5. If any of them do otherwise, he Excommunicates and Curses them,
whether they be Papists or Protestants. p. 145. 146. etc. IX. The eighth
Observation, That the Pope is the great Antichrist, the Man of Sin, and Son of
Perdition, spoken of 2 Thessalonians. 3. 4. That the Opinions of H. Grotius, (that
Caius Caligula) and of Dr. Hammond, (that Simon Magus was Antichrist) are
inconsistent and contradictory to each other, and to themselves. That they are
(both of them) repugnant to Scripture, the Judgment of the primitive Fathers,
of Protestants and Papists, and the sense of Christendom for about 1600. years
after our blessed Savior, etc. p. 151. 152. etc. ad p. 199. X. The ninth
Observation, What the Popes Power is, (and whence they pretend to have it)
which inables them with Authority to sit Judges, and pass damnatory Sentences
against Supreme Princes, for Heresy. 2. What that Heresy is, and who the
Heretics, who by the Pope are so severely damned. 3. What those punishments
are, which they pretend they may, and (when and where they can) actually do
inflict on such Heretics. 4. Of the Waldenses, that (by the testimony of their
Enemies) 1. They had continued ever since the Apostles times. 2. That there was
scarce any Christian Country in which they were not. 3. That they lived justly
before men, and believed all things well of God, and all the Articles of the
Creed: but their fault was, They said Rome was Babylon, and the Pope
Antichrist, etc. p. 199. 200. etc. XI. Observation the Tenth, That Queen
Elizabeth stood Excommunicate, before the Damnatory Bull of Pius the Fifth, and
by whom, etc. p. 213. XII. Observation the Eleventh, Of the damnable and
pernicious Doctrines and Conclusions, which evidently follow, upon their
approved and practiced Principles, of Deposing and Anathematizing Kings and
Supreme Princes. That it is neither Treason, Murder, or any Sin, for Subjects to
Assassinate their King, if he be Excommunicate by the Pope. Nay, that it is a
meritorious Act, for which they promise them vast rewards here, and an higher
degree of glory in Heaven hereafter, etc. p. 219. 220. etc. XIII. The Damnation
and Excommunication of Henry the Eighth by Pope Paul the Third, December. 17.
Anno 1538.
FINIS.

