A CATECHISM AND Confession of Faith, Approved of and Agreed unto by the
General Assembly of the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, CHRIST himself
being chief Speaker In and Among them. Which contains a true and faithful
Account of the Principles and Doctrines, which are most surely believed by the
Churches of Christ in Great Britain and Ireland, who are reproachfully called
by the Name of Quakers; yet are found in the One Faith with the Primitive
Church and Saints, as is most clearly demonstrated by some plain
Scripture-Testimonies (without Consequences or Commentaries) which are here
collected and inserted by way of Answer to a few Weighty, yet Easy and
Familiar Questions, fitted as well for the wisest and largest, as for the
weakest and lowest Capacities. To which is added, An Expostulation with, and
Appeal to all other Professors.

By R. B. A Servant of the Church of Christ.

Search the Scriptures ( or, ye search the Scriptures) for in them ye think ye
have Eternal Life, and they are they which testify of me; and ye will not come
to me that ye might have Life, John 5. 39, 40. THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
SINCE first that great Apostasy took place in the Hearts and Heads of those
who began even in the Apostles days to depart from the Simplicity and Purity of
the Gospel, as it was then delivered in its primitive Splendour and Integrity,
innumerable have been the manifold Inventions and Traditions, the different and
various Notions and Opinions, wherewith man (by giving way to the vain and
airy Imaginations of his own unf^able Mind) has burdened the Christian Faith;
So that indeed, first by Adding these things, and afterward by Equalling them,
if not Exalting them above the Truth, they have at last come to be substitute
in the stead of it; so that in process of time, Truth came to be shut out of
doors, and another thing placed in the room thereof, having a Show and Name,
but wanting the Substance and Thing it self: Nevertheless, it pleased God to
raise up Witnesses for Himself almost in every Age and Generation, who,
according to the Discoveries they received, bore some Testimony, less or more,
against the Superstition and Apostasy of the Time; and in special manner
through the Appearing of that Light which first broak forth in Germany about
One Hundred and Fifty Years ago, and afterward reached diverse other Nations;
the Beast received a Deadly Wound, and a very great Number did at one time
Protest against, and Rescind from the Church of Rome in diverse of their most
gross and sensual Doctrines and superstitious Traditions: But alas! it is for
matter of Lamentation, that the Successors of these Protestants are
establishing and building up in themselves that which their Fathers were
pulling down, instead of prosecutiug and going on with so Good and Honorable a
Work, which will thus easily appear.

The generality of all Protestants (though in many other things miserably rent
and shattered among themselves) do agree in Dividing from the Church of Rome in
these Two Particulars:

First, That every Principle and Doctrine of the Christian-Faith is, and ought
to be founded upon the Scripture* and that whatsoever Principles or Doctrines
are not only not contrary, but even not according thereto, ought to be deny^d,
as Antichristian.

Secondly, That the Scriptures themselves are plain and easy to be understood;
and that every private Christian and Member of the Church ought to read and
peruse then, that they may know their Faith and Belief founded upon them, and
receive them for that Cause alone, and not because any Church or Assembly has
compounded and recommended them; the choicest and most pure of which they are
obliged to look upon as Fallible.

Now, contrary to this their known and acknowledged Principle, they do most
vigorously prosecute and persecute others with the like Severity the Papists
did their Fathers, for believing things that are plainly set down in the
Scriptures, and for not believing diverse Principles for which themselves are
forced to recur to Tradition, and can by no means prove from Scripture; To show
which I shall not here insist, having allotted a Chapter for it in the Book it
self, because to put it here, would swell beyond the Bounds of a Preface.

Oh! how like do they show themselves (I mention it with Regreet) to the
Scribes and Pharisees of old, who of all men most cried up and exalted Moses
and the Prophets, boasted greatly of being Abraham's Children? And yet those
were they that were the greatest Opposers and Vilifiers of Christ, to whom
Moses and all the Prophets gave witness; yea, their chief Accusations and
Exceptions against Christ, was, as being a Breaker of the Law and a Blasphemer.

Can there any Comparison run more parallel, seeing there is now found a
People, who are greatly Persecuted, and bitterly reviled, and Accused as
Heretics by a Generation that cry up and exalt the Scriptures; And yet this
People's Principles are found in Scripture, Word by Word, though the most
Grievous, and indeed the Greatest Calumny cast upon them is, That they vilify
and deny the Scriptures, and set up their own Imaginations instead of them.

To disprove which, this Catechism and Confession of Faith is compiled, and
presented to thy Serious and Impartial View: If thou love the Scripture
indeed, and desire to hold the plain Doctrines there delivered, and not these
Strained and Far-Fetched Consequences, which men have invented, thou shall
easily observe the whole Principles of the People, called QUAKERS, plainly
couched in Scriptute-Words, without Addition or Commentary; especially in those
things their Adversaries oppose them in, where the Scripture plainly decideth
the Controversy for them, without Nicities and School-Distinctions, which have
been the Wisdom by which the World has not known God; and the Words which have
been multiplied without Knowledge, by which Counsel has been darkened.

In the Answers to the Questions, there is not one Word, that I know of,
placed, but the express Words of Scripture: And if in some of the Questions
there be somewhat subsumed of what in my Judgment is the plain and naked Import
of the Words, it is not to impose my Sense upon the Reader, but to make way for
the next Question, for the dependence of the Matter's sake; I shall leave it to
the Reason of any Understanding and Judicious Man, who is not biased by
Self-Interest, that great Enemy to True Equity, and who in the least measure is
willing to give way to the Light of Christ in his Conscience, if the Scriptures
do not pertinently and aptly answer to the Questions.

As I have upon serious Grounds separated from most of the Confessions and
Catechisms heretofore published; so, not without Cause, I have now taken
another Method: They usually place their Confession of Faith before the
Catechism; I judge it ought to be otherwise, in regard that which is easiest,
and is composed for Children, or such as are Weak, ought in my Judgment to be
placed first; it being most regular to begin with Things that are Easy and
Familiar, and lead on to Things that are more Hard and Intricate: Besides, that
Things be more largely opened in the Catechism, and diverse Objections answered,
which are proposed in the Questions, the Reader having past through that first,
will more perfectly understand the Confession, which consists mainly in
positive Assertions.

Not long after I had received and believed the ^estimony I now bear, I had in
my View both the Possibility and Facility of such a Work; and now after a more
large and perfect Acquaintance with the Holy Scriptures, I found Access to
allow some Time to set about it; and have also been helped to Accomplish the
same.

I doubt not but it might be enlarged by diverse Citations, which are here
omitted, as not being at present brought to my Remembrance: Yet I find Cause to
be Contented, in that God has so far assisted me in this Work by his Spirit,
that Good Remembrancer; the Manifestation of which, as it is minded, will help
such as Seriously and Conscientiously read this, to find out and cleave to the
Approved of and Agreed unto by the Truth, and also Establish and Confirm those
who have already believed; Which of all things is most earnestly Desired, and
daily Prayed for, By

ROBERT BARCLAY, A Servant of the Church of CHRIST.
From Vrie, the Place of my Being in my Native Country of Scotland, the 11th of
the 6th Month, 1673.
A CATECHISM
CHAPTER I.
Of GOD, and the True and Saving Knowledge of Him.

Question, SEeing it is a thing unquestioned by all sorts of Christians, that
the Height of Happiness consists in coming to know and enjoy Eternal Life,
what is it in the Sense and Judgment of Christ?

A. This is Life Eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, Joh. 17. 3.

Q. How does God reveal this Knowledge?

A. For God, who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in
our Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face
of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6.

Q. How many God's are there?

A. One God, Ephesians. 4. 6.

We know, that an Idol is nothing in the World, and that there is none other
God but One. But to us there is but One God, 1 Cor. 8. 4, 6.

Q. What is God?

A. God is a Spirit, Joh. 4. 24.

Q. Among all the blessed, Glorious and Divine Excellencies of God, which are
asscribed and given to him in the Scriptures; what is that which is most
needful for us to take notice of, as being the Message which the Apostles
recorded in special manner to declare of him now under the Gospel?

A. This then is the Message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you,
That God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all, 1 John 1. 5.

Q. What are they that bear Record in Heaven?

A. There are Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word and the
Holy Ghost; and these Three are One, 1 John 5. 7.

Q. How comes any man to know God the Father according to Christ's words?

A. All things are delivered to me of my Father; and no man knows who the Son
is, but the Father; and who the Father is, but the Son, and he to whom the Son
will reveal him, Luke 10. 22. Mat. 11. 27.

Jesus says unto him, I am the Way, the Truth and the Life; no man comes unto
the Father but by me, John 14. 6.

Q. By whom, and after what manner does the Son reveal this Knowledge?

A. But as it is written, Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have
entered into the Heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that
love him; But God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit; For the Spirit
searches all things, yea, the deep things of God. For what man knows the
things of a man, save the Spirit of a man, which is in him? Even so the things
of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God. Now, we have received not the
Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the
things that are freely given to us of God, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12.

But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my
Name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your Remembrance,
etc. John 14. 26.

CHAP. II.
Of the Rule and Guide of Christians, and of the Scriptures.

Question, SEeing it is by the Spirit that Christ reveals the Knowledge of God
in things spiritual, is it by the Spirit that we must be led under the Gospel?

A. But ye are not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of
God dwell in you. Now, if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none his.

For, as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, Romans
8. 9, 14.

Q. It is an Inward Principle then, that is to be the Guide and Rule of
Christians?

A. But the Anointing, which ye have received of him, abides in you; and ye
need not that any man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you of all
things, and is Truth, and is no Lie; and even as it has taught you, ye shall
abide in him, 1 John 2. 27.

But as touching Brotherly Love, ye need not that I write unto you; for ye your
selves are taught of God to love one another, 1 These. 4. 9.

Q. I perceive by this, that it is by an inward Anointing and Rule that
Christians are to be taught; Is this the very tenor of the New Covenant
Dispensation?

A. For this is the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel after
those days, says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their Mind, and write them
in their Hearts; and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People:
And they shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother,
saying, Know the Lord; for all shall know me* from the Least to the Greatest,
Hebr. 8. 10. ^1.

And they shall be all taught of God, John 6. 45.

Q. Did Christ then promise, that the Spirit should both abide with his
Disciples, and be in them?

A. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that
he may abide with you forever, even the Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot
receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him: but ye know him; for he
dwells with you, and shall be in you, Joh. 14. 16, 17.

Q. For what End were the Scriptures written?

A. For whatsoever things were written before time, were written for our
Learning, that we through Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures might have
Hope, Romans 15. 4.

Q. For what are they profi^able?

A. Thou have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto
Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given by
Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all Good Works, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17.

Q. Wherein consists the Excellency of the Scriptures?

A. Knowing this first, that no Prophecy of the Scriptures is of any private
Interpretation; For the Prophecy came not in Old Time by the Will of Man, but
Holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21.

Q. The Scriptures are then to be regarded because they came from the Spirit*
and they also testify, that not they, but the Spirit is to lead into all
Truth; In what respect does Christ command to search them?

A. Search the Scriptures: for in them ye think ye have Eternal Life, and they
are they which testify of me, Joh. 5. 39.

Q. I perceive there was a Generation of old that greatly exalted the
Scriptures, and yet would not believe, nor come to be guided by that the
Scriptures directed to, How does Christ bespeak such?

A. Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father; there is One that
accuses you, even Moses, in whom ye trust: For had ye believed Moses, ye would
have believed me; for he wrote of me: But if ye believe not his Writings, how
shall ye believe my Words? John 5. 45, 46, 47.

Q. What ought then such to be accounted of, notwithstanding of their Pretenses
of being ruled by the Scriptures?

A. In which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are
unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures unto their
own Destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 16.

CH^P. III.
Of Jesus Christ's being manifest in the Flesh, the Use and End of it.

Question, What are the Scriptures which do most observably prophecy of
Christ's Appearance?

A. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee
of thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him ye shall hearken, Deuteronomy. 18. 15.

Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a Sign: Behold a Virgin shall
conceive, and bear a Son, and shall call his Name Immanuel, Isa. 7. 14.

Q. Was not Jesus Christ in being before he appeared in the Flesh? What clear
Scriptures prove this, against such as erroneously assert the contrary?

A. But thou Beth-lehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the Thousands of
Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be Ruler in
Israel, whose Goings forth have been from of Old, from Everlasting, Mic. 5. 2.

In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God; The same was in the Beginning with God: All things were made by him, and
without him was not any thing made, that was made, John 1. 1, 2, 3.

Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I
am, John 8. 58.

And now, O Father, Glorify thou me with thine own self, with the Glory which
I had with thee before the World was, John 17. 5.

And to make all men see what is the Fellowship of the Mystery, which from the
beginning of the World has been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 3. 9.

For by him were all things created, that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth,
visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities
or Powers: All things were created by him and for him, Col. 1. 16.

God has in these last days spoaken unto us by his Son, whom he has
appointed Heir of all things, by whom also he made the Worlds, Hebr. 1. 2.

Q. These are very clear, that even the World was created by Christ; But what
Scriptures prove the Divinity of Christ against such as falsely deny the same?

A. And the Word was God, Joh. 1. 1.

Whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the Flesh Christ came, who is
over all God, blessed forever, Amen, Romans 9. 5.

Who being in the Form of God, thought it no Robbery to be equal with God,
Philip. 2. 6.

And we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an Understanding,
that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his
Son Jesus Christ: This is the true God, and Eternal Life, 1 John 5. 20.

Q. What are the Glorious Names the Scripture gives unto Jesus Christ, the
Eternal Son of God?

A. And his Name shall be called, Wonderful, Counselor, The Mighty God, The
Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace, Isa. 9. 6.

Who is the Image of the Invisible God, the Firstborn of every Creature, Col.
1. 15.

Who being the Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person (
or more prop^rly according to the Greek, of his Substance) Hebr. 1. 3.

And he was clothed with a Vesture dipped in Blood, and his Name is called the
Word of God, Rev. 19. 13.

Q. After what manner was the Birth of Christ?

A. Now, the Birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: Whenas his Mother Mary was
espoused to Joseph (before they came together) she was found with Child of the
Holy Ghost, Mat 1. 18.

And the Angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary; for thou have found Favor with
God; And behold, thou shall conceive in thy Womb, and bring forth a Son, and
shall call his Name Jesus: He shall be great, and shall be called The Son of
the Highest; and the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of his Father
David. Then said Mary unto the Angel; How shall this be, seeing I know not a
Man? And the Angel answered, and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon
thee, and the Power of the Highest shall over-shadow thee: Therefore also that
Holy Thing, that shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God, Luke 1.
30, 31, 32, 34, 35.

Q. Was Jesus Christ, who was born of the Virgin Mary, and supposed to be the
Son of Joseph, a True and Real Man?

A. Forasmuch as the Children are Partakers of Flesh and Blood he also himself
took part of the same, that through Death he might destroy him thath has the
Power of Death, that is, the Devil, Hebr. 2. 14.

For verily, he took not on him the Nature of Angels, but he took on him the
Seed of Abraham; wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto
his Brethren, that he might be a Merciful and Faithful High Priest, etc. Hebr.
2. 16, 17.

For we have not an High Priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of
our Infirmities; but was in all Points tempted as we are, yet without Sin,
Hebr. 4. 15.

And the Gift by Grace, which is by one Man, Jesus Christ, has abounded unto
many, Romans 5. 15.

But now is Christ risen from the Dead, and become the First Fruits of them
that slept; for since by Man came Death* by Man came also the Resurrection of
the Dead, 1 Cor. 15. 20, 21.

Q. After what manner does the Scripture assert the Conjunction and Unity of
the Eternal Son of God in and with the Man Christ Jesus?

A. And the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld his Glory,
the Glory as of the Only Begotten of the Father) full of Grace and Truth, Joh.
1. 14.

For he whom God has sent, speaks the Words of God; for God gives not the
Spirit by Measure unto him, Joh. 3. 34.

How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with Power, who
went about doing Good, and healing all that were oppressed of the Devil; for
God was with him, Acts 10. 38.

For it pleased the Father, that in him should all Fullness dwell, Col. 1. 19.

For in him dwells all the Fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2. 9.

In him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Col. 2. 3.

Q. For what End did Christ appear in the World?

A. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the Flesh, God
sending his Son in the Likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin condemned Sin in
the Flesh, Romans 8. 3.

For this Purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the
Works of the Devil. And ye know that he was manifested to take away our Sins, 1 John 3. 8, 5.

Q. Was Jesus Christ really Crucified and Raised again?

A. For I delivered unto you first of all, that which I also received, how that
Christ died for our Sins, according to the Scriptures; And that he was buried,
and that he arose again the third day, according to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15.
3, 4.

Q. What End do the Scriptures asscribe unto the Coming, Death and Sufferings
of Christ?

A. For mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation, which thou have prepared before the
Face of all People, A Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of thy
People Israel, Luke 2. 30, 31, 32.

Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to
declare his Righteousness for the Remission of Sins that are past, through the
Forbearance of God, Romans 3. 25.

And walk in Love, as Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us,
an Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling Savor, Ephesians. 5. 2.

And having made Peace through the Blood of his Cross by him, to reconcile all
things unto himself by him, I say, whether they be things in Earth or things in
Heaven. And you that were sometimes alienated, and Enemies in your Minds by
Wicked Works; yet now has he reconciled in the Body of his Flesh through
Death, to present you Holy, Unblamable and Unreprovable in his Sight, Col. 1.
20, 21, 22.

Neither by the Blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own Blood he entered in
once into the Holy Place, having obtained Eternal Redemption for us. How much
more shall the Blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit offered himself
without Spot to God, purge your Consciences from Dead Works, to serve the
Living God, Hebr. 9. 12, 14.

For Christ also has once suffered for Sins, the Just for the Unjust (that he
might bring us to God) being put to Death in the Flesh, but quickened by the
Spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 18.

Hereby perceive we the Love of God, because he laid down his Life for us, 1
John 3. 16.

And for this Cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of
Death for the Redemption of Transgressions that were under the first Testament,
they which are called might receive the Promise of the Eternal Inheritance,
Hebr. 9. 15.

Q. Is Christ then the Mediator?

A. For there is One God, and One Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ
Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due time, 1 Timothy
2. 5.

Q. Was not Christ the Mediator until he appeared, and was crucified in the
Flesh?

A. He is the Lamb that was slain from the Foundation of the World, Rev. 5.
12. and 13. 8.

Q. Is it needful then to believe that the Saints of old did partake of Christ,
as then present with, and nourishing them?

A. Moreover, Brethren; I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all
our Fathers were under the Cloud, and all passed through the Sea; and were all
baptized unto Moses in the Cloud and in the Sea; and did all eat the same
spiritual Meat, and did all drink the same spiritual Drink (for they drank of
that spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ) 1 Cor. 10. 1,
2, 3, 4.

Q. But whereas most of these Scriptures beforementioned do hold forth, that
the Death and Sufferings of Christ were appointed for the destroying, removing
and remitting of Sin? Did he so do it while he was outwardly upon Earth, as not
to leave any thing for himself to do in us, nor for us to do in and by his
Strength?

A. For even hereunto were ye called, because Christ also suffered for us,
leaving us an Example, that ye should follow his Steps, 1 Pet. 2. 21.

Whereof I Paul am made a Minister, who now rejoice in my Sufferings for you,
and fill up that which is behind of the Afflictions of Christ in my Flesh for
his Body's sake, which is the Church. Col. 1. 23, 24.

Always bearing about in the B^dy the Dying of the Lord Jesus, that the Life
also of Jesus might be made manifest in our Body. For we which live, are always
delivered unto Death for Jesus's sake, that the Life also of Jesus might be
made manifest in our mortal Flesh, 2 Cor 4. 10, 11.

And that he dyed for all, that they which live should not henceforth live
unto themselves, but unto him that dyed for them, and also rose again, 2 Cor.
5. 15.

That I may know him, and the Power of his Resurrection, and the Fellowship of
his Sufferings, being made conformable to his Death, Phil. 3. 10.

CHAP. IV.
Of the New Birth, the Inward Appearance of Christ in Spirit, and the Unity of
the Saints with him.

Question. Does Christ promise then to come again to his Disciples?

A. I will not leave you comfortless; I will come unto you, John 14. 18.

Q. Was this only a special Promise to these Disciples? or is it not the common
Privilege of the Saints?

A. For thus says the High and Lofty One that inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name
is Holy, I dwell in the High and Holy Place, with him also that is of a
Contrite and Humble Spirit, etc. Isa. 57. 15.

For ye are the Temple of the Living God, as God has said, I will dwell in
them and walk in them, 2 Cor. 6. 16.

Behold I stand at the Door and knock: if any man hear my Voice, and open the
Door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me, Rev. 3. 20.

Q. Does the Apostle Paul speak of the Son of God his being revealed in him?

A. But when it pleased God, who separated me from my Mother's Womb, and called
me by his Grace, to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the
Heathen, Gal. 1. 15, 10.

Q. Is it needful then to know Christ within?

A. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith, prove your own selves;
Know ye not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13. 5.

Q. Was the Apostle earnest that this Inward Birth of Christ should be brought
forth in any?

A. My little Children, of whom I travel in Birth again, until Christ be formed
in you, Gal. 4. 19.

Q. What says the same Apostle of the Necessity of this Inward Knowledge of
Christ, and of the New Creature beyond the Outward?

A. Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the Flesh; yea, though we have
known Christ after the Flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more. Therefore
if any man be in Christ, he is a New Creature; Old things are passed away,
behold all things are become New, 2 Cor. 5. 16, 17.

But ye have not so learned Christ; if so be that ye have heard him, and have
been taught by him, as the Truth is in Jesus, That ye put off concerning the
former Conversation the Old Man, which is corrupt, according to the Deceitful
Lusts; and to be renewed in the Spirit of your Mind; and that ye put on the New
Man, which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4.
21, 22, 23, 24.

Q. Is this Christ Within, the Mystery of God and Hope of Glory, which the
Apostle preached?

A. To whom God would make known what is the Riches of the Glory of this
Mystery among the C^ntiles, which is, Christ in you the Hope of Glory, whom we
preach, Col. 1. 27, 28.

Q. Does the Apostle any where else press the putting on of this New Birth?

A. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not Provision for the Flesh to
fulfill the Lusts thereof, Romans 13. 14.

Q. Does he write to any of the Saints, as having put off the Old, and on the
New Man?

A. For, as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ,
Gal. 3. 27.

Seeing that ye have put off the Old Man with his Deeds, and have put on the
New Man, which is renewed in Knowledge after the Image of him that created him,
Col. 3. 9, 10.

Q. What speaks Christ himself of the Necessity of this New Birth?

A. Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a
man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of (...), Jo^. 3. 3.

Q. Of (...) Seed (...) Birth?

A. Being born again, not of Corruptible Seed, but of Incorruptible, by the
Word of God, which lives and abides forever, 1 Pet. 1. 23.

Q. What does the Apestle Paul witness of himself concerning this N^w Life?

A. I am crucified with Christ, nevertheelss I live, yet not I, but Christ
lives in me, Gal. 2. 20.

Q. What is the Preaching of the Cross of Christ?

A. For the Preaching of the Cross is to them that perish Foolishness; but unto
us that are saved, it is the Power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 18.

Q. What Effect had this Cross in the Apostle? and how much prefers he the
New Creature to all outward and visible Ordinances and Observances?

A. But God forbid that I should Glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom the World is crucified unto me, and I unto the World: For in
Jesus Christ neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a
New Creature, Galat. 6. 14, 15.

Q. What speaks Christ of the Unity of the Saints with him?

A. At that Day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in
you, John 14. 20.

Abide in me, and I in you: As the Branch cannot bear Fruit of it self, except
it abide in the Vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me. I am the Vine, ye
are the Branches; He that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth
much Fruit; for without me ye can do nothing, John 15. 4, 5.

Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe in me
through their Word: That they all may be One; as thou Father, art in me, and I
in thee, that they also may be One in us, that the World may believe it that
thou have sent me. And the Glory which thou gave me I have given them, that
they may be One, even as we are one: I in them, and thou in me, that they may
be made perfect in One, and that the World may know that thou have sent me, and
have loved them as thou have loved me, John 17. 20, 21, 22, 23.

Q. What says the Apostle Paul to this Purpose?

A. For both he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are all of one*
for which Cause he is not ashamed to call them Brethren, Heb. 2. 11.

Q. What says the Apostle Peter?

A. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious Promi^es, that by
these you might be Partakers of the Divine Nature, having escaped the
Corruption that is in the World through Lust, 2 Pet. 1. 4.

CHAP. V.
Concerning the Light wherewith Jesus Christ has enlightened every man; The
Universality and Sufficiency of God's Grace to all the World made manifest
therein.

Question, WHerein consists the Love of God toward Fallen and Lost Man?

A. For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have Everlasting Life, John
3. 16.

In this was manifested the Love of God toward us, because that God sent his
only begotten Son into the World, that we might live through him, 1 John 4. 9.

Q. What is intended here by the World? all and every man, or only a few?

A. But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower then the Angels for the
suffering of Death, crowned with Glory and Honor that he by the Grace of God
should taste Death for every man, Hebr. 2. 9.

And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father. Jesus Christ, the
Righteous; and he is the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours only, but
also for the Sins of the whole World, 1 John 2. 1, 2.

Q. Methinks the Apostle John is very plain there, in mentioning the whole
World, which must be not only the Saints, but all others; seeing he
distinguishes the World from himself and all the Saints to whom he then wrote:
What says Paul elsewhere in this Matter?

A. Christ in you, the Hope of Glory, whom we preach, warning every man, and
^eaching every man in all Wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus, Col. 1. 27, 28.

I exhort therefore, that first of all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions
and Giving of Thanks be made for all men; For this is good and acceptable in
the Sight of God our Savior, who will have all men to be saved, and to come to
the Knowledge of the Truth; who gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified
in due time, 1 Timothy 2. 1. 3, 4, 6.

Q. What is the Apostle Peter's Testimony in this?

A. The Lord is not ^lack concerning his Promise (as some men count Slackness)
but is Long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that
all should come to Repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9.

Q. Are there any more Scripture-Passages that prove this thing?

A. Say unto them, As I live, says the Lord God, I have no Pleasure in the
Death of the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from his Way and live, Ezekiel. 33.
11.

The Lord is Gracious, and full of Compassion; slow to Anger, and of great
Mercy. The Lord is good to all, and his tender Mercies are over all his Works,
Plal. 145. 8, 9.

To wit, That God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.
19.

Q. Seeing then by these Scriptures it appears that the Love of God is held out
to all, that all might have been or may be saved by Christ; What is to be
judged of those who assert, that God nor Christ never purposed Love nor
Salvation to a great part of Mankind, and that the Coming and Sufferings of
Christ never were intended, nor could be useful to their Justification; but
will and must be effectual for their Condemnation, even according to God's
Purpose, who from their very Infancy to their Grave withheld from them all
Means of Salvation? What says the Scripture to such?

A. For God sent not his Son into the World to condemn the World, but that the
World through him might be saved, John 3. 17.

I am come a Light into the World, that whosoever believes in me, should not
abide in Darkness. And if any man hear my words and believe not, I judge him
not; for I came not to judge the World, but to save the World, Joh. 12. 46, 47.

Q. From what Scripture then come these men to wrest an Opinion so contrary to
Truth?

A. For the Children being not yet born, neither having done any Good or Evil,
that the Purpose of God according to Election might stand, it was said unto
her, The Elder shall serve the Younger, as it is written, Jacob have I loved,
but Esau have I hated, Romans 9. 11, 12, 13.

Q. I perceive in that Scripture it was only said before the Children were
born, The Elder shall serve the Younger; These other words (Jacob have I loved,
Esau have I hated) are mentioned out of the Prophet Malachie, who wrote them
many hundred years after both were dead: Does not the Scripture mention any
^ther Cause of God's Hating Esau, then merely his Decree? What says the same
Apostle elsewhere?

A. Left there be any Fornicator or Profane Person, as Esau, who for one
Morsel of Meat sold his Birth Right; for ye know, how that afterward when he
would have inherited the Blessing, he was rejected, Heb. 12. 16, 17.

Q. But seeing that such allege, that it is because of Adam's Sin that many,
even Children are damned; Does not the Scripture ^ver, that the Death of Christ
was as large to Heal, as Adam's Sin could Condemn?

A. For if through the Offense of one many be dead, much more the Grace of God,
and the Gift by Grace, which is by one Man, Jesus Christ. Therefore as by the
Offense of one, Judgment came upon all men to Condemnation, even so by the
Righteousness of one the free Gift came upon all men unto Justification of
Life, Romans 5. 15, 18.

Q. That proves abundantly that Christ's Death is of sufficient Extent to make
up any Hurt Adam's Sin brought upon Mankind: What is then the Cause of
Condemnation?

A. He that believes on him is not Condemned; but he that believes not is
condemned already, because he has not believed in the Name of the Only
Begotten Son of God, John 3. 18.

And with all Deceivableness of Unrighteousness in them that perish, because
they received not the Love of the Truth, that they might be saved. And for this
Cause God shall send them strong Delusions, that they should believe a Lie,
that they all might be damned who believe not the Truth, but had Pleasure in
Unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12.

Q. Seeing it is so of a Truth according to the Scripture's Testimony, that God
has purposed Love and Mercy to all, in the Appearance of his Son Jesus Christ;
Is the Gospel or Glad-Tidings of this Salvation brought nigh unto all, by which
they are put into a Capacity of receiving the Grace, and being saved by it?

A. If ye continue in the Faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away from
the Hope of the Gospel* which ye have heard, and which was preached to every
Creature which is under Heaven, whereof I Paul, am made a Minister, Col. 1. 23.

Q. What is the Gospel?

A. I am not ashamed of the Gospel; for it is the Power of God unto Salvation
unto every one that believes, Romans 1. 16.

Q. Is this Gospel hid?

A If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are Lost, in whom the God of
this World has blinded the Minds of them which believe not, lest the Light of
the Glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.

Q. Is this Light then come into the World? and are not men condemned because
they love it not, and not because it is hid from them?

A. And this is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and men
love Darkness rather then Light, Joh. 3. 19.

Q. Why do they so?

A. Because their Deeds are Evil, John 3. 19.

Q. Is every man enlightened by this Light?

A. He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light, that was
the True Light, which enlightneth every man that comes into the World, John 1.
8, 9.

Q. Does this Light discover all things?

A. All things that are reproved are made manifest by the Light; for whatsoever
does make manifest is Light, Ephesians. 5. 13.

Q. Do Evil Men preach up this Light, or mind it?

A. Every one that does Evil hates the Light, neither comes to the Light,
lest his Deeds should be reproved, John 3. 20.

They are of those that Rebel against the Light, Job 24. 13.

Q. Do Good Men love it, and follow it?

A. He that does Truth comes to the Light, that his Deeds may be made manifest,
that they are wrought in God, John 3. 21.

Q. What Benefit does redound to such as love the Light, and walk in it?

A. If we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, we have ^ellowship one with
another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanses us from all Sin, 1 John 1. 7.

Q. Does Christ command to take heed to the Light?

A. While ye have the Light, believe in the Light, that ye may be the Children
of the Light, Joh. 12. 36.

Q. Were the Apostles commanded to turn People to the Light?

A. Delivering thee from the People, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I
send thee, To open their Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness unto Light, and
from the Power of Satan unto God, that they may receive Forgiveness of Sins,
and Inheritance among them which are sanctified, through Faith that is in me,
Acts 26. 17, 18.

Q. Does this Light abide with every man all his Life time, in order to save,
or only during the Day of his Visitation?

A. Yet a little while is the Light with you; walk while ye have the Light,
lest Darkness come upon you, John 1^. 35.

Again, He limiteth a certain Day, saying in David, to day, after so long time,
as it is said, To day if ye will here his Voice, harden not your Hearts, Heb.
4. 7.

Q. How can it be proved, that there is a day wherein People may know things
concerning their Peace, which afterward may be hid from them?

A. And when he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it, saying, If
thou had known even thou, at least in this thy day the things which belong
unto thy Peace; but now they are hid from thine Eyes, Luke 19. 41, 42.

Q. Is there any further Scripture Proof of the Lord's Willingness to gather a
People, who would not, and therefore were condemned?

A. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them
which are sent unto thee, How often would I have gathered thy Children together,
even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not? Mat.
23. 37. Luke 13. 34.

Then his Lord, after that he had called him, said unto him, O thou Wicked
Servant! I forgave thee all the Debt, because thou desiredst me; should not
thou also have had Compassion on thy Fellow Servant, even as I had Pity on
thee? And his Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the Tormentors, till he
should pay all that was due unto him, Mat. 18. 32, 33, 34.

Then Paul and Barnabas wa^ed bold, and said, It was necessary that the Word of
God should first have been spoaken to you; but seeing ye put it from you, and
judge your selves unworthy of Everlasting Life, ^o we turn to the Gentiles,
Acts 13. 46.

Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my Hand, and no
man regarded: But ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and would none of my
Reproof; I also will laugh at your Calamity, I will mock when your Fear comes,
Prove. 1. 24, 25, 26.

And at what Instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a
Kingdom to build and to plant it; If it do Evil in my Sight that it obey not my
Voice, then I will Repent of the Good wherewith I said I would benefit them,
Jer. 18. 9, 10.

Q. Does God's Spirit strive then for a season, and afterward^ forbear?

A. And the Lord said, My Spirit shall not always strive with man, Genesis 6. 3.

Q. May it then be resisted?

A. Ye Stiff-necked and Uncircumcised in Heart and Ears, ye do always Resist
the holy Ghost, as your Fathers did, so do ye, Act. 7. 51.

For the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness of Men, who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness,, Romans 1. 18.

Q. Has God manifested to man that which may be known of himself?

A. That which may be known of God is manifest in them; for God has showed it
unto them, Romans 1. 19.

Q. Is then this Light or Seed sown in the Hearts of Evil Men?

A. And he spoke many things to them in Parables; Behold, a Sower went forth to
sow, and when he sowed, some Seeds fell by the Way side, etc. some fell among
stony Places, etc. and some fell among Thorns, etc. Matthew. 13* 3, 4, 5, 7.

Q. Are these Places where the Seed is said (...) have fallen, understood of
the Hearts of Men*

A. Hear ye therefore the Parable of the Sower: when any one hears the Word
o^ the Kingdom, and understands it not, the^ comes the wicked One, and
catches awa^ that which was sown in his Heart; this is h^ which received the
Seed by the Way side, etc* Mat. 13. 18, 19.

Q. Is this Seed small in its first Appearance^

A. The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a Grain of Mustard Seed, which a man took
and sowed in his Field, which indeed is the least of all all Seeds, Mat. 13.
31, 32.

Q. Forasmuch as many understand not this under the Notion and Appellation of
Light or Seed, it being quite another Dialect then the common; though I must
needs confess it is the very Language of the Scriptures* Is a Saving
Manifestation of the Spirit given unto all?

A. The Manifestation of the Spirit given to every man to profit withal, 1 Cor.
12. 7.

Q. Sure, if it be to profit withal, it must be in order to save; for if it
were not useful, yea, sufficient to save, what Profit could it be of? But in
regard some speak of a Grace that is common, and of a Grace that is saving, is
there such a Grace common unto all as brings Salvation?

A. The Grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared to all men, Tit. 2. 11.

Q. That which brings Salvation must needs be saving; What does that Grace
teach us?

A. Teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, we should live
Soberly, Righteously and Godlily in this present World, Tit. 2. 11.

Q. Certainly that which teaches both Righteousness and Godliness must be
sufficient; for therein consists the whole Duty of Man; What says the
Apostle elsewhere of this Instructor?

A. And now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace,
which is able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among all those
that are sanctified Acts 20. 32.

Q. What is the Word of God?

A. The Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper then any Two-edged
Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the
Joints and Marrow, and is a Discerner of the Thooghts and Intents of the Heart.
Neither is there any Creature that is not manifest in his Sight, but all things
are naked and open to the Eyes of him with whom we have to do* Heb. 4. 12, 13.

Q. Ought we to take heed to this Word?

A. We have also a More Sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye
take* heed, as unto a Light that shines in a Dark Place, until the Day dawn,
and the Day Star arise in your Hearts, 2 Pet. 1. 19.

Q. I perceive the Scriptures are very clear both concerning the Universality
and Sufficiency of this Light, Seed, Grace and Word of God; but is this Word
nigh or afar off, inward or outward?

A. Say not in thine Heart, Who shall ascend into Heaven, that is, to bring
Christ down from above; or who shall descend into the Deep, that is, to bring up
Christ again from the Dead: But what says it? The Word is nigh, in thy Mouth
and in thy Heart, that is the Word of Faith which we preach, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8.

Q. That is clear as to the Word; Is there any Scripture speaks of the Light's
being inward?

A. God, who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness has shined in our
Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of
Jesus Christ. But we have this Treasure in earthen Vessels, that the Excellency
of the Power may be of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4. 6, 7.

Q. But seeing it is also called the Seed of the Kingdom, is the Kingdom of God
also within?

A. The Kingdom of God comes not with Observation, neither shall they say, Lo
here, or Lo here; for behold, the Kingdom of God is within you, Luke 17. 20, 21.

CHAP. VI.
Concerning Faith, Justification, and Works.

Question, What is Faith?

A. Faith is the Substance of things hoped for, and the Evidence of things not
seen, Heb. 11. 1.

Q. Is Faith of absolute Necessity?

A. Without Faith it is impossible to please him; for he that comes to God,
must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek
him, Heb. 11. 6.

Q. Are we justified by Faith?

A. Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we
might be justified by Faith, Gal. 3. 24.

Q. What is the Nature of this Faith that avails to Justification?

A. For in Jesus Christ neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision; but Faith which works by Love, Gal. 5. 6.

Q. Are Works then necessary to Justification as well as Faith?

A. But will thou know, O Vain Man, that Faith without Works is dead? Was not
Abraham, our Father, justified by Works when he had offered Isaac, his Son,
upon the Altar? See thou how Faith wrought with his Works; and by Works was
Faith made perfect? And the Scripture was fulfilled, which says, Abraham
believed God, and it was imputed to him for Righteousness: He was called the
Friend of God. Ye see then how that by Works a man is justified, and not by
Faith only, Jam. 2. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

Q. If then both be equally required in Justification, what are these ^orks
which the Apostle excludes so much?

A. By the Deeds of the Law there shall no Flesh be justified in his Sight,
Romans 3. 20.

Q. But though we be not justified by the Deeds of the Law, is not th^s to
exclude Boasting, that the Grace of God may by exalted?

A. For by Grace are ye saved, through Faith, and that not of your selves, it
is the Gift of God; not of Works, left any man should boast; for we are his
Work manship created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10.

Q. Are even the Works which are performed by Grace excluded? are we never said
to be saved or justified by them?

A. Not by Works of Righteousness which we have done, but according to his
Mercy he saved us by the Washing of Regeneration and renewing of the Holy
Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ, our Savior; That
being justified by his Grace we should be made Heirs, according to the Hope of
Eternal Life, Tit. 3. 5, 6, 7.

Q. I perceive then that to be justified by Grace, is to be justified or saved
by Regeneration, which cannot exclude the Works wrought by Grace and by the
Spirit; How does the Apostle add in the next Verse for the maintaining this
against these that Cavil about the Law?

A. This is a Faithful Saying, and these things I will that thou affirm
constantly, that they which believed in God might be careful to maintain good
Works; these things are good and profitable unto men: But avoid Foolish
Questions, and Genealogies, and Contentions, and Strivings about the Law; for
they are unprofitable and vain, Tit. 3. 8, 9.

Q. Does the Apostle Paul, that is so much against justification by the Works
of the Law, speak any where else of being justified by the Spirit?

A. But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified; but ye are justified in the Name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6. 11.

Q. But since the Law gives not Power nor Ability to obey, and so falls short
of Justification; Is there no Power under the Gospel by which the Righteousness
of the Law comes to be fulfilled inwardly?

A. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the Flesh, God
sending his own Son in the Likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin condemned Sin
in the Flesh; that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who
walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8. 3, 4.

Q. Seeing th^n there is Power in the Spirit, is not Works through it a
Condition upon which Life is proposed under the New Covenant?

A. For if ye live after the Flesh, ye shall dye; but if ye through the Spirit
do mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live, Romans 8. 13.

Q. Do not the Apostles then frequently propose Life to People upon Condition
of Repentance and other Works?

A. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your Sins may be blotted out,
Acts 3. 19,

And if Children, then Heirs of God and joint Heirs with Christ, if so be that
we suffer with him, that we also may be glorified together, Romans 8. 17.

It is a faithful Saying; For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with
him: If we suffer, we shall also reign with him. If a man therefore purge
himself from these, he shall be a Vessel unto Honor, sanctified and meet for
the Master's Use, and prepared unto every good Work, 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12, 21.

Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and Repent, and do the first
Works: or else, I will come unto thee quickly, and remove thy Candle stick out
of his place, except thou Repent, Rev. 2. 5.

Q. It appears clearly by these Passages, that the Apostle excludes only our
Righteousness, which he elsewhere explains as being the Righteousness of the
Law from being necessary to Justification, and not such Works as the Law of the
Spirit of Life leads to, and are not so much ours as Christ in us; are not such
good Works rewarded, though they require no absolute Merit, as being the Fruits
of free Grace, yet does not God judge according to them? and may they not be
said to have a Reward?

A. But if a man be Just, and do that which is Lawful and Right, and has not
eaten upon the Mountains, neither has lift up his Eyes to the Idols of the
House of Israel, neither has defiled his Neighbor's Wife, neither has come
near to a Menstruous Woman, and has not oppressed any; but has restored to the
Debtor his Pledge, has spoiled none by Violence, has given his Bread to the
Hungry, and has covered the Naked with a Garment; he that has not given forth
upon Usury, neither has taken any Increase, that has with drawn his Hand from
Iniquity, has executed True Judgment between man and man, has walked in my
Statutes, and has kept my Judgments to Deal Truly, he is just, (...) (...)
surely Live, says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 18. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

For the Son of Man shall come in the Glory of his Father with his Angels, and
then he shall Reward every Man according to his Works, Mat. 16. 27.

Then Peter opened his Mouth, and said, Of a Truth I perceive that God is no
Respecter of Persons; but in every Nation he that fears him and works
Righteousness, is accepted with him, Acts 10. 34, 35.

The Righteous Judgment of God, who will render to every man according to his
Deeds; To them who by Patient Continuance in Well-doing seek for Glory and
Honor, and Immortality, Eternal Life? But Glory, Honor and Peace to every man
that works Good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile, Romans 2. 6, 7, 10.

For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his Body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5. 10.

Which is a manifest Token of the Righteous Judgment of God, that ye may be
counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer, 3 These. 1. 5.

But who so looks into the Perfect Law of Liberty, and continues therein, he
being not a forgetful Hearer, but a Doer of the Work, this man shall be blessed
in his Deed, James 1. 25.

Cast not away therefore your Confidence, which has great Recompense of
Reward, Hebr. 10. 35.

And if ye call on the Father, who without Respect of Persons judges according
to every man's Work, pass the time of your sojourning here in Fear, 1 P^t. 1.
17.

And behold I come quickly, and behold my Reward is with me, to give every man
according as his work shall be. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that
they may have a Right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the Gates
into the City, Rev. 22. 12, 14.

Q. It should seem that the Purpose of God in sending his Son, the Lord Jesus
Christ, was not simply to save Man by an Imputative Righteousness altogether
without them; but also by the Washing of Regeneration, or any inward
Righteousness: What says the Scripture further of this?

A. And thou shall call his Name Jesus; for he shall save his People from their
Sins, Mat. 1. 21.

Looking for that Blessed Hope, and the Glorious Appearing of the Great God,
and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us
from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of Good
Works, Tit. 2. 13, 14.

CHAP. VII.
Concerning Perfection, or Freedom from SIN.

Question, I Perceive then by all these Scriptures aforementioned, that
Christ, as well as he has purchased Pardon for our Sins, has also obtained
Power by which we may even here be cleansed from the Filth of them; may we
expect then in this Life to be freed from the Dominion of Sin?

A. For Sin shall not have Dominion over you, Romans 6. 14.

Q. For what Reason?

A. For ye are not under the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6. 14.

Q. How comes the Apostle then to cry out and complain of Sin, saying, Who
shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? Does he speak that, as a
Condition always permanent to him and other Saints, or only that which he had
passed through? What says he afterward?

A. There is therefore now no Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus,
who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; for the Law of the Spirit
of Life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of Sin and Death. Who
shall separate us from the Love of Christ? Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or
Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? (as it is written, For
thy sake we are killed all the Day long, we are accounted as Sheep for the
Slaughter) Nay, in all these things we are more then Conquerors through him
that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither Death nor Life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor Height,
nor Depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate us from the Love of
God which is in Christ Jesus, our Lord, Romans 8. 1, 2, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39.

Q. What says that Apostle then unto such, who taking Occasion from his words
should plead for Continuance in Sin for term of Life, and think to be saved by
the Imputative Righteousness of Christ, as being under Grace?

A. What shall we say then? shall we continue in Sin, that Grace may abound?
God forbid, Romans 6. 1, 2.

What then? shall we Sin, because we are not under the Law, but under Grace?
God forbid.

Q. Is not the Apostle then so far from supposing that Condition, of being
always under Sin, to be his own constant Condition, or that of all the Saints,
that he even supposes, many of the then Church of Rome, to whom he wrote, to be
free of it; How bespeaketh he them as in relation to this Matter?

A. How shall we that are dead to Sin, live any longer therein? Know ye not,
that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his
Death; Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into Death, that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead by the Glory of the Father, even so we also
should walk in Newnes of Life: For if we have been planted together in the
Likeness of his Death, we shall be also in the Likeness of his Resurrection;
knowing this, that our Old Man is crucified with him, that the Body of sin
might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve Sin; for he that is
dead is freed from Sin. Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed
unto Sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ* our Lord. Let not Sin
therefore reign in your mortal Body, that ye should obey it in the Lusts
thereof: Neither yield ye your Members as Instruments of Unrighteousness unto
Sin; but yield your selves unto God, as those that are alive from the Dead, and
your Members as Instruments of Righteousness unto God. Know ye not, that to
whom ye yield your selves Servants to obey, his Servants ye are to whom ye
obey, whether of Sin unto Death, or of Obedience unto Righteousness: But, God
be thanked, that ye were the Servants of Sin; but ye have Obeyed from the Heart
that Form of Doctrine which was delivered unto you; being then made free from
Sin, ye became the Servants of Righteousness: I speak after the manner of men,
because of the Infirmity of your Flesh; For as ye have yielded your Members
Servants to Uncleanness and to Iniquity, unto Iniquity, even so now yield your
Members Servants to Righteousness unto Holiness: For when ye were the Servants
of Sin, ye were free from Righteousness; What Fruit had ye then in these things
whereof ye are now ashamed? for the End of these things is Death. But now,
being made free from Sin, and become Servants to God, ye have your Fruit unto
Holiness, and the End, Everlasting Life: For the Wages of Sin is Death; but the
Gift of God is Eternal Life through Jesus Christ, (...) Lord, Romans 6. 3* 4, 5,
6, 7, 11, 12, 13, ^6, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, ^2, 23.

Q. It would appear then that God requires of us to be perfect?

A. Be ye therefore Perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is Perfect,
Mat. 5. 48.

Q. Is it then possible to keep the Commandments?

A. My Yoke is easy, and my Burden is light, Mat. 11. 30.

For this is the Law of God, that we keep his Commandments, and his
Commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5. 3.

Q. Is it necessary then for Salvation to keep the Commandments?

A. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have Right to the
Tree of Life, and may enter in through the Gates into the City, Rev. 22. 14.

Q. Do you understand by this Perfection that any have so kept the
Commandments, as never to have sinned?

A. If we say, that we have not sinned, we make him a Liar, and his Word is not
in us, 1 John 1. 10.

Q. Do you understand that those who are perfect may say, they have no Sin; or
only that having sinned, and so having Sin, in respect they once sinned, as the
Apostle in the Passage cited mentions? May they not withstanding thereof come
to know Forgiveness for the Guilt, but also Cleansing from the Filth?

A. If we say, we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in
us: If we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and
to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness, 1 John 1. 8.

Q. That Scripture seems to be very plain, being compared with the other
beforementioned: But because some are apt to mistake and wrest the Words of
that Apostle, what says he elsewhere? Did he judge, any could know God, or be
True Christians, who kept not the Commandments?

A. My little Children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not; and if
any man sin we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, the Righteous:
And hereby do we know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments. He that
says, I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar, and the Truth
is not in him: But whosoever keeps his Word, in him verily is the Love of God
perfected. Hereby know we that we are in him. He that says he abides in him,
ought himself also to walk even as he walked. Beloved, now are we the Sons of
God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when he
shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is: And every
man that has this Hope in him, purifieth himself even as he is pure. Whosoever
commits Sin transgresses also the Law; for Sin is the Transgression of the
Law. And ye know that he was manifested to take away our Sins, and in him is no
Sin: Whosoever abides in him sins not: Whosoever sins has not seen him,
neither known him. Little Children, let not man deceive you; he that does
Righteousness is Righteous, even as he is Righteous. He that commits Sin is
of the Devil; for the Devil sins from the beginning: For this purpose the
Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the Works of the Devil.
Whosoever is born of God does not commit Sin, for his Seed remains in him;
and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. In this the Children of God are
manifest, and the Children of the Devil; whosoever does not Righteousness is
not of God, neither he that loves not his Brother, 1 John 2. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and 3. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

Q. It is very plain by these Passages that the Apostles were far of another
Mind, then those that plead for Sin during term of Life, and much against the
Deceit of those who will esteem themselves Good Christians while they live in
their Sins?

A. Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, but he that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven. Therefore
whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him unto
the Wise Man, which built his House upon a Rock, Mat. 7. 21, 24.

If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them, Joh. 13. 17.

Q. What says the Apostle Paul further concerning the Needfulness of this
thing?

A. Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is nothing; but the keeping of
the Commandments of God, 1 Cor. 7. 19.

Q. Was not this according to the Apostle Paul's Judgment, the very Intention
of Christ, to have his Church and Children to be pure and without Spot?

A. According as he has chosen us in him, before the Foundation of the World,
that we should be Holy and without Blame before him in Love, Ephesians. 1. 4.

Even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might
sanctify and cleanse it, that he might present it to himself a Glorious
Church, not having Spot or Wrinckle, or any such thing; but that it should be
Holy and without Blemish, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27.

Q. Does not Paul press the same thing further, besides the other Passages
abovementioned?

A. Having therefore these Promises, Dearly Beloved, Let us cleanse our selves
from all Filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the Fear of
God, 2 Cor. 7. 1.

Finally, Brethren, farewell; be perfect, 2 Cor. 13 11.

Christ in you the Hope of Glory, whom we preach, warning every man, and
teaching every man in all Wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus, Col. 1. 28.

Laboring fervently for you in Prayers, that ye may stand perfect and complete
in all the Will of God, Col. 4. 12.

To the End he may establish your Hearts unblamable in Holiness before God, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 13.

And the very God of Peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God, your whole
Spirit, and Soul, and Body be presented blameless unto the Coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.

Q. Is not this then the very End for which God appointed Teachers in his
Church?

A. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors and Teachers, for the Perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of
the Ministry, for the Edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come in the
Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man
unto the Measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.

Q. Seeing this is so much pressed by the Holy Men, does not the Scripture,
which cannot lie, give none of the Saints this Testimony, as being free from
Sin at sometimes, and so not always and daily sinning, as is supposed?

A. Noah was a Just Man, and Perfect in his Generations; and Noah walked with
God, Ger. 6. 9.

And the Lord said unto Satan, Have thou considered my Servant Job, that there
is none like him in the Earth, a Perfect and an Upright Man, that fears God
and escheweth Evil, Job 1. 8.

There was in the days of Herod, King of Judea, a certain Priest named
Zacharias, of the Course of Abja; and his Wife was of the Daughters of Aaron,
and her Name was Elizabeth, and they were both Righteous before God, walking in
all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless, Luke 1. 1, 2.

Q. That proves sufficiently as to particular Persons; But what does the
Scripture intimate of this nature even of considerable Numbers?

A. But God, who is rich in Mercy, for his great Love, wherewith he has loved
us, even when we were dead in Sins, has quickened us together with Christ, and
has raised us up together and made us sit together in Heavenly Places in
Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 4, 5, 6.

But ye are come unto Mount Sion and unto the City of the Living God, the
Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an Innumerable Company of Angels, to the General
Assembly and Church of the Firstborn, which are written in Heaven; to God, the
Judge of all, and to the Spirits of Just Men made perfect, Hebr. 12. 22, 23.

And I Looked, and lo, a Lamb stood on the Mount Sion, and with him an Hundred
Forty and Four Thousand, having his Father's Name written in their Foreheads:
These are they which were not defiled with Women; for they are Virgins: These
are they which follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes: These were redeemed from
among men, being the First Fruits unto God, and to the Lamb. And in their Mouth
was found no Guile; for they are without Fault before the Throne of God, Rev.
14. 1, 4.

CHAP. VIII.
Concerning Perseverance and Falling from GRACE.

Question. IS it enough for a Believer, to be sure that he has once received
true Grace? or is there any further Certainty requisite?

A. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give Diligence to make your Calling and
Election sure; for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall, 2 Pet. 1. 10.

Q. May one that has received true Grace have Ground to fear, or suppose he
can fall?

A. But I keep under my Body, and bring it into Subjection, lest that by any
Means when I have preached to others, I my self should become a Cast away, 1
Cor. 9. 27.

Q. That greatly contradicts the Doctrine of such as say, Once in ^race, ever
in Grace; But does the Apostle Paul express this only o^t of an Humble Esteem
of himself? or does he judge or suppose the like of other Saints?

A. Take heed, Brethren, lest there be in any of you an Evil Heart of Unbelief,
in departing from the Living God; But exhort one another daily, while it is
called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin,
Hebr. 4. 12, 13.

Let us labor therefore to enter into that Rest, lest any man fall after the
same Example of Unbelief, Hebr. 4. 11.

For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of
the Heavenly Gift, and were made Partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted
the Good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to come, if they shall fall
away, to renew them again unto Repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves
the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open Shame, Hebr. 6. 4, 5, 6.

Looking diligently, lest any man fail of the Grace of God, lest any Root of
Bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled, Hebr. 12. 15.

Q. Does he speak this only by Supposition? or does he assert it not only
Possible, but Certain?

A. For the time will come, when they will not endure sound Doctrine, but after
their own Lusts shall they heap to themselves Teachers, having itching Ears;
and they shall turn away their Ears from the Truth, and shall be turned unto
Fables, 2 Timothy 4. 3.

Q. Does the Apostle even judge it necessary to guard such a one as his beloved
Son, Timothy, against this Hazard?

A. This Charge I commit unto thee, Son Timothy, according to the Prophecies
which went before on thee, that thou by them might war the good Warfare;
Holding Faith in a good Conscience, which some having put away concerning
Faith, have made Shipwreck, 1 Timothy 1. 18, 19.

For the Love of Money is the Root of all Evil, which while some coveted after,
they have erred from the Faith, and pierced themselves through with many
Sorrows, 2 Timothy 4. 10.

And their Word will eat, as does a Canker, of whom is Hymeneus and Philet^^,
who concerning the true Faith have erred; saying, That the Resurrection is past
already; and overthrown the Faith of some, 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18.

Q. Does the Apostle any where express his Fears of this as a thing that may
happen to any number of People, who once truly received the Faith of Christ?

A. Well, because of Unbelief they were broaken off, and thou stand by
Faith; be not High-minded, but fear, Romans 11, 20.

Now, the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the Latter times some shall depart
from the Faith, etc. 1 Timothy 4. 1.

For this Cause, when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know your Faith,
lest by some means the Tempter have tempted you, and our Labor be in vain, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 5.

Q. What is the Apostle Peter's Mind? does he judge that such as have known the
right Way may forsake it?

A. Cursed Children, which have forsaken the Righteous Way, and are gone
astray, following the Way of Balaam, the Son of Bez^r, who loved the Wages of
Unrighteousness; but was rebuked for his Iniquity; the dumb Ass speaking with
Man's Voice, forbad the Madness of the Prophet, These are Wells without Water,
Clouds that are carried with a Tempest, to whom the Mist of Darkness is
reserved forever: For when they speak great swelling Words of Vanity; they
allure through the Lusts of the Flesh, through much Wantonness; those that were
clean escaped from them who live in Error: For if after they have escaped the
Pollutions of the World through the Knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the Latter-end is worse
with them then the Beginning; for it had been better for them, not to have
known the Way of Righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the
holy Commandment delivered unto them: But it is happened to them, according to
the true Proverb, The Dog is turned to his Vomit again, and the Sow that was
washed to her wallowing in the Mire, 2 Pet. 2. 14, 15, 18, 20, 21, 22.

Q. Gives he any Cautions to them that stand, as supposing they may also fall?

A. Ye therefore, Beloved, seeing ye know these Things before, beware, lest ye
also being led away with the Error of the Wicked, fall from your own
Stedfastness, 2 Pet. 3. 17.

Q. May a man be truly a Branch in Christ, or a real Member of his Body, and
afterward be cut off?

A. If any man abide not in me, he is cast forth, as a Branch, and is withered,
Joh. 15. 6.

Q. May a Righteous Man then depart from his Righteousness?

A. But when the Righteous Man turns away from his Righteousness, and commits
Iniquity, and dies in them, for his Iniquity that he has done shall he dye,
Ezekiel. 18. 26. and 33. 13.

Q. May a Believer come to such a Condition in this Life, from which he cannot
fall away?

A. Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he
shall go no more out; and I will write upon him the Name of my God, and the
Name of the City of my God, which is New Jerusalem, who comes down out of
Heaven from my God; and will write upon him my New Name, Rev. 3. 12.

Q. May such an (...) ome to be assured that he is in this Condition?

A. For I am persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor Height,
nor Depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate us from the Love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus, our Lord, Romans 8. 38, 39.

CHAP. IX.
Concerning the Church and Ministry.

Question, WHat is the Church?

A. But if I tarry long, that thou may know how thou ought to behave thy
self in the House of God, which is the Church of the Living God, the Pillar and
Ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15.

Q. Who is the Head of the Church?

A. Who has delivered us from the Power of Darkness, and has translated us
into the Kingdom of his dear Son; and he is the Head of the Body, the Church,
from which all the Body by Joints and Bands, having Nourishment ministered, and
knit together, increases with the Excrease of God, 1 Coloss. 1. 3. and 2. 10.

Q. What kind of Persons make the Church?

A. Them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1. 2.

And the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved, Acts 2. 47.

Q. Has not Christ appointed any Officers in the Church for the Work of the
Ministry?

A. Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high, he led Captivity captive,
and gave Gifts unto Men; and he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the Work of the Ministry, for the Edification of the Body of Christ, Ephesians.
4. 8, 11, 12.

Q. What kind of Men should such as are Teachers and Overseers of the Church be?

A. A Bishop then must be Blameless, the Husband of one Wife, Vigilant, Sober,
of good Behavior, given to Hospitality, apt to teach, not given to Wi^e, no
Striker, not greedy of filthy Lucre; but Patient: Not a Brawl^^, not Covetous,
one that rules well his own House, having his Children in Subjection with all
Gravity (for if a man know not how to rule his own House, how shall he take
Care of the Church of God?) not a Novice, lest being lifted up with Pride, he
fall into the Condemnation of the Devil; Moreover, he must have a good Report
of them which are without, lest he fall into Reproach, and the Snare of the
Devil, 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

For a Bishop must be Blameless, as the Steward of God, not Self-willed, not
soon Angry, not given to Wine, no Striker, not given to Filthy Lucre; but a
Lover of Hospitality, a Lover of good Men, sober, just, holy, temperate,
holding fast the faithful Word, as he has been taught, that he may be able by
sound Doctrine, both to exhort and to convince the Gainsayers, Tit. 1. 7, 8, 9.

Q. What is incumbent upon such to do?

A. Take heed therefore to your selves, and to all the Flock, over which the
holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, Acts 20. 28.

The Elders which are among you, I exhort, who am also an Elder, and a Witness
of the Sufferings of Christ, and also a Partaker of the Glory that shall be
revealed: Feed the Flock of God which is among you, taking the Oversight
thereof, not by Constraint, but willingly; not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready
Mind; neither as being Lords over God's Heritage, but being Ensamples to the
Flock, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3.

Q. Though they be not to Lord over the Flock, yet is there not a Respect due
to them in their Place?

A. Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double Honor,
especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5. 17.

Q. Albeit then among true Christians every one that believes is to have the
Witness in himself, being persuaded in himself by the Spirit; yet is there not
also a real Subjection to be to one another in the Lord?

A. The Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets 1 Cor. 14. 32.

Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch
for your Souls, as they that must give Account, that they may do it with Joy,
and not with Grief; for that is unprofitable for you, Heb. 13. 17.

And we beseech you Brethren, to know them which labor among you, and are over
you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to esteem them very highly in Love, for
their Works sake, 1 These. 5. 12, 13.

Likewise, ye younger, submit your selves unto the Elder; yea, all of you be
subject one to another, and be clothed with Humility; for God resists the
Proud, and gives Grace unto the Humble, 1 Pet. 5. 5.

Q. How ought true Teachers to minister in the Church?

A. As every Man has received the Gift, even so Minister the same one to
another, as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God. If any speak let him
speak as the Oracles of God: If any Man minister, let him do it as of the
Ability which God gives, that God in all things may be glorified, through
Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 4. 10, 11.

Q. I perceive then, that every true Minister of the Church of Christ is, to
minister of the Gift and Grace of God, which he has received: But some are of
the Judgment, that Natural Wisdom or Parts, and human Learning are the
Qualifications, which are of absolute Necessity for a Minister; but Grace they
judge not to be so absolutely necessary, but that one may be a Minister without
it; What says the Scripture in this Case?

A. A Bishop must be Sober, Just, Holy, Temperate, Tit. 1. 7, 8.

Q. Methinks it is impossible for a Man to be Blameless, Just, Holy, Sober and
Temperate without the Grace of God: So that if these Qualifications be
absolutely necessary, then surely, that without which a man cannot be so
qualified, must be necessary also: But what says the Scripture, as to the
Necessity of Natural Wisdom and Human Learning?

A. Where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of this
World? Has not God made foolish the Wisdom of this World? For after that in
the Wisdom of God, the World by Wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the
Foolishness of Preaching, to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1. 20, 21.

Q. It seems then the Preachings of the true Ministers are not gathered
together by Wisdom and Learning: It has been supposed, that a Man must be
greatly skilled in Learning, to make a good Sermon; what is the Apostles
Judgment in the Case?

A. For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel; not with
Wisdom of Words, lest the Cross of Christ should be made of none Effect, 1 Cor.
1. 17.

And I was with you in Weakness, and in Fear and in much Trembling; and my
Speech and my Preaching was not with enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, but in
Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power, that your Faith should not stand in
the Wisdom of Men, but in the Power of God, 1 Cor. 2. 3, 4, 5.

Q. I perceive the Apostle lays far more Stress upon the Demonstration and
Power of the Spirit in a Preacher, then upon human Literature; ought Ministers
then to preach as the Spirit teaches them?

A. Also we speak not in the Words which Man's Wisdom teaches, but which the
holy Ghost teaches, 2 Cor. 2. 13.

And they were all filled with the holy Ghost, and began to speak as the Spirit
gave them Utterance, Acts 2. 4.

Q. Is it Christ then that speaks in and through his Ministers?

A. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father, which speaks
in you, Mat. 10. 20.

For it is not ye that speak, but the holy Ghost, Mark 13. 11.

For the holy Ghost shall teach you in the same Hour, what ye ought to say,
Luke 12. 12.

Since ye seek a Proof of Christ speaking in me, which to you ward is not weak,
but is mighty in you, 2 Cor. 13. 3.

Q. What is the Apostle's Mind of that human Learning, which some cry up so
much, and think so needful in a Minister?

A. Beware, le^t any Man spoil you through Philosophy and vain Deceit, after
the Tradition of Men, after the Rudiments of the World, and not after Christ,
Col. 2. 8.

O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy Trust, avoiding profane and
vain Babbling and Oppositions of Science, falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6. 20.

Q. Though true Ministers speak not by the natural Wisdom of Man; yet is their
Testimony altogether void of Wisdom?

A. Howbeit, we speak Wisdom among them that are perfect; yet not the Wisdom of
this World, nor of the Princes of this World, that come to naught; but we speak
the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, even, the hidden Wisdom, which God ordained
before the World to our Glory, 1 Cor. 2. 6, 7.

Q. What is the Reason that Man by his natural Wisdom is not capable to
minister in the Things of God?

A. For what Man knows the Things of a Man, save the Spirit of a Man, which
is in him? Even so the Things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God: But
the natlural Man receives not the Things of the Spirit of God; for they are
Foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 11, 14.

Q. These Scriptures do sufficiently hold forth, that the true Call to the
Ministry is from God; that which makes a true Minister, is the Gift and Grace
of God; that the true and effectual Preaching of a faithful Minister, is such,
as (...) from the inward Teaching and Leading of the Spirit of God: But what
say the Scriptures touching the Maintenance of Ministers?

A. Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate unto him that teaches in
all good Things, Gal. 6. 6.

If we have sown unto you spiritual Things is it a great Matter if we shall
^eap your carnal Things? If others be Partakers of this Power over you, are not
we rather? Nevertheless, we have not used this Power but suffer all Things,
lest we should hinder the Gospel of Christ: Do ye not know, that they which
minister about holy Things, live of the Things of the Temple; and they which
wait at the Altar, are Partakers with the Altar; even so has the Lord
ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor.
9. 11, 12, 13, 14.

For the Scripture says, Thou shall not muzle the Ox that treads out the
Corn; and the Labourer is worthy of his Reward, 1 Timothy 5. 18.

Q. I perceive by these Scriptures, that there lies an Obligation upon the
Saints, to help with outward Things such as truly minister unto them spiritual;
but this seems to be voluntary; ought not therefore true Ministers to preach,
whether they be sure of this or not? What says the Apostle of himself in this
Case? and what advises he others?

A. But I have used none of these Things; neither have I written those Things,
that it should be so done unto me; for it were better for me to dye, then that
any Man should make my Glorying void; for though I preach the Gospel, I have
nothing to glory of; for Necessity is laid upon me, yea, Woe is unto me if I
preach not the Gospel: For if I do this Thing willingly, I have a Reward; but
if against my Will a Dispensation of the Gospel is committed unto me, what is
my Reward then? Verily, that when I preach the Gospel, I make the Gospel of
Christ without Charge, that I abuse not my Power in the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 15,
16, 17, 18.

I have coveted no Man's Silver, or Gold, or Apparel; yea, ye your selves know
that these Hands have ministered unto my Necessities, and to them that were with
me. I have showed you all Things, how that so Labo^ring ye ought to support the
Weak, and to remember the Words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more
blessed to give, then to receive, Acts 20. 33, 34, 35.

Q. Its observable that the Apostle every where makes special mention among the
Qualifications of Teachers, that they be not given to Filthy Luchre; What ought
we then to think of these Teachers as will not preach without Hire; yea, that
will by Violence take from those who receive no Spirituals from them? are they
like to be the Ministers of Christ? or what else says the Scripture of such?

A. Yea, they are greedy Dogs, which can never have enough; and they are
Shepherds that cannot understand* they all look to their own Way, every one for
his Gain from his Quarter, Isa. 56. 11.

Son of Man, Prophecy against the Shepherds of Israel, Prophecy, and say unto
them, Thus says the Lord God unto the Shepherds, Woe be to the Shepherds of
Israel, that do feed themselves: Should not the Shepherds feed the Flock? Ye
eat the Fat, and ye cloth you with the Wool, ye kill them that are fed; but ye
feed not the Flock.

As I live, says the Lord God, Surely because my Flock became a Prey, and my
Flock became Meat to every Beast of the Field, because there was no Shepherd:
Neither did my Shepherds search for my Flock; but the Shepherds fed themselves,
and fed not my Flock, Ezekiel. ^4. 2, 3, 8.

Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets that make my people ERR, that bite
with their Teeth, and cry PEACE; and he that puts not into their Mouths,
they even prepare WAR against him: The Heads thereof judge for Reward, and the
Priests thereof Teach for Hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for Money; yet
will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord amongst us? None Evil
can come upon us, Michah 3. 5, 11.

Q. These are plain Testimonies from the Prophets; Are there none such from the
Apostles?

A. Perverse Disputings of men of corrupt Minds, and destitute of the Truth,
supposing that Gain is Godliness, from such withdraw thy self; But Godliness
with Contentment is great Gain: For we brought nothing into the World, and it
is certain we can carry nothing out; and having Food and Raiment, let us
therewith be content. But they that will be Rich, fall into Temptation and a
Snare, and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in Destruction
and Perdition; For the Love of Money is the Root of all Evil, which while some
coveted after, they have erred from the Faith, and pierced themselves through
with many Sorrows 1. Tim. 6. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

For Men shall be Lovers of their own selves, Covetous, Boasters, Proud,
Blasphemers, Disobedient to Parents, Unthankful, Unholy, 2. Tim. 3. 2.

For there are many unruly and vain Talkers and Deceive^s especially they of
the Circumcision, whose Mouths must be stopped; who subvert whole Houses,
teaching things which they ought not for Filthy Lucre's sake, Tit. 1. 10, 11.

But there were False Prophets also among the People, even as there shall be
False Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in Damnable Heresies, even
Denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift Destruction;
And many shall follow their Pernicious Ways, by Reason of whom the Way of
Truth shall be Evil spoaken of. And through Covetousness shall they with
feigned Words make Merchandise of you, whose Judgment now of a long time
lingereth not, and their Damnation slumbreth not: Having Eyes full of Adultery,
and that cannot cease from Sin, beguiling unstable Souls; an Heart they have
exercised with Covetous Practices. Cursed Children, which have forsaken the
Right Way, and are gone astray, following the Way of Balaam the Son of Bozor,
who loved the Wages of Unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3, 14, 15.

VVo unto them; for they have gone in the Way of Cain, and run greedily after
the Error of Balaam for Reward, and perished in the Gainsaying of Corah: These
are Murmurers, Complainners, walking after their own Lust^; and their Mouth
speaks Great Swelling Words, having men's Persons in Admiration because of
Advantage, Jude 11. 16.

Q. Ought there to be any Order in the Church of God?

A. Let all things be done decently, and in Order, 1 Cor. 14. 40.

Q. What Good Order is prescribed in the Church concerning Preachers? Is it fit
that only one or two speak, or may more, if moved thereto?

A. If any thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold his
Peace; For ye may all Prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and that all
may be comforted. And the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets;
for God is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace, as in all the Churches of
the Saints, 1 Cor. 14. 30, 31, 32, 33.

Q. Is there any Promise that Daughters as well as Sons shall Prophecy under
the Gospel?

A. And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out of my Spirit
upon all Flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall Prophecy; your Old Men
shall dream Dreams, your Young Men shall see Visions, Joel 2. 28.

Q. Is that Promise fulfilled, and to be fulfilled?

A. But this is that which was spoaken by the Prophet Joel, And it shall come
to pass in the last days (says God) I will pour out of my Spirit upon all
Flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy; and your Young Men
shall see Visions, and your Old Men shall dream Dreams, Acts 16. 17.

Q. Is there any such Instance of old in the Scripture?

A. And the same Man had four Daughters, Virgins, which did Prophecy, Acts 21.
9.

Q. But may all Women speak; or are any commanded to keep Silence in the Church?

A. Let your Women keep Silence in the Church; for it is not permitted unto
them to speak* but they are commanded to be under Obedience, as also says the
Law. And if they will learn any thing, let them ask their Husbands at Home; for
it is a Shame for Women to speak in the Church, 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35.

Let the Woman learn in Silence with all Subjection. But I suffer not a Woman
to teach or usurp Authority over the Man; but to be in Silence, 1 Timothy 2. 11,
12.

Q. The first of these seems only to relate to Women that have Husbands; What
comes of them that have none; The second speaks nothing of the Church, but only
that she ought not to usurp Authority over the Man; Has this no Limitation?
Does not the same Apostle give Directions how Women that speak should behave
themselves in the Church?

A. Every man Praying or Prophesying, having his Head covered, dishonors his
Head: But every Woman that Prays or Prophesies with her Head uncovered,
dishonors her Head; for that is even all one as if she were shaven, 1 Cor.
11. 4, 5.

CHAP. X.
Concerning Worship.

Question, What is the Worship that is acceptible to God?

A. But the Hour comes, and now is, when the True Worshippers shall worship
the Father in Spirit and in Truth; for the Father seeks such to worship him.
God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in
Truth, Joh. 4. 23. 24.

Q. Seeing Prayer is a Part of Worship, when ought we to pray?

A. And he spoke a Parable unto them to this End, That Men ought always to
pray, and not to fai^t, Luke 18. 1.

Pray without ceasing, 1 These. 5. 17.

Q. Does God hear the Prayers of all that call upon him?

A. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon
him in Truth, Psalm. 145. 18.

For there is no Difference between the Jew and the Greek; for the same Lord
over all is rich unto all that call upon him, Romans 10. 12.

Q. Has God no respect to the Manner of Calling upon him?

A. The Lord is nigh to all them that call upon him, to all that call upon him
in Truth, Psalm. 145. 18.

The Lord is far from the Wicked; but he hears the Prayer of the Righteous,
Prove. 15. 29.

Now we know, that God hears not* Sinners; but if any Man be a Worshipper of
God, and does his Will, him he hears, John 9. 31.

And this is the Confidence that we have in him. that if we ask any Thing,
according to his Will, he hears us, 1 John 5. 14.

Q. After whae Manner does the Apostle then declare he will Pray?

A. What is it then? I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with the
Understanding also: I will sing with the Spirit, and I will sing with the
Understanding also, 1 Cor. 14. 15.

Q. Must we then pray always in the Spirit?

A. Praying always, with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, and
Watching thereunto with all Perseverance and Supplication for all Saints,
Ephesians. 6. 18.

Q. Since we are commanded to pray always in it, can we do it of our selves
without the Help thereof?

A. Likewise the Spirit also helps our Infirmities: for we know not what we
should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit it self makes Intercession for us
with Groanings, which cannot be uttered. And he that searches the Hearts,
knows what is the Mind of the Spirit, because he makes Intercession for the
Saints, according to the Will of God, Romans 8. 26, 27.

Q. I perceive, that without the Leadings and Help of the Spirit, Prayers are
altogether unprofitable; may not a Man truly utter these Things that are
Spiritual, without the Spirit's Assistance?

A. Wherefore I give you to understand, that no Man speaking by the Spirit of
God, calls Jesus Accursed; and that no Man can say, that Jesus is the Lord,
but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. 3.

Q. That is strange: It seems the Spirit (...) much more necessary then many
called Christistians suppose it to be; some of which can scarce give a good
Account, whether they have it, or want it: But if a Man speak Things true upon
the Matter, are they not true as from him, if spoaken without the Spirit?

A. And though they say, The Lord lives, surely they swear falsely, Jer. 5. 2.

Q. It is apparent from all these Scriptures, that the true Worship of God is
in Spirit; and as it is not limited to a certain Place, neither to any certain
Time, what shall we think of them that plead for the Observation of certain
Days?

A. But now, after that ye have known God, or rather, are known of God, how
turn ye again to the weak and beggarly Elements, whereunto ye desire again to
be i^ Bondage: Ye observe Days, and Months, and Times, and Years; I am afraid
of you, lest I have bestowed upon you Labor in vain, Gal. 4. 9, 10, 11.

Let no Man therefore judge you in Meat or Drink, or in respect of an Holy Day,
or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbath Day, which are a Shadow of Things to
come; but the Body is of Christ, Col. 2. 16, 17.

Q. Seeing it is so, may not some Christians, as lawfully esteem all Days
alike, as others may esteem some Days above another? What Rule gives the
Apostle in this Case?

A. One Man esteems one Day above another, another esteems every Day alike;
let every Man be fully persuaded in his own Mind: He that regards a Day,
regards it unto the the Lord; and he that rega^deth not the Day unto the
Lord, he does not regard it. He that eats, eats to the Lord; for he gives
God Thanks; and he that eats not to the Lord, he eats not, and gives God
Thanks, Romans 14. 5, 6.

Q. But is it not convenient and necessary that there be a Day set apart to
Meet and Worship God in? Did not the Apostles and Primitive Christians use to
meet upon the First Day of the Week, to make their Collections, and to Worship?

A. Now, concerning the Collection for the Saints, as I have given Order to the
Churches of Galatia, even so do ye upon the First Day of the Week: Let every
one of you lay by him in store, as God has prosper'd him, that there be no
Gatherings when I come, 1 Cor. 16. 1.

CHAP. XI.
Concerning Baptism and Bread and Wine.

Question, HOw many BAPTISMS are there?

A. One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism, Ephesians. 4* 5.

Q. What is the Baptism?

A. The like Figure, whereunto even Baptism does now save us: not the putting
away the Filth of the Flesh; but the Answer of a good Conscience toward God,
by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, who is gone into Heaven, and is on the
Right Hand of God, Angels, and Authorities, and Powers, being made subject unto
him, 1 Pet. 3. 21, 22.

Q. What says John the Baptist of Christ's Baptism? how distinguishes he it
from his?

A. I indeed baptize you with Water unto Repentance; but he that comes after
me, is Mightier then I, whose Shoes I am not worthy to bear, he shall baptize
you with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, Mat. 3. 11.

Q. Does not Christ so distinguish it also?

A. And being assembled together with them, commanded them, That they should
not depart from Jerusalem; but wait for the Promise of the Father, which, says
he, ye have heard of me* For John truly baptized with Water; but ye shall be
baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence, Act. 1. 4. 5.

Q. Does not the Apostle Peter also observe this?

A. And as I beg^n to speak, the Holy Ghost fell on them, as on us at the
Beginning; Then remembered I the Word of the Lord, how that he said, John indeed
baptized with Water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost, Acts 11. 15,
16.

Q. Then it seems John's Baptism must pass away, that Christ's may take place;
because John must decrease, that Christ may increase?

A. He must increase, but I must decrease, John 30. 30.

Q. I perceive then, many may be sprinkled with (...) dipped and baptized in
Water, and yet not truly baptized with the Baptism of Christ? What are the Real
Effects in such as are truly baptized with the Baptism of Christ?

A. Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his Death? Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into
Death, that like as Christ was raised up from the Dead by the Glory of the
Father, even so we also should walk in Newness of Life, Romans 6. 3, 4.

For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal.
2. 27.

Buried with him in Baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him, through the
Faith of the Operation of God, who has raised him from the Dead, Col. 2. 12.

Q. I perceive there was a Baptism of Water, which was John's Baptism, and is
therefore by John himself contra-distinguished from Christ's: Was there not
likewise something of the like Nature appointed by Christ to his Disciples, of
eating Bread, and drinking Wine in Remembrance of him?

A. For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, that
the Lord Jesus, the same Night in which he was betrayed took Bread, and when he
had given Thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat; this is my Body, which is
broken for you; this do in Remembrance of me. After the same manner also he
took the Cup, when he had supped, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my
Blood; this do ye, as often as ye drink it, in Remembrance of me, 1 Cor. 11. 23,
24, 25.

Q* How long was this to continue?

A. For, as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the
Lord's Death till he come, 1 Cor. 11. 26.

Q. Did Christ promise to come again to his Desciples?

A. I will not leave you comfortless; I will come to you. Jesus answered, and
said unto him, if a Man love me, he will keep my Words; and my Father will love
him, and we will come unto him, and make our Abode with him, Joh. 14. 18, 23.

Q. Was this an Inward Coming?

A. At that Day ye shall know, that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in
you, Joh. 14. 20.

Q. But it would seem this was even practiced by the Church of Corinth, after
Christ was come in wardly; Was it so that there were certain Appointments
positivelycommanded, yea, and Zealously and Conscientiously practiced by the
Saints of Old, which were not of perpetual Continuance, nor yet now needful to
be practiced in the Church?

A. If then your Lord and Master have washed your Feet, ye also ought to wash
one another's Feet; For I have given you an Example, that ye should do as I
have done to you Joh. 13. 14, 15.

For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you no greater
B^rden then these necessary Things, that ye abstain from Meats offered to
Idols, and from Blood, and from Things strangled, and from Fornication; from
which if ye keep your selves, ye shall do well; farewell, Acts 15. 28, 29.

Is any man sick among you, let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let
them pray over him, anointing him with Oil in the Name of the Lord, Jam. 5. 14.

Q. These Commands are no less positive then the other, yea, some of them are
asserted as the very Sense of the Holy Ghost, as no less necessary then
abstaining from Fornication; and yet the Generality of Protestants have laid
them aside, as not of perpetual Continuance: But what other Scriptures are
there, to show that it is not necessary, that of Bread and Wine to Continue?

A. For the Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink; but Righteousness, and Peace,
and Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17.

Let no Man therefore judge you in Meat or in Drink, or in respect of an Holy
Day, or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbath Days: Wherefore if ye be dead with
Christ from the Rudiments of the World, why, as though living in the World, are
ye subject to Ordinances (touch no, taste not, handle not, which all are to
perish with the Using) after the Commandments and Doctrines of Men? Col. 2. 16,
20, 21, 22.

Q. These Scriptures are very plain, and say as much for the abolishing of
this, as to any Necessity, as ought can be alleged for the former: But what is
the Bread then wherewith the Saints are to be nourished?

A. Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses gave you
not that Bread from Heaven; but my Father gives you the True Bread from
Heaven; for the Bread of God is he which comes down from Heaven, and gives
Life unto the World. Then said they unto him, Lord, evermore give us this
Bread? And Jesus said unto them, I am the Bread of Life; he that comes to me,
shall never H^^ger; and he that believes on me shall never Thirst. I am that
Bread of Life: Your Fathers did eat Manna in the Wilderness, and are Dead; This
is the Bread which comes down from Heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not
dye. I am the Living Bread which came down from Heaven; If any man eat of this
Bread, he shall live forever: and the Bread that I will give him, is my Flesh,
which I will give for the Life of the World. The Jews therefore strove amongst
themselves, saying, How can this man give us his Flesh to eat? Then Jesus said
unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son
of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you: Whosoever eats my Flesh, and
drinks my Blood, has Eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the Last Day;
For my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed. He that eats my
Flesh and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him. As the Living Father
has sent me, and I live by the Father, so he that eats me, even he shall
live by me. This is that Bread which came down from Heaven; not as your Fathers
did eat Manna, and are dead: He that eats of this Bread shall live forever,
John 6. 32, 33, 34, 35, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58.

CHAP. XII.
Concerning the Life of a Christian in general, what and how it ought to be in
this World.

Question, What is True RELIGION?

A. Pure Religion and Undefiled is this, To visit the Fatherless and the Widow
in their Affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the World, Jam. 1. 27.

Q. What is required of man?

A. He has showed thee, O man, what is good: and what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?
Michah 6. 8.

But to this man will I look, even to him that is pure, and of a contrite
Spirit, and trembles at my Word, Isa. 66. 2.

Q. Does God then require People to be Quakers, to tremble at his Word? was
there any such among the Saints of old?

A. Then were assembled unto me every one that trembled at the Words of the God
of Israeal, Ezra 9. 4.

Now therefore let us make a Covenant with our God, to put away all the Wives,
and such as are born of them, according to the Counsel of my Lord; and of those
that tremble at the Commandment of our God, Ezra 10. 3.

Q. It seems Ezra loved well, and had a high Esteem of Quakers, since he would
have their Counsel followed: Do any other of the Prophets point out Quakers or
Tremblers, as God's People?

A Hear the Word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his Word: Your Brethren that
hated you, that cast you out for my Names sake, said, Let the Lord be
glorified; but he shall appear to your Joy, and they shall be ashamed, Isa. 66.
5.

And it shall be to me a Name of Joy, a Praise and an Honor before all the
Nations of the Earth, which shall hear all the Good that I do unto them; and
they shall fear and tremble, for all the Goodness and for all the Prosperity
that I procure unto it, Jer. 33. 9.

Q. The Prophets promise good Things there to Quakers; what becomes of these
that tremble not, and are not such?

A. Hear now this, O foolish People! and without Understanding, which have
Eyes, and see not, which have Ears, and hear not, fear ye not me? says the
Lord; will ye not tremble at my Presence? etc. Jer. 5. 21, 22.

Q. Are then all God's Children Quakers? and are we commanded to quake or
tremble, in order to our Salvation, both under the Law, and now under the
Gospel?

A. Scrve the Lord with Fear, and rejoice with Trembling, Psalm. 2. 11.

I make a Decree, that in every Dominion of my Kingdom, Men fear and tremble
before the God of Daniel; for he is the living God, and steadfast forever, Dan.
6. 26.

Work out your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling, Phil. 2. 12.

Q. What be the chief Commandments?

A. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul,
and with all thy Mind: This is the first and great Commandment, and the second
is like unto it; Thou shale love thy Neighbor as thy self: On these two
Commandments hang all the Law and Prophets, Mat. 22. 37, 38, 39, 40.

Q. What ought a Christian to seek after in the first Place?

A. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and all these
Things shall be added unto you, Mat. 6. 33.

Q. How ought Christians to behave themselves in this World?

A. But this I say, Brethren, the Time is short: It remains, That both they
that have Wives be as though they had none; and they that weep, as though they
wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that
buy, as though they possessed not; and they that use this World, as not abusing
it; for the Fashion of this World passes away, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31.

Q. What says the Apostle Paul further, as that which is fit for Christian Men
and Women to be found in?

A. I will therefore, that Men pray every where, lifting up holy Hands with out
Wrath and Doubting: In like Manner also, that Women adorn themselves in modest
Apparel, with Shamefastness and Sobriety; not with broidered Hair, or Gold, or
Pearls, or costly Array; but (which becomes Women professing Godliness) with
good Works, 1 Timothy 2. 8, 9, 10.

Q. I observe, the Apostle is much against the Vanity and Superfluity of
Clothes among Christians; what says Peter to this?

A. Whose Adorning, let it not be that outward Adorning of plating the Hair, of
wearing of Gold, or of putting on of Apparel: But let it be the hidden Men of
the Heart, in that which is not corruptible; even, the Ornament of a meek,
quiet Spirit, which is in the Sight of God of great Price, 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4.

Q. The Apostle is very plain there; but what says the Scripture, as to
Respect of Persons among Christians?

A. My Brethren, have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of
Glory, with Respect of persons: for if there come unto your Assembly a Man with
a Gold Ring in goodly Apparel; and there come in also a poor Man in vile
Raiment; but ye have Respect to him that wears the gay Clothing, and say unto
him, sit thou here in a good Place; and say to the poor, stand thou there, or
sit here under my Footstool: Are you not then partial in your selves, and are
become Judges of evil Thoughts? hearken my beloved Brethren; has not God
chosen the poor of this World, rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom, which
he has promised to them that love him; but ye have despised the poor. Do not
rich Men oppress you, and draw you before the Judgment Seat? Do they not
blaspheme that worthy Name by the which ye are called? If ye fulfill the royal
Law according to the Scripture, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, ye
do well; but if we have Respect to Persons, ye commit Sin, and are convinced of
the Law as Transgressors, Jam. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

Q. Though that be indeed sufficient to reprove the different Rancks among
Christians upon the Account of Riches or Birth; yet is there not a relative
Respect among Christians, as betwixt Master and Servant: what Admonitions gives
the Apostle in this Case?

A. Servants be obedient to them that are your Masters, according to the Flesh,
with Fear and Trembling, in Singleness of your Heart, as unto Christ, not with
Eye-Service, as Men Pleasers; but as the Servants of Christ, doing the Will of
God from the Heart; with Good will doing Service, as to the Lord, and not to
Men; knowing that whatsoever good Thing any Man does, the same shall he receive
of the Lord, whether, he be bond or free And ye Masters, do the same Things
unto them, forbearing Threatening, knowing that your Master also is in Heaven;
neither is there Respect of Persons with him, Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

Servants, obey in all things your Masters, according to the Flesh; not with
Eye Service, as Men-Pleasers, but in Singleness of Heart, fearing God: And
whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto Men, knowing,
that of the Lord ye shall receive the Reward of the Inheritance; for ye serve
the Lord Christ: But he that does Wrong shall receive for the Wrong which he
has done; and there is no Respect of Persons, Col. 3. 22, 23, 24, 25.

Masters, give unto your Servants that which is just and equal, knowing that ye
also have a Master in Heaven, Col. 4. 1.

Let as many Servants as are under the Yoke count their own Masters worthy of
all Honor, that the Name of God and his Doctrine be not blasphemed: And they
that have believing Masters, let them not despise them, because they are
Brethren; but rather do them Service, because they are faithful and beloved,
Partakers of the Benefit; these Things teach and exhort, 1 Timothy 6. 1, 2.

Exhort Servants to be obedient unto their own Masters, and to please them well
in all Things; not answering again, not purloining; but showing all good
Fidelity, that they may adorn the Doctrine of God in all Things, Tit. 2. 9, 10.

Servants, be subject to your Masters with all Fear, not only to the good and
gentile, but also to the froward; for this is Thank^worthy, if a Man for
Conscience toward God endure Griefs, suffering wrongfully: For what Glory is
it, if when ye be buffeted for your Faults, ye shall take it patiently; but if
when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it, patiently, this is acceptable
with God; for even hereunto were ye called, because Christ also suffered for
us, leaving us an Example, that ye should follow his Steps, 1 Pet. 2. 18. 19,
20, 21.

Q. What good Admonitions gives the Scripture as to the Relation betwixt
Parents and Children?

A. Children, obey your Parents in the Lord; for this is right: honor thy
Father and thy Mother (which is the first Commandment with Promise) that it may
be well with thee, and thou may live long on the Earth. And ye Fathers,
provoke not your Children to Wrath; but bring them up in the Nurture and
Admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Children, obey your Parents in all Things; for this is well-pleasing unto the
Lord. Fathers provoke not your Children to Anger, lest they be discouraged,
Col. 3. 20, 21.

Q. What between Husbands and Wives?

A. Wives, submit your selves unto your own Husbands, as unto the Lord; for the
Husband is the Head of the Wife, even as Christ is the Head of the Church, and
he is the Savior of the Body: Therefore as the Church is subject unto Christ;
so let the Wives be to their own Husbands in every thing. Husbands, love your
Wives; even as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, so ought men
to love their Wives as their own Bodies: he that loves his Wife, loves
himself; for this Cause shall a Man leave his Father and Mother, and shall be
joined unto his Wife, and they two shall be one Flesh: Nevertheless, let every
one of you in particular so loye his Wife, even as himself; and the Wife see
that she reverence her Husband, Ephesians. 5. 22, 23, 24, 25, 28, 31, 33.

Husbands, love your Wives, and be not bitter against them, Col. 3. 19.

Likewise ye Wives, be subject to your own Husbands, that if any obey not the
word, they also may without the word be won by the Conversation of the Wives,
while they behold your Chaste Conversation coupled with Fear. Likewise, ye
Husbands, dwell with them according to Knowledge, giving Honor unto the Wife,
as unto the weaker Vessel, and as being Heirs together of the Grace of Life,
that your Prayers be not hindered, 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2, 7.

Q. What is the Armor of a true Christian? and wherewith ought he to wrestle?

A. Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the
Wiles of the Devil; for we wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, but against
Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness of this
World, against spiritual Wickedness in high Places; wherefore take unto you
the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil Day, and
having done all, to stand. Stand therefore, having your Loins girt about with
Truth, and having on the Breast Plate of Righteousness, and your Feet shod with
the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace; above all, taking the Shield of Faith,
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery Darts of the Wicked One; and
take the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God, Ephesians. 6. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

Q. What are Christians Weapons? and for what End?

A. For though we walk in the Flesh, we do not war after the Flesh; for the
Weapons of our Warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling
down of strong Holds, casting down Imaginations and every high Thing, that
exalts it self against the Knowledge of God; and bringing into Captivity
every Thought to the Obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5.

Q. Ought Strife and Envy to be among Christians?

A. Who is a wise Man, and endued with Knowledge amongst you? Let him show out
of a good Conversation his Works with Meekness of Wisdom: but if ye have
bitter Envying and Strife in your Hearts, glory not, and lie not against the
Truth: This Wisdom descends not from above; but is Earthly, Sensual,
Devilish; for where Envying and Strife is, there is Confusion and every evil
Work: but the Wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable and
easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits, without Partiality and
without Hypocrisy: And the Fruit of Righteousness is sown in Peace of them
that make Peace, Jam. 3. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

Ought Wars to be among Christians? from whence proceed they?

A. From whence come Wars and Fightings among you? Come they not hence, even
from your Lusts, that war in your Members: Ye lust, and have not; ye kill and
desire to have, and cannot obtain; ye fight and war, yet ye have not, because
ye ask not, Jam. 4. 1, 2.

Q. What says Christ, even of Defensive War?

A. But I say unto you, that ye resist not Evil; but whosoever shall smite thee
on thy right Cheek, turn to him the other also, Mat. 5. 39.

But I say unto you which hear, Love your Enemies; do Good to them which hate
you; bless them that curse you, and pray for them which despightfully use you;
and unto him that smites thee on the one Check, offer also the other; and him
that takes away thy Cloak, forbid not to take thy Coat also, Luke 6. 27, 28,
29.

Q. What say the Apostles?

A. Recompense to no man Evil for Evil, Romans 12. 17.

Not rendering Evil for Evil, or Railing for Railing; but contrary-wise,
Blessing; knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a
Blessing, 1 Pet. 3. 9.

See that none render Evil for Evil unto any Man; but ever follow that which is
Good, both among your selves, and to all men, 1 These. 5. 15.

Q. It was lawful of old to Swear; and an Oath for Confirmation was to them an
End of all Strife: Is it not Lawful for Christians also to Swear?

A. Again, ye have heard, that it has been said by them of old time, Thou
shall not forswear thy self; but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths: But
I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, for it is God's Throne;
nor by the Earth, for it is his Footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the
City of the great King; neither shall thou swear by thy Head, because thou
can not make one Hair white or black; but let your Communication be Yea* Yea;
Nay, Nay; for whatsoever is more then these comes of Evil, Mat. 5. 33, 34, 35,
36, 37.

But above all things, my Brethren, swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by
the Earth, neither by any other Oath; but let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay,
Nay, lest ye fall into Condemnation, Jam. 5. 12.

Q. Is it fit for Christians or Believers to receive Carnal and Worldly Honor
one from another?

A. How can ye believe which receive Honor one of another, and seek not the
Honor that comes from God only, John 5. 44.

Q. Does God allow us to give flattering Titles to Men?

A. Let me not, I pray you, accept any Man's Person: neither let me give
flattering Titles unto Man; for I know not to give flattering Titles, in so
doing my Maker would soon take me away, Job 32, 21, 22.

Q. What should we say to such as quarrel us for speaking proper sound Words,
as Thou to One, You to Many; which is Christ's and the Saints Language in the
Scripture?

A. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome Words, even the
Words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to
Godliness, he is proud; knowing nothing, but doting about Questions and Strife
of Words, whereof comes Envy, Strife, Railings, Evil Surmisings, 1 Timothy 6. 3,
4.

Hold fast the Form of sound Words, which thou have heard of me in Faith and
Love, which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 1. 13.

Q. What is the great Commandment given by Christ to his Disciples, as that
which even declares them to be such, and is also pressed by his Apostles?

A. A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another, as I have
loved you, that ye also love one another: by this shall all men know that ye
are my Disciples, if ye have Love to one another. This is my Commandment, that
ye Love one another, as I have loved you: These things I command you that ye
love one another, Joh. 1^. 34, 35. and 15. 12, 17.

Be ye therefore Followers of God, as dear Children; and walk in Love, as
Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us an Offering and a
Sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling Savor, Ephesians. 5. 1, 2.

If any man say, I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a Liar; for he that
loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not
seen? And this Commandment have we from him, that he who loves God, loves his
Brother also, 1 John 4. 20, 21.

Q. Is Humility very needful to Christians? what like must we be ere we can
enter the Kingdom?

A. And said, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and
become as little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven;
whosoever therefore shall Humble himself as this little Child, the same is
greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 18. 3, 4.

Q. Ought Christians to lord over one another? what Rule gives Christ in this
Case?

A. But Jesus called them unto him, and said, Ye know that the Princes of the
Gentiles exercise Dominion over them; and they that are great, exercise
Authority upon them: but it shall not be so among you; but whosoever will be
great among you, let him be your Minister; and whosoever will be chief among
you, let him be your Servant, even as the Son of Man came not to be ministered
unto, but to minister, and to give his Life a Ransom for many, Mat. 20. 25, 26,
27, 28.

Q. How then are Christians in this World?

A. Behold, I send you forth as Sheep in the midst of Wolves; be ye therefore
wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves, Mat. 10. 16.

Go your ways; behold I send you forth as Lambs among Wolves, Luke 10. 3.

Q. Are we then to expect Afflictions and Persecution here?

A. And ye shall be hated of all men for my Names sake; but he that endures to
the End shall be saved, Mat. 10. 22. Mark 13. 13.

And ye shall be hated of all men for my Names sake, Luke 21. 17.

If the World hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you: if ye
were of the World, the World would love his own; but because ye are not of the
World, but I have chosen you out of the World, therefore the World hates you,
John 15. 18, 19.

These things I have spoaken unto you, that in me ye might have Peace; in the
World ye shall have Tribulation; but be of good Cheer, I have overcome the
World, John 16. 33.

And all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer Persecution, 2 Timothy
3. 12.

Q. Ought we then to fear Persecution?

A. Fear not them which kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul; but
rather fear him who is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell, M^t. 10. 28.

And I say unto you, my Friends, be not afraid of them that kill the Body, and
after that have no more that they can do: But I will fore-warn you whom ye
shall fear; fear him which after he has killed, has Power to cast into Hell;
yea, I say unto you, fear him, Luke 12. 4, 5.

Q. What Advantage is to them that suffer Persecution cheerfully, and Hazard to
them that shun it?

A. Blessed are they which are persecuted for Righteousness sake; for theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5. 10.

But if ye suffer for Righteousness sake, happy are ye; and be not afraid of
their Terror, neither be troubled, 1 Pet. 3. 14.

Whosoever therefore shall confess me before Men, him will I confess also
before my Father which is in Heaven; but whosoever shall deny me before Men,
him will I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven: He that loves Father
or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me; and he that takes not his Cross,
and follows after me, is not worthy of me: He that finds his Life shall
loose it; and he that loses his Life for my sake shall find it, Mat. 10. 32,
33, 37, 38, 39.

Also I say unto you, Whosoever shall confess me before Men, him shall the Son
of Man also confess before the Angels of God; but he that denis me before Men,
shall be denied before the Angels of God, Luke 12. 8, 9.

Then said Jesus unto his Disciples, If any Man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me; for whosoever will save his
Life shall loose it, and whosoever will loose his Life for my sake shall find
it, Mat. 16. 24, 25.

If we suffer, we shall also reign with him; if we deny him, he also will deny
us, 2 Timothy 2. 12.

If any come to me, and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife and Children,
and Brethren and Sisters; yea, and his own Life, he cannot be my Disciple, Luke
14. 2^.

And he said to them all, If any Man will come after me, let him deny himself,
and take up his Cross daily, and follow me; for whosoever will save his Life
shall loose it; but whosoever will loose his Life for my sake, the same shall
save it, Luke 9. 23, 24.

And when he had called the People to him, with his Disciples also, he said
unto them, whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
Cross, and follow me; for whosoever will save his Life shall loose it; but
whosoever shall loose his Life for my sake and the Gospel, the same shall save
it, Mark 8. 34, 35.

Q. There is nothing more certain, according to these Scriptures, then that
Christians must suffer Persecution in this World, even in their Persons and
Estates: But shall they not also suffer in their Good Names, in being accounted
Blasphemers, Heretics and Deceivers?

A. The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord; It is
enough for the Disciple that he be as his Master, and the Servant, as his Lord:
If they have called the Master of the House B^elzebub, how much more shall they
call them of his Household? Mat. 10. 24, 25.

Blessed are ye when Men shall revile you, and Persecute you, and shall say all
manner of Evil against you falsely for my sake, Mat. 5. 11.

Then they suborned men, which said, We have heard him speak Blasphemous Words
against Moses and against God: And they stirred up the People, and the Elders,
and the Scribes, and came upon him and caught him, and brought him to the
Council, Acts 6. 11, 12.

And when they found them not, they drew Jason and certain Brethren unto the
Rulers of the City, crying, These that have turned the World upside down, are
come hither also, Acts 17. 6.

But this I confess unto thee, that after the Way which they call Heresy, so
worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things which are written in the
Law and the Prophets, Acts 24. 14.

Being defamed, we entreat: we are made as the Filth of the World, and are the
Offscouring of all things unto this Day, 1 Cor. 4. 13.

By Honor and Dishonor, by Evil Report and Good Report, as Deceivers, and yet
true, 2 Cor. 6. 8.

Q. It is easily apparent from what is mentioned, that Christians are to expect
Persecution and Tribulation; and that they are always the Sheep, and never the
Wolves; the Persecuted, and never the Persecutors; the Afflicted, and not the
Afflicters; the Reproached, and not the Reproachers: Is it not fit then that
Christians be so far from persecuting others, that they ought to pray for the
Persecutors? is this Christ's Command?

A. But I say unto you, Love your Enemies; Bless them that Curse you, do Good
to them that hate you, and Pray for them which despightfully use you and
persecute you, Ma. 5. 44.

Q. Was this Christ's own Practice?

A. Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do, etc.
Luke 23. 24.

Q. Is Christ herein to be our Example?

A. For even hereunto were ye called, because Christ also suffered for us,
leaving us an Example, that ye should follow his Steps, who did no Sin, neither
was Guise found in his Mouth; who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when
he suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself unto him that judges
righteously, 1 Pet. 2. 21, 22, 23.

Q. Is there an Instance of any Saint in Scripture, who followed his Example
herein?

A. And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud Voice, Lord; Lay not this Sin to
their Charge, etc. Acts 7. 60.

Q. It appears by all these Scriptures, that Christianity consists in the
Exercise of Fear and Trembling, Humility, Patience and Self-denial; What ought
we then to think of such who place much of their Religion in abstaining from
Marriage, and certain Meats; Worshipping of Angels, and other such Acts of
voluntary Humility?

A. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, That in the latter Times some shall
depart from the Faith, giving heed to Seducing Spirits and Doctrines of Devils,
speaking Lies in Hypocrisy; having their Conscience ^eared as with a Hot Iron,
forbidding to Marry, and commanding to abstain from Meats, which God has
created to be received with Thanksgiving of them which believe and know the
Truth, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3.

Let no man beguile you of your Reward in a voluntary Humility, and worshipping
of Angels, intruding into these things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up
by his Fleshly Mind, Col. 2. 18.

CHAP. XIII.
Concerning Magistracy.

Question. What is the Duty of a Magistrate?

A. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me; he that Rules over
men must be Just, Ruling in the Fear of God, 2 Samuel 23. 3.

Q. What do the Scriptures speak of the Duty of such as are under Authority?

A. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers; for there is no Power but
of God: the Powers that be, are ordained of God; Whosoever therefore resists
the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist shall receive to
themselves Damnation: For Rulers are not a Terror to Good Works, but to the
Evil. Will thou then not be afraid of the Power, Do that which is Good, and
thou shall have Praise of the same; for he is the Minister of God to thee for
Good: But, if thou do that which is Evil, be afraid; for he bears not the
Sword in vain; for he is the Minister of God; a Revenger, to execute Wrath upon
him that does Evil. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but
also for Conscience sake, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, whether it
be to the King, as Supreme; or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by
him, for the Punishment of Evildoers, and for the Praise of them that do well;
for so is the Will of God, that with Well-doing ye may put to Silence the
Ignorance of Foolish Men, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15.

Q. Ought Tribute to be paid to them?

A. For, for this Cause pay we Tribute also; for they are God's Ministers,
attending continually upon this very thing: Render therefore to all their Dues,
Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear,
Honor to whom Honor, Romans 13. 6, 7.

Then says he unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are
Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's, Mat. 22. 21.

Q. Are we obliged to obey Magistrates in such things, as we are persuaded in
our Minds are contrary to the Commands of Christ?

A. And they called them, and commanded them not to speak at all, nor teach in
the Name of Jesus: But Peter and John answered and said unto them, Whether it
be right in the Sight of God, to hearken unto you more then unto God, judge ye;
for we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard, Acts 4. 18,
19, 20.

And when they had brought them, they set them before the Council, and the
High Priest asked them, saying, Did not we straightly command you, that ye
should not teach in this Name? And behold, ye have filled Jerusalem with your
Doctrine, and intend to bring this Man's Blood upon us: Then Peter and the
other Apostles answered, and said, We ought to obey God rather then Men, Act.
5. 27, 28, 29.

Q. What ought to be Magistrates Behavior in such Cases according to the
Counsel of wise Gamaliel?

A. Then stood there up one in the Council, a Pharisee, named Gamaliel, a
Doctor of Law, had in Reputation among the People, and commanded to put the
Apostles forth a little space, and said unto them, Ye men of Israel, take heed
to your selves what ye intend to do as touching these men: And now I say unto
you, Refrain from these men, and let them alone; for if this Counsel or this
Work be of men, it will come to naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot
overthrow it, lest happily ye be found even to fight against God, Acts 5. 34,
35, 38, 39.

Q. What Command gives Christ to his People under the Gospel in relation to
this matter? How does he hold forth their Duty under the Parable of Tares?

A. So the Servants of the Household came, and said unto him, Sir, Did thou
not sow good Seed in thy Field? from whence then has it Tares? He said unto
them, An Enemy has done this. The Servant said unto him, Will thou then that
we go and gather them up? But he said, Nay, lest wh^le ye gather up the Tares,
ye root up also the Wheat with them, Mat. 13. 27, 28, 29.

Q. Does he explain these Tares of the Wicked, whom the Godly must not take
upon them to cut off, lest through Mistake they hurt the Good, but leave it to
God, to do it by his Angels?

A. The Field is the World; the good Seed are the Children of the Kingdom; but
the Tares are the Children of the Wicked One* the Enemy that sowed them is the
Devil; the Harvest is the End of the World; and the Reapers are the Angels: As
therefore the Tares are gathered and burnt in the Fire, so shall it be in the
End of this World; The Son of Man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall
gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them which do Iniquity,
Mat. 13. 38, 39, 40, 41.

CHAP. XIV.
Concerning the Resurrection.

Question. What says the Scripture of the Resurrection of the Dead?

A. And have Hope toward God, which they themselves also allow, that there
shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the Just and Unjust, Acts 24. 15.

Q. To what different End shall the Good be raised from the Bad; and how are
they thereunto reserved?

A. Marvel not at this; for the Hour is coming, in the which all that are in
the Graves shall hear his Voice, and shall come forth: they that have done
Good, unto the Resurrection of Life; and they that have done Evil, unto the
Resurrection of Condemnation, John 5. 28, 29.

But the Heavens and the Earth, which are now, by the same Word are kept in
store, reserved unto Fire against the Day of Judgment, and Perdition of Ungodly
Men, 2 Pet. 3. 7.

Q. What must be answered to such as ask, How the Dead are raised? and with
what Body?

A. Thou Fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it dye: and that
which thou sowest, thou sowest not that Body that shall be; but bare Grain, it
may chance of Wheat, or some other Grain: But God gives it a Body as it has
pleased him, and to every Seed his own Body. All Flesh is not the same Flesh;
but there is one kind of Flesh of Men, another Flesh of Beasts, another of
Fishes and another of Birds: there are also Celestial Bodies, and Bodies
Terrestrial; but the Glory of the Celestial is one, and the Glory of the
Terrestrial is another: there is one Glory of the Sun, and another Glory of the
Moon, and another Glory of the Stars; for one Star differs from another Star in
Glory; so also is the Resurrection of the Dead; it is sown in Corruption, it is
raised in Incorruption; it is sown in Dishonor, it is raised in Glory; it is
sown in Weakness, it is raised in Power; it is sown a Natural Body, it is
raised a Spiritual Body: There is a Natural Body, and there is a Spiritual
Body, 1 Cor. 15. 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44.

Q. The Apostle seems to be very positive, that it is not that Natural Body,
which we now have, that shall rise; but a Spiritual Body?

A. Now this I say, Brethren, That Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom
of God; neither does Corruption inherit Incorruption. Behold, I show you a
Mystery, We shall not all sleep; but we shall all be changed in a Moment, in
the Twinkling of an Eye, at the Last Trump (for the Trumpet shall sound) and
the Dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed: For, this
Corruptible must put on Incorruption, and this Mortal must put on Immortality;
So when this Corruptible shall have put on Incorruption, and this Mortal shall
have put on Immortality, then shall be brought to pass the Saying that is
written, Death is swallowed up in Victory; O Death, where is thy Sting? O
Grave, where is thy Victory? 1 Cor. 15. 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55.

CHAP. XV.
A Short Introduction to the Confession of FAITH.

HAving thus largely and evidently performed the chief Part of that which I
promised in this Treatise, in giving a full Account of our Principles in plain
Scripture-words; and also answering by the Scriptures the chief and main
Objections made against us, I come to a Confession of Faith, in which I shall
not be so large, for that I judge it not convenient to make an Inter-repetition
of all the Scriptures beforementioned, which, if needful, the Reader may easily
observe were not very difficult to do: But whereas a Confession of Faith
calls rather for an Affirmative Account of one's own Faith, then for the
Solution of Objections, or any thing of Debate in a Discursive Way, which is
both more properly and pertinently performed in a Catechism, therefore I have
here only done so. I am necessitate sometimes to intermix some words for
coherence of the Matter, as sometimes ( And) and sometimes ( Therefore) and the
like; but not such as any ingenous Person can affirm, do add to the Matter, or
that may any wise justly be reckoned a Comment or Meaning, and therefore to
avoid the Censure of the most Curious Carping Critieks; these are marked with a
different Character. Likewise, unless I should have ridiculously offered to
publish incongruous Grammar, there was a true Need sometimes to change the Mood
and Person of a Verb; in all which places, whosoever will look to the words,
shall find it is done upon no Design to alter any whit the naked import of
them: as for instance; where Christ says, I am the Light of the World; were it
proper for me to write thus, I am the Light, etc? Or can it be reckoned any
whit contradicting of my Purpose or Promise to write, Christ is the Light,
where the first Person is changed to the third? Also, sometimes I express
things which are necessarily understood, as when any of the Apostles say We,
there instead of We, I write Apostles; and where they say You, speaking to the
Saints, there I mention Saints instead of it for the Connection of the Sentence
sometimes requires it; as in the first Article, in mentioning that of 1 John 1.
5. concerning God's being Light, and in such like Cases, which I know no
impartial Reader would have quarrelled, though wanting this Apology, which I
judged meet to premise, knowing there is a Generation, who when they cannot
find any real or substantial Ground against Truth and its Followers, will he
cavilling at such little Nicities, therefore such may see this Objection is
obviated.

CHAP. XVI.
A Confession of Faith, Containing XXIII. Articles.

ARTICLE I. Concerning GOD, and the True and Saving Knowledge of him.
THere is one God Ephesians. 4 6. 1 Cor. 8. 4, 6.
Who is a Spirit Joh. 4. 24.
And This is the Message which the Apostles heard of him, and declared unto the
Saints, That he is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all 1 John 1. 5.
There are Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, and these Three are One 1 John 5. 7.
The Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the Father John 10 38. and 14. 10,
11. and 5. 26.
No man knows the Son, but the Father; neither knows any man the Father,
but the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him Mat. 11, 27. Luke 10.
24.
The Spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of God 1 Cor. 2. 10.
For the Things of God knows no man but the Spirit of God: Now the Saints
have received not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God, that
they might know the things which are freely given them of God 1 Cor. 2, 11, 12.
For the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father sends in Christ's
Name, he teaches them all things, and bringth all things to their Remembrance
Joh. 14. 16.


ARTICLE II. Concerning the Guide and Rule of Christians.
CHrist prayed to the Father, and he gave the Saints another Comforter, that
was to abide with them forever, even the Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot
receive, because it sees him not, nor knows him; but the Saints know him;
for he dwells with them, and is to be in them Joh. 14. 16, 17.
Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his: For, as many
as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God Romans 8. 9, 14.
For this is the Covenant that God has made with the House of Israel, he has
put his Laws in their Mind, and writ them in their Hearts; and they are all
taught of God Heb. 8. 10, 11.
And the Anointing, which they have received of him, abides in them; and they
need not that any man teach them, but as the same Anointing teaches them of
all things, and is Truth, and is no Lie 1 John 2. 27.


ARTICLE III. Concerning the Scriptures.
Whatsoever things were written before time, were written for our Learning,
that we through Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures, might have Hope Romans
15. 4.
Which are able to make wise unto Salvation through Faith, which is in Christ
Jesus: All Scripture being given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for
Doctrine for Reproof, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may
be Perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all Good Works 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17.
No Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private Interpretation; for the
Prophecy came not in old time by the Will of man, but Holy Men of God spoke as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost 2 Pet 1. 20, 21.


ARTICLE IV. Concerning the Divinity of Christ, and his Being from the
Beginning.
IN the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God; the same was in the Beginning with God: All things were made by him; and
without him was not any thing made that was made John 1. 1, 2, 3.
Whose Goings forth have been from of old, from Everlasting Mic. 5. 2.
For God created all things by Jesus Christ Ephesians. 3. 9.
Who being in the Form of God, thought it no Robbery to be equal with God Phil.
2. 6.
And his Name is called Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace Isa. 9. 6.
Who is the Image of the Invisible God, the Firstborn of every Creature Col.
1. 15.
The Brightness of the Father's Glory, and the express Image of his Substance
Hebr. 1. 3.
Who was clothed with a Vesture dipped in Blood; and his Name is called The Word
of God Rev. 19. 13.
In him dwells all the Fullness of the God head bodily Col. 2. 9
And in him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge Col. 2. 3.


ARTICLE V. Concerning his Appearance in the Flesh.
THe Word was made Flesh Jo. 1. 14.
For he took not on him the Nature of Angels; but he took on him the Seed of
Abraham, being in all things made like unto his Brethren Hebr. 2. 16, 17.
Touched with a feeling of our Infirmities; and in all things tempted, like as
we are, yet without Sin Hebr. 4. 15.
He dyed for our Sins, according to the Scriptures; and he was buried, and he
rose again the third day, according to the Scriptures 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4.


ARTICLE VI. Concerning the End and Use of that Appearance.
GOD sent his own Son in the Likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin condemned
Sin in the Flesh Romans 8. 3.
For this Purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the
Works of the Devil 1 John 3. 8.
Being manifested to take away our Sins 1 John 3. 5.
For he gave himself for us, an Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a
Sweet Smelling Savor Ephesians. 5. 2.
Having obtained Eternal Redemption for us Heb. 9. 12.
And through the Eternal Spirit offered up himself without Spot unto God, to
purge our Consciences from dead Works, to serve the living God Hebr. 9. 14.
He was the Lamb that was slain from the Foundation of the World Rev. 5. 8, 12,
13.
Of whom the Fathers did all drink; for they drank of that spiritual Rock that
followed them; and that Rock was Christ 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that we should follow his
Steps 1 Pet. 2. 21.
For we are to bear about in the Body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the
Life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our Body, being always delivered
unto Death for Jesus's sake, that the Life also of Jesus may be made manifest
in our Flesh 2 Cor. 4. 10, 11.
That we may known him, and the Power of his Resurrection, and the Fellowship
of his Sufferings, being made conformable to his Death Phil. 3. 10.


ARTICLE VII. Concerning the Inward Manifestation of Christ.
GOd dwells with the Contrite and Humble in Spirit Isai. 57. 15.
For he has said, he will dwell in them and walk in them 2 Cor. 6. 16.
And Christ stands at the Door, and knocks; if any man hear his Voice, and
open the Door, he will come into him, and sup with him, and he with him Rev. 3.
20.
And therefore ought we to examine our selves and prove our own selves, knowing
how that Christ is in us, except we be Reprobates 2 Corin 13. 5.
For this is the Riches of the Glory of the Mystery, which God would make known
among ( or rather IN) the Gentiles, Christ Within, the Hope of Glory Col. 1. 27.


ARTICLE VIII. Concerning the New Birth.
EXcept a Man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God Joh. 3 3.
Therefore ought we to put off the Old Man with his Deeds, and put on the New
Man, which is renewed in Knowledge after the Image of him that created him, and
which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness Ephesians. 4. 21, 22.
Col. 3. 10.
For henceforth know we no man after the Flesh; yea, though we have known
Christ after the Flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more 2 Cor. 5. 16.
For if any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature, old things are past away;
behold, all things are become new 2. Cor. 5. 17.
For such have put on the Lord Jesus Christ Romans 13. 14.
And are renewed in the Spirit of their Minds Ephesians. 4. 23.
Since as many as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ Gal. 3. 27.
Being born again, not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word
of God, which lives and abides forever 1 Pet. 1. 23.
And glory in nothing, save in the Cross of the Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the
World is crucified unto them, and they unto the World Gal. 6. 14.
For in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision, but a new Creature Gal. 6. 5.


ARTICLE IX. Concerning the Unity of the Saints with Christ.
HE that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all of one Hebr. 2. 11.
For by the exceeding great and precious Promises that are given them, they are
made Partakers of the divine Nature 2 Pet. 1. 4.
Because for this Endprayed Christ, that they all might be one, as the Father
is in him, and he in the Father, that they also might be one in them; and the
Glory which he had gotten from the Father, he gave them, that they might be one
even as the Father and he is one; Christ in the Saints, and the Father in
Christ, that they might be made perfect in one Joh. 17. 21, 22, 23.


ARTICLE X. Concerning the Universal Love and Grace of God to all.
GOd so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have Everlasting Life John 3. 16.
And in this was manifested the Love of God toward us, because that God sent
his only begotten Son, that we might live through him John 4. 9.
So that if any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, the
Righteous; and he is the Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours only, but
also for the Sins of the whole World 1 John 2. 1, 2.
For by the Grace of God he has tasted Death for every Man Heb. 2. 9.
And gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due Time 1 Timothy 2. 6.
Willing all Men to be saved, and to come to the Knowledge of the Truth 1 Timothy
2. 4.
Not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance 2
Pet. 3. 9.
For God sent not his Son into the World to condemn the World, but that the
World through him might be saved John 3. 17.
And Christ came a Light into the World, that whosoever believes in him should
not abide in Darkness John 12. 46.
Therefore, as by the Offense of one Judgment came upon all Men to
Condemnation; even so by the Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all
Men to Justification of Life Romans 5. 18.


ARTICLE XI. Concerning the Light that enlighteneth every Man.
THe Gospel was preached to every Creature under Heaven Coll. 1. 23.
Which Gospel is the Power of God unto Salvation to them that believe Romans 1.
16.
And if it be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of this
World has blinded the Minds of them which believe not, lest the Light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ should shine into them 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.
And this is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and Men love
Darkness rather then Light, because their Deeds are Evil Joh. 3. 19.
And this was the true Light which lightneth every Man that comes into the
World Joh. 1. 9.
By which all things that are reproveable are made manifest; for whatsoever
makes manifest is Light Ephesians. 5. 11.
Every one that does Evil hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest
his Deeds should be reproved; but he that does Truth, comes to the Light that
his Deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God John 3. 20, 21.
And they that walk in the Light, as Christ is in the Light, have Fellowship
one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanses them from
all Sin 1 John 1.
Therefore ought we to believe in the Light, while we have the Light, that we
may be the Children of the Light John 12. 36.
Therefore to Day if we will hear his Voice, let us not harden our Hearts Heb.
4 7.
For Christ wept over Jerusalem, saying, If thou had known, even thou, at
least in this thy Day, the Things which belong unto thy Peace, but now they are
hid from thine Eyes Luke 19. 42.
And he would often have gathered her Children, as a Hen gathers her
Chickens; but they would not Mat. 23. 37.
for the stiff-necked and uncircumcised in Heart and Ears do always resist the
Holy Ghost Acts 7. 51.
And are of those that rebel against the Light Job 24* 13.
Therefore God's Spirit will not always strive with Man Genesis 6. 3.
For the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness of Men, who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness Romans 1. 18.
Because what is to be known of God is manifest in them; for God has showed it
unto them Romans 1. 19.
And a Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every Man to profit withal 1
Cor. 12. 7.
For the Grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared to all Men, teaching
us, that denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present World Tit. 2. 11, 12.
And this Word of his Grace is able to build up, and give an Inheritance among
all those that are sanctified Act. 20. 32.
For the Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two-edged
Sword piercing even to the dividing asunder of the Soul and Spirit, and of the
Joints and Marrow, and is a Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart
Hebr. 4. 12.
This is that more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto we do well that we take
heed, as unto a Light that shines in a dark Place, until the Day dawn, and the
Day Star arise in the Heart 2 Pet. 1. 19.
And this is the Word of Faith which the Apostles preached, which is nigh in
the Mouth and in the Heart Romans 10. 8.
For God, who commanded Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our
Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of
Jesus Christ 2 Cor. 4. 6.
But we have this Treasure in earthen Vessels, that the Excellency of the Power
may be of God 2 Cor. 4. 7.
and not of us; for the Kingdom of God comes not by Observation, but is within
us.

ARTICLE XII. Concerning Faith and Justification
FAith is the Substance of things hoped for, and the Evidence of things not
seen Heb. 11. 1
Without which is is impossible to please God Heb. 11. 6.
Therefore we are justified by Faith, which works by Love Gal. 5. 6.
For Faith without Works, being dead, is by Works made perfect Jam. 2. 22, 26.
By the Deeds of the Law there shall no Flesh be justified Romans 3. 20.
Nor yet by the Works of Righteousness, which we have done; but according to
his Mercy, we are saved by the Washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the
holy Ghost Tit. 3. 5.
For we are both washed, sanctified and justified in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God 1 Cor. 6. 11.


ARTICLE XIII. Concerning Good Works.
IF we live after the Flesh, we shall dye; but if we through the Spirit do
mortify the Deeds of the Body, we shall live Romans 8. 13.
For they which believe in God, must be careful to maintain Good Works Tit. 3 8
For God will render to every Man according to his Deeds: according to his
righteous Judgment to them, who by patient Continuance in well-doing, seek for
Glory, Honor and Immortality, Eternal Life Romans 2. 6, 7.
For such are counted worthy of the Kingdom of God 2 These. 1. 5.
And cast not away their Confidence, which has great Recompense of Reward Heb.
10. 35.
Blessed then are they that do his Commandments, that they may have Right to
the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the Gates into the City Rev. 22. 14.


ARTICLE XIV. Concerning Perfection.
SIn shall not have Dominion over such as are not under the Law, but under
Grace Romans 6. 14.
For there is no Condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; for the Law of the Spirit of Life,
makes free from the Law of Sin and Death Romans 8. 1, 2.
For such are become dead unto Sin, and alive unto Righteousness; and being
made free from Sin, are become Servants of Righteousness Romans 6. 2, 18.
Therefore ought we to be perfect, as our Heavenly Father is perfect Mat. 5. 48.
For the Yoke of Christ is easy, and his Burden is light Mat. 11. 30.
And his Commandments are not grievous 1 John 5. 3.
And whosoever will enter into Life, must keep the Commandments Mat 19. 17.
Hereby do we know that we know God, if we keep his Commandments 1 John 2. 3.
He that says, I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar, and
the Truth is not in him 1 John 2. 4.
Whosoever abides in him, sins not; whosoever sins, has not seen him,
neither known him 1 John 3. 6.
Let no Man deceive us; he that does Righteousness is Righteous, even as he is
Righteous; He that commits Sin is of the Devil: whosoever is born of God,
does not commit Sin; for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because
he is born of God 1 John 3. 7, 8, 9.
For not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; but he that does the Will of the Father, which is in Heaven Mat. 7. 21.
Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircimcision is nothing; but the keeping of the
Commandments of God 1 Cor. 7. 19.


ARTICLE XV. Concerning Perseverance and Falling from Grace.
WE ought to give Diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, which
things if we do, we shall never fall 2 Pet. 1. 10.
For even Paul kept under his Body, and brought it into Subjection, lest by any
Means, when he preached to others, he himself become a Castaway 1 Cor. 9. 27.
Let us therefore take Heed, lest there be in any of us an evil Heart of
Unbelief, in departing from the living God Heb. 3. 12.
Likewise, let us labor to enter into that Rest, lest any Man fall after the
same Example of Unbelief Heb. 4. 11.
For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of
the Heavenly Gift, and were made Partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted
of the good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to come, if they shall
fall away, to renew them again unto Repentance Heb. 6. 4. 5, 6.
For he that abides not in Christ, is cast forth and is withered Joh. 15. 16.
Yet such as overcomes he will make as Pillars in the Temple of his God, and
they shall go no more out Rev. 3. 12.
And these are persuaded, that nothing shall be able to separate them from the
Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus Romans 8. 38.


ARTICLE XVI. Concerning the Church and Ministry.
THe Church of God is the Pillar and Ground of Truth 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Whereof the Dear Son of God is the Head Col. 1. 18.
From which all the Body by Joints and Bands, having Nourishment ministered, and
knit together, increases with the Increase of God Col. 2. 19.
Which Church of God is, them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus 1 Cor. 1. 2.
Who when he ascended up on high, gave Gifts unto Men: And he gave some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry Ephesians. 4. 8. 11.
Who ought to be blameless, vigilant, sober, of good Behavior, given to
Hospitality, apt to teach; not given to Wine, no Strikers, not greedy of filthy
Lucre, but patient; not Brawlers, not covetous 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3.
Lovers of good Men, sober, just, holy, temperate, holding fast the faithful,
as they have been taught, that they may be able by found Doctrine both to
exhort and to convince Gainsayers Tit. 1. 8, 9.
Taking heed to themselves and to the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost has
made them Overseers, to feed the Church of God Acts 20. 28.
Taking the Oversight thereof, not by Constraint, but willingly; not for filthy
Lucre, but of a ready Mind; neither as being Lords over God's Heritage, but as
being Ensamples to the Flock 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3.
And such Elders as rule well, are to be counted worthy of double Honor,
especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine 1 Timothy 51 17.
And to be esteemed very highly in Love for their Works sake 1 These. 5. 12.
As every Man has received the Gift, so ought the same to be ministered: if any
Man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God; if any Man minister, let him do
it, as of the Ability which God gives 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11.
Preaching the Gospel, not with the Wisdom of Words, lest the Cross of Christ
be made of none Effect 1 Cor. 1. 17.
Nor yet with enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, but in Demonstration of the
Spirit and of Power; that the Faith may not stand in the Wisdom of Men, but in
the Power of God 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5.
Howbeit such speak Wisdom among them that are perfect; yet not the Wisdom of
this World, nor of the Princes of this World, which comes to naught; but they
speak the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, even the hidden Wisdom, which God
ordained before the World to their Glory 1 Cor. 2. 6, 7.
Which things they also speak not in the Words which man's Wisdom teaches,
but which the Holy Ghost teaches 1 Cor. 2. 13.
For it is not they that speak, but the Holy Ghost, of Spirit of the Father,
that speaks in them Mat. 10. 20.
Who if they sow spiritual things, ought to reap carnal Things; for so the Lord
has ordained, that they ^h^ch preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel;
for the Scripture says, Thou shall not muzle the Mouth of the Ox that treads
out the Corn; and the Labourer is worthy of his Reward 1 Cor. 9. 11. 14. 9.
Yet a Necessity is laid upon them; yea, VVo is unto them, if they preach not
the Gospel; and their Reward is, that when they preach the Gospel, they make
the Gospel of Christ without Charge 1 Cor. 9. 16, 17, 18.
Not coveting any Man's Silver, or Gold, or Apparel; but their Hands minister
to their Necessities, that so laboring, they may support the Weak, remembering
the Words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, Its more blessed to give, then to
receive Acts 20. 33, 34.
For they are not of the greedy Dogs that can never have enough Isa. 36. 11.
Nor of the Shepherds that look to their own Way, every one his Gain from his
Quarter Ibidem.
That feed themselves, and not the Flock Ezekiel. 34. 8.
That make the People err, biting with their Teeth, and crying Peace, and
preparing War against all such as put not in their Mouths, teaching for Hire,
and divining for Money Mic. 35. 11.
Nor yet of those which teach things which they ought not for fi^thy Lucres
sake Tit. 1. 11.
That run greedily after the Error of Ba^a^ for Reward, loving the Wages of
Unrighteousness 2 Pet. 2. 15.
And through Covetousness, with feigned Words, making Merchandise of Souls 2
Pet. 2. 3.
Men of corrupt Minds, destitute of the Truth, supposing that Gain is Godliness
1 Timothy 6. 5.
But they know that Godliness with Contentment is great Gain 1 Timothy 6. 6.
and having Food and Raiment, they are therewith content 1 Timothy 6. 8.


ARTICLE XVII. Concerning Worship.
THe Hour comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall worship the
Father in Spirit and in Truth; for the Father seeks such to worship him John
4. 23.
God is a Spirit; and they which worship him, must worship in the Spirit and in
the Truth John 4. 24.
For the Lord is nigh to all them that callupon him, to all that call upon him
in Truth Psa. 145. 18.
He is far from the Wicked; but he hears the Prayers of the Righteous Pro.
15. 29.
And this is the Confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his Will, he hears us 1 John 5. 14.
What is it then? We must pray with the Spirit, and with the Understanding
also; we must sing with the Spirit, and with the Understanding also 1 Cor. 14,
15.
Likewise the Spirit also helps our Infirmities; for we know not what we
should pray for, as we ought; but the Spirit itself makes Intercession for us
with Greanings, which cannot be uttered. And he that searches the Heart,
knows what is the Mind of the Spirit, because he makes Intercession for the
Saints, according to the Will of God Romans 8. 26, 27.


ARTICLE XVIII. Concerning Baptism.
AS there is One Lord, One Faith, so there is One Baptism Ephesians. 4. 5.
Which does also now save us, not the putting away of the Filth of the Flesh,
but the Answer of a Good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ 1 Pet. 3. 21, 22,
For John indeed baptized with Water, but Christ with the Holy Ghost and with
Fire Mat. 3. 11.
Therefore as many as are baptized into Jesus Christ, are baptized into his
Death, and are buried with him by Baptism into Death, that like as Christ was
raised up from the Dead by the Glory of the Father, even so they also should
walk in Newness of Life Romans 6. 3, 4.
Having put on Christ Gal. 3. 27.


ARTICLE XIX. Concerning Eating of Bread and Wine, Washing of one anothers's
Feet; Abstaining from things Strangled, and from Blood, and Anointing of the
Sick with Oil.
THe Lord Jesus, the same Night in which he was betrayed, took Bread, and when
he had given Thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat; this is my Body, which
is broken for you; this do in Remembrance of me; After the same manner also he
took the Cup, when he had supped, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my
Blood; this do ye, as often as ye drink it, in Remembrance of me; for, as often as
ye do eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show forth the Lord's Death
till he come 1 Corin. 11. 23, 24, 25.
Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into his Hands, and that he
was come from God, and went to God, he arises from Supper, and laid aside his
Garments, and took a Towel, and girded himself; after that, he pours Water
into a Basin, and began to wash the Disciples Feet, and to wipe them with the
Towel where with he was girded; So after he had washed their Feet, and had
taken his Garments, and was sat down again, he said unto them, Know ye what I
have done unto you? Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well; for so I am;
If then I, your Lord and Master have washed your Feet, ye also ought to wash
one another's Feet; for I have given you Example, that ye should do as I have
done unto you Joh. 13^. 2, 4, 5, 12, 13, 14, 15.
For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you no greater
Burden then these Necessary Things, That ye abstain from Meats offered to
Idols, from Blood; and from things strangled, and from Fornication; from which
if ye keep your selves, ye do well Act. 15. 28, 29.
Is any man sick am^ng you, let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let
them pray over him, anointing him with Oil Jam. 5. 14.


ARTICLE XX. Concerning the Liberty of such Christians as are come to know the
Substance, as to the Using or not Using of these Rites, and of the Observation
of Days.
THe Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness, and Peace, and
Joy in the Holy Ghost Romans 14. 17.
Let no man therefore judge us in Meat or Drink, or in Respect of an Holy Day,
or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbath Days Col. 2. 16.
For if we be dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the World, why, as though
living in the World, are we subject to Ordinances? Let us not touch, or taste,
or handle, which all are to perish with the Using, after the Commandments and
Doctrines of Men Col. 2. 20, 21, 22.
For now, after we have known God, or rather are known of him, why, should we
turn again unto the Weak and Beggarly Elements, or desire again to be in
Bondage to observe Days and Months, and Times and Years, lest Labor have been
bestowed on us in vain Gal. 4. 9, 10, 11.
If one man esteem a Day above another, another esteems every Day alike; let
every man be fully persuaded in his own Mind: He that regards a Day,
regards it unto the Lord; and he that regards not the Day to the Lord, he
does not regard it Romans 14. 5, 6.


ARTICLE XXI. Concerning Swearing, Fighting and Persecution.
IT has bin said by them of old, Thou shall not Forswear thy self; but shall
perform unto the Lord thine Oaths: But Christ says unto us, Swear not at all,
neither by Heaven, for it is God's Throne; nor by the Earth, for it is his
Footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King* neither
shall thou swear by thy Head, because thou can not make one Hair white or
black; but let your Communication be, Yea, Yea; Nay Nay; for whatsoever is more
then these comes of Evil Mat. 5. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37.
And James charge us, Above all things not to Swear, neither by Heaven,
neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath; but let your Yea be Yea, and
your Nay, Nay, les^ ye fall into Condemnation Jam. 5. 12.
Though we walk in the Flesh, we are not to war after the Flesh; for the
Weapons of our Warfare are not to be carnal, but mighty through God, to the
pulling down of strong Holds, casting down Imaginations, and every High Thing
that exalts it self against the Knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity
every Thought to the Obedience of Christ 2 Cor. 10 3, 4, 5.
For Wars and Fightings come of the Lusts, that war in the Members Jam. 4. 1, 2.
Therefore Christ commands, Not to resist Evil; but whosoever will smite on the
Right Cheek, to turn the other also Mat. 5. 39.
Because Christians are Lambs among Wolves Luke 10. 3.
Therefore are they hated of all men for Christ's sake Mat. 10. 22.
And all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus must suffer Persecution 2 Timothy 3.
12.
Such are Blessed; for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven Mat. 5. 10.
For though they have lost their Lives, yet shall they save them Mat. 16. 25.
And because they have confessed Christ before men, he will also confess them
before the Angels of God, Luk 12. 8, 9.
We ought not then to (...) them which kill the Body, but are not able ^o the
kill the Soul; but rather him which is able to destroy both Soul and Body into
Hell Mat. 1^: 28.


ARTICLE XXII. Concerning Magistracy.
LET every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers; for there is no Power but of
God: the Powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the
Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist shall receive to
themselves Damnation: For Rulers are not a Terror to Good Works; but to the
Evil. Will thou then not be afraid of the Power, do that which is Good, and
thou shall have Praise of the same; for he is the Minister of God to thee for
Good: But, (...) thou do that which is Evil, be afraid; for he bears not the
Sword in vain; for he is the Minister of God; a Revenger, to execute Wrath upon
him that does Evil: Wherefore we must needs be subject, not only for Wrath,
but also for Conscience sake; for, for this Cause pay we also Tribute; for they
are God's Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing: Render
therefore to all their Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom
Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
Therefore are we to submit our selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's
sake, whether it be to the King, as Supreme; or unto Governors, as unto them
that are sent by him, for the Punishment of Evildoers, and for the Praise of
them that do well; for so is the Will of God, that with Well-doing we may put
to Silence the Ignorance of Foolish Men 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15.
Yet it is right in the Sight of God, to hearken unto him more then unto them
Acts 4. 19.
And though they straighly command us, not to teach in Christ's Name, we ought
to obey God rather then Men Acts 5. 28, 29.


ARTICLE XXIII. Concerning the Resurrection.
THere shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the Just and Unjust Acts
24. 15.
They that have done Good, unto the Resurrection of Life; and they that have
done Evil unto the Resurrection of Damnation Johu 5. 29.
Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does Corruption
inherit Incorruption 1 Corin. 14. 56.
Nor is that Body sown that shall be; but God gives it a Body as it has pleased
him, and to every Seed his own Body: It is sown in Corruption, it is raised in
Incorruption; it is sown in Dishonor, it is raised in Glory; it is sown in
Weakness, it is raised in Power; it is sown a Natural Body, it is raised a
Spiritual Body 1 Corin. 15. 37, 38, 42, 43, 44.


CHAP. XVII.
A Short Expostulation with, and Appeal to all other Professors.

COme, let us reason with you, all ye Professors of Christianity, of what sort
or kind soever; and bring forth your Catechisms and Confessions of Faith to
that which by most of your selves is accounted the Touchstone or Rule: And
suffer your selves no more to be blinded, and to Err through your Ignorance of
the Scriptures, and of the Power of God; But freely acknowledge and confess to
that Glorious Gospel and Light, which the Scriptures so clearly witness to, and
your Experience must needs answer; as also to these other Doctrines, which
consequentially depend upon the Belief of that Noble and truly Catholic
Principle, wherein the Love of God is so mercifully exhibited to all men, and
his Justice and Mercy do like Twins so Harmonously concord; his Mercy in the
often tendering of his Love through the Strivings and Wreslings of his Light,
during the Day of every man's Visitation; and his Justice, both in the
destroying and cutting away of the Wicked Nature and Spirit in those that
suffer themselves to be redeemed through his Judgments; and in the utter
Overthrow of such, who rebelling against the Light, and doing Despite to the
Spirit of Grace, hate to be reformed: Now, not only this Fundamental Principle
is clearly held forth in this Treatise, but all these that depend upon it, as
the real and inward Justification of the Saints, through the Power and Life of
Jesus revealed in them, their full and Perfect Redemption from the Body of
Death and Sin, as they grow up by the Workings and Prevalency of his Grace; and
yet, lest Security should enter, there is great need of Watchfulness, in that
they may even depart after they have really witnessed a good Condition, and
make Shipwreck of the Faith, and of a good Conscience, with all the Parts of
the Doctrine of Christ, as they lie lincked together like a Golden Chain, which
does very much evidence the Certainty and Virtue of Truth above all Heresies,
Error and Deceit, however so cunningly gilded with the specious Pretenses
thereof; for Truth is entire in all its Parts, and consonant to it self,
without the least Jar, having a wonderful Coherence and notable Harmony,
answering together like the Strings of a well-tuned Instrument; whereas the
Principles of all other Professors, though in some things most of them come
near, and diverse acknowledge that which is Truth; yet in most things they stray
from it, so that their Principles greatly contradict and jar one against
another; and though they may allege Scriptures for some of their Principles,
yet they are put strangely to wrest it, and to deny it for others. My Appeal
then to, and Expostulation with all sorts of professors, is not to prove some
one or two Points by the Scriptures (for there be some general Notions of
Truth, which most (if not all) agree to) but the whole Body of our Principles,
as they stand in relation to each other, which none of them all is able to do;
for, among the many Professors, their Catechisms and Confessions of Faith, I
find none (save the Dispensation of Truth now again revealed) but such as in
most of their substantial Principles differ greatly, and in many contradict
grossly the plain Text and Tenor of the Scripture. I confess there be certain
men in this Age, who with some plausible Appearance of Reality undertake this
Task: These are they that join with, and own not wholely any Imbodied People;
but while they pretend a general Love to all, yet find Fault with some part of
every sort, while in the mean time they scarce can give any Account of their
own Religion, and most of them prove at bottom to have none at all: These men,
I say, may perhaps acknowledge some general Truths, and also hold to the Letter
of the Scripture in some other things, so as thereby to take Occasion largly to
judge others, while themselves offer not to bring these good things to practice
they blame others for the Want or Neglect of: But such an Enterprise from these
men will not (when weighed) prove a fulfilling of this Master, seeing it is not
enongh to acknowledge many Truths, but also to deny and witness against all
Error; and likewise, not to fall short of any Truth, which ought to be
acknowledged: Whereas these sort of men for the most part cannot give account
of their Faith in many things needful to be believed; and whatever things they
may acknowledge to be true, they err most grievously, and contradict a Truth
most needful to be minded and answered, as is proved hereto, in that they stand
not forth to appear for any of these Discoveries, they pretend they have, but
make a shift to hide their Heads in Times of Trial, so as not to suffer for,
nor with any: And through these fine Pretenses above mentioned, through their
Scruples of joining with any, they can cunningly shun the Difficulties of
Persecutions, that attend the particular Sects of Christians; and yet by their
general Charity and Love to all, claim a Share in any Benefits or Advantages
that accrue to one and all: Such then cannot honestly lay claim to justify
their Principles and practices from the Scriptures: But I leave these Straglers
in Religion, and come again to the diverse Sects.

To begin with these, that are most numerous; I think I need not say much to
the Papists in this Case; for they do not so much as pretend to prove all their
Dogmaes by the Scriptures; since it is one of their chief Doctrines, That
Tradition may Authorize Doctrines, without any Authority of Scripture; Yea, the
Council of Constance has made bold to command things to be believed Non
obstante Scriptura, i.e. Though the Scriptures say the contrary; and indeed, it
were their great Folly, to pretend to prove their Doctrines by Scripture,
seeing the Adoration of Saints and Images, Purgatory, and Prayer for the Dead,
the Precedence of the Bishop of Rome, the Matter of Indulgencies, with much
more Stuff of that kind; has not the least Shadow of Scripture for it.

Among Protestants, I know the Socinians are great Pretenders to the
Scriptures, and in Words as much exalt them as any other People; And yet its
strange to see how that not only in many things they are not agreeable to them;
but in some of their chief Principles quite contrary unto it, as in their
Denying the Divinity of Christ, which is as expressly mentioned as any thing can
be; And the Word was God, Joh. 1. As also in Denying his Being from the
Beginning, against the very Tenor of that of John 1. and diverse other, as at
large is shown in the third Chapter of this Treati^e. Diverse other things, as
to them, might be mentioned; but this may suffice, to stop their Boasting in
this Matter.

The Arminians are not more successful in their Denying the False Doctrine of
Absolute Reprobation, and in Asserting the Universal Extent of Christ's Death
for all, then they are short in not placing this Salvation in that Spiritual
Light, where with man is enlightened by Christ; but wrongously asscribing a Part
of that to the Natural Will and Capacity, which is due alone to the Grace and
Power of God, by which the Work is both begun, carried on and accomplished. And
herein they, as well as both the Socinians and Pelagians, though they do well
in Condemning their Errors; yet they miss, in setting up another, and not the
Truth in place thereof, and in that respect are justly reproved by such
Scriptures as their Adversaries (who otherwise are as far wrong as they) bring
against them, in showing the Depravity of man's Will by Nature, and his
Incapacity to do any Good, but as assisted by the Grace of God so to do.

On the other hand, Its strange to observe how many Protestants (the first
Article of whose Confession of Faith is, to assert the Scripture to be the Only
Rule) should deny the Universal Extent of Christ's Death, contrary to the
express words of Scripture, which says, He tasted Death for for every man; or
the Universality of Grace, and a sufficient Principle, which the Scriptures
assert in as many positive words, as, except we may suppose the Penmen
intended another thing then they spoke, it was possible to do, viz. A
Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal; The Grace
of God, that brings Salvation, has appeared unto all men; and many more be
ore-mentioned: The like may be said of their denying the Perfection of the
Saints, and asserting the Impossibility of any falling away from real
Beginnings of true and saving Grace, contrary to so many express Scriptures, as
are heretofore adduced in their proper Place. But to give all that defire to be
undeceived a more full Opportunity to observe serve how the Devil has abused
many, pretending to be wise, in making them cloak with a Pretense of Scripture,
false and pernicious Doctrines; I shall take a few of many Instances out of the
Confession of Faith and Catechism, made by the Divines at Westminster (so
called) because the same is not only most universally received and believed by
the People of Britain and Ireland; but also contains upon the Matter the
Faith of the French Churches, and of most others, both in the Nether-Lands, and
elsewhere, that it may appear what wild Consequences these Men have sought,
both contrary to the naked Import of the words, and to all common Sense and
Reason, to cover some of their Erroneous Principles.

CHAP. XVIII.
A Short Examination of some of the Scripture-Proofs, alleged by the Divines
at Westminster, to prove diverse Articles in their Confession of Faith and
Catechism.

IT is not in the least my Design in this Chapter, to offer so large an
Examination of any of their Articles, as might be done, nor yet of so many as
are very obvious; but only of two or three, to give the Reader a Taste of them,
for Example's sake, whereby as ex ungue Leonem, he may judge of most of all the
rest, if he will be at the pains narrow^ly to look over and examine them.

I shall begin with the first Chapter Sect. 1. where they assert two things:
First, That God has committed his Will now wholely to writing. Secondly, That
the former Ways of God's revealing his Will, as by Immediate Revelation are
now ceased. The Scriptures they bring to prove, are first, Prove. 22. 19, 20,
21. Verse. 19. That thy Trust may be in the Lord, I have made known to thee this
day, even to thee. Verse. 20. Have not I written to thee Excellent Things in
Counsels and Knowledge. Verse. 21. That I might make thee know the Certainty of
the Words of Truth, that thou might answer the Words of Truth to them that
send unto thee. Luke 1. 3, 4. Verse. 3. It seemed good to me also, having had
perfect Understanding of all things from the very first, to write unto thee in
Order, most excellent Theophilus, that thou might know the Certainty of
those things wherein thou have been instructed. Romans 15 4. For whatsoever
things were written afore-time, were written for our Learning, that we through
Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures might have Hope. Mat. 4. 4, 7, 10. But
he answered, and said, It is written, Man shall not live by Bread alone, but by
every Word that proceeds out of the Mouth of God. 7. Jesus said unto him, It
is written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. 10. Then says Jesus
unto him, Get thee hence, Satan; for it is written Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Isa. 8. 19, 20. 19. And when they shall
say unto you, Seek unto them that have Familiar Spirits, and unto Wizards, that
peep and that mutter; Should not a People seek unto their God? for the Living
to the Dead? To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to
this Word, it is because there is no Light in them.

But is it not matter of Admiration, that men should be so beside themselve, as
to imagine these Te^timonie, do in the least prove their Assertion; or that
others, that do not take things merely upon Trust, would be so foolish as to
believe them: For, though God made known and wrote excellent things to Solomon;
Though Luke wrote unto Theophilus an Account of diverse Transactions of Christ's
Outward Abode; For many were never written, Joh. last verse. last; et 20. 30.
And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which if they should
be written every one, I suppose, that even the World it self could not contain
the Books that should be written: And many other Signs truly did Jesus in the
Presence of his Disciples, which are not written in this Book. Though Christ
made use of diverse Scriptures against Satan, and that Isaiah directed People to
the Law and to the Testimony, who will be so mad as to say, It naturally
follows from thence that God has now committed his Will wholely to Writing?
Such a Consequence is no more deducible from these Scriptures, then if I should
argue thus, The Divines of Westminster have asserted many things without
Ground, therefore they had Ground, for nothing they said: Nay, it follows not
by far so naturally, seeing after the writing of all these Passages, by them
cited, according to their own Judgment, there were diverse Scriptures written;
so that it had been false for them to assert, That G^d had then committed his
Counsel wholely to W^iting, which indeed was not true; So it is most Irrational
and Unwarrantable for any to draw such a strange and strained Consequence from
their words.

For the Second, That the former Ways are now ceased, they allege Hebr. 1. 1,
2. God, who at sundry Times and in diverse Manners, spoke in times past unto the
Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son,
whom he has appointed Heir of all things, by whom also he has made the
World^. 2 Pet. 1. 19. We have also a More Sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye
do well that ye take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a Dark Place,, until
the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your Hearts.

Which prove the Matter as little as the former: If Paul had intended by that
to Timothy what those Divines would have, Would not they have made the Apostle
speak a manifest Untruth, seeing they themselves acknowledge that John's
Revelation was written long after; so that these former Ways were not then
ceased? As for that of Peter, it is to beg the thing in Question, To say, It is
intended of the Scripture; and though it were, it proves not the Case at all.
That of Hebr. is so ar from asserting the Matter they would have it, that it
may be very aptly brought to prove the quite contrary; for God indeed speaks to
us now by his Son: But to infer from thence, That the Son speaks only to us by
the Scriptures, remains yet unproved; And for the Apostle to have there
asserted it, had been false; seeing the Revelations, which he and others
afterward had, were inward, and so such were not ceased: And if we may trust
the same Apostle better then these Men, he tells us, that so soon as Christ was
revealed in him, he went straight and obeyed: And the same Apostle tells us,
that Except Christ be in us, we are Reprobates; sure he is not dumb in us,
seeing he says, He will dwell in us and walk in us, and be with us to the End
of the World. And John tells us, that the inward Anointing is to teach us all
things, so that we need not, as to any absolute Necessity, any Man to teach us;
how then is this ceased, seeing God speaks to us by Christ, and Christ must be
in us? Surely, these Men have not herein followed the Rule of the Scriptures;
but rather endeavored most grossly to wrest them, and make of them a Nose of
Wax, notwithstanding their Pretenses as to the contrary in their 6th Sect.
where they say, All things necessary are either expressly set down, or by good
and necessary Consequences may be deduced: Now that these two former Assertions
are not expressly set down, they will not deny; whether they follow by sound
Consequence, any understanding Man may judge, by what is above observed.

There are diverse other things in the same Chapter, which will not abide the
Test, for which the Scripture-Proofs are alleged by them, are most ridiculous;
yet for Brevity's sake I have omitted.

In Chap. 21. Sect. 7. where they say, That the Sabbath from the Resurrection
of Christ, was changed into the First Day of the Week, which in Scripture ( say
they) is called the Lord's Day, and is to be continued to the End of the World,
as the Christian-Sabbath. In which they assert Three Things:

First, That the First Day of the Week is come in place of the Seventh for a
Sabbath: To prove which, they allege 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2 Now concerning the
Collection for the Saints, as I have given order to the Churches of Galat^^,
even so do ye upon the First Day of the Week: Let every one of you lay by him
in store, as God has prospered him, that there be no Gathering when I come.
Acts 20. 7. And upon the First Day of the Week, when the Disciples came
together to break Bread, Paul preached to them, ready to depart on the morrow,
and continued his Speech until Midnight.

That these Proofs assert not the thing expressly, we need not, I suppose,
dispute. Now to say, that because Paul desired the Corinthians to lay somewhat
by them in store that day; or because he broak Bread, and continued his Speech
until Midnight; therefore the First Day of the Week is come in place of the
Sabbath, is a Consequence more remarkable for its Sottishness, then to be
credited for its Soundness: Indeed to make so solemn an Article of Faith, as
these men would have the Morality of the first day of the Week to be, would
need a more positive and express Authority. The Text does clearly enough tell
the Reason of the Disciples meeting so frequently, and of Paul's preaching so
long, because he was ready to depart to morrow; it speaks not a word of its
being Sabbath.

Their Second Assertion, That the First Day of the Week is therefore called the
Lord's Day, is drawn yet more strangly from that of Rev. 1. 10. I was in the
Spirit on the Lord's Day, and heard behind me a great Voice, as of a Trumpet;
Whereas no particular Day of the Week is mentioned: so for them to say, John
meaned the First Day of the Week, has no more Proof but their own bare
Assertion.

For their Third Assertion, That it is to be continued to the End of the World,
as the Christian-Sabbath, they allege these Scriptures, Exodus 20. 8, 10, 11.
Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it Holy; but the Seventh Day is the Sabbath
of the Lord thy God; in it thou shall not do any Work, thou, nor thy Son, nor
thy Daughter, thy Manservant, nor thy Maidservant, nor thy Cattle, nor thy
Stranger, which is within thy Gates; for in Six Days the Lord made Heaven and
Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the Seventh Day; wherefore
the Lord blessed the Sabbath Day, and hallowed it. Isaiah 56. 2, 4, 6, 7. Mat.
5. 17, 18. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets; I am
not come to destroy, but to fulfill: For verily, I say unto you, Till Heaven and
Earth pass, one J^t or one Tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all
be fulfilled.

If they prove any thing, they must needs prove the Continuance of the Seventh
Day, seeing in all the Law there is no mention made of the First Day of the
Week being a Sabbath: If these may be reckoned good and sound Consequences, I
know no Absurdities so great, no Heresies so damnable, no Superstitions so
ridiculous, but may be cloaked with the Authority of Scripture.

In their 27th Chapter, in the 1, 2, 3. Sections, they speak at large of the
Definition and Nature of Sacraments; but in all the Scriptures they bring,
there is not one word of Sacraments: The Truth is, there was a good Reason for
this Emission; for such a thing is not to be found in all the Bible. For them
to allege that the thing signified is (though that be also a begging of the
Question) will not excuse such, who elsewhere aver the whole Counsel of God is
contained in the Scripture, to forsake and reject the Tenor thereof, and
scrape out of the Rubbish of the Romish Tradition, for that which is reckoned
by themselves so substantial a Part of their Faith.

In their 4th Section they assert two things: First, That there are Two only
Sacraments under the Gospel. Secondly, That these two are Baptism and the
Supper.

To prove which they allege Mat. 28. 19. Go ye therefore, and teach all
Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 11. 20, 23. When ye come together therefore into one place,
this is not to eat the Lord's Supper; for I have received of the Lord that
which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same Night in which he
was betrayed, took Bread. 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so account of us, as of the
Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God. Hebr. 5. 4. And no
man takes this Honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.

Now granting there were such a thing, as Sacraments, to be so solemnly
performed; all that these Scriptures will prove is, That these two were
appointed to be performed: but that there are only two, or that these are they
(which is the thing asserted, and incumbent to be proved) there is not the
least Shadow of Proof alleged; for, according to their own Definition of a
Sacrament in the larger Catechism, where they say, The Parts of a Sacrament are
Two; the one an outward and sensible Sign, used according to Christ's own
Appointment; the other, an inward and spiritual Grace thereby signified; both
the Washing of one another's Feet, and the Anointing of the Sick with Oil does
Answer to it, and many other Things: So that the Probation of a Sacrament at
all, or of their being Two, Seven, yea, or Seventy, is all alike easy, seeing
neither Name nor Number is to be found in the Scripture, they being the mere
Conceits and Inventions of men; and yet it is mavelous to see with how great
Confidence some men do assert the Scripture to be their Rule, while they build
up so considerable Parts of their Doctrine, without the least
Scripture-Foundation.

Thus I thought fit to pitch upon these three, viz. the Scriptures, Sabbaths
and Sacraments, because these be three of the main things for which we the
Quakers are chiefly cried out against, and accused, as believing Erroneously
concerning them: Now what we believe concerning these things, and how agreeable
our Testimony herein is to the Scriptures, is heretofore sufficiently
demonstrated: Also, how little Scripture Proof these have for their contrary
Assertions to us in these things, notwithstanding of their great Pretenses to
Scripture, will also appear to the Vnbyassed Reader.

Advertisment to the Reader.
NOte Reader, That I have here throughout made use of the Last Common
Translation of the Bible; And if I would have made use of the Hebrew and Greek,
I could have produced diverse other very clear Scriptures, which in the Common
Translation are corrupted and perverted; but I choosed rather to do thus, that
our Opposers might see, I took no Advantage that way; and also, that all that
can but read may find the places cited in their own Bibles.

THE END.

