A Full and Satisfactorie ANSWER TO THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBVRIES Speeh,
OR, Funeral Sermon Preached by himself on the Tower Hill, on Friday the
tenth. of January, 1645. Upon Hebr. 12.1, 2.

At which time he was there and then Beheaded.

Wherein Is a full and plenary Discourse to satisfy all those who have been
startled with his Subtle and Jesuiticall Falacies, and evasions in the said
Speech.

And other passages and observations of great consequence, to satisfy the
expectation of the Kingdom therein.

ISAY. 14.16. They that see thee, shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider
thee, saying, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake
Kingdoms.

LONDON: Printed by JANE COE. 1645.

A full and satisfactory Answer to the Archbishop of Canterburies Speech, Or,
Funeral Sermon.
Good people,
YOu will pardon my old Memory, and upon so sad occasions as I am come to this
place, to make use of my Papers, I dare not trust my self otherwise.

Answ. The Archbishop here you se made a repetition of a lesson he had writ
out by heart (whether by the advice of his Counsel, or whether he had it from
Oxford; or did stuit himself it matters not) he spoke it not you see out of
Conscience, which was the cause why he dirst not trust his decriped memory;
lest his conscience should fly in his face, and put him out of his lesson.

Good people,

This is a very uncomfortable place to preach in, and yet I shall begin with a
Text of Scripture, in the twelfth of the Hebrews, Hebrews. 12.1, 2. Let us
run with patience that race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the
author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was ser before him,
endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the aight hand of
the Throne of God.



Answ. He saw how uncomfortable a thing it was to be brought to public
shame, in respect of himself, but was nothing at all touched in Conscience;
for that Cruel Tyranny where by he insulted over others to bring them to
public shame before, he speaks nothing, nor was at all humbled for that. And
yet speaks of a place of Scripture you see* that no Text in all the whole
Bible (had he had grace) could have come nearer to his conscience, for
persecuting, imprisoning, whipping, pillering, and drawing the blood of the
saints of God, in that Tyrannical manner which he has done.

I have been long in my race, and how I have looked unto Jesus the Author and
finisher of my Faith, is best known to him: I am now come to the end of my
race, and here I find the Cross, A death of shame, but the shame must be
despised, or there is no coming to the right hand of God; Jesus despised the
shame for me, and God forbid but I should despise the shame for him.

Answ. He lived to an old Age; and enjoyed many great blessings, had he had
grace to use them to Gods glory) but you see he does not in all his speech so
much as once praise God for the same: But rather stand upon his justification
by Works as you shall see by and by? Why he calls Jesus to witness here; and
then goes on to apply his Text to himself; even to his very death, to
Justification by works: Even triumphing over that shameful death, in all
which he speaks nothing of believing but all of doing.

I am going apace, as you see, toward the Red Sea, and my feet are upon the
very brinks of it, an Argument, I hope, that God is bringing me to the Land of
Promise, for that was the way by which of old he led his people; But before
they came to the Sea, he instituted a Passover for them, a Lamb it was, but it
was to be eaten with very sower herbs, as in the Twelfth of Exodus.

Answ. He was then indeed as near the Red Sea as Pharaoh was when his Horses
drew him into the deluge, as he was pursuing the people of God, and in Justice
cut off, whilst he pursued them by bloody persecution. No doubt but many of
those Saints, that died under his Martyrdom are in the Land of promise: And
though for himself he labors to make us believe him to be a Lamb, yet was he
chief amongst the first borne of the Egyptians, that so Cruelly insulted over
the people of God, which was to be smitten before the people of God could
expect to be delivered.

I shall obey, and labor to digest the sower herbs, as well as the Lamb, and I
shall remembr that it is the Lords Passover; I shall not think of the herbs,
nor be angry with the hands that gathered them, but look up only to him who
instituted the one, and governs the other: For men can have no more power
over me, then that which is given them from above.

Answ. Now he comes to Works of superarogation to make himself not one Lamb,
but a Lamb unspotted, and the putting of him to death a Passover, nay a
Passover of Gods institution.

I am not in love with this passage through the red Sea, for I have the
weakness and infirmity of flesh and blood in me, and I have prayed as my
Savior taught me, and exampled me, Vt transiret Calix ista.

That this Cup of red Wine might pass away from me, but since it is not that
my will may, his will be done; and I shall most willingly drink of this Cup as
deep as he dleases, and enter into this Sea, I and pass thorugh it, in the way
he shall be pleased to lead me.

Answ. He would make himself a Lamb as Christ was, expressing himself in
Christ's very words, you see so proudly, and loftily did he carry himself in all
his actions at his death, as if he was so pure a Lamb, that he would bid
defiance to Heaven: To charge him with any spot, or blemish.

And yet (Good people) it would be remembered, That when the Servants of God,
old Israel, were in this boystrous Sea, and Aron with them, the Egiptians which
persecuted them, and did in a manner drive them into the Sea, were drowned in
the same waters, while they were in pursuit of them: I know my God whom I
serve, is as able to deliver me from this Sea of Blood, as he was to deliver
the three Children from the furnace, Daniel 3.

Answ. His speech is the phrase of a Potentate; (still, Good people?) The
language which Princes use when they speak to their people; scorning to call
us us brethren, who had so much honor from the Pope, like the Beast which must
be lifted up above his brethren. Yet I wonder what should make him dream of a
deliverance* whether he looked for a Pardon or a Repreeve, from the KING: or
whether he thought the parliament did but jest with him, to try what he would
do, or that he hopod for an insurrection about him, or what it should be, I am
altogether Ignorant. Surely, in that condition he was now in, it had been more
consonant to a gracious spirit, to humble himself before God, seeing how he was
overwhelmed with those waves; into which he had driven the people of God, and
in which himself was now so near drowning.

And I most humbly thank my Savior for it, my resolution is now, as theirs was
then; their Resolution was, They would not worship the Image which the KING had
set up; nor shall I the Imagination which the PEOPLE are setting up, nor will I
forsake the Temple, and the Truth of GOD, to follow the bleating of Ieroboams
Calves in Dan and in Bethel.

Answ. He still goes on, as if there had been some hopes of his deliverance,
and set down you see his resolutions, if he should have lived, and that full
of pride, that he would never submit to the Parliaments, and their Laws,
which he sets in oposition to the Temple and truth of God: Nay he is so far
from Charity, that he seems to invite the people to mutiny.

And I pray God bless all this People, and open their eyes, that they may see
the right way; for if it fall out that the blind lead the blind, doubtless
they will both into the ditch.

Answ. Are not these wicked Tares for a dying Man to sow between the
Parliament and the People.

For my self, I am, (and I acknoledge it in all humillity) a most grievous
sinner many ways, by thought word and deed, and therefore I cannot doubt but
that God has mercy in store for me a poor penitent, as well as other sins;

Answ. This speech has something like grace in it, when it is spoken from a
sincere Coonscience; but whether this was only a complement with God, or to
blind many, or how cordial it was spoken none can judge; and therefore I shall
wave that to come to those particulars which follow, in which we shall better
understand this.

I have, upon this sad occasion, ransack^d every corner of my heart, and yet I
thank God, I have not found any of my sins that are there, any sins now
deserving death by any known Law of this Kingdom.

Answ. Had he ransacked every corner of his heart as he here says he did, and
dealt ingeniously with us: and laid the poor fellows blood (that he caused to
be hanged, drawn and quartered to fulfill his humor) close to his Conscience;
that (had there been nothing else) would have given him the lie in this
particular. But that is but one thing, there were many crimes proved against
him; as to give the King a wrong oath at his Coronation, to keep that Plot so
private, which he knew of when an Indian nut had bin prepared to be given to
the King with poison; his laboring to subvert the fundamental Laws of the
Land; his correspondency wi^h the Pope, and known Jesuits, Priests and Papists
in England, which is treason by Law; his causing of new Canons to be made
against law and men's houses to be pulled down over their heads to please his
humor; his causing of several Parliaments to be broaken up, etc. Why should a
dying man this dissemble at his death; But then he daubs up the matter and
says:

And yet thereby I charge nothing upon my Judges (I humbly beseech you I may
rightly be understood, I charge nothing in the least degree upon my Judges) for
they are to proceed by proof, by valuable Witnesses, and in that way I or any
Innocent in the world may justly be condemned: And I thank God, though the
weight of the Sentence lie very heavy upon me, yet I am as quiet within, as (I
thank Christ for it) I ever was in my life:

Ans. The Witnesses are hundreds of honest godly men that came against him,
some of them are honorable Members in Parliament, some of them reverend
Divines, some Gentlemen, and other godly honest Christians, and of as good
repute as any amongst those where they live, that came to witness against him
from all parts of the Kingdom.

And though I am not only the first Archbishop, but the first man that ever
dyed in this way, yet some of my Predecessors have gone this way, though not
by this means: for Elfegus was hurried away and lost his head by the Danes;
and Simon Sudbury in the fury of VVat Tyler and his fellows: And long before
these Saint John Baptist had his head danced off by a lewd woman; and Saint
Cyprian Archbishop of Carthage submitted his head to a persecuting Sword.

Ans. The Archbishop here you see looks upon John Baptist as his Predecessor,
but the Archbishops case was rather like that of Thomas a Becket, or Cardinal
Woolsey's, or Bishop Bonners, but his stomach will not down, he cannot bow, no
he talks of greatness, and his comfort is that he goes the way of great men.
But nothing in all his speech can be more observable then this that here he
bring in; not only Cyprian a moderate Popish Father, but Elfegus a most
notorious Popish Priest of the Danes, and with him also Simon Sudbury another
as notable a Iesuited Prelate, in King Richard the seconds days, and these are
the men from whose example (he says) to his great comfort he is taught
patience.

Many examples great and good, and they teach me patience, for I hope my cause
in Heaven will look of another dye then the color that is put upon it here
upon earth; and some comfort it is to me, not only that I go the way of those
great men in their several Generations:

Ans. Indeed it was a great favor to grant him leave to dye such a honorable
death? But this you see is not all, for he looks upon his death as
meritorious* and that so the very act will appear in heaven, is his hope.

But also that my charge (if I may not be partial) looks somewhat like that
against Saint Paul in the 25. of the Acts, for he was accused for the Law and
the Temple, that is the Law and Religion; and like that of Saint Stephen in the
6. of the Acts, for breaking the Ordinances which Moses gave us, which
Ordinances were Law and Religion: but you will say, do I then compare my self
with the integrity of Saint Paul, and Saint Steven?

Answ. Yes* and here he showed a great deal of Arrogancy in it too, his cause
and theirs being quite contrary. Yet he says:

No, God forbid, far be it from me; I only raise a comfort to my self, that
these great Saints and servants of God were thus laid up in their several
times; And it is very memorable that Saint Paul, who was one of them, and a
great one, that helped on the accusation against Saint Steven, fell afterward
into the selfsame accusation himself, yet both of them great Saints and
servants of God.

Answ. This seems verily to rise from the pride of his heart, and we may all
see how justly God has requi^ed him for the evil he has done to these
Kingdoms, which he was too proud to a^ply to himself in that particular
concerning Paul's fall who before helped forward the accusation against S^ephen:
seeing he was the man that helped forward the accusation against the Scots to
cause them to be proclaimed Traitors, and Bendfield to be hanged, drawn and
quartered as a Traitor, it was just with God to caase him to dye under the
condemnation of a Traitor, though he was too lofty to stop down before the
throne of Gods justice, and lay it home to his Conscience.

I but perhaps a great clamor there is, that I would have brought in Popery, I
shall answer that more fully by and by, in the mean time, you know what the
Pharisees said against Christ himself, in the eleventh of John; If we let him
alone, all men will believe on him, Et veniunt Romani, and the Romans will come
and take away both our place and the Nation. Here was a causlesse cry against
Christ that the Romans would come, and see how just the Judgment of God was,
they crucified Christ for fear least the Romans should come, and his death was
that that brought in the Romans upon them, God punishing them with that which
they most feared: and I prey God this clamor of veniunt Romani, (of which I
have given to my knowledge no just cause) help not to bring him in; for the
Pope never had such a Harvest in England since the Reformation, as he has now
upon the Sects and divisions rhat are amongst us; in the mean time, by honor
and dishonor, by good report and evil report, as a deceiver and yet true, am
I now passing out of this world.

Answ. To pass by this caution (for indeed we may already say veniunt Romani,
and indeed the Pope never had such an Harvest in England; but who may we thank
for this, did not the Archbishop act his part in this, yea verily, and both
countenanced, and encouraged the Queen, and told her that with a good
Conscience she might go on according to those Principles, which occationed
all this, which gave opportunity to such Armies of Papists in the three
Kingdoms;) but let us see what it is, he says further of this in the ensuing
discourse, first taking a view of that he says concerning the King.

Some particulars also I think not amiss to speak of: and first this I shall
be bold to speak of the King, our gracious Sovereign, He has been much
traduced by some for laboring to bring in Popery, but upon my Conscience (of
which I am now going to give God a present account) I know him to be as free
from this Charge I think as any man living, and I hold him to be as sound a
Protestant, according to the Religion by Law established as any man in this
Kingdom, and that He will venture His Life as far and as freely for it* and I
think I do or should know both His affection to Religion, and His grounds
upon which that affection is built, as fully as any man in England.

Ans. It is rather conceived that by the labors, and endeavors of the Queen,
and the Jesuits, and Priests, and Friars, that by the Archbishops means have
been suffered at Court, the King has been brought to do what he does. And
till now the Archbishop never once talks of Conscience and now he speaks his
Conscience, you see what it is that he says, J know him, I think him; I hold
him to be a Protestant, and I think I know his affection, and the grounds
upon which upon which that affection is built; Is this an expression for such a
man as he, that is an Archbishop to bring his Conscience too, that gives no
satisfaction at all, he had been better to have said nothing at all of him. But
let us see what he says of the City of London, for that is the next particular
he speaks of.

The second particular is concerning this great and populous City, which God
bless; here has been of late a fashion taken up to gather hands, and then go
to the Honorable and great Court of the Kingdom, the Parliament, and clamor
for Justice, as if that great and wise Court, (before whom the causes come
which are unknown to the many;) could not, or would not do Justice, but at
their call and appointment; a way which may endanger many an innocent man, and
pluck innocent blood upon their own heads, and perhaps upon this City also,
which God forbid: and this has been lately practiz^d against my self, God
forgive the setters of this, with all my heart I beg it, but many
well-meaning people are caught by it: In Saint Stephens case, when nothing else
would serve, they stirred up the people against him, Acts 6. and Herod went
just the selfsame way, for when he had killed Saint James, he would not
venture upon Saint Peter too, till he saw how the people took it, and were
pleased with it, in the 12 of the Act. But take heed of having your hands full
of blood, in the first of Isai. for there is a time best known to himself.

Ans. Here you see he seems to look back to the Earl of Strafford; whom he
compares to Stephen, and seems to charge the Parliament that the City coming
with Petitions against him, to them, and finding that Straffords death pleased
the people, therefore they put him to death also: and from thence charges the
City with blood, wherein he now flies quite from what he said before, and most
enviously, goes about to do what he can to blemish the Parliament, and the
City of London; when he said before that he charged nothing upon his Judges;
and whereas he speaks as if the way that has been taken with him, may
endanger an innocent man, it is notoriously known that in this he lies against
his own Conscience, well knowing, that never any Subject in England, had a
fayrer trial, and more liberty and privilege, and favor all along than he,
the like was never shown to any man in his case, if he could have defended
himself, and that his Counsel knew right well.

When God among other sins makes inquisition for blood; and when inquisition
is on foot, the Psalmist tells us, Psalm 9. that God remembers, that is not
all, tha^ God remembers and forgets not (says the Prophet) the complaint of
the poor; and he tells you what poor they are in the ninth verse, the poor
whose blood is shed by such kind of means: Take heed of this. It is a fearful
thing (at any time) to fall into the hands of the living God, in the 12. of the
Hebrews: but it is fearful indeed, and then especially, when he is making
his Inquisition for b^oud, and therefore with my Prayers to avert the Prophecy
from the City, let me desire that this City would remember the Prophecy that
is expressed, Jeremiah 16.15.

Ans. He should have taken this into serious Consideration when he pesecuted
the poor saints of God from place to place, never suffering them to be at
quiet but going a thirsting for their blood from day to day, for whereas he
talks of Inquisition for blood. J am sure by his means the high Commission was
little inferior ti the Spanish Inquisition for bloo^, and now as if he had had
some Divine Revelation from Heaven, her angles upon the City, and bids us
remember it, as it is in Jeremiah 26.15. But to come to his third particular.

The third particular, is this poor Church of England, that has flourished
and been a shelter to other neighboring Churches, when storms have driven
upon them; but alas, now it is in a storm it self, and God knows whether,
or how it shall get out; and which is worse then a storm from without, it is
become like an Oak cleft to shivers with wedges made out of its own body, and
that in every cleft, profaneness and irreligion is creeping in apace; while as
Prosper says, Men that introduce profaneness are cloaked with a name of
Imaginary religion; for we have in a manner almost lost the substance, and
dwell much, nay too much a great deal in Opinion, and that Church which all
the Iesuitical machinations in these parts of Christendom could not ruin, is
now fallen into a great deal of danger by her own.

Answ. We may say so too with sad hearts, but from whence came these storms;
we may all know the Prelates, and the Prelaticall Clergy, raised thereby
contribution-mony, to invite the King to war against his own Subjects; at
which time the Arch Bishop was very active: and none did press it forward more
then he. These, and the Jesuits and Papists amongst us, are those wedges that
are driven into the body of this Kingdom; to rent and tear it to pieces. It
was horrible impiety that they daily committed, and still do commit, and
suffer to be committed; and sowed pillowes under the Elbowes of of those that
live in such profaneness? and yet these men like the Archbishop, will call
themselves Protestants. But I pray God to bless the Parliament in their
settling of this great Reformation, who labor to cast off all that Imaginary
Religion, which the Prelates imposed upon us: and so settled the Church,
according to that rule which is written in the word of God. But in the last
place, see what he says of himself.

The last particular (for I am not willing to be tedious I shall hasten to go
out of this miserable world) is my self, and I beseech you, observe me, I was
borne and baptized in the bosom of the Church of England, as it stands yet
established by Law, in that profession I have ever since lived, and in that
profession of the Protestant Religion here established I come now to die; this
is no time to dissemble with God, least of all in matter of Religion, and
therefore I desire it may be remembered, I have always lived in the Protestant
Religion estabished in England, and in that I come to die, What Clamors and
Slanders I have endured for laboring to keep an Uniformitie in the external
service of God according to the Doctrine and Discipline of this Church all men
knows, and I have-abundantly felt.

Answ. The Archbishop has been always very laborious to cause the memory of
him to remain, and without all doubt, that moved him to write the day of his
own life; and many other things: as particular this last speech of his, which
for that purpose he gave a Copy to Doctor Stern, but to take a view of this
expression of his, where he professes himself a Protestant of the Church of
England: but what is it to say so, he is not charged for, being a Papist
himself; but for laboring to bring in Popery. It may be the Pope came not
high enough, and (as some say) would have sent another Cardinal from Rome to
have overtopt him, and so he kept off for the present; only held a
Correspondencie with his friends here: and so would have both Religions for the
present to remain. And in this, he rather appeared an Atheist indeed; for he
was like a Camelian of diverse colors, sometimes punishing the poor Sect of
Romish Priests, but the fat ones he protected; and cherished such as Father
Leader, superior of the Benedicts, Master Flanders, and Master Price; and
Master Gascoygne, etc. and the whole order of the Jesuits: and feasted, and
adored the great ones; such as Sir Cellam Digby and others: and because he
could not be Pope of Rome, intended to be a Cardinal in these Kingdoms: as a
Popish Priest (Father Brown by name) confessed, and was put upon the bringing
in of Altars, Tapers, and other superstitions into the Church by Father Leader,
when he eame into England; and by the advice of the Court Papists to be cruel
in the high Commission against godly people under the name of Puritans: and
Separatists, etc. And the like he used, in his verdict at Lambath. In all
which* the truth of it is, that I think he had his Religion to choose; but
concerning the Treason he is charged with, he says thus.

Now at last I am accused of high Treason in Parl. a crime which my soul ever
abhorred, this Treason was charged upon me to consist of two parts: an
endeavor to subvert the Law of the Realm, and a like endeavor to overthrow
the true Protestant Relgion established by those Laws. Besides my answers which
I gave to the several charges, I protested my inocency in both Houses, It was
said Prisoners Protestations at the Bar must not be taken de ipso; I can
bring no witness of my heart, and the intentions thereof, therefore I must come
to my Protestation, not at the Bar, but to my Protestation at this hour and
instant of my death, in which (as I said before) I hope all men will be such
charitable Christians as not to think I would die and dissemble my Religion, I
do therefore here, with that caution that I delivered before, without all
prejudice in the world to my Judges, that are to pr^ceed secundum allegata and
probata, and so to be understood, I die in the presence of Almighty God and
all his holy and blessed Angels, and I take it now on my death, That I never
endeavored the subvertion of the Laws of the Realm, nor never any change of
the Protestant Religion into Popish superstition: and I desire you all to
remember this protest of mine, for my innocence in these and from all manner of
Treasons what soever.

Answ. You see, the Archbishop he shamefully denies to be guilty of the
Treason proved against him, first in particular, and secondly in general. All
which, as has been showed already, was fully proved against him. But that he
calls God, and the holy Angels to witness, and take it upon his death, that
he never endeavored to subvert the laws of the Realm, nor never any change
of the Protestant Religion into Popish superstitions; this is most desperate of
all the rest. For (as you shall see by and by) he in part confesses himself
guilty of the one, in endeavoring to subvert the Parliament, the very
fountain of the Laws of the Realm. And for the other, if he had never any
intent to change the Protestant Religion into popish superstition, why did he
so many things for the popes Agents against the protestants here, to get into
the popes and the Queens favor, as has been said already; why did he at the
instigation of the Jesuits use the godly protestant Ministers, with such
rigor; and why did he impose a Common Prayer book (that came from Rome upon
the Scots) and why did he counsel the King to put out a book for sports on
the Lords day. And the like evident demonstrations of his endeavors to bring
in popery. But to come to his conclusion.

I have bin accused likewise as an enemy to Parliaments no, God forbid, I
understood them, and the benefits that comes by them, a great deal too well to
be so, but I did indeed dislike some misgovernments (as I conceived) of some
few one or two parliaments; and I did conceive humbly that I might I have
reason for it, for corruption optimi est pessima: There is no coruption in the
world so bad as that which is of the best thing in it self, for the better the
thing is in nature, the worse it is corrupted; and this being the highest and
greatest Court, over which no other can have any Jurisdiction in the Kingdom,
if by any way a misgovernment, which God forbid, should any ways fall upon it,
the Subjects of this Kingdom are left without all manner of remedy, and
therefore God preserve them, and bless them, and direct them, that there may
be no mis-conceit, much less mis-government amongst them. I will not enlarge
my self any further, I have done, I forgive all the world, all and every of
those bitter enemies, or others whatsoever they have been, which have any ways
prosecuted me in this kind, and I humbly desire to be forgiven first of God,
and then of every man, whether I have offended him or no, if he do but
conceive that I have; Lord, do thou forgive me, and I beg forgiveness of him,
and so I heartily desire you to join with me in prayer.

Answ. See what juggling here is, wherein almost in every line he contradicts
himself.

First, he denies that he has been an enemy to Parliaments, (No, God Forbid)
and yet in the next line but one he confesses that he misliked one or two
Parliaments: and conceives he says that he might have reason for it.

The second, he does acknowledge it to be the highest, and greatest Court, and
yet by and by calls it Misse-Governement.

Thirdly, he says that none can have Jurisdiction over the parliament, and yet
does himself presume to dislike thereof.

Fourthly, He pleads for his own Innocence, and has presumed to traduce the
King to break up former parliaments: and yet should parliaments be hindered by
misgovernment ( which must be by force, or by tretchery of their enemies) He
confesses that we should there be blessed with all manner of Remedy. And has
thus made a Confused distracted Conclusion; he standing still upon his own
righteous dealings, his forgiving of all men, and desires all to forgive him,
in which he is so plausible, that he desires, even to those who do but conceive
that he has wronged them: And prays to God to forgive him, and so after his
prayer execution was done upon him.

In all which there is you see nothing of faith or assurance, but all of Works
and Merits, and Superarogation as you have seen at large.

Only thus much I would not be mistaken, That we are not to judge of any man's
final estate, his last prayer was (Lord Receive my soul) And as to the thief
on the Cross, so to him or any vessel of mercy, God can come and receive them
at the very last hour if he pleases.

FJNJS.

