THE SPEECHES OF THE LORD DIGBY IN THE HIGH Court of Parliament, CONCERNING
GRIEVANCES, and the Trienniall PARLIAMENT.

Printed for Thomas Walkely, 1641.

THE LORD DIGBYES SPEECH, the 9th of Novem. 1640.
Mr. Speaker,
YOU have received now a solemn account from most of the Shires of England, of
the several grievances and oppressions they sustain, and nothing as yet from
Dorset-shire; Sir, I would not have you think that I serve for a Land of
Goshen, that we live there in Sunshine, whilst darkness and plagues overspread
the rest of the Land: As little would I have you think, that being under the
same sharp measure that the rest, we are either insensible and benumbed, or
that that Shire wants a servant to represent its sufferings bouldly.

It is true Mr. Speaker, the County of Dorset has not digested its Complaints
into that formal way of Petition, which others (I see) have done; but have
entrusted them to my Partners and my delivery of them by word of mouth unto
this Honorable house. And there was given uuto us in the County Court, the day
of our Election, a short memorial of the heads of them, which was read in the
hearing of the Freeholders there present, who all unanimously with one voice
signified upon each particular, that it was their desire that we should
represent them to the Parliament, which with your leave, I shall do, And these
they are.

1. The great and intolerable burden of Ship Money, touching the legality
whereof they are unsatisfied.

2. The many great abuses in pressing of Soldiers, and raising Moneys
concerning the Same.

3. The multitude of Monopolies.

4. The new Canon, and the Oath to be taken by Lawyers, Divines, etc.

5. The Oath required to be taken by Church Officers to present according to
Articles new and unusual.

Besides this, there was likewise presented to us by a very considerable part
of the Clergy of that County a note of remembrance containing these two
particulars.

First, the imposition of a new Oath required to be taken by all Ministers and
others, which they conceive to be illegal, and such as they cannot take with a
good Conscience.

Secondly, the requiring of a pretended Benevolence, but in effect a Subsidy,
under the penalty of Suspension, Excommunication, and Deprivation, all benefit
of appeal excluded.

This is all we had particularly in Charge: But that I may not appear a
remiss servant of my Country, and of this House; give me leave to add
somewhat of my own Sense.

Truly Mr. Speaker, the injurious sufferings of some worthy members of this
House, since the dissolution of the two last Parliaments, are so fresh in my
memory, that I was resolved not to open my Mouth, in any business wherein
freedom and plain dealing were requisite, until such time, as the breach of
our privileges were vindicated, and the safety of speech settled.

But since such excellent Members of our House thought fit the other day to lay
aside that Caution, and to discharge their souls so freely in the way of zeal
to his Majesty's service, and their Countries good: I shall interpret that
confidence of theirs for a lucky Omen to this Parliament, and with your
permission license my thoughts too, a little.

Mr. Speaker, under those heads which I proposed to you, as the grievances of
Dorset-shire, I suppose are comprised the greatest part of the mischiefs which
have of late years laid battery either to our Estates, or Consciences.

Sir, I do not conceive this the fit season to search and ventilate
particulars, yet I profess I cannot forbear to add somewhat, to what was said
the last day by a learned Gentleman of the long Robe, concerning the acts of
that reverend new Synod, made of an old Convocation. Does not every Parliament
man's heart rise to see the Prelates thus usurp to themselves the Grand
Preeminence of Parliament? The granting of Subsidies, and that under so
preposterous a name as of a Benevolence, for that which is a Malevolence
indeed; A Malevolence I am confident in those that granted it, against
Parliaments: and a Malevolence surely in those that refuse it, against those
that granted it: for how can it incite less? when they see wrested from them
what they are not willing to part with, under no less a penalty then the loss
both of Heaven and Earth: of Heaven, by Excommunication; and of the Earth by
Deprivation; and this without Redemption by appeal. What good Christian can
think with patience on such an insnaring Oath, as that which is by the new
Canons enjoined to be taken by all Ministers, Lawyers, Physicians, and
Graduates in the Universities? where, besides the swearing such an
impertinence, as that things necessary to salvation are contained in
Discipline; besides the swearing those to be of Divine right, which amongst the
learned, never pretended to it, as the Arch things in our Hierarchy. Besides,
the swearing not to consent to the change of that, which the State may upon
great reason think fit to alter; Besides the bottomless perjury of an etc.
Besides all this Mr. Speaker, men must swear that they swear freely and
voluntarily what they are compelled unto; and lastly, that they swear that
Oath in the literal sense, whereof no two of the makers themselves, that I have
heard of, could ever agree in the understanding.

In a word, Mr. Speaker, to tell you my opinion of this Oath, it is a Covenant
against the King, for Bishops and the Hierarchy; as the Scottish Covenants is
against them, only so much worse then the Scottish, as they admit not of the
Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs, and we are sworn unto it.

Now Mr. Speaker, for those particular heads of grievances whereby our estates
and properties are so radically invaded; I suppose, (as I said before) that it
is no season now to enter into a strict discussion of them; only thus much I
shall say of them, with application to the Country for which I serve, that
none can more justly complain, since none can more justly challenge exemption
from such burdens then Dorset-shire; whether you consider it is a Country
subsisting much by Trade; or as none of the most populous; or as exposed as
much as any to foreign Invasion.

But alas Mr. Speaker, particular lamentations are hardly distinguishable in
universal groans.

Mr. Speaker, it has bin a Metaphor frequent in Parliament, and if my memory
fail me not, was made use of in the Lord Keepers Speech at the opening of the
last, that what money Kings raised from their Subjects, they were but as
vapors drawn up from the Earth by the Sun, to be distilled upon it again
in fructifying showers: The Comparison Mr. Speaker, has held of late years in
this Kingdom too unluckily: what has bin raised from the Subject by those
violent attractions, has bin formed, it is true, into Clouds, but how? to
darken the Suns own luster, and has fallen again upon the Land only in
Haylstones and Milldews, to batter and prostrate still more and more our
liberties, to blast and wither our affections; had not the later of these bin
still kept alive by our Kings own personal virtues, which will ever preserve
him in spite of ill Counselors, a sacred object, both of our admiration and
loves.

Mr. Speaker, It has bin often said in this House, and I think can never be
too often repeated, That the Kings of England can do no wrong; but though they
could Mr. Speaker, yet Princes have no part in the ill of those actions which
their Judges assure them to be Just, their Counselors that they are Prudent,
and their Divines that they are Conscientious.

This Consideration Mr. Speaker, leads me to that which is more necessary
far, at this season, then any farther laying open of our miseries, that is,
the way to the remedy, by seeking to remove from our Sovereign, such unjust
Judges, such pernicious Counselors, and such disconscient Divines, as have of
late years, by their wicked practices, provoked aspersions upon the government
of the gratiousest and best of Kings.

Mr. Speaker, let me not be misunderstood, I level at no man with a forelayd
design* let the faults and those well proved lead us to the men: It is the
only true Parliamentary method, and the only fit one to incline our Sovereign.
For it can no more consist with a gracious and righteous Prince to expose his
servants upon irregular prejudices; then with a wise Prince to withhold
Malefactors how great soever from the Course of orderly Justice.

Let me acquaint you Mr. Speaker, with an Aphorism in Hippocrates, no less
Authentic (I think) in the Body politic, then in the natural. This it is Mr.
Speaker, Bodies to be thoroughly and effectually purged must have their humors
first made fluid and moveaable.

The Humors that I understand to have caused all the desperate maladies of
this Nation, are the ill Ministers. To purge them away clearly, they must be
first loosened, unsettled, and extenuated, which can no way be effected with a
gracious Master, but by truly representing them unworthy of his protection. And
this leads me to my motion, which is, that a select Comittee may be appointed
to draw out of all that has bin here represented, such a Remonstrance as may
be a faithful and lively representation unto his Majesty of the deplorable
estate of this his Kingdom, and such as may happily point out unto his clear
and excellent judgment, the pernicious Authors of it. And that this
Remonstrance being drawn, we may with all speed repair to the Lords, and
desire them to join with us in it; And this is my humble motion.

THE LORD DIGBYES SPEECH IN THE HOUSE OF Commons, to the Bill for trienniall
PARLIAMENTS. Jan. 19. 1640.
Mr. Speaker,
I Rise not now with an intent to speak to the frame and structure of this
Bill, nor much by way of answer to objections that may be made; I hope there
will be no occasion of that, but that we shall concur all unanimously in
what concerns all so universally.

Only Sir, by way of preparation, to the end that we may not be discouraged in
this great work by difficulties that may appear in the way of it, I shall
deliver unto you my apprehensions in general of the vast importance and
necessity that we should go through with it.

The Result of my sense is in short this. That unless for the frequent
convening of Parliaments there be some such Course settled, as may not be
eluded; neither the people can be prosperous and secure, nor the King himself
solidly happy. I take this to be the Vnum necessarium: Let us procure this, and
all our other desires will effect themselves: if this Bill miscarry, I shall
have left me no public hopes, and once past, I shall be freed of all
public fears.

The Essentialnes Sir of frequent Parliaments to the happiness of this
Kingdom, might be inferred unto you, by the reason of contraries, from the
woeful experience which former times have had of the mischievous effects of any
long intermission of them?

But Mr. Speaker, why should we clime higher then the level we are on, or
think further then our own Horizon, or have recourse for examples in this
business, to any other promptuary then our own memories; nay then the
experience almost of the youngest here?

The reflection backward on the distractions of former times upon intermission
of Parliament, and the consideration forward of the mischiefs likely still to
grow from the same cause if not removed, doubtlesly gave first life and being
to those two dormant Statutes of Edward the 3d, for the yearly holding of
Parliament: And shall not the fresh and bleeding experience in the present age
of miseries from the same spring, not to be paralleld in any other, obtain a
wakening, resurrection for them?

The Intestine distempers Sir, of former ages upon the want of Parliaments, may
appear to have had some other cooperative causes, as sometimes, unsuccessefull
Wars abroad; sometimes, the absence of the Prince; sometimes, Competitions of
Titles to the Crown; sometimes, perhaps the vices of the King himself.

But let us but consider the posture, the aspect of this state, both toward it
self, and the rest of the world, the person of our Sovereign, and the nature
of our sufferings* since the third of his Reign. And there can be no cause
colourably inventable, whereunto to attribute them, but the intermission, or
which is worse, the undue frustration of Parliament, by the unlucky use, if not
abuse of Prerogative in the dissolving them.

Take into your view Gentlemen, a State in a state of the greatest quiet and
security that can be fancyed, not only enjoying the calmest peace it self, but
to improve and secure its happy condition, all the rest of the world at the
same time in Tempest, in Combustions, in uncomposable Wars.

Take into your view Sir, a King Sovereign to three Kingdoms, by a
Concentring of all the Royal lines in his Person, as undisputably as any
Mathematical ones in Euclide. A King firm and knowing in his Religion,
eminent in virtue; A King that had in his own time given all the Rights and
Liberties of his Subjects a more clear and ample confirmation freely and
graciously, then any of his Predecessors (when the people had them at
advantage) extortedly, I mean in the Petition of Right.

This is one Map of England, Mr Speaker, A man Sir, that should present unto
you now, a Kingdom, groaning under that supreme Law, which Salus populi
periclitata would enact. The liberty, the property of the Subject fundamentally
subverted, ravished away by the violence of a pretended necessity; a triple
Crown shaking with distempers; men of the best Conscience ready to fly into the
wilderness for Religion. Would not one swear that this were the Antipodes to
the other; and yet let me tell you Mr. Speaker, this is a Map of England too,
and both at the same time true.

As it cannot be denied Mr. Speaker, that since the Conquest there has not bin
in this Kingdom a fuller concurrence of all circumstances in the former
Caracter, to have made a Kingdom happy, then for these 12 years last past; so
it is most certain, that there has not bin in all that deduction of ages,
such a Conspiracy, if one may so say of all the Elements of mischief in the
second Caracter, to bring a flourishing Kingdom if it were possible, to swift
ruin and desolation.

I will be bold to say, Mr. Speaker, and I thank God, we have so good a King,
under whom we may speak boldly of the abuse of his power by ill Ministers,
without reflection upon his person.

That an Accumulation of all the public Grievances since Magna Carta, one
upon another, unto that hour in which the Petition of Right past into an Act
of Parliament, would not amount to so oppressive; I am sure not to so
destructive a height and magnitude to the rights and property of the Subject,
as one branch of our beslaving since the Petition of Right.

The branch I mean is the judgment concerning Ship Money. This being a true
representation of England in both aspects.

Let him Mr. Speaker, that for the unmatcht oppression and enthralling of free
Subjects in a time of the best Kings reign, and in memory of the best Laws
enacting in favor of Subjects liberty, can find a truer Cause then the
ruptures and intermission of Parliaments. Let him, and him alone be against the
settling of this inevitable way for the frequent holding of them.

It Is true Sir, wicked Ministers have bin the proximate causes of our miseries,
but the want of Parliaments the primary, the efficient Cause.

Ill Ministers have made ill times, but that Sir, has made ill Ministers.

I have read among the Laws of the Athenians, a form of recourse in their
Oaths and vows of greatest and most public concernment to a threefold Deity,
Supplicum Exauditori, Purgatori, Malorum depulsori.

I doubt not but we here assembled for the Commonwealth in this Parliament,
shall meet with all these Attributes in our Sovereign.

I make no question, but he will graciously hear our Supplications. Purge away
our Grievances, and expel Malefactors, that is, remove ill Ministers, and put
good in their places.

No less can be expected from his wisdom and goodness.

But let me tell you Mr. Speaker, if we partake not of one Attribute more in
him; if we address not our selves unto that, I mean Bonorum Conservatori; we
can have no solid, no durable Comfort in all the rest.

Let his Majesty hear our Complaint never so Compassionatly.

Let him purge away our Grievances never so efficaciously.

Let him punish and dispell ill Ministers never so exemplarily.

Let him make choice of good ones never so exactly.

If there be not a way settled to preserve and keep them good; the mischiefs
and they will all grow again like Sampsons Locks, and pull down the House upon
our heads. Believe it Mr. Speaker, they will.

It has bin a Maxim among the wisest Legislators, that whosoever means to
settle good Laws, must proceed in them, with a sinister opinion of all Mankind;
and suppose that whosoever is not wicked, it is for want only of the
opportunity. It is that opportunity of being ill Mr. Speaker, that we must take
away, if ever we mean to be happy, which can never be done, but by the
frequencie of Parliaments.

No State can wisely be confident of any public Ministers continuing good,
longer then the Rod is over him.

Let me appeal to all those that were present in this House at the agitation
of the Petition of Right. And let them tell themselves truly, of whose
promotion to the management of affairs do they think the generality would at
that time have had better hopes then of Mr. Noy, and Sir Thomas Wentworth, both
having bin at that time, and in that business as I have heard, most keen and
active Patriots, and the later of them to the eternal aggravation of his
Infamous treachery to the Commonwealth be it spoken, the first mover, and
insiister to have this clause added to the Petition of Right, that for the
comfort and safety of his Subjects, his Majesty would be pleased to declare
his will and pleasure, that all his Ministers should serve him according to the
Laws and Statutes of the Realm.

And yet Mr. Speaker, to whom now can all the inundations upon our liberties
under pretense of Law, and the late shipwreck at once of all our property, be
attributed more then to Noy, and those, and all other mischiefs whereby this
Monarchy has bin brought almost to the brinke of destruction, so much to any
as to that Grand Apostate to the Commonwealth, the now Lieutenant of Ireland?

The first I hope God has forgiven in the other world; and the later must not
hope to be pardoned it in this, till he be dispatched to the other.

Let every man but consider those men as once they were.

The excellent Law for the security of the Subject enacted immediately before
their coming to employment, in the contriving whereof themselves were principal
Actors.

The goodness and virtue of the King they served, and yet the high and
public oppressions that in his time they have wrought. And surely there is no
man but will conclude with me, that as the deficience of Parliament has bin
the Causa Causarum of all the mischiefs and distempers of the present times:
so the frequencie of them is the sole Catholic Antidote that can preserve and
secure the future from the like.

Mr. Speaker, let me yet draw my Discourse a little nearer to his Majesty
himself, and tell you, that the frequencie of Parliament is most essentially
necessary to the power, the security, the glory of the King.

There are two ways Mr. Speaker, of powerful Rule, either by Fear, or Love,
but one of happy and safe Rule, that is, by Love, that firmissimum Imperium quo
obedientes gaudent.

To which Camillus advised the Romans. Let a Prince consider what it is that
moves a people principally to affection, and dearnesse, toward their
Sovereign, He shall see that there needs no other Artifice in it, then to let
them enjoy unmolestedly, what belongs unto them of right; If that have bin
invaded and violated in any kind, whereby affections are alienated, the next
consideration for a wise Prince that would be happy, is how to regaine them, to
which three things are equally necessary.

Renistating them in their former liberty.

Revenging them of the Authors of those violations.

And secureing them from Apprehensions of the like again.

The first God be thanked, we are in a good way of.

The second in warm pursuit of.

But the third as essential as all the rest, till we be certain of trienniall
Parliament, at the least; I profess I can have but cold hopes of.

I beseech you then Gentlemen, since that security for the future is so
necessary to that blessed union of affections, and this Bill so necessary to
that security.

Let us not be so wanting to our selves; let us not be so wanting to our
Sovereign, as to forbear to offer unto him, this powerful, this everlasting
Philter to Charm unto him the hearts of his people, whose virtue can never
evaporate.

There is no man Mr. Speaker, so secure of another friendship, but will think
frequent intercourse and access very requisite to the support, to the
Confirmation of it: Especially if ill offices have bin done between them; if
the raising of jealousies has bin attempted.

There is no Friend but would be impatient to be debarred from giving his
Friend succor and relief in his necessities.

Mr. Speaker, permit me the comparison of great things with little, what
friendship, what union can there be so comfortable, so happy, as between a
gracious Sovereign and his people, and what greater misfortune can there be to
both, then for them to be kept from intercourse, from the means of clearing
misunderstandings from interchange of mutual benefits.

The people of England Sir, cannot open their Ears, their Hearts, their
Mouths, nor their Purses, to his Majesty, but in Parliament.

We can neither hear him, nor complain, nor acknowledge, nor give, but there.

This Bill Sir, is the sole Key that can open the way to a frequencie of those
reciprocal endeerments, which must make and perpetuate the happiness of the
King and Kingdom.

Let no man object any derogation from the Kings Prerogative by it. We do but
present the Bill, it is to be made a Law by him, his honor, his power, will be
as conspicuous, in commanding at once that Parliament shall assemble every
third year, as in commanding a Parliament to be called this or that year:
there is more of Majesty in ordaining primary and universal Causes, then in
the actuating particularly of subordinate effects.

I doubt not but that glorious King Edward the third, when he made those Laws
for the yearly Calling of Parliament, did it with a right sense of his dignity,
and honor.

The truth is Sir, the Kings of England are never in their glory, in their
splendour, in their Majestique Sovereignty, but in Parliaments.

Where is the power of imposing Taxes? Where is the power of restoring from
incapacites? Where is the legislative Authority? Marry in the King, Mr.
Speaker. But how? in the King circled in, fortified and evirtuated by his
Parliament.

The King out of Parliament has a limited, a circumscribed Jurisdiction. But
waited on by his Parliament, no Monarch of the East is so absolute in
dispelling Grievances.

Mr. Speaker, in chasing ill Ministers, we do but dissipate Clouds that may
gather again, but in voting this Bill, we shall contribute, as much as in us
lies to the perpetuating our Sun, our Sovereign, in his vesticall in his noon
day luster.

FINIS.

