The Grand IMPOSTOR UNMASKED, OR, A Detection of the notorious hypocrisy, and
desperate Impiety of the late Archbishop (so styled) of Canterbury, cunningly
couched in that written Copy, which he read on the Scaffold at his execution, (
Ian. 10. 1644.) Alias, called by the publisher, his funeral Sermon. By Henry
Burton.

Romans 2.5. But thou after thy hardness, and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto
thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous
judgment of God: Who will render to every man according to his deeds. Psalm.
50.21. These things have thou done, and I kept silence: thou thoughtest that I
was altogether such a one as thy self: but I will reprove thee, and set them in
order before thine eyes. O consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you
in pieces, and there be none to deliver. When the Fox preaches, let the Geese
beware.

Published according to Order.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black-spread Eagle at the West end of
Paul's.

The Preface to the READER.
READER,
THE old saying is, Of the dead speak nothing but well; so shall I speak nothing
but truth of this man's falsehood, both while he lived, and when he died. And let
me deprecate thee the least suspicion of malice in me toward the man, or his
memory; the which I was so far and free from in his life time, that a little
before his death, my self with two other godly, reverend brethren, went to his
lodging in the Tower, to tender our Christian duty of charity to him, for
Counsel and comfort (if it would be accepted) in that his condition. But by
his Secretary he returning Court-thanks, said, some had been with him that day,
and now he was otherwise employed in his private business. Whereupon we
returned: And that morning Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower having been with him,
and taking his leave with these words, I pray God open your eyes: he returned
him thanks, Saying, And I pray God open your eyes; and I hope there is no
harm in that. By which he would cunningly insinuate, that Master Lieutenants
eyes were blinded, rather then his. But more of this legierdemain anon; and for
this task, I was first earnestly importuned by two reverend godly Ministers, to
under take it, which I took as a call from God.

Now for his Funeral Sermon, how it could be truly said to be preached, when
he read it verbatim, as also how he could properly be said to pray, what he
read in his paper (for without his book he could neither preach, Clericus
absquc libro.
nor pray) I leave it to thy right judgment.

Finally, that such a poysonfull piece as this should be so licentiously
published in Print, before some Antidote were prepared, either to correct its
Malignancy, or to corroborate the simple hearted people, apt to drink in such a
sugared potion, from the mouth of such a bold dying man, though a Traitor: if
understanding men do not wonder, I shall confess my self the only fool to
marvel. But I hope this Antidote will not come altogether too late to recover
such, as whose weaker stomachs have not been able to overcome the poison.
Farewell.

The grand Impostor unmasked.
GOOD People, You Will pardon my old Memory, He begins.
and upon so sad occasions as I am come to this place, to make use of my
Papers, I dare not trust my self ^therwise.

HOw ever the good People may Pardon his old memory for reading, instead of
preaching; yet how the righteous God should pardon such an old memory, as could
not remember one of all those gross sins, wherein he had lived, so as to
confess them, and to crave pardon of God for them, I cannot see, I dare not
say: He did with Adam hide his transgressions in his bosom; Job. 31.33. Josh.
7. Mat. 27.3.
he would not with Achan confess his sin that troubled Israel, to give glory
to God; nor with the Traitor Judas repent of his Treason, nor restore the price
of innocent blood, which he had shed, nor confess at all his sin of treason:
Yea, when Mr. Weld, Mrs. Jones, and others, came to him in the Tower to demand
of him recompense for all the wrongs he had done them in their persons,
credits, and estates, he could never be brought to acknowledge the least,
saying he remembered no such thing, thus laying all the burden upon his old
memory, living and dying.

And yet in his next words he adds; And upon so sad occasions, as I am come to
this place. A sad occasion sure, had he been so sensible of it, as he should
have been: Wherein, though his old memory failed him, yet his old Conscience
(surer to keep, then a thousand memories) might have helped him. But it seems,
that not only his long habituated wickedness had feared, and brought his
Conscience into a deep Lethargy, or dead sleep, but surely some compounded
Cordial by the Apothecaries Art, had so wrought with him, that not only it
caused him to have a ruddy fresh countenance, but also did so prop up his
spirits, that he might seem, as Agag, to have already swallowed down the bitter
cup of death, and that the world might take him to die as some innocent Martyr,
as all his Sermon would set him forth, and for which end it was penned, if not
also Printed. But how sad soever the occasion of his death was to him, or no:
sure we are the occasions thereof (which was in sum, high Treason, in the belly
whereof, (as in that Trojan horse) were so many cruel practices, and crafty
conveyances closely couched, the very s^ed and spawne of those locusts out of
the bottomless Pit, as horses prepared to battle, with their King Abaddon
over then*) ( Revel. 9.) have made sad not only many thousand particular
persons, and families of godly people, undone by him, but even three whole
kingdoms, two whereof lie weltering in their blood, as at this very day. Only,
blessed be God, Psalm. 74.14. Psalm. 80.13.
our sadness is at length somewhat refreshed with the broken head of this
Leviathan in our desolate land, almost turned into a wilderness by this Romish
wild Bore.

He calls the Scaffold an uncomfortable place to preach in. But sure if his
cause had been good, and his conscience innocent, he needed not have complained
of the uncomfortablenesse of the place. The Martyrs did not so, who coming to
the Stake, cheerfully saluted it with a kiss.

And could his Old memory have remembered that Pillory-suffering, not much above
seven years standing, which his Conscience at least might have suggested unto
him, how a certain Being not long before degraded.
quondam Preacher standing in the Pillory, pleasantly said; I never preached in
such a Pulpit before; saying also to the people, (and that with a Repetition
for their remembrance) little do you know what fruit God is able to produce out
of this dry Tree: making the Pillory all the while his triumphall Chariot,
while that Canterburian Prelate (together with Con the Popes Nuntio, and other
Compeers) was a triumphant spectator out of the Star Chamber; he little dreamed
then, that such a Pillory could in the space of seven years grow to such a
bulk, as whereof to hew out, and erect a Scaffold on the Tower Hill, where
himself should loose his head for others ears: perhaps one of the fruits of
that dry Tree; so that if the innocent cause and conscience of one, made the
Pillory such a comfortable Pulpit: sure it must be the contrary cause and
conscience, that makes the Scaffold such an uncomfortable place, for the
Prelate to preach upon.

Well he takes his Text: Heb. 12.1, 2. Let us run, etc. Looking unto Jesus, etc.

Miserable man! Never was a holy Text so unhallowed, so miserably abused, so
corruptly glossed upon, so shamefully perverted, as this Text. And does he call
about him that cloud of witnesses (ver. 1.) those holy Patriarchs and believers
of the Old Testament, to witness the suffering of a lying Traitor, as if a
dying Martyr?

Surely this man in his race had often an eye unto Jesus, that is to the Name
JESUS, whereof he was a very devout Adorer, and so zealous, that he suspended
me once from preaching against the superstitious bowing at the nameing of that
Name. So as however he looked unto Jesus, yet he never showed such a favorable
aspect upon Christ, whom in his swift footed zeal (until in the Tower, the
sinew of his leg, without any violence, had a terrible crack, that he could not
now run so fast in his race, Act. 9.
as before) he so cruelly persecuted in his servants and members: So as by this
time himself knows sufficiently, with what eye he looked unto Jesus, as whom he
finds a just Judge, and punisher of that faith of his, which was none other
but that of Babylon; as the Reader may see at large in my Reply. Page 166, to
170, 173.
Reply to his Relation of a conference, etc.

That he is now come to the end of his race, though long, we bless God.

But here he finds the Cross, a death of shame. And why so shameful the
Cross, which he so honored and adored in his life, witness the goodly
Crucifix over his Altar at Lambeth, White Hall, and else where, which he was
not wont to pass by unsaluted.

But the same must be despised, or there is no coming to the right hand of God.
How, must that shame be despised, which the righteous hand of God brought him
unto? Why did he not acknowledge it a shame most due unto him, for all the
dishonor he had done to God in his life time? Or why did he petition the
Lords, that he might not dye the more shameful death of the halter, but rather
of the hatchet, as more suitable for one, who had sat so long and often, at those
late Honorable boards, as also in the prsent Parliament? Nay, had he had any
one spark of true Grace, (over and above that of Canterbury) considering the
numberless shameful acts that were perpetrated by him with a shameless
forehead, and remorslesse conscience: he would with Origin (for but once
offering incense to the Idol) have said to all the people, Calcate me insipidum
salem, trample upon me, as unsavory salt: and he would have Petitioned, that
he might have the most shameful death, yea hanging, drawing, and quartering,
that head and limbs might be set up for everlasting monuments of such an enemy
of Religion and State. This had been the way to come at length to Christ's right
hand, to have found him his Jesus, and not to his left, to find him his Judge:
But for Gods right hand, that is proper to Christ alone.

But he is so far from this shame, that he adds, God forbid I should despise
the shame for him. What? A shame suffered for Christ? A shame despised, being a
most condign punishment? Christ is said to despise the shame by a voluntary
undergoing it in our steads, but this man despises the shame, by a desperate
contempt, in suffering it perforce, against his will.

But he tells us, his feet are now upon the brinke of the Red Sea: an argument
(he hopes) that God was bringing him to the land of promise, for that was the
way, by which of old he led his people. O poor man! Did he not remember that
Pharaoh and his Egyptians, coming into the Red Sea, were drowned. And did not
his Old memory yet call to mind, that not many years ago, he had been a prime
Task-master under Pharaoh, yea even the Pope himself, to the intolerable
oppression of Gods people, Exodus 1. Act. 7.19.
even to the cutting off of the masculine spirits of Israel; and therefore no
good argument for him, to hope to pass that way to Canaan, that Israel went,
he having gone the clean contrary way; and therefore now lies drowned in the
Red Sea of his own blood, as a just revenge upon him, for causing so much blood
to be shed, and more especially of that poor soul, who was hanged, drawn and
quartered, about the business of Lambeth house; so as that speech of Queen
Thomyris the Amazon, when she cut off King Cyrus his head, and cast it into a
vessel of blood, may be well applied to this blood-sucker of poor innocents,
Now satiate thy self with blood, which living thou did so much thirst after.

No less does he abuse, and misapply the Lords Passover, the Lambs, the
Sour herbs: the gatherers whereof how little angry he is with, will appear
anon.

He says, Men can have no more power over him, then that which is given them
from above. Innocent Christ spoke those words, and only he might properly
speak them: and not any such malefactor, as this, on whom the just laws of the
land had immediate power thus to punish him; whereas Pilate had no such legal
power over innocent Christ to put him to death, but only from an extraordinary
divine dispensation. But thus this man has taken a lawless liberty to
himself all along, thus intolerably to abuse the Sacred Scriptures, beating
this gold by force of his hammer so thin, that he may therewith guild over his
rotten cause, thereby to deceive the simple at his death, as he had done in his
life; who are apt to take all for gold, that glittereth.

Here he compares himself with Aaron, as before with Christ: but he must
remember, he is no longer the Canterburian High Priest. But who be those
Egyptians, that drove this Aaron into the Red Sea, and must be drowned in the
same waters? Act.
O full of subtilty! What the Parliament? O child of the Devil!

But who is that God, whom he had served? Though our God has served himself of
this Prelate, as he does of Satan, and other wicked men, using them as his Esa.
10.
rods to scourge his own dear children; surely in no other sense could he be
said to serve God truly: For all his other service, what was it, but
superstitious, Idolatrous, after the inventions of men, a will worship, after
the rudiments of the word, and not after Christ. Col. 2.


And here he compares himself, with those three children in the furnace, whence
God delivered them, and so can he him. Miserable Prelate! Is he now upon the
scaffold for such a cause, as those were in the furnace? Why, those were there,
for not obeying the Kings commandment, to bow to his new golden god: but was
this Bishop now on the Scaffold* for any such disobedience? Nay, was it not for
his too much officiousness, and obedience. So that, might he not have said, as
Cardinal Wolsey, Had I (said he) been as careful to serve God, as I have been
to serve the King, I had never come to this death. And for Gods power to
deliver, it is not questioned. But his glory was seen in delivering those three
innocent children from the hot fiery furnace; not so, that he should have
delivered such a traitor from the block: when as his Glory called for
execution of justice upon such a Malefactor, yea such a notorious hypocrite,
such a desperate, obdurate, impenitent, remorselesse, shameless, monster of
men.

Here he prosecutes his comparison between himself and the three children: They
would not Worship the Kings golden Image: Page 5.
Nor will I (says he) the Imaginations which the People are setting up; Nor
will I forsake the Temple and the Truth of God, to follow the bleating of
Jeroboams Calves in Dan and in Bethell. By People here in Capital Letters, he
must needs mean the Parliament; the People of the Land representative; and so
by Jeroboams Calves, whereby he means a revolting from Judah, and from true
Religion, and that the Religion now to be set up, is, in comparison of that
under the Prelacy, no better then Ieroboams Calves, worshipped in Bethell and
Dan; and the Prelaticall Government, as the Temple of Jerusalem, and the Truth
of God. Thus he holds to his old Principles, which he sucked in with his Mothers
milk, and was Nursed up in Oxford, and which grew up with him in Court to a
full stature. But stay; shall he run away with it thus in a dark mist; leaving
the People to grope at noon day, as in the Aegiptian darkness? Esa. 44.19, 20.
Hab. 2.^8.
I most humbly thank my Savior for it (says he) my resolution is now, etc.
What? Not to forsake the Temple, and Truth of God. O Hypocrisy! O Blasphemy!
Will he interest and engage Christ in all his Idolatrous Crucifixes, Crosses,
Altars, Superstitious Worship, Ceremonies, and Relics of Rome, set up every
where in his Idol Temples and Chappells, calling all this his Temple, and
Truth of God? Will he call his Images the Truth of God, which the Truth of God,
the Scripture, calls a Esa. 44.19, 20. Hab. 2.^8.
Lie, and a teacher of Lies? O abomination! And does this devout Votary to
Images, humbly thank Christ, that his resolution lay not to lie down, till he
lay down his head upon the Block, not to part with his Antichristian Hierarchy,
the Grand enemy of Christ's Kingdom, and grievous Tyranny over the Souls and
Bodies of Christ's Saints, whose Redemption cost him his dearest Blood? O the
Rocky cruelty of this wretched man! Who as he showed no mercy to others, whom
he most wickedly oppressed in his life: so now at his death he can show no
mercy to himself, by considering the justice of that Savior, whereof his whole
life had been a most high provocation, now sealed up at his death, with a
desperate resolution to be the same man still; should his life be prolonged an
hundred years. So as no marvel it is, if wicked men be punished eternally in
hell, when if they should live eternally in this world, they would hold firm
their Resolution, never to cease to be the same men in sinning.

But he bestows his Episcopal blessing upon the People, for the opening of
their eyes, to see the right way: Himself being so blind as not to see any
other right way, out of his own way, then which none is more contrary and
opposite to Christ, and his way*

Ibid.
But he acknowledges himself in all humility a most grieveous sinner many
ways, by thought, word, and deed, and therefore I doubt not (says he) but
that God has mercy in store for me a poor penitent, as well as for other
sinners. But wherein? What sign? What thought? What word? What deed? Did he
confess those thoughts, whereby he resolved and endeavored to reconcile Rome
and England together, which he expressed in his Relation of a conference with
the Jesuit; Did he confess the sinful words of that Reconciling Book? That
there he cunningly incites the King against godly Ministers? That there he
blames and bewayles with a bleeding heart, the separation between Protestants
and Papists, both for the causing, and continuing of it: That he has there in
many passages abused and vilified the Scriptures all along his Book? That he
has fathered his gross lies upon Reply, p. 19. p. 252.225.

See the Reply. p. 205.202.275, p. 211.


God the Father, upon Reply, p. 19. p. 252.225.

See the Reply. p. 205.202.275, p. 211.


Christ, upon Reply, p. 19. p. 252.225.

See the Reply. p. 205.202.275, p. 211.


the Holy Ghost? and infinite other bold and wicked expressions there.

And for his Deeds: did he ever confess elsewhere, or on the Scaffold, all his
Prelaticall pranckes and practices in oppressing, suppressing, supplanting the
Truth of God, both in Pulpit and Press, silencing, As, Mr. Rud, Mr. Bernard,
and many others.
suspending, fining, confining, outing godly, painful Preachers, with wives,
childern, and other christians? Did he ever confess his being the chief cause
of cropping of Ears, Pillorying, Imprisoning, Whipping, Branding, Banishing
those, against whom no crime could be laid by any Law? Or did he (to show the
truth of conversion) come forth, to offer restitution to all that he had
wronged, oppressed, and spoiled of their goods and livelyhoods? No such thing,
here is nothing, but a general confession of (I wot not what) grievous sins.
But being put to it, he would not confess one particular sin, as we noted
before, when some came to him for restitution of their wrongs. And yet does he
hope for pardon. Aug. says* The sin is not pardoned, where the wrong is not
satisfied for: Aug. Non remititur peccatanisi resti^ua^ur abla^um.
Nay, when many such things were witnessed against him before the Honorable
House of Lords, as of his violent dealing with many Preachers and others, he
justified himself, saying; that he did but discharge the office of a good
Diocesan; and the like.

And what does this desperate Hypocrite tell us, of ransacking every corner of
his heart? What have we to do with his selfe-deceiving heart, known only to
God? We look upon his Actions; we judge of the tree by the fruits. He finds
not in his false heart any true cause of death. But we find it in his hands, we
find the blood of the souls, yea and the bodies too of the poor Innocents
upon his skirts; and this is found not by secret search, Ier, 2.34.
but upon all these. His notorious practices proclaim it, so as he that runs,
may read. And does not the Law of this Kingdom punish Thieves, and Robbers, and
Murderers, and Traitors? But however, he charge nothing upon his Judges.
That's well, for never had Traitor fairer play; and they proceeded, secundum
allegata et probata. And this is the Law of the Land. Let that suffice. But
whom else he lays his charge upon, it matters not; his charge is no burden,
nor his tongue a slander. And though in a legal course an Innocent may be
condemned, yet more Nocents are, which he was to have looked better to.

But for all this, he thanks Christ, he is quiet within, as ever. O poor
wretch! What? All this while, no remorse, no stirring, no sting of conscience?
No awaking of that sleepy Lion? No apprehension of Divine Justice? Nothing but
a dead slumber, or deep Hypocrisy, or damnable Atheism? I remember how
Consci^ntiae mala, and tranquilla.
Bernard tells us of a bad conscience, and quiet; which is the most dangerous
and desperate of all other.

Among others, his Predecessors (as he calls them) he brings in St. John
Baptist (as he styles him) whose head was danced off by a lewd woman: And
surely if he had been as faithful, as John Baptist was, in reproving Herod,
and his lewd Woman, he might perhaps have been prevented of loosing his head
for treason, and might have proved a Saint William for it; did Saint-ship now a
days go by virtue, ^and not by villainy, the way that he took. And why among
the rest, did he not mention his Predecessor, his St. Thomas a Be^ket, who,
though not judicially, was taken away? He sought, by depressing the King and
State, to exalt the liberty of the Church. For this, the Pope Sainted him: but
K. Hen. 8. afterward would have him called no longer Saint, but Traitor. But
this man thought himself no Traitor, because not against the King. As if
Treason against the State of the Kingdom, and Commonweal, be not treason
also against the King, by dividing the one from the other, and cutting the
knot, that should knit them together, as Oath, Covenant, Laws.

But it comforts him, that his charge looks somewhat like that of St. Paul,
Act. 25. being accused for Law and Religion: and that of Stephen Act. 6. A
poor comfort, when well considered, and the account cast up. And though Paul
(before his conversion) was consenting to Stephens death, yet he found Mercy
afterward, as having done it ignorantly, and confessing and repenting of it.
But this Prelate could not say, he persecuted the Saints ignorantly, neither
would ever confess those persecuting sins of his, nor repent of them; and
therefore how could he find or hope for mercy at Gods hand, or man's either?

Here he, as impertinently as before, hales in another place of Scripture, and
that most grossly. The Romans will come, if we let this man ^lone. Surely he
has pretty well played his part to bring the Romans in; for has he not been a
maine instrument to fill the Land with Papists, and profane ignorant
Protestants, not only by the publishing of that profane Book of Sports
(lately burned in Cheap Side) where with the whole Land has been poisoned, but
by stopping the free course of Preaching God^ Word, cropping off both branch
and fruit of all godliness and sound knowledge, and by placing his profane,
and Popishly-affected, avaritious* and ambitious Priests, and the Courts
favorites, in all the chief places of the Kingdom? so as no marvel it is,
if by the industry of this man (that enemy who has sowed his tares in every
field of this Kingdom, (...). Mat^ 13.25
while men sl^pt) the Pope never had such a harvest in England. And surely
never had the Pope such a desperate power, and numerous party in England, and
that collected out of all Popish Countries round about, waging war against
our Laws and Liberties, Religion and Republic, and all to reduce (by solemn
and fast league with Rome) England back again to the Pope, as being one of
those that are made drunk with the Whoores cup* and do give up their Kingdom
unto the Beast, who now altogether make war with the Lamb, and those on his
side, called, and chosen, and faithful: so that Popery is that grand Sect, the
Grand^m of all divisions, especially of this great one, between King and
Kingdom, Head and Body, Husband and Wife, Father and Children; a right
Babylonish division, which tends to confusion. But his aim was against godly
people, who separating from his Hierarchy, he brands with sects and divisions;
and therein comprehends and condemns, the very body of the Kingdom, the
which has cast out both Bishops and their Service book* for which he styles us
all Sects, etc. But I trust God will so bless these Sects, that they shall be
the Angel with the sharp sickle to cut down the Popes Harvest in this Land,
never henceforth to reap any more in England. And as for that place of the 2
Cor. 6, 7.
Apostle, the Hypocrite does most falsely apply it unto himself, as he does all
other Scripture. For his honor is dishonor, his good report is evil, and
this deceiver is truly so, living and dying.

Next he tells us what a good Protestant the King is. Truly if he be not so
good, as he would have him, the fault is not the Prelates. And what good
council he has given him, both his practices, and his Epistle Dedicatory
before his Relation, (besides his conscience) can tell.

Here he complains of the City, for that fashion in gathering of hands, and
going to the Parliament to clamor for Justice, as being a disparagement to
that great and just Court; a way to endanger the innocent, and pluck innocent
blood upon their own, and Cities head. How? What a disparagement does he
finely cast upon that great and wise Court, as if any such clamor should
extort from them any act of injustice, as thereby to condemn the innocent?
Indeed if that Honorable Court were as those Pharisees in Stephens case, and
as Herod in Peter's, having killed James, to whom this man compares our
Parliament, as not daring to do any thing in this kind, till they saw how the
people were affected: it were some thing. But here this Serpent sli^y stings
both People and Parliament. But was there not a cause? And for his bidd^ng take
heed of having our hands full of blood: surely this is the ready way to f^ee
both land and hand from the guilt of innocent blood, when justice is hastened
upon the heads of those, who have shed it. It Is tru^, God has his own time:
but we must serve his divine paovidence, by doing our duty, and using the
means. Therein is our discharge, and safety. And he might as well blame Gods
Elect, Luke 18.7
for crying day and night to the great Judge to avenge their cause. Surely if
Gods wisdom and careful providence over his people were hereby eclipsed, he
would not animate them thus to cry* and importune him continually, and V. 1.
(...).
not to faint, but sharply reprove them, and forbid them so to do, as here the
Prelate does. Therefore certainly in calling for justice, not only of God, but
of man, who sits in Gods throne for that end, is the peoples duty, who ought
to obey God, rather than a Prelate, who is so unreasonably partial in his own
cause.

Those places, Psalm. 9. and Heb. 12. he miserably applies: he would now in that
impenitent and desperate condition be that poor man, whose complaint God
remembers: and those fearfully to fall into the hands of the living God, who
have passed, or procured the sentence of condemnation, and execution, and
especially when now God is making his inquisition for blood. So he. And surely
in this good season of Gods inquisition for blood, it has pleased him to find
out this Achan, who has cunningly, even to the last hour, (not as Achan,
glorifying God by confession, as before) hid all his stolen goods, the wedge
of gold, the Babylonish garment, the two hundred shekels of silver, all his
underhand dealings for the undoing of this Kingdom, in the hollow of his
false heart; and had not both Parliament and People bestirred themselves in the
discoveries, he had been too nimble for us all. But God (I say) was pleased to
use the industry of his people, to find out this foxes holes.

But besides all this, O the impudency of this wretched man, in commending to
this City the consideration of that Prophecy, Ier. 26.15. they are the words
of the Prophet Jeremiah to the Princes of Judah and Jerusalem: The words are
these (though they are not set forth in the Sermon, but only the pl^ce quoted
with a special recommendation to this City; and whether he spoke them on the
scaffold, I know not, for I was not there) As for me, behold I am in your
hand: do with me as seems good and meet unto you. But know it for certain,
that if ye put me to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon your
selves; and upon this City, and upon the Inhabitants thereof: for of a truth
the Lord has sent me unto you, to speak all these words in your ears. Now
could this man possibly believe, that any in this City should be so simple, as
to believe him? Or could he believe, that this Scripture should persuade the
City, or Parliament, Princes, and People, to do as the word^ follow declare,
(verse. 16.) Then said the Princes and all the People unto the Priests, and to
the Prophets; This man is not worthy to dye: for he has spoken to us in the
name of the Lord our God?

Here this Porcupine strikes himself through with his own quils. He
complains for the poor Church of England: and that is his Hierarchy, that
that once flourished (as once the Abbeyes and Monasteris did) and was a shelter
to other neighboring Churches. What? To the Church of Scotland? witness his
reformed Service-booke, and his animating the King with his Army against them,
for casting out such merchants and merchandice. Or that of Ireland, which he
had filled with his Arminian and superstitious Priests, and helped to make that
land a field of blood, a shambles to butcher those hundred thousands of
innocent Protestant Subjects; as good a Protestant as himself is, or his
confederates.

In every cle^t of this selfe-divided Kingdom, profaneness (he says) and
irreligion has crept in. Now truly himself was the prime wood-cleaver, that
drove in the first wedges, and thereby brought in by the head and ears all
profaneness and irreligion, which leaking, yea flowing in so fast, have well
nigh drowned the ship. But stay, what means this profaneness and irreligion,
which the Prelate here tells us of? he shall be his own interpreter. In his
Relation, Page 18, 19. See Reply, p. 37, 38.
in the Epistle Dedicatorie, he tells the King saying, Though J cannot
prophecy, yet I fear, that Atheism and irreligion gather strength, while the
truth is thus weakened by an unworthy way of contending. And p. 19. The
external worship of God, in his Church, is the great witness to the world,
that our hearts stand right in the service of God. Take this away; or bring it
into contempt, and what light is there left to shine before men, that they may
see our devotion, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven? The result is (as
the Replyer clears) that the neglect or contempt of his external worship, is
that which brings in profaneness and irreligion; that is, Not to set the
face in a right posture toward the East in our devotion: not to bow to an
Altar: not to kneel at the Sacrament: not to use a fair white Surplice, and
black hood in Administration: not to baptize with the sign of the Cross: not
to say second service etc. all this shows, that our hearts stand not right in
the service of God; that without these, no light is left to shine before men,
that they may see our Devotion, and glorify our Father which is in heaven. O
notorious hypocrisy! O egregious impiety, thus to abuse Scripture, and all
true religion! so as Prospers speech here alleged by him, hits him full home:
Men that introduce profaneness (which is done by a false Religion and Devotion
of man's devising) are cloaked with a name of imaginary Religion. And what is
Imagerie in worship, but an imaginary Religion? And if we have in a manner
almost lost the substance, we may thank his Ceremonies for it: and for the
danger the land is now in, threatening ruin, the Lord prevent it by the just
ruin of this man, that has been a maine isntrumental cause of it.

He comes page 13
here to his last particular, which is himself. He makes a solemn Protestation
of his Religion to be Protestant, but with this limitation, in reference to the
Church of England only; not to other Protestant Churches: for no Protestant
Churches are Episcopal, but this. This therefore he sticks to; in this
profession he was born, lived, and will now dye: He disclaimes the bringing in
of Popery into this Land. Now what should be the meaning of this Mystery,
considering all his endeavors and practices have tended, and contended, to
reduce this his Church to as near a conformity with Rome, as possibly may be?
For (excepting the differences in Doctrine) take the whole Hierarchy,
Government, Discipline, Officers, Services, Ceremonies, Vestments, and all
other implements; we find the Church of England to be one and the some with
that of Rome, as the Prelate affirms; for which, see my Reply, from page 63.
to 69, How then is it true, that he is no setter up, or bringer in of Popery,
as he protests? surely two ways: Relation, Epistle Ded. page 16. Amos 7.13.
First, because he found some old Relics of Rome, in the Kings Chappells, and
some Cathedralls, as an Altar, Jmages, Adorations, Organ-Service, Copes, and
the like. Therefore he makes a shift by piecing it out with some forced
interpretations of the Queens Injunctions, and with improvement of the Service
Book, and other viis and modis, to bring in a general conformity to those
paterns, and that under a specious color of uniformity, a very Laudable thing
in a Kingdom; especially. Regis ad Exemplum, that all should be of the Kings
Religion, or the Religion of his Chapel, every Daughter-Church to conform to
the Mother, See my book for God and the king.
the Cathedral; and thus all being raised up to one conformity, it came to
pass, that both Jesuits on the one side boasted, that the Church of England
was turned Roman, and some bold Ministers began to tell tales in the Pulpit,
and at last, to write and publish Books of it, though to their cost. This is
the Golden lea^e wherewith the Prelate has Gilded over his Protestation for
current, for which he flies and lays hold on the Horns of the Altar, in the
Kings Chapel, his most sacred Sanctuary. His See his Speech Starcham^ber.
other, is a word of Equivocation, which is Popery. He distinguishes Popery,
into Proper and Improper, or less proper. Popery, taken properly, is that,
whereof the Pope is sole Head and Master: And this is that Popery, which he
here protests he never intended, or endeavored to set up in the Church of
England, to wit, the universal Headship of the Pope, which the Logitians call,
proprium quarto modo; that is, such as is proper to the Pope, and only to the
Pope, and always to the Pope: as laughing is said to be proper to man, alone
and at all times. The Prelate then would not have such a Popery set up in the
Propriety of it, as should exalt the P. over the Sea of Canterbury, to overtop
the Metropolitan of all England, What then? He would have no other Popery set
up in England, then that only, which is less proper, or improperly called
Popery, or rather a thing that is Popery, but must not be called Popery. And
that is, That the Pope shall be Head, or Bishop of the Church of Rome, and the
Archbishop of Canterbury shall be an Independent Primate, and Metropolitan of
all England, and the Pope to have nothing to do here, but himself alone to be
Dominus fac totum. Only with this Reserve, that this Primate become Pope, when
time serves. And it seems he takes it as a deed if gift from the Pope, which
he gave to the Prelat^ Predecessor, Anselm, to whom the Pope gave this Title,
stiling him, Patrarcha alterius orbis: the Patriarch, or Pope of the other
world, meaning England; of which the Roman Poet writ of old, Et penitus toto
divis^s or be Britannos. And thus, it seems, it descended upon the Successors
of Canterbury by an hereditary right from the Pope. And therefore not without
cause does the Prelate make mention hereof in his P. 171 See Reply p. 263, 264
Relation, telling us, that a Patriarch is above a Prelate; so expert was he in
the learning of Ecclesiastical Heraldry for Titles, and Degrees. And thus we
come to understand what he means by making profession of the Protestant
Religion of the Church of England; namely, that this Religion is not Popery
properly taken, but only improperly, as has been said. So as herein we may
give credit to his words in some sense, both for himself and his friends, whom
he so highly magnifies for good Protestants of the Church of England. This is
that true Protestant Religion, which they so much professed by hook or crook to
maintain.

Touching his Treason in subverting the Laws, and perverting of Religion; it
matters not for all his protestations, that he never intended, but ever
abhorred it; for all things were clearly, and fully proved in Court against
him. His Protestations of his innocence have been too well known, as well as
others, what credit they deserve. A man commits many Murders, and pleades he
abhorres to be a murderer. He kills, slayes, slaughters innocent Protestant
Subjects, and protests he intends the maintenance of the true Protestant
Religion. Will this hold good in Law? or yet in the Court of Conscience?

For his contempt of Parliaments, this was also proved against him; and he here
in part confesses it. And in the close, he forgives all the world. He cries
Thief first, calling all his Persecutors his bitter enemies. He forgives them,
he says, but he gives them a cruel dash, calling them bitter enemies, who
did but in a legal way, and just cause prosecute him, as a grand enemy both to
Religion, and to the Republicke. Therefore what kind of forgiveness this is,
God knows, when it so ends in a most bitter calumniation.

But he asks forgiveness of God, and then of every man, whether I have (says
he) offended him or no, if he but conceive that I have. Alas, what a pitiful
shu^^ing i^ here? Here i^ a general asking of forgiveness: but for what? here
is no acknowledgment of any sin against God, o^ of any one offense or injury to
any man. And tha^ all may plainly see how this Hypocrite and Impostor plays
mock-holi-day, he asks forgiveness of every man, whether he has offended him
or no. Why? what needs forgivenes* when no offense given or taken. But (...)
he, if he do but conceive that I have. Oh ^ender heart* But here lie would make
the world believe, that none can challenge him for wrong, unless in conceit
only, it is but a conceit that men have only, that the good Bishop of Canterbury
should do the least wrong to any man living. For what say you to that Speech of
his in his Relation to the King? God forbids* I should ever offer to persuade a
persecution in any kind* or practic^ it in the least. It Is but a conceit then
that the Prelate of Canterbury should be either a persecutour, or a perswader
thereunto. A conceit, that he should persuade, that the terrible censure in the
Star Chamber against those his three bitter men (as he calls them), should be
executed to the uttermost, although he left them to the Kings Justice, A
conceit that he should use the least means to promerit the Judges a little
before the censure, though he made a great feast at Lambeth, and conceit, that
he should be an instrument of persecu^ion, to whom poor petitioners to the
King, about the book of sports, were referred for mercy, where none could be
had or hoped for.

And thus he concludes, Lord, do thou forgive me, and I beg forgiveness of
him Of whom? Of one, whether I have offended him or no, if he do but conceive
that I have. What juggling is here? No spark of ingenuity, or truth in all
this, nor all along. Well, but what then? So (says he) I heartily desire you
to join with me in prayer.

Nay stay, He should have remembered that saying of Christ, Matthew. 5. 23, 24. If
thou bring thy gift before the Altar, and there re^embrest that thy brother
has ought against thee, leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way
first, be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer t^y gi^t. Agree
with thine Adversary quickly* etc. Now the Prelate here brings his gift to the
Altar, he has a Prayer in his hand in stead of his heart to offer: but he
should remember, that not one brother, but many have great, and grievous things
against him. Therefore before he read his Prayer, he should have rubbed up his
old rusty memory, and called for those who had many things against him, and
have made his peace with them. He should have called for all thos^ Preachers,
whom he had wickedly and Prelatically Suspended, Silenced, Deprived, thrust out
of their Means, with their wives and children exposed to beggary and misery,
among many others* Mr. Rudd of Abington, Mr. Bar^ard, Mr. Forbis* Mr. Ward,
etc. He should have called for all those godly Preachers and Christians whom
his bloody cruelty caused to fly into the Deserts of Ameries, as Mr. Cotton,
Mr. Hooker, Mr. Davenport, Mr. Peter, with many thousands more. He should have
called for all those Congregations, whose souls he had famished by taking away
their godly teachers, Ier. 2.3 4*
the blood of whose souls were found to be upon his skirts, and under ^is
wings. He should have called for all those whom he had most cruelly, and
against all justice* caused to be imprisoned, pillaryed, eare-cropped, branded,
whipped, fined, confined to perpetual close imprisonment, and that in
perpetual banishment from their native country, from society of wives,
children, friends, a^quaintance, common light and air, and what not? As Mr.
William Pryn, Doctor Bastwick, Henry Burton, Doctor Leighton, Mr. John
Lilburne, Nathani^ll Wickins, all which, with many more, endured intolerable,
inhumane, and most barbarous usage in their prisons and persons. These, these
should he have called for to have made his peace with them, by a^ least
acknowledging his extreme wronging of them, as having been the prime
isntrumental cause thereof, though otherwise he could never make them
re^^itution for their ears, nor satisfaction for their losses. But he should
have done to the uttermost what lay in his power, before he should go on so
desperately to offer his Sacrifice of Prayer at Gods Altar. He should have put
it past If and And w^^ther he had offended any, or no, as if any did but
conceive so. But so far was he from showing the least ingenuity, or from having
the lest dram of grace, as that he refused to be spoken withal by any, whom
he had wronged, much less would he acknowledge the least offense done to any,
either in his lif^, or now at his death. But as a man beref^of his common
senses, stripped of his understanding, benumbed with a lethargy, senseless,
brutish, blind, obdurate, he persists in his Diabolical impenitencie,
acknowledging not the least offense to Man in all his Life, of which to repent,
hoping thereby after his Death to merit his Inscription upon his Tomb, Here
lies the most Innocent Archbishop of Cantyrbury.

But now, can he not be content to die in his own sins, but he must heartily
desire the people to ioy^e with him in his most hypocritical, dead, ^^me,
blind, Prayer, that he brought with him in his hand, as a price in the fools
hand, but he wants a heart? Had he not sufficiently ca^tivated the people to
such blind devotion by his Servi^-book Prayers? And had not this old
Arch-prelate in all the time he lived, got one Prayer, at least by heart,
though he wanted grace in his hear^* and Christ's Spirit, ^ven the Spirit of
Grace and Supplication (which for any evidence he has given, he never had in
all his life) to power forth one (...) sigh of godly sorrow now at his death?
Here be may goodly words indeed compiled together, but all will not make up one
prayer of Faith, being but as a dumb Image without life and breath, or like
Caesar's Sacrifice without a heart, which was taken for a presage of death, as
proved true the same day.

Again, should the people become accessory to all the hypocrisy,
dissimulation, and impenitencie of this wretched man, who would wrappe up all
his villainies committed in and against the State of this Kingdom, and all Gods
faithful people therein, by joining with him in such a godless, spirit-lesse
Prayer, even the dead carcass of a prayer, Deuteronomy. 15.21.
a blind and lame sacrifice, which the Lord abhors, and forbids to be
offered?

Besides, as the whole prayer for the frame of it, is not an Incense according
to Christ's spirit, but patched, Exodus 30*
and made up of sundry ingredients of a most hypocritical spirit, which makes
the whole prayer to be a very pack of lies, and so, abominable before God: so
there are some passages in it, so gross, and palpable, as any one that has
the least spark of Gods spirit, may discover plainly to be monstrous false, As
1. That he has a heart ready to die for Gods honor: and yet he will not
confess any one particular wickedness, that he might with Achan give glory to
God. 2. For the Kings happiness: when if either he counseled the King to all
those courses, so destructive both to himself and kingdom; or if he by
obeying the Kings command, in being an active instrument of all those cruel
oppressions perpetrated by him, upon the innocent subjects, and exorbitant,
illegal, violent, tyrannical invasions upon the just laws of the kingdom,
and natural liberties of the subject, be thus by the laws of the kingdom,
and a due proceeding therein, brought to this just penal death: surely, this
can little make for the Kings happiness; unl^sse the cutting off of such
limbs as these, and so of this active instrument of mischief in patticula^,
may be a means to procure the Kings happiness, in case such Heads so cut off,
prove not the heads of the Roman Hydra* which upon the cutting off of one head,
puts forth two, until the whole Lerna-Lake shall be quite drained and dried
up; otherwise, he, whose life has but a little advanced the Kings happin^sse,
can give but little hope of raising it by such a death, the just reward of a
traitor. Thirdly, for this Churches preservation, by which he alway^^
understands his Hierarchy* or the protestant Religion of the Church of England,
(as before) there cannot be a more sure Omen of the utter ruin of that, as
whose Primate is so cut off by the hatches of Justice in the Hangmans hand.

Again, he boldly tells God, that his zeal to these three, is all the sin,
which he knows is yet known of him in this particular of Treason. Did his
zeal then so far transport him, as to wade so deep through so many acts of
treason to the State, as to play the Traitor for the honor of God* surely God
will not be honored with any such service.

And as for his zeal to the Kings happiness, no m^rvaile if i^ were so fiery,
as to become an Incendiary to the State, and all for the prservation of this
his Church, which could not be preserved, but with the extreme hazz^rd, if not
utter ruin of three kingdoms; so as such a preservation purchased at so dear
a rate, could be a^ little for the Kings honor, as for his happiness, when
three kingdoms should rather welter in their own blood, then the Prelaticall
kingdom should not wallow in all its pomp and pleasure* and indeed the zeal
hereof in all Ages, has been that, which has set the kingdoms of the Earth
in such horrible combustions, as at length it has grown to be a Proverb of
the Prelates own making, No Bishop, no King: and so, No Bishopprick or
Bishopdome, no Kingdom:

He prays also, that there may be a stop of that issue of blood, in this more
then miserable Kingdom. Here it may be questioned what he means by this issue
of blood. If he mean the stopping of the course of Justice in cutting off such
Trayt^rs, as himself: this is to pray that this more then miserable Kingd^me,
may be made more then most miserable. If he mean the stopping of the now ^^sue
of blood, that is and has been shed by this intestine and unnatural war,
whereby the Beasts power seeks to destroy the Lambs Kingdom with his called,
and chosen, and faithful people: This should extremely aggravate, and make the
sin of this Prelate ou^ of measure sinful, as who has been one prime
instrument and bloody agent to procu^e all this bloodshed.

But that which follows, surpasses all transcendency of the malice and
wickedness of hell it self. I shall desire (says he) that I may pray for the
people too, as well as for my self: O Lord, I beseech thee give grace of
repentance to all people, that have a thirst for blood, but if they will not
repent, then scatter their devices, etc. Here 1. he makes it plain, that what
he prayed before, was for himself, and his party, and that the issue of blood
on his part might be stopped; as before. 2. The maine of his prayer is, to lay
the guilt of all the blood that has been shed in this war, upon the Parliament
and people, especially this City, that stand for their Rights, ^s a people that
thirst for bl^od: whereof if they repent not, that then their devices may be
sca^tered, as being contrary to Gods glory, the truth and sincerity of
Religion, (to wit) of Popery (as before is showed) to the establishment of the
King and his Posterity after him in their just Right^ and Privileges* (to wit)
in an Arbitrary and Tyrannical government, whereby the Tyrannical Prelacy,
the truth and sincerity of the Popish Religion, may he supported and
maintained: for which very cause all this bloody war^ has been^ raised and
con^^^ued in Ireland and England, wherein so many hundred thousands of innocent
people, and loyal Subjects, have been most barbarously murdered, and for no
other cause, but that they bar^ the name of Protestants, only not such
Protestants as could be hoped to profess the true Protestant Religion of the
present Church of England, the truth and sincerity of which Religion is Popery,
improperly so called, as before showed.

But he adds: For the honor and conservation of Parliaments, in their ancient
and just power. Note here: never a prayer in particular for this present
Parliament, but for Parliaments in general, and that also with a limitation,
in their ancient and just power. And what is that? Namely so far as stands
with the Kings Prerogative; according to that new clause lately foysted into
the Kings Oath at his Coronation, by the Legierde-main of this Iugler, to
govern his people according to the Laws, and maintain their Rights and
Liberties; But with this Provi^o, so far as stands with the Kings Prerogative.
Which Legier-de-main was one of those Charges proved against the Prelate in the
Honorable House of Peers, so as in these words, ancient and just power, does
lurck a great deal of serpentine deceit; that all this ancient and just power
comes to just nothing, further then with reference unto, and dependence upon
the Kings Prerogative. Such are the sly equivocations, and mental
reservations of this subtle serpent all along in this his pretended prayer,
wherein he thus desperately dallyeth with God and men.

Then, For the preservation of this poor Church, in her truth, peace, and
patrimony* This poor Church, to wit, the late and yet proud Prelacy: her
truth, such as is regulated by he^ Canons, with an Et caetera: her Peace, for
which she has caused troubles and war in those Kingdoms: he^ Patrimony, a
part of Peter's Patrimony, for the support of her truth and peace* that which
this Prelate in his Relation of a conference, took all that pains about for
the blessed meeting of Truth and Peace, (as he call^ it) in reconciling of Rome
and England together, as he professes throughout his book, and in the very
last page and words thereof.

He adds, And the settlement of this distracted and distrossed people, etc.
Whatsoever he prays here, is with reference to the truth, peace, and patrimony
of his poor Church, and therefore it is added with a Copulative, and the
settlement, etc.

And hereunto he adds another And: And when all this is done, that then they
may be thankful, with religious dutiful obedience to thee and thy
Commandments. Here they must take notice, that there is no such blessing, for
which to be thankful, as the up-holding of the Prelates Protestant Religion;
When this is done, then fill their hearts with thank^fulnesse* But how can
dutiful obedience to Gods Commandments, and to Prelaticall Canonical
Commandments, stand together? For what more contrary and opposite one to the
other, then Christ's Commandments to Antichrists? We have had woeful experience
hereof. Christ commands to preach the Word in season, 2 Timothy 4.2
and out of season: the Prelates forbid Lectures, on week days, and Sermons in
the afternoon on Lords days. God commands to worship him in spirit and truth:
^o^. 4.23.
Prelates command to worship God by humane forms, by Images, by Adorations
toward the East, Deuteronomy. 5.
with many other superstitious Ceremonies of man's devising. God commands his
Sabboths or Lords days to be sanctified: Prelates suspend Ministers for not
reading the book for profane sports on these days, with infinite more.

He closes all, with a Lord receive my soul to m^rcy: adding, Our Father, etc.
Now what has an impenitent hard hearted hypocrite to do with mercy? All that
he has here prayed, or rather babled out of a paper, is but merely to delude
the people, and to mock God even to his face. Never came there such a forlorn
and formidable spectacle upon stage or scaffold, to act the hypocrites part, so
that, as he was a seducer and deceiver ell his life time: so he will dye. The
reply to the Relation, has set him ^orth in his colors long before, Reply, p.
74.405.86.87. Printed 1640.
prophesying of his c^rsed end, which we see now fulfilled, as also of the
terrible judgments and calamities that should fall upon his Prelaticall Clergy
of England, together with his Protestant Religion, alias Popery, though but
improperly so called.

He complains for want of Room to dye, which he needed not: for he had too
much of Room, that brought him to dye. I beseech you (says he) let me have an
end of this misery. For all this have, he should have laid a better and surer
foundation to build his hope upon, for freedom from a future misery, both
infinitely durable, and extremely intolerable, then yet we have seen in him.
Nor could he find a word in Scripture to satisfy Sir John Clotworthie's
question, for any assurance that he had of a better life. And just was this
with God the righteous Judge, that as he was a great decryer and vilifier of
the Scripture, as: The light which is in Scripture it self, Relation p. 80. p.
83.84.85. See Redly.
is not bright enough, it cannot bear sufficient witness to it self: That
the belief of Scripture to be the Word of God, depends primarily upon the
authority and tradition of the present Church: That it is a candle which has
no light, till it be lighted, which is first by the tradition of the present
Church. That notwithstanding these and many more most gross derogations from
the selfe-sufficiency, authority, and light of Scriptures to demonstrate it
self to be the word of God, he says, he has given to the Scripture enough,
and more then enough, etc. Just (I say) was it with God, that this wretched
Prelate, for so vilifying, yea annihilating the sufficiency of Scripture Light,
should be lost altogether without so much light, as to light him to so much as
one place of Scripture, that might minister unto him some solid comfort at the
hour of his death. As some Malefactors trusting to their neck-vers, when they
came before the Judge, were not able to read one word of the book. And though
he said to Sir John, that that word was the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and that
alone: yet this graceless wretch was never acquainted with this knowledge of
Jesus Christ. For he was a perpetual enemy to Jesus Christ, a cruel persecutor
of his Saints, a hater of his Word, an oppressor of the power of godliness,
where ever he found it. Phil. 3.10.
This wretch n^^er knew Jesus Christ in the power of his Resurrection, in the
fellowship of his afflictions, in a conformity to his death. He never had
Christ's spirit, and therefore was none of Christ's. Romans 8.
He had not the spirit of grace and supplication, he had not the spirit of
prayer even unto his death, as he had been a quencher of this spirit of
prayer, in all those in whom he perceived it to be. For he was altogether for
book-prayers, as here he was at his death. Such was his last prayer, which was
in his hand: And this prayer (if a prayer) is to be interpreted as the former,
all for mercy, but wwithout repentance; for this Kingdom, but in reference to
Tyranny, to his Protestant Religion, to this his Church of England. Thus he
dies one that was ever true to his old principles, as in his life, so at his
death, and thus he is as good as his word in his Relation, where he tells the
King thus: In the publishing hereof, I have obeyed your Majesty, Epist. ded.
page 22.
discharged my duty to my power, to the Church of England, given account of the
hope that is in me, and so testified to the world that faith, in which I have
lived, and by Gods blessing and favor purpose to dye. Now concerning this
faith of his, and that of Rome, there is no more difference between them, then
that distinction which himself has put (mentioned before) to wit, Popery,
properly so called* and popery improperly so called.

I shall conclude with a passage or two in my Reply written in my banishment at
Guernsey above four years ago, in Answer to the Prelates Relation, toward
the end. Page 402.
Bethink your self how sudden the time may be, that you must go and give
account (as you say) to God and Christ, of the talent committed to your charge,
which you cannot so easily answer before that Judge, as you could do in the
Star Chamber. And remember what you said to the Jesuit: Our reckoning will be
heavier, if we thus mislead on either side* then theirs that follow us* But I
see I must look to my self, Relation. page 116.
for you are secure. And are not you full out as secure, as the Iesuit^? But in
that you p^ay that God for Christ's sake would be merciful to you. But is that
enough to wipe off all old scores, to say, God be merciful to me? when the
whole course of a man's life has been a very enmity and rebellion against
Christ: When he lies, spends and squandereth the talent o^ of his strenth and
wit, learning* (...) and friends, to the dishonor of God, in oppressing
Christ's word, persecuting his servants and members, profaning and polluting the
service of God with superstitious inventions of men, and Will wo^ship, forceing
men's consciences to confor^ity, using all cru^lty, even to blood, and the like,
with Lord have mercy upon me without any more ado, serve the turn, to salve
all again? But where is your hearty repentance, for all your Scarlet and
Episcopal sins? your high Commission sins? your Star Chamber sins? your
Counsel table sins? Nay? is not your soul conscience still ^eared and
stupefied? is not your heart still hardened? O stupid conscience? O desperate
soul? O shameless Hypocrite? O blasphemous wretch? Do thou thank God, to
make him the author of all thy impiety, iniquity, cruelty, craft, hypocrisy,
and dissimulation, of thy faith^esse and false heart, in thy plotting to bring
thy false truth and thy turbulent peace with the Whore of Babylon (that
notorious ene^y of Christ, and of his true Spouse his Church) to a meeting, a
blessed meeting, yea, to a cursed meeting? This is that Peace and Truth, which
you contend for; for the procuring and meeting whereof, all truth shall be
corrupted, and peace perturbed, not only in the Churches but in Civil States
and Kingdo^^s, when for the maintenance of your Truth and Peace, Princes shall
be set against their People, and People forced to stand for their Liberties
against Prelatticall ^surpation, and Tyrannical Invasion*

But I conclude; if such was his deplored condition then, as to ly naked to
such language; how is the measure thereof now filled up, in an obstinate
out-facing and maintaining all his wickednesses, perpetrated since that, till
now, and that before the high bar of the Kinhdome, the very Tribunal of God,
and at last upon the very Scaffold, pouring out his blood in a most obdurate,
desperate, and final impenitency? O that this might be an example to all that
tread in his steps. It is very observable by common experience in the^e days,
that a malignant and godless life, has an impenitent and desperate death.
This is that Ca^terburian Arch-Prelate, in his life time heire-apparant to the
Pope-dome, subtle, false, treacherous, cruel, carrying two faces under one
hood, Satan's second child, who ever is ^he first, as hard to speak truth, as
to do good, or to repent of any evil, as his Father the Devil, an inveterate
adversary to Christ, and all true Christians* an underminer of the Civil
State, a Traitor to his Country, wilfully damning his own soul, to save the
credit of his cursed cause, sealing with his blood the Kings part, with Romes,
to be righteous, and the Parliaments odious, that so he might be as unlike to
Sampson, as possible, to do as much (if not more) mischief to his native
country at his death, as he had done in his life; and therefore worthy to have
dyed the ancient death of parricides, or Traitors to their Country, which the
ancient Romans used, to be sowed up in a Culle^s or leather sack and cast into
the warer, and there to perish, as unworthy to touch either earth, or water, or
air, as Natures outcast.

FINIS.

