Silent Meeting, A WONDER to the WORLD; Yet Practiced by the APOSTLES, And
Owned by the People of God, Scornfully called QUAKERS.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black-Spread-Eagle and
Windmill in Martins l'Grand, 1660.

Silent Meeting, A WONDER to the WORLD; Yet practiced by the Apostles, and
owned by the People of God, scornfully called QUAKERS,
Reader,
HAving formerly passed through a twofold Ministry; First, As a Gifted-Man in
the National. Secondly, as a Baptist: And now brought to wait on God in
Silence, it is a wonder to many; upon which the Lord has led me forth to
publish this Paper, and make it a Free-gift unto those who desire some
satisfaction concerning Silent Meeting; Deuteronomy. 32. 49.
in which I wait on God for a Purer Ministry, if he please to bring me unto it,
or if I fall short, (like Moses to dye on Mount Nebo) and only see it afar
off, his blessed will be done.

I preaching first in the National Ministry for hire, selling my Sermons at my
best Market, and afterward being took off from that merchandising, becoming a
Baptist, and preaching freely without selling, did not think my spiritual
condition to be very good; (...). 48. 1(...).
but the Eternal God, who Empties from Vessel to Vessel, to take away all the
Carnal Taste, did not suffer me many years in this Estate; who by a further
discovery of himself, brought me back to Silence, that I should wait with the
despised Remnant called Quakers.

And as one alone from the Tumult or outside of a Wood can easiest hear the
Clamours and Outcries within; so I being come forth of the Forms and Forest of
the World, unto a holy Silence, by the power of Jesus Christ within me, could
the better discern to see and view the various Sects and Forms in their
Congregations, how unlike the most part were unto the true Spouse of Christ;
which with a heavy burden on my spirit, Dan. 2.
I beheld their Parochial Assemblies to appear something like Nebuchadnezzar's
Image in the Golden head; but upon a through observation in the Life, Fruits,
and Conversation, as the Iron and Clay; Barren, Fruitless, and Empty, having
the Imitations and Forms of Godliness, but denying the Power of Christ, in
leading forth the Creature.

When thus, Lu. 15. 17
like the returning Prodigal, I came to look on my self within, I saw how I had
fed on husks; but God (my Father) had Bread enough: And although Arts,
Sciences, Teaching for Hire, getting of money, with such Carnal Delights,
quieted flesh a while, as a Rattle or Pipe does a Child, for a time without the
Breast: Yet now the Immortal part seeing its Emptiness, and coming to the true
Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness, John 6 51, 53.
nothing but an Eternal God would Satisfy, to give that Bread, Flesh, and
Drink of Life, whereby a poor Soul may grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of
God; but those that live and depend only upon outward Forms, and visible
Things, the same deceive thousands, who thereby fall short of what they imagine.

I now see that he is no true Minister of Jesus Christ, but who is led forth by
his Spirit, and such we rejoice to hear declaring the things of God: otherwise
upon Meeting we sit silent in the Tongue, yet having a heart full of praises,
where we Worship God in Spirit and Truth, who makes our bodies Temples for the
same Spirit; John 4. 23. 2 cor. 6. 16,
not speaking by hearsay, and humane Arts, but lay all that down; when earthly
thoughts, earthly words, and earthly works are all laid aside, and the Temple
within us is ready, the Light of Christ shining in it, and the Lord with a
further Manifestation of his Love, enters it by his Eternal Power; whereupon we
can truly say, that the Lord's presence is amongst us, feeding of his Flock,
and making us feel the power of an endless life.

As one must come forth of the house which intends to see it round about; so we
in obedience to God being separate and come forth from the world, can the
better see how the major part of people come to their Worship, 2 Cor. 6. 17*
as to a Market, dressed up in their Fashions, with their Tongues in Carnal
Discourse, both going thither, and returning back; the Eye gazing upon Vanity
and Filth; the Ear ready to receive such stuff as defiles, and the Heart as an
Anvil to Forge within; whereby they come, not enquiring, like the Spouse of
Christ, Cant. 1. 7. or as a people to do the Work of God; as a true Wife to
rejoice in her Husband; but as an Harlot, that wantons and sports her self;
yea, if they stay a while for their coming together, what Scoffing, Playing,
Quarrelling, Carnal Talk, Unseemly Behavior, and Sinful Actions are taken up
amongst them! woeful experience can testify.

And among such people I poor wretch did once spend some time, selling them
words which they paid for, but did not keep them; using pleasing expressions,
and speaking by hearsay ( as others did) and not upon experience from Christ
within me, but by imitation; as Players on a Stage, assume the Names, and act
the person of Princes, Nobles, etc. but being come off, and unmasked, they are
no such men; yea, I was persuaded then, that flesh must sin, and have its lusts
fulfilled, while I was in the body; 2 Cor. 7. 1
not seeing that all filthiness of flesh and spirit must be cleansed, or else
Holiness cannot be perfected in the fear of God. And with comfort I write this
Truth, That I have found and felt more of the Lords presence in one Silent
Meeting, then I have done in a hundred Sermons preached by me in times past;
and though then I did deliver them with much zeal: But this is

A Wonder to the World, Isa. 55. 2.
who have given their Money for that which is not Bread; buying the Letter of
their Priests that chide them for sinning, yet say, they must continue sinners
while they are in this body, telling the people that God must do all for them,
and in them, yet bid the same people to get Faith, get Repentance, etc. So that
the new Creation in making a new Creature, is a Mystery unto them that are thus
ignorant, 1 Cor. 5. 17. which affirm, that people must live in sin until they
die; as if God had laid a necessity upon the Creature to offend him; ^ Cor. 10.
5
therefore they own no Light within, nor power of Christ within, whereby to
bring each thought in obedience; but rather like the Athenians, they mock at
what they understand not, Acts 17. 18.

Take heed therefore, both you that sell Scripture-Letter for money, and you
Hearers, which think you buy it; for thus Simon the Sorcerer thought with his
money to purchase the gift of God; but his deceit deceived himself, and he went
without it, Act. 8. 20. And do not think that speaking, hearing, and reading
the Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
suffices to make you wise unto Salvation; but consider, how it must be by
faith in Christ Jesus: So except Christ in Spirit be within, to work Faith and
Obedience* the seeing, hearing or reading the Letter avails little without us:
for the Letter of former Scriptures, the Scribes, Pharisees and persecuting
Priests had, who crucified Christ; as many now have the Letter also, yet to
little purpose whilst they seek to destroy: the works of the Spirit: Nor does
Christ say, That there is Eternal Life in the Scriptures; but reproves the
Jews, Ioh 5. 39.
who thought so, yet would not own him who was the substance of all.

Look therefore, by the Light of Christ within you, unto whom ye yield your
sleves in your members to obey, as Eyes to see, Ears to hear, and Tongues to
speak, Hearts to think, etc. For therein you are servants, whether in Power for
doing good, Romans 6. 13, 16.
or under the Devils power by living in sin; and whether you live after the
flesh in the Devils Power, or after the spirit in Gods Power, may be easily
known by the mind within of each man and woman: for upon what the mind is
carried with most eagerness, joy and delight, in Earthly things, or upon
Heavenly things, in that estate you are at present, of Flesh or Spirit, either
for Heaven or Hell, Romans 8. 5, 6, 7. Yet I advise you not to take up this or
that outward Form, but to seek for that Pearl, and fell (or part with) all
earthly affections to buy or obtain it, Matthew. 13. 45. even that Kingdom of God
to be within your selves, which is in the Sanctified Ones: Luk 17. 21
for God manifests himself in the Creature, making his people partakers of the
Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4 causing things invisible to be understood, even his
Eternal power, etc. So that he leaves man without excuse, Romans 1. 20. And for
that Spirit which leads into these Truths, we silently wait: And this was

Practiced by the Apostles, who had from Christ two distinct Commissions for
going forth to preach: The First, From Christ in the flesh, before his death,
Luke 9. 1. 10. which lasted but a time; for although they could cast forth
Devils, whilst it held, yet being ended they could not do it, Luke 9. 40. Mat.
10. 5
and in this they went only to the Jews. Their Second Commission was to all
Nations, Matthew. 28. 19. both to Jews and Gentiles; given them by a risen
Christ, and confirmed by the Holy Ghost, or Christ in Spirit, about Fifty days
after, Acts 2. 1. during which time, although they Prayed, yet they did not go
forth to preach unto the people, Act. 1. 14.
until they had that Spirit which they were commanded to wait for, Ephesians. 1. 13.
as the Seal of their Commission, Acts 1. 4. So they were silent as unto
Preaching, wherein they waited for that which should lead them into all Truth,
John 16. 13. Whence note, It was not the Letter, or Christ in the Flesh, that
Jesus said should do it; but him in Spirit, who promised his Disciples to come
again unto them, John 14. 28. John 16. 22. and although he came again to them
after he was risen from the dead; yet in the several Promises we may see, how
it was the Holy Ghost, or Christ in Spirit, should lead them into all Truth,
and bring all things to remembnance; and make them able Ministers of the
Spirit, John 14. 26. 2 Cor. 5. 6. And such the Holy Ghost teaches, Luke 12.
12. yea, it is said, The Holy Ghost speaks, Mark 13. 11. And the Spirit
speaks in them, Mat. 10. ^0. And what injuries are done to them, is taken to
himself, Mat. 25. 41.

Thus being at Jerusalem, all in one place, with one accord (as they were
commanded to wait) Acts 1. 4. Acts 2 1. in that Silent-Meeting they received
what they had waited for, which made them able Ministers of the Gospel: And
then Peter began to speak, verse 14. This being the Order of their second
Commission, and is to hold unto all that look for Christ's spiritual coming
into their flesh, to make them able Gospel-Teachers, Joh. 4. 2.
and their bodies a habitation and temple for the same Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 19.
Ephesians. 2. 22. Therefore it is not Christ's spiritual coming in another Saints
flesh, which I feel, that gives me comfort; but when the same Holy Ghost, even
Christ in spirit dwells in my body; I then can witness it, by his Eternal
Power within, who is my Light and my Savior: But this is a strong Lesson to
the World, who cannot receive or know this Spirit promised to be in the Saints,
John 14 17. Yet this remember, that he who has not Christ in him, is a
Reprobate: 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Which Scripture Truth, and Gospel practice is

Owned by the People of God scornfully called Duakers: Who coming like Solomon
unto self-Experience, in seeing all our joys, Eccles. 2.
pleasures; profits, or other things delightful to the Flesh, to be but vanity
and vexation, we become silent thereunto, not answering, to obey the lusts of
the carnal mind, but as dead to the world, that we may live unto God: Even then
humane prudence in things of the Lord is laid in silence, and fleshly glory is
emptied forth; 1 John 2. 15.
leaving off to love the World; or the things of the world, as formerly; being
as the great dunghill for the true Convert to keep under his feet, and not
magnified in his heart; knowing, that every work and secret thing, both good
and evil, must come to judgment, Eccles. 12. 14.

In which Holy Silence, although the Tongue speaks not, yet the Spirit helps,
Romans 8. 26. which the Heart-Searcher beholds: The body in Silent-Meetings,
resting from labor (which is all the rest in a carnal man's worship) but we go
further, with a heart striving to rest from sinful imaginations, and entering
upon a true rest in God, of which we feel, see and taste in its beginnings, as
an earnest of our blessed Inheritance; desiring Christ may take the whole
Dominion in us, Romans 8. 23
to deliver from that bondage of corruption, by redeeming the body from the
same, which in part is begun, and shall be finished when Christ is formed, Gal.
4. 19. and the strongest takes the whole possession; but a time we must wait
for this as at Bethsada's Pool, until the Lord by his healing water cures his
poor wounded Creatures.

In consideration of such a spiritual Ministry, note Three Things: 1. The Work
of Moses. 2. Of Christ in Flesh. 3. Of Christ in Spirit.


First, Moses believed and obeyed, seeing things afar off, yet drank of the
Spiritual Rock that followed: but his work was not to hold unto the end in a
Levitical Ministry, and paying of Tithes, with material Temple-worship, etc.
For he shows, how the Lord would raise him another Prophet to be heard, Deuteronomy.
18. 15, 19.
and who would not hearken to that Prophet (Christ Jesus) in all things, the
Lord would punish; of whom Peter and Stephen spoke the same, Acts 3. 22. and 7.
38.

Secondly, Note, Christ's work in the Flesh, who had a glory with God before
the world was, Joh. 17. 5. but now assumed a body to satisfy for sinners, and
preached in that body to be the Light, John 1. 9.
for enlightening the world, to make them Saints; not as if they were such, but
that they might be so: showing how his true Disciples and Followers should
forsake all to embrace him; and they believed he was the Son of God: Yet then,
(he being with them in his Flesh) they were ignorant of many things; as the
Rising from the Dead, Mark 9. 10. and Understanding of the Scriptures, Luke 24.
45. and of Christ's Kingdom, thinking it should be temporal, in Israel, Acts
1. 6. and of his Sufferings, before he entered into his glory, after his fleshly
manifestation, Luke 24. 21, 26. Yea, John Baptist testified of Christ, yet
afterward sent to know if it was he, Mat. 11. 3. Neither does Christ say, that
then in flesh he told his Disciples all things, or lead them into all things;
but left that work unto his coming in Spirit, Joh. 16. 13 John 14. 16, 26. John
15. 26. For, although in himself he had the Spirits fullness, yet to Believers
it should not come until he was gone away in flesh; Ioh. 16 17.
the vessel of his body being broken, and the Unction therefore, to fill many
therewith: where Note, As Moses Ministry was now at an end, so also Christ in
Flesh should depart, and Christ in Spirit would come, to set up a Ministry, and
abide with Believers for ever, John 14. 16. Heb. 13. 8.

Thirdly, Consider Christ's work in Spirit, which is to abide for ever; But at
this the Jews stumbled, thinking it was in flesh he should continue always;
and so they looked for a temporal Kingdom, John 12 34
and outward glory, as many aim at in these days: whereas his Kingdom is not
of this world, John 18. 36. neither are his Ministers of the Letter, but of the
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 6. Called, New Testament (or New Covenant) Ministers, having
that written in their hearts before promised, Jerem. 31. 33. Isaiah 54. 13.
John 6. 45. Who should not search Authors, Gal. 1. 16.
Commentaries and Manuscripts as a Shop-book, for a Sermon; Acts 2.
but speak from the power of Christ within, as Paul did, and the Apostles did;
having the Word in the Mouth, and in the Heart, Romans 10. 8. For the Scriptures
must be preached by the same Spirit that gave them forth, and not only by
Humane Learning; for Flesh is not able to comprehend the things of God; and who
has not this Spirit is none of his, Romans 8. 9. From whence we may speak
boldly, That those which have not this Spirit, to preach from it, and by it,
they are none of Christ's: and by this Spirit they knew the things of God, who
had received it, 1 Cor. 2. 10. 12. and this searches the deep things of God:
So it is plain, Luke 10. 2
That True Ministers must have Christ in Spirit, who speaks in Spirit, Mat. 10.
20, 40. And who hears, or despises them, is said to do it unto Christ, Luke
10. 16. Therefore we must pray God to send us such, for men cannot do it by
calling one another Batchelors and Masters, and Doctors upon humane Arts and
Acts; which is like that of the Jews, John 5. 44. wherein one man took honor
of another: And take heed, least it be with you as it was with Jerusalem, of
whom it is not said, ye could not, but ye would not, Luke 13. 34. A sad
condition.

And now this 22, day of the 7 th Month, the Word of the Lord came unto me, to
warn all you in power; and you National Priests (or Ministers) called, Bishops,
Deans, Doctors, or Inferior; and you that are Hearers, Know ye, that the Lord
is pleading his own Cause, and has a strong Controversy with you; Therefore
take heed what ministry you plead for; and remember what I answered William
Prynne; That there is no Gospel Plea for Tithes nor forced Maintenance, etc. To
you that was, and this is from the Lords Spirit, by me his Messenger.

Now as the Apostles Silent Meeting was in expectation of the Spirit before
promised; so God (in Scriptures) having engaged himself, that in these latter
days there should be flowings forth thereof, we silently wait for it; and
whosoever looks now for this promised Spirit (being a frequenter of Silent
Meetings) must in the power of Jesus Christ, sincerely strive to have these
Three things in themselves: 1. A Spiritual Watch. 2. A Spiritual Touchstone. 3.
The Spiritual Scales.


I say unto all, Mar. 13. 37.
Watch; For ye know not when the time of Trial is, John 3. 8.
or when the coming of the Spirit shall be; it being as the Wind, which
blows where it lists; For flesh loves to break out, and have it is will, and
the lusts thereof; therefore the spiritual Watch must be truly kept within, to
see and note what works are in hand, and what words are issuing forth, and what
thoughts are in thee: But those which keep not this Watch, do run hastily upon
action, and their tongues speak unadvisedly, in hasty Questions and Answers,
oftentimes proceeding to Passion, and Rage, like short fits of madness, with
their hearts wandering out after folly, and carnal objects, by which means many
Professors break forth into filth; Psalm. 39. 1.
yet say, They are Soldiers of Christ, but keep not a Spiritual Watch under
him; so their tongues are not bridled, nor have they learned to take heed unto
their ways.

Therefore, if thou seek to reap the pure Benefit of Silent Meetings, learn
first to come unto a pure Silence in thine own self, which is to silence all in
thee that is evil, by that Eternal Power of God; so thy tongue, heart and hands
shall be under the Faithful Watch, and the Actions without in the body, with
thy Actions within of thy mind, as Love, Joy, Desire etc. will by degrees be
all brought into true Obedience: which Watch keeping according to thy measure
(or Talents received) sin shall not have dominion over thee: but thou will grow
in Grace, and become a Conqueror in him that has loved thee: Mar. 13. 37.
Therefore remember what Christ spoke to his Disciples, was also to thee, and
me, Watch.

Secondly, When the work, word or thought, is thus slaid by the Watch, then
bring it to the spiritual Touchstone; for trial, whether it be good or no; for
oftentimes Satan and Flesh covers Vices under the names of Virtues, and will
either extenuate or lessen a Sin, or else flourish it over with some zeal, or
pretense of holiness; therefore we must prove and try them in the Light of
Christ: which the Apostle sets forth by Examination and Proof of a man's own
work, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Gal. Ephesians. 5, 10.
6. 4. and thereby is seen what is acceptable to the Lord: Mal. 3. 3.
For God by his spiritual work comes into a man as a Refiner, to purify; and
unto what strength and heat the spiritual fire in thee is come, so is the
melting, trying; and refining within, upon proof of thy actions, and taking
away of dross and filth: Yea, note in words themselves, how sometimes they are
too many; sometimes unsound and untrue; sometimes too short, in telling but
half a truth, etc. Therefore let them first be tried by the Spiritual
Touchstone, before they proceed out of thy mouth, whether they are pure or
impure.

Thirdly, Use the Spiritual Scales, to weigh, ponder, or consider all things to
be spoken or done, before they pass from thee: For man durst not let so many
filthy words drop from his tongue, if first they were weighed or considered
within at the heart: Yea and Nay, Yes and No, must be the same as they are
spoken, and so speak the same thing intended and pretended; Rev. 21. 8.
for otherwise you are Liars, and Liars are for the Lake, Rev. 22. 15
to be amongst Dogs, and Whoremongers without: yet with many, lying is
common, who have not learned to speak the same thing intended; as, if you ask
them to eat, to drink, to tarry, etc. they will say No; yet desire them again,
and they will accept it; so here they are Liars: Some in scoffs and mocks,
think it is witty to speak a Lie, in a Jest; others being asked the truth of a
thing, will sometimes flourish and enlarge it, making the same too much, or too
little, as in praising or disprasing, in buying or selling, and account
themselves expert dealers, and cunning Chapmen, because they can use their
Tongues for advantage; whereas they are but Liars in it; and such know not what
a Spiritual Watch means: Therefore know, That in all such Estates ye are
quite out of the Good Old Way, or Way of Truth; and remember, If any such seem
Religious, yet they are not so, seeing their tongues are unbridled, Iam. 1. 26.
not brought to the Truth, and their Religion is vain or empty. Yet because you
are such, I do not say, you are damned; but declare your being captive in
fleshly Babylon, showing from the Spirit of God, what must be done by you, if
ye are saved.

If any are in Christ, they are new Creatures; and there is a New Heaven, and a
New Earth in them: For all their Parts, Members, Faculties, and Abilities; are
put to a New Use, the New Heart, and New Spirit is in them; so they Speak and
Act New Things from that Law of God written in their inward Parts; 1 Cor. 15.
31.
and such dare not Vent their Frothy Words, as Flesh did formerly; but now
there is a killing of that; as Paul dyed daily; so the new Creature Dies daily
to Sin; he is Dead as to Act in Sin, but Lively to Righteousness; whereas the
Sinner is quick to Sin, but Dead and Dull in the things of God; So thou shall
see the difference of these Two Estates, betwixt Darkness and Light, when thou
come to use the Spiritual Watch, Spiritual Touchstone, and Spiritual Scales;
according to thy measure in the growth of Grace, to know the power of an
endless life within thee, working and effecting these things; and then thou
may say, I now see what pure silence is; yea, then thou shall benefit by
Silent Meetings.

And those that are come to the pure silencing of flesh, to bridle the tongue,
Ephesians. 6. 12 2 Cor. 10. 5.
to wrestle with the spiritual Wickedness in the high place of the heart, that
each Tongue may be brought into Obedience unto Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 31.
and whatsoever they Act, do all to the Glory of God; such can witness the
Power of Christ in them, and when he please to call them by his Eternal Spirit,
to go forth as Ministers, they can best Declare what God has Revealed unto
them. As the Man having the Devil's cast forth, Mar. 5 20
published in Decapolis, how great, things Jesus had done for him: Whereas they
that preach by hearsay, and humane study, show, they speak not as the Spirit
gives them utterance, but with the Tongues of flesh, from Carnal Apprehensions:
So that, when they preach unto the people, it might be objected: Jesus I know
has the Spirit, Acts 19 15
and Paul I know had it; but who are ye? Upon what account would you conjure
forth sin out of others, who have not the true Spirit your selves?

Therefore let none Assume or Own any other Gospel Ministers, then those called
forth by the Spirit of God, as Christ in Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 6
after his Resurrection and Ascension, confirmed the same, to lead them into
all Truth, and bring all things to their Remembrance, as able Ministers of the
Spirit, and not of the Letter, as Carnal men do, who teach one another Humane
Learning, and then sell it for Divinity, forcing many to pay for it a dear
rate, even to spoiling of Goods, Imprisonment and Cruelty.

But some will object, Their Non-Scripture Distinctions of Mediate, and
Immediate; Ordinary, and Extraordinary, etc. saying, That although the Apostles
were so called of God, yet they ordained others not so called; and so out of
their Carnal Inventions, they undertake to consecrate or make Steeple Houses,
Mass-Houses, High Places, or the Tower-houses to be Churches, and to be
Holy-places, and fit men by their Arts and Degrees to preach in such places,
etc.

Ans. Gal. 1. 8.
All their pretenses can no more make such places holy, then a heap of stones;
John 4. 23, 24.
nor add any virtue thereby into the Pulpit, then into a Tub: For God is
worshipped in Spirit and Truth: ^ Tim. 1 3 Mat. 16. 17
Nor are true Teachers to deliver any other Doctrine than what the Apostles
did: Therefore see what Qualifications they were to have, 1 Timothy 3. 2. etc.
Tit. 1. 6. etc. Now it is not flesh and blood that Reveals this unto them, nor
the Tongues of Humane Learning, which qualifies men thus for the Ministry, but
the same Spirit of God: Therefore it is common to see those having much Humane
Learning to be Great Persecutors, and will not take up the Cross to follow
Christ, and so cross their own Lusts, Pride, Covetousness, Envy and Filth, but
give way unto it, by which means we find so many cruel Priests; For there is
scarce any Persecution of Saints, but the Priests are chief Actors therein,
either by Instigating, or Acting.

Now consider Friends, it was that charged on Thyatira, for suffering Jezebel,
Rev. 2. 20.
who called her self a Prophetess, to teach and seduce the people: So these
National Ministers call themselves Divines, and Gospel Ministers, yet lead the
People in Error; which we now seeing by the Light of Christ, if we do not
Discover, Reprove, and Oppose them therein, God will lay the same thing to our
charge as he did unto Thyatira; Mat. 23. 3
For now Jesus Christ will set up his own Ministry: And although he forbade not
his Disciples to hear the Scribes and Pharisees, when the Law-Ministry was not
ended; yet now having finished that work in his flesh; his Spiritual Ministry
he has set up to continue unto the end, and no other are we to hear. And this
is the Testimony which the Lord has called me to hold forth, Therefore hearken
unto it.

The 23 d Day of the 8 th Month, 1660. William Britten.

THE END.

