THE SWAN-SONG: Or the Second Part of the LIFE of FAITH, in times of TRIAL and
AFFLICTION: Opened and applid by That Late, Learned, eminently Gracious,
singularly Faithful and exemplarly Zealous Minister of Jesus Christ, MR JOHN
BROWN: And published by his afflicted Friend, and a poor Well wisher to the
Interest of Christ, and his suffering Remnant.

1 Cor. 16: 13. Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be
strong.

Ephesians. 6: 13. Wherefore, take unto you the whole armor of God, that you may be
able to withstand in the evil day, etc.

Ver. 16. Above all taking the shield of faith etc.

1 John 5: 4. -- And this is the victory that over-cometh the world, even our
faith.

Philip. 4: 13. I can all things through Christ which strengthens me.

Printed ANNO DOM. M. D C. LXXX.

To the CHRISTIAN READER, More particularly to the poor suffering Remnant of
the CHURCH OF SCOTLAND.
DEAR BRETHREN, and Companions in tribulation and in the Kingdom and patience
of JESUS CHRIST,

I make no other Apology, for this my present address, than that it was
amongst the last commands, laid upon me, by the great, and now glorified Author
of this following treatise, (revised by himself, and almost wholly printed
before his death) to prefixe a few lines unto it, and so send it out into the
Church; that by it he being dead might yet speak, particularly to his Brethren
in tribulation, to whom living he was so comfortable, by holding forth light,
sanctuary light, in their darknesses and difficulties, and now continues still
to be, (after he has no more a being amongst us) by pointing forth the way of
life and strength, whereby the suffering saint (without succumbing or sinking,
because of sorrow, misery and affliction) may be made able to do all things,
and endure all things, while he walks in that light. But, Christian Reader,
while I obey the last command of my dear Brother, I shall so far consult thy
advantage, as not to keep thee back, by my tedious and tastlesse scrible, from
the perusal of a piece, which not only, as to thee, needs not my Epistle of
Commendation; For the First Part (long a^oe in thy hands) is a sufficient
Epistle to this Second, with all who are in love with, and know the necessity
of the way of living by faith, which is the Christians life, in this life;
(for, till the day of immediate vision, and full fruition come, we must walk by
faith, not by sight: O blessed walk, which brings with it joy unspeakeable,
and full of glory! And so it must, since it is a walking with God; For as
faith's first work is the association of the soul with him, so its next and
after work is the assimilation of the soul to him; whereupon follows that
near, that sweet and dear fruition of him, which has unspeakable joy, as its
inseparable Companion, or native effect) But, the due, and deserved praise of
the Author, is so much in the Church of Christ, as it needs not the Epistle of
any else, to command it; For,

First, If thou be not a stranger in our Israel, whoever thou be; then, if
either eminency in grace or learning; if vastness and pregnancy of parts; if
fervor of zeal according to knowledge; if unvvearied diligence, in the work of
the Lord, (wherein he labored more abundantly than any of us all; for no man
in the Church of Scotland has filled up his measure, even as to that: nor
know, nor see I a man who is like to do it, nay who is in capacity for it;)
If a holy heroic misreguard of men, and their estimation, in approving himself
to God, by a ready and resolute withstanding the corruptions of his time, and
opposing all these courses and contrivances, and these unworthy connivings,
whereby the cause has been prejudged; yea basely abandoned, and the free
course and progress of the Gospel obstructed; If single sollicitousnesse, and
strenuous endeavors, how to have pure ordinances preserved in this generation,
and propagat to the posterity: in a word, if faithfulness, as a servant, in
all the house, and matters of his God, even that God, who counted him faithful,
and put him in the Ministry; and loyalty to his princely Lord and Master,
(the prerogatives of whose Crown, the Privileges of whose Kingdom, and the
establishment of whose Throne, were more prized by him, more precious and dear
unto him, than all other interests whatsoever: nay, he was so far from
reguarding any other interest, in respect of that alone valuable one; that, as
he was never daunted, from a plain peremptorinesse in owning thereof, by the
dread of poor mortals, or the fear of what the stated enemy could do unto him;
so, he was never demurred, into a forbearance, or brow-beaten into a base and
un - Ambassador - becoming silence, by the displeasure and disconntenancings,
even of such of his Brethren, whom otherwise he loved, and highly honored, as
to a plain contending with them, wherein he perceived them not to walk
uprightly, according to the truth of the Gospel, and to the former principles
of that Church, while she retained first love, and did first works: Yea, he
judged it duty (and in this he had the mind of Christ) to contend earnestly
with them, for their not earnest contendings for the Faith; though, for this,
he should have been contemned, and accounted (as he was) a man of contention:)
I say, if thou be such an one, to whom such a blessed Conjunction of rare
Gifts, with such a rich and plentiful measure of Grace, can endear any man; I
then nothing doubt, but MR BROWN, Great and Gracious MR BROWN, has such a
place in thy soul, and such a preference to others, as thou will judge it
superfluous in me, to say any thing to commend what the truly great Elijah of
his time (I mean of this present time, when, having served his generation,
according to the will of God, he fell asleep,) the man jealous for the Lord God
of Hosts, above all his Brethren, whom he has left behind him, (I except not
one Soul, nor am I ashamed, or afraid to give it under my hand) does here
present thee with, as his farewell to the Saints, and the excellent Ones, in
whom he so much delighted, and for whose advantage he so much laid out himself,
night and day, and for the work and cause of Christ his Lord; In so much as
this his kindness to the Saints, and care of all the Churches, particularly
that poor Church of Scotland, keept him always near unto death, through his
not reguarding his own life, to supply the lack of other men's service to Christ
and to his Church: But, if thou be not such an one; then, as thou declares thy
self unworthy of what is here presented, so thou can not quarrel, if I be so
far of the same opinion with thee, though I dare not but wish thee to be
quickly of another mind. I know very well, this which is here hinted, of the
excellent and savourie Author, will be unsavourie to some; yea, will incense
not a few, who would be accounted Masters in Israel who have been busy (while
he was busied about the work of the Lord) in backbiting defaming and
reproaching him, and that, because he withstood them all to the face, wherein
they were, and are justly to be blamed: But, I must lay my reckoning, and have
done it, with that, and many such things: Only, by way of Apology, I must
tell such, that it is not my work, to engage with them, at present, on this
head; they may exspect to hear of that afterward; yet next, till more come, I
do not crave their liberty or pardon to say, that it shall be amongst the
posterity (as it is already with the more serious in this generation) a stain,
which shall never be wiped off the memory of the reproachers, when his
memory shall be blessed, and his cognizance, in the succeeding generations of
the Church, shall be, that, in the day when he fell a sleep, the Church of
Scotland was deprived of the most incomparably able, and the most absolutely
burning and shining light, belonging to that Church.

Secondly, it may be an appreciating, and endearing consideration, unto thee,
that this Treatise is not only the work of such a worthy workman, such a
Walker with God, such a Wrestler with him, such a Witness for his Master, and
such a beloved Disciple: But it is his last Work; this he wrote at the close of
a long walk with God: For, in his walk with him, and after him, having by
experience found, there neither would, nor could be courage, nor constancy nor
comfort in that course, except faith were acting vigourously, upon its blessed
object, that Fountain of all fullness, both for furniture and frame, both for
the light of direction and consolation, and for a measure of life, in order to
action, according to the emergent difficulties, and dangers, that are the
inseparable attendants, of the duties of the present day: He was taught, by the
things which he suffered from all hands, to make a blessed, and beneficial
virtue of this necessity, and so he held on in his way, (being thus upheld and
supported without turning aside to the right hand, or the left, and without
being diverted or deterred from following the Lord fully. The things that he
suffered of late, especially at the hands of Brethren, (their shame, but his
garland and glory) put him to study and learn the obedience of faith, wherein
he was helped, and taught to make such progress, and proficiency, as he
enjoyed a sweet serenitie and calm, in the midst of all these boisterous
blasts, which, out of all airths, blew in his face; but most bitterly out of
that airth, whence the storm could, or should least of all have been
exspected; so that, he did not only possess his soul in patience, as moved by
none of these things, which befell him, from foes or friends; but he was
quieted, quickened, and comforted in his conflictings; yea, he got meat out of
the eater, out of weakness he was made strong, and enabled to do exploits as
knowing his God: And finding the sweetness of this life, (otherwise of many
sorrows) and experiencing, how much he was enabled for all things, through
Christ strengthening him, he was moved and constrained, from the abundant
furniture, the sweet facility, yea the begun felicity he found in this life
and course, to point forth this way of pleasantness, and this path of peace,
to such as are put to walk in the midst of trouble; that so they may find, by
following this course, the same Light arising to them in Darkness; and the
same life, strength, courage and comfort, springing up and communicate unto
them, whereby they may be enabled to go foreward, through all difficulties,
all dangers, yea and all deaths. Hereby thou who, in the sight of difficulties,
and the sense of thy impotency, art made to say, What is my strength that I
should hope? Art taught to anwer by another question, Since he is strong, why
should I despond or doubt? For, all things are possible to him that believes,
all difficulties are superable to faith; for, faith is the engaging of an
Omnipotent God, for an impotent Creature, whereby the believer is more than a
conqueror: And because that stronger is he who is in the believer, than he
that is in the World, therefore, being, by him that dwells in him, strengthened
with all might, according to his glorious power, unto all patience, and long
suffering, with joyfulnesse, conquer he must; and this is the victory, whereby
he overcomes the World, even his faith; for faith's valor is, when
overpowered, to cast it self and its burden upon God, who performs all things
for the believer; and so (how weak so ever in the conflict; yet) by faith he
carries away the conquerours Crown in the issue, and is set down at last to
sing, Thanks be to God who has given me the victory. I say then, these are the
last words, of a great Student in this blessed and mysterious art, and of a
noble proficient in this happy study (for he speaks what he knovves, he
speaks what he has found and tasted) instructing thee, how thou may with
him hold on in thy way, and wax stronger and stronger; yea, how thou may
surmount all difficulties, otherwise insuperable, as carried upon eagles
vvings; and run, with the greatest burden upon thy back, and not be weary;
and walk, with the greatest load upon thy loins, and not be faint.
Naturalists, you know, and Mariners tell us of the flieing fish, which, when
pursued in the water by the Shark, flies up into the air, as a foul, and so
escapes the danger: But it can flee no longer in the air, than its fins
continue wet, and when these become dry it falls down again into the sea: A
lively emblem of a lively Christian who, when in hazard to be svvallovved up
of trouble, and devoured by the teeth of sharks, mounts up above them upon
eagles vvings, and so escaps them. But that which waters these vvings,
whereby faith flies, and that which gives it this vigor is fresh influence
of the Spirit: The supply of the Spirit of Christ quicken's and strengthen's
faith, and then failing and feeble faith renews its strength, as the eagle
renews her age: Its this which gives weak and withered faith a fresh,
vigourous and youthful greenness, and puts the believer in case both to say,
in God have I put my trust, I will not fear what flesh can do unto me; and
also, I am able for all things, through Christ who strenghtens me, or puts
power in me. Now the Authors scope and aim is to tell thee, and teach thee how
thou may be expert in this noble flight above trouble: (O happy dexterity
in a time of trouble upon earth, to know how to make use of faith's wings, in
flieing heaven height, and to be instructed in the exercise of that blessed
art, how to make use of thy faith, whereby thou pleases God in thy ordinary
walk, for performing these high heroic acts, in the day of the most dismal and
deep distress, whereby it is evident, that the sweetest ferenitie of soul, in
the sadest and most surprising of troubles, is possible to him that believes!)

Thirdly, That which does commend Books, and without an Epistle of of
recommendation, is an Epistle Commendatory sufficient, and makes all courting
of the Reader to their perusal, a superfluous complement, an unprofitable waste
of words, yea, and a profuse expense of precious time, is, That what the Author
writs be not only upright, and words of truth; But, that the truth treated of
be pertinent to the present day; and the duty pressed be that which must be
known, that it may be practiced, when upon the real and right performance
thereof depends, in a particular manner more than the believers peace; yea,
more than his soul, and eternal happiness can amount uuto; Viz. the glorifying
of God in the fires of fiery trials, and the bringing up a good report upon his
vvayes, by a practical proof, that there is a sufficiency of strength
communicable, whereby the weakest is made strong; and a singularity of
sweetness experienced, whereby a man, otherwise of sorrows can sing in the
ways of the Lord, even when his way lies through fire and water; so that he who
has taken hold of the path of life needs neither faint in the way, because of
his own weakness, there being everlasting arms underneath, strongly
supporting; nor yet turn aside out of it, when there is a lion in it; neither
weary in going foreward, through want of what is sweet and refreshing, since
there is a well spring of comfort insured unto the walker in these ways, so as
in the greatest pinch and penury, of all outward things* yea, when put to the
greatest pain, he has still everlasting consolation, and can glory in
tribulation, and rejoice, not only in the hope of the glory of God; but sing
as already in the suburbs of heaven, while under the shineings of his Masters
face, and the shedings abroad of his love in the heart. And according to this
rate and reckoning I may make bold to say; the matter herein treated of is of
that moment, import and present necessity, as to draw the eyes of all men
toward it, that their hearts may be cast into this mould, and they put in case
to practice accordingly; for, this was the happy Authors scope; for this he
wearied himself, and was at this piece of pains, (amongst his other eminent,
singularly useful and assiduous labourings, for the edification of the Church,
at home and abroad, the care of all which lay upon him) that thou might know
how to find ease, safety and refreshment, when there seems nothing in thy
life, but sorrow; and in thy cup, but gall and wormwood. In a word, the Author
has written the first and second part of the Life of Faith, that the Reader
may write the third part in his practice, by making his life a transumpt of
both, in a day when most are making shipwreck of faith and a good conscience;
and many* who once professed themselves Disciples, are now turning back: And,
Alas, I am afraid, it shall be observed, and said of them, they walked no more
with him; But, for their turnings aside unto these croaked courses, were led
forth with the workers of iniquity: So that this is a word in season seeing
besides the native, and intrinsic beauty of truth, that commends what is said
to thy peruseal* the adventitious beauty of seasonablenesse endears it to
thee; For he that writes it was a Preacher, who sought to find out acceptable
words, and the tongue of the learned was given unto him; For, what he writs
does witness, that his ear was vvakened to hear as the learned, that so the
might speak and write as the learned.

But, for a conclusion, I must tell thee, that the spiritually wise, and
zealous Author was not only driven to treat of this subject, because of the
present pressurs of the poor remnant, pressed out of measure, and beyond
strength, (though he had this also in prospect) that so they might be
quickened, quieted, encouraged and comforted, under these crushing calamities;
and might be instructed, how to glorify God, in this day of visitation; and
endure the worlds hatred and the vvorst that either enraged Adversaries, or
incensed friends can do, as seeing him who is invisible, and as believing,
that all these shall work together for their good, and as assured that they
shall turn to their salvation, through the intercession of the Mediator, and
the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ: But, more particularly considering
our way, and our proceeding from evil to worse; what high affronts have been
put upon our infinitely glorious Lord and Master; and how these have not only
not been resented and witnessed against, with a zeal, a fervor of pure zeal
proportioned to the furious fervidnesse, and unhallovved heat* of that
opposition to Christ, and hatred to the coming of his Kingdom in the World,
witnessed by the complex of the adversaries course and carriage: But, Alas, to
our shameful and astonishing faint (when called to have been valiant for the
truth, and to have acquit ourselves as the good soldiers of Jesus Christ,
ambitious to have been sacrificed upon the Interest of our Royal Master's
glorious Crown, and Prerogative) has been added, a drawing back; Courses have
been taken, patronized and applauded, partly in recto, partly in obliquo; And
that, by some whom least of all it became, and, if I may say so, from whose
hand Christ might have exspected a heroic opposition to these hell-black
driveings, whereby a defection (for in despite of all the palliatings, and
cunning plaisterings to hide this, now its manifest) has been, and is now
carried on: And there is no small rage witnessed, against all who essay to
discover our iniquity, to turn away our captivity: In a word, when he
considered all the dispensations of God, and took notice of the dispositions
and propensions of men, not of the multitude, but of Ministers, and Professors,
even of these who would monopolize to themselves the repute of zealous
according to knowledge, and the only wise men in the Church, who know the
times, and what the Israel of God ought to do* as if wisdom were either to
die with them, or to live only with the persons of their principles and
practices, he fell under the apprehension and persuasion (and who can escape
it) of a woeful day, coming upon the people of these practices; however a great
many have not only been putting far away the thoughts of this evil day, but have
been dreaming of a delivery: (ah how deep a delusion shall this be quickly
found!) And therefore that the poor remnant, who in some measure have escaped,
and have endeavored to keep themselves pure from the pollution of this
defection, may know what to do, and how to carry, in that day of vengeance of
our God^, when he shall draw his wheted, his glittering and furbished sword, to
avenge the quarrel of a broken and a burnt Covenant; and that sword shall
devour flesh, till the Land, defiled under the inhabitants thereof, by
transgressing the Law, changing the Ordinances, and breaking the everlasting
Covenant, be soaked with the blood of the men guilty of these abominations:
(and then, Alas, who shall live when the Lord does this?) I say, it was the
foresight of this woeful day which made this Seer draw these draughts, and lay
before thee these Directions, that thou may not be put out of frame and
posture; But may be strengthened, perfected and thoroughly furnished unto
every good work, when all things run in a confusion, and tend to ruin; and that
thou may know of a blessed, a secure and safe place of retreat, in that
dismal day, when it shall be said to the men with the slaughter weapon in
their hand, begin at my sanctuary, begin at the houses of Ministers and
Professors, (I know, it will be mistaken, if I say it; But yet, I cannot
forbear it: Alas? of all the men in the Nation, we may particularly meditat
terror; and I fear, it shall be seen and observed, escape who will, many of
us shall be taken; escape who will, Ministers, their wives and children, and
many professors, together with their wives and Children, shall not escape;) and
may be as Mount Sion, that cannot be moved; yea, and without fear, by living
the life of faith, though the earth should be removed, and the mountains
carried into the midst of the sea; though the waters thereofroar, and be
troubled, and though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof: There is a
refuge, and quiet resting place; there is strength, and a present help in the
time of such trouble; for God is then a rock of salvation, and a refuge to his
people, even in such tempests and troubles, when the Confusion and calamity
is so great and universal, as the sea seems to svvallow the mountains, and the
mountains seem to smother the sea: And the Authors design, in what thou art
here presented with is to teach thee, how to make this rock of ages all things
to thy self, by believing, and acting faith upon him, which he has made
himself to thee in the promise; that so thou may be safe and sing, because,
to thy security by him, there is unspeak able satisfaction to be had in him;
when the sinners in Zion shall be afraid, and fearfulness shall both surprise
the hypocrites, and many who have the root of the matter in them, because of
what they have been; and because of what they have unworthily done, and left
undone: he who follows this Course, shall dwell on nigh, his place of defense
shall be the munition of rocks his bread shall be given him, and his waters
shall be sure.

Believe it, my Brethren, all you have found is but the least part of what you
have to fear, yea of what is inevitable: The fury of the Lord is ready to be
poured forth as fire upon this generation; the day and hour approaches, wherein
no man shall have any thing left him to allay his sorrovv, or comfort him in
his anguish: But he who, being in Chist Jesus, is in case to oppose the
Comforts of the Holy Ghost, and that everlasting Consolation which is in
Christ, to present confounding and overwhelming calamities; the oppressions,
the horrid and bloody barbarities of enraged, cruel and blasphemous enemies,
incensed into a madness against the followers of the Lamb, and thristing
insatiably after the blood of the saints, who dare nor receive the mark of the
beast; the tumult of incensed friends, the clashings, the contendings, the
insurrections of brethren against brethren, will make our poor Land such a
weary Land, as men shall be weary of their lives, and wish to be gone from the
evil day; yea, shall either seek for death, and not find it, or in agony and
horror, shall be found of death, and cannot flee from it. But o how in that
day and hour will the sweet shadow, and the secure shelter of the rock of Ages
revive, and refresh such as have access with boldness and confidence, to lay
themselves down under it! they shall find it that place indeed where the weary
are at rest, they shall find that this is the rest alone, wherewith they may
cause their weary souls to rest, and that this is the refreshing too: such as
believe in Christ Jesus, and dwell in him by faith, and delight in him by love,
shall either not find the evil of these dreadful days, which are coming; or
what they sinde of it shall not much trouble them, because of what upmaking
they find in the fruition of him, who gives meat out of the eater and sweet
out of the strong, and who shall walk with them in the midst of the fiery
furnace, when we may exspect, it shall be made seventimes hoter than ever we
saw it. (For the Devil is come down, having great wrath, and the cry of our
crimson iniquities is gone up to Heaven.) O happy is the man, who by all his
distresses, is driven to seek, and make sure a dwelling, in the secret place of
the most high, and to take up his abode under the shadow of the Almighty; for,
such may sit down and sing, because safe, and say of the Lord, He is my refuge,
in him will I trust, as it is Psalm. 91: verse. 1, 2. O safe! o sweet refuge! he
can find no evil who is got in there, and no evil can find him: For he covers
the man, with his feathers who trusts under his wings, and his truth is his
shield and buckler: Would the man, that is escaped in thither, change his
dwelling place, and abode, for a Kings palace, while in this Pardise feasted
upon the peace of God; would he change his shelter for a strong tower: O! by no
means! the Universe cannot afford him such security and protection; neither
can it supply him, to a running over, with such plenty of sure and unspeakable
pleasure: O how excellent do these find his lovingkindenesse, who put their
trust under the shadow of his wings! As they shall find there a refuge, until
the calamity be overpast, so they shall be abundantly satisfied, with the
fatness which they shall find, in this house, and he shall make them drink of
the rivers of his pleasure; he shall feast them, while others famish, upon the
begun fruitious of himself, and while others are made to weep, and wring their
hands, over their broken and empty cisterns, they shall find, that with him
is the fountain of life, so that they may drink, and drink abundantly, and
thus forget their poverty, and remember their misery no more: Nay, this is
such a happy hiding place, as it is a complete dweling place; any hole or hold
that is a shelter and protection, in the day of a windy, storm and tempest, is
thought good; wars will commend the bottom of a dark dungeon, where a man is
as buried alive; yea a coal si^k (whereof some dear to God have in our days,
while the wicked were hunting for the precious life, been forced to make use as
a shelter) beyond and above a palace of pleasure; but o what a sure; what a
safe refuge is the rock of Salvation in time of trouble! O how do: the
environing wall^ of Christ's righteousness, and power, these everlasting arms
underneath, supporting, and round about surrouding and preserving, from the
tempest of wrath, that it cannot invade or break through make such accommodation
sweet and pleasant! But, when with all? this secret place of the most high has
not only all safety in it, but it has also all sweetness, all satisfaction
and all goodness laid up in it, for such as it hids: Its not only a strong
place, that has salvation for walls and bulwarks; But it is within this also,
that he shines and shows his marvelous kindness, Psalm. 31: verse. 20, 21.
there is not only a refuge here, but there is besides a rich treasure of all
goodness, laid up in this storehouse, to be laid out, and made forthcoming for
all who enter within the gates of this City: Its not only a house of war, but
a house of peace and pleasure; its within these walls that that peace of God,
which passes understanding, does guard the heart and mind; as its here, that
the place of their defense is the munition of rocks, so it is within this rock,
that their bread is given them, and their waters ate m^de sure; there is great
fatness within this strong hold for feasting souls, and a river of pleasure
for their refreshing: This is that unexhausted wellspring and fountain of
loving kindness, tender mercies and bounty, which glads perpetually the
hearts of all believers: This is the river that makes glade the whole City of
God: This is the very Fountain of life it self, thristing to be drunk of by
thristy souls; which is nothing else, but God himself imparting, and
communicating himself, to his empty and indigent people, and making up thereby
all their wants, according to his riches in glory; a saving God, satiating the
weary soul, and replenishing it with goodness; this River of God which is full
of water running in into the heart of him who has opened his mouth wide, till
it be filled, to a running over. O how do they, who find by tasting how good
he is; and what is to be had in the Kings chambers, pity the poor mistaken
World, that feed upon husks, while they are feasted with these royal dainties.
Alas! the World, who are strangers to their joy, knows little what a Kings
life they live; and how while in their wilderness lot, they feed upon Manna,
and are feasted with Angels food; they little believe, how the People of the
Lord, in their shuttings up, are so fatiat with goodness, as their hearts are
enlarged, while made glade by the light of his countenance lifted up upon them,
in their desirings for others, that it were with them in all things, as it is
with themselves, save as to their bonds: O what a blessed hiding place do they
find him! He is such a secure hiding place, as is also a most sweet beautiful
and refreshing resting place; a refuge, where repose and soul ravishment are
met and married together, without a divorce. Now, could a soul think of
changing his dwelling place, could he ever by choice and upon deliberation come
out, after he has enterd into these chambers, and shut the doors about him,
and has tasted and seen how good God is? No sure, it will not, it cannot think
on this without terror; it will not, after it has drunk of the river of his
pleasure, and is satisfied with the fatness of his house, leave these pure
springs, to drink of an impure pudle, O how easily must the soul be arrested,
where it is ravished in the fruition of what it finds.

Now, my dear and distressed Brethren Consider, that you may not be weary nor
fainted in your minds, in the day when the blast of the terrible one is as a
storm against the wall, what a complete hiding place you have from trouble,
and what a city of refuge you have to flee unto, Thou art my hiding place,
thou shall preserve me, from trouble, thou shall compass me about with songs
of deliverance, said the Psalmist Psalm. 32. And in this he is not alone, for
grace has made you sharers with him of this great goodness: The sure mercies
of David are made sure to all who have taken hold of the Covenant, so as
whosoever have fled into Jesus Christ for a refuge from wrath and for pardon of
sin, when pursued by justice, they may conclude this, as a sweet consequent of
it also, Thou art my hiding place from trouble; And whatever hardship you may
meet with, or whatever heaviness you may be under, yet you may conclude (O
comfortable conclusion) That the Lord will command his loving kindness in the
day time for you, and in the night his song shall be with you; yea, you shall
be compassed about with songs of deliverance, songs shall inviron you about,
and joy shall break in on every side; you shall be able to look no where (even
while all who look on may think your misery unmixed, and your sorrow without
the least alay of sweet) but you shall find matter of a song, and be able to
command a most sweet consort of music within your own soul, because both safe
and satisfied. The Lord will be a refuge, in times of trouble, Psalm. 9. and
they who know his name, which is a strong tower, may and will put their trust
in him. This then is the all of your business in order to support, saftie and
satisfaction; in order to your being in case, both to honor him, and to be
happy, in the midst of all possible sufferings for his sake; to betake
yourselves to him for shelter, and trust in the covert of his wings: And it is
for this end, that this teacher, taught of God, has left his Brethren in
affliction these directions, that as they may be persuaded to stand perfect and
complete in all the will of God; so amidst all their sufferings for his sake,
they may know how to have a sweet serenitie of soul, by acting faith upon him
as a full Fountain, sutably to all their needings, wantings, darknesses,
difficulties and dangers; and so be put in case to say, In the Lord have we
righteousness and strength; in him by whom we are justified, in him and by him
do we glory in tribulation, and are more than conquerours. Now, that you may
live more constantly with him and have a more comfortable and joyful life then
ever, in a fellowship with the Father and with his Son J. Christ; that you may
have grace for grace, yea an all of grace, whereby you may glorify your Father
which is in Heaven; adorn the doctrine of God the Savior; be enabled to fight
the good fight of Faith through Christ strengthening you, and endure to the
end, by the new supplies of the Spirit of Christ, as it is the aim of the
Writer of this treatise, who after all his sufferings and sorrows, (in which
and under which he behaved as a good soldier of Jesus r^ist; and was observed,
to have acquired a special dexterity, in making use of the shield of Faith) is
now got above them, and eternally comforted over them, in the sight and
fruition of that God, in whose service he lived, as devoted to his fear, and
died in that noble posture; So it is for you the earnest desire of his soul,
who is

Your poor Welwisher and Companion in tribulation.

THE LIFE of FAITH in times of PERSECUTION. PART. II.
THE INTRODUCTION.
A Word spoken fitly (says the Wise man Prove. 25. ver. 11.) or in its season,
or as it is in the Original, upon his wheels, is like apples of gold, in
pictures of silver; that is, is both pleasant and profitable. We began, in the
foregoing Treatise of this Subject to explain the nature of this Life, which
is to be had by faith, in a very sad and trying time; how and what way faith
interesteth a Soul in this Life; and how they should Act faith, who would
partake hereof, in a day of Difficulty and Temptation, wherein, because of
adhereing to Christ, and his Truth, the life of his people is made bitter unto
them, and they are exposed to many Troubles and sharp Exercises: And, for a
further Encouragment unto a faithful and steadfast adhereing to the Truth, in a
day of stormy Tempests, and fiery Trials, we mentioned some of those many
Considerations, which the Lord had left on record, in his word, that we through
patience and comfort of these Scriptures might have hope; and so might be
perfect, and of good comfort: such as

1. Gods promised Presence with them, in all their Trials, how sharp and
fiery so ever, the faith of which would make the weak and fainting soul become
courageous and valiant, as David.

2. Christ's Sympathy with them, in all their Distresses, Troubles,
Necessities, Dangers, Pains, Losses, Crosses, and Sufferings for Him, and His
Cause; which, if firmly believed, according to the s^re and undoubted grounds
thereof, could not but make them sing all their Sorrow out of countenance.

3. The Lord's Style of being a Redeemer; which if fled unto by faith, in an
evil day, would prove a strong Tour, to which they might ^un and be saife.

4. The promises, which are Many, Great, Glorious, Suitable, Pertinent,
Precious, Sure and Covenanted; and as these are made and registered of purpose,
that His People might have strong Consolation; so the Christian faith and
Improvement of them, in a day, when Dispensations would seem to cross them, is
both the special duty of His people, in that day; and also the only mean to
keep them in life, and hold their head above water, when called to swime
against both tide and stream; and the fixed faith of these would both stablish
and strengthen the tossed and weary soul.

5. Former Experiences of God's Care, Faithfulness, Tenderness, Readiness to
deliver and supply wants, to carry through Troubles, and at length, in due time,
to deliver out of them. These, when rightly improven, according to Gods
warrant, and Gospel grounds, will fournish a feast, whereupon faith may feed,
and the soul become strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might; and with
Courage, Hop and Confidence wade through a Sea of Affliction.

6. The quarrel and controversy is the Lords. A noble ground of courage,
comfort and confidence, when believed and rightly Improven.

7. Their Sufferings are the Sufferings of Christ, when they are for His sake,
and upon His account. And this cannot but be a well full of Consolation, unto
the poor afflicted and persecuted Child of God, when it is believed, and fed
upon by faith.

These I have (as the Lord was pleased to assist) spoken a little unto, in the
foregoing Piece, only in order to this End, That the faithful and honest
hearted Believer, who either has already met with, or lays his account to
meet with, Sufferings of one kind, or of another, in following his Lord and
Master, in the way of Truth and Righteousness, according to the Commands of
God, and Institutions of Christ, may in part be helped to know his own
strength, where the stock thereof is, and how he may improve the same to his
own rich advantage, in every Case and Condition, that the Lord, in his wise and
holy Providence, brings him into; and that so, as, notwithstanding of all the
fiery Trials, sharp Afflictions, sore Temptations, sad Exercises, cruel
Persecutions, continual Tossings and Harassings and pinching Straits and
Difficulties, that he may meet with, in his way, he may be helped unto a
Christian Deportment, a Rejoicing evermore, and a bearing of the cross with
Joy, Valor, Christian Courage, undaunted Resolution and a fixed Stedfastness
and Unmovablness in the way of the Lord: and so win to a life of faith, and
through faith, in the midst of all the deaths, that he is to rancountre with,
in his way, to the everlasting possession of that Crown of life, and of the
Inheritance, that is Incorruptible and Undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in heaven for them, who are kept by the power of God, through faith
unto Salvation.

I shall now, in the prosecution of this Matter for the end mentioned, mentione
and speak a little unto some other Considerations: such as.

CONSIDERATION. VIII. It is the decreed will of God.
IF the afflicted soul, that is tossed with Tempests, and not comforted, and is
like to sinck under the heavy burden of Affliction, Temptation and Tribulation,
were considering aright, how that affliction comes not forth of the dust, nor
troub^e springs not out of the ground, Job 5: 6. that is, That afflictions
come not by mere Chance, neither have they all their Original from Inferior
agents, carnal and worldly Instruments; but there is an higher hand to be
observed and espied in all, that the men of this world, the Instruments of
Satan, devise and execute, and that there is an higher Resolution, Decree and
Determination, to be heeded, than what is taken by man. If the afflicted soul
(I say) were considering this, he would find himself called to far other
Thoughts and Meditations, than he has, or can have, when his mind is only
poreing upon the secondary and far inferior rise of his trouble, to wit, as
from men. We see what course Peter took Act. 4: 27, 28. When thinking upon the
rage of Enemies against our Lord, and against them, his Servants, for his sake;
for of a truth (says he) against thy holy Child Jesus, whom thou have
anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilat, with the Gentiles, and the people of
Israel were gathered together; for to do whatsoever thy hand and the Counsel
determined before to be done. So Act. 2: 23. He tells them, who had been
Instrumental, in killing of the Lord of life, that he was delivered by the
determinat Counsel and fore knowledge of God, otherwise they had had no power
over him. It is good and necessary for Believers, to be always, and then in
particular, fixed in the faith of this, That nothing comes to pass by chance
or fortune (as we s^y:) but that all events, that fall out or come to pass,
are from Eternity, freely and unchangably Ordained and Appointed by the
unalterable Determination and Decree of the holy and wise Counsel of God: for
He works all things after the Counsel of his own will, Ephesians 1: 11. There is
an unalterable Decree past in the grand Court of Parliament in heaven,
concerning all Events, that fall out in the world; even such, as we would think
to be most uncertain and contingent, as events determined by lot, Prove. 16:
33. The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole disposing thereof is of the
Lord. What more uncertain, than that the soldiers should not handle Christ,
after the same manner, that they handled the other two, who were crucified with
him: and yet they broke not his bones, as they did the bones of the rest; and
they pierced him, which they did not to the rest; and that because, it was
determined of God, that not a bone of Christ should be broken, and also that he
should be pierced; and that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, where mention
was made of these determinations, as we see in the Evangelists, besides many
other mere (to us) accidental things, that befell him.

I know what difficulties some move about this matter, in sinful events, as all
the Trouble, Affliction, and Persecution are, which the people of God meet
with, at the hands of wicked Instruments, upon the account of their adhereing
unto Truth, and following duty: But I shall purposely wave all disputs, at this
occasion, and only hold forth the Truth, and thereafter show, how it ought to
be improved unto advantage, in such exercising times.

1. Whatever Affliction, Cross, Trouble, Suffering, Tria^ or Tribulation, any
of his are put to endure, in following of duty, it is not to be looked on, as
an accidental, fortuitous event, or chance; but as determined of the Lord, who
has in his Sovereign wisdom and Counsel thought fit, to have it so; and
ordered it, that it should be so, that his people in all ages, should meet with
Opposition, Contradiction, Affliction, Crosses, or Persecution, at the hands of
one or other: so that the Substance of the Trial and Exercise is to be looked
upon, as ordained and determined of Jehovah: Such a determination, as this,
must be the ground of that Act. 14: 22. -- And that we must through much
tribula^ion enter into the Kingdom of God: And of that, which Paul says Act 20:
23. though he knew not in particular what evils should befall him at Jerusalem,
whither he was now going; yet he knew, that bonds and affliction did abide him;
saying, Save that the Holy Ghost witnesses in every City, saying, that bonds
and affliction abide me. It was determined then that these, as pages of honor,
should attend him, and should wait for his landing in every place he came unto.
And yet more clearly he tells the Thessalonians, 1 Epist. 3: 3. That they knew,
that he and the rest were appointed hereunto, that is, to afflictions; adding
Verse. 4. For verily, when we were with you, we told you before, that we should
suffer tribulation, even as i^ came to pass, and ye know. Peter also, in his
first Epistle, minds those, he writteth unto, of this, several times, and
points them unto this will of God, that they might eye it, that is, His
determining, decreeing, and appointing will 1 Pet. 3: 17. For it is better, if
the will of God be so, that y^ suffer for welldoing, etc. And again Chap. 4:
19. Wherefore, let them that suffer, according to the will of God, etc. From
all which Testimonies, we see, that there is a Will, Determination, Resolution
and Decree of the Ancient of days past, anent the Afflictions, Trials,
Tribulations and Sufferings of his people.

2. Not only is there a Decree and Determination past, in the Court of heaven,
about the Sufferings of the people of God, in the gross (as it were) and in
general: but also the special Kind of the Cross, or Affliction, that they meet
with, or the special manner, or quality thereof. God has not only decreed,
that this or that man, this or that follower of Christ, shall meet with some
Cross and some Affliction, or other; but he has determined the species and
kind thereof; to wit, whether it shall be a cross as to his Body, or as to his
Estate, or as to his Spirit; or as to several or all of these together; whether
he shall be put to suffer Fineings, or Confinments, or Imprisonments, or Exile,
or Death; whether Scourgings, Pains and Torments, or Harassings, Fears,
Perils, or what ever it be. Paul knew, that bonds did abide him. The Lord
determined, that Abraham's Posterity should be strangers, in a Land, that was
not theirs, and be made to serve Genesis 15. verse. 13. He determined that Satan
should cast some of the Church of Smirna in prison, and that they should have
tribulation, Revel. 2: 10. We know also, what was particularly threatened
against David, 2 Samuel 12: 11.

3. As the Lord decrees the Kind and Species of the Trial; so likewise he
passes a Determination, concerning all the Ingredients and Parts of the same.
The trial possibly is not one single Exercise, but one complicated, and
compounded of many; a cup not of one pure liquor, but mixed of many
ingredients; but of how many Ingredients so ever it be compounded, and of how
many parts so ever it consist; yet all of them are particularly and
determinatly decreed and appointed of the Lord. Many bitter ingredients were in
the cup, which Christ got to drink; but all and every one of them fell under a
plain and peremptour determination of heaven. They were gathered together
(says Peter, in the fore cited place) to do whatsoever thy hand and thy
Counsel determined to be done: there was a whatsoever here: Nothing was or
could be done, but what this Counsel of God had Determined to be done; and all
that was done, was Determined by this Counsel.

4. The Degree, and Measure of the affliction, that His people are to meet
with, is as particularly determined, as any circumstance thereof else: we know
what Ioseph's Brethren had intended against him, when thy said, come let us
slay him, and cast him into some pit, Genesis 37: 20. But God had not intended so
much; and therefore they were made to change their mind, and to sell him to
the Midianites, Verse. 28. And though thereby they thought they were quite of
him for ever, and that he should remain a slave to his dying day; yet we know
it came otherwise to pass; they thought evil; but God meant it unto good Genesis
50. verse. 20. As the Lord had another end before his eyes, than they had; so he
had determined, that they should not reach their end, nor do any more, than
should contribute unto His end. The King of Assyria had it in his heart, to
destroy and cut off Nations not a few. But God had another end in raising him
up to be a scourge: and therefore suffered him not to do all he would, Esai.
10: 6, 7, 12. Upon this ground it is, that he debateth with his people in
measure, when he sends forth his rod; and stays his rough wind in the day
of his east wind Esai 27. 8.

5. The Season and time of the affliction and trial is likewise determined of
the Lord, which is another Circumstance, sometime very considerable, and
weighty. He has determined the minute of time, when it shall begin, and with
what occasion it shall be trysted. He determined the precise time, when the
Messiah should be cut off, after threescore and two weeks, Dan. 9 verse. 26.

6. The Duration of the Trial is also determined by the unchangable decree of
God, to a day, yea, to an hour and a minute. He decreed the length and
duration of the affliction, that was to come upon the posterity of Abraham,
four hundereth and thirty Years Genesis 15: 13. Exodus 12. verse. 13. And at the
end of these Years, even the self same day, it came to pass, that all the
hosts of the Lord went out from the Land of Egypt, where these Years of
servitude were to end. So he determined seventy Years for the captivity of
Judah in Babylon, Ier. 25: 12. and 29: 10. Dan. 9. verse. 2.

7. He has also determined who shall be the Instruments of the trouble, He
said, he would hiss for the fly, that is in the uttermost part of the rivers
of Egypt; and for the be, that is in the Land of Assyria, Esai. 7: 18. He
appointed the ruin of Judah to be by the Babylonians, or Caldeans. He
determined to raise evil against David, out of his own house, 2 Samuel 12: 11.

These particulars might have been further enlairged, and confirmed; but
because I suppose the truth herein will not be denied, or questioned by the
Lords people, it will be much more useful to speak a few things, concerning the
right use making of this Truth, That there is a Decree past in heaven from all
Eternity, touching our Sufferings, and all the Ingredients and Circumstances
thereof, concerning the manner and way of our troubles, the time when, and how
long, the Instruments by whom, and all the other particulars considerable in
the same: all are fixed by a peremptour and unalterable Determination.

Now the faith and believing Consideration of this would still, and calm the
risings of our proud spirits, and the insolent stirrings of our corruptions,
when the Affliction, that is bitter and unpleasant to the flesh, is lying on;
and make us patiently endure all, and sweetly submit to all, saying, the will
of the Lord be done: Let him do what seems him good; as good old Eli said,
when he heard the determination of the Lord concerning him, and his family,
wherein were many sad and bitter ingredients, as may beseen 1 Samuel 2. and 3.
Chapters: and go^d is the ^rd of the Lord, as good Hezekiah said, when he heard
by Esaias, that the Lord had determined, that all that was in his house, and
all which his fathers had laid up in store, until that day, should be carried
to Babylon, nothing should be left; and of his sons, that should issue from
him, which he should beget, should they take away, and should be Eunuchs in the
palace of the King of Babylon Esai. 39. verse. 6, 7, 8. Whether.

(1.) Our thoughts be troubled at the kind of the Cross or Affliction, which is
upon us; so as we are ready to say, had the Lord sent any other rod or
affliction upon us, than this, wherewith we are exercised, we could better have
born it, Had he visited me (will one say) with Poverty, and not with Disgrace,
I could have born it: and another, had my affliction been any other, than just
what it is, I could have comported with it; but the consideration of this, that
God has decreed, that that, even that same cross, should be thy cross, and no
other, will make the Soul sit down and say, seeing the Lord has from all
eternity appointed and shapen-out this, even this, and none else for me, I must
bear it, and submit to his will, who is wiser, than I am, and sees further
than I do, and knows what is good and best for me, better than I my self do,
His holy will be done. This is a grief, and I must bear it, says Jeremiah Chapter
10: 19.

(2.) If our heart be troubled and vexed at the Consideration and thoughts of
the particular Ingredients in and Parts of our mixed and compounded cup of
affliction, whereof every one seems more bitter than another; and we be
saying, we are compassed with evils on all hands* trouble of Body is upon us,
and trouble of Mind also; we are wrestling with pains inward and outward, with
poverty, with disgrace, with perils and hardships; and all at once: This will
compose our spirits, if we call to mind, that God has willed and decreed all
this; He thought good to have it so; He has ordered, as a wise Physician, all
the Ingredients of our bitter cup: and what have we to say against him? Job, we
know, had many a bitter ingredient in his cup, and this compesceth the
tumultuatings of his spirit Job 23: 13, 14. But he is in one mind, and who can
turn him? And what his soul desires, even that he does. For he performs the
thing, that is appointed for me; and many such things are with him. As if he
had said, what He will do, He will do; none can turn him, or make him change
his mind; He performs what He has appointed and decreed for me; and He can
do much more yet, and what know I but he shall do much more against me, than he
has done? This did so far put him from quarrelling at what was done; that he
was troubled and afraid at the thoughts of the Majesty and Soveraignity of this
great King, who does what he will; and so might add yet more ingredients in his
cup, as long as he was left breathing, and thereby make his case worse.

(3.) If the thoughts of the exceeding great weight and measure of the Trouble
vex us; this may counter-work that, and calm us: if we should suppose, that
God does not measure-out our calamity by drachmes and unces, but by pounds and
ston weights; and thereupon cry out, that our Trouble is greater, than we can
bear, and give way to sinful murmurings and complainings: we should do well, in
that case, to call this to mind, That all the doses are weighed and appointed
for us from eternity, He has measured every scruple or grain weight thereof;
and what he has appointed for us, we must have; He knows best, what dose or
measure of such or such a simple, and what weight or quantity of all together
will work best on our humors: and this will help to calm our spirits;
knowing that He has determined all things according to infinite wisdom,
according to the Counsel of his own will; and more than he has appointed shall
no man be able to inflict. He leaves not the measuring and weighing out of the
ingredients of our calamity, unto men or enemies: but himself does it, by an
unalterable Decree, that all the rage of Enemies can not change as to one ase,
or in the hundereth part of one drachme. We hear what Christ said Ioh. 18: 11.
The cup, which my father has given me, shall I not drink it? It is true, when
the dregs of this cup, wherein was the Curse, was presented to him, his holy
humane Nature, in a sinless manner, scunnered at it Mat. 26: 39. If it be
possible, let this cup pass from me: Yet, as sweetly acquiescing in the Lord's
Determination, he adds, Nevertheless, not my will, but thy will be done. And
again Verse. 42. O father, if this cup may not pass away from me, except I
drink it, thy will be done. Bitter and sharp was this cup, even to the highest
degree; yet he viewed the will of God, appointing that he should drink it; and
calmly submitted, and said, not as I will, but as thou will.

(4.) It is true, the Consideration of the season, in which we are exercised
and trysted with such a trouble, may add grief to our sorrow; and we may say
in our vexation, had this Trouble come upon us, at any other time, we could
have better com^orted therewith; had it either come sooner, or later, we had
been more able to have born it; but as it is come precisely at such a nick of
time, it becomes a double burden unto us: Yet it will help to calm us, and
compesce our turbulent spirits, to remember, that He, who knows all seasons,
and all times, has chosen this and no other, for the particular season,
wherein we shall meet with such trials; and it could be no otherwise, than he
has willed; the trials behoved to come, at that very nick and minute, and no
other: an ancient Determination passed thereupon, and no power under heaven
could alter it, no not for one hour or minute.

(5.) When our thoughts are busied about the Duration of the Trouble; this
Consideration of a Divine determination, past also thereupon, will contribute
to our settling. We are ready to cry out, when afflictions lie heavy upon our
loins, oh will they ever come to an end: shall we never be redeemed herefrom?
Shall we never see a good day again? And we are ready to conclude, that our
hopes are perished, and we are cut off for our parts: as Hezekiah said when
trouble lay upon him Esai. 38: 10, 11, 12, 13. I said in the cutting off of my
days, I shall go to the gates of the grave: I am deprived of the residue of
mine years. I said, I shall not see the Lord, the Lord in the Land of the
living, I shall behold man no more with the Inhabitants of the world; mine age
is departed, and is removed from me, as a shepherds Tent. He will cut me off
with pining sickness, from day even to night will thou make an end of me. I
reckoned till morning, that as a lion so will he break all m^ bones: from day
even to night, will thou make an end of me. The affliction, through the
distemper of our spirits, raises such a mist before our eyes, that we can not
see through the dark face of the dispensation. How often do we limite the holy one
of Israel, and say, if he come not before such a month, or such an year, we
may conclude, that he will not come at all, and so need wait for him no
longer: and the oftener, that our foolishly set and prefixed Periods go over,
and the storm continues, or grows, our fainting and despondence grows:
especially when we consider, the evil disposition, rage and cruelty of Enemies:
and see how their strength grows, and providence seems to smile upon them.
But now the faith of this, that He, who has set bounds to the raging of the
sea, saying, hithertil shall thou come and no further, has also bounded and
limited the time, how long such a Calamity, or Tri^l shall endure, will sedate
our minds, and keep us calm, and free of that discomposure of Spirit, that
the thoughts of the restless Malice, incessant Rage, and cruel Hatred of the
Enemies will and do usually cause; for do they what they can, God will observe
the Periods prefixed by himself: his thoughts take place in all generations And
when our hearts are disquieted at the thoughts of the long continuance of the
Affliction, the calling of this to remembrance, That the only wise God has
determined all the hours and minutes of its continuance, for his own holy
ends, will prompt us to say, we cannot strive against the Almighty. Let us
therefore wait His time, in patience; all our struggling will but perplex our
selves the more; and all our endeavors to get free, will but contribute to our
further entanglement: we shall not be able, do what we can, to Anticipate his
day; and therefore it is best for us to mind the duty of the day, and lay
aside all thoughts of using any unlawful means for our outgate, and wait in
patience, until his good time come.

(6.) As also the thoughts of the Instruments of our trouble and calamity may
sadly affect us, as we see it did David Psalm. 55: verse. 12, 13, 14. It was not
an Enemy, that reproached me, then I could have born it; neither was it he
that hated me, that did magnify himself against me, then I could have hid my
self from him. But thou, a man, mine equal (or a man according to my rank) my
guide, and mine acquaintance. We took sweet Counsel together, and walked unto
the house of God in company. See Ps. 41: 9. So many, upon this account, may
say, If my trouble were brought unto me by any other hands, and instruments, I
could comport the better with it; but when it is caused by such an one, my near
Relation, mine obliged friend, of whom I least expected any such thing, and
unto whom I could have yielded up my self, and all I had, how heavy must it
needs be unto me? But the Consideration of this, That so it has seemed good
unto the only wise God, and Supreme Sovereign, may and should, and, when
rightly believed and improven, will cause us lay our hand upon our mouth, and
say, The good will of the Lord be done; Has he determined, that such an one,
and not another, shall occasion all my grief and sorrow; shall be
isntrumental in all my Calamities? good is the will of the Lord: though I
would think, that if I were persecuted and troubled by others, it would be
better, and I could bear it better; yet seeing Infinite wisdom has determined
this circumstance of my calamity; why should not I acquiesce?

Thus we see, how this Consideration, rightly improven and duly believed, will
help such, as are under Affliction, Trouble, or Calamity, to a sweet, quiet,
submissive and patient life: for

1. By this means, the soul will be freed from sinful murmurings, grudgings,
frettings and repineings, at this or that Particular, this or that Instrument,
or this or that other Circumstance, of its present Distress and Calamity; in
that hereby it will be made to see, that its murmuring thus is against the
Lord, and against his Soveraignity, who determines what he will, according to
the good pleasure of his will, and is to give an account of his ways and
determinations to none.

2. This will help unto a Christian Patience under all, that God thinks good
to lay on; and to endure patiently without wearying until his good time come:
for they will easily see, that it is not for them to strive against the
Almighty; or to think to cause Him alter his Purposes and Resolutions, seeing He
is of one mind, and none can turn him.

3 This will teach Christians sweetly to comply with all the holy
determinations of God, concerning their sufferings, and to say heartily and
cheerfully, The will o^ the Lord be done; as those did, who were persuading
Paul not to go up unto Jerusalem, and found that he would not be persuaded.
Act. 21: 14. O what a sweet life is this, to be sailing with the stream of
God's eternal Determinations; and to be embracing and kissing every
Dispensation, we meet with, how sharp and bitter so ever it be, because it is
Determined by the absolute Sovereign and Lord of Heaven and Earth! How light
and easy does this make every load, that is lying upon our shoulders, when we
bear it as bound upon us by an everlasting Decree?

4. This will help unto a life of practical Praising of the Lord, as Absolute
Sovereign: for when the event is submitted unto and sweetly embraced, because
determined by a fixed Decree of the Lord Jehovah, the soul does thereby
declare, and acknowledge His Soveraignity; and upon the matter, by practice, in
submission, even though silent, does Celebrat the praises of that Absolute
Sovereign, who is God over all, blessed for ever; while as such, upon the
contrary, who fret and rebel against the Lord's Determinations, by refusing to
give that sweet hearty submission, that is requisite, do give a practical
declaration of their not believing and acknowledging of Him to be the
Sovereign Lord of all.

5. The thoughts of this will free the soul of many heart-perplexing
soul-distracting, disquieting and renting thoughts; such as these; If this had
not been, or if I had not been in such a place, or had not done such or such a
thing. I had been free of all this; so that every thought of every thing, that
had but a far-off and remote tendency unto the occasioning of the trouble, is
enough to distract, disquiet and perplex the man (I do not mean here sins
occasioning, or bringing on of trouble; for these should be thought on and
mourned for; which will not mar this suitable frame of Spirit; but other
things, about which our thoughts are more readily conversant, in such a time:)
and beside these thoughts of what has been done, or not done, in times by
past, there are other thoughts of what may yet further be, and how that may be
prevented, which may not a little unhinge and disquiet the soul: Now from all
such is the soul freed, by the believing thoughts of God's eternal Decree
concerning their trouble, and all the way of its coming to pass, and the
occasion, and all other circumstances, how and by whom, it was brought on. Here
the soul will find such a satisfying subject of Meditation, that other
disquieting thoughts will be quickly hushed to the door, and the soul will
find no leisure for them.

6. Hereby will the soul be kept from poreing upon, and too much eying of the
motions of the under-wheels of Creatures, and instruments of the trouble and
calamity, which will rather cause a reeling, and giddiness, and hence
occasion a staggering and falling, than any stayedness or establishment;
because hereby the soul will be brought to fix its eye upon that* one wheel of
the Lords, that moves evenly fixedly, and invariably, in the midst of all the
wheels of men, the motions whereof are so irregular, eccentrick, and so
opposite and contrarious one to another.

7. Hereby is the believer helped to win to that life of tasting and feeling
the sweet of that serenity of soul, that a filial disposition possesses the
man of, by an holy, humble, son-like submission and subjection of soul unto the
good will of the Lord: When this submission is yielded unto, the Supreme will
of God, upon Christian Grounds and Considerations, the soul is in a manner
brought into the suburbs of heaven, and enjoys an heavenly serenity and peace
of mind, whereby it is in case to sing under all its sorrowful pressures, and
the confused noise of such as are the Agents and Instruments of all the
calamity; and the believing thoughts of the Sovereign will of God, ordering
and appointing all, is a singular help hereunto.

8. The believer is hereby put without the reach of many a Temptation, and is
strengthened against them; whether to use unwarrantable means to be delivered
from the Trouble and Distress incumbent; or to prevent, what may be further
imminent, and is to be feared; or to vent his displeasure against the
Instruments of all the calamity; or the like: for here will be an antidote at
hand, The Lord orders and disposes of all things, according to His own holy
and wise will: and nothing can come to pass, but what He has decreed; and
what He has decreed shall come to pass, and that when, and neither sooner nor
later, and how, and by whom He has decreed, and no otherwise; what have I
then more to do, but to mind my present duty, and welcome what the Lord's will
determines for me, will he say.

There are these, Three particulars, which set home this Consideration, and
promoveth thereupon this work of Submission, and hearty acquiesceing unto the
will and determination of God; and which should be thought upon to this end.

1. The Lord is in all his Determinations and Decrees unalterable, as he is
unchangable in himself, there being no variablness or shadow of turning with
Him Iam. 1. verse. 17. And if it were otherwise, He could not be infinitely Wise
in himself, or not Almighty, and Irresistible by others, for any alteration,
that might be in the determinations of his will, must either flow from new and
second thoughts in himself: and so He were not Infinitely wise, or from
inability to effectuat or through his former Determinations, and therefore must
take new measures; and so He were not Almighty. Now the Soul should think with
it self, Should I wish, or desire, that the Lord's will were not done, that He
should not be able to do what soever he will Psalm. 115: 3. and 135 6 or that
any of his everlasting Purposes and Decrees should fail, and not take effect;
or that He should alter his purposes and lay his conclusions of new? Then I
should wish, He were not God; for the true God is a God that changes not Mal.
3: 6. and a God, whose Purposes cannot fail; for they have a hand with them to
effectuatall Esai. 14: 26. as he purposes, so shall it stand Esa 14: 24. Who
can disanull what He purposes? Verse. 27. And what he purposes, he will also
do Esai. 46: v. 11. So that if I should once imagine, that His decrees could
alter upon one account, or other, I should in so far deny the true and living
God. And if one of his purposes could alter, why not another? and how then
should I think, that his purpose according to election should staud? Romans 9:
11. and 8: 28. Ephesians. 1: v. 11. and 3: 10, 11. 2 Timothy 1: 9. And if there were
the least ground of doubt here, where were all my Hop, Comfort and Confidence?
Therefore would the believer say; Because it is my joy and comfort, that His
purposes fail not, and that He is a God that cannot change, but whom he loves,
he loves to the end; therefore will I with joy subject my self unto all his
decreed Dispensations toward me, how hard so ever they may seem to flesh;
because He is Unchangable and Almighty, and thereupon hangs all my Hope and
Salvation.

2. All his determinations and decrees are for his own glory. He works all
things, according to the Counsel of his own will, that we should be to the
praise of his Glory Ephesians. 1: 11, 12. He makes all things for Himself Prove.
16: 4. Hence the believing soul reasons with himself, Shall I stand in the
way of God's getting his glory? He has determined this to befall me, for his
own glory; and should I wish it to be otherwise? Should I not comply with his
holy design of glorifying himself, by this his Dispensation toward me? Should
I not acquiesce in all the means and methods, His infinite wisdom has thought
upon, and He, in infinite wisdom, has determined to make use of, for
glorifying of his own name? Should not I be satisfied with his being exalted?
Nay, should not this Consideration, that hereby God will be glorified, make
mine heart sing under all my sorrow: and cause me conclude all my meditations
on His dispen fations toward me, as Paul did his Discourse Romans 11. For of
him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever,
Amen. v. last.

3: As all that God has decreed to do in the world, is for his own glory; so
all that he has determined to do with, or to bring upon His own people, who
are called according to the election of grace, is for their good, according to
that Romans 8: 28. And we know, that all things work together for good, to them
that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose. Hence the
Godly Soul can reason, Shall I be against mine own good and advantage? Shall I
wish that things were otherwise, than they are, when the only Wise and Gracious
God has ordered and ordained them so, for my good? He has made many noble
connexions, in his Purposes, that I see not: and seeing He has said, that all
things work together for good to such as love Him, and are called according to
his purpose, why should I not believe against sense and carnal reason? Am I
able to search out the Almighty unto perfection? Can I find out all the depths
of his Counsel and Wisdom? Shall I think then that he can bring about my good
and felicity, by no means, and dispensations, but such as I am satisfied with?
Shall I measure the unsearchable riches of his Wisdom and Council thus? Shall I
rebel against his Dispensations, and fret and murmr against Him, who deals
thus and thus with me. because I see not, how He can bring about my everlasting
advantage hereby? No: Nay rather because his word is true, believing the same,
I will embrace the sharpest of Dispentions, He is pleased to tryst me with, and
waire to see how infinite Wisdom shall make good, what Truth it self has said:

Thus we see, how the Consideration of the decreed will of God can preserve the
Christians life, in worst of times.

CONSIDERATION. IX. It is the Commanding will of God.
CHristian souls have much Peace, and joy, when they are going about a
commanded duty, and they know upon good grounds, that what they are going about
is a commanded duty, notwithstanding of the many Hazards, Difficulties, Pinches
and Distresses, they are put to, in the prosecution thereof: and when they are
called to suffer, and to lie under outward Trouble and Affliction, are
oftentimes under much sadness of heart, and disquietment of mind, upon this
account, among others, That they know not, if their suffering be according to
the will of God, and whether or not they have ground to expect God's
approbation; which if they saw clear ground to believe and look for, they would
be no more disquieted, than when going about other clear and necessary duties.
It will be useful therefore and advantageous to such, as meet with a suffering
life, to know some thing, whereby they may come to understand, how and what way
they may, or may not be called of God to suffer.

I grant, that Suffering, as it is a mere passion, does not properly fall under
a command: But the Choosing, Embracing, patient, cheerful, courageous and
Christian Enduring of Sufferings and Affliction fall under a command; and this
is all the subject of our present inquiry, That we may know, when we are to
judge our selves called of God to choose Affliction with the people of God, and
to undergo it with courage and patience, knowing that in so doing, we are
approven of God.

In order therefore to the clearing up of this, we would know, That as there is
a time, when God calls to valient acting and appearing and hazarding lives
and fortunes, and all for Him, and His interest, and to jeopard our lives, on
the high places in the field, and to come forth to the help of the Lord against
the mighty, as we would escape the Curse of Meroz Judge. 5: 23. So there is a
time, when He, who only can change seas^ns and times, calls for Valiant
Suffering, and to become a companion in Tribulation, and in the Kingdom and
Patience of Jesus Christ. And this appears from these particulars.

1. There is a particular gift of God for this Suffering, as we see Phil. 1.
verse. 29. Unto you it is given not only to believe on him, but also to suffer
for his sake. And when God gives a gift for such a peculiar work, it says,
there is a time and season, when that gift is to be employed and exercised, for
he gives not gifts to lie by us and rust, or to be hid in a napkin under
ground.

2. There are peculiar duties called-for at the hands of Christians, relative
only or mainly unto a suffering time; as Taking up the Cross, Patience, Being
faithful unto the death Revel. 2: 10. Holding fast Christ's name, and not
denying his faith Verse. 13. Keeping Christ's works unto the end Verse. 26.
Keeping of Christ's word, and not denying his name, Revel. 3. v. 8. Keeping the
word of Christ's patience V. 10. Keeping fast and not casting away our
Confidence Heb. 10: 35. and the like: All which say, there is a time for
suffering, and witnessing to the truth by suffering.

3. ^he many motives and encouragments given to bear up the hearts of
sufferers, say, that the people of God have such a lot to look for, and must
lay their account to meet with Trials and Tribulations for adhering to truth.

4 The many Instances and examples of valiant and steadfast Sufferers before us,
recorded for our Instruction, and Information, say, there is such a season,
wherein such, as would stand fast in the faith, can look for nothing but sharp
trials for the Name of Jesus.

5. The forewarnings given to such, as will follow Christ, to take up withal
their cross Mat. 16: 24. And that through much tribulation we must enter into
the Kingdom of God, Act. 14: 22. And that all who will live godly, in Christ
Jesus, shall suffer persecution 2 Timothy 3. verse. 12. That we should not think
strange concerning the fiery trial, which is to try us, as though some strange
thing happened unto us 1 Pet. 4. verse. 12 These and the like confirm this matter.

6 Christ, the Captain of our Salvation, was made perfect through sufferings
Heb. 2: 10. and He himself has told us Mat. 10: 24, 25 That the Disciple is
not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord, and that, it is enough
for the Disciple that he be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord: and
that, if they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more
shall they call them of his household? And we are bidden look unto Jesus, the
Author and finisher of faith, who, for the joy that was set before him, endured
the cross, despising the shame: And to consider him, that endured such
contradiction of sinners against himself, lest we be wearied and fainte in our
minds, Hebr. 12: 2, 3. And we are told 1 Petr. 2: 21. That even hereunto we
are called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we
should follow his steps. And again Chap. 4: 1. For as much as Christ has
suffered for us in the flesh, we should arm our selves likewise with the same
mind. All which and the like say, that a Suffering lot is abiding the followers
of Jesus; and that it is the will of God they should prepare for it.

7. Some special works there are, which God has upon the wheels to perfect,
and these call for a suffering season; such as the trial and discovery of the
sincerity of His grace in His own, as also the exercise and promoving thereof;
for tribulation works patience, and patience experience, and experience hop.
Romans 5: 3, 4. So the trying of says works patience Iam. 1: 3. See also 1
Pet. 1. verse. 7. and 4: 12. As also the discovery of the rottenness and
hypocrisy of a Professing generation, who want root, and so must wither, when
the scorching sun of persecution arises Mat. 13: 5, 21. For this is as a small
sieve So also the discovery of the Maliciousness and wickedness of Enemies,
which lay hid and latent, before it got a seasonable vent, when their hour and
power of darkness comes. Luke 22: 53.

8. This may be confirmed by express Testimonies of Scripture, such as 1 Pet.
2. verse. 19, 20, 21. For this is thank worthy (or grace) if a man for
conscience toward God, endure grief, suffering wrongfully. -- But if when ye
do well and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable (or grace,
or favor) with God. For even hereunto were ye called. It must then be a
commanded duty, and obedience to a command, that rendereth a man gracious and
acceptable with God. So 1 Pet. 4: 19. Wherefore let them that suffer, according
to the will of God. etc. this is according to his will of command. So Heb. 10:
39. The will of God, there mentioned, is, as we explained it, his will of
command, which was done by enduring patiently, for the Profession of the truth,
a whole fight of afflictions; their patient suffering being noble service to
their Lord and Master. By all which we see, that there are some times and
seasons, wherein the people of God are called to suffer.

If it be enquired. When is that Time and Season, wherein the people of the
Lord are called to suffer? The answer is easy: to wit, when the red horse
(spoken of Revel. 6: 4.) is sent forth, and power is given to him, that sits
thereon, to take peace from the earth; and for that end, has given unto him a
great sword; that is, when Truth and the Profession thereof is persecuted; when
Tribulation or Persecution arises because of the Word; as it is Mat. 13: 26.
When men must be slain for the Word of God, and for the Testimony, which they
hold Revel. 6: 9. When the Truth and the open Profession thereof, is questioned
and opposed, then are the followers of Christ called to suffer rather than to
sin, and upon all hazards to hold fast the Profession of their faith without
wavering, not forsaking even the assembling of themselves together Heb. 10: 23,
25. Then are they to make Moses's choice; that is, choose rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season Heb. 11: 25. When any of the revealed Truths of God are opposed, and
such as own the same are maligned, hated and persecuted, that is the Season,
wherein the Lord calls all His to embrace any suffering, rather than deny His
Truth, and the word of His Patience. It is spoken to the commendation of the
Church of Pergamos Revel. 2. verse. 13. That though dwelling where Satan's seat
was, yet she held fast Christ's ^ame, and did not deny His faith, even in these
days, wherein Antipas, Christ's faithful Martyr, was slain. So that it is
Christ's will and command, that all his followers should abide steadfast,
faithful and unmovable in owning of his Truth and Cause, his Word and Interest,
on all hazards.

But some will possibly enquire, How shall I know, whether or not, I in
particular be called to suffer? Answer. We are not to expect any extraordinary
Revelation, or Declaration of God's mind, in this particular; though I grant,
the Lord may condescend, in love and pity to some weak persons, to give some
more than ordinary intimation of his will, whether by some secret and forcible
impulse upon their Spirits; or by some influence of comfort and encouragment,
whereby they are enabled to despise the shame, and to endure the cross, as
seeing the joy set before them; and are strengthened against the fears of men,
even of the greatest and most terrible, as seeing Him, who is Invisible. But
these outflowings of his Love and Tenderness, not being the Rule of our duty,
we must not think, that we are never called to hazard on suffering, until we
meet with some such Dispensation of his free grace. Nor must we wait for some
singular Intimation, made by some more than ordinary light, given to discover
the Truth, and the Importance thereof, for owning of which we are exposed to
suffering; The Revelation of the Truth, made by Jesus Christ, in his Word, is
the only ground of our faith, and our faith thereunto is called for, though we
want such rare communications of Light, bearing home the soul-captivaring
persuasion of the Truth and its concernments, over all possiblity of doubting
or hesitating in the least; for these are not our Ground or Rule of faith, but
sovereign and special helps to strengthen our faith, and to fix us more upon
our ground. But the ground of our Suffering, and that which we should look upon
as a call from God, to choose suffering, is the Lord's command, to own and
avow His Truth: so that when the Lord, in His Holy and Wise Providence,
orders matters so, as that we must either suffer, or sin, in denying His
word, or any point of Truth, revealed in his word; and so either Suffer or
forsake our Duty; then are we to look upon our selves, as called of God to
choose suffering, rather than sin: When, as it were, Sin and Suffering are laid
before us, that we may make our choice, and there is no third thing to demurre
us, nor any fair and lawful way to escape the suffering, but by sinning; then
with Moses in that forecited place, Heb. 11: 2^. We are to prefer Suffering
before Sinning, and that according to the will of God. This deed of Moses, in
choosing rather to suffer a ^tction with the people of God, than to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season, was a rare Act of faith; and consequently an act
of obedience; faith being no blind act, but walking upon the ground of a
command. When then we can not evite suffering, but by sinning in denying the
Truth, or in not adhering to it, or not Professing of it, according to the will
of God, we suffer for well doing. This is it, that is acceptable unto God, and
that to which we are called, to wit That we take it patiently, when we do well
and suffer for it. This is to endure grief, suffering wrongfully, for
conscience toward God, and which is thankworthie 1 Pet. 2. verse. 19, 20, 21.

Hence we see, that it must be Truth, and the Word of Christ, that must be
suffered for; else we cannot be said to suffer for Conscience toward God, nor
for well doing. If a Person be under the Power of an Erroneous Conscience,
taking that for Truth, which is nothing but Error, his suffering in defense
thereof, and for adhering thereto, is not suffering for well doing, nor for
conscience toward God, nor have such any call from God to suffer upon that
account; and yet if, for fear of suffering, any such should deny that, which
they apprehended to be truth, they should virtually deny the truth of God, and
sin; because they should deny that, which they took to be the truth of God;
and if it had been ^eally the truth of God, they would have denied it, no less
than now they have done, though they did mistakingly apprehend it to be the
truth of God, when it was not. In this case, there is no preventing of sin, but
by laving by the blinded and erroneous Conscience; that is, by laying aside the
mistake and error, and receiving ^ight Information concerning the Truth. And
therefore, when a time of trial comes, and persecution arises upon the
account of the Testimony of Jesus, and of his Word, all, w^o would be found
faithful in that day of trial, should labor to have the Word dwelling in them
richly, to be rooted and grounded in the Truth, tobe receiving and drinking-in
the Truths of God, and to have all grounded upon the infallible Word of Truth,
that what they own and hold may be the sure and undoubted Truth of Jesus, and
so a part of his Testimony. And for this Cause, they would be living near to
Him, who is the Truth, that being taught of Him, and receiving the Truth, as it
is in Jesus, they may be in case to assert and own the same, upon all hazards,
and so fitted for witnessing to the Truth, and for holding fast Christ's Word;
and nothing else.

But some may say, Though we know and believe the Truth, that is opposed: Yet
we are not able to maintain it against learned Adversaries, nor to answer
their contrary Arguments and Objections; How can we suffer upon the account of
such a piece of truth, which we have not skill and understanding to defend
against cunning Adversaries? I Answ. Though it is true, Men of great parts, and
abilities to plead and argue for truth, would seem to have a great advantage,
in such a day of trial; yet experience proves, that such as are far inferior
unto them, as to parts and abilities, will be helped to faithful
witness-bearing to the Truth, when they may shamfully decline that Duty.
Suffering is a peculiar gift, and does not always accompany the gift of
learning. And I doubt, it be required of all Christians, to be able to disput
for the truth, and to answer all the Sophismes of cunning Adversaries; yet it
is required of all, that they contend earnestly for the faith, which was once
delivered unto the Saints Iud. 3. and that they stand fast in the faith, 1 Cor.
16: 13. and in the Lord Phil. 4: v. 1. 1 These. 3: 8. and hold fast Christ's Name
and the Word of his Patience, and not deny his Faith and Name Revel. 2: 10, 13,
and 3: v. 8, 10. and that they keep his Word Revel. 3: 8. It is the Duty of all
to receive the Truth, and the Love of the Truth; and when the truth in its Love
and Loveliness is received, then it sincketh into the heart; and such, though
they cannot Disput for the Truth, yet can suffer for it; and not deny it, upon
any terms. Though they have but a little strength, yet they will keep his
Word, as is spoken to the Commendation of the Church of Philadelphia Revel. 3:
v, 8. Truth is Truth, though we be not able to defend it against Sophisters,
and to stop the mouth of gaine-sayers, and the Truth, as it is in Jesus, and as
it is a part of his Testimony, who is the Truth, should be owned and
maintained by suffering. The Primitive Christians, who suffered martyrdom for
the Truth, were not all able to answer the Cavils and Sophismes of a Celsus
and a Porphyrie, and others, who employed their learning and parts against the
Truth; yet having received the love of the truth, and embraced the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, no sufferings nor torments could move them to a forsaking or
denying of the same; They did keep Christ's word, and would not deny his Name.

But may some say, what if the point of Truth, upon which I am questioned and
staged, be but small, and of no great consequence, and many more than I do so
judge it; must I hazard on suffering, upon the account thereof, and think that
God will accept of me therein? Answer. Let the point of truth be never so
small and inconsiderable, whether in thine own eyes, or in the eyes of others;
yet it being a part of the Truth of God, and of the Revelation of Jesus Christ,
it is a part of that Name of Christ's, which should not be denied; and of that
Word, which should be kept. Satan may move Persecuters to urge but small things
at the beginning, that thereby he may make way to greater; knowing that if once
Professors cede in smaller matters, they are the fairer to be prevailed with in
greater things; for h^ving forsaken the Lord in lesser, they are out of the
ordinary rode of meeting with promised help and assistance, when they are
questioned upon greater things. Who love Truth for Truth's sake, and upon the
account that it is the Truth of Jesus, will love the l^ast of divine truths,
and therefore will not deny it, because it is a part of the Name of Christ,
every part whereof is sweet and desirable unto the gracious soul. On the other
hand, who forsake and deny Truth, because it is small, and inconsiderable, will
hold no Truth, as the Name and Word of Christ, and so will be fair to deny the
greatest; who suffer not for the Truth, as it is the Truth, and because it is
the Truth of Christ, cannot be said to suffer for conscience toward God, and as
holding fast the Name of Jesus, and the word of his patience. And such as are
willing to suffer for the Truth, upon this account, will suffer upon all Truth,
how small so ever it may seem to be, if it be a part of the word of His
Testimony. The Testimony to the Truth is not to be estimat, according to the
greatness or weightiness of the Truth, upon which the Testimony is called for;
but rather on the contrary, that may be accounted a great Testimony, which is
for a small Truth (to speak comparatively, for indeed no part of Christ's truth
should be accounted small) because it argues great love to the Truth, and Zeal
for it; it argues much singleness, and honesty; and so is much to the glory of
God: such as are thus faithful in a very little, may be much esteemed of by the
Lord, and have rule over many cities. The denying of or not witnessing unto the
meanest Truth, in a stated case of Confession, is a being ashamed of Christ and
of his Truth; and who are ashamed of or deny Him before Men, He will deny them
before His Father, which is in heaven. The least sin must not be committed to
shun suffering; but the denying of, or not bearing witness unto any of the
Truths of Christ, in a day of trial, is no small iniquity: and therefore (as
we said) we are to look upon our selves as called of God to suffer, when we can
not avoid it but by finning.

Yet some may say, when the thing required is manifestly sinful and
unrighteous, the call to suffering rather, in that case, seems very clear and
unquestionable; and when it is so, the person may have much peace and calmness
within, but when the question seems more disputable, the call must needs be
less clear, that one has to suffer upon that account; and an unclear call
cannot but creat much perturbation of mind, and perplexity. Ans. A call may be
Gods call, wherein or whereabout, there may be much unclearness: It is said of
Abraham Heb. 11: 8. That by faith, when he was called to go out into a place,
which he should after receive for an Inheritance, he obeyed, and went out,
though, as it is added, not knowing whither he went. It seems good in the
Lord's eyes, not to make every ones call alike clear and unquestionable, that
their faith and obedience may be the more tried. Some have their call to
suffering written, as it were, with sunbeams, so clearly and distinctly, that
he who runs may read it: others have their duty and call written with
smaller letters, which every one cannot read; and yet this be no less the call
of God, than the other. The call which the three Children had to suffer, was
clear and unquestionable; (...) being such an act of manifest Idolatry which
was enjoined them; that none acquanted with the law of God, could have the
least scruple, touching its horrid iniquity; The call again which Moses had,
rather to suffer, than to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, would seem
not to have been so legible and clear to all; and yet it was the true call of
God, for by faith he obeyed this call. So Daniel's call to hazard rather on the
lions, than forbear prayer to the God of heaven, seems more ^lear and legible
than Mordecai^s call to hazard his own life, and the life of all the Jews,
before he would bow, and do rever^ce unto Haman ^e Amalakite and yet this was
found to be the true call of God. In the primitive times, the case seemed clear
and unquestionable, when Christians were commanded to renounce Christianity, to
give up their Bibles, as renunceing the same, or to burn incense to Idols, or
to build a Temple to Idols, or suffer death; but when their life was offered
unto them, on condition, they would but give any old paper or clout, in stead
of the poors coats; or would give a small sum of money, wherewith to helo to
build the temple to the Idol God, one would think their call to suffer was more
dark: and yet these worthy witnesses would not redeem their life at such a
rate: Yea, if the soldiers, weary in executing of them, should have violently
plucked any such thing from them against their wills, as desireous of the
smallest seeming Victory, they would not consent, but run after them declaring
their adherence to the truth; and Marcus Arethusius would not give one penny to
the building of the Idol Temple.

If it be said, But what if by some Imprudent, or Unnecessary act or other, I
have occasioned the trial and trouble to my self; Can I in this case suppose,
that I am called of God to suffer. I Ans. It is true, that some unnecessary, or
not every way commendable act or other, may give the first rise or occasion to
our trouble; and yet when sufferings are not purely upon that account, nor for
that cause: but stated upon another ground; we may notwithstanding of this
imprudent or unnecessary occasioning of the trial to ourselves, look upon
ourselves as called of God to suffer, rather than to deny Him, or any part of
His Truth. It is observed by some of Paul, that the occasion of his last
trouble, mentioned Act. 21. to wit his hearkening to the advice of James and
the Elders of Jerusalem, was a thing which he might well have forborne, yea and
refused, and therein have walked consonant unto both his former Doctrine,
Practice and Writtings, by all which, before this time, he had declared, that
the Ceremonial Law was not obliging; Christ, the special end and substance of
all these shadows, being now come, and having established the Gospel way of
worship: and others, though they will not blame Paul, nor think he dissembled
in what he did, yet they think James and the rest should have forborne to have
pressed him to do what they urged him to do. Yet we see, that notwithstanding
of this, which gave the rise and occasion to these his last sufferings, this
not being the ground, or cause, for which he was persecuted; but his
maintenance of the Gospel, and opposing of the necessary observation of the
Law of Moses, which was now abrogate, he is in all his sufferings, which
followed hereupon, owned of God, and approven of him.

If it be said, Though I dar not deny the Truth, upon which I am challenged and
staged, nor dar I say, but I am suffering for Truth, and that I could not have
shunned this affliction, but by sinning; yet I am made to doubt of God's call
and warrant, because He hides his face from me, yea He hides himself from me,
more than ever. This causes me suspect, that all is wong; and that I have run,
in this matter, without his warrant and allowance. I Ans. This is no certain
ground, whereupon to draw such a conclusion. These out-lettings of his free
grace, and sensible significations of his favor, are dispensed according to
the Soveraignity of his will and pleasure. A person therefore may have an
unquestionable call and warrant to hazard on suffering, when he cannot
otherwise do, unless he would sin, though he miss these soul-comforting,
and heart-establishing blainks of His face. How often do we find the Saints of
God, in Scripture, cry out of the hiding of God's face, when outward trouble
was lying heavy upon them? As in Job and David: and why may not the Lord
dispense thus with others? I grant the Trial and the Exercise is, upon this
account, the greater: but what do we know, but the Lord be ordering matters so,
in his holy wisdom, for our further trial, and for the exercise of faith? It is
easy to swime (we say) when the head is born up above the water. And if the
Lord thinks good to double our Trials, ought we not sweetly to submit? His
word should satisfy us; and He has promised enough to him, that overcomes:
We ought to remember our duty, that is, hold fast what we have, till he come,
and He will come quickly, Revel. 2. verse. 25. and 3. verse. 11. If He will have
us venturing upon faith, why should we not glorify him thereby? He knows,
when the fittest season is of intimating his favor and acceptance. That holy
martyr, that complained of this want, all the time he was in prison, yet while
going to the staik was made to cry out, He is come, He is come.

Let us now speak a word unto the improving of this Consideration, to the end,
we may see, how it can contribute unto life, in an evil time.

1. This Consideration may calm and quiet the Sufferer, and may make him enjoy
peace within, what ever trouble he meet with from without; because, hereby he
understands, that he is about his Master's work, he is following duty, and
walking in a commanded path, whatever trouble he meet with therein: So whatever
other thing occur, to cause disquietment, this may bear him through all, that
he is in the way of duty, and obeying the command of the great Lord and
Lawgiver. Christians use to pacify their own spirits with this, when they
meet with unexpected crosses and disappointments, That they were following
their duty: So this may quiet them under all their Tossings, Troubles,
Persecutions and Vexations, that they have sinfully occasioned none of these
things, nor by their sin and foolly brought them on themselves.

2. When on-lookers are ready to condemn them of Foolly, Rashness,
Inconsideratness, Pertinaciousness, and the like, this Consideration; That they
are about a commanded duty, may counterballance all; for then they may know,
that whoever condemn them, their Lord and Master will approve of them; and how
ever men construe of their doings, He will account their Sufferings loyal and
faithful service to Him.

3. The consideration of this will help the Believer to a life of Patience and
Submission, without fretting at their lot: for sure the honest believer has
engaged himself unto God, and has promised absolute obedience unto him in all
things, and to take up his cross and yoke, whatever it be, that God shall think
good to appointe for him: and without all doubt, he is to have respect to all
the commands of God, and is obliged to carry as a Son and as a Servant; and
therefore must willingly and with sweet submission do any piece of service,
that is laid upon him, and go about any commanded duty with cheerfulness,
because it is commanded, how unpleasant so ever it be to the flesh The honest
believer will say, I have given up my self to His service, and count it my
glory to be called, the Servant of God; and why should I not go willingly and
cheerfully, and with heart and hand, without all repineing or murmuring, about
any piece of service He is pleased to put in my hand? I made no reserves nor
exceptions, when I resigned and gave up my self unto Him; and why should I not
now submit to all He commands? Sure, it is He who is Lord and Master, and so
must command and give-out orders; I am but a servant, a sworn-servant, and am
highly advanced, when I am called and accounted a servant to him, and therefore
must not carve-out my own work, and service, but be under Authority, and go and
abide, or do this or that, or bear this or that burden, as commanded. It is not
seemly for a child, or for a servant, or for a soldier to quarrel with his
Father, Master, or Commander, for putting him to any piece of service; but
rather sweetly to acquiesce, and run cheerfully about what is commanded: And
(should the believer say) it is more unseemly for me to quarrel with God, who
is my Father, Master, and Commander, upon a more noble and substantial an
account, for any piece of service He puts in my hands: I never covenanted
with Him, upon condition, He should not call me to suffering, or put any piece
of service in my hand, that was not easy and sweet to the flesh. So that the
Consideration of this would certainly move to submission, and shoot-out all
contrary thoughts, which distract and disquiet the soul, and make his spirit
bitter, and his life less lively and comfortable.

4. Hereby would the believer be helped to a life of Patience and Long
suffering, under the Trial and Tribulation, when continueing long, and like yet
to continue longer, without fainting or wearying: for the honest soul would
think with it self, I should not weary of prayer, nor of hearing the word, nor
of any other religious duty; and why should I weary of the cross, seeing the
bearing of it, christianly and handsomely, is as much my duty, and an act of
obedience to Him, when He calls thereunto, as is Prayer, or the like, in
their season. There is a time, when He calls for valiant acting, there is
also a time, when He calls for Christian suffering; and every thing is
beautiful in its season: and if the season be longer, than we would desire; yet
the Supreme Lord of Times and Seasons, He knows better than I, how long such
a season should endure; and so long as He thinks fit to appointe the season,
so long is the duty seasonable and pleasant, that is called for in that season.

5. This would also help forward the inward Satisfaction of the Believer; for
hereby he might see, that how unworthy and inconsiderable soever he thought his
own sufferings; yet the Lord would get glory thereby; seeing he might easily
understand, that the Lord would set him about no employment or service, but
such as would be for his own glory: the husband man will not command his
servants to plow-up some cumbersome piece of ground wherein they must meet with
much labor and toil, if he saw not how to reap some fruit thereby; nor will
God set any of His servants about an irksome piece of work, if he saw not
advantage to be had thereby to his Name, Interest and Glory: The faith of this,
That God will get glory by their sufferings, that being a piece of work He has
put them about, who does nothing in vain, and whose glory is advanced by our
obedience to His commands, will quiet the heart of the honest believer, while
he is sweating in tugging and toiling at that troublesome work. And when such
thoughts as these prove troublesome unto the honest hearted believer, Alas I am
out of case now, while thus shut up in prison, to go about my Christian duties,
with my Christian Neighbors, wherein I was wont to rejoice, and God was
glorified; I cannot get Him now so served and glorified, and his praises
solemnly sung, in the public Assemblies of his people. This may satisfy and
comfort him. That now he is called unto this piece of service, and by his
Christian deportment herein, God will be as much glorified, as He was by his
Christian exercises, while at liberty; That now he has as good occasion, to
advance in his Principal work of glorifying God, though upon another account,
as when he was employed in the most solemn service, that Christians are called
to.

6. This consideration will also promove their life of inward Contentmen^ and
Satisfaction, under their suffering lot, in that they will thereby be helped to
see, that as God will thereby get his due rent of praise and glory (as we
said:) so their own spiritual advantage and spiritual life will be promoved
thereby, if they foolishly hinder it not by their unchristian deportment under
the cross. All obedience has a native tendency to promove the spiritual good
of Christians, they walk and go from strength to strength, in the paths of
obedience, The doing of God's will is the exercise of the Christian life, and
the Christian's life is made more and more lively by this exercise: So that,
all these Tribulations, or Afflictions, are so far from hindering their
spiritual grouth and advancment in grace, that on the contrary they promove the
same, when the Christian is helped, through grace, to yield obedience unto the
good will of God, in undergoing that lot and dispensation, in a Christian
manner, even because the Christian is then in the way of God, and carrying as a
submissive obedient Son and Servant ought to do.

7. Hereby, (which will also prove advantageous to their spiritual life) they
will see, How Satan is disappointed of the two great Ends, he aims at, in
raising up Persecution against the people of God: to wit, the dishonor of God,
and the hurt and undoing of the Child of God; neither of which he can at taine
by this mean: for when Afflictions, Distresses, Tribulation and Persecution are
borne, in way of obedience to the holy will of God, and the soul is sweetly
complying therewith, as its present duty, both God is glorified, and the
Christian soul is edified, as by all other Christian duties; and thus Satan is
disappointed. Sure, this can not but yield much peace and comfort unto the
suffering believer, under all his hardships and sore pressures.

8. This Consideration, if rightly improven, could not but make the suffering
believer sing and rejoice, with Paul and Silas, while in prison Act. 16. verse.
25. and with the Apostles, when sh^mfully beaten Act. 5. verse. 40, 41. Because,
they cannot but say, that their hearts are glade and rejoice within them (if
they be not under the power of some evil frame) when they are about known duty;
and that what they do, they do with a piece of joy and gladness, when they
reflect upon it, as a commanded duty, and remember how therein they are doing
the will of their Father, and running His errands: and why should they not be
also glade and rejoice in their sufferings, when they may know, that therein
they are also about the will of their Father, and actually evidencing their
Loyalty, Faithfulness, Subjection, and Obedience to Him?

9. This Consideration may also quiet the honest-hearted Believer, when
troubled with these or the like thoughts, That now he cannot get God so served
as he was wont to do; He cannot get such a good work begun or perfected, which
he had intended for the publik good; He cannot get the spiritual good of
others, Neighbors and Relations, so promoved, as he would desire. From this, I
say, the Believer may draw grounds of peace to his own soul, and hush these
perturbing thoughts to the door; because the Lord is not now calling for these
works at his hands; but is now calling for another duty, wherein if he carry
himself aright, God will be no less glorified, than by all that work, which he
Intended: nay, this being the present duty, and piece of work now put in his
hand by God, the doing thereof aright will more glorify God: And therefore
this should allay all their sorrow and grief, which they find upon their
disappointments, and cause them sweetly comply with the present duty, and
account that best, which He accounts best.

10. Seeing in choosing affliction rather than sin, they are about a commanded
duty, and doing the will of God; they have the same ground of hope, that the
Lord shall enable them thereunto, and by his grace carry them through, that they
have, as to other duties; the same Covenant-Grounds, and Covenant-promises
reatch all duties, and except none, so that this very Consideration may raise
the soul in hope, and may encourage the man to go to Christ by faith, and lean
to him for seasonable strength and supplies of grace, for throughbearing in the
duty; and through Him, expect to be accepted of the Father, in the discharge of
the duty.

CONSIDERATION. X. Afflictions are all ruled and overruled by a good hand of
Providence, which is always in and about them.
MAny a time the Believer, when swiming through a sea of trouble and afflic
tion, and finding no sensible in-come of relief, or mitigation of the
calamity, cries out with the Church Esai. 49. verse. 14. -- The Lord has
forsaken me, and my God bath forgotten me: And as it is Esai. 40. v 27. My way
is hid from the Lord. He has left me alone, in this sea of trouble, as
forgetting that I am into this wrestling and fighting postoure: He has turned
his back upon me, and seems unconcerned with all that is come upon me, and
yet is lying heavy on me. He considers neither my weakness, nor the strength
and violence of the Temptation, under which I am, and which is like to
overwhelme me. Hence he cries out with David Psalm. 31. verse. 12. I am
forgotten, as a dead man out of mind: And again Psalm. 42. verse. 9. Why have
thou forgotten me. It is certain, such sad complaints are not altogether
justifiable, as they proceed from men, in whom is so much corruption and
unbeleef (though in our blessed Lord, while on the cross, such a sentence, as,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? was free of all mud or unbelief) for
though they express the ardencie of their desires to have the Lord smiling upon
them; yet there is some admixture of dross in them; and they hint, at least,
that they apprehend God is at a distance, taking little notice of them, or of
their present condition, but withdrawing his helping hand, or delaying to send
relief, as not careing, how great their Affliction be, or how their Enemies
trade them under foot. Hence we see, what corruptions are ready to stir and
work in the believer, at such a time: And the faith of God's being always
present with them, while under the trial, and ordering all things, in the
dispensation, with a fatherly care and tenderness, would comfort them, and ease
their mind, in the saddest of their distress. It may therefore be of use to
speak a little unto this Consideration.

In order therefore to the clearing-up of this Consideration, for the end
intended, we shall.

1. Show, that the Lord indeed has an high and holy hand, in all such
dispensations, as prove sad and grievous afflictions unto the godly.

2. We shall endeavoure to explain and clear, how and what way the hand of the
Lord is in and about these afflictions, only with an eye to our present design.

3. We shall briefly pointe-out the way how this Consideration should be
improven, in the time of Affliction and Tribulation.

As to the first, That God has an holy and high over ruling hand in and over
the afflictions, and crosses, that his people meet with. This is past all doubt
and disput, as to some of them; such as poverty, through God's immediate hand,
blasting men's labors and endeavors, or taking away their goods by sea, or by
fire, or destroying their cattle by death: and sickness upon their bodies, or
death of friends and relations, and the like. In such, every one will grant,
that God has an hand, and every wise Christian will look upon them (as the
Centurion, that great Believer, did, Mat. 8. verse. 8, 9.) as God's Servants and
Soldiers under his command and Authority, to go and return, as He enjoineth.
But as to other afflictions, brought about by the Instruments and Under-agents
of Satan, maliciously set to persecute the Godly, in their Name, Liberty,
Goods, Life, or Conscience, though none of Gods Children, when they are in
their right minds, and at themselves, will deny the Sovereign over ruling
hand of Providence; yet while under Temptation, and wrestling with the
calamity, they will be found too ready to think and speak that, which is not
very consistent with the lively faith and persuasion of this Sovereign Truth,
we shall therefore in a few words confirm it, from the Scriptures.

1. We find that the Godly have looked on these sad afflictions, brought about
by wicked hands, out of wicked purposes and designs, as coming from God
principally; and have eyed God, as having a principal holy hand in the same.
The affliction, that Joseph met with, was sad, when he was sold by his own
Brethren; and though it was they that had sold him, and that out of wickedness
and maice; yet he says Genesis 45: 8. to them. It was not you, that sent me
hither, but God. He saw the Lord to be the principal disposer of all; and
therefore says: Genesis 45 5. -- God sent me before you, to preserve life. And
again Genesis 50. verse. 26. But as for you, ye thought evil against me, God meant
it unto God, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive.
It was likewise a great affliction to David, to be scourged with the tratorous
tongue of Shimei, railing upon him, when he was flying from the face of his Son
Absalom: and calling him a Man of blood, and a Man of Belial; and saying to
him, the Lord has returned upon thee all the blood of the house of Saul, in
whose stead thou have reigned -- And behold thou art taken to thy mischief,
because thou art a bloody man. 2. Sam. 16: 5, 6, 7, 8. Yet holy David observed
an higher hand in all this, and therefore said Verse. 10. Solet him curse,
because the Lord has said unto him, curse David. Who shall then say, wherefore
have thou done so? And Verse. 11. again Let him alone, and let him curse, for
the Lord has bidden him. He takes up God's hand in the business as
principally ordering the matter. So Job when the Sabeans and Caldeans had
robbed him of his goods; said nevertheless Job 1. verse. 21. Naked came I out of
my Mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord
has taken away: blessed be the name of the Lord: He looks over Instruments,
and sees above them an higher hand overruling all, and ordering all,
according to His sovereign will and pleasure. See also Ps. 44. v. 11, 12. and
89: 39.

2. The Lord himself by his Prophets signifies so much: and, as it were,
looks upon the deed of these wicked Instruments, as His own; because of His
principal holy hand therein, ordering all to His own holy ends. Thus he says
by Amos 3: 6. -- Shall there be evil in the city, and the Lord has not done
it. So Esai. 45. verse. 7. I form light and creat darkness, I make peace and
creat evil: I the Lord do all these things. Darkness then and evil and sad
dispensations are from the Lord Creator: He forms and makes these things,
according to his own mind. Likewise Ier. 18: 11. -- Thus says the Lord, behold,
I frame evil against you, and devise a devise against you. A remarkable passage
we have 2. Sam. 12: verse. 11, 12. Thus says the Lord, behold I will raise up
evil against thee, out of thine own house; and I will take thy wives, before
thine eyes, and give them unto thy Neighbor; and he shall lie with thy wives,
in the sight of this sun: for thou did this secretly, but I will do this
thing before all Israel, and before the sun. And this accordingly was done by
that wicked wretch Absalom 2. Sam. 16. verse. 22. And because of the high, holy
and sovereign hand, which God had in this sore a^iction, He says by Nathan
the Prophet, that He would do it.

3. We find in the Scriptures, that the wicked Enemies, in following and
prosecuting their malicious designs against the People of God, are held forth,
and spoken of, as God's Instruments, in that work: As Esai. 10. verse. 5. Where
the Assyrian is called the rod of God's anger; and the staff in their hand, is
said to be His indignation. So Verse. 15. They are compared to an a^ in the hand
of him, that heweth therewith; and to a saw, to a rod and to a staff, all which
(we know) can do nothing, but as moved and ordered by the principal Actor. To
the same sense, are they compared to a rasour, wherewith God will shave the
head and the hair of the feet, and the beard Esa. 7. verse. 20. Thus is Babylon
called a golden cup in the hand of the Lord Ier. 51. verse. 7. Likewise the
Enemies are compared to a net. which God will spread over his people Hos. 7. v.
12. and to a snare Ezekiel. 12. verse 13. They are likewise called God's sword
Psalm. 17. verse. 13. and His hand verse. 14. All which and the like expressions
show, That God has a principal hand, in the afflictions, which his people meet
with at the hands of wicked Instruments; and that the wicked are but as so many
Instruments and Lixes, employed by him, for that effect, howbeit they mind no
such thing, but drive on their own designs, to satisfy their own wicked lusts.

4. The Scripture speaks of the Lord, as raising up these wicked Instruments,
as leavying them, and sending them to execute his will. So Esai. 5. verse. 26.
And He will lift up an Ensign to the Nations from far, and will hiss unto
them from the end of the earth, and behold they shall come with speed swiftl^.
So Esai. 7. verse. 18. And it shall come to pass, in that day, that the Lord
shall hiss for the fly, that is in the uttermost parts of the rivers of
Egypt; and for the be, that is in the Land of Assyria By which we understand,
that as these Enemies cannot stir, notwithstanding of all their malice, rage
and anger against the Lord's people, till God send for them, and hiss for
them, and (as it were) subscribe and seal their commission; so they are wholly
at his disposal; as the army is at the disposal of the General, or of him, who
leavyeth them, and employeth them. In like manner, we read 1 Chronicles. 5. verse.
26. that the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Pull, King of Assyria,
against the Reubenits, the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh So it is
said Psalm. 105. verse. 25. That God turned the heart of the Egyptians to hate
his people, and to deal subtly with his servants. And 2 Cbron. 21. verse 16.
that he stirred up against Iehoram the spirit of the Philistines, and of the
Arabians, that were near the Ethiophians.

5. We find the Lord said frequently to deliver up his people into the hands
of these Enemies, and to sell them unto them, and as it were to give them
wholly up to their devotion and disposal; see Judge. 3: 8. and 4. verse. 2. and
6. verse. 1. and 10: 7. Dan. 1: 2. 2 King. 17. verse. 20. Thereby showing, that
these Enemies could do nothing against the people of God, until the Lord had
permitted the same, and given way thereto, and had (as it were) withdrawn his
protection, and taken away his hedge of defense, and so left them naked and
exposed unto the rage and cruelty of their brutish Enemies.

6. This is also manifest from the grand and noble Purposes and Designs, which
the Lord brings about by those means, far diff^rent from what these wicked
Instruments intend; as we see Gen 45. and 50 Ioseph's Brethren meaned evil
against him; but God meaned it for good. So Esai. 10. verse. 7. The Assyrian
means not so, as God does, neither does his heart think so; but it is in his
heart to destroy and cut off nations not a few: but the Lord has another work
upon mount Zion and on Jerusalem Verse. 12. to wit, to punish them, only by his
smiting with a rod, and lifting up his staff, after the manner of Egypt V. 24.
or (as it is Esai. 27: 9.) to purge away the iniquity of Jacob, and to take
away sin. Wherefore seeing the Lord has such sovereign ends, as the
chastisement and trial of his people, the exercise of their graces etc. to
bring about, He cannot but have a special hand in and about the means, which
serve to bring about these ends. This being sufficient to clear up what was
first to be spoken to, we come

Secondly to speak a little of the manner and way, how the hand of the Lord is
to be observed in and about the sharp afflictions of his people, by the hand
of wicked persons, who are active therein. And in speaking to this, we shall
wave all subtle debates, concerning God's Decreeing the event of sin, His
Predetermination, and His Concourse with second causes, in those Actions, which
are sinful; and shall only pitch upon some particulars, which are more plain
and undeniable, and also more useful to the point in hand. As

1 There is the Lord's holy permission, giving way to, and not restraining the
fury, and rage of Enemies, when He has a mind to make use of them for a
scourge; He must loose, as it were, the chain, with which they are bound and
restrained; and take away the hedge of protection, wherewith he guardeth and
protecteth his people, and all that belongs to them Satan could do nothing
against Job, nor stir so much as one lambs tail, that belonged to him, until
the Lord, for holy and wise ends, gave way thereunto; therefore he said unto
the Lord Job 1. verse. 10. Have not thou made an hedge about him, and about his
house, and about all that he has, on every side? This is also imported, in the
Lords giving up his people into the hands of Enemies, and selling them and
delivering them, as a judge does a Malefactor into the hand of the Executioner.
Yet we must not conceive of this Permission, as if it were in all things like
unto the bare and naked permissions of men; but as suitable to him, who is a
most pure and simple Act

2. There is herein considerable the Lord's Commission, to speak so: not that
He will warrant and approve of them, in their wickedness, or give them any
moral Authority or Power thereunto: but that in his active providence, He has
such a sovereign and supreme hand, and all these wicked agents do so depend
upon Him, as they cannot stir, or move, till he give (as it were) the sign,
and a Providential call and commission; as soldiers can not set upon a City,
or the Enemy, or give an assault, or charge until the General give the word
of command. Thus the Lord behoved to say to Satan, ere he could trouble Job,
Behold all that he has is in thy power: and again, Behold he is in thy hand,
Job 1. verse. 12. and 2. verse. 6. This is it which David's words, concerning
Shimei, import, when he said, The Lord has said unto him, curse David. The
lying Spirit in the mouth of Ahab's false Prophets, could not go forth to
deceive Ahab, that he might fall at Ramoth Gilead, till the Lord had said, Thou
shall persuade him, and prevail also: go forth and do so 1 King. 22: 22.

3. There is the Lord's fitting (as it were) and qualifying them for the work,
by so ordering things, in his Holy and Sovereign Providence, that they are
enabled to carry on their purposes, and to do what they are employed in, and to
perform the work, they are set about: Absalom could not have been such a
cross and plague to his father, David: as to chase him from his Throne and
Kingdom, unless he had got the power of the Country upon his side, and such a
numerous army to back him: and whence was this, but from the Lord, in his holy
Justice and Soveraignity? Nebuchadnezar could not have been the hammer of the
earth, if the Lord, in his holy Providence, had not given him great power and
might for that end. Hence Christ said to Pilat Ioh. 19. verse. 11. Thou could
have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above. Pilat
was boasting of his power and place, and supposed, that he could do what he
pleased, and that he had full power over Christ, to crucify him, or to set him
at liberty, as he pleased; but he boasted of that, which he was not Master of;
for Christ ^els him, whence his power came, and that he had no more, than the
Supreme Lord and Governor, the absolute Disposer of all things, was pleased to
grant.

4. There is the Lord's ordering and fixing the Beginning of the Trouble, which
nece^sarily follows upon the foregoing Acts; so as the Enemies, for all their
heat and rage, cannot touch one hair of God's Children, nor work them the least
trouble, before the time come, that the Lord has appointed, and that He (as it
were) appoint them to begin, and give the sign. The wicked are as so many
rampant and devouring lions, longing earnestly for their prey, but God has
them so chained, and muzzled, that they can neither bark nor bite, till He give
way. Early did Herod begin to seek the life of our Lord Jesus, while He was
but a child in the swedling clothes; and often did his Enemies attempt his hurt,
and seek advantage against Him, but all in vain; for his hour was not yet
come: Hence it was, that when the Pharisees told him, that Herod was seeking
his life, He answered Luke 13. verse. 32, 33. Go tell that fox, behold, I cast
out Devils, and do cures, to day, and to morrow, and the third day I shall ^e
perfected: Nevertheless I must walk to day, and to morrow, and the day
following; for it cannot be that a Prophet perish out of Jerusalem. Jesus
Christ, the angel, that ascended (in vision to John Revel 7. verse. 2, 3.) from
the East, having the s^al of the liv^ng God, cried with a loud voice to the
four angels, to whom it was given to hurt the Earth and the Sea; s^ying, hurt
not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till w^ have sealed the servants
of our God: So that there is a restraining power, keeping* up from hurting
until the set time come.

5. There is the Lord's determining and specifying the nature and kind of the
Trouble, with which His people must be exercised; and herein His determining
and ordering Providence appears. The Enemy would be at death, and no less
will satisfy them; but He will order it so, that they shall not get their
will; and therefore will suffer them to do no more than to cast the man in
prison, or confine him, or fine him, and spoil him of his goods. The Devil
would have been at no less, than Job's life, when he said Job 2. verse. 4. Skin
for skin, yea all that a man has will ^e give for his life: But the Lord would
not grant this, but said, save his life Verse. 6. And suffered him only to smite
him with sore boils from the sole of his foot unto his crown.

6. There is the Lord's careful Providential measuring-out the quantity of the
Trouble, like a faithful and painful Physician, who will himself measure the
quantity of the physic, he is to prescribe unto his dear Son, or Daughter, and
will not commit it unto the Apothecary, who possibly may more consult his own
advantage, than the good of the patient. Our Lord weighs the affliction in
his own just balances. Enemies may think to ruin and undo all; but our God,
who sets bounds to the sea* limiteth their rage; and will suffer them to do
no more, than He thinks good. The plowers plow, and make long their furrows,
upon the back of God's People, and many a time they afflict them; yet they
prevail not against them; why? the Lord cuts asunder the cords of the wicked,
Psalm. 129: 1, 2, 3, 4.

7. The Lord's hand of Providence appears, in mixing together the several
ingredients, that make up their cup of affliction. Many a time the Lords people
have a complicated cross, as we see in Io^, David* Heman and others; and it is
the Lord, who weaveth and warpeth these crosses together; Satan and his
Instruments are but His drudges, blowing at the furnace; and therefore the
Godly fix their eye mainly upon God; as knowing, that He orders all to his
own mind, and no one ingredient more can be put into their cup, than He will.

8. The hand of the Lord appears, in his suiting the Trouble or Calamity,
unto their case and necessity. As a wise Physician considers the Temper and
Constitution of the patient, and takes special notice of the nature of the
disease, and accordingly frames the Medicine: So the Lord considers the ca^e
of his people, and what humores and corruptions are most predominant in their
souls: and accordingly orders and prepares such medicinal afflictions, as
are fittest to purge-out these peccant humores: and hence there is a necessity
for such sharp Medicines, as the Lord makes use of, 1 Pet. 1. verse. 6 Wherein
^egreatly rejoice, though now for a season* (if need be) ye are in ^eaviness,
through manifold temptations. Heaviness, or Sadness, through temptations, and
manifold temptations, was necessary to their condition, The Lord saw, that
their case called ^or it, otherwise he had not exercised them thus.

9. So the hand of the Lord is manifest, in making the affliction answerable to
their strength* A potion may be fit for and suitable to the disease, yet may be
too strong for the weak patient, and more readily kill, than cure: therefore a
wise and tender Physician will take good notice of the patients present
strength. So the Lord, who is tender of His peoples welfare, will proportion
the Physic of affliction unto their strength. Hence we hear it said, 1 Cor.
10. verse. 13. -- But God is faithfal, who will not suffer you to be tempted,
above that you are able. Accordingly Jeremiah prays Chap. 10. v. 24. O Lord
correct me, but with judgment, not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to
nothing. The Lord s way is to correct his people in measure, I^r 30. verse. 1^.
and 46. verse. 28. And as a father pitieth them, that fear him* for he knows
our frame, he remembereth we are dust, Psa^. 103. verse. 13, 14. He knows that
their strength i^ not the strength of stones, nor are their bones of brass; and
so he knows they are not able to bear many blows. Thus we see, the Lord
measures the affliction to their strength: It is true, Paul says 2 Cor. 1.
verse. 8. That he and his companions were pressed out of measure, and above
strength: which would seem to contradict what is said; But this seeming
contradiction will be taken away, by what we shall next add.

10. When the affliction and distress is such, as would undo, and press the
poor Believer out of measure, if he got not some new supply of strength to
stand under that burden; the Lord's hand appears, in fitting the Believer for
the stroke, and in enabling him to bear it, so that he is not killed thereby,
nor overwhelmed therewith; by giving cordials, he fortifieth the man against
the violence of Temptations, which otherwise would prevail against him: Paul
and his Company 2 Cor. 1. verse. 8, 9. were pressed with trouble in Asia, out of
measure, above strength, so much that they despaired even of life, yea and had
the sentence of death in themselves; such a storm was it, that they could not
ride it out, if fresh supplies of strength and courage had not been granted by
God, who raises the dead, unto them: and if the Lord had not thus delivered
them from so great a death, they had perished; but how was this done? See Verse.
4, 5. The God of all comfort comforted them, in all their tribulations; and as
the sufferings of Christ abounded in them, so their consolation also abounded
by Christ: And thus the Lord fitted them for the stroke, when the stroke was
too sore for them. So this same Apostle, when assaulted with a messenger of
Satan, that buffeted him 2 Cor. 12. verse. 7. Was strengthened by the grace of
God, Verse. 9. to stand out against that temptation, which otherwise had
overcome him, as his praying thrice, that it might depart from him Verse. 8.
would import. Thus the Lord keeps the head of his poor people above water, by
making his power to rest upon them, and by making perfect his strength in their
weakness, Verse. 9. Thus also are they strong, when weak Verse. 10.

11. The Lord's good hand of Providence appears in this matter, in
disappointing the Enemies of their malicious designs; They are busy plotting
and contriving the ruin and destruction of His people; but the more they seek
to destroy them, the more they grow and thrive, the more they multiply, and the
stronger they become. It is almost incredible, what multitudes of Christians,
through the whole Empire, the bloody persecuting Emperors destroyed and put to
death, in the primitive times; but the more they were massacred, the more they
grew; the blood of the saints and martyrs, was the seed of the Church.
Daniel's adversaries thought to have got him destroyed; but their enmity and
rage against him tended to his further exaltation and establishment. So was it
with David, the more that Saul did persecute him, the more his bow abode in
strength.

12. The Lord's hand mightily appears in the afflictions of his people, in
that He powerfully and Infallibly carries on, and brings to pass His own
Purposes and Designs, countermining and counter working the designs and
wicked projects of the Enemies; yea, in effectuating His own ends, even by what
the Enemies are doing purposely to carry on their Ends. When the Enemies are
blowing with all their might, to make the furnace burn hot, that the metal, as
they suppose and intend, may be wholly consumed; the Lord by that same means
is infallibly bringing about His Ends, and accomplishing His designs; to wit,
to purge the metal, and take away the dross. By what the Assyrian was doing,
in prosecution of his Ends, to wit, to destroy and cut off nations not a few
Esai. 10. verse. 7. The Lord was performing his whole work upon mount Zion and
Jerusalem, Verse. 12. and what was this, but to purge away iniquity, and to take
away sin, Esai. 27. verse. 9? to chasten and punish for correction and
amendment Ier. 30: 11. and 46: 28.

13. Herein also appears the Lord's overruling hand, that while possibly the
trouble is in its greatest strength, and Enemies are swelling in their pride,
and thinking their contrivances cannot fail, their plots and designs are laid
so deep and so sure, that they cannot misgive; even then the Lord will make a
door of outgate appear unto his people, and give some foreruning tokens of the
dawning of a fair day; even then, He will make a way for an escape, that they
may be able to bear it 1 Cor. 10. verse. 13.

14. Lastly, His hand appears herein, that in due time, He puts a period
to the trial and trouble, by delivering his people out of them all Psalm. 34.
verse. 7, 17, 19. He will not suffer the rod of the wicked to rest always on
the back of the righteous Psalm. 125. verse. 3. He will not contend for ever,
lest the spirits should fail before him, and the souls, which he has made
Esai. 57. verse. 16. He will keep His people no longer under Physic, than He
sees necessary; and therefore it is but for a season, that his people are in
heaviness. 1 Pet. 1. verse. 6. Enemies think to keep the people of God at under
for ever; but the Lord's supreme overruling hand appears here, that He has
limited the duration of the trial and trouble to Ten days Revel. 2. verse. 10.
He has limited the rage of Enemies to an hour, a day, a month and a year
Revel. 9. verse 15. And the treading of the holy city under foot to 42, months
Revel. 11: 2. And when the Lord's time comes, all the power and malice of the
Enemies will not be able to hinder the delivery; and how little so ever His own
people look for it, yet He will work it: so that though there be scarce faith
upon the Earth, yet He will come, and perfect what He has intended.

We come now to speak a little to the 3 particular, to wit, To show how this
Consideration may and ought to be improven to advantage, in a time of
affliction, And

1. The faith and right thoughts of this. Truth, That the Lord rules and
over-ruleth all that the wicked are devising and executing, according to their
own lust and rage, to afflict, persecute and destroy His people, according to
His own mind, would yield comfort and encouragment unto His people, be their
trouble what it would. In a time of Trouble, there are several thoughts, that
come in the mind of His people, which occasion Discouragment and Sorrow; all
which this Consideration of God's overruling hand, if rightly improven, would
either prevent, or keep them from the hurt of; so that notwithstanding of
these, they were in case to rejoice, and to sing, as

(1.) When they think upon the Instruments of their calamity, they are ready
to pore too much on them, and to look upon them, as if there were none above
them, to marshal and order them, to command and overruled them; as people are
terrified by soldiers, that are under no Command or Discipline, and expect no
pity, or favor from them. But the faith of God's being above their heads, to
over-see and overawe them, would free the Child of God from this
discouragment. He would not be so cast down and affrighted, if he believed,
that God has all these wicked Instruments, more under his command, than the
best disciplined soldiers are under the Command of the most strick and awful
General, that ever was. These Instruments cannot move a finger without God.
Soldiers, when out of the sight of their Commanders, may do much mischief;
and their Commanders cannot hinder it, because they know not of it: But neither
Devils, nor the most wicked of his Instruments, can move one hair of God's
people, till the Lord give way, and permit it to be done, He must first loose
the reigns, or they cannot move a foot. because they are chained hand and
foot, in the chains of his Providence; yea their very tongue is chained, that
they cannot so much, as curse or reproach any of His people, until the Lord
loose their tongues, and say, (as it were) go curse and rail upon such an one.

(2.) When they observe the Confusion, Irregularity, Brutishness and
Unreasonableness of these Enemies, in their way and actions; they are ready to
think, that God has forsaken the earth, and is unconcerned with what these
wretches were doing; and upon this they cannot but be much fainted and
discouraged. But the faith of this, that God is working hitherto Ioh. 5. verse.
17. and that these wicked Instruments of their calamity were under his eye,
would free them of this misapprehension. Nay, they would believe, and by faith
see, a divine Order and Regularity, in the midst of the greatest Confusions,
and brutish Ma^sacres, that ever were; if they believed that God had a
principal hand in all these Actions, Moving, Ruling, Ordering and Overruling
all, according to His own mind.

(3.) The consideration of the Activity, Diligence, Malice, Restlesness and
Malicious wickedness of the Enemies, troubles them, and makes them fear, that
ere ever they be aware, they shall be swallowed up. But this discouragment
would evanish, if they remembered and believed, that the timing of their
affliction is not in the hand of their Enemies. They cannot stir, till their
commission be (as it were) subscribed; and the hour and minute appointed come,
when they must begin; He, who is Supreme, determines the season, and the
time; and over-ruleth all so, that were the hunger and desire of these ravenous
wolves never so great, they cannot attempt any destruction, till the minute
appointed come.

(4.) When they consider the exceeding great Rage and Cruelty of their Enemies,
they are ready to think, that sure, they will make havoc of all, they will
destroy, utterly, and make an end of all. But how terrible so ever this thought
be, yet its terror is weakened, when the believer calls this to mind, That
it will not be as these enraged and merciless Beasts intend; but as God will,
who is the Sovereign Disposer of all, and Supreme Master of work; they are but
under-Agents, and the Instrument in His hand: They are no Master of themselves,
in this matter; but as the ax and saw, in the hand of the workman, that cannot
cut, but as he orders it: The child will not be afraid of a sword, or of an
ax, when he sees it is in the hand of his father. Their threatenings are not
much to be regairded; They have said, come and let us out them off from being a
nation, that the Name of Israel may be no more in remembrance as it is Psalm.
83. verse. 4. But they have not yet gotten it done. They intend Destruction; and
therefore breath-forth nothing but cruelty; but God, who is above them,
intends but Correction, and some Chastisement, and will suffer them to do no
more, than may contribute to that end.

(5.) The thoughts of the strength and liveliness of the Enemies create also
terror and fear; they see their power decays not, but grows rather, and
their number increases, and thence they art ready to infer, There shall be
no outgate: But a sight of God, as near (as David prays, when he took such a
look of his Enemies, Psalm. ^8. verse. 19, 21. saying But mi^e Enemies are
lively, they are strong, and they that hate me wrongfully are multiplied --
Forsake me not, O Lord; O my God, be not far from me) would help in this case;
the Believer would not be much cast down for all this; for he would be in case
to say, They must be kept up, so long as God has work for them, as a man
will keep his ax and his saw sharp and clear, so long as he minds to make
use of them: but all their strength says not, that there shall be no out^ate;
when the Lord has finished his work in Zim, he will punish the fruit of the
stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks: And the
Lord of hosts will send among his fat ones leanness, and under his glory, he
shall kindle a burning. like the burning of a fire Esai. 10. verse. 12, 16. And
for as strong as they are, the Lord can raise up a scourge against them; as
Esai. 10: 26. yea and make the light of Israel for a fire, and his holy one for
a flame, and it shall burn and devour their thorns, and their briers, in one
day, and shall consume the glory of their forest, and fruitful field etc. as
Esai. 10. verse. 17, 18

(6.) But even this proves sometimes fainting and discouraging unto his
people, That it is not man, that they have to do with, but with God
principally, whoever be the Instruments; and that upon several accounts; as
because He is a God of Might, of Power, and of Terror; and it is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of a living God; and withal He is just, and they
are conscious to themselves of much guilt. But yet, notwithstanding of this,
the thoughts of Gods having a principal hand in all these afflictions, may keep
from fainting, because (1.) He is not intending their destruction, as Enemies
do; but their Good, their Amendment, their Repentance, and Returning unto the
Lord etc. (2.) He measures not out their a^lliction, according to his strength
and almighty Power, else He should soon crush them, and bring them to nothing.
Will He plead against me (said Job Chap. 23. verse. 6.) with his great power?
No, but He will put strength in me. (3.) Nor according to strick Justice, and
pure Wrath. In plenty of justice, He will not afflict; as the words of Elihu
Job 37. verse. 23. may be read. He will not stir up all his wrath, Psalm. 78.
verse. 38. (4.) Nor according to their deservings; for that word of Zophar
holds true. Job 11. verse. 6. God exacteth of thee, less than thine iniquity
deserves. And Psalm. 103. verse. 10. He has not dealt with us according to our
sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities. (5.) Nor does the Lord deal
with them, as Enemies; the difference is great betwixt his dealing with the one
and with the other Esai. 17, verse. 7. Has He smitten him, as He smote those
that smote him? is he slain according to the slaughter of them, that are slain
by him? But on the contrary, He deals with them, according to a rule of
Mercy, and fatherly Compassion; for as a Father pitieth his Children, and only
chasteneth them; so does the Lord deal with them. He knows what they can
bear, and lays no more upon them, than they are able to bear. The wise
Prophet tells us Prove. 12. verse 10. That the righteous man regairdcth the life
of his beast, and therefore will not overcharge him with a load, heavier than
he can bear: And will not the righteous Lord regaird the life of his own
servants? Are they not of much more value, than many beasts? Sure then, He will
not overcharge them. 1. Cor. 10. verse. 13

2. The believing and right consideration of this Truth, That God over-ruleth
and disposes of, and orders afflictions, as He sees good, would much help
unto the life of Patience, which is so commendable Iam. 5. verse. 11. Being a
piece of the honor and badge of Saints Revel. 13: 10. and 14. verse. 12. and so
much taken notice of by God Revel. 2. verse. 2, 19. Yea and profitable, having
its perfect work Iam. 1. verse. 4. and bringing happiness with it Iam. 5: 11.
This Consideration (I say) rightly Improven, may help hereunto; for it will
fortify the soul of the Believer against those thoughts, which usually
occasion impatience. as

(1.) When the man is poreing upon the uncouthness of the Affliction, wherewith
he is exercised, and saying with the Church Lam. 1. verse. 12. Behold and see,
if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, wherewith the Lord has afflicted
me, in the day of his fierce anger, he is ready to give way unto impatience.
But when he considers, who has prepared this potion for him; that it was no
unskilful Apothecary, it was not the malignant Enemy, that intended his death
and destruction; but the only Wise and Supreme God, who was seeking his good,
his life and health, and who knew, that no other potion would suite his
distemper, and purge out his peccant humores; this will help him to lie under
the workings of that physic with patience; Though the potion of physic be
bitter, and work something hard, yet a wise man will have patience, when he
considers, that the Physician, who did appoint it, was both well skilled, and
his special friend; and therefore persuades himself, that no less would do him
good: So when the believer considers, that it is His God and Father, who has
prepared that potion for him, and that He saw his distemper called for it, and
when he considers that God with his own hands did make and prepare it,
weighed all the doses, with great carefulness, and mixed in nothing but what
was most necessary, he will drink it, though bitter, with the better will: and
albeit it work hard, and make him sick; yet he will not be impatient, and cry
out, why am I so and so handled? does every one get such paining and sickning
physic, as this? but rather say, because every one needs not such strong
physic, I must be dealt with in a special manner; I have other corruptions,
than ordinary, and therefore must have patience, and be content to be otherwise
dealt with, than others usually are.

(2.) The person in affliction, when he sees, himself compassed about with
evils, and that he is not visited with one or two rodes, but with many at once;
and that innumerable evils compass him about (as said David Psalm. 40. verse. 12.
which in part occasioned his adding, therefore my heart fails me, or
forsakes me.) then he is ready to say, how can I, while thus environed with
evils, have patience? But if he would call to mind God's hand in the matter, as
Job did, he would, with him, bless the name of the Lord; for then he would see,
that God himself had ordered all, and that not one of all these multifarious
evils came, without the Lord's special and active Permission, and Providential
Ordination, Appointment and Commission: and that God alone had ordered that
mixture, and combination of troubles and trials.

(3.) The impatience of Gods people is often occasioned by their imagining, that
the trouble is greater, than they can bear: as we see in Job Chap. 6. verse. 11,
12. What is my strength, that I should hope! And what is mine end, that I
should prolong my days? Is my strength the strength of stones? Or is my flesh
of brass. And again Chap. 7. verse. 11, 12. Therefore I will not refrain my
mouth, I will speak in the anguish of my spirit, I will complain in the
bitterness of my soul. Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou set a watch over
me? But would they consider and believe, that God knows what they are able to
bear, and is proportioning the load to their strength, which He knows, better
than they do: or when He sees it fit to press them above measure, that they
may despair in themselves, and not trust in themselves, that then He under
proppeth and supporteth the weak back, and conveyethin secret strength,
enabling them to stand, under the load; and thus never lays more on, than
they are able to bear: If (I say) they were calling this to mind, they would
see no cause of Impatience; but rather cause of crying out, when we are weak,
then are we strong, and therefore we will glory in our infirmities, that the
power of Christ may rest upon us 2 Cor. 12. ^ers. 9, 10. And they would through
faith, be in case to say, with Paul 2 Cor. 4. verse. 8. We are troubled on every
side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but
not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed.

(4.) Their Impatience is likewise occasioned by considering, that their
Trouble and Affliction is still growing, when they supposed, that it should
have decreased. But the right Improvement of this Truth would frame the Soul
for patience, notwithstanding hereof: because the believer would see ground to
say, grow as it will, the hand of the Lord is about it; it will grow to no
greater height, than he sees good: let Enemies blow at the fire, as fast and
with as great earnestness, as they will, the furnace shall be no hoter, than
the Supreme Master and Over-ruler of all, sees fit, for the ends He intends:
He knows the nature of the metal, and how hot a fire will serve the turn
to purge it.

(5.) This also raises impatient thoughts in their heart, That they can see no
appearance of an outgate; all doors are so shut, that no hope appears: thus
was it with Job; and therefore has he many such expressions: as Chap. 7. verse.
6. My days are swifter than a weavers shuttle, and are spent without hope.
Verse. 7. -- Mine eye shall no more see good. Verse. 8. The eye of him, that has
seen me, shall see me no more. But this Impatience would evanish, if this were
believed, That the Lord's hand were in and about the affliction, making a fair
way to a saife escape, and at length, in his own due time, putting a period to
the Trouble: when his work is finished, and the end He designed attained: and
if it were firmly believed, that, let Enemies make all as sure, as they can,
and rage as they will, they shall not be able to keep them longer under their
iron harrowes, than He sees good, no not one day, nor an hour.

3. The right improvement of this Consideration would help unto an holy and
sweet Submission, and cause us say with David Psalm. 39. verse 9. I was dumb, not
opening my mouth, because thou did it. When Aaron met with a sad
dispensation, two of his prime sons, Nadab and Abihu, were taken away in the
fiour of their age, and that in a very terrible manner, by fire from heaven,
for their rashness, and when Moses told him Levit. 10. verse. 3. That this was
it, which the Lord spoke, saying, I will be sanctified of all them that come
near me, it is said of him, And Aaron held his peace. A sight of the hand of
God, though in a terrible manner, in that dispensation, made him lay his hand
upon his mouth, and sit silent in the dust; He had not one word to say. So that
a sight of the hand of God, in the dispensation, ordering all things in it,
would help them unto a Christian, yea unto a cheerful Submission: It would not
be patience by force; but an hearty, willing, cheerful choosing, bearing and
embracing of that lot, because bound on their back by the hand of God. Shall we
not drink (would they say) this potion with delight, that God has prepared,
and carefully made up for us? He knows what is best for us; Shall we not
willingly lie under the cross, that God has tied upon us, when He knows
what He is doing, and what we must not want, and will not sufler us to be
tem^ted above what we are able? When His good time is come, there will be an
end, and all the power of Enemies shall not obstruct our Delivery. The Church
Micah. 7. verse. 9. could sweetly sit down, and bear the indignation of the
Lord, when by faith she could say, Rejoice not against me, O mine Enemy; when
I fall I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be alight unto me.
He will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness, V.
8, 9.

4. The believing improvement of this would keep the believer from fainting, and
sincking through discouragment: many thoughts come into the mind, while
affliction is lying on their loins, and Satan can suggest many things, at that
time, to cause the poor man succumb, while under the load: but the faith of
God's Sovereign and Absolute O dering of all things, in and about the Trouble,
according to his own mind, would keep up their head, and preserve them from a
sinful and shamful fainting. They look too much to instruments, and pore too
much upon their Nature, Disposition, Activity, Power, Wisdom, Wickedness,
Maliciousness, Rage, Cruelty, and Indefatigableness; and forget that they are
but under agents, and can do nothing, but as the Supreme God Wills, Ordert
he, Disposes, and Permits; and that He alone Over-ruleth all, Moderateth
and Orders all, according to His own mind, and for His own holy ends, So that
they cannot do any thing, whether as to the Substance, or as to the
Circumstances of the affliction, but as He, who is the Supreme Master of work,
is pleased to suffer and give way unto.

5. The believing thoughts of this Truth would keep the Soul from that dreadful
sin of Murmuring against the Lord, upon occasion of any Trouble or Distress, he
meets with. It is the Lord, would the Soul say, and who am I, that I should
quarrel with Him. He is ordering, disposing and moderating all, that under
agents and lixes are doing, so that all things are done, as He will; and shall
I yet be displeased and quarrelsome? Enemies cannot get their will, They are
overruled, in all their Consultations, Projects, Contrivances, bloody
Resolutions, and cruel Executions; matters go not, as they will, but as He
will, who is over them; and why then should I murmr, and repine against Him?

6. This would also airth the Eyes of the soul toward the right object, in a
day of Trouble. They would not with Heathens, look to chance or fortune, as
ruling and ordering all; nor would they with the carnal multitude f^x their eye
upon the instruments, and run with the dog to the stone, that is cast at him:
but would see another more noble object of their sight, to wit, the Principal
Agent, Mover, and Orderer of all, in whose hand the wicked are, as the ax and
saw in the hand of the workman, and as the rod in the hand of the father; and
this sight would help unto a Spiritual Christian frame of Godly fear and
Subjection of Soul, and would put the soul in case, to observe the Wisdom,
Soveraignity, and absolute Dominion of God, doing what He will, frustrating the
toakens of the liars, and disappointing the crafty devices of wicked men; as
also this sight would mind the man of Christian duties, of searching his
ways, repenting of his sins, and turning again to the Lord; for he would
see, it was the Lord, with whom he had to do. He would look for his Outgate and
Salvation from God alone; so that his Faith, his Hope and his Confidence would
be in the Lord alone. His eye being fixed on this object, he would not see
cause of troubl^ng himself much about-Enemies, or how he might procure their
favor; and so would be kept from Temptations to any sinful compliance or
accommodation: So would he be preserved from temptations to the using of
unlawful means for an outgate. Thus we see, how advantageous this eyeing of
the Lord, in the day of Trouble, is unto the afflicted; and the faith and
improvement of this Consideration cannot but airth the souls eye unto this
object.

7. The right improving of this Truth would free the believer from many carnal,
disqu^eting, distracting and perplexing fears: He is ready to say; oh I cannot
ride out this storm, I shall one day fall by the hand of Saul, the next blast
of temptation shall blow me over, I cannot but at length faint and succumb, and
the Enemy shall have matter of joy, and all God's people shall be made to
mourn: for were it believed, that God Ordered, Disposed, and Overruled all,
the believer would see no ground for these fears; for he would see, that no
blast could blow, but as He would; no storm could come sooner, than He thought
good; nor continue longer, than He saw convenient; nor be more violent and
strong, let Enemies threaten and rage as they pleased, than He saw good: He
would see the hand of God measuring out all, so as he needed not fear to be
overcharged; or if the trouble were indeed greater, than he could well stand
under, he might see the Lord fitting him by secret strength for it.

8. Finally the faith of this, and the right improvement of it would preserve
the soul from a dead and senseless stupidity, under the rod, or stoical frame,
as unconcerned with what befalls them, which has no affinity with, but is
utterly repugnant to, a Christian frame, and to Christian valor, and undaunted
courage: This looks liker to the frame of an Atheist, than of a Child of God,
who trembles and fears, when he sees the rod in his Fathers hand, and dar
not despise the chastening of the Lord. Now a sight of God's hand in all,
Ordering, Timeing and Seasoning, Mixing and Compounding, Limiting and Bounding,
Qualifying and Restricking, Terminating and Ending, Directing and Overruling,
would perserve the soul from a dead Temper, and cause him mark and observe the
footsteps of Royal Soveraignity, Majesty, Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Care and
Tenderness.

CONSIDERATION. XI. Christ himself had a suffering life.
WHen the Leaders and Commanders of an Army, are to bring the Infantrie through
some deep water, they use to alight off their horses, and walk on foot, that
they may take a share of the same lot with the soldiers, that thereby they may
the more encourage them to wade with cheerfulness through the water: and it
proves indeed some matter of Encouragment to soldiers to follow their
Leaders, be the way never so uneasy. Our Lord Jesus, in like manner, who is
called the Captain of our Salvation Hebr. 2. verse. 10. knowing that his
followers had both fire and water to go through Esai 43. verse. 2. the more to
encourage them, to endure that hard lot, would come down off his Throne of
Majesty and State, and take a share of the lot himself; yea and go before them
to break the ice. Therefore it cannot but be most advantageous for the
soldiers of Christ. who have a mind to run the race, that is set before them,
to be looking, in the time of their affliction, upon this Captain, according to
the advice, which the Apostle gives unto the afflicted and persecuted Hebrews
Chap. 12. verse. 2. Looking unto Jesus, the Author and finisher of faith, who
for the joy, that was set before Him, endured the cross, and despised the
shame. 3. Consider Him, that endured such contradiction of sinners against
himself; lest ye be wearied and fainte in your minds. For this same end and
purpose do we find the Apostle Peter proposing this example, for the
encouragment of a number of poor scattered and afflicted saints 1 Petr. 2.
verse. 21. For even hereunto were ye called; because Christ also suffered for
us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps. And again, Chap.
3. verse. 17, 18. For it is better, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for
well doing, than for evil doing: for Christ also has once suffered, the just
f^r the unjust, that He might bring us to God.

It will then be of no small advantage, to afflicted persons, to have this
Copy and Example laid before them, if He would help us to speak unto it, in
any measure to edification. It will not be necessary, to speak of this subject
of Christ's Sufferings, in the full latitude; but it will be sufficient to
speak of them, only in reference to the end proposed; as an Encouraging
Example; and in order to this, we shall only do these Two things. 1. We shall
mention and propose some particulars, considerable in the sufferings of Christ,
which may be suitable matter for the thoughts of a Child of God, in affliction,
to dwell upon: 2. Speak some things to the advantageous improvement of the
same, in a day of Trouble.

As to the first, we shall only mention these particulars considerable.

1. The Person, who was put to all these Sufferings, was no ordinary person: we
think more of the sufferings of a Nobleman Prince, King or great Potentate,
than of the Sufferings of a mean, poor man. What shall we then think of the
Sufferings of Christ, who was higher than the Princes of the earth, who was
King of Kings and Lord of Lords? He was in the form of God, having the same
Essential Divine form with the Father, He thought it not robbery to be equal
with God, having the same Divine Nature and Properties. Phil. 2. verse. 6. And
yet for all this, He made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form
of a servant. -- And being found in the fashion of a man, he humbled himself,
and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross verse. 7, 8. Even
He, who was the Ancient of days, who was set up from everlasting, from the
beginning, ere ever the earth was Prove. 8. verse. 23. Even He was put to end his
days in pain and sorrow, He, whose goings forth have been from of old, from
everlasting Mica. 5: 2. Who wasthe Creator of the ends of the earth, who was
with God, by whom all things were made, and without whom was not any thing
made, that was mad^. Ioh. 1. verse. 1, 2, 3. Even He it was, who was put to all
this suffering. What a wonder is this, That the everlasting Father, the Prince
of peace, the mighty God, as He is called Esai. 9. verse. 6. should become a man
of sorrows, and acquanted with grief Esai. 53: 3. That the High and holy one,
who inhabiteth eternity, and whose perfections and virtues are past finding
out, should be found in the fashion of a suffering Man, That God should be thus
manifest in the flesh 1 Timothy 3. verse. 16? This is a subject worthy of our
thoughts, That He, who was God equal with the Father in power and glory, having
the fullness of the God head dwelling in him bodily, Col. 2. verse. 9. should
condescend so low, as to take on Him man's Nature, and suffer therein. It is
true, the Divine Nature could not suffer: but his Humane Nature being
personally united unto the Divine Nature, the Person was one, and so He, who
was and is God over all, blessed for ever, did suffer, while his humane Nature
was put to suffer.

2. Consider by whom He was put to suffer, even by all ranks of Persons, both
high and low, by rich and poor, by noble and ignoble, by Churchmen and
Statesmen, and by soldiers, by judges higher and lower, and by lixes, by
Jews and Romans. Some of whom were Malicious, Invective, Cruel, Merciless and
Irreconcilable Enemies; such as the Priests, the Scribes and the Pharisees, who
were ringleaders; and did all out of pure malice and wickedness of heart,
committing thereby that unpardonable sin, Mat. 12. v. 31, 32. These drove
forward their cruel design, and forced Pilat, in a manner, to condemn Him,
though he found no fault in Him; and urged a late law of their own thereunto,
saying Ioh. 19. verse. 7. We have a law, and by our law he must die, because he
made himself the Son of God; a strange law, by which they had bound themselves
to condemn and pursue unto death the Messiah, whom they pretended to be
waiting for, when ever he came; for the true Messiah was to be Immanuel: and
when this was not like to work, their malice carries them further Verse. 12.
saying If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend; for whosoever
makes himself a King, speaks against Caesar. Others of those his Persecuters
were led on against Him, in their ignorance and blind Zeal, for Christ himself
prays for them, saying Luke 23: 34. Father forgive them, for they know not
what they do. And Peter says Act. 3: 17. And now, Brethren, I ^ot, that
through ignorance you did it, as did also your Rulers.

3. Consider the duration of his Troubles, they lasted not for a short time,
for a few Days, or Months; but during this whole Life: For His whole Life was
nothing but a Life of Suffering: no sooner came He into the world, but Herod
sought his Life. He was forced to flee into Egypt, being but a child in the
cradle. He was a Man of sorrows, and acquanted with grief Esai. 53: verse. 3.
from the Cradle to the Grave, His Life was interwoven with sufferings of one
kind and another; and especially after He entered into the public exercise of
His Offices, and was Baptized, He is not well out of one trouble, while He
meets with another; How often is He put to flee, and hide himself for his Life?
How often is He maligned, tempted, slandered, persecuted, called a Devil, hated
and hunted, until He is at length condemned and killed?

4. Consider what it was that He suffered: It was not one kind of Trouble and
Affliction, that He was exercised with; but in a manner all sorts came upon
Him, He was a Man of Sorrows and acquanted with grief, He was oppressed and
afflicted Esai. 53 3, 7. He was despised and rejected of men Esai. 53: 3. He
hid not his facefrom shame and spitting, but gave his back to the smiters, and
his cheeks to them, that plucked off the hair Esai. 50: v. 6. Matthew. 26: 67.
and 27: 26. He was exercised with Hunger, Thirst, Weariness, Poverty, and the
like. He was apprehended as a Thief or a Robber, Imprisoned, falsely Accused,
Condemned, Scourged, and Crucified. He was mocked and reproached, by Words and
Deeds, when they put a Crown of Thorns on His Head, clothed Him with a Rob, and
put a Reed in His Hand, and bowed the knee before Him, saying, Hail, King of
the Jews.

5. Consider what, beside all this that He suffered in His Body and Name, He
suffered in Soul, when He was in the Garden Matthew. 26: 37, 3^. Where He began
to be sorrowful even unto Death: Yea so sad and heavy was He, that He cried out
Verse. 39 O my Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me: And this
He cried thrice over, which shows the vehemence of that pressure, under which
He lay, at that time, when He was beginning to wrestle that bloody combat with
the Wrath of God, and to drink that galled Cup, wherein was the Law* curse,
because of Sin. And all this was from the Hand of His Father; for it was He,
who bruised Him, and put Him to grief Esai. 53: verse 10. And it was He, who
hid His face from Him; so that He cried out, while on the Cross, My God, My
God, why have thou forsaken me? And that when He was presently to give up the
Ghost Mat. 27: v. 46, 50.

6. Consider how little outward Comfort of Friends or Relations He found, all
this time: While He was sweating drops of Blood, through the vehemency of the
bitter agony, He was into, while in the Garden, He could not prevail with His
Disciples to watch with Him, but one hour. And when He was apprehended by the
treachery of His own Disciple, who ate of His Bread, by Judas the Traitor,
all His other Disciples forsook Him; Courageous Peter denied Him thrice, not
without Oaths and Execrations; His loving and beloved Disciple John stood a far
off; bleeding and sorrowful-hearted, Mary, His Mother, durst not come near to
Him: When the Shepherd was smitten, the Flock was scattered.

7. Consider how innocent He was, He had done no violence, neither was any
deceit found in His mouth Esai. 53: 9. Though He was just, yet was He put to
suffer 1 Pet. 3: v 18, and 2: 22. We know what false accusations were
brought-in against Him; But by all their false witnesses, they could not get
Him convict of sin: The Causes wherefore (as to men) He was judged and
condemned were Glorious and Fundamental Truths, such as His affirming that He
was the Son of God, and that He was a King, though His Kingdom was not of this
World; and therefore was not inconsistent with Caesar's Kingdom Luke 22: 70, 71.
Ioh. 18 36, 37.

8. Yea not only had He done no wrong, but He was come about the most necessary
and useful Business of the World, to wit, to save sinners. He was come to bear
witness to the truth, and to lay down His Life for His People; He was come to
save them from Sin and Destruction, by bearing the Wrath and Curse of God, that
was due to sinners, in their stead, as being their Cautioner, and substitute by
the Father, in their Room and Place. He was Jesus, the Savior of His People:
The Horn of Salvation for us, in the House of David, that we should be saved
from our Enemies, and from the hand of all, that hate us, as Zacharias sung
Luke 1: verse. 68, 69, 71, etc. And yet notwithstanding that this was his
errand, this was the welcome He got. He came unto His own, but they received
Him not: He came to save them, from all their Enemies; and they dealt with Him,
as with the Worst of Enemies; and were never at peace, until they had gotten
Him crucified and buried.

9. Consider what a Death He was put to: It was not a simple Death, but a
multiplied one: For being Crucified, He had (1) a Painful Tormenting Death, a
long lingering and painful Death, yea five Deaths at once, every nail bringing
Death with it. (2.) He had a shameful Death, while thus Crucified, as a chief
Malefactor, and hung-up betwixt two Thieves. (3.) He had a cursed Death; for
the Law said, cursed is every one, that hangs on a tree Gal. 3: verse. 13.
Deuteronomy. 21: 23.

10. Consider for whose sakes all this suffering of His was: It was for the
unjust 1 Pet. 3: verse. 18. He bare our griefs, and carried our sorrows; He was
wounded for our Transgressions, the chastisement of our Peace was upon Him; The
Lord laid on Him the iniquity of us all, for the transgression of his People
was He smitten Esai. 53: verse. 4, 5, 6, 8. It was for Enemies that Christ, died
for sinners, and for the ungodly Romans 5: 6, 8, 10.

21. Consider likewise how patiently He endured all this, When He was reviled,
He reviled not again 1 Pet. 2: verse. 23. He was brought, as a Lamb to the
slaughter, and as a Sheep before the Shearers is dumb, so He opened not His
mouth: Yea though He was oppressed and afflicted, yet He opened not His mouth
Esai. 53: 7. When He was accused of the chief Priest and Elders, he answered
nothing Matthew. 27: verse. 12. Yea, when Pilat said unto Him, hear thou not
how many things they witness against thee? He answered him to never a word, in
so much that the Governor marvelled greatly verse. 13. When one of the Officers
stroke Him with the Palm of His Hand, He only answered thus; If I have spoken
evil, bear witness of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou Me? Ioh. 18: 22,
23. We have heard of the Patience of Job, but withal also of much of his
Impatience: But never was such Patience seen in any, as in Christ; never was
there an Impatient Word heard out of His Mouth, even when the base Soldiers
were reviling Him, spitting in His face, putting a Crown of Thorns on His
Head, and a fools coat upon Him, and when scourging Him, buffetting Him?
Hoodwinking Him, and Mocking Him. Yea when they were doing the worst they could
devise against Him; He said, Father forgive them, for they know not what they
are doing.

12. Consider how willingly and cheerfully He did undergo all, When He knew,
that the Priests Emissaries were coming with the Traitor to apprehend Him, He
would not go out of the way; nor suffer His Disciples to rescue Him; yea He
would not pray to His Father for Angels help: Think thou (said he to Peter
Matthew. 26: 53.) that I cannot now pray to My Father, and he shall presently
give me more, than Twelve Legions of Angels. Verse. 54. But how then shall the
Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be. Nay all the Roman Soldiery
could not have taken His Life, if He had not been willing Ioh. 10: verse. 17,
18. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my Life, that I might
take it again. No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self. I have
power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again: This Commandment
have I received of my-Father. He had a Baptism to be Baptized with, and how
was He straightened, or pained, till it was accomplished? Luke 12: v. 50. How
offended was He at Peter, when he would have dissuaded Him from suffering,
saying to Him, Get thee behind me, Satan Matthew. 16: v. 23. When He knew, the
time was approaching, it is said, He steadfastly set His face to go toward
Jerusalem Luke 9: 51.

As to the Second thing here to be spoken to, the Advantageous Improvement of
these Particulars, We shall only mentione some Conclusions, which the right
thoughts of these things, will help the Believer to draw, in order to his
possessing a life, in time of Afflictions and Persecutions: As

1. The Afflicted Believer may say, I need not think it strange, that I am
exercised with Afflictions, Temptations and Tribulations: It is no new or
uncouth thing that is befallen me; the Captain of my Salvation was thus, and
worse handled; and who am I, that I should think to be exeemed from such a lot?
Is it not enough, that the common Soldier be as his Captain? Nay, will not
the common Soldier be glade to share of the Captains lot of Hardship? And
should not I rejoice, that I am honored to wear my Captains Livery? His Life
was a Life of lasting and growing trouble; and should not I be glade to follow
Him, and drink of that Cup, whereof He drank? Affliction was no strange or
uncouth thing to Him, and why should it be strange to me? Have I Him, even Him,
set before me, for a Copy, and why should I not be most willing to write after
this Copy?

2. Hence the Afflicted Believer may Infer, I have so little cause to
Complain of all that is befallen me, that, when I consider what Glorious
Christ did meet with, I have great cause to Wonder, and Praise, that I am so
gently dealt with: He has been very tender toward me; when He might have
made my lot much more sad: behold, how He has pitied me, and considered my
weakness. He has not dealt with me, as He dealt with His own only begotten
Son, Jesus Christ: His own dearly beloved Son was otherwise exercised, than I
have been: He had more sharp Trials and Temptations, and sadder Exercises to
rancountre with, beside the Wrath and fiery Indignation of God, that He had to
wreastle with. How mercifully then has God dealt with me, that He has not
made my Torments and Grief inward much more insupportable? O! When I read, how
the Holy and Just One, the Innocent Lamb of God, was handled by sinners,
through the Holy Permission and Providence of God, and lay my petty troubles in
the Balance with these, how am I made to wonder, that the Lord has not dealt
otherwise with me a sinner; and to cry out, who am I that I should have been
stroaked with such a gentle Hand? Who am I, that God should have put so much
sugger in my Cup; when the Prince of Life, the Prince of the Kings of the
Earth, who was Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, and separate from Sinners, was
otherwise handled? So that right thoughts, of this would make them ashamed to
Quarrel with the most High; or to repine at his Dispensations with them. When
they consider, how others are spared, and they so sharply exercised, their
hearts are ready to say, why does the Lord deal so with me? Why does He single
me out from others, and deal worse with me, than with them? But if they would
present before their eyes, what Christ, the Son of His Love, did meet with,
they durst not suffer a quarrelling thought to lodge within their heart; but
all their frettings, and repineings would be turned into wonderings and praises.

3. The Afflicted Believer would hence draw this Conclusion. Seeing Christ was
put to suffer such and such evils before me, I may infer, that the sting,
venom and curse of these evils are taken away: Seeing He has passed through the
straits of Affliction, He has made the passage easier and wider for His
followers: He has sweatened the passage, and taken the sting away; so that
now, it cannot hurt or harm so much, as otherwise it would. Christ has gone
through Sorrow, Shame, Pains, Wants, Temptations, Mockings, Spittings,
Scourgings, Yea and Death it self; and thereby has paved a Way for His
Followers, and has strawed it with flowers of fragant Love; His footsteps, all
alongs the way, have dropped fatness. O how sweet has He made an hard bed now?
He became poor, that we might become rich, even while poor; and so might
sanctify Poverty to us. He became a man of Sorrows, and acquanted with
grief, that He might sweeten that lot unto His Followers, and keep them from
the evil of it, from the hurt and poison of it. May not this Consideration
encourage His Followers, to embrace the Cross with Love; Complacency, and
Delight, when it is thus sweetened to them, and in a manner no Cross? May not
a Prison become an heartsome Palace unto His People, when they consider, how
the Prince of Life, the Absolute Lord of all, the Chief or Standard Bearer
amongst Ten Thousand, was taken from Prison Esai. 53: 8.? How welcome should an
unjust Sentence from men be, when our blessed Lord was taken also from
judgment, and was wickedly condemned for a Traitor? How sweet should the most
shamful and painful Death be to us, that the wicked can devise, as the
expression of their imbittered malice, and rage; when Noble Jesus was
crucified; and so put the most shamful and cursed Death, that could be; seeing
hereby Death has lost its sting, and the curse is taken away; for he was made
a curse Gal. 3: verse. 13.

4. The Afflicted Believer may hence Infer, That seeing Christ has thus been
exercised himself, He knows how to Pity and Sympathize with such, as are so
handled. Was He Mocked, Vilified, Maligned, Despised, falsely Accused, Condemned
for a Traitor to Caesar, Buffetted, Spit upon, Scourged, and Hanged as a
thief; He knows what it is to be so exercised, and what such a condition
calls for, and what they in such a condition have need of: He knows what
word of consolation will be fittest for them. And this is no small encouragment
unto the Believer, as was shown above Consid. 2.

5. The suffering Believer may draw this Conclusion. Seeing Christ was put to
all these sharp and sad sufferings, I may well lay my hand on my mouth, I may
put my mouth in the dust, and be silent, let the Lord lay one me what He will:
and by this means, he may quiet all the insurrections of his spirit against
the Lord, and put a check unto all the insolent thoughts, that arise in his
mind against the Lord's procedour with him, upon whatsoever occasion: as

(1.) Does this trouble and vex his spirit, that he is innocent, as to what is
laid to his charge, and is persecuted without cause? And will he not be
quieted, when he remembereth, how the Innocent lamb of God was handled; how He
was mis-used and persecuted, who did never man hurt, who never did sin, nor
was guile found in His mouth 1 Pet. 2. verse. 22. They hated and persecuted Him
without a cause Ioh. 15. verse. 25. as they did David, who was a typ of Him
Psalm. 35. verse 19. and 69. verse. 4. See also Psalm. 35. verse. 7. and 109. verse.
3. and 119. verse. 78, 161.

(2.) Does it vex him to think, that he has to do with unreasonable men, worse
than Heathens or Turks? And will not this stop his mouth, That they can be no
more rude, absurd, cruel and unreasonable, than those with whom Christ had to
do? What fair law or justice could Christ get? They could not get so much as
false witnesses to agree in any thing to accuse Him of; yet they would
persecute Him to the death. Pilat was convinced of his Innocence, and yet did
deliver Him to be crucified. What men more irrational, than the brutish,
ignorant rabble, set on by judicially-blinded and enraged Ringleaders, the
Priests and Rulers?

(3.) Does it vex them to think, that their own familiar friends and
acquaintances turn their back upon them, and refuse to comfort them? And had
not Christ this to wrestle against, when all fled and forsook Him, and His own
Disciple betrayed Him; Is it not said, that He came unto His own, and that His
own received Hi^ not? Ioh. 1: 11.

(4.) Does it trouble them to think, that they are exercised with many troubles
at once, and which is worst of all, when outward troubles are lying on, the
Lord is hiding His face? And I pray, was not this also Christ's lot? was not He
put to cry out, even while on the cross, and within a few minutes of expiring
and of giving up the ghost, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And had
He not a sadder inward exercise, while in the garden, where He was made to
sweat drops of blood, than any that can befall them? He had the weight of
Law-wrath to bear, that was due to all the Elect ones; but the hidings, which
Believers can meet with, are only fatherly with-drawings.

(5.) If the duration and continuance of the trouble and affliction come into
their minds, and vex them; let them think, that it cannot be worse with them,
than it was with the Lord Christ, whose whole life was a life of suffering: we
read of His weeping, but never of His laughing. How often was He in hazard of His
life, even from His Infancy? How was He maligned, slandered, called a Devil, a
glutton and a winebiber, a profane Person? How often were snares laid for Him?
and how did Trouble follow Him to His grave?

6. The afflicted Believer may hence Infer, That it is his duty to study and
to endeavor patience: for in this did Christ leave us an example, that we
should follow His steps 1 Pet. 2. verse. 21. In this passage of Peter, we have
some particulars, which were evidences, proofs or effects of Patience in
Christ, in all which we should labor to follow our Example: as

(1.) As He was free of sin, before He began to suffer, and His Enemies could
lay no sin to His charge; so, while He was under their hands, all the pain and
trouble, they put Him to, caused Him not to sin in thought, word, or deed: So
should the Sufferer labor and strive against sin: It is true, we cannot be
sinless, and our corruptions will work; yet it is our duty to wrestle against
corruptions, and to set a watch upon the door of our lips, and to guaird our
hearts; or rather to give heart and tongue and all unto Christ to keep; that we
may be helped to suffer holily, to His glory.

(2.) When He was reviled, He reviled not again; when He suffered, He
threatened not. When they were doing the worst they could do against Him, He did
not in the least requite them, or wish harm unto them; but on the contrary, as
we heard Luke 24. 34. He prayed the Father to forgive them. So in this should
we endeavor to follow our copy, and thereby give proof of our Christian
Patience; to bless when they curse us, and pray for them, when they dispitfully
use us, and persecute us; and to do them good, that hate us: thus shall we
evidence that we are the Children of our Father, who is in heaven Mat. 5: 44,
45.

(3.) He committed Himself to Him, that judges righteously: He referred
Himself and His Cause unto the righteous Judge of quick and dead. So should we
do, we should not fret our selves because of evil doers, neither be envious
against the workers of iniquity; but commit our way unto the Lord, and trust
also in Him, and He shall bring it to pass Psalm, 37. verse. 1, 5. wait for His
decision, who is the righteous Judge.

Further, the right Consideration of this Patience of Christ, in all His
sufferings, would help us unto a more Christian and Patient way of bearing the
cross; for we would see ground to say,

(1.) Was Christ, who did no sin, put to all this suffering; and did He bear it
all with wonderful patience; and should I take it ill, to be thus persecuted,
seeing, howbeit men have no just quarrel against me; yet God has just cause to
pursue me? Was sinless and holy Jesus patient, and should I be impatient, who
am punished of God, less than mine iniquities deserve?

(2.) Was Christ so patient under such an heavy cross, with which mine is not
to be compared, or named in one day; and should I be impatient, and thereby
offend God more? It were better for me, to be following my copy, and keeping
mine hands clean of sin, let the cross be what it will.

(3.) Could not all the wrongs, that Christ met with at the hands of cruel and
ungrate wretches, move Him once to give them one evil word, or to wish them the
least evil imaginable; But did He rather pray for them? And is it fit for me to
be wishing them evil in my heart? Should I not rather desire to imitate Christ,
and to strive against mine own passion, and willingly forgive them all the
wrongs, they do unto me?

(4.) Did Christ commit His cause to God, and wait for His decision? And
should not I possess my soul in patience, resting on God by faith, that He
will judge all these wrongs and injuries, in due time? Is not God the judge?
And does not vengeance belong unto Him? And should I think to dethrone Him, and
take his office and work upon me? Oh! It is better, that I follow Christ, and
roll all over on God, and quiet my Soul in hope of a righteous Determination
from God, the righteous judge of all the world.

7. The right consideration of Christ's sufferings upon such an account, as to
men, I mean, His suffering because He affirmed Himself to be a King, would make
the Believer, called to suffer upon that same account, (to wit, for Asserting,
Maintaining, Avowing, and by their actions and practice Declaring, that Christ
is King, and only King and Head over His spiritual Kingdom and Church,) rejoice
in that honor, that is put upon him, to be called to witness unto such a
Truth, that Christ Himself was a Martyr for, in respect of Men. O! how should
this fill the hearts of such with joy, and make them sing, in the midst of the
flames, and rejoice in that they are counted worthy to suffer for so noble a
cause, or for the least branch thereof.

8. From Christ suffering so willingly, so cheerfully, so resolutly for the
unjust, for sinners, and for rebels, the Suffering believer will draw this
Conclusion: did Christ suffer such things, and that so cheerfully, heartily and
willingly for my cause; and should not I be ready to suffer cheerfully,
heartily and willingly for his Cause, Word, Truth, and Interest? So that this
would hearten unto an hearty and courageous witnessing for the Lord, and for
His Truth, and for the Word of His Patience, and shame the man from a
discouraged, faint-hearted, dead and drouping manner of following Christ, and
of bearing His cross; for he would see cause to say, did Christ suffer so much
for unworthy, sinful, nothing Me, and that with so much Patience, Cheerfulness,
Sted fastness and fixed Resolution; and should I be ashamed of Him, who is the
God of glory, the Prince of the Kings of the earth, King of Kings and Lord of
Lords, or of His Cause and Interest? Should I carry, when suffering upon His
account, and upon the account of His Truth, His Word, His Testimony, His work
and Interest, as if I were an evil door? Should I carry, as if I repented of
owning Him, and His Interest? No, no, I should account it my glory, as it is
indeed.

CONSIDERATION. XII. Our Sufferings are nothing comparable to Christ's.
WHen we spoke to the last Consideration, we mentioned something of this: But
because more is to be said of it, and it may be edifyingly Improven, for the
ends designed; we shall speak alittle more to it here by it self, though it be
but a branch of the former. And for this cause, we shall do these two things.
1. We shall mention some particulars, whereby the disproportion betwixt
Christ's Sufferings and Ours, will appear manifest. 2. We shall show how
thoughts of these my prove advantageous unto a Christians spiritual life, in a
day of Affliction and Tribulation.

In order to the understanding of the first, we would take notice.

1. That the disproportion is infinite, in respect of the Persons suffering:
what are we, Yesterday-Nothings, base and worthless worms, whose life is in
our nostrils, vain empty shadows? But He is the standart-bearer amongst Ten
Thousand Cant. 5. verse. 10. The wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God; the
Everlasting Father, and the Prince of peace Esai. 9. verse. 6. This makes that
all our Sufferings are not worthy to be compared with His. We know, that the
Greatness, Nobility, Worth and Dignity of the Person, who is put to suffer,
makes the Sufferings more in the account of men, than otherwise they would be.
That a poor, base, unworthy beggar is scourged, spit upon and buffeted, is
nothing, or not much considerable; but to see a King, a Prince, or great
Nobleman so used, that is a considerable matter, in the eyes of men. It is not
much to see beggars sitting on dung-hils; but it is much to see such, as did
feed delicatly, sit desolat in the streets; and to see such as were brought up
in scarlet, embraceing dunghils; that is indeed matter of a lamentation. Lam.
4. verse. 5. To see base men contemned and slighted is not much; but to see
Princes hanged-up by their hand, and the faces of Elders not honored, that is
sad and lamentable Lam. 5. verse. 12. So it is not much to see us, base,
unworthy, sinful and nothing creatures, suffering, and put to hardships,
disgrace, pain, shame, misery and wants: But to see the Prince of the Kings
of the earth in disgrace; to see the Lord of life killed, the Son of God
despised, the King of Kings spit upon, and put to pain; to see the Heir of
all things suffering want; that is an uncouth sight. This makes Christ's
sufferings incomparably great, and all our Sufferings nothing in comparison
with these, even when ours are at the greatest. What are the sufferings of a
beast, of a worm, or the like, unto the sufferings of the greatest Prince that
ever was, or unto the sufferings of an Angel? And yet the worm being a
creature, as well as the Prince or Angel, the difference is not so very great:
but the difference is Infinitely more great, betwixt the sufferings of Christ,
who is God, equal with the Father in power, and the sufferings of the greatest
King or Emperor, or Angel that ever was, because there is no comparison
betwixt Finite and Infinite, betwixt God and the Creature.

2. We know it is much more for one to suffer Death, while in the flowr of his
age, and in the prime of his Strength, and who in all probability, according to
his natural Constitution, might live many years; than for one, who is half Dead
already, and is carrying about with him the Sentence of Death, his Body being
decayed, and his clay-cottage ruinous, and almost fallen to the ground: So in
this respect Christ's Sufferings are far beyond ours; for our Clay-bodies are so
rotten with Corruption, so broken with sicknesses and diseases, that a few
years should put an end to our days, and we should quickly return unto dust,
though no hand were streatched out against us; yea, though all imaginable
means were used, to keep us in vigor and life. But Christ's Body, though a
true Body, yet was naturally free of these Corruptions, that come because of
sin, which our Bodies are obnoxious unto: We never read of his sickness. And
though his death was not wholly miraculous, yet we may not say, that He would
have died naturally, as other men do, though no violent hands had been laid
upon Him.

3. We use to think much more of his sufferings, who suffers wrongously and
without Cause, than of his, who suffers deservedly; We will not be much moved
to see a bloody Murderer put to Death; but it will move us much to see a man
put to death, against whom nothing worthy of Death can be alleiged. So, in
this respect, our Sufferings are nothing in comparison of Christ's; for however,
as to men, we should suffer innocently; yet there is ground for God to plead
His controversy against us, and to use these, as Instruments of His Justice,
to execute His righteous Sentence against us. But it was otherwise as to
Christ, who, though as standing in the room of the Elect, and made their
Cautioner, and so made sin for them, or had their sin imputed to Him, He was
smitten of Justice; yet as to His own Person, He was the Innocent Lamb of God,
and without sin, Holy, Harmless, Undefiled. And as to men, He suffered most
wrongously, as was seen above.

4. The difference is great in this respect, That Mercy is Master of work,
standing at the side of the fournace, and ordering the same, while His people
are lying into it: But the Law-wrath and Justice of God was blowing at the coal
of Christ's Sufferings. We have to do but with men, whose Actions are overruled
by the Omnipotent hand of a Merciful God? But He had to do with God, executing
Law-Justice, because He stood in the room of the Elect. The Lord laid on Him
the iniquity of us all. He was wounded for our transgressions, He was bruised
for our Iniquities, the Chastisement of our Peace was upon Him. He bear the
iniquity and sin of many Esai. 53. v. 5, 6, 11, 12. His own self bear our sins,
in his own Body, on the tree 1 Pet. 2: v. 24. It is not so with the Lords
People; He deals not with them, in pure Wrath, or in Justice; but in Mercy
and in Moderation. The Cup, that Christ had to drink, was full of the purest
Law-wrath, and so bitter, that His Holy Sinless Soul did scunner at it: But in
the Cup of his Children, there is not one drop of the revenging Justice of God,
or of Law-wrath; but much of His Fatherly Mercy, and it smells strongly of
Love; for He is bringing about their good hereby. Therefore the disproportion
betwixt Christ's Sufferings and ours is Infinite, upon this account.

5. Put the case (which yet will not be) that God should deal with any of His
own, according to strick Severity, and Law-Justice; yet could not their
Sufferings be comparable unto Christ's. Though they were pursued by pure
Justice, and by Law-vengeance, and sent away to everlasting flames, they should
not, for all that, endure what He endured; for they should but suffer, in that
case, for their own particular and personal faults: But Christ bear the sins of
many, even of all the Elect: And this would make the difference great: How much
greater then must the difference now be, when their Sufferings are of a far
other Nature?

6. This will be further clear, if we Consider, how Christ did not only undergo
the Debt of the Elect, and wrestled with strickest Law-Justice; but by His
Sufferings, He made full Satisfaction to Justice; which they all, for whom
Christ died, had never been able in hell to have done; there had they lain, for
ever, and had never come out of prison; for they had never been able to have
satisfied Justice: But what Christ Suffered was full Satisfaction to Justice,
that it could crave no more; the Bond and Obligation was cancelled on the
Cross, and Christ cried out, It is finished; intimating that the last penny
was paid. Thus Christ suffered more, than all of them could have done, for all
Eternity: and so certainly His sufferings were transcendently and surpassing
great; and the hardest of our Sufferings ought not to be named in one day with
His.

In Order to the Improving of this, (which is the Second Particular) we shall
mentione these few things,

1. Were this Consideration rightly thought on, and improven, His people would
not be so much troubled and affrighted, in a time of Sufferings, as usually
they are. We see how Christ went up to Jerusalem, and set His face to go
thitherward, resolving to go thither, notwithstanding of all Impediments in the
way; and albeit His Disciples were averse from that journay, and would have
dissuaded Him from it; He went thither with a full Resolution, though He knew
He was to grapple not only with the King of Terrors there, but with pure
Law-Curse and Wrath, because of the Sins of His chosen ones: And what should
make His people afraied, who have little or nothing to meet with, in comparison
of what Christ did meet with; they have nothing of Law-wrath, and of pure
Vindictive Justice to meet with, as Christ had to rancountre with, in full
measure: Justice is now satisfied in their behalf; and it is their mistake to
think, that in and by Afflictions, God is pursueing them in wrath: It is true,
there may be fatherly anger and displeasure in the Cup, Which they get to
drink; but Christ drank-out the Curse, and satisfied Vindictive Justice, and
there is no payment to Justice, no not one farthing required of them, in all
their Sufferings. So that Believers have not so great cause to fear, as they
suppose.

2. Were this rightly considered, the people of God would carry more like
Saints under Afflictions, than they do: They are oftentimes, when sore
afflicted, saying within themselves, why does the Lord deal so with me? Are not
many worse than I am more gently dealt with. Oh! They consider not what Holy
and Harmless Jesus was made to suffer. Sure, if they considered this, they
durst repine and fret in their minds no more. What though they have been
innocent, as to men; and what though they be sincere and upright, as to God?
Yet they are sinners, and Christ, who never sinned, was otherways handled
both at the hands of God and Man, than they are, though their Afflictions and
Sufferings were many vvayes multiplied.

3. Right thoughts of this would teach them to carry the yoke with very great
patience and submission of Soul: Holy Jesus had another sort of yoke upon His
blessed neck; and yet he bore it with wonderful Patience, yea with Holy
Delight. Why then should they be so impatient under their light and easy Yoke?
It is little they have to bear, yea nothing, in comparison of what Christ stood
under.

4. Seeing Christ suffered so much, and bore the Curse, what have believers now
to endure, or lie under? The height they can be reckoned to, is but small
remnants of what fell on Christ in a full flood; and what they meet with is
wholly free of Vindictive Wrath. They suffer but some little thing of that,
which is behind of the Sufferings of Christ Col. 1: verse. 24. Christ trod the
Wine Press, He has gone through the sea, and all the mighty waves thereof: The
shoure of Law-vengeance fell on His face, in its full force and might; and
there is nothing of that left, but small drops of the outward Affliction, freed
of the Curse, left behind for His Followers. Have not His Followers then cause
of Rejoiceing, upon this account, in the midst of all their Afflictions?

5. Though trouble increase, yet they ought to be quiet, and possess their
Soul in Patience; for it will never increase to that height, that it will be
equal to Christ's trouble: Though their Afflictions come to the heighest, that
men can bring them to: Yet will they be infinitely below the Afflictions, that
Christ suffered. Have any then cause to complain, when they are so gently
dealt with; and when all their Afflictions are in a manner no Afflictions, in
comparison of Christ's?

6. We are often ready to look upon our Sufferings thorovv a magnifying glass,
and take notice of all Considerations, that may serve to heighten them; and
thus we take a way to create much more trouble and vexation to ourselves, and
to make our life more sad and bitter: But the right improvement of this
Consideration would prevent all this; for would we take a right view of the
inconceivably great and unparalleled Sufferings of Christ, ours in comparison
of these, would soon evanish out of sight, and disappear as nothing: And thus
would we be brought to bear our Affliction with full Subjection of Soul, with
silence, yea and with thankful acknowledgment of Gods Graciousness and
Tenderness, who has dealt so gently with us, when He might have made the yoke
more, yea much more, heavy and insupportable.

7. Who, taking a right View of what Christ suffered, will not think themselves
called to suffer for His sake, with great willingness and cheerfulness? May not
every Believer say, did Christ undergo the heavy weight of the Wrath of God,
for me? Did He lie under the Law-curse, and bear the blows of Vindictive
Justice, for me? Stood He betwixt me, and the pure Wrath of a sin-revenging
God? Did He drink the bitter Cup, the Gall and the Wormwood of Law-vengeance,
that I might be freed therefrom? Did He bear that, under which I should have
lain to all eternity, that I might never come into that place of torment? And
what Affliction, Persecution, Tribulation, Distress, Sorrow, Pain and
Suffering should I think too much for Him and His sake? Seeing He endured for me
the brunt of the battle, and stood-out the sharpest of the storm and hail of
Divine Wrath, and Law-Indignation; why should not I be content to bear a drop
of man's Wrath, or of the storm of man's Indignation, which is free of the Curse
and of pure Wrath, for Him and for His Interest? Has He suffered so much for
me, and shall I think much to suffer such a small matter for Him? Is there no
proportion betwixt what He willingly endured, to save me from Hell and from the
Wrath of a Sin-revenging God, and what I can be put to suffer for Him, and His
Testimony? And shall I notwithstanding be unwilling to undergo such a small
inconsiderable bit of suffering for His Glory, and for the Word of His
Patience? Drank he the Cup of pure Wrath for me, and shall I think much to
drink a drop of cold Water for Him? O how willing and cheerful would the right
apprehension of this Consideration, make the Believer, to undergo all that men
could devise, for His Lord and Master?

CONSIDERATION XIII. Suffering has been the Lot of Christ's Church, in all
Ages.
ORdinarily when the Church and People of God meet with new trials and
troubles, they cry out, as the Church did of old Lam. 1: v. 12. Behold and see
if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow: They presently conclude, that their
case has not a parallel, and that the Church in no age did meet with such a
dispensation, as they are under: Hence proceeds much sorrow. But if it were
considered, that the Church in all Ages (very few excepted) has met with the
like or sorer trouble, and has drunk of that same cup, that is now at theit
Head, they could not but see cause of laying their hand upon their mouth, and
sitting silent in the dust, as being convinced, that there were no new thing
under the Sun; Therefore, seeing this Consideration may be of use, in order to a
spiritual Life under Afflictions, we shall speak a little to it; and in order
to the right improvement thereof, lay down these following Particulars to be
pondered.

1. The only Wise God has thought good, for His own Holy ends, that His Church
should be a Militant Church here, should taste of the Wormwood and the Gall of
Affliction, and wade through Trouble and Persecution: He has seen it fit, that
she should be in a wilderness Condition here: And so it has been in almost all
ages, as might be evidenced, if necessary.

2. Not only has the Church of God met with Affliction; but the cup has been
long at her Head, without any intermission. The seed of Abraham were to be
strangers, to serve and be afflicted four hundereth years and more, even from
Ismaels beginning to mock, until they were delivered out of Egypt Genesis 15: v.
13. Act. 7: 6, 7. with Exodus 12: 41. Was not the Church kept forty years
wandering in the Wilderness, before she came to rest? And when settled in the
promised Land, how many years together was she oppressed by Enemies? sometimes
Eight Judge. 3: 8. then Eighteen verse. 14. then Twenty Judge. 4: v. 3. Then
Senventie Years in captivity in Babylon. And we know, how the Christian Church
was in an afflicted and persecuted condition, in the primitive times, three
hundereth Years, until Constantine the great came to the Empire; and how long
she has groaned under Antichrist's tyranny.

3. The Lord also thinks good, to renew the days of the Church her sorrow;
after some warm blainks, and some short respite; as the primitive Church had,
in the intervals betwixt the Ten vehement and fiery Persecutions, some whereof
were of longer, some of shorter continuance: After a respite, He sends a new
storm; so that her calamites are like waves of the sea, ere one be well away,
another comes. Hence the Psalmist says Ps. 129. verse. 1, 2. Many a time have
they afflicted me from my youth.

4. Yea moreover, the Lord sees good to afflict her, with billows of waves of
His displeasure, and to afflict her very sore: as Esai. 64. verse. 9, 10, 11,
12. Be not wroth very sore -- Thy holy cities are a wilderness, Zion is a
wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation. Our holy and our beautiful house, where our
fathers praised thee, is burnt up with fire, and all our pleasant things are
laid waste: will thou refrain thy self for these things? O Lord, will thou
hold thy peace, and afflict us very sore? This was a sore stroke, which
destroyed both Church and State.

5. Some times the Church has to do with more Enemies, than one, at once: See
Psalm. 83. ver. 5, 6, 7, 8. For they have consulted together with one consent,
they are consederat against thee. The Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites,
of Moab and the Hagarens, Gebal and Ammon and Amalek, the Philistines with the
Inhabitants of Tire. Assure also is joined with them; they have helped the
children of Lot. This was a dreadful conspiracy of all the Enemies round about,
both far and near; and their design was, to cut off the people of God from
being a Nation, that the Name of Israel might be no more in remembrance verse.
4. As Herod and Pilat will agree, when they are to concur to the cutting off
of Christ; so these Enemies, though sometimes at variance among themselves, yet
can agree in one to join their forces together, to destroy and cut off, if
they could, the Inheritance of the Lord.

6. Withal the Lord may hide His face, in the midst of these outward
calamities, and refuse to give light, comfort, counsel or direction. She may be
afflicted and tossed with tempests, and withal not comforted. How has the
Lord (said the Church Lam. 2. v. 1, 3.) covered the Daughter of Zion with a
cloud in his anger? -- He burned against Jacob, like a flame of fire See also
Chap. 3: 8, 9, 10, 11, etc. and several other passages.

7. Sometime the Lord so orders the affliction, as that the very timeing of
it, makes it much more heavy, than otherwise it would be; as when His people
are secure, and crying peace, peace. The Israelites thought all was well, when
they were got out of Egypt; but ere they were awar, how quickly were they
environed with new Difficulties, pursued by Pharaoh, and all his hosts; and
having the red sea before, and no way to escape upon either hand, doubtless the
very season and time of this new difficulty made it very grievous. It cannot be
but sad, when it is with the Church, as Jeremy says of the Church, in his
time Ier. 8: v. 15. and 14: 19. We looked for peace, but no good came, for a
time of healing, and behold trouble.

8. Not only is the Church put to contend with open Enemies; but she is also
much molested with false friends, who, under pretense of friendship, seek to
ruin her; These prove most dangerous Enemies, as traitors within a besieged
place. While she is prospering, many offer their service to her, and seem to be
cordial friends, and yet are but a mixed multitude, who, when the first
occasion offers, will seek to return to Egypt: for all their profession of
kindness and friendship, when a fit opportunity offers, there are none more
bitter Enemies, than they are. So that it often fares with her, as Paul said it
would fare, after his death, with the Church of Ephesus, in respect of
Heretics and false Teachers Act. 20. verse. 29, 30 For I know this, that after
my departing, shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock;
also of your own selves shall men arise, spea^ing perverse things etc.

9. Yea, so low may the Church sometimes be brought, under the feet of
adversaries. that little hope may remain of her recovery; yea she may be
looked on by one and other, as in a desperate and forlorn condition; so that
even many of the faithful may be shaken in their hops, and saying, will the
Lord be favorable no more? Are His mercies clean gone? Does His promise fail
for ever more? Has He forgotten to be gracious? Has He in anger shut up His
tender mercies? Such may be her condition, that all humane probability of her
recovery may be gone, and the faithful have nothing but a bare hair ofhop to
hold by, or a small plank ofa promise, and that also under the waters of
contrary dispensations, to stand upon; and so far may the delivery be out of
sight, that, when it begins to dawne, they may be as those that dream Ps.
126. verse. 1.

10. Yet withal it is considerable, that notwithstanding of all the
opposition, made by the Devil and his Instruments, against the Church, she has
been a burning bush, and yet not consumed: though she has been many a time
afflicted, and that from her youth, yet her adversaries have not prevailed
against her: the plowers have often plowed upon her back, and made long their
furrows; yet still the righteous Lord has cut the cords of the wicked Psa.
129. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4. Many an arrow have they shot at her; yet mount Zion
stands, and she has her Towers, Bulwarcks and Palaces Psalm. 48. She is founded
upon the rock of ages, and the ports of hell cannot prevail against her Mat.
16. No Weapon, that is formed against Israel, shall prosper Esai. 54: 17.

If these particulars were rightly thought upon and improven, we might be
helped thereby to a life of Faith and Hope, both in reference to the sad
condition of the Church in general, and also in reference to our own particular
suffering condition.

And first, In reference to the Church, we may from these particulars see
ground of giving a check to our Inferences from the Lords's present
Dispensations with His Church, savouring of Unbeleef, Despondency,
Discouragment and Hoplesness. We see, it is true, the Church overwhelmed with
sorrow, fitting as a widow, and her tears upon her face: We see her looking
pale, as if death were in her face, all beauty and liveliness gone, her Enemies
multipliying and prospering daily, and the Church still sincking more and more
in the sea of sorrow and distress. Many, it is true, are ready to say, can this
be the true Church, and these the real people of God, whose life is thus
constantly made bitter with renewed storms and tempests of adversity? Can this
indeed be the work of God, which is thus cast down to the ground, and trampled
under-foot? Would the Lord stand by and look on, when His spouse (if she were
so indeed) is thus abused by the vilest of men? Would He suffer His Name and
Work to be thus blasphemed? True, all this and much more may be said, and be
done against His Church, and she remain the true Church of Christ; and His
work be His work. It has been so before now; and there is no new thing under
the Sun. And the right thoughts of what is said would prevent the trouble, that
such Atheistical and perplexing thoughts necessarily cause, if they be admitted
and fomented. Has not the Church of Christ been a militant Church from the
beginning? has there not been a constant enmity betwixt the seed of the
Serpent, and the seed of the woman? Is it any new thing to see the Church
driven to the wilderness, and tossed in the sea of afflictions? Is it any
un-heard-of thing, that the Church must be tossed betwixt wind and wave, and
have storms and tides and all against her? Is it any new thing to see the
Church, even while within the sight of the haven of an happy and glorious
Reformation, driven back to sea again? What? has she not oftentimes seemed to
on-lookers to be sunck? have not false friends many a time sought to drive her
upon rocks, or cut her cables, that she might be left to the mercy of the seas;
or to make lecks, that she might sinck to the ground? Is outward prosperity the
mark of the true Church? No: let Antichrist make it a mark ofhis, seeing so the
Papists will. The Church of Christ must be the speckled bird; She must have
many horns in her side: Her rest and triumphant state is above; though, it is
true, she may have some breathing times, some lucide intervals, and a more
glorious day, when the Vial is poured forth on the Seat of the Beast, Euphrates
dried up, and the Kings of the East brought in, and when Babylon the great is
fallen, Gog and Magog destroyed, and the Beast and the false Prophet cast into
the lake of brimstone; but then the end of her warfare will be nigh.

Again would we call to mind, how often the Church has been very low, and her
Enemies singing a triumph, as if they had gotten an everlasting victory, and as
if they were assured, that the Name of Israel should be no more mentioned; and
yet the Lord has hithertill saved, and has brought that broken Vessel saife
to land. Notwithstanding of all that the red Dragon the Hethenish Emperors did
in persecuting, with their bloody massacres, the Christian Church, the first
three hundred Years; yet the Church of Christ, grew and multiplied and spread
over all the Empire. And though the Antichristian abomination did prevail in
the Church, and the woman was made to flee to the wilderness 42 months, or
1260 days, or Years, from the Year 660 or 666 (as some compute) until the
Reformation 1550. or 1560. Yet notwithstanding of this long desolation and
darkness, dureing which time the Gentiles possessed the outter court, the Lord
in his own good time, in the days of Luther and afterward, made light break
up, and made the world see, that His Church was not yet destroyed. And though
now Antichrist be thinking to possess the outter Court again, and to destroy
the Reformation and to make even the lands, that were by solemn Covenant
devouted unto Christ, as His peculiar Inheritance, become lands of graven
images, and brought under his tyranny: yet the Lord lives, and we are to
wait in faith and hop and to possess our souls in patience; for now is the
faith and patience of the Saints; and to believe, that in due time, He, who
has begun to pour forth the vials of His wrath upon that Antichristian cursed
conspiracy, will also make an end: and in His own good time shall pour forth
the Vial on the Beast Revel. 16. verse. 10. And the judgment of the great whore
shall come, that fitteth upon many waters, with whom the Kings of the earth
have committed fornication, even the woman, that sits upon a
scarlet-colored beast, full of Names of Blasphemy, having seven heads, and ten
horns, arrayed in purple and scarlet color, and decked with gold and precious
stones and pearls, having a golden Cup in her hand, full of abominations and
filthiness of her fornication, upon whose forehead is a Name written, MYSTERY,
BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. And
which is drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus. Which is manifestly interpreted by the Spirit of God (Revel.
17. verse. 8. to the end,) to be the Papal Church and State, sitting at Rome and
commanding all. Wherefore it becomes all, who love their lives, to take notice
of that word Revel. 18. verse. 4, 5. -- Come out of her my people, that ye be
not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues, etc. for the
day is coming, when it shall be said (as it is verse. 6, 7, 8, etc.) Reward
her, even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double according to her
worksin the cup, which she has filled, fill to her double. How much she has
glorified her self and lived delicious^, so much torment and sorrow give her;
for she says in her heart, I sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall see no
Sorrow. Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, and mourning, and famine,
and she shall be utterly burnt with fire; for strong is the Lord God, who
judges her. Let us live in hope, that the day shall come, when what follows
there shall be fulfilled, and it shall be said, as verse. 20. Rejoice over her,
thou Heaven, and ye Holy Apostles and Prophets; for God has avenged you on
her. And it shall be found true, that is said verse. 21. And a mighty Angel took
up a stone, like a great millstone, and cast it into the Sea, saying, Thus with
violence shall that great City Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no
more at all. And that shall be verified, which is foretold Chap. 19. A great
voice shall be heard of much people, saying Allelujah, Salvation and Glory, and
Honor and Power unto the Lord our God: For true and righteous are His
judgments; for He has judged the great whore, which did corrupt the Earth with
her fornications, and has avenged the Blood of His Servants at her hand, verse.
1, 2.

Next, This Confideration may be improven by particular Believers, in reference
to their particular Exercises and Afflictions: For hence they might infer,

1. That they have no cause to complean, but reason rather to lay their hand
upon their mouth, what ever way the Lord be pleased to exercise them, and what
ever Affliction* He lay upon their loins; for this has been the ordinary Lot
of the Church; and seeing the Lord thinks good to exercise her with sore and
sharp trials, in all Ages: Why may He not also exercise them, in Particular?

2. That they have yet less cause to compleane or be dissatisfied, seeing the
Church, their Common Mother, has met with sadder and sorer Crosses and
Distresses, than they have met with, or can meet with: It is a sadder sight to
see the Mother put to the door, and sitting in a Wilderness, weeping and
refusing to be comforted; than to see a Child whipped.

3. That they have reason to rejoice, in their sad Lot, upon this account, that
they are not in that solitary and lamentable Condition alone; their Mother is
suffering with them. Are they in a Wilderness, so is she: are they sitting in
the dust, so is their Mother sitting with them.

4. That by this they see, they are no Bastards, but Children of the House,
suffering with the Mother, and no other ways dealt with, than the Mother is.

5. That Crosses and a Course of Affliction are no evidence of the Lords not
owning or looking upon them as His Children; as corruption and unbeleefe would
prompt them to infer and conclude: Afflictions can no more say, that they are
not the Children of God; than Afflictions on the Church can say, that she is
not the Church of Christ, nor His Spouse.

6. That they may comfort themselves, in their Troubles, with the Mother her
Consolations; and as it were lie in her lap or bosom, and partake of her
cordials, and feed with her upon the same promises, until the night be over,
and the day dawn, and the time of the singing of the birds come, and the voice
of the turtle be heard in the land, and until the Beleever's God and the Church
her Husband wipe all tears away from the face both of Mother and Child.

CONSIDERATION. XIV. Other precious Believers have been Afflicted so, if not
worse.
THough such, as are ease in Zion, think little of all the Trouble and Anguish,
that the Afflicted are put unto; and not a few prove like Jobs Friends Job. 6:
v. 15. etc. though to him, that is afflicted Pity should be shown verse. 14.
Yet such, as are under the Affliction, can subscribe to the truth of that,
which the Wise Man has Prove. 15: 15. All the days of the afflicted are evil:
for, so long as the Affliction endures, they are ready to think, that their
Condition grows worse and worse daily. Nay, ordinarily Affliction so seazeth
upon them, that they cannot perceive the Grounds of Comfort, though hard at
hand, and can make little use of Cordials, though within their reach. A time of
Affliction is such a thoughtful time, that they are as a Ship at Sea, tossed
with Tempests and contrary Tides. Among other disturbing thoughts, this is one,
How is this (think they with themselves) that the Lord has pitched upon me,
and singled me out, from all the rest, or the most part of His Children, at
least, whom I know, and set me up for His mark, at which He is shooting His
Arrows? My case is not like the ordinary case of others; there is something
extraordinary in my case: I know, that His Followers have been in Affliction,
but their Affliction was nothing comparable to mine: Were all things laid
together, my Affliction would be found to be of another kind: Were my
Affliction but such as others have had, I should be able to bear it; but there
being something Odd and Uncouth in mine, I cannot choose but be troubled.

Though He only, who comfort those, that are cast down, can comfort such, 2
Cor. 6: verse. 7. Yet he can do it by unlikely means, and bless a few words to
this end. We shall therefore only propose a few things, that may serve to make
a Diversion, as to these perplexing and disturbing thoughts; and reduce them to
these few Heads.

First, We shall propose a few Generals, which such afflicted persons would
take notice of.

Secondly. Show how, possibly, their case is not so singular, as they conceive
it to be.

Thirdly, We shall show, how little cause they would, possibly, befound to
have, to speak thus, if all things were well considered.

Fourthly, We shall show, how that, seeing they will take notice of others, and
compare their case with theirs, they may and should improve the example of
others, better than thus.

As to the First, let these Particulars be considered.

1. It is ordinary almost with every one to be accounting their own case and
condition, in Affliction, singular; and to say, as much as those of whom we are
now speaking. Every one feels that best, which is nearest to himself: they
are more sensible of their own pain, than of the pain of others; and pain
felt is more touching, than what is understood by the report of others only.
Hence every one is ready to conclude, that their own case is worst. And
therefore this should be looked upon, as no strange thing.

2. Every bodies Temper and Disposition not being alike, some may be obnoxious
to distempers and diseases, that others are not much acquainted with; and some
by their Folly and Intemperancy may bring peculiar diseases upon themselves;
and when such must have peculiar Physic, adapted to their diseases, should
they complean of the Physician; that he gives them not such gentle and easy
Medicines, as he does to others? So the compleaner here may have brought upon
himself some uncouth spiritual distemper, which calls for some Afflictions,
more than ordinary, to cure the same: Should they then be anxious to find out
a precedent, or one that has been so handled, as they are? Ought they not
rather, to reasone thus with themselves, does the Lord purge and afflict me
more than ordinary, then it is like my peccant humors, and my corruptions, have
been more than ordinary.

3. Be it so, that thy case is in some respects singular, what knows thou, if
there shall be two found, in all particulars, or in all considerable
circumstances, every way alike? May not the Lord hereby declare and preach
forth his Infinite Wisdom, in guiding so many Sons and Daughters to glory,
through so many several Kinds of Trials, Exercises, Afflictions and
Temptations? Will it not be much to His Glory, when every one of the Redeemed
shall, beside their wondering at the gracious Work of Redemption, common to
them all, have each something peculiar to himself, raising his Admiration? As
it commends the wonderful Workmanshipe of God, that among so many millions of
faces of Men, two shall hardly be found, betwixt which no difference shall be
discovered; so, may not this commend the Work of Gods Providence?

4. And what if, as to those Particulars, wherein they think their own case
singular, it be otherwise indeed? Have they had through acquaintance with all
the Saints of God, in all ages? Why then do they speak so confidently?

5. But be it so, as they say; yet they should know, that they are in the hands
of a well skilled Physician, and of a tender Father, who knows their
Constitution, their Distemper, and their Strength; and will make the Physic no
stronger, than He knows they can bear, and will work, and do them good. And
this should cause them forget their complaints.

6. All that people say, while under a distemper, must not be taken for
certain. Job had many expressions, while under the Affliction, that he would
not own or approve of, afterward.

As to the Second Head, that we may come nearer their case, what if it be
found, that even as to these same Particulars, upon the account of which they
account their case singular, others, of whom we read in Scripture, have been in
the like case before? We shall therefore mentione some Particulars, which
people in Affliction use to aggravat their case from, and because of, look upon
their case as singular,

1. Some may think their case singular upon this account, That they never knew
much in experience what prosperity meant; their Life has been nothing but a
Life of Exercises, Temptations and Trouble. Such would know, that some
therefore would possibly think, they might bear Afflictions the better, being
so accustomed therewith, and inured thereunto, and trained up at that School.
But however, they err, if they think, that this case is singular, or that none
but they have been so exercised; not to mention our Lord Jesus, whose Life was
a Life of bitterness, as we saw above; see one Instance of Heman Psalm. 88:
verse. 15. I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up. His Trouble and
Affliction was not of Yesterday; He was under it from his youth:

2. Others, it may be, will complain, and think their Affliction so much the
sadder, that they have not been much enured with, nor trained up at the School
of Affliction; and that if they had been used with Trouble, they would have
thought this, that now lies upon them, the more light and easy to be born; but
now, having been so long in prosperity, and at ease, the Affliction coming is
more terrible, and seems more insupportable. Oh what is man, that will thus
abuse and pervert all things; and can be satisfied with almost nothing! Others
would look upon this Dispensation as gentle and easy, and as a great favor,
and yet what some would account a mitigating ingredient, others will look upon,
as a great aggravation. Some would say, that such were not much to be pitied,
who have had such a long Summer-day of prosperity: who would think much, if a
Shipe, that has for many days had a fair wind, should toward the end of
her Voyage, meet with a contrary blast; But the truth is, so rebellious are our
hearts, that none of Gods Dispensations with us, can satisfy us; and every
Body is better pleased with another Lot, than with his own; and therefore we
are so ready to choose any condition, but what God is pleased to carve out unto
us; and we think every bodies Affliction is more easy, than our own; and we
could bear any Lot better, than what we are called to bear. May it not be
thought, that such as compleane upon this account, would complain much more,
if it were with them, as it was with Asaph Psalm. 73: v. 14. All the day long
have I been plagued and chastenedevery morning? However such as cry-out,
because after a long time of prosperity, they meet with adversity, would know
that their case, in this, is not singular; as Jobs instance can evince, who was
not much acquainted with adversity and affliction, till Satan began to pursue
him; but dwelt at ease, and in prosperity Job. 16: 12. I was at ease, but He
has broken me asunder.

3. Some possibly will look upon their case as sad and singular, because the
Cross, under which they stand, seems so heavy, that they see not how they
shall be able to stand under it. As if, forsooth, every one almost were not
ready to say the same; How few are there, who look upon their own Affliction,
as the lightest and easiest? David told us, Psalm. 6: verse. 3 that his Soul was
sore vexed and Psalm. 55: verse. 4. that his heart was sore pained within him.
Was not the Israelites case in Egypt hard, when their lives were made bitter
with hard bondage Exodus 1: 14. and they were made to sigh by reason of the
bondage Exodus 2: 21? Was it not sad with Paul and his Companions, when he
says, they were pressed out of measure, and above strength, in so much, that
they despaired even of life 2 Cor. 1: v. 8. We hear of some, who have come out
of great Tribulation, Revelation 7: v. 14.

4. Some possibly will account their condition singular, in that it is not
with one or two rodes, that they are chastened, but with many, and with several
sorts, their Affliction is complicated, and many are twisted together; whence
they are ready to say, That none was ever so visited and afflicted, as they
are. But the case of Job is enough to confute this mistake. Has God taken away
thy goods, and made thee of a rich man, a poor man? So did He to Job, whose
riches were great; for he had Seven Thousand Sheep, Thr^ Thousand Camels, Five
Hundred Yoke of Oxen, Five Hundred She Asses Job. 1: verse. 3. Has God taken
away thy pleasant Children, in whom thou tookest delight? So did He take away
Job's Seven Sons and Three Daughters, and that in one hour, and that by an
unusual manner, he neither seeing them die, nor getting one word of them,
before they died. Read his book, and see what a multitude of evils came upon
him at once. See a short sum Chap. 19: verse. 8, -- 21. He has fenced up my
way, that I cannot pass, and He has set darkness in my Paths, He has stripped
me of my glory, and taken the Crown from my Head. He has destroyed me on every
side, and I am gone, and mine hope has He removed, like a tree. He has also
kindled His wrath against me, and He counts me unto Him, as one of His
Enemies. His Troops come together, and raise up their way against me, and
encamp round about my Tabernacle. He has put my Brethren far from me, and mine
acquaintaince are verily estranged from me. My Kinsfolk have failed, and my
familiar friends have forgotten me. They that dwell in mine house, and mine
maidens account me for a stranger; I am an alien in their sight. I called my
servant and he gave me no answer, I entreated him with my mouth. My breath is
strange to my wife: though I entreated for the Childrens sake of mine own body.
Yea young Children despised m^: I arose, and they spoke against me. All my
inward friends abhorred me, and they whom I loved are turned against me. My
bone cleaves to my skin and to my flesh; and I am escaped with the skin of my
teeth. Paul 2 Cor. 6: 4 5, 8, 9, 10. gives us a catalogue of calamities of
various kinds, that he and others did meet with: such as, Afflictions,
Necessities, Distresses, Stripes, Imprisonments, Tumults, Labors, Watchings,
Fastings, Dishonor, Evil reports, accounted Deceivers, Unknown, Dying,
Chastned, Sorrowful, Po^r and having nothing. And again he gives us an
account of what befell himself, 2 Cor. 11. verse. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. -- In
stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths often; of the jews
five times received I forty stripes save one; Thrice was I beaten with rods,
once was I stonned; Thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a da^ have I been
in the depth; in jurneying often, in perrils of waters, in perils of robbers,
in perils by mine own contrymen, in perrils by the Heathen, in perils in the
city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false
Brethren, in weariness, in painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and
thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness etc. Who can say, that his
condition runs parallel with this? And if not, have they any cause to
complain, and cry out, never man was so hardly dealt with, as they are? See
also what hardships those did undergo, of whom we read Hebr. 11. verse. 36; 37,
38. They had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea moreover of bonds and
Imprisonments, they were sawne asunder, were tempted, were slain with the
sword, they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented, etc. Can they say, that they are more hardly dealt with,
than these were? If not, is not their complaint very groundless?

5. Some possibly will account their case singular, in that afflictions attend
them, as the shadow does the body; where ever they be, and whithersoever they
go, Crosses, Troubles and Temptations are their constant Companions. But do
they verily think, that none before them, has had as good cause to speak thus,
as they? Sure, the Catalogue of calamities, that Paul reckons up, as we heard
lately, says, he had such a lot, before them, He met with trouble both by sea
and land, in cities, in wildernesses, by his own contrymen, by strangers,
and by false Brethren; in some places was he scourged, in some places beaten
with rods, in some places stoned, in some places imprisoned etc. so that a
short view of his life will put this beyond question. And himself said Act. 20.
23. that in every city bonds and afflictions did abide him.

6. Some may possibly think, that their sufferings are so much the sadder, that
they reach not their goods, but their good name, and credit, and that without
all color of ground. Yet, for as heavy as this appears to be; it is no new
or uncouth thing. It is true, it may prove sad to some, who are tender of their
name and credit, and would glory thereof; but how sad so ever it be to them,
they must not say, that their case, as to this, is singular. Woe to you (said
Christ to his Disciples and followers Luke 6. verse 26,) When all men speak well
of you; for so did their Fathers unto the false Prophets. And again, Mat. 5.
verse. 11, 22. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, -- And shall say all
manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding
glade; for great is your reward in heaven; for so persecuted they the Prophets,
which were before you. So that this was the common lot of the Prophets, and was
to be the lot of the Apostles, and accordingly Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 4. verse. 9,
11, 12, 13. -- That they were made a spectacle unto the world, and to Angels,
and to men; and he adds, Even unto this present hour, we both hunger and
thirst, and are naked and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place,
and labor working with our own hands; being reviled, we bless; being
persecuted, we suffer it; being defamed, we entreat; we are made as the filth
of the world, and the offscouring of all things, to this day. Was not here a
suffering of an high degree, both in body and in name? So 2 Cor. 6. verse. 8. As
deceivers, and yet true. So were they accounted, the chief of Traitors, such
as turned the world upside down Act. 17. verse. 6. He was accounted, the man,
that taught all men every where against the People, and the Law, and the Temple
Act. 21. verse. 28. Elijah was called the Troubler of Israel 1 King. 18. verse.
17. We heard above, how Christ himself suffered in His Name. So that this must
be no rare or uncouth thing.

7. It may be an heavy affliction to some, possibly, to be persecuted by their
own Contrymen, Neighbors, and Relations. But was not Christ so? was not
Paul so exercised 2 Cor. 11. verse. 26. Were not the Thessalonians so afflicted
1 These. 2: verse. 14? Knew not David this in experience Psalm 55. verse. 12, 13.
And Job also, when not only his Friends and domestic Servants and neighbors
carried so unfriendly and untenderly with him; but even his own wife, that lay
in his bosom, had no other consolatory counsel to give him, but to take his
leave or last good night (as we say) of God, and so be destroyed out of hand;
for thus the sentence may be interpreted, which in the Original is, bless God
and die; as we use to bless, or wish well to them, of whom we are taking our
leave; and so this benedicere, is, as it were, valedicere: Her saying bless
was as much, as if she had said, Bid Him fare well.

8. Some may think their cross heavy upon this consideration, that they have
to do with men, who know no Justice, and walk not either by Law, or Equity; but
do what they please. But neither is this any strange thing; for not to speak of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who was thus dealt with; what Law or Justice did John
Baptist meet with, when upon the desire of a light dancing Damsel, his head was
cut off in prison, without so much as a form of process? What Law or equity
acted the confused rabble, that rofe up against Paul, at Ephesus Act. 19? By
what Law was he and Silas beaten openly and uncondemned at Philippi Act. 16.
verse. 22, 23, 37? By what color of law, was he drawn out of the Temple, and
almost killed by the Jews Act 21?

9. If it add to the grief of any, when they consider, that such as persecute
and oppose them, are not openly profane, and wicked Persons; but such as are
accounted good and sober persons; and such as may be judged to have the grace
of God in them: It would be remembered, that howbeit this indeed be a sad
Ingredient in the cup of affliction, and may make the trouble heavier, than
otherwise it would be; yet it is no uncouth thing: Job's friends were good,
sober, understanding Persons, though in a great mistake as to the application
of their discourse unto Job's state. Paul did meet with some thing like this
Act. 13. verse. 30. at Antioch, when the jews stirred up devout and honorable
women against him. The false Teachers, that on all oc casions opposed Paul,
were not profane, wicked Persons; for they had transformed themselves into the
Apostles of Christ 2 Cor. 11: v^rs. 13. We read also of some, that preached
Christ of envy and contention, supposing thereby to add affliction unto Paul's
bonds. Phil. 1. verse. 15, 16.

10. Some may possibly think much to be put to open shame, and made a gazing
stock, and to be exposed to open contempt, and ludibrie; and indeed, that may
be a sad affliction to some noble and generous spirit, and heavier than death
it self. But yet it is no strange thing; for we read of some Hebr. 10. verse.
33. who were theatrized, brought to open scaffolds, and put on pillories, and
made public spectacles, and exposed to open mockery. So Hebr. 11. verse. 36.
some had trial of cruel mockings: Was not Job made a byword of the people, and
their song Job 17: 6. and 30. verse. 9.

Several other things of this nature might be named, but I shall haste unto the
third particular, and show, how little ground there would be for such
complaints and outcryes, if all were known and rightly considered: and to this
end I shall mentione these particulars.

1. When Peter is writting to a scattered company, living as strangers, in a
strange land, he says unto them 1 Pet. 4. verse. 12. Beloved, think it not
strange, concerning the fiery trial, which is to try you, as though some
strange thing happened unto you. Though they were scattered through many
Countreyes' and were to meet with trials, yea and fiery trials; yet he would
not have them troubled thereat, or look upon it, as any uncouth accident,
befalling them: teaching us thereby to look otherwise upon the sharpest of
trials and exercises, that we meet with, than we readily do; and not to think,
that we are worse dealt with, than others, or that God takes some uncouth
un-heard-of course with us.

2. What if it be found, after impartial trial, that there have been many, who
have drunk deeper, by many degrees, of the cup, than they have done; and that
their affliction, under which they groan and cry-out so much, is nothing
comparable to what others of the Lord's worthies have been exercised with? Will
not this appear by an impartial view of the Instances adduced? And seeing their
cross is light, in comparison of what some dear to the Lord have had, is there
or can there be any ground for their so complaining?

3. Will it not be found, that such as complain thus, dar not compare
themselves with others, who have been as sore afflicted, if not sorer, than
they, as to Grace, Sanctification, Communion with God etc? Will they arrogat to
themselves that honorable Epithet, which the Lord gave David, a Man according
to God's own heart; or Job, a perfect man and upright, and one that feared God,
and eshewed evil? And if not, is there ground for their complaint, when God is
dealing no worse with them, than He did with those, yea is dealing with them in
a far more gentle manner?

4. What if it be found, that such as have been visited with the same
affliction, with which they are visited, and under which they groan so much,
have not provoked the Lord, so much as they have done? And will not their
complainings then be found most unreasonable and groundless?

5. What if it be found also true and undeniable, that those who have met with
the same calamities, have been more useful in their generation, than they are,
or ever were? If God spare not the green tree, shall the dry tree, that is
sapless and barren, doing little more than cumbering the ground, complain,
that it is cut down? We should be content with the same lot, that both the
Prophets and Apostles had. It needed not grieve the Philippians, that they had
the same conflict, which they saw in Paul, and heard to be in him. Phil. 1.
last.

The last particular, is to show a better way of improving the example of
others, who have been afflicted before us, than to take occasion therefrom to
complain of God's dealing, as if it were worse with us, than with them: to
wit, to be considering their Christian carriage under their afflictions, that
we may be ashamed of our deportment, and may be stirred up to follow their
example, in what is truly commendable, and is for that end held forth to us in
Scripture: many particulars of this kind might be mentioned, we shall name only
a few.

1. We find them patient under the cross, and their instance proposed to us
for imitation, in this respect: So says the Apostle James Cap. 5. verse. 10,
11. Take, my Brethren, the Prophets, who have spoken in the Name of the Lord
for an example of suffering affliction, and of patience. Behold, we account
them happy which endure; ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen
the end of the Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy. If the
carriage of the Prophets under the cross, and particularly of Job, were
narrowly searched, it would be found, that there was sometime too much
Impatience, but the Spirit of the Lord would not have us poreing upon that, but
to take special notice of their patience; and in this, to look upon them, as a
copy, set before us; for albeit there was much Impatience to be observed in
Job's carriage; yet his Patience is taken notice of by the Spirit of God, and
we are bidden look to that, as if we had never heard of one of his impatient
expressions.

2. We find them looking especially to God's hand in the matter, and
overlooking all Instruments, adoring and reverencing the holy Providence and
Disposal of God, laying their hand upon their mouth, and giving God the glory:
and in this we should study to be followers of them. David said Psalm. 39. verse.
9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it: And when Shimei
railed upon him, and cursed, he said, let him curse, for the Lord has said
unto him, curse David, and Job said, the Lord has given and taken, blessed be
His name.

3. We find them following their duty, notwithstanding of all the trouble and
calamity which they did meet with; Paul, notwithstanding of all that befell him,
went on, and minded his work; when he was persecuted in one place, he went to
another, and there preached the Gospel: And in this we should follow them; for,
for this end, are these things left on record.

4. We find them so far from fretting and repineing at the Lord's
Dispensations with them, in suffering wicked instruments to afflict them and
persecute them, for righteousness; that they therein rejoice, as the Apostles
did Act. 5. verse. 41. And Paul glorified in these his infirmities 2 Cor. 12.
And it is commendable to follow them here.

5. We find them likewise, notwithstanding of all their Sufferings, standing
fast in the faith, adhereing to their principles, refusing deliverance upon any
sinful or base terms. Heb. 11. verse. 35. Others were tortured, not accepting
deliverance, that they might obtean a better resurrection: And it were good, if
we were considering them to this end, that in this we might follow their
footsteps.

6. We find them acting faith on God, in the mean time, Heman Psalm. 88. was in
a very sad case, yet for all that was come upon him, he would not quite his
interest in God; but begins that sad Psalm thus, O Lord God of my salvation.
So did Job likewise act faith on God, Chap. 19.

7. We find them exercising Hop, for as desperat-like as their case would seem
to be; as David Psalm. 38. the beginning whereof shows that his case was then
very sad; yet V. 15, he cries out, In the Lord do I hope.

8. We find them taking with their iniquity, whereby they provoked God, to
deal so with them, or desireous to understand what is the ground of God's
controversy: so the Church Mica. 7. verse. 9. I will bear the indignation of
the Lord, because I have sinned against him. See likewise Lam. 3. verse. 39, 42.
And Job said, Chap. 10. ver. 2. I will say unto God, do not condemn me; show
me, wherefore thou contendest with me.

If we were thus taking notice of the commendable deportment of other worthies,
when they were in Afflictions, to the provoking of our selves unto the like
carriage, we would find it a more profitable exercise, than to be, in our
minds, aggravating our lot, beyond the lot of those before us, and imagining
that God deals worse with us, than He has done with others, before us.

CONSIDERATION. XV. Suffering Christianly is a special gift of God.
MAny look upon Suffering for the Name of Christ, with an evil eye, and with
prejudice; and because of the misapprehensions they have of it, they cannot
complye with it; whereas a right view of it would make it less terrible, yea
more lovely and desirable. The Apostle, writting to the Philippians Chap. 1.
verse. 29. gives them ground to think well of the cross of Christ, when he
said, for unto you it is given, in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe
on Him, but also to suffer for His sake. He had been exhorting them, in the
foregoing Verses, that they would stand fast in one spirit, with one mind,
striving together for the faith of the Gospel, and in nothing be terrified by
their adversaries: and after he had told them, that the opposition of the
adversaries was an evident token to them of Perdition, and that their own
standing and withstanding was an evident token to themselves of Salvation, and
that of God; He subjoineth this ground of encouragment; that it was granted
unto them, as a special favor, and that in the behalf of Christ, not only to
believe on Him, but also to suffer for His sake. In which words, these Three
Particulars are chiefly considerable, in order to our present design.

1. That suffering, for the sake of Christ, is a special gift of God, and not a
thing that mere natural Strength and Courage can reach.

2. That it is a gift purchased by Christ, and given on His behalf, or for His
sake; and not for any thing in us.

3. That it is a gift, in some respect, beyond that excellent gift of faith.

But before I speak particularly to these points, I shall premit these three
things considerable.

1. Though to bear any cross, or crossing dispensation, outward or inward, in
a christian acceptable manner, be beyond the power of nature, and natures
strength, and is the pure gift of God: yet here we are mainely to speak of that
Trouble, Afflictions and Crosses, which the followers of Christ are put to
suffer by wicked Men, and for avowing of His truth and Interest, of what
measure or degree so ever it be; for, this is that which is here understood,
and whereof the Apostle is speaking, as the forgoing and following Verses
clear.

2. Nor do we hereby understand every Trouble, that wicked persons create unto
the Godly (though unto a Christian deportment, in such a case, the special
grace and gift of God be required:) but of that, which is properly for the Name
of Christ, for adhereing to His truth and cause: for of this does the Apostle
speak, when he mentions suffering for Christ's sake.

3. Nor do we speak of Suffering here, simply considered; but of suffering,
accompained with its Christian Concomitants, or of Suffering in a Christian,
humble; self denied, handsome and cleanly manner; this being the Suffering,
which is to be called the gift of God; and not that, which may be undergone,
upon a carnal account, and may flow from a carnal Principle, and be intended
for some carnal end.

Having premised these things, we come to speak to the first point, and show,
That suffering in a Christian manner, for the Name of Christ, is the mere gift
of God, and beyond the reach of all natural Strength and Courage: Which will be
sufficiently clear, if we but take a view of such particulars, as are requisite
unto a Christian way of suffering for Christ's sake, some only of which we shall
content ourselves here to name: as

1. To the end, that one suffer as a Christian, for the sake of Christ, it is
requisite, that he be a Christian indeed, a believer in Christ indeed; for a
man in nature can act nothing, as a Christian, as wanting the divine principle
of all Christian Actions: This is imported in the Text, now before us, where
the gift of faith in Christ is supposed as existent, before the gift of
suffering. Now it is beyond all debate with the orthodox, that to believe in
Christ, and to become a Christian indeed, is beyond the reach of nature; and
the same Text here evinceth faith to be given of God; so also is it expressly
said to be the gift of God, and not of ourselves Ephesians. 2. 8. And therefore,
this Christian suffering for the sake of Christ, must be the special gift of
God.

2. Unto suffering Christianly it is requisite, not only that the sufferer be
aBeleever; but also, that faith be acting on God, through Christ, and resting
upon the promises of outgate, and of an everlasting recompense, and of
throw-bearing, and the other objects of faith, necessary to be eyed, in such a
day; for if this be not, even the believer may fainte and fall backward, as we
see in Peter: Now this present acting of faith being the gift of God, through
His grace and influences, it is manifest, that Christian suffering, unto which
this is requisite, must be also His gift.

3. Hope is also requisite unto a Christian suffering; for hereby must the
sufferers head be born-up, when he is swimeing through the sea of Persecution;
it is the Souls anchor, which must not be wanting in a storm; it is his
helmet, and must not be a missing in the day of battle. Now this hope being the
special gift of God, and his work 1 Pet. 1: 3. 2 These. 2. verse. 13. it is
manifest, that Christian suffering, unto which this hope is so necessary, must
be His special gift.

4. Patience is likewise hereunto requisite, for without it, there will be
nothing but wearying, fainting, fretting, repineing, and sinful longing to be
from under the Cross; hence there is so great need of patience, Heb. 10. verse.
36. Luke 21. verse. 19. Iam. 1. verse. 4. 2 Pet. 1. verse. 6. And it is so much
pressed Iam. 5. v. 10, 11. 1 Timothy 6: 11. And commended 1 These. 1. verse. 3. 2
These. 1. verse. 4. Revel. 2: 2, 9. Now this patience is not the work of nature,
but His work, who is the God of all patience Romans 15. verse. 5. And therefore
Christian suffering must be His work and gift also.

5. Humble submission and calmness of spirit is also requisite unto a right way
of suffering; for a proud, haughty, unquiet and undaunted spirit, will never
take a right lift of the cross: and this must also be wrought by the free and
powerful grace of God, and must be of Him, from whom every good gift, and every
perfect gift comes down; even of the Father of lights Iam. 1: 17. And
therefore, Christian suffering, unto which this is so requisite, must be of Him
also.

6. Such, as will suffer Christianly for Christ, must have Courage, Boldness,
and Christian Resolution; as accounting it their glory and honor to suffer for
His sake, and as remembering, that as, on the one hand, their cheerful,
courageous and valiant suffering for the Interest of Jesus, is no small
encouragment to others to adhere to Him, and to His cause; so, upon the other
hand, to suffer discouragedly, and with a fainting heart, is no small
disadvantage to the cause, Enemies being thereby more hardened, and friends
discouraged. And this Courage and fixed Resolution must only be had from God,
Nature will not fournish this. They must be strong in the Lord, and in the
power of His might Ephesians. 6. verse. 10. And as this is from the Lord alone, so
must the grace of Suffering Christianly be.

7. He, who would suffer as a Christian, must have his Conscience sprinkled,
God must be pacified, all quarrels must be taken out of the way; for the sense
and apprehension of an angry God, and sin and guilt looking the man in the
face, will much dash, discourage and fainte him, in his sufferings, Now it is
unquestionable, that God's manifesting himself satisfied and well pleased with
the man, is His own free gift; it is His proper work to sprinkle consciences
from dead works; and so must this Christian suffering be from Him, which
depends hereupon.

8. When one is questioned for the Cause of Christ, before learned and able
Statesmen and Politicians, or before learned Churchmen, he will have need of
something, wherewith to answer his Accusers; and so be in case to give a
glorious Testimony to the Truth, and the cause of Christ, otherwise the
adversaries will think, they have cause to triumph, when he is made speachless
(though that Christian Martyr-woman, who said, she could not disput for Christ,
but she could burn for Him, did sufficiently refell all the Arguments of her
Adversaries, which were but mere Sophismes) especially if the maine crime be
coloured-over with some alleiged personal fault; In this, or the like cases, it
is necessary, that the accused have pertinent, clear and pungent reasons of his
actions, in readiness, whether to refell what is falsely alleiged; or to defend
what is just and righteous. Now whence shall this be had, or from whom is it to
be expected, but from Him, who has promised that it shall be given them, in
that hour Mat. 10. verse. 19. But when they deliver you up, take no thought,
how, or what ye shall speak; for it shall be given you, in that same hour,
what ye shall speak. And therefore Christian suffering, unto which this is so
necessary, must be given of God also.

9. Such as are suffering for Christ's sake, had need to be very fixed, stayed,
and steadfast, in adhereing to their Principles, as unshaken with any wind of
temptation; for cedeing and yielding, in matters of a Testimony, dishonors
the Lord, whose truth is questioned; encourages and confirms Enemies, and
stumbleth and marreth the confidence of others; therefore such as would suffer
aright, must stand to the truth, and not yield in an hoof, nor sell or give
away the least point of truth. And this fixed, and steadfast adhereing to the
truth, is of God alone. He who stablisheth us in Christ, is God 2 Cor. 1: verse.
21. And when Paul is pressing the Thessalonians to stand fast 2 These. 2. verse.
15. He adds Verse. 16, 17. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our
father -- Comfort your hearts, and stablish you, in every good word and work.
And therefore so must the Christian suffering be of Him alone.

10. A Christian sufferer for Christ must have a Christian love to Christ; for
it is this that makes the sufferers not count their life dear to the death for
Christ, and makes them hazard all for Him; they love him better, than they
love Father, or Mother, or any thing else in a world, and therefore are content
to lose all for Him, and His sake. Now, love is of God, who is love. 1 Ioh. 4.
verse. 7, 8. And it is one of the fruits of the Spirit Gal. 5. verse. 22. And
must be from the God of all grace; for we love Him, because He first loved us 1
Ioh. 4. verse. 19. And therefore so must this right suffering be from Him.

11. Before one can suffer aright for Christ, and His cause, he must be dead
and mortified to this world, and to all the Riches, Honors and Pleasurs, to
the lust of the eye, to the lust of the flesh, and to the pride of life, as
John speaks 1 Ioh. 2: 16. Yea he must be dead to himself, and to his own
life, otherwise these will hang as weights upon him, and hinder his swimeing
through the sea of affliction and persecution. Now this self denial being the
singular gift of God, suffering, unto which it is so necessary, must be His
peculiar gift also.

12. Unto Christian Suffering for the sake of Christ, it is necessarily
requisite, that the Sufferer have fresh Influences from the Spirit of God, to
stir up the graces of God in him, and to carry him through; for if these be
withheld, a very Peter will sinfully and shamefully deny his Master: now, it is
unquestionable that these Influences must needs flow from the fountain, and be
the effects of Gods grace and love; and therefore so must Christian suffering
be, which cannot be without these.

By these particulars the first point is clear: And as for the Second Viz. That
this gift of suffering is purchased by Christ, is a fruit of His death, and is
obtained for His sake, and bestowed in His behalf. To you it is given in the
behalf of Christ to suffer, we need not insist upon it, seeing it is certain,
and undeniable, that every gift of this kind, and every spiritual grace, is
purchased to us by the blood and merits of Christ; He laid down His life to
purchase heaven to His own, and every thing else, that was needful for them, in
the way to heaven. In Christ are we blessed with all spiritual blessings, in
celestials Ephesians. 1. verse. 3. Every spiritual blessing comes to us, in and
through the Covenant of Grace, and of this Covenant Christ is the Mediator; so
that every blessing of the Covenant is purchased by Him. This is also manifest
from what was said, in confirmation of the former Point; for all these favors,
requisite unto a Christian suffering, as the grace of Faith, Hop, Courage,
Stedfastness, Patience; Humility etc. are purchased to us by Christ; and
consequently so must this gift of Christian suffering be purchased also.

The third point follows, to wit, That this gift of Suffering Christianly for
the sake of Christ, is a gift, in some respect, beyond faith: for the Apostle
says. It was given to these Philippians, not only to believe, but also to
suffer, which expression, not only, but also, imports a sort of gradation,
and gives some eminency and excellency unto the last; as Ioh. 5: verse. 18. and
13. verse. 9. Act. 19. verse. 27. and 21. verse. 13. Romans 5. verse. 3, 11. and 8.
verse. 23. and 13: 5. 2 Cor. 7: 7. and 8: 10. Ephesians. 1. verse. 21. and else
where. We shall clear this further, by mentioning some particulars.

1. This Christian-suffering for the cause of Christ, does presuppose Faith, as
we said above; and so must be a gift given, over and above faith.

2. Many have the gift of faith, who never receive this gift of suffering; many
precious believers go to their grave in peace, and know not what it is to die
for witnessing to the Name of Jesus, on a scaffold, or to suffer at the hands
of Persecuters, upon that account. It is reported of famous Luther, that he often
wished and prayed for this; and yet God thought fit, he should die on his bed
in peace. This gift then of suffering, not being common to all, to whom faith
is common, must have some peculiar excellency, as being more rare.

3. Yea even all those believers, who are called to suffer for the cause of
Christ, cannot always win to this gift of Christian and Valiant Suffering for
the sake of Christ, but through temptation and carnal fear over-powering them,
may for a time shrink, cede and fainte, and thus wrong their own peace, harden
the Adversaries, discourage the Godly, wrong the Cause, and dishonor the Lord;
as we see in Peter, when he denied his Master, and that with Curses and
Execrations, whose faith yet failed not, the Lord having prayed for that Luke
22: 32.

4. Though it be a matter of no small, difficulty to believe; yet some may win
over that difficulty, that cannot win over the difficulty of Suffering
Christianly, in bearing Testimony to the truth of Jesus, as that instance of
Peter clears. It being then a matter of greater difficulty to suffer aright,
than to believe, this gift of suffering must be a greater gift.

5. Unto Suffering for the sake of Christ, in a right manner, there is
requisite (as we saw above) a greater concurrence of the graces of the Spirit
of God; and a necessity also for a greater concurrence of divine Influences, to
carry the soul through.

6. This suffering for Christ's sake has a special piece of honor attending
it: Hence the Apostles rejoiced, that they were counted worthy to suffer shame
for the Name of Christ Act. 5. verse. 41. And Peter 1 Pet. 4. verse. 13. desires
those, he wrote unto, to rejoice, in that lot; and Paul Romans 5. verse. 3. says,
we glory in tribulations; yea he speaks of this, as in some respect, a step
above their rejoiceing in the hope of the glory of God, Verse. 2. for he
brings it in, with a not only so, but also. Which manifestly clears the
excellency of this gift of Suffering.

7. Christian Suffering for the Name of Christ, is a common and public good,
being edifying to the Body, and so advantageous to many: A man's faith is mainly
profitable to himself, and is thereunto ordained; But Suffering in a right
manner is profitable unto many; to Enemies and Persecutors it gives a dash,
and leaves some ground of conviction; and Friends are much encouraged thereby;
yea the whole Church receives advantage; for thereby a noble Testimony is
given to the truth, and the blood of the Martyrs becomes the seed of the
Church.

8. Suffering for the cause of Christ, in a Christian manner, makes the
Sufferers to be like Christ and conform to the Captain of their Salvation; as
one now graduat, or advanced to an higher class; Christ came to bear witness to
the truth, and suffered upon the account of bearing Testimony to the truth; and
those, who are honored with this special gift, are made in a special manner
conform unto Him, and thus are greatly honored.

9. As Sufferers for the cause of Christ are thereby advanced to great honor
and dignity, so are they usually admitted to great neerness and access to God;
the Lord loves to let out of himself unto them, in a special manner: that is a
confirming expression, which we have 1 Pet. 4: 14. If ye be reproached for the
Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of God and of glory rests upon
you. Sufferers have, even here, an happiness, and an happiness upon the account
of their suffering (were it but) reproach, for the Name of Christ; and who can
tell how rich and great this happiness is, and wherein it consists? The
Spirit of glory and of God rests upon them; this Spirit of God, which is the
Spirit of glory, working in them all His glorious graces, whereby He prepares
them for glory, and comfort their souls, as if they were in the suburbs of
glory, resideth in them, and rests upon them, as the sure earnest of glory:
wherefore this Suffering for His Name must be a great matter.

10. This Christian suffering for the Name of Christ makes way for a greater
degree in Glory: If we suffer with Him, we shall also reign with Him, 2 Timothy
2: verse. 12. If we suffer with Him, we shall be glorified together, Romans 8:
verse. 17. There is a noble word to this purpose 2 Cor. 4: verse. 17. For our
light Affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. The Glory, that our momentany Affliction
works for us, is eternal, and the Weight of that Crown is eternally Weighty,
that can never be fully weighed: Nay, It cannot be told by Hyperbolee's heaped
upon Hyperbolee's; all these will come short of expressing the Weight thereof.
We find in the Book of the Revel. Chap. 7: ve^s. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. that
there were some discernable from others, and more remarkable, having on a
distinguishing rob, as a peculiar livery in Glory; They are said to have had
White Robs, and who were these? Such as came out of great Tribulation. They
were made to wear on earth a red livery of blood; but now in glory they are
shineing in white: And it is added Verse. 15, etc. Therefore are they before ^he
Throne of God, and serve Him day and night, in his Temple, and He that sits
on the Throne shall dwell among them. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst
any more; neither shall the Sun light on them any more, for the Lamb, which is
in the midst of the Throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living
fountains of Waters: And shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

We shall now come to speak something, in order to the improvement of these
Truths, which we have confirmed.

First, The faith of these Truths would give a check unto several evils, that
we are too ready to comply with, in a day of trial, and discover unto us
several things, for which we are to check and rebuke ourselves, as

1. Do not some find an Antipathy at the cross working and striving in them,
even when the Cross is yet far off? Do they not find some aversness of soul
therefrom? Now this evil would meet with a check, if these Truths were
believed? No believer finds any aversness from faith; but he is still
desaring more and more of it, and praying, Lord increase our faith; for he
knows how excellent and necessary it is. And now, seeing the grace and gift of
Suffering is, (as we have shown,) in several respects above and beyond faith,
should they be unwilling to receive it, if God shall be pleased to honor them
with that? Might not the believer hence say to himself, are there any of the
Gifts of God to be refused, or rejected? Are not all His Graces and Gifts
excellent and lovely? Why does my heart then so much stand out against this?
How is it, that I am not more in love with the Glorious Cross of Christ?
Especially seeing it is an honor, that isnot conferred on every one, and an
honorable Gift, purchased by the precious blood of Christ, that has purchased
nothing that will harm us, or nothing but what is excellent and desirable? Why
then am I so little in love with suffering for the sake of Christ? Ought I not
to be ashamed of and displeased with my self, upon this account? Ought I not to
check this aversness?

2. The faith of this would give a check unto our readiness to shift the Cross,
when we are called to make ready for it, and when it seems to be at the door:
For, would we say, what? Shall we devise means to shift suffering for the
Cause of Christ, when He is calling us to it? What, shall we meditate a way of
shifting and putting away such an honorable Divine Gift, more excellent than
faith, in several respects? What unsuitable and unworthy carriage must this be?
Is it a gift of God, and such a gift of God, and a gift given in the behalf of
Christ, as purchased by His Merits and Death; and shall we thus sinfully,
basely and unworthily shift it by our door; and rather sin, than embrace it,
and make it welcome? What a shame were this?

3. The faith of these things would give a check unto our fool-hardiness and
too rash adventuring on sufferings, without a due call; and as if our strength
were able to carry us through. Too many are too confident, and promise too much
upon their own Ability, Parts, Resolution and Strength, as if the stood in need
of no more; and as if this Suffering for the sake of Christ were not a pure
gift of Grace, that must come down from above from the Father of Lights,
through Jesus Christ. Now the faith of these Truths, would check these
thoughts. Any that know what true faith is would be dissatisfied with such, as
would talk of it, as a thing in their power, and which they could put in Act,
when they pleased, because they would know, that such boasted of what they had
not; and that faith was not in their Power, but was the special and purchased
gift of God. So would the right thoughts of this put us from ever thinking to
venture on suffering, in our own strength, and put us to look to Him, from whom
every good gift and every perfect gift comes, through Jesus Christ, and wait
on Him for it.

4. The faith of this would likewise rebuke our readiness to fainte, when we
aer called to suffer, or engaged in it; and put a check to our saying: Alas, we
will never win through this Sea of Affliction, one day or other, we shall
shamefully fall, and betray the cause, and so come off with disgrace; and would
put us to look off ourselves, and to look up unto the giver, who gives freely;
and to the Purchaser, who will receive all that He has purchased. Must we not
thus carry, in order to faith, when we begin to fear, that it shall fail us;
Do we not comfort ourselves with this, That faith is the free gift of God, and
is purchased by Christ, and is not of ourselves? And why should we not do so,
in order to suffering, which is also the free gift of God, and is purchased by
Christ? When we are like to be discouraged with the thoughts of our own
weakness, and unfitness to contend with Horsemen, and with the swellings of
Jordan; should we not look upon it, as the gift of God, whereby He can make us
strong, even when we are weak, to the Glory of His free Grace? And when we are
discouraged with the thoughts of our unworthiness, and thereupon infer, that
God will never honor us, with bearing faithful Testimony unto His Truth;
should we not, in humility and in the acknowledgment of our own Unworthiness,
and Provocations, look to Him, as the great and free giver, who gives nothing
because of our merits: He gave us faith freely, notwithstanding of our former
Provocations and great unworthiness; and may He not also give us this gift,
when He calls us to the duty, freely through Jesus, the great Purchaser?

5. The faith of this would give a check to that humore, whereby some are ready
to sacrifice to their own net, and to burn incense to their own drag; that is,
to be puffed up, and vainly proud of their carriage, when they have been helped
to carry honestly in a day of trial, as if they by their wit and courage had
done it, or as if it had not been given them, in that hour: what would such
have to be proud of, who believed, that this grace was freely given to them,
and that, in the behalf of Christ? And who saw, that if it had not been so,
they had never been able to have endured the storm; Would not they see cause
to say, Not unto us, not unto us, but unto God be Glory;

Secondly, From these Truths, we may be informed of several things, the
knowledge of which may be useful, in an evil day: As

1. We may hence be convinced of the difficulty of Suffering Christianly, for
the Cause of Christ: It is not Natural Courage, Stoutness, or Fear of Shame, or
the like, that will be able to carry through: No, no, A Divine purchased, Grace
and Gift must be had, or there will be no standing. Many, in a calm day, may
think it no great matter to suffer upon Christ's account, and may seem very
resolute, willing and ready to suffer; but when the storm begins to blow to
purpose, and they are put to it, they find it some other thing. than they
imagined: And what wonder? It is not a thing that Nature can command, nor
Natural Strength and Courage can enable for: but Divine Help is required
thereunto. It must be given, and given in Christ: and this says, there is no
small difficulty in it.

2. We may hence see a fundamental Reason, why some are honored with suffering
for the Cause of Christ, and others not; It is the free gift of God, and
purchased by Christ, and so is bestowed only on those, for whom it is
purchased, and on whom free grace will bestow it. As also, whence it comes to
pass, that of two, who are both called to witness to the truth by suffering,
one is honorably helped through, the other faints. The one has got the free
gift, the other not: It is true, other provoking causes may come here into
consideration, as bringing this on; but yet this is principally to be
considered, our sins may provoke the Lord to withold this gift; and when it is
not given, there will be no suffering for the sake of Christ, in a Christian
manner.

3. We may hence be informed concerning the ground of this honor being
bestowed upon any: It is not for their eminency of parts, or worth, or any such
thing in them; but purely of free grace, and on the behalf of Christ.

Thirdly, Upon the ground of these Truths, we may read several Duties, called
for at our hands, in a day of Suffering. As

1. In such a day, when storms are at hand, we should not be troubled with
perplexity and anxiety of Spirit; nor disquiet or discourage ourselves with
fears and apprehensions, that we shall fainte in the day of Adversity, and
shall not be in case to stand steadfast in the storm: For our strength and
standing is not in our own hands, It is in Gods Hand; His gift must make us
sta^, and nothing else.

2. We should be looking off ourselves and all that is within us, and not
think, that any thing of that kind will be able to carry us through; But fix our
eye upon the gracious Giver, and lay hold on Christ by faith, and expect the
thorow-bearing Gift and Grace, in and through Him; In such a day, we would do
well to renounce all within us; that we may not lean to it, and so betake
ourselves alone to the fountain of free grace, and expect what is necessary in
that day, from Him, who gives freely and upbraideth not.

3. And in order to this, seeing this gift is bestowed only in and through
Christ, we should study before hand, to get our Interest in Christ made up,
that so we may have ground to expect a grant of this gift for His sake; for
none else can expect this, but such as are reconciled to God through Christ.

3. We would also labor to be in good terms with God, and to be keeping our
Conscience void of offense both before God and Man, lest He be provoked to
withold this gift from us. When we have been walking near God, and keeping
carefully Communion with Him, we may go to Him with the greater Confidence and
Boldness, and ask this gift, through Christ.

Fourthly, We may hence see, what Duties we are especially called to, in the
day, when we are actually and particularly called to bear witness to the Truth,
and to suffer upon the account thereof. As

1. We should make the Cross of Christ welcome, because it is Gods send; all
that God sends should be welcome; This is a special Gift, and a purchased
Gift; and therefore it should be heartily embraced, both because of the Giver,
and because of the Purchaser. It is true, flesh and blood have no will of
Suffering, nature is averse from it; yet Spiritual Reason and Grace should say,
God will give me nothing on the behalf of Christ, but what is good and
necessary for me; and seeing Suffering for Christ's sake is of that nature; and
is so excellent a Gift, beyond faith it self, in so many respects, why should I
storm? Why should I quarrel upon that account? Why should I not rather embrace
it with love, and give it an heartsome welcome?

2. Not only upon this account should we accept of that favor heartily and
cheerfully; but also we should accept thereof with Joy and Gladness, rejoicing
that free grace would put that singular honor upon us: As we had cause to
rejoice, when He was pleased to single us out from many others, no worse than
we were, and bestow faith upon us; so have we cause to rejoice, in His pitching
upon us, and going by many others, better than we are, in the matter of
Suffering. Should we not count it all Joy, when, for Christ's sake, we fall into
manifold temptations, because the Lord is thereby honoring and enriching us
with this rare and precious Gift? Should we not, upon this account, Glory in
Tribulations, as in so many enriching gifts, freely bestowed on us of God, and
purchased by Christ?

3. Hereby should we learn to beware of fretting or repineing at the trouble,
that the Cross and Testimony of Jesus brings with it; and choose rather to
be thankful for such an honorable gift, as this Suffering for the sake of
Christ is: Nay the more our trouble and harassing be, let us look upon
ourselves as the more honored of God; and therefore called to be thankful and
to bless; seeing we should bless Him, for all His Benefits; and this is among
the chief of His benefits.

4. We should then be wholly dead to ourselves, and to any stock of strength or
courage, that we may imagine to be in us; that we may not think of standing
upon our own legs; for these will fail us: And should fix our eye on this
Father of Lights, from whom every good gift must come; and by faith depend upon
Him, and seek this from Him, in prayer through faith. We have encouragment now
to go to God, through Jesus, to seek this gift, because it is a gift, and
because it is a gift purchased by Christ.

5. And especially should this be our exercise, when at any time, we find our
heart like to fainte, and our strength like to faill us, and we are like to
sinck. Then should we double our ^uites, and renew our acts of Faith, upon the
ground of Christ's Purchase, and the Fathers Grace and Readiness to bestow what
we need, and cannot now want, of His own Free Grace, and good Will.

Lastly, There is here a sure ground of great Comfort laid down; and this is
the plain scope of the words; for the Apostle is comforting these Christians of
the Church of Philippi, against the Cross, with this, (among others) that to
suffer for Christ's sake was a gift of God, and a gift bestowed upon them
through Jesus Christ: So that there is here comfort against many Discouragments
As

1. Against the thoughts of the greatness of the difficulty: we are ready to
cry out; Oh we cannot wrestle through this Cross, wherein are so many
difficulties, and each more insuperable than another: But this may comfort us.
That there is a gift of God for it, which will make all difficulties superable:
we of ourselves, as of ourselves, cannot wreastle through; but this gift can
enable; and that there is nothing called for at our hands, but what this gift
will enable us to do: this gift will bear all our Charges, and keep our heads
above, when swiming through the most dangerous Seas,

2. This may comfort against the thoughts of Rageing, Strong and Cruel
Adversaries; for this gift will enable; if it be given to Suffer, we shall be
helped to Suffer all their Rage and Cruelty, and not fear, or fainte.

3. It may comfort us against the thoughts of our own weakness: we are but like
a reed shaken in the wind, and cannot endure much: Yet as when the gift of
faith was given all our corruption and unbeleefe, and all the Power of Satan
could not hinder our closeing with Christ; so, when this Gift of Suffering is
bestowed, through Jesus Christ, all our inward weakness and aversness shall not
hinder our through-bearing: We shall then go in the strength of that gift,
without wearying or fainting; for we shall then be strong in the Lord, and in
the Power of His Might.

4. It may Comfort against the apprehensions of our own sinfulness and great
unworthiness, whereby we may fear, that He shall forsake us, because of our
provocations, and not help us through: For this being the gift of God, and
given in the behalf of Christ, we cannot think, that it can be given for any
worth in us: What ever our sins be, we may look to Him, when we are called to
bear witness to His Truth, who is a great and a free Giver, and have hope that
He will make us Partakers of that free Gift, in and through Christ. Beggars
look for a free alms, though they can plead nothing but poverty and want; and
are far from pleading their own worth and merits: He gave us faith, at first,
which we neither did, nor could merit; and why may He not also give us this
gift, when He calls us to the duty?

5. It may comfort against the faintings of others, whom we apprehend to have
been more able to ride through the storm, than we are: We are ready to say, How
can such as I am stand, when the like of Peter fainted so foulely? But this is
comfortable, that it is not any stock of Grace, or inward Strength, Resolution
and natural Courage, or the like, that will carry through; but the gift of God;
and without this gift of God, the strongest will not stand; and with it, the
weakest will be enabled to stand-out the trial: And when God denies this for a
time unto strong Christians, for His own Holy Ends, He may give it to the weak,
and so carry them through; that all may see, it is His gift that does the thing,
and nothing else.

6. This may also comfort us, against the thoughts of our unpreparedness to
meet with the trial; for the matter of our throwbearing depends not upon our
fitness, and preparation for the Exercise; but upon the Gift of God; and this
gift will be more glorious and excellent in their eyes, who knowing themselves
to have been very far out of case, for such a trial, were yet enabled by virtue
of that gift to stand, and to suffer for the sake of Christ.

7. So it may comfort against the sorrowful thoughts of their former
Miscarriages, Faintings and sinful Shunnings of a faithful Testimony, which may
readily cause such apprehend, that the Lord will stand by them no more, but
forsake them, as they did formerly forsake Him: This, I say, may comfort them,
that it is a gift, and a gift of God, and a gift, purchased by the blood of
Jesus, by which they must be helped; and what is of that nature, may be given,
notwithstanding of all that has past; all Gods gifts being free, and the more
unworthy they be, on whom they are bestowed, the glory of free grace shines
forth the more, and the worth and value of the Merits of Christ is more
conspicuous.

CONSIDERATION. XVI. The Sufferings of Christ's Servants are for the advantage
of the Church.
WHen persecution arises especially against Christ's eminent Servants and
Followers, then many are ready to draw strange Conc^usions, in their own mind,
touching the Church; and to think that the Church shall be utterly extirpated;
little considering the wonderful Workings of God, who, by that mean, which, to
them, threatens ruin, is bringing about the welfare and advantage of the
Church, to the Glory of His Power and Wisdom. Whereas if it were believed, that
even by persecution, raised against the Preachers and eminent Professors, the
Church should be no loser, the thoughts of such a Dispensation could not cause
much consternation.

In order to the speaking a few words unto this, we would take notice of a few
Instances, which will confirm the truth thereof, Act. 8: verse. 1. It is said,
that at that time, there was a great persecution against the Church, which was
at Jerusalem and they were all scattered abroad throughout the Regions of Judea
and Samaria, except the Apostles; that is, all the Church Officers were forced
to flee, after Stephen was stoned. But did this any harm to the Church? No;
but did tend rather to the furtherance of the Gospel; for it is added verse. 4.
Therefore they that were scattered went every where, preaching the word; so
that by this means, the Gospel was spread throughout the Regions about, and
that more quickly, than otherwise, in all probability, it would have been.
When Paul is speaking of his Sufferings Col. 1: 24. he says, they were for
them, and not so only, but for the whole body, the Church. Who now rejoice in
my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of
Christ, in my flesh for his bodies sake, which is the Church. So 2 Cor. 1: 6.
And whether we be afflicted, it is for your Consolation and Salvation, 2 Timothy
2: 10. Therefore I endure all things for the Elects sake. Another plain
Instance we have Phil. 1: 12. But I would, ye should understand, Brethren, that
the things, which happened unto me, have fallen out rather unto the furtherance
of the Gospel.

1. For further clearing up of this, we shall mentione some particular
Advantages, which the Church reapeth by the Sufferings of Christ's Eminent
Servants and Followers.

1. Their sufferings, upon the account of Truth, serve much to Strengthen and
Establish the rest of the people of God, in the faith; for the truth is thereby
much confirmed unto them, and made to have some deeper Impression in their
hearts, when they see, that the Truths, which those Servants of Christ
delivered unto them, were such, as the Preachers themselves were persuaded of,
as truths, and as weighty truths; yea and such, as they are ready to seal
with their blood. It is for this cause, that Paul makes mention of his
sufferings, in that Epistle to the Colossians; for he is endeavoring to settle
them in the faith, and to keep them steadfast in the day of Temptation. He would
have them verse. 23. Continue in the faith, grounded and settled, and not moved
away from the hope of the Gospel. And because they might have said, what can we
do, when you are put to such sufferings, and are shut up in Prison? He
obviateth this by saying, I rejoice in my sufferings for you. As if he had
said, My Imprisonment and Sufferings are not to your disadvantage, but for your
good; and upon that account I rejoice in them. So that this is a notable mean
to keep others steadfast in the truth: As, upon the other hand, it is a potent
and forcible mean to shake poor people out of their hopes, and to confirm many
in Atheism and Infidelity, when they see such, as have been preaching forth
truths unto them, refusing to stand to them, and avow them, in a day of
Temptation: Hence is it, that Satan, seeing this so much for his advantage,
doubleth the force of his Temptations and Assaults against such, knowing that
the fall of one such may endanger many, and occasion the staggering of
multitudes.

2. By this means the Gospel is made to spread more, and and that not only by
occasion of the banishment of Preachers; as we see Act. 8. but also, that by
reason of their very Imprisonment or Persecution to the death many will be made
to enquire after the cause, why such are put to so hard sufferings; and after
inquiry, some may be made to see, that their Cause is just and righteous,
howbeit they be condemned, and thus may be brought to like their cause, and
befriend it, and to hate the carriage of the Persecuters: So that the
Gospel Truth is no loser, by all the loss that the Preachers suffer, upon the
account thereof; for when strangers observe that such men of Understanding,
judgment and Conscience, are ready and willing to confirm the truth of what
they assert with their blood, and to suffer any thing rather than deny the
same, they begin to search more seriously after the matter, and to consider
its consequences, and come at length to affect that way more in their heart; an
Instance whereof we have Phil. 1: 12. 13. He told them verse. 12. that what
hardships had befallen him; had fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the
Gospel, and in the next verse he shows, how this was, saying, so that my
bonds in Christ are manifest, in all the Palace, and in all other places. The
report of his Imprisonment, for the Name of Christ, went far and near; so that
even Caesar's Court ringed again with the noise of it, and they are talking of
it among themselves; and severals are converted to the truth thereby, and
brought to embrace the Gospel; for he tells us Chap. 4: 22. That there were
Saints in Caesar's household, all the saints salute you, chiefly they that are
of Caesar's household.

3. When the Lords eminent Servants are persecuted upon the account of truth,
the lord is (to speak so) more engaged to do for His Church, to own her, and
to counter work the plots and wicked devices of Satan; and this He is pleased,
for the glory of His name, to declare and manifest, by making thereby the
Gospel to flourish more, in power and life; and to bless the labors of a few
the more The Church did never thrive better, than in the Primitive times,
during these hot persecutions. I^ time of persecution, the Church is purer,
for few adhere to the truth, but such, who have received the truth, as it is in
jesus, and have the grace of God in them in truth; then are there fewest
hypocrites to be found in the Church, the heat of persecution drives them
away, and drives the uprght hearted nearer to God, so that their grace and
communion with God grows, their mortification to the things of this life
increases, and they become more and more crucified unto the world, and the
world unto them: So that howbeit the outward bulk of Professors diminish; yet
the true hearted grow more lively, strong and vigorous, and the inward man is
renewed day by day 2 Cor. 4: 16. So that really the Church suffers no loss,
but is a gainer.

4. By this means, many other faithful, zealous and honest-hearted Servants of
God, are made (through the Lord's wonderful defeating of the Counsels of Satan)
more bold and forward, in owning and declaring the truth: The devil thinks, by
the sufferings of some eminent Servants, to discourage and fainte many, as
supposing that they will be affrighted from their duty; but the grace and power
of God worketh-out the contrary event: As we see Phil. 1: 14. where another
fruit of Paul's bonds and Imprisonment is added. And many of the Brethren in
the Lord, wa^ing confident by my bonds, are much more bold to speak the word,
without fear. So that the Church is a gainer, through the Lord's wonderful
working, by all these Sufferings.

5. There is hereby an encouraging exemple laid before others: ^is no small
advantage unto particular Believers, in a time of Persecution, to know of some
precedent, of some that have gone through the foord before them: Therefore says
the Apostle James Chap. 5: 10. Take, my Brethren, the Prophets, who have spoken
in the name of the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction, and of
Patience; so that such Examples are refreshing, and helpful unto their
Constancy and Stedfastness; when they see others standing fast in the faith, in
the midst of all persecutions, that they meet with, they are animated unto the
like stedfastness, and to resolution, in adhering fixedly to the truth: such
examples will make even a timorous man wax bold; and the exemplary carriage of
sufferers is very encouraging and comfortable, wherefore the Apostle says 2
Cor. 1: 6. whether we be afflicted, it is for your Consolation. Therefore these
Sufferings are much for the advantage of the Church.

6. Hereby is the Church awakened from security, and made to look out for a
suffering lot; when thus it is done to the green tree, they are made to take
Warning; Such a dispensation is as the sounding of the trumpet for an alarm;
and this is no small advantage, when she is raised to her feet, and put in a
postour, and made ready for the battle; then she needs not fear a surprisal;
but has time to prepare, and make ready for the storm.

In order to the Improvement of this Consideration, we would

1. Beware to conclude that all is gone, when we hear or see Christ's eminent
Servants put to sad sufferings: We are ready to wonder why the Lord should
suffer such and such things to be done; why He should suffer such sad things to
befall His eminent and useful Servants, who cannot well be missed, one whereof
is worth an hundred, so that the Death or Imprisonment of one such threatens
more destruction to the Church, than the loss of many: But we know not the
thoughts of the Lord; we know not what He is designing, and what He minds to
effectuat thereby. And if we believed, that even such a dispensation as this
could do no harm to the Church; how little would we be troubled at it? If we
saw, what an effectual way this were, in the steady, unerring Hand of God, to
bring about the spiritual advantage of the Church, how would we lay our hands
upon our mouth, and be silent? And though we can not see in particular, what
advantage the Church is like to get, by the taking away of such, as were as
Pillars of the Church: Yet we should by faith rest assured, that the Head, and
Husband of the Church, would not suffer such a Dispensation to come, if He knew
not, how to bring good and advantage out of it; and that thereby good seed was
sown, which, though accompanied with tears and blood, yet should yield full
sheaves at length, which should be brought home with Joy.

2. We would do well to search ourselves, at such a time, to see if we, as
particular members of the Church, be reaping any advantage by what we hear and
see of the Sufferings of Christ's eminent Servants; as for example, see if
thereby the truth of the Gospel become more riveted in our souls, and we
becomes more rooted in the faith and assurance thereof, and more fixed in our
Resolution to adhere thereunto; See if Truth becomes lovely and desirable to
us upon this account; See if grace be growing more within, and if our hearts
and affections be loosed more and more from the things of a world, and we be
prepared more to quite all for Christ, and His Cause; See if by the example of
others we be more animated, and encouraged to avow and abide by the truth, cost
what it will; See if these news be raising us out of our bed, and making us
prepare for the battle, and make ready for the approaching storm: and if we
find any such advantage thereby, let us bless Him, who is giving us meat out
of the eater, and doing us good by the dear cost and charges of others.

3. This should comfort such, as are called forth to suffer for the Name of
Jesus; they need not trouble themselves with thoughts, what shall become of the
Church and Interest of Christ; but leave that upon the Lord; and believe, that
He shall make it contribute to the furtherance of the Gospel, and to the
enlairgment of His Kingdom; Ministers called to suffer may possibly think, Oh
what shall become of the poor people? we cannot get preached unto them, as
formerly; but what if God make their stedfastness in suffering more
advantageous, than their preachings would have been? What if that edify more,
than many preachings did, or would do? Ought not they, upon this Consideration,
rejoice in their Lot, and suffer cheerfully, that Christ's Interest may prosper
more thereby? What know they, what influence their Christian carriage may have
on all On-lookers, yea and on Enemies and Persecuters themselves, beside what
confirmation friends may have thereby?

CONSIDERATION XVII. The Lord Reigns in Zion.
Believers are not like unto the Subjects of Kings, here on earth, who may be
dethroned, and their Crowns may fall from their Heads, and the Scepters be
taken out of their hands, and they may lose all the Ensigns of Royalty; and
when it falls out so (as is done many a time) Subjects have but cold Comfort,
in looking to the Throne, when it has forsaken him, that sat thereon. But
Believers have a King, who lives and reigns for ever and ever, and whose
Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom. It cannot then but be strange, that when
Men, who have all their temporal happiness hanging upon the standing of Kings
of Clay, can rejoice in adversity, when they have any hope of their King's
recovering of his lost Throne and Kingdom, though the grounds of their Hop be
most disputable and uncertain; that the Children of God, in the day of their
Adversity, can draw so little Comfort from the sure and certain Grounds of
Hope, which they have to look to. If Christ's Crown and Throne were not surer,
than the fading and perishing Regalia of Men, what would believers do? Whither
could they go for consolation, in the day of their Distress and Anguish? But
now, seeing their King is not like the Kings of the Earth, why are they so
heartless, in the day of their extremity? Sure, the Reason must be, because
they believe not, that He is such a King, as He is indeed; or they know not how
to improve, to any spiritual Advantage, such a noble Ground of Consolation, as
this is. Wherefore it may be useful to speak a little unto this: And so we
shall first lay down some Propositions, clearing up this Truth, and next some
Conclusions, pointing out the improvement, that may be made thereof.

First, As for the Propositions, take these following,

1. The Lord stands under the Relation of a King to His Church and People; He
has taken to himself that Name and Title: and accordingly we find them eyeing
this, in the day of their Distress; So David Psalm. 5: verse. 2. and 84: v. 2.
embraces Him, crying, My King and my God: and he comfort himself with this
Ps. 10. v. 16. The Lord is King for ever and ever. And the Church cries out
Psalm. 74: v. 2. God is my King of old: and comfort herself with this Esai.
33: v. 22. The Lord is our judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our
King, He will save us. So does the Lord make a sweet promise of this, for the
Comfort of His people, Hos. 13: v. 10. I will be thy King. Whereby we see, that
there is such a relation betwixt God and His People, that will yield Comfort,
in an evil day.

2. He is not a King that is far off; but is near at hand, in the midst of His
Kingdom and People: And this is also comfortable: Kingdoms may have a King,
and yet be little the better of Him; he may be far away, and unable to help
them, in the day of their greatest necessity; But it is not so with Zions King,
He is always at hand, in the midst of His People: He is established King in
Zion. Psalm. 2: v. 6. Yet I have set my King (says the Father of His Son, the
Mediator) upon my holy hill Zion. His whole Kingdom is, as it were, his
Throne, and there He sits, as King on his Throne; and He is placed and fixed
there by a sure and unchangable Decree. That question of Jeremiah Chap. 8: v.
19. puts the matter out of question, Is not the Lord in Zion? Is not her
King in her? So Ps. 99: 2. The Lord is great in Zion. Zions King then is a
great King, in the midst of her.

3. Zions King is a King actually reigning upon His Throne, and exercising His
Kingly Office; not like a King, imprisoned, or put out of a capacity of
helping, or releiving his distressed Subjects; for He reigns Psalm. 93: v. 1.
and 97: 1. and 99: v. 1. It is the bringing of good tidings, the publishing of
Peace, the bringing of good tidings of good, the publishing of Salvation, to
say unto Zion, Thy God reigns Esai. 52: v. 7. Zions King is not a King outted
and dethroned; but actually reigning and sweying His Scepter, exerceing His
Kingly Office and Government.

4. Zions King is an everlasting King, He shall reign for ever and ever: He
cannot be dethroned, He must reign until all His Enemies be made His footstool
1 Cor. 15: v. 25. for He is settled on His throne by an everlasting and
unchangable decree Ps. 2: v. 6, 7. And therefore He is called the King eternal
1 Timothy 1: 17. That is a sweet and comfortable Word of Promise Ps. 146: v. 10.
The Lord shall reign for ever, even thy God, O Zion, unto all generations.
Micah 4: 7. And the Lord shall reign over them, in mount Zion, from hence
forth, even for ever. Psalm. 10: v. 6. The Lord is King for ever and ever. And
Psalm. 45: 6. Thy Throne, o God, is for ever and ever. Ier. 10: 10. The Lord --
is an everlasting King; and so His Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom; for it
is said Luke 1: 33. He shall reign over the House of Jacob for ever, and of
His Kingdom there shall be no end. So Revel. 11: 15. And the Seventh Angel
sounded, and there were great voices in Heaven, saying, the Kingdoms of this
world, are become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ; and He shall
reign for ever and ever.

5. Not only does this King reign in the midst of Zion, His Kingdom and
Throne; but He rules in the midst of His Enemies Psalm. 110: 2. This is
advantageous and comfortable; For He can reach them a blow, when He will: And
all their Consultations, and Cabinet Counsels, are well known to Him; He rules
in the midst of them, and over-ruleth all their Plots and Actions, as He sees
good; and is working out His own holy ends and designs by what they are doing:
Hence it follows ver. 5, 6. That He shall strike through Kings, in the day of
His wrath. He shall judge among the Heathen: He shall fill the places with the
dead bodies; He shall wound the heads over many Countries. Other Kings must
make use of Spies and Intelligencers, to know the purposes and motions of their
Enemies; and after all their pains remain ignorant; or if they come to some
knowledge thereof, be unable to prevent the mischief designed: But this King
rules, as Commander in chief, among the very Enemies, though they know it not.

6. This King of Zion, is a mighty and great King, He is excellent in Power and
Majesty; and therefore is styled King of Kings Revel. 17: 14. He is the blessed
and only Potentat, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords 1* Tim. 6: 15. He has
on His thigh and on his Vesture, a name written, King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords Revel. 19: 16. And therefore by Him Princes rule, and all the Judges of
the earth verse. 16. He is a King therefore endued with Supreme Power and
Authority, higher than the Kings of the earth, whose petty Soveraignity is as
nothing compared with His.

7. As He is a Mighty and Powerful King; so is He a Righteous and just King. He
shall reign in righteousness. Esai. 32: 1. The scepter of His Kingdom is a
right scepter Psalm. 45: 6. He loves righteousness, and hates wickedness verse
7. just and true are all His ways, who is King of Saints Revel, 15: 3.
Righteousness and judgment are the habitation of His throne Psalm. 97: 2. Yea
the King's strength loves judgment, He establishes equity, He executes
judgment and equity in Jacob Psalm. 99: 4. His strength and Power needs not be
terrible unto his Subjects, for His throne is a throne of judgment, and His
scepter is a scepter of Righteousness: All His Regalia have this engraven on
them, to the great comfort of His Subjects.

8. He is a King, that is clothed with Majesty and Terror; and so is able to
affright and strike terror in the heart of the greatest and proudest
Adversaries The Lord reigns, and He is clothed with Majesty Psalm 93: 1. This
mighty one girdeth His sword on His thigh, marches with Glory and Majesty, and
in Majesty he rides prosperously Psalm 45: 3, 4, 5. The Lord is great in Zion,
and He is high above all people, and His name is great and terrible. Psalm. 99:
2, 3. Clouds and darkness are round about Him, a fire goes before Him, His
lightnings enlightened the world, the earth saw and trembled, the hills melted
like wax at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the Lord of the whole
earth Psalm. 97: verse 2, 3, 4, 5. What Enemy then is able to withstand, or
resist this Potentat.

9. He is a King thoroughly fournished with all Enduements and necessary
Qualifications for the Exercise of this His Government. Grace is poured into
his lips, and He is anointed with the oil of gladness above His fellows Psalm.
45: 2, 7. In Him are hid all the treasurers of wisdom and knowledge; yea in Him
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily Col. 2: 3, 9. He is then a
Compleet King, fully able to administrate this Kingly Office, and to perform
all Acts belonging thereunto, in truth and faithfulness, and in due season.

10. As he is a King terrible unto the Kings of the earth Psalm. 76: 12. and is
clothed with Majesty and Power; so is He a King, that is meek and lowly: Even
when he rides in Majesty, it is upon truth and meekness, as the words may be
rendered Psalm. 45: 4. When He rides in state, it is upon Meekness. He is a
King that comes -- having Salvation, lowly and rideing upon an Ass, and upon
a colt tho fool of an ass Zech. 9: 9. Mat. 21: verse 5. Though He be the
terriblest King, that ever was, unto Enemies and Rebels; yet He is all meekness
unto his own.

11. This King, who sits and rules upon His throne, is a Priest upon His
throne Zech. 6: 12, 13. -- Behold, the man, whose name is the Branch, and He
shall grow up out of His place, and He shall build the Temple of the Lord; even
He shall build the Temple of the Lord, and He shall bear the glory, and shall
sit and rule upon his throne, and He shall be a Priest upon his Thron; and the
Counsel of peace shall be betwixt them both: Such a King is He, that will not
destroy His followers, notwithstanding of their sins and rebellions, but will
rather make an atonement for them, lay down His life for them, and become an
Intercessour on their behalf.

12. He is an ancient King. His throne is established of old; and He is from
everlasting Psalm. 93: 2. The goings forth of this Ruler of Israel have been of
old from everlasting Micah. 5: 2. And thus His throne is from everlasting to
everlasting.

13. This King of Zion has Dominion over all the earth, over hell and over
death. Angels and Authorities and Powers are made subject unto him 1 Pet. 3:
verse 22. He has them all under his command and Authority, that He may dispose
and make use of them, as He sees fit. By Him were all things created, that are
in heaven, and that are in earth, Visible and Invisible, whether they be
Thrones or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, all things were created by
Him and for Him Col. 1: 16. God has put all things under His feet, and has
given Him to be Head over all things to the Church Ephesians. 1: 22. He is King of
all the earth, and He reigns over the Heathen Psalm. 47: 7, 8. All Power in
Heathen and in Earth is given unto Him Mat. 28: 18.

14. He is a King that rides prosperously Psalm. 45: 4. The work He undertaketh
does not misgive in His hand, nothing miscarrieth, or can miscarry, which He
undertaketh. He is the happiest sweyer of a scepter, that ever was. His
purposes fail not; He is not disappointed of his Projects or Designs; all of
them succeed well in His hand. The pleasure of the Lord shall Prosper in His
hand. Esai 53: 10.

Secondly, From these Comfortable Propositions, let us draw some comfortable
Conclusions.

1. The Church and People of God are not an headless, helpless Company, as many
take them to be. They have an Head, and a living head, though Strangers and
On-lookers do not observe it, nor believe it. The world, and the men of the
world, look upon them, as a contemptible Company; yet they have a King
reigneing over them, and a King that shall reign for ever and ever. They
themselves are often times perplexed and distressed in mind, when they see not
one great Person owning them and their Interest, and offering himself to be an
head unto them; but if they knew, what anon they had for their Head, Husband
and King, they would not be much troubled, though not one great Person in all
the earth should own them and theirCause: So that when all earthly Powers
forsake them, and withdraw their helping hand, this may comfort them, That
there is a standing relation betwixt Christ and them, as is betwixt a King and
his Subjects, and this relation neither is, nor can be broken off.

2. Let devils and men do what they can, they shall not be able to destroy and
root out the People of God. They may intend to destroy, and to cut them off
from being a Nation, that the name of Israel may be no more made mention of;
and may make a strong combination for this end, as Psalm. 84: verse 4. But this
their Interprise is vain, they will never be able to effectuate what they
design. Seeing He is a King, that reigns on his Throne, He must have a
Kingdom and a People, whom He must govern, and over whom He must swey His
scepter. So that whoever would resolve to destroy His Kingdom, must first think
of making Him no King; take away His Kingdom, and take away His Scepter too;
Himself must be dethroned, ere He have no Kingdom. Enemies then may attempt
great things, and promise to themselves great success; but in end, they will
prove themselves to be fools; for He must reign for ever and ever, and His
Kingdom must be to all Generations. He shall reign for ever, and of His
Kingdom there shall be no end. Luke 1: verse 33. His people then may be at
peace, though they know what great things their Enemies design against them,
and that their cruelty and rage is such, as nothing but their utter overthrow
and destruction will satisfy; seeing it is all one, as if they should presume
to pull God from His throne. Let the Devil, and his trustee Livetenant,
Antichrist, conspire, and use what Machinations and bloody Devices they will,
to destroy the whole Interest of Christ; He must not want Subjects, He shall
not want a Kingdom, so long as Sun and Moon endure: Howbeit the people of God
may be several times brought very low; yea and almost out of sight, as a Woman
fled to the wilderness; yet this exalted King, who is set upon His throne, by
an everlasting Decree, must have a Kingdom, and shall have a Kingdom, over
which to swey His Scepter.

3. Yea Christ's Kingdom must be a coming and a growing Kingdom Luke 1: verse
32. He must be great, and have the throne of His Father David: Many excellent
promises have we of this: Micah. 4: 1, 2, 3. But in the last days, it shall
come to pass, that the mountain of the house of the Lord, shall be
established on the tope of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the
hills, and people shall flow unto it, and many Nations shall come -- and He
shall judge among the people. So Esai. 2: 2, 3, 4. Rev. 11. verse 15. And the
seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven, saying, the
Kingdoms of this world, are become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of His
Christ; and He shall reign for ever and ever. We are taught to pray daily, Let
thy Kingdom come. Our Lord shall be great to the ends of the earth Micah. 5: 4.

4. Wherefore, Let Enemies do what they can, His Church shall not get much
hurt: For so long as He is in the midst of her, she cannot be moved, though the
earth be removed, and though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the
sea, though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled, though Mountains shake
with the swellings thereof. Psalm. 46: 5. It is promised Mic. 4: 7. That the
Lord shall reign over them, in mount Zion; and what follows? And thou, o
Toure of the Flock (verse. 8.) the strong hold of the Daughter of Zion, unto
thee shall it come, even the first Dominion, the Kingdom shall come to the
Daughter of Jerusalem.

5. Though it frequently come to pass, that God's people are brought low, and
Enemies get the upper hand; yet Zion's King lives; and therefore He will
Assemble her, that halteth, and will gather her, that is driven out, and her
that have been afflicted; and make her that halteth a remnant, and her that was
cast off a strong Nation Mica. 4: 6, 7. Because He lives, His members must
live also. Seeing the Churches Head is above the water, she cannot drown.
Wherefore, upon this very ground, that Zions King lives and reigns, His
Church and People, even while low and under the feet of Enemies, may lift up
their head in hop, and be sure that their day of redemption draws near; and
they may conclude with the Church Esai. 33: 22. The Lord is our judge, the Lord
is our King: He will save us. Seeing He is King, He can command deliverance
Psalm. 44. 4. and work Salvation Psalm. 74: 12. Upon this ground, David infers
a Delivery and a Victory Psalm. 10: v. 16. The Lord is King for ever and ever,
the heathen are perished out of his land. Enemies will not be able to stand
long in Immanuel's Land. It is His work, as King, to deliver and defend His
Subjects; and they may be sure, He will not deny Himself, He will answer ^is
Title and Relation.

6. When His people see, that all their Strength is gone, and that there is
none shut up or left, they are ready to conclude, that all is gone: But what,
cannot this King in Zion soon leavy an Army? How easy is it for Him, to speak
to dry bones, and make them armed men Ezekiel. 37. When mention was made of this
Ruler in Israel, whose goings forth were from of old, and who should stand and
feed in the strength of the Lord, in the Majesty of the Name of the Lord His
God Micah. 5: 4. It is added, This man shall be the peace, when the Assyrian
shall come into our Land, and when he shall trade in our Palaces; then shall we
raise against him Seven shepherds and eight Principal men, and they shall waste
the Land of Assyria with the sword, and the Land of Nimrod, in the entrance
thereof. Thus shall He deliver us, from the Assyrian, when he comes into our
Land, and treads within our borders. And the remnant of Jacob shall be among
the Gentiles, in the midst of many people, as a Lion among the beasts of the
forest, as the young Lion among the Flocks of sheep -- Thine hand shall be lift
up upon thine Adversaries, and all thine enemies shall be cut off verse. 5, 6,
7, 8, 9. When His people are brought very low, so that, in all probability,
they shall not be able to raise up themselves; then this King can help the
business, He can raise up an invincible army, out of lame sick soldiers. He
can make Jerusalem a cup of trembling, and a burdensome stone; for all people
Zech. 12: 2, 3. He can make the Governors of Judah like on hearth of fire
among the wood, and like a toarch of fire in a sheaf, and they shall devour
all the people round about, on the right hand and on the left ver. 5. He can
make Him, that is feeble among them, like David, and the house of David, as
God, as an Angel of the Lord before them v. 8. Out of Him comes the corner,
out of Him comes the nail, out of him the battle bow -- and He can make them
to be as mighty men, which tread down, as the mire of the street, in the
battle; and He can strengthen the house of Judah. Zech 10: 4, 5, 6. He can bend
Judah for himself, and fill the bow with Ephraim, and raise up Zions sons
against their Enemies Zech. 9: 13: He can make poor worm Jacob, a new sharp
threshing Instrument having teeth; and say to them, thou shall thresh the
mountains; and beat them small, and shall make the hills as chaff etc. Esai. 41:
14, 15.

7. This Consideration speaks dread and terror unto Enemies; for He is a
King, that is terrible to the Kings of the earth. He makes the Earth, and the
heavens to tremble, the hills melt and quake before him; and what then can weak
man do? What will they be, in the hands of the Almighty, who shakes Nations?
The Lord reigns, Let the earth tremble, He sits between the Cherubims, Let
the earth be moved Psalm. 99: 1. At the wrath of this everlasting King, the
earth shall tremble; and the Nations shall not be able to abide his Indignation
Ier. 10: 10. Where then shall His Enemies stand, in the day of His Indignation?
We are often afraid of the terror of Enemies, but saw we Him, who is our King,
we would see, that our Enemies had more cause to be afraid of Him, who is
clothed with Majesty: there goes a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of
His mouth devoureth and coals are kindled by it Psalm. 18: verse. 8. Read what
follows.

8. When we are thinking on the Wit, Skill and Activity, of the Adversaries, let
us call to mind, that our King is infinitely beyond them, He searches the heart
and tries the reins; He knows the thoughts afar off: He is privy to all
the motions of Adversaries; He knows when they march, and when and where they
halt Esai. 10: 28, 29. See what is said of our King Esai. 11: 2, 3. The Spirit
of the Lord shall rest upon him, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the
Spirit of Counsel and Might, the Spirit of Knowledge, and of the Fear of the
Lord; and shall make him of quick understanding, in the fear of the Lord.
Though the Adversaries should soon out-wit us; yet they will not be able to
out-wit Him, who is our King; for the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are in
Him: So that it is an easy business for Him, to countermine all their Plots
and Machinations. He has formed all their hearts, and so He knows what is in
their hearts. Nothing can be hid from Him, His very eyelids try the Children
of Men Psalm. 11: 4. Wherefore, when we are at a nonplus, and know not what to
do, this may comfort us, and compose our Spirits, our King knows very well,
how to carry on his own Contrivances, and glorious Projects: So that when we
are blind, we are to look to Him, who knows what to do, when we know not
what to do; and let Him alone with His own work.

9. It is sad, when the Children of God are wronged, and cannot get fair
Justice: wickedness is to be seen in the place of judgment, and iniquity in the
place of righteousness Eccles. 3: v. 16. judgment is turned away backward, and
Justice stands afar off, for truth is fallen in the streat, and equity cannot
enter; yea truth fails, and he that departs from evil makes himself a prey
Esai. 59: v. 14, 15. But here is comfort against this, that Zions King
reigns, who is just, and a King that reigns in righteousness. He shall not
judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his
ears, but with righteousness shall He judge the poor, and reprove with equity,
for the meek of the earth -- and righteousness shall be the girdle of His
loins, and faithfulness the girdle of His reins Esai. 11: 3, 4, 5. His people
then need not fear, seeing there is Justice to be had at His bar.

10. The Children of God are much fainted and discouraged, when second means
are out of sight, they see not horses, nor horsemen, to appear in the fields for
them; but a right sight of this Truth would prove helpful and encouraging in
this case: Did they but by faith see, that Zions King were reigning on His
Throne, and actually sweying His Scepter, they would easily conclude, that all
would be well; for this King would either work without means (as sometime He
does) or creat means for His own use: A wight man (we say) never wanted
weapons; and shall our King be straightened for want of means? Could Sampson,
without either Sword or Spear, only with what came next to his hand, the
Jaw Bone of an ass, slay so many? And need we fear, that our King shall want
Instruments, when He minds to work by Instruments? Omnipotency cannot want
hands: Any of all the Creatures is sufficient in His hand; with vermin He made
an end of proud Herod. If He but speak the word, He will therewith command
deliverance: So that we need not fear, though the fig tree should not blossom,
and though we should see nothing but dry bones, and dry bones scattered about
the graves mouth, so long as this King lives and reigns, unto whom belong
the shields of the Earth, Ps. 47: v. last.

11. The Lords reigning in Zion may assure us, that there are great and rich
offfallings to be had. Courtiers fear not want, so long as the King possesses
His Throne, yea they dar adventure to take on Luck's head (as we say) and why
may not the Lords people also rejoice on Lucks head, seeing their King shall
never be dethroned? It is said Esai. 32: verse. 1. that a King shall reign in
righteousness. And what is to follow thereupon? See verse. 2, 3. And a man shall
be as an hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the Tempest, as Rivers
of water, in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land, and
the eyes of them that see shall not be dim, and the ears of them that hear
shall hearken.

12. This Consideration may fill the souls of his People with Joy and
Consolation, however matters go with them, were they never so low, were Enemies
never so high, were the case of the people of God never so desperate like: That
Zions King lives and reigns, is the most encouraging news, that can be, The
Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice, and let the multitude of the Isles be
glade thereat Psalm. 97: 1. There is Joy and gladness here sown for all the
upright in heart. Is not the Lord in Zion? Is not her King in her? Said Jeremy
Chap. 8: 19. It is a shame, that Believers should any way carry themselves so
as On-lookers might have ground to think, that Zions King were not in her, or
that they themselves did not believe, that Zions King indeed were reigning.

CONSIDERATION XVIII. The time of Affliction is but short.
IT is an ordinary thing for people, under Affliction, to be putting more hours
in their day, than twenty four; to be multiplying their years, and accounting
their months Years, their weeks Months, and their hours Days; and to be
crying out, Oh will this life never have an end? How long, how long, will this
Cup be holden to my head? When shall the day dawn, when God shall loose this
Yoke from off my neck? The Harvest is past, and the Summer is ended, and we are
not saved, Ier. 8: verse. 20. Will not this year put an end to our trouble? How
long shall the rod of the wicked rest upon the lot of the righteous? How long
will God lengthen-out this sad trial? These speeches, and the like, are but too
frequent in their mouth; and their thoughts are too often upon this Subject: and
thus eternizing their sad lot, in their minds, or foolishly imagining, it will
not have an end, in have, they multiply their own Sorrow; whereas did they
calculat by the Scripture-account, they would see the time shorter, than they
now imagine it to be. Now to help them, as to his, We shall 1. Show what is the
Scripture account of the time of Affliction. 2. Answer what can be objected to
the contrary. 3. Show how this Consideration may and should be improven to
advantage.

As to the First, The Scriptures give us this account of the matter.

1. That it will not be for ever 1 King. 11. v. 39. And I will for this afflict
the Seed of David, but not for ever. Though for their iniquities He resolved to
punish and afflict the Seed of David; yet it will not be for ever: And what is
here spoken of David's Seed, will, in some respect, agree to the Church and
People of God, in all ages. Ay, and there may be here a Meiosis, a Figure,
whereby much more is imported, than the words signify; and this not for ever,
is as much as, for a short time. It must then be the language of unbeleef to
say, that God will cast off for ever, and that He will be favorable no more;
for His strokes upon the Godly are not of that nature: He may afflict for a
time, but not for ever.

2. The Scripture tells us, that these days will be shortened, Matthew. 20:
22. And except those days should be shortened, no flesh should be saved; but
for the Elects sake, those days shall be shortened. Christ is speaking there
of sore and sharp Tribulation, that was to come upon the Land; and for the
comfort of the Elect, He says, that those days of Affliction and Tribulation
should not long continue, but should be shortened for their sake: And this will
hold good, in all Ages, the Lord being as careful of His Elect now, as then,
and His Elect being as ready to fainte, through long Affliction now, as
formerly: Therefore the ground of this promise continueing, we must not say,
that the promise it self is out of date: To say then, that Affliction shall
never have an end, is upon the matter, to annul this Promise.

3. We find the Scripture saying, That Affliction, or the rod of the wicked,
should not rest upon the Lot of the righteous, lest the righteous put forth
their hands unto iniquity, Psalm. 125: v. 3. This promise contains likewise,
in the bosom of it, a ground of assurance, that it is not expired; for as
long, as the righteous are in hazard of putting forth their hands unto
iniquity, because of the continuance of the trouble; we may eye this promise,
that the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon their lot; and this ground will
always endure; and so the promise, bearing this Ground and Reason in its
bosom, will continue likewise in force. We must not then say, that Afflictions
on the Godly shall never have an end, unless we would withal destroy this
promise. Therefore we may conclude, that the People of the Lord shall not be
the rest of the burden of the Word of the Lord; as it is said of Damascus Zech.
9: 1.

4. We are also told in Scripture, That the Heaviness of Affliction is but for
a Season, 1 Pet. 1: 6. wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a Season (if
need be) ye are in heaviness, through manifold temptations. The word rendered
for a Season, in the original, signifies a little present now; to show that
this Season is but short; a present now, without any considerable duration. If
this were believed, we could not be crying-out, as we are too ready to do, Oh,
will those days never be at an end? we would see that the little
inconsiderable present now, or point of time, would quickly be over. See Revel.
6: 11.

5. The Scripture tells us of a little while, Heb. 10: 37. for yet a little
while, and He that shall come will come etc. The expression is mostemphatick in
the Original, and cannot well be rendered to the full; as if he had said, yet a
little, how little, how little? As if it could not be expressed, how little the
time was to be. This little while, or appointed time (as it is called Habb.
2:.3 will soon be over.

6. The Scripture points it out to be a very little while Esai. 10: 25. for
yet a very little while, and the Indignation shall cease etc. In the Original
there are two words, both of them signifying a little time, or a very little
time; and so it is as much as if he had said. a very little little time. Sure
that time cannot be long, which is so short, that the shortness of it cannot be
expressed. Is it not then strange, that when the Spirit of the Lord cannot (to
speak so) get words to express the shortness of the duration of their trouble,
they on the contrary cannot get words sufficiently to express their sense of
the length of the time?

7. We find it called by a definite number Ten days, Revel. 2: 10. -- And ye
shall have tribulation ten days; Whereby the shortness of the duration of that
tribulation is expressed; not that the trouble was to continue just ten days;
but to signify that it was not to continue long, but a short inconsiderable
time, which the Lord had determined and limited punctually to a day.
Tribulation will not last always, Ten days will put a period to it.

8. If this be too long, we have it expressed as yet much shorter; even a
night, which is no long time Psalm. 30: 5. -- Weeping may endure for a night,
etc. The dark disconsolat weeping time will not endure long, the few hours of
a night will put an end to it: It is but a night, and a night, that has the
dawning of a day following it. We should be ashamed then, to think, or say,
that our Trouble and Affliction will always last; we never saw a night yet,
but it had a morning of a new day following it.

9. If this should yet seem too long, we have it denominated from a shorter
time, as an hour Revel. 3: 10. there is mention made of an hour of temptation,
that was to come on all the earth. Our Lord; sure, would hereby confute our
error of construeing the time to be too long, when He does of purpose mention
such short measures of time. An hour will soon be at an end, the few minutes
thereof will swiftly post away.

10. Nay, if this should seem too long, we have it expressed by a shorter
duration viz. of a moment, Ps. 30: 5. for his anger endures but a moment. And
what can be shorter, than a moment? Is there any measure of time shorter, than
a moment? And yet by this is the duration of the Anger of God against His
Children, in afflicting of them, expressed. Why then should we account that an
age, which the Lord calls but a moment? So Esai. 54: 8. In a little wrath I
hid my face from thee, for a moment. The word rendered moment signifies
cutting or dividing, and so imports the shortest cutting or division of time.
The Apostle speaks thus of it also 2 Cor. 4: 17. Our light Affliction, which
is b^t for a moment. The Apostles expression is singular, there is a lightness
of Affliction, and that lightness is but a momentany lightness; Now weightiness
or lightness is not measured by time; yet the Apostle, in a most emphatick
manner does so here, to show us, that all the weight of the Affliction (in
comparison of the glory, that is coming) is mere lightness; or is so light,
that it cannot be measured with the least of weights; and therefore he says,
it is but a momentany thing, like a feather falling on a man's hand and
immediately blown away again. It can be nothing then, but shameless unbeleef,
that says the time is long.

11. Nay, which is yet more; as if this duration were yet too long, it is
expressed by a little moment Esai. 26: verse. 20. As if it were a little part of
the least division of time, if there be any moment less then another, that is
the right name of the duration of the Troubles and Afflictions of His People.
So Esai. 54 verse. 7. It is called a small moment. And can we imagine how it can
be less? If the People of God had the measuring of the time of their trouble,
in their own hand, could they give it any shorter duration, than this? Could
they imagine a shorter? When the Spirit of the Lord expresses it thus, We
should be ashamed to think it too long.

But it will be objected (and this is the Second thing I am to speak to) That
the Lords ordinary dispensation with His people in all ages seems to
contradict this, for ordinarily, if not always, we see, that the Afflictions
of His People are of long continuance: did not Israel wander Forty Years in
the Wilderness? After they came into Canaan, did they not serve the King of
Mesopotamia Eight years Judge. 3: 8. and the King of Moab Eighteen verse. 14. and
the King of Canaan Twenty Years Judge. 4: 3. and the King of Midian Seven Years
Judge. 6: verse. 1? Were they not captives in Babylon Seventy Years? not to
mention their being now Non-churched above sixteen hundredth Years? How then can
this time be called and accounted so short?

For clearing of this, we shall propose these few things following to
Consideration,

1. The time of the Affliction of His people may be accounted short, in regaird
of the great and manifold effects, which God is to bring about by the same, a
through Consideration of which would make us say, (if we judged according to
our usual manner) that the Afflictions must of necessity continue a long time,
to the end those great and noble effects may be produced thereby. Would we
consider, how much Dross and Corruption in His own people remains to be
purged away, as Pride, Carnality, Inordinat Self-love, and Love of Pleasures,
Riches, Honors, Ease etc. Carnal-Security, Passion, Self-conceite, Formality,
Hypocrisy etc. we would see a necessity for the Crosses lying-on for a long
time, in order to the purging of these away; As also would we consider how much
Hypocrisy, Hollow-heartedness there is to discover; how many false Friends to
Christ and His Interest, there are to be made known, we could not but think,
that of necessity, in order to the effectuating of this discovery, a long time
of trouble and trials were requisite. As likewise, if we called to mind, how
many things His people are to learn thereby. Considering I say, those and such
like noble Effects, which the great Master of Work is to effectuate and produce
by the Affliction; And how they would seem to call for the continuance of the
same for a considerable time, And withal how notwithstanding the Lord prevents
the thoughts of many, and makes a short work; and does that in a few Months
or Days, which we could have thought should have called for many Years. When
then the Lord makes such a quick dispatch of such a great Business, we may
well say, that the time is short, and that many Years are but a very short time.

2 The time of Afflictions may be accounted short, considering what our Sins
and Provocations call for at His hand. When in righteousness the Lord might
keep us under the rod all our days, and multiply Afflictions upon us, to our
very dying day, Ten or Twenty Years Captivity should seem a very short time, a
few Years Imprisonment would seem nothing to a man, who had been condemned to
perpetual Imprisonment: To another possibly, who got no such Sentence, a few
Months Imprisonment would seem longer, than many Years to him, because he
expected no less, than perpetual Imprisonment. So, were we considering, that in
regaird of our deservings, the time of Afflictions might justly be continued to
the end of our days, a few Years or Months would appear to be no considerable
time. Wherefore in respect of our deservings, a long time of Affliction is but
a short time; because the longest is nothing to what we have deserved.

3. They may be accounted short, in respect of the days of Prosperity, which
they have had sometimes in the world The Lord does not always chide, He will
not cast off for ever, but though he cause grief, yet will He have compassion,
according to the multitude of His tender Mercies Lam. 3: verse. 32. and so He
sends Prosperity, which lasts longer, than their Adversity did; as we see
Judge. 3: verse. 11. after Eight Years bondage, they had rest Forty Years: And
verse. 30. after Eighteen Years trouble, they had rest Fourscore Years So Chap.
5: verse. last. after twenty Years bondage, they had rest Forty Years. Thus the
Lord sometimes sends such a length of Prosperity, that the days of Adversity
are forgotten, as if they had been few and inconsiderable.

4. The time of Affliction may be accounted short, considering how that
oftentimes, for as long as the delivery seems to be a coming, yet, when it
comes, His People are surprised therewith, their expectation is prevented;
they imagined, in their own apprehensions, a longer duration of the trouble, so
that mercy preventeth them, when it comes; and this makes the bypast time of
their Affliction seem short. Though the People of God had been a conderable
time in bondage, and under the feet of Adversaries; yet it appeared unto them,
but (as it were) as the time betwixt seed time and harvest Psalm. 126: verse. 5,
6. after God had wonderfully delivered them out of Captivity and Bondage, they
draw this Conclusion from this rare Act of Gods Providence about them. They
that sow in tears shall reap in Joy, and he that goes forth and weepeth having
precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoiceing, bringing His
sheaves with him. Whereby is imported that Gods People, abiding by the Lord,
though they should meet with Affliction, in their Duty, and be made to weep
sore, be reason thereof; yet the time of delivery should come, like an Harvest
with fruit, recompensing all their toil and tears: and so, they summed up all
their Seventy Years into less than Seven Months. And how came it to pass,
that the time seemed so short? That Psalm points this forth, as one Reason
hereof, Verse. 1: When the Lord turned again the Captivity of Zion, we were
like men that dream. They were surprised with the mercy, for they did not look
for it; but thought their exiled Condition should have continued longer,
because they saw no appearance or probability of a return. So that in regaird
of what the People of God themselves may imagine, the time of the Affliction
may be short.

5. It may likewise be accounted short and inconsiderable, in regaird of the
wonderful and extraordinary goodness of God, that appears in the delivery;
when it comes, it may be attended with such signal and notable Mercies, which
so fill their souls with amazement and satisfaction, that the length of the
time of their Affliction disappeareth and evanisheth; and, as if it had been
nothing, it is presently forgotten. So in that forecited Psalm. 126: verse. 2.
The delivery is accounted signal and wonderfully remarkable, such as filled
their mouth with laughter, and their tongue with singing. It was such a notable
delivery, accompanied with so many rare Passages, and carrying in the bosom of
it so many rare demonstrations of Gods Power, Tenderness, Faithfulness,
Constancy and loving Kindness, that they could not but be filled with
admiration thereat, and have their tongues loosed to sing his praises: Yea they
took notice of this circumstance, which increased the admirablness of the
delivery, that even Strangers and Heathens were made to say, that God had done
great things or the poor Jews; and they themselves, being no less convinced
hereof, could not but subscribe to the truth thereof, and (as it were) take the
word out of their mouth, and say v. 3. The Lord had done great things for us,
whereof we are glade. Now this being so remarkable a delivery, the first sight
and apprehension of it did so fill their soul with Joy and Admiration, that the
long Seventy Years Bondage seemed to them, but as the pains and labor of a
few Months, in expectation of a good harvest, after the seed was sown: as the
long pains of a women traveling in Childbirth are forgotten, when she has
brought forth a Man-Child. In respect therefore of the delivery, so signal as
to its Ingredients, Attendants and Circumstances, the time of Affliction may
appear as nothing.

6. This time of Affliction may appear to be short, in respect of the Comfort
and Support, which the Lord may bestow upon them in the Affliction: His
Presence and Company may so sweeten the Lot, that the time may (as it were)
steal away, and scarce be observed: what is a whole Years Affliction, when God
is pleased to shine in love upon the soul dureing that time? Good Company will
make the Journay seem short, and the way good, which otherwise would be
tedious. Now the Lord is pleased sometimes so to manifest Himself, as to fill
His People with Joy, and this so sweetneth the trouble, and cutteth the time
short, that many Years seem but a few days.

7. The time may be accounted short, in respect of the rich recompense of
reward, that is coming. If we should lay this in the balance with an hundred
Years Bondage and Affliction, what would all these Years of trouble seem to be,
but as the trouble of a moment, when it is past? Therefore, when Paul takes a
view of the exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, which was coming, all the
Afflictions in this earth appeared as nothing in his eyes; the transcendent
Glory and incomprehensible Excellency of the one, eats away the duration of
the other to a thing of nothing 2 Cor. 4: ver. 17. It is with the Believer, in
this case, as it was with Iaeob, when he was serving for Rachel, Seven Years
enduring of the cold frost by night, and the heat by day, seemed unto him but
as a few days, For the love he had to her Genesis 29: verse. 20. The thoughts of
the rich and upmaking reward, that faithful Sufferers have to look-for, will
cause a long time of sad Affliction seem short.

8. The time of Affliction is so short, that it is as nothing, in comparison of
Eternity: the exceeding and eternal weight of Glory will make the Afflictions
light and momentany. What is the whole of time unto Eternity? Is there any
comparison betwixt what is finite, and what is Infinite? Seeing then the whole
of time is not as a moment of time to all eternity; what can the longest
duration of Affliction be, but as an inconsiderable part of that inconsiderable
whole? What do those, who are up before the Throne, think of the many Years of
their Trouble and Persecution here below? Are they, think we, calculating it by
Years or by Days, or by Hours? Oh no, all of it is, with them, comprised
within the Circle of a small inconsiderable point.

These and the like particulars being duly pondered and considered, it will
appear, how the longest time of Affliction, that we can have here, is but short
and inconsiderable: And it is our not weighing and laying of these things to
heart, which makes our trouble seem so long.

Thirdly, We come now to speak of the Christian and Edifying Improvement of
this Consideration: which is by fixing it in our heart, as a sure truth, that
the time of Affliction is indeed but short. And had we the faith hereof rooted
in our souls, we would be in case to carry Christianly under Afflictions: For
the faith hereof would produce several sweet and useful Effects, in our hearts,
seasonable and profitable for such a time: Such as these following.

2. The fixed apprehension of this, that the time of trouble is but short,
would fortify the Soul of a Believer against the false suggestions of the
Devil, which he makes much use of at that time, to disquiet their hearts, and
make their lives bitter. He will labor to persuade them, that God looks on
them as Enemies, otherwise He would not continue their heavy Affliction so
long; and thus tempt them to question their Interest in God. But the faith of
this truth would enable the Believer to answer this Objection, and to repel
this Temptation, by saying, His anger is but for a moment, His face will not
always be hid; this blast will go over; and therefore I have no cause to call
my Interest in question, upon this account.

2. The fixed faith of this would keep the Believer from questioning the
promises, upon the account, that the Lords Dispensations did seem to threaten a
long lasting trouble; and a sad life of Affliction for a long time. Temptation,
it is true, will then say, God has forgotten to be gracious, He will be
favorable no more, His faithfulness fails for ever. But the Soul, believing
this Conclusion, will say, what a poor insignificant ground is that for me,
whereupon to call the faithfulness of God in question? If the trouble were
lengthened out ^et longer, all the time is but short, it will soon have an end.

3. The faith of this will contribute much to hold up Hop's Head. When the
afflicted Person, through the Power of Temptation, is made to cry-out, O! This
Trouble will never have an end, this perplexity and exercise is but growing;
and what shall I do? Then hope begins to fail, and when hop fails, the
soul sincketh: But now, when this Consideration is seriously thought upon, and
the soul is made to say, all the time of Affliction, which his Children meet
with here, is but short, it will not always last, it is but for a moment, yea
and for a very short moment; then hop is made to lift up its head; for the man
will be ashamed to quite his hop, and despond, who knows that the storm will
quickly be over, and be but like a may-shoure.

4. The Faith of this will help unto the exercise of Patience: when we look
upon the trouble, as that which will not end, or must be of long continuance,
our courage departs, our spirits fail, and we storm and grow Impatient. But
when we by faith look through the thick and black side of the dispensation, and
see the end of the calamity nigh at hand, the moment posting away, how sweetly
will we lay our necks under the yoke, and set our faces against the storm, and
hold on our Journay? How patiently will we bear the Indignation of the Lord,
when we know, that it will be over within a moment? We will be ashamed to
quarrel, or complain, when we know, that a period shall quickly be put
thereunto. The Apostle told the Hebrews Heb. 10: 36. that they had need of
patience: And to encourage them unto Patience, he tells them, that within a
little while, yea a very little while. He that should come, would come, and
would not tarry verse. 37.

5 The faith of this will help unto Constancy and Stedfastness. When we once
conceive and apprehend, that our trouble shall be of long endurance, we grow
weak, and unable to stand out against temptations; and are ready to say,
because this storm will not soon blow over, it is best to row to a lee shore,
and comply with the sinful courses of the time: Whereas did we see and believe,
that the storm would not endure long, but be quickly gone, we would be
encouraged to ride it out, and enabled to withstand temptations unto a sideing
with the workers of Iniquity.

6. It would help also unto Christian cheerfulness under the Cross; when we
know that it will be but a blast, soon over and gone, our Countenance will not
fall, nor our courage fail: but when we represent the trouble to ourselves, as
of long continuance, and we begin to doubt if ever it shall have an end, then
we become discouraged, and our countenances are cast down, and we appear no
more courageous and cheerful: How do our hearts faint, and our hands fail us?
The Consideration of the short and momentany Affliction keeped-up Paul's heart,
and made him say, For this cause we fainte not 2 Cor. 4: 16, 17.

7. The faith of this would free us from many fears, that ordinarily attend
such a Condition; we are, while under Affliction, saying, what if this or that
fall out? But the faith of this would hush these troublesome fears and
questions to the door. The Tribulation being but to continue ten days, we
would fear none of these things Revelat. 2: v. 10.

CONSIDERATION. XIX. Remember Peter's fall Mat. 26. verse 33, 34, 35.
IN a time of trials and temptations, as it is of advantage to be calling to
mind, and presenting to ourselves the Christian, and commendable Carriage of
such, as have been helped of the Lord, to witness a good Confession for Him,
and for His Cause and Interest, before men; to the end we may thereby be
encouraged to follow their example, and to adventure on the Promises with them,
and not to fear the faces of men, in Christ's Cause; so it may be of use for us
also, to present before our eyes, and to take notice of the faintings of
others, in the day of Trial, that thereby we may learn, to walk in fear, and
not to trust to ourselves, or to any thing within us; and to watch, lest we
enter into temptation, when we are not in case to wrestle against it.

We have here before us a sad and an alarming Instance viz. the foul fall of
an Eminent man, in the hour of Temptation, which may be Improven to advantage.

After Christ and His Disciples had been supping together, at that Instituted
Feast, He tells them some sad and wakening news verse. 31, 32. to Teach us (1.)
That we are never more ready to grow secure, and to think that our mountain
stands so strong, that it shall never be moved, than when we have had greatest
Enjoyments of and Communications from the Lord, and nighest Access unto him.
(2.) That there is never less cause of security, than at that time; for the
higher we have come in our seize, the Devil is the nigher with his
storm. (3) That we should never be secure; but even, when we win nearest God,
we should resolve upon and prepare for new assaults, and temptations. But
withal it is remarkable, that the Lord delayed the signification of the sad
things, that were to fall out, until the feast was ended, and they had sung a
hymn; knowing that they would then be best in case to bear the sad report; and
not loving to mar their mirth, at that feast of Love.

Though Christ had told them, that they should all be offended because of Him,
that night; yet Peter, out of a piece of manly courage (as would appear)
promising too much upon his own head, would not believe; but would rather make
his Master a false Prophet, than suspect his own weakness: Therefore Christ
tells him, that he should be more offended, than any of the rest; and that he
should deny Him thrice, ere the next morning came verse. 34 But all this would
not lay the high conceit, that Pet^r had of himself; for he resolved rather to
die, than do that; and this he avowed openly, little knowing this own strength.

In this carriage, and in these Answers of Peter, there are some things good,
and some things bad; and the noticeing of both may be of use to us. As for such
things, as are good here, and may yield us some Instruction, we shall mention
these three.

First, It was good, that Peter was convinced, and did acknowledge, that it was
his duty, and the duty of all Christ's Disciples, to avow their Master, and not
to be offended in Him, whatever came. And this is an undeniable truth, That
upon all hazards, Christ should be owned and avowed by all, that would not have
Him to be ashamed of them one day? And yet how little is this believed and
beleevingly practiced?

Secondly, It was good, that he was convinced, and that he confessed, that it
was his duty, though all the rest should have left alone, yet notwithstanding
to own and avow his Master, and not deny him: For Christ and His truth and
cause is worthy to be owned and avowed, how small so ever our encouragment from
others be: And as we should not follow a multitude to do evil; so neither will
the defection of many justify our defection, and lessen our fault, if we
depart from the faith.

Thirdly, It was good, that he saw, and acknowledged, that he was obliged to
own his Master, and stand at his back, be the hazard never so great; and that
the very fear of death, should not cause him deny his Master. Thou^h (says he)
I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee. And indeed all, that would be
faithful Disciples to Christ, must not think their life dear to the death for
Him; but must be dead to life and all that is dear to them.

But that which we would chiefly here take notice of is, that which was amiss
in him; and which will ground some sad Truths for our use; As

First, He had too great a conceit of himself; and thought too much of what he
had, and of what he was Hence obs. That Christians are too ready to be puffed up
with thoughts of themselves; and are in hazard to be carried away with this
evil of self conceit, and vain thoughts of their own worth and excellency.
And this arises from these evils.

1. Unmortified Corruption, This is always working against God, one way or
other; and is as ready to work this way, as any other way.

2. Little self searching, and self examination, whereby we become strangers to
the evil of our hearts, and know not what enemies are lurking there, and what
wickedness abounds; and when we know not what is within, it is little wonder
we be readily puffed up with swelling thoughts of vanity.

3. Little real acquaintance with the treachery, deceitfulness and double
dealing of our false hearts: If we saw that, and saw its activity for evil, we
would see more cause of humiliation, than of pride and self conceit.

4. Little mindeing and considering aright the failings and falls of others,
who seemed to be as fast at the root, as we: If we thought upon this, we might
have cause to fear, that we should also not be able to ride out a storm.

5. Trusting too much unto our own present good disposition and frame, as if
this would always continue with us, and we needed to fear no change.

6. Trusting too much to our Resolutions, Purposes and earnest Engagments,
considering little the treachery and deceitfulness of the heart, nor
remembering our own Changeableness and Unconstancy, and that our good fits may
be soon off us.

7. Little considering how we must depend on the Lord and His Influencing
grace, for through-bearing in all our duties; and how we can do nothing without
Him, and His supplies of grace and strength.

This should be a warning to us to guaird against this evil of pride and self
conceit: and to study more humility of mind; knowing better what we are, and
where our strength lies, that we may promise less upon our own head, and
undertake noth ing in our own strength. And it should teach us to mourn over
this body of death, and to guaird against its riseings and motions, and to
strive against it, in all its appearances and actings.

Secondly, The foretold defection and fainting of all the rest of the Disciples
makes not him the more afraid; but for all that he keeps fast his high and
presumptuous thoughts of himself. Which tells us, that there is such an evil
among good Persons, as not to suspect themselves, and fear their fall,
notwithstanding of the supposed and foreseen falls and failings of others. And
this flows from the same evil root of pride, and self confidence. We remember
not that the same evil heart of Unbelief, Unconstancy, Treachery and
Backsliding, that is in others, remains in us.

Whence we should learn to bewar of this evil, and to know our hearts better,
and suspect the evil of them more. Let us not think of ourselves more highly
than we ought Rom 12: 3 but Let him that stands take heed lest he fall 1 Cor.
10: 12. And let the examples of others put us to watchfulness and fear, lest we
fall after the same example of unbeleefe. Heb 4: 11.

Thirdly, He would not fear, though Christ told him, and that with a doubled
asseveration, verily, Verily that himself in particular, as well as the rest,
should deny him. Whence we see, how ^ard it is to lie open to Convictions of
our own weakness, and readiness to decline in an evil day. And this flows
from the same evils of Pride, Self-confidence, and Ignorance of our hearts and
ways.

This should teach us to observe and notice the strength and activity of this
piece of Corruption, which yet remains in the best: And to hate and strive
against this evil and proud humore: As also to be jealous of ourselves, and to
lie open to Convictions from the Word, and be ready to take warnings, and to
tremble before the Lord, and at his Word.

Beside these things that were good, and that were bad in Peter. We may
consider this Prediction of Christ's, and the intertainment that Peter gave it,
whereof we have heard, with the event, and other circumstances here recorded,
and thence find some matter of Instruction.

1. Then, we may observe. That a Person may be convinced of his duty to stand
by Christ and his Cause and Interest, in a day of trial, and yet deny Him, when
it comes to the point of trial. Peter's Conviction of his duty to own Christ,
come what could come, did not keep him from a foul fall, in the hour of
temptation: And the reason is manifest, for (1.) Convictions may evanish, or
lose their force and edge: Light may grow dark, truths become questioned; or
(2.) suppose Convictions should remain in their force; yet it is only fresh
supplies of Influences of grace, and strength, that will cause the man stand,
without which he may be carried over the belly of Light, Conscience and all
Convinctions, in a day of temptation.

Hence we see Light and Convictions are not enough to keep us sted fast, in a
day of trial; we must look-out for something more, and not lean to that which
will not carry us through, more than it did Peter.

2. A Person may be thoroughly convinced, that he should stand by Christ and his
Cause and Interest, though the defection were never so great, yea though he
should be left in that quarrel alone; and yet deny Christ and his Truth, in a
day of trial: Peter was convinced, that he should not deny Christ, though all
others should do it; and yet fell foully. And the grounds of this are the same,
with the grounds of the former truth: Deep Convictions are one gift, and
stability in a day of trial is a distinct gift. Light is one thing, but grace
to follow that light, is another thing.

Wherefore the deeper our Convictions be, we ought the rather to fear the
more, and depend the more by faith on Christ for actual Assistance, Influence
and Grace to follow Convictions, and abide by Duty, in the day of trial.

3. Clear, Plain, Peremptour and Particular Warnings, will not be enough to
keep us sted fast in an evil day: Peter had such here, and yet he fell in the
day of temptation: And the reason is because (1.) These warnings may wear
away, and be forgotten, And (2.) Pride and Corruption may so puff up, that all
these shall not once pick upon the man: And so he may forget himself, and take
little notice of them

The consideration of which should teach us to be Jealous of our heart, to keep
humble, and fear always; and to improve warnings, to a stirring of ourselves
up to Diligence, Watchfulness, Acting of faith upon Christ, and Living nigh to
Him.

4. A present good frame and disposition, or a fit of warmness and affection to
Christ, will not be enough to secure us from a fall, in the day of trial. As we
see here in Peter; He seemed to be in a very good frame, at present, and full
of affection, when he would rather die than deny his Master; and yet when the
temptation came, he yielded The reasons are (1.) Such frames and fits do not
usually stay, nor leave any deep impression on the heart. (2.) Grace actuated,
and blown upon one way, will not be sufficient to make grace lively another
way, or for other work; but the habit must have new Influences for every new
work: For (3.) without Christ we can do nothing: All our strength is in Him; in
Him we must move, as well as live; and He must work in us both to will and to
do, of his own good pleasure.

This should learn us, not to think much of any present fit of tenderness, or
flash of affection; for that may soon wear off; nor think that that will be
sufficient to carry us through new straits and difficulties. It were better to
be learning and practiseing the way of faith, and of dependence upon Christ,
that we may be strong in Him, and in the power of His might Ephesians. 6: 10. That
we may live in Him, and bring forth fruit in Him. Diffidence of our selves, and
of any thing we have, even when we are at the best, would be more suitable and
useful for us, than building too much upon such slender and slippery grounds:
And the consciousness of our own Unconstancy, and Instability should make us
live closer to Christ.

5. Strong Purposes and Resolutions to stand fast, in a day of trial, will not
keep us from reeling and staggering in a stormy day: Peter had brave Purposes
and stout Resolutions; yet he fell notwithstanding, in the hour of temptation.
And the reason is because: (1.) These Purposes and Resolutions are often ill
founded with us; we ground them too often upon something within ourselves, on our
Parts and Abilities, our Light and Knowledge, and upon our Grace and
Receivings from God, or upon former thorow-bearings, and the like; which may
prove but a sandy foundation. (2.) The heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked; and so may fail us, in a day of strait and difficulty. (3)
These purposes may soon be forgotten and laid by.

Which should learn us, not to deceive ourselves with those specious and
promiseing flourishes of Purposes and Resolutions, even when they are real, and
without the reproachings of our heart; for these are not strong enough to carry
us through a sad storm, that may come.

6. A Person may resolve on death, in avowing Christ, and yet not stand out
against a smaller temptation: Peter resolved to die, rather than deny his
Master, and yet the word of a Damsel made him deny Christ. And that because
(1.) Presupposed hazard is not so terrible to nature, as what is present, a
small trouble present is more frightful to nature, than a greater trouble afar
off, (2.) We often make our Resolutions without Christ, and resolve not in Him,
but in ourselves. (3.) Oftentimes these Resolutions are not deliberat, but done
in a fit of a good mood and warm frame; and when that is off, the Resolutions
animated thereby wax cold and faint.

The Consideration of which should make us fear always, and not to trust the
highest and strongest of Resolutions. Happy such as abide in Christ, and depend
upon Him, for their daily Food, Strength, Courage and Activity; and undertake
nothing without Him.

7. All these fast and firm-like Purposes, Vows and Resolutions will be so far
from keeping a person from a fall, in a day of temptation, that they will not,
some time, keep him even for a few hours. So was it here with Peter; for that
very night he denied his Master. And that because (1.) A Christian, when left
to himself is not able to stand-out a storm, even a very little time. (2.)
Their adversary the Devil is active, subtle, and vigilant. (3.) After Vows
and fast Purposes they become secure, as thinking their hazard less, and
trusting to their own strength; and so the Devil gets most advantage, when
they are gone from their watch-towr, and are fallen asleep in their security.
(4.) The Lord may see it good to suffer this, to punish them for their Pride
and Self-Confidence, and to let all see, that he that glories should glory in
the Lord.

This may let us see, What an Unconstant Creature a believer is, when he is
left to himself, and how inconsistent he is with himself. And should teach us
to fear most, and be most upon our guard, when we think ourselves best and
saifest. And to know, that our Strength and standing is in the Lord.

8. When Persons think themselves most sure, they may be nearest to a fearful
fall: Peter thought now his mountain stood so strong, that he should never be
moved, as David did Psalm. 30. And all the warnings he got did not make him
once fear a fall: And yet w^ know, what a fearful fall followed upon this. And
the reason is, because (1.) They often judge by sense and carnal reason; and so
think because they find themselves, in a good mood at present, that all is
well, and they need to fear nothing. (2.) They grow then most secure, and self
confident, and therefore neglect their watchful, and circumspect walking, and
are not in the fear of the Lord all the day long. (3.) Satan observing this
watches his time, and finding them secure sets on, and cannot but prevail.
(4.) Self-confidence blinds the eyes, that they see not their own weakness,
and where Satan may have advantage against them. (5.) The only Wise God
orders it thus, to let us see, that all Flesh is grass.

Therefore we should never resolve to quite our Watch-towr, but always mind
watchfulness and circumspection, and guard against Security. Let us fear most,
when we think we are saifest, and beware of promising saifty and immunity to
ourselves, in whatsoever condition or frame we be into. Let him that stands
take heed, lest he fall.

9. Such as have an higher conceit of themselves, than of others, may come to
fall fouler than any. Peter thought more of himself, than of all the rest; and
that he should stand by his Master, though all the rest should shamefully turn
their back upon Him; and yet none among them all did, as he did. And the Lord
wisely orders matters thus, that (1) All Flesh may lie low in the dust, be
humble, tremble and fear. (2.) That the best may be jealous of themselves, and
fear a fall. (3.) That He may chastise the pride of some, who thought there
were none comparable to them.

Which is a warning to all, to have humble and low thoughts of themselves, and
to beware of proud imaginations and lofty thoughts.

10. A Person may have true Grace, and yet sinfully and shamfully shun
suffering for Christ. As we see in Peter, who had the root of the matter in
him: For to believe is one gift, and to suffer is another distinct gift, and
they go not always together. See Phil. 1: v. 29. of which we spoke above.

To teach us to depend upon Him for the one, as well as for the other; and not
to think, that if we have grace, we need no more to carry us honestly through a
day of temptation. We would remember, that it must be given us in that very
hour, to suffer steadfastly, and to stand to the truth.

11. A Child of God may fall into this grievous sin of denying his Lord and
Master in all His Interests, in His Person, Offices, Attributes and Works. This
was no small sin, in which Peter fell, at this time: It had a long tail of
direful and sad Consequences. There is no sin, which Believers are exempted
from, but the unpardonable sin unto death, final impenitency, and final and
total Apostasy. And Satan, in all his temptations, drives at this, to have
them denying, quiting and renouncing Christ.

Which should teach us (1.) To have charity to some, that fall in a day of
temptation; seeing some, in whom is the root of the matter, may, being left of
the Lord, fall very foulely. (2.) To be humble and watchful all our days, not
knowing what may befall us ere we die: We may ride through one, or two, or more
storms, and yet fall shamfully, ere we go off the stage. (3) To remember what
a strong and violent Body of Death we have within us; lest we turn secure and
careless. (4.) To be thankful to God, if we be kept steadfast at any time; for
that is not of ourselves; the Grace and Power of God have done it. Therefore
let God have the Glory, and not we ourselves.

12. When once a Believer, in a day of temptation, begins to fall, and
loses a foot, he may fall very foulely, ere he recover himself. Peter lost his
foot, and spoke an untruth at first, simply denying his Master; but it came to
fearful Oaths, Cursings and Execrations, ere all was done. For (1.) The way
down-ward is very easy (2.) Satan is at hand, to drive forward; and who can
stand, when the Devil drives down ward? (3.) Conscience being once wounded
will be easily made worse: If once a little hole be made in the Conscience, it
is easily made wider; for tenderness and watchfulness go away.

Which should serve as a loud warning, to beware of the very beginning of a
defection, and to guard against the very first breaking-in of waters, It is not
saife to say, such a length I will go, and so far I will yield, to save a
staik, and to keep my peace; but I will go no further. It were more wisdom, to
hold further off the brinke and precipice, lest, if our foot slip, we recover
not ourselves so easily again: And we know not, what a providential Commission
the Lord may give Satan, to drive us, by his temptations, forward to that,
which we never dreamed of, because of our rash and sinful ventureing, and bold
hazarding upon sin and known dangers. It is Wisdom to resist the beginnings of
evil; then are we strongest, and best able to withstand; whileas, the more we
cede and yield, the weaker we become, and the weaker we are, we are the more
easily driven downward, and carried away of the wind of temptation.

CONSIDERATION XX. Gods Way of delivering his People is hid and mysterious.
ESAI. XLV. VERSE. 15. Verily thou art a God, that hidest thy self. O God of
Israel the Savior.


BEcause right thoughts of Gods Mysterious ways of Working, and bringing about
Salvation and Deliverance, are useful, in a dark day, we shall speak alittle to
this.

We find in Scripture frequent mention made of God's hiding himself, 1. His
Saints are often complaining of it Job. 13: v. 24. Wherefore hidest thou thy
face? So Psalm. 10: 1. and 44: 24. and 88: 14. and they are making it the matter
of their lamentation, and laying it forth, as the ground of their sorrow and
grief.

2. We find this dispensation threatened because of sin Deuteronomy. 31: 18. And I
will surely hide my face, in that day, for all the evils, which they shall have
wrought.

3. We find it also accordingly executed because of sin Ezekiel. 39: 24.
According to their uncleanness, and according to their transgressions have I
done unto them, and hid my face from them. So Esai. 57: 17. For the iniquity of
his Covetousness was I wroth, and smote him, I hid me and was wroth. See also
Esai. 59: verse 2. and 64: verse 7. and 54: 7, 8.

4. We find this dispensation accompanied with sad Effects: Such as

(1.) A not hearing of the prayers of his people Esai. 1: 15. And when ye
spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you. Hence these petitions
are put up together to God by the Psalmist Psalm. 27: 7, 9. Hear, O Lord, when I
cry with my voice, and hide not thy face far from me. As upon the other hand,
when He hears the cry of His people, it is an evidence that His face is not
hid: Yea these are looked on as one thing, so firmly are they knit together
Psalm. 22: v. 24. -- Neither has He did his face from him; but when he cried
unto Him, He heard.

(2.) Sad and grievous Afflictions, as Esai. 64. 7. Thou have hid thy face from
us, and have consumed us.

(3. Sad and grievous Afflictions continued, together with a not-regairding, or
owning of them, in their Afflictions: For so does the Church complain Psalm.
44: 24 Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our affliction and
oppression?

(4.) Trouble and grief inward Psalm 30: ver. 7. -- Thou did hide thy face,
and I was troubled. So Psalm. 88: v. 14. Lord why castest thou off my soul? Why
hidest thou thy face from me?

But this is not the hiding, whereof the Prophet in this place Esai. 45: 15. is
speaking: For the hiding here mentioned is of a far other nature, giving us
properly to understand, That the Lord has an Unseen, Unusual, Hid, Mysterious,
Sublime, Excellent, transcendently and incomprehensibly Glorious way of
carrying on His Work, of bringing about His holy Purposes, and of making good
His faithful Promises: The circumstances of the Text do fully make out this to
be the true and genuine meaning of the words; for the whole contexture of what
preceedeth and of what follows, is a mass of gracious Promises of great
things, which the Lord was about to do, in the behalf of His Church and
interest; and the very particular Instrument, King Cyrus, by whom the Lord
would begin the recovery of the Estate of his Church, is designed; and his
prosperous success, in all his attempts, against what stood in his way,
foretold; Objections, that might arise in his peoples minds removed; and they
shamed from their Unbeleeving, Querrelling, proud and arrogant Contending
humore: Together with remarkable adjuncts, and concomitants of this great
change of the Church to the better, in their Neighbors, Egyptians, Ethiopians
and Sa^eans; as also ruin and destruction foretold, to come upon all the
Enemies. Now in the midst of these thoughts, the holy Prophet breaks out into
a rapture of Admiration, having in these words, an holy Ejaculation and
Apostrophe, as ravished with the thoughts of these great incredible-like and
wonderful matters, and the rare and wonderful manner of bringing about this
Change and Outgate, which humane understanding could not comprehend: For as one
transported with joy and wondering, he cries out, in the midest of these
Prophecies. Verily thou art a God, that hidest thy self O God of Israel, the
Savior. Wherein we may take notice of these four things.

1. The frame of the Prophet, and the holy disposition of his soul, held forth
by this abrupt Ejaculation.

2. The matter or occasion of this Rapture and Transport, which is twofold; for
(1.) He sees God hiding himself; and (2.) in that dark and unseen way, he saw
him, the God of Israel, and the Savior.

3. The Manner of Expressing this his admiration, with a Verily.

4. His venting himself thus in the bosom of God. Verily, thou art a God etc.

As to the first, the frame of soul, which was in the Prophet, at this time, we
may take notice of these Particulars, which may withal point-out our duty, in a
sad day.

1. We see the Prophet fixed in the faith and persuasion of the truth of what
the Lord was here promiseing, concerning his Church and People: He was
confident and fully persuaded, that the deliverance of the people of God out of
the Babylonish Captivity, in which they were to be, full Seventy years, would
come; though at this present, while he is getting this discovery and
manifestation, there was no appearance of their being brought in bondage, and
led away captive out of their own land by the Babylonians; far less of their
delivery out of that Captivity; the people being now dwelling in their own
Land, and living in peace and quiet, far from any molestation from the
Caldeans: His faith and persuasion of the truth of what the Lord said to Him,
and by Him, was the ground of this his Admiration and Ravishment: For what we
do not believe to be true, how rare and uncouth so ever it be, it will not
ravish us, nor cause in us a rapture of Admiration.

Hence we see all the sayings of God, how improbable and unlikely so ever they
may be, should be embraced with fullness of faith; we should with Abraham Romans
4: 18. Against hope believe in hope; He did not consider his own body now dead,
nor the deadness of Sarahs womb, nor did he stagger at the promise of God,
through unbeleef; but was strong in the faith, giving glory to God, and was
fully persuaded, that what God had promised, he was able also to perform verse.
19, 20, 21. So no more should we take any notice of the humane improbability,
and of the many unlikelyhoods, and of such things, as might, to humane reason,
walking upon humane grounds, make the thing promised seem altogether
improbable, if not impossible: But, having the firm Word of God, who cannot
lie, nor change, there to rest, as anchored upon that immovable Rock, and
ride-out all storms of carnal Reasonings, and corrupt Suggestions and
Temptations of Satan.

2. We see in the Prophet, that all the consideration, that he might have had,
at this time, of the Improbabilities, small Appearances, Difficulties, yea and
Incredibilities to humane judgment, standing as mountains in the way of the
chariot of God's Faithfulness and Truth, coming With Salvation to his people,
did but contribute to his more firm and fixed gripping of, and cleaving to,
the Promises and Predictions; and raise in his soul an holy Ravishment and
Rapture of wondering, at this rare and wonderful Work of God, which he saw by
faith. And this should teach us to take notice of the Difficulties, and
Improbabilities, that seem to us to lie in the way of the accomplishment of the
great Promises, for no other end than this, that we may become more fixed in
the faith thereby, and be raised up to see more of the Glorious Power, Truth,
Goodness and Faithfulness of God, and helped to get a fuller look of God, as
Incomprehensible in all His ways.

3. We may observe here, in the frame of the Prophet, That he discovered in God
something Rare, Admirable, Excellent and Glorious, that ravished him, and
transported his soul: He saw a Divine, Holy Mystery, in God's way: When the
way of the Lord was, to humane eyes, Unclear, Dark and Cloudy, he saw the Glory
of God shining forth, with greater brightness and splendor. He saw the Lord,
while covered, as to his way of working, with a thick cloud, by the eye of
faith; he pierced the clouds, and saw the Invisible. Thou art a God: Nay he,
saw, that such a way, whatever the shallow and dim-sighted Reason of Man might
apprehend, concerning it, was God's way; and had the manifest lineaments of God
engraven upon it: he saw that that hid way was God-like; and these thick
clouds, that to humane reason would darken the beauty and luster of God's
Glory, did the more set off to him, the Divine Glory and Majesty of God. O what
an excellent frame is this; and how useful and necessary for his people, in a
day of clouds and darkness? And what a sharp eagles-eye must faith have, that
can discover Glory in obscurity; and see a rare and singular sight of God, even
when He is hiding himself; and can observe a greater Glory, and splendor of
Excellency, in the clouds and darkness, that are about His throne. How great
must the difference be betwixt that sight of God, which a Natural eye,
measuring things according to the rule of Carnal Reason, can get of the most
refulgent and self-manifesting Operations of God; and that discovery of God,
which faith gets, in those dispensations of God, which have no Glory or
Majesty in them, unto a Carnal eye? How averse and unwilling should the
consideration of this make us, to judge of God and of his Ways and Doings, by
Carnal Reason? And how blind a judge must that be of Gods Ways and
Dispensations?

4. We may here take notice, in the Prophets frame, That he discovers, in the
ways of God, about which now his thoughts are occupied, an unsearchable Depth,
a Mystery, and Incomprehensibleness: For he is like a man walking into the sea,
and finds it the longer the deeper, and at length is like to drown, and there
stands, and cries out, this ocean has no bottom; I shall lose my self if I
go further: He has been, as it were, wading in his contemplations of the
Mystery of God's ways with and about his Church and People; and as one loseing
ground, he cries out Verily thou art a God, that hidest thy self: Thy ways
are Incomprehensible, Unfathomable, and Unsearchable. As the Apostle Paul, in a
case not unlike Romans 11: 33. -- how unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out? David has an expression not unlike, in his
contemplations of God Psalm. 145: 3. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be
praised; and his greatness is unsearchable?

5. It is observable in the Prophets frame, That as he discovers in the ways
of God, which were now the matter of his Spiritual Meditation, a singular and
rare Beauty, and Divine Excellency, a transcendent Glory; so he saw this, while
all these ways of God were covered with clouds, and darkness. Even when He was
hiding himself, and clouds and darkness were round about Him, he saw, that
Righteousness and Judgment were the habitation of his throne; as it is Psalm.
97: 2. Faith can see God in the dark, and discover a God hiding himself: Faith
can go-in through clouds and coverings and dark dispensations, and see the
Glorious God acting in Majesty, and carrying on His work in Faithfulness and
Truth, according to His everlasting Purposes, and Faithful Promises. This
should be our study, in the day of God's hiding of Himself, as to His visible
dispensations, and outward work, in the world.

6. We may here also mark, in the holy Prophets frame, a suitable Submission of
spirit, and holy Acquiescence of soul, in this singular and rare way of the
Lords bringing-about His Intended Designs; There is no footstep here of the
holy man's Murmuring, Repining, Grudging or Quarrelling, at this dark and unseen
way of the Lord's ordering His matters; but on the contrary we may observe, the
Prophet stouping, and putting his mouth in the dust, sweetly acquescing in, and
submitting to the way, howbeit dark, unusual, and compassed with dark clouds,
that infinite wisdom thinks good to take and follow, in carrying on His
Purposes, and Designs of love and mercy, to His people. Verily thou art a God,
that hidest thy self etc. I see that now, would he say, that I did not observe
before; and I am satisfied: I have nothing to say against it; I close with it,
and am fully content it be so. Such a frame would suite us well, let the Lord
take what way He will, and follow what method He thinks good: How uncouth and
dark so ever it seems to us; yet so far should we be from complaining, or
from a quarrelling discontentedness of mind; that we should heartily,
cheerfully, and with full satisfaction of soul comply therewith, in heart, mind
and affection.

7. It is observable also in the holy Prophets frame, that notwithstanding of
all these interveening clouds of Improbabilities and Unlikelihoods, and dark
Dispensations, that would seem to cover and hide the comfortable relation, that
God stands in unto his Church and People; as their Covenanted God and
Savior; yet against hope, as to humane appearances, and carnal reasoning, he
believes in hope; and holds this fast, that be His dispensations what they
will, and be the outward and visible appearances of His owning of and appearing
for His people, never so small and inconsiderable; yet He was, and would be,
the God of Israel, and the Savior. Howbeit the reasonings of flesh and blood
would say, God has forgotten to be gracious, and his Promises fail, and he
will be favorable no more, as Psalm. 77: v. 7, 8, 9. Yet he saw, that His way
was in the Sanctuary, and in the sea, and His path in the great waters; and
that though His footsteps could not be seen, yet He was leading his people like
a flock. v. 13: 19, 20. Such actings of faith, in a dark day, would be of great
use, and would contribute much to our Establishment; and keep us from
staggering, in the day of temptation.

8. We may take notice here, in this manner of expression, of the burning of
the holy man's Affections toward God; These thoughts of the Lord's
Dispensations, whereby He appeared a God like himself, did not alienate his
heart from God, nor drive him further from Him; but on the contrary, they did
warm his Affections more, and draw him nigher unto God; for he is uttering
these his Apprehensions of God, and of His way, even unto God himself, saying,
Verily, thou art a God etc. It is good when our Meditations of God, and of His
ways, how uncouth, strange, and unusual so ever they be indeed, or seem to be,
work thus upon us, and are accompanied with a powerful attractive virtue,
drawing and powerfully inclineing the heart and soul, to approach nigher unto
God: And when the Lord is rightly seen, in any of his ways, how dark soever,
this will follow upon it; the heart will be more engadged unto God, and the
soul will improve these meditations, to a noble advantage; and have thereby
many sweet occasions of heavenly Ejaculations, and of Postings of soul toward
God.

9. It is considerable also in the Prophets carriage, while he thus utters
the whole matter of his thoughts, even in the Presence of God, and pours
forth his soul into the very bosom of God, that he was real, and single
hearted, in all this Exercise; it was not a mere rational discursive
Contemplation, but a real exercise of soul; his heart was really and in very
deed affected with the matter, Verily (says he) thou art a God that hidest thy
self and. His declaring of the thoughts of his heart unto God, says, that he
was not formal, superficial, or for a fashion exercised in this case; but was
really exercised therewith at the heart; his soul was in the meditation; and he
looked upon it, as momentous, and weighty, and as a matter of high concernment.
A Formal, Superficial, Indifferent, and Cursory Contemplation of the works and
ways of the Lord, should be hateful to us; and Uprightness, Sincerity and
Reality should appear in all our ways, and especially while musing and
meditating upon the rare Passages of God's Providence: Our heart and soul
should be in every thought, for the subject is grave and weighty, and of great
concernment.

10. Lastly, It is obvious enough, that the Prophet here is in a transport of
Admiration: he gets so broad a sight of this Majestic and God-like way of
carrying on His work, that he is astonished thereat, and ravished with
wondering; and therefore breaks out, in this holy Apostrophe and Ejaculation,
verily, thou art a God, that hidest thy self etc. Never do we get a right look
of God, and of his ways but when the sight thereof raises in us an high
admiration and wondering; for it is no common and ordinary thing, that is to be
seen in them, when they are seen in the right colors: Our not wondering
declares our sight here to be but common and superficial. It was no ordinary
thing in the eyes of the Jews, when they saw the man leaping and standing and
walking, who had been lame from his Mothers womb Act. 3: 8, 9. and therefore
they were filled with wonder and amazement v. 10. When David was musing upon
the Lords alseeing knowledge, he cries out Psalm. 139: v. 6. Such knowledge is
too wonderful for me, it is high, I cannot attain unto it.

Next, Let us consider the matter and occasion of this Transport of the holy
Prophet: what is the thing, which he sees; and what are his thoughts busied
about, causing this Ejaculation? First. He sees God hideing Himself, Next He
sees Him hiding Himself, even while He is the God of Israel and the Savior;
or he sees Him abiding the God Israel, and Savior, even while His way is hid,
and He will not be seen.

As to the first of these, to wit, the Lord's hiding himself, that is, bringing
about the promised deliverance, and salvation to his people, in a way not
discernable and obvious to the eyes and observation of* every one; in a way
removed from the sight of ordinary beholders; and as to them hid, dark, under
ground, and out of the reach of their perception; in which is a Sovereign,
Majestic, Kingly and Stately procedour to be seen by Spiritual eyes; and only
by such, as can see God, while covered with clouds, and thick darkness. And
this says, That howbeit in all the ways and works of the Lord, there is a
singular, rare and divine piece of State Majesty and Glory to be seen by
Spiritual observers; yet there is sometimes, in the Lords bringing about the
deliverance and outgate of his People, so much hid Mysteriousness, and
Majestic Imperceptibility, that says to a gracious observer, that the Lord is
hiding Himself, and carrying on his Purposes, and perfecting his Work,
according to such grounds and rules of Divine Policy, that every one cannot
penetrate thereinto, nor discover his Footstpes, nor see distinctly the hand of
God, at work. As sometimes wise and great Politicians, Statsmen, and Leaders of
Armies carry on their designs, in such a way, as ordinary onlookers shall not
understand what the matter means, nor what is intended, by what they see done
with their eyes; And the more they carry on their work with success in the
dark, and hid from the observation of ordinary spectators, the more do they
discover their great wit, and give proof of their dexterity, in the managment
of affairs of greatest consequence; and such underground workings, and
stratagems, carry on them a special piece of Beauty and Glory. Thus our Lord
thinks good sometimes to work, and while working, not let every one see, what
he is doing; but carry on his business, much out of sight, and under ground,
and by Holy and Majestic Stratagems; so as not only enemies shall be ignorant
of what He is doing, or about to do; but many even of his own followers and
friends shall be in the dark. So that the observation of Job. Chap. 23: 8, 9.
is often times found to be true, Behold I go forward, but he is not there; and
backward but I cannot perceive him, on the left hand, where he does work, but I
cannot behold him; he hides himself on the right hand, that I cannot perceive
him. As also of the Psalmist, Psalm. 77: verse. 19. Thy way is in the Sea, and
thy path in the great waters; and thy footsteps are not known.

As all the ways, and footsteps of the Lord, are full of Majesty, and of hid
and unseen Glory; and therefore must be sought out of all that take pleasure
therein Psalm. III: verse. 2. so that in all of them, the Lord is like Himself,
and acts like Himself; and every piece of them discover to a spiritual
observer the Finger of God. So there are some special pieces of work, which are
more signal, and remarkable, and wherein the Lords gloriously-working hand is
less obvious; and even these works, upon that very account, are in a special
manner Glorious and Majestic; and of such is the truth in hand to be
understood, wherein the Lords footsteps are not seen, nor known, nor observable
by every one: for further clearing of which point of truth, concerning the
Lord's thinking good to work; and yet to hide Himself, so as it shall not be
observed by every one, that He is indeed working; we shall mentione some few of
these special Works of God, that are thus covered with a cloud of Majesty, that
every one cannot understand the Reasons of State, why such and such things are
done, or suffered to be done; nor see the connection betwixt these Actings, and
the intended Design: As

1. When there is not only a seen and palpable disproportion, betwixt the
means taken and followed, and the end projected or intended; and an obvious
unsutableness of the means used unto the design to be carried on by them: But
the Work of the Lord seems to Onlookers to Cross and Counter-work the
intended end. How often is it seen, that the Works of Gods Providence seem not to
run in a subserviency to the bringing effectually about of the Promises; but
rather to turn head upon them, and to threaten the utter annulling of them, and
rendering of them void, and of no credit? When the present Dispensations of
providence are considered, and compared with the great things concerning the
Kingdom of Christ promised; who can see what rational correspondence they keep,
and can observe them smiling one upon another, as fit means and the end would
do? Nay, who would not say, that these Dispensations do rather drive on a
direct design to defeat the Promises, who would consult with humane Reason?
Is not this then a special piece of the Lord's Work, wherein He hides himself,
and thinks good to cloth himself with State and Majesty, that every one may
not be able to prye into the Depths of his Insinite Wisdom; nor see how all
things are laid, and joynted together, with firm bands and ligaments, that
cannot be broken or dissolved; and so have a certain connection, with the
intended and promised good? When Moses was sent to deliver the People of Israel
out of Egypt, and to tell them good news, that the Lord had visited them, and
looked upon their Affliction, and would now rescue and deliver them from their
bondage and slavery Exodus 4: v. 30, 31. the Dispensation, that immediately
followed upon the neck of that, seemed to keep no good correspondence
therewith, when their yoke was made heavier, and their bondage more grievous,
and their slavery and hard work doubled, by the People of Israel their being
constrained to seek straw for themselves, without diminishing the tale of their
bricks; and they hereupon, who formerly believed the Word of God by Moses, and
bowed down and worshipped, when they heard the same, now made to say unto Moses
and Aaron Exodus 5: v. 21. The Lord look upon you and judge, because ye have
made our savor to be abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his
Servants, to put a Sword in their hand to slay us. Yet herein was a piece of
that Stately Working of God, which is full of Majesty, which the People could
not see; and which Moses himself could not well take up, as his words to God
Verse. 22, 23. evidence, where he says -- Lord! Wherefore have thou so evil
entreated this People? Why is it that thou have sent me? For since I came to
Pharaoh, to speak in thy Name, he has done evil to this People; neither have
thou delivered thy people at all.

2. When the Dispensations of God are such, as even those, whom they most
concern, and who have greatest interest in them, and are most called therefore
to understand them, do not know what to say of them; nor what construction to
put upon them; nor what to gather out of them, not only in particular, but even
as to a more general matter; that is, they shall not know, whether they
speak-out Mercy, or Anger in God toward them. This must be a singular piece of
God's hiding himself, and covering himself with a cloud, that no distinct
judgment can be made of what He is doing: Such was that Dispensation, which
Sampsons Father met with: He and his Wife could not agree in their judgment, as
to what they saw Judge. 13. Manaoh said Verse. 22. We shall surly die, because we
have seen God. But his Wife, on the contrary, said Verse. 23. If the Lord were
pleased to kill us, he would not have received a Burnt offering, and a
Meat Offering, at our hands; neither would he have showed us all these things,
nor would he at this time have told ut such things, as these. So as to that
strange and unusual Dispensation, which holy Job did meet with, he did not
know, what the mind of the Lord was, nor what he was intending and driving-at
thereby: therefore he resolves Chap. 10: Verse. 2. to say unto God -- Show me
wherefore thou contendest with me; which shows, that he was utterly ignorant
hereof.

3. When the Lord surprizeth His People with a Mercy and a Deliverance, and
comes upon them with an unexpected Out-gate; whether (1.) As to their present
Frame and Fitness for the mercy and delivery; Or (2.) As to their Present Hopes
and Expectation. When First, I say, the Lord comes with a sweet and merciful
delivery unto a People, that seem to be in no present capacity for it, as being
out of all good Frame or Fitness, for receiving such a mercy with advantage,
because lying in their sin and impenitency; When the Lord comes with Salvation
unto such a people, sure, his way must be covered with darkness, and hid from
the eyes of Beholders, with a clothing of Soveraignity; for who could think,
that deliverance were upon its march toward such a people, who are not seeking
it, nor turning from their sinful ways, that the Lord may have mercy upon
them, according to his usual Method and Order? Such steps of Soveraignity are
hid steps of Majesty, and full of Glory; and therein the Lord is hiding
Himself, and His way, coming with Salvation in an unusual path: As when he
says Esai. 57: 17, 18. For the iniquity of his Covetousness, I was wroth, and
smote him, I hid me and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his
heart, I have seen his ways, and will heal him: I will lead him also, and
restore Comforts unto him, and to his mourners. Next, When the Lord surprizeth
a people with a mercy, that they are not in Expectation of, nor Waiting for,
then he acts, like a stately King, and His Way is Glorious and hid; as it
was, when the Captivity was brought back from Babylon, concerning which they
say Psalm. 126: verse. 2. When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we
were like them, that dream. It is true, they had good ground to be now looking
for their delivery, because of the Prophecy of Jeremiah, foretelling that after
Seventy Years, they should return back to their own land; and Daniel
understood so much, and thereupon, when the time was approaching, set himself
to pray Dan. 9. But as to the generality, they were, in all appearance, little
looking for this outgate; but rather fearing more trouble and vexation, by
Babylons wars with the Medes and the Persians, who were coming against them;
though the name of Cyrus, because of what was foretold by Esai. Chapter 44. and 45.
might have caused them lift up their heads in hope. But notwithstanding of all
this, we see, they were, (at least as to the generality and bulk of the people)
little looking for an outgate, at this time; and therefore at the first report
of freedom, granted to them to return, they were like men that dream; scarce
believing their own eyes and ears: At which time, while they were in this
dreaming posture, how were they surprised with this mercy? And how was the way
of the Lord, in His stately Marchings, hid from their eyes? In reference to
this same Dispensation of deliverance to his People by Crus, is the Prophet
here crying out thus; Verily thou art a God, that hidest thy self; as the
former part of the Chapter, from the beginning, clears.

4. When Dispensations, upon the one hand, and the other, say, that in humane
probability, there is no appearance, or ground of hope of an outgate, or
deliverance; yet delivery comes, in an unexpected way; how hid must the way of
the Lord then be? Thus He loves to hide Himself, in His advancing with
Salvation, when there is no appearance to humane Consideration, whether men's
eye be upon the Enemies, or upon the People of God themselves: As to Enemies
they may (1.) Be Strong, Mighty, and Invincible, the Consideration of which
might alone be sufficient to dash all hopes; as who could have thought, that
the People of Israel, being so under the feet of that mighty Monarch Pharaoh,
could get out of his Territories, and be freed of his mighty Yoke? (2.) They
may not only be strong, but prevalent, and prospering in their evil way, all
things succeding according to their mind, the Lord, as it were, shining upon
their Counsels, and granting to them their hearts desire, crossing them in none
of their wicked interprizes, and designs; but even suffering them to devise
mischief upon their bed, and to put it the next day in execution. Was it not
so with Saul, in his wicked persecution of David, oftentimes? Had he him not
sometimes in a net, and compassed him about, on all hands, that there was no
apparent escaping? and yet deliverance came. (3.) They may be also Crafty and
Politic, and lay their trains so sure, that they may think they cannot
misgive; and have all things prepared to their mind, that in a moment, they
may blow up His People, that there should not so much, as a memorial of them be
left; and yet be disappointed. The Lord, in an unseen way, may bring about His
Peoples deliverance; so was it with the people of the Jews, in the days of
Mordecay, when Haman had got a Commission sealed by the Kings ring, and a
Decree passed, that might not be ranversed, or recalled, the day appointed, and
designed, and that by a lot, as having something like a divine approbation,
Orders dispatched to put all in execution; and thus the mine was ready for the
springing; what hop could the poor Jews then have of a delivery? And yet,
behold, the Lord was then a God, that hid himself: He was counter-working this
mine, and laying a back train, that might cause it spring back upon the
Authors; and so it did, as the Story clears. When the Enemies thought
themselves sure of their designs, and thought it impossible, that their
purposes could fail; behold, the God of Israel, the Savior, was hiding
himself, and laying an unseen ambush, that cut them off, who thought to have
destroyed the Jews. So upon the other hand, this God will bring about
deliverance to his People: When upon their part, there is not one toaken for
good, not one thing apparent, that can be a probable ground of hope: As (1.)
When their strength is gone, and there are none shut up or left; not a man,
that might be an hopful Instrument, to the fore; all their valiant Men, and Men
of Courage, and such, of whom any thing could be expected, destroyed and taken
away; Yet He, who is a God that hides Himself, can come in an unseen way, and
loves to come so; according to that gracious Word Deuteronomy. 32 verse. 36. For the
Lord shall judge his People, and repent Himself for His Servants, when he sees
that their power is gone, and there is none shut up or left. Was it not thus
also, in the days of Deborah, when there was not a spear or shield seen among
Forty Thousand in Israel? Judge. 5: verse 8. (2.) When their heart and courage
is gone, they are desponding and desparing, and looking on their own case as
hopless and helpless; as it is said of the People of Judah, while in Babylon,
who said Ezekiel. 37* v. 11. -- Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost, we are
cut off for our parts. Then, even then* when People can see no hope, He, who
hides himself, can say, Prophecy upon these Bones, and cause breath enter
into them, and bring flesh upon them, and cover them with skin, and put breath
in them, that they may live Verse. 3, 4* 5, 6, 7, etc. and make them a strong
Army. This is among his hid Acts, whereof he has a rich treasure.

5. When the means, which He puts His peoples upon, in order to their
deliverance and outgate, are such as promise little ^or nothing, being
considered abstractly; and in themselves, being very unlikely, in humane
probability, to effectuate the end designed, then and therein the Lord is a
God, that hides himself: as when he commanded Joshua and the People to compass
Jericho, and to blow with Rams Horns, who could have thought, that that should
have proven an adapted mean, for bringing to the ground the strong Walls of the
City? And when Esther was employed to effectuate the ranversing of the decree,
given out to destroy all the Jews, who could think, that thereby Haman should
have been destroyed, and all the Enemies of the Jews? Who would have thought,
that the stirpling, David, should have killed the great Goliath, and thereby
brought about the defeat of the mighty Army of the Philistines? Thus
oftentimes the Lord makes use of most unlikely and improbable means, that the
excellency of the Power, and the Glory, may be His: And He comes thus in a
dark cloud, with Salvation, without observation, that His hand may more
eminently appear and be observed, and His Salvation be more conspicuous.

6. When some very hopful beginning of a good Work of Reformation meets with
an unexpected stop, and impediment to retard it; this is one of the ways,
wherein the Lord chooses, to hide Himself and His work; then is His way
covered with a cloud, and His footsteps cannot be seen. Thus it was, when
contrary Orders came to stop the building of the Temple, after the peoples
return from captivity; as we read in the Book of Ezra; whereby that necessary
work, so much desired, prayed for, hoped for, and with such earnestness begun,
was for a considerable time retarded. Thus was it also, when David was about
the bringing up of the Ark, out of Kirjath Iearim to set it in its place, in
the midst of the Tabernacle, that was pitched for it; and had for this end
assembled the Body of the People of Israel, and all the chosen Men of Israel,
Thirty Thousand; and was now rejoiceing before the Lord, playing before Him,
on all manner of Instruments; then, even then, is there an unexpected stop put
to the work; for when they were advanced to Nachons threshing floor, Vzzah, one
of the Sons of Abinadab, put forth, in his simplicity, his hand to the Ark of
God, and took hold of it, for the Oxen shook it; and upon this, the Anger of
the Lord was kindled against Vzzah, and God smote him there, for his error,
and there he died by the Ark of God 2 Samuel 6: verse. 5, 6. And upon this, the
work is stayed; for David was afraid of the Lord, that day; and would not
remove the Ark unto him, unto the City of David; but carried it aside unto the
House of Obed Edom, the Gittite, where it stayed full three Months, Verse. 8,
9, 10, 11. See 1 Chronicles. 13.

7. When even the Godly are left of God, to take such courses, as do provoke
God to anger, prove stumbling blocks to the Godly, and a strengthening of the
wicked, in their evil ways; and to bring wrath upon the Land; then does the
Lord hide Himself, and has His way in the Sea; for who can consider this
Dispensation* and not be astonished? Are the Reasons hereof obvious to all? Is
there not something singular, uncouth, and rare, in this Dispensation? Thus was
it, when the Lord left Gideon to make that Ephod, which proved a snare to him
and to his House, and an occasion of sin to the Land; for it is said* All
Israel went thither a whoreing after it Judge. 8: verse. 27. And this was, when
the Lord had wrought a great deliverance by him, and had subdued Midian; so
that they lifted up their heads, no more. Thus also was it, when the Lord left
Aaron to make that Calfe, in the Wilderness, that brought so much Sin and Wrath
upon the People, as we see Exodus 32, and 33. Deuteronomy. 9: verse. 8, -- 21. Thus was
it also, when the Lord suffered David to number the People, and moved him, as
it is said 2 Samuel 24: verse. 1. or suffered Satan to stand up to provoke him
thereunto, as it is said 1 Chronicles. 21: verse, 1. A deed that cost Israel dear;
for therefore the Lord sent a Pestilence, that destroyed, in three days,
Seventy Thousand Men 1 Chronicles. 21: v. 14. 2* Sam. 24. 15.

8. So we may conceive the Lord to be a God that hides himself, when we see
wicked enemies employed, and actively bestirring themselves, in carrying
forward the Lords Work: It is true, when these Enemies are most active, in
carrying on their wicked Designs, and malicious Purposes; the Lord, who
overruleth all, as the great Master of Work, turns their desperate wickedness
to good, and in his Holy Wisdom, and by his Irresistible Power, makes that
contribute to His ends; and to the carrying-on of his Holy Designs; for He
has a wheel in the midst of all their wheels: and in this, the Lords way is
indeed in the deep waters, so that Enemies cannot perceive this; and his own
People are often in the mist; and through unbeleefe, and faithless fear, have
oftentimes unsuitable thoughts of God, and of His Way. But the thing that we are
now speaking of, is a passage of the Lords Providence, that is more rare and
observable; when, to wit, the Lord will force and necessitate Enemies to do
that, which is a manifest and plain setting forward of His work, contrare to
their own wills and inclinations; as when the Philistines were constrained to
send home the Ark to Israel again 1 Samuel 6: This was a Majestic piece of
Providence: And that, which made the way of the Lord more hid here, was this,
that the Lord would rather bring home the Ark thus, than employ the Israelites
themselves, and send them forth to recover the Ark by a glorious Victory over
the Philistines. We would readily think, that He should rather have done this;
but He is a God that hides himself; and chooses what way He thinks meet.

9. The Lord manifests himself to be a God that hides himself, in His
workings; when in His holy Providence He delayeth, procrastinateth, and
suffers His intended and promised work to meet with retarding hindrances and
impediments: we would think, that when the Lord did so wonderfully and with
such an outstretched arm bring the People of Israel out of the furnace of
Egypt, to the end he might make good His promise to Abraham, and put his
posterity, according to His faithful word, in possession of that promised land;
he should incontinent, after He had brought them through the red sea, and
brought them to the very border of Canaan, have entered them into Canaan: Yet
we see, He caused them to wander in a waste houling Wilderness Forty Years.
Again, when He brought them over Jordan, we would think He should in all
haste, with great expedition have destroyed the Canaanites, that in a short
time Israel might have had peacable possession of the whole Land: Yet we see,
the Lord thought good to do other ways. And how many a time, does He think
good to exercise the Patience and Faith of His People; and for this end delay
the carrying on and perfecting of the work He intends? And this He does, not
for want of strength to go over all Opposition; nor for want of Wisdom, as if
he were put to new Resolutions, and to a stand, in carrying-on his old
Purposes: But that he may give proof of His Majestic Soveraignity; and show
how Stately and Glorious He is in His Operations, performing all, according to
the Counsel of His own will; cutting short His Work, when we might think, it
could not be finished, in haste; and again drawing it forth to a longer period
of time, when we would think, that all things cry for His hastening of it.

10. The Lord hides Himself, in His workings, when He suffers Enemies at
once to destroy and overthrow a work, that has been long in building, and has
been carried-on with much trouble, toil, work and care, by prayers, fastings,
and blood. We understand not, what that means, which the Lord says by
Jeremiah, unto Baruch Ier. 45: 4. -- Behold, that which I have built, will I
break down; and that which I have planted, I will pluck up, even this whole
land. But this is a piece of His working, who loves sometimes to be a God that
hides himself. It is a sad complaint, which the Church has Psalm. 74: verse. 4,
5, 6, 7, 8. Thine Enemies roar in the midst of thy Congregations, they set up
their ensigns for signs. A man was famous, according as he had lifted up axes
upon the thick trees: But now they break down the carved work thereof at once,
with axes and hammers. They have cast fire into thy sanctuary. -- They said in
their hearts, let us destroy them together. They have burnt up all the
Synagogues of God in the Land. Thus was there more destroyed in one Year, than
was built-up in many. Is not our Lord, in such a case, a God, that hides
Himself? Who can see through such a Dispensation, as this?

11. There is a time also, in which we may say, the Lord is a God, that hides
himself; and that is, when his Dispensations are so mixed and composed, to
speak so, of mercy and judgment, that People shall not know, which to regaird
most; or what to judge of the complex Business. As it was when the Ark came to
the Bethshemites, there was great joy, and offering of brunt Offerings, and
Sacrificeing of Sacrifices, 1 Samuel 6: verse. 13, 15. But behold, ere the day was
ended, their mourning was as great as their joy; for the Lord slew Fifty
Thousand and Threescore and Ten Men, because they had looked into the Ark of
the Lord v. 19 Whereupon the people lamented, because the Lord had smitten
them, with a great slaughter; and they said verse. 20. Who is able to stand
before this holy Lord God; and to whom shall he go up from us? A wonderful
dispensation, wherein the Lord showed himself to be a God, that hides Himself.

12. We may add to these another case, in which, the Lord may be looked upon,
as one that hides himself; and that is, when He is unwilling to make use of
holy and useful Instruments, of whom much might be expected, and who would
willingly spend themselves, and be spent in the service of the Lord. As the
Lord thinks good to make use of Instruments, in his work; so it is an hopeful
business, when the Lord raises up, fitteth and animateth Instruments, for
carrying on of his work; and the Lord is then appearing in His power, on the
head of His work: But when He says, by His dispensations, that He will not
make use of hopful, and steadable Instruments, for beginning or carrying on of
His work, then He is, as it were, hid, and his footsteps cannot be seen.
Whether (1.) He expressly declares, that he will not make use of such or such a
worthy Instrument, that would gladly be Employed in the work; as when David did
so earnestly desire to be employed in building of Gods House; yet the Lord
said, he should not build Him an House: He would not have that service from
him, 2 Samuel 7. but would employ one out of his loins for that end; and David
must be content to prepare money and materials for the work. Or (2.) When the
Lord takes away Instruments, before their work be ended; as He did Moses, who
would feign have passed over Jordan, to have seen that good Land, and have
perfected his work of leading the people thereinto Or (3.) When He suffers
worthy and eminent Instruments to be snatched away basely and unworthily; as we
see in John Baptist, a man that had not a marrow that day upon the face of the
earth; the only forerunner of Christ; greater then any Prophet, that was before
him; and a man that had done much good; yet see how unworthily he is taken
away; he is cast in prison, and at the desire of a light dancing damesel,
prompted thereto by a base and unworthy harlot; and taken away in a most
unworthy manner, murdered in his prison, and his head given as a propine and
satisfying gift to that girl. What a wonderful dispensation was this, that the
Lord should suffer them to do to this non-such and eminent man, even what they
would, and listed? But in these and the like workings of the Lord, He is a God
that hides himself.

We have thus declared how the Lord is a God, that hides himself, even when He
is about to do good to, and to deliver his People; and have, for further
clearing and explaining of the matter, given some instances of cases, wherein
the Lord may be said to be a God hiding himself. If we should now enquire, Why
and for what Reasons does the Lord choose to work so, and bring about
deliverance to His people, in such an hid and unobservable manner? It should
satisfy us for an answer. That thus it pleases Him to do, for his own
glorious ends, which we may not too curiously prye into: Yet seeing all that God
does, is done in great wisdom, both for matter, and method; and for holy ends,
which His word mentions; we may so far, with soberness and humility, enquire
into these; to the end, we may be able to observe something of the wise and
holy workings of God, and so be in better case, with knowledge and
understanding, to carry ourselves as Christians, with a suitable frame and
disposition. To the Question then, Why the Lord thinks good to follow this
way? We answer, He does it for great and weighty reasons, partly (1.)
concerning Himself; partly (2.) concerning Enemies: and partly (3.) concerning
His own People.

As to the first, the reasons concerning Himself, we may take notice of these.

1. The Lord thinks good, to bring about His purposes of delivering His
people, in an hid, unseen, and unobservable way, that He may show forth the
glory of his Soveraignity, who chooses Ways and Methods, as He pleases; and
does, as whatever he will, so after what manner he will, in heaven and in
earth; and is not obliged to follow ordinary methods, or to walk in beaten and
trodden paths; but to do what beseems a great King and a Royal Sovereign, who
gives not an account of any of his matters; whose will is a law to us, and a
rule (to speak so) to himself. Hence, in this same Chapter Esai. 45. is this so
often repeated, I am the Lord, and none else. verse. 5, 6, 18, 21. Hereby laying
down the ground of His so acting; and quieting his peoples minds, and stilling
their thoughts, concerning this matter.

2. The Lord thinks good to trade in such an unseen way, that spiritual e^es
may the more see, that it is He, even He, who is God, and there is none else;
that it is He, who forms the light and crea^eth darkness, who makes peace
and creates evil; and is the Lord, who does all these things verse. 7. Wherein
should it appear, that He were Jehovah, if, in all things, he should work
according to the thoughts and imaginations of men? Is not this a manifest proof
of His being God, when his ways and Actings transcend our Comprehensions?
Though in all his ways and workings, He is God, and works and does like
himself, even in such as are most ordinary and obvious; and a Spiritual eye can
discern and espve something truly divine, and the marks of a divine hand;
there yet when His way is in the deep waters, and his footsteps cannot be
seen, He acts in a manner more like Himself, like one, who is indeed God, and
whose ways are beyond and above the reach of Men, the wisest, and holiest of
Men; and then may all have ground to say, This is the finger of God, as the
Magicians of Egypt said, when the Lord did somethings, which they with all
their enchantments could not imitate Exodus 8: 18, 19.

3. The Lord chooses this way, to give some signal proof of His Wisdom; if
Statsmen should manage and carry-on their affairs of State, always in such an
open and plain manner, that every plain and simple man, that knows nothing
of the intrigues of state, should be able to discern their motions, designs
and all their contrivances, they would not give great proof of their State
wisdom and Policy. And if a Commander and Leader of an army should so manage
all his affairs, in that conduct, that the meanest soldier should be able to
discover and understand all his designs, and stratagems; he should give but a
sorry proof of his singular dexterity in conduct. But when the Statsman, and the
Commander in chief so carry on their projects, that few or none can well
understand what their Design and Intention is, then a demonstration is given
of their Ability, Wisdom and Accomplishment, for such places of power and
trust. So when the Lord hides His holy Purposes and Projects, and acts so,
as ordinary on-lookers will suppose and imagine that he is going East, when He
minds to march west ward; and even many of his own will think, that He is
about to destroy his work and people, when He is upon His way to raise them up,
and set them on high, and to destroy the Adversarieship and thigh, then His
deep and unsearchable Wisdom appears. Then it appears, that He also is wise
Esai. 31: 2. Job got a sight of this, in the Lords rare works of providence
Job. 12: 12, 13. to the end; and therefore says, with the ancient is wisdom,
and in length of days understanding, with Him is wisdom and strength, he has
counsel and un derstanding. So Paul got such a sight of this, that made him
cry out Romans 11: 33. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge
of God? how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out?

4. Hereby also the Lord gives a clear demonstration of his Faithfulness and
Truth. If He were carrying-on the accomplishment of his Promises and Purposes
of good toward his people, in a visible, discernable and obvious manner, folks
would have but an ordinary and cursory observation of His Faithfulness; and
their hearts accordingly would be but in an ordinary manner affected, and they
moved but to praise and bless Him therefore, of course; for, remarking nothing
singular, their hearts would not be raised-up, above what is usual and
ordinary, to admire and extol Him, upon that account. But when he follows
another method, and takes an unusual course, to bring about his grand
designs, and such a course, as whereby Enemies might think, He did not see,
nor regard, He would never come to help His people, the day was theirs, they
should prosper, and never be moved; for there is no appearance, or probability,
might they think, that ever the case shall alter, and our affairs be
overturned; and upon the other hand, whereby his own People might s^e no
visible or probable ground of hope, that the promises should be accomplished,
and the word of the Lord should take effect; then His appearance with
salvation, after he had wrought so long under ground, and out of sight, and all
hop was gone from them, and fear from the enemy, is much more remarkable; and
his Faithfulness shines forth with a more then ordinary Glance and Luster: It
comes forth then with a witness: Then they see and say, that his faithfulness
is unto the clouds Psalm. 36: 5. that his righteousness is like the great
mountains, and his judgments are a great depth verse. 6. and that his
faithfulness is unto all generations Psalm. 119: 90. So that no vicissitudes, or
changes here below, can alter Him; no delay of time or procrastination, or the
like, can make any alteration in Him; for his faithfulness is unto all
generations. Then will they praise his Truth Psalm. ^1: 22.

But next as to such grounds, and reasons hereof, as concern Enemies, we may
take notice of these

1. He comes with deliverance unto His people, in a way not obvious nor
observable, that enemies may appear in their own colors; and give a plain and
open discovery of the latent malice and wickedness of their heart against the
People of God: If the Lord did always appear openly and manifestly, in the
behalf of His own; and let all the world see, that He owned them for His
people; and would suffer none to do them harm; the malice and wickedness of
many latent enemies, who can speak with their mouth smooth words, smoother than
butter, and softer than oil, when war is in their heart, and drawn swords
Psalm. 55: 21. would not appear: But when the Lord hides himself, and goes out
of sight, then they say, as it is Psalm. 71: 11. God has forsaken him,
persecute and take him; for there is none to deliver. Because they say in their
heart, God has forgotten, he hides his face, he will never see; therefore
their mouth is full of cursing and deceit and fraud; under their tongue is
mischief and vanity; they sit in the lurking places of the villages, in the
secret places do they murder the innocent; their eyes are privily set against
the poor etc. Psalm 10: verse 8, 9, 10, 11.

2. The Lord makes choice of this manner of way of appearing, and working for
His people, that Enemies may be judicially hardened, in their wicked course of
opposition to His Interest and People; and so fitted for the fatal blow of
God's Justice. As it was with Pharaoh, when the plagues were taken off, and
God's terror removed out of sight, he became always thereupon more hardened
in his wickedness against God and His people; and thereafter when he saw, that
the people of Israel were ensnared betwixt mountains and the sea, and so
judged, that God had left them, or could not help them, then his heart was
hardened unto a peremptory resolution, to pursue and take them, even through
the red sea, and there the wrath of God fell upon him, and all his army.

3. The Lord carries on His work thus, that the ruin of the enemies may be
the more signal and remarkable, and the hand of God manifestly seen therein,
when they are puffed up with pride, and think no hand can reach them, they are
beyond all hazard; no appearance is there of any thing, that can put the least
demurre unto their wicked proceedings: The blow becomes the more remarkable,
them ore surprising, and unexpected that it is: Such was that fatal blow, that
came on Pharaoh, and his host; and on Belshazzar, when ravelling with his
Nobles, Wives and Concubines, and profaning the holy vessels of the house of
the Lord Dan. 5.

4. The Lord thinks good to follow this way: That He may, the more
observably, fill the faces of his Enemies with shame and confusion: therefore
he he will suffer them to carry on their designs, to lay their mines close, to
prepare all, so that nothing may seem to remain, but putting fire to the
train, that they may blow up the Interest and People of God, in a moment; and
when they think all is ready, give them a fearful disappointment; and withal
let them see, that He, who is the watchman of Israel, has seen what they have
been doing, all that time, in secret, and has been counter-working their
devices, and undermineing their mines, when he shall cause their mine spring
back upon themselves; and thus cover their faces with shame and confusion; when
they shall see, that it is the hand of God, that has done it, defeating their
plots and devices, which were laid and carried-on with such secrecy, and with
such providential foresight, and rational security; that nothing but the
immediate hand of God could frustrat and defeat them. Was it not so with Hamans
device and bloody plot, to cut off all the Jews? And how shamfully came he
off? Thus the Lord destroys the wisdom of the wise Esai. 29: 14.

5. The Lord takes this way, to the end, He may shame (if it can be) those
enemies from their wicked atheistical thoughts concerning Him; that they may
know, that there is a God, that rules in the earth; a God that cares for His
people, and watches over his Inheritance; or else, they may be rendered the
more inexcusable, in the day of their appearance before God. Thus the Lord will
consume such, as belch out with their mouth, have swords in their lips, and
say, who does hear? That they may know, that God rules in Jacob, unto the ends
of Earth Psalm. 59: 7, 13. An eminent place for this we have Esai. 49. The Lord
hid Himself, so that his people became a prey, and were captives; yet says the
Lord verse. 24, 25, 26. Shall the prey be taken from the mighty; or the lawful
captive delivered? But thus says the Lord, even the Captives of the mighty
shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered etc. And
what then? And all flesh shall know, that I the Lord am thy Savior, and thy
Redeemer, the mighty one of Iacoh.

6. The Lord thinks fit to follow this way, that hypocrites, and such as are
not heart friends to Him and His cause, may be discovered, may fall off, and so
appear to be what indeed they are. If the Lord were always appearing for His
people, when ever they began to be in a strait, and visibly making bare His
arm, in their behalf, many hollow hearted and false friends would take part
with them, and stay among them, and seem to love and favor them; Therefore,
that they may be made manifest, the Lord hides himself, and appears not so
openly for his friends; but suffers them to fall under the feet of enemies,
who oppress them, and all that take their part; which occasioneth their
stepping aside, and turning away from the Truth, as not being reconciled with
the cross, nor loving Christ, and his People so, as to take a share with them
in the Affliction and Bondage. How many, who appeared zealous, in a fair day,
will turn about, and side with wicked and evil doers, to be free of the cross;
and when they see no footsteps more of the Lords appearing for his Work and
Interest?

On the other hand, in the third place, the Lord thinks good, to follow this
way, for some good ends, in reference to His own people: As

1. The Lord does thus, that he may discover the hid Corruption, that lurketh
in His own people, which in a fair day, when He is upon their head, marching
through the host of the Enemy, and tradeing them under foot, who oppressed His
people, and keept them at under, will lie at the bottom, and not appear. As
(1.) Unbelief, when the arm of the Lord is revealed, they cannot then but
believe, That He is the Lord, and the God of his people; they cannot then have
the least doubt about this: But many Doubts, Questions, Scruples and
Hesitations, will arise in their soul, when the Lord's face is hid, and He
appears not in behalf of His Afflicted People and Interest: The Disciples
did openly enough profess their faith in Christ, as the Messiah, and the Son
of the living God, while was with them, He working miracles before their eyes;
but when once he was crucified, dead and buried, Thomas would not believe, no
not though the other Disciples had told him, that they had seen the Lord; nor
would he believe, as he said expressly himself, unless he should see, in his
hand, the print of the nails, and put his finger in the print of the nails, and
thrust his hand, in his side Ioh. 20: 25. And what unbeleefe these Disciples
vented, who were going to Emmaus, unto the Lord himself, whom they knew not, we
may see Luke 24: 21. and may gather from Christ's sharp rebuke verse. 25, 26. O
fools and slow of heart to believe all, that the Prophets have spoken: Ought
not Christ to have suffered these things, and to have entered into his Glory?
(2.) Fainting of heart. So long as the shipe saileth fair before the wind, a
raw seaman will have courage enough: Men at Christ's back, who have not yet
had a storm blowing in their face, will be as stout as Peter, who nothing
doubted, but he would lay down his life for his Master; who yet, when the Lord
is out of sight; and his cause seems to be upon the declineing hand, will
shrink and turn back, at a very small temptation: As Peter did deny his Master,
and that with cursing and swearing, at the very word of a Damsel. (3) Self love
is another evil, that such a day as this will discover: Many will appear very
self denied, and willing to hazard all for Christ and His Cause, in a fair
day, who, when a storm comes, will be unwilling enough to cast their goods
over board to save the shipe: In a day, when the Lord is hiding himself, many
will seek to save skin and life, by such indirect courses, as sometime they
would have been ashamed of. (4.) Impatience: How does the heart of many too
often say little less, than that graceless King said, This evil is of the Lord,
why should I wait any longer for the Lord? 2 King. 6: verse. 33. Such
expressions, as that good man had, in that dark day, do evince this
sufficiently Psalm. 77: v. 7, 8, 9. Will the Lord cast off for ever? And will He
be favorable no more? Is His mercy clean gone for ever? Does His promise fail
for evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious? Has He in anger shut up His
tender mercies?

2. The Lord follows this way and method, that he may put his people to the
trial and exercise of the graces of His Spirit; such as these (1.) Their Faith
in Him, and in His Word and Promise: It is no great art or difficulty to
believe, that God will make good His promise, when he is, in the sight of all
beholders, most manifestly accomplishing whatever he said and promised: But for
Abraham to believe, that in his seed all the Nations of the Earth should be
blessed, and that his Seed should be multiplied, as the Stars of the Heaven,
for multitude, when he had not one Child, and himself was stricken in years,
his body now as good as dead, he being about an hundred Years old, and when
Sarahs Womb was also dead; that was faith; then his faith appeared, while he
against hope believed in hope, when he staggered not at the promise of God,
through unbeleefe, but was strong in the faith giving Glory to God; for he was
fully persuaded, that what God had promised, He was able also to perform Rom 4:
verse. 18, 19, 20, 21. Again, It was no great matter for Abraham to believe,
that it would be, as the Lord had said, when Sarah was with Child, and had
brought forth her Son, and he was healthy and thriving; but to believe the
accomplishment of the promise, when God said unto Him, Go offer up thy Son, thy
only Son Isaac, there was faith, accounting that God was able to raise him up
from the dead, Heb. 11: verse. 19. Thus faith is both tried and exercised. (2.)
Patience is also tried and exercised, when the Lord is out of sight, and
seems to say, He will not yet come, the time is not yet come: We often cry out,
How long will the Lord hide his face; not so much out of an earnest love and
desire to see his face again, as out of impatience Psalm 6 verse. 2. and 13: v.
1. and 35: 17. and 90: 13. Job. 7: v. 19. Hab. 1. v. 2. The Lord will thus
teach his people to stand upon their watch, and upon the watch towr, till the
Vision, that is yet for an appointed time, and tarrieth, shall speak Hab. 2:
verse. 1, 3. (3.) To try and exercise their hope: for that is the fit time for
the exercise of this grace, when humane appearance and probability fails, and
when the Lord hides himself, and delayeth his coming Romans 8: v. 24, 25. for
usually then people are ready to say, there is no hope Esa. 57: 10. and our
hope is lost Ezekiel. 37: 11. What is my strength (said holy Job Chapter 6: 11.) that
I should hope? It is good in such a case, to say, with the Church Lam. 3: 24.
The Lord is my portion, therefore will I hope in Him. (4.) To try and exercise
their Submission to and Dependence upon Him. That they may learn to carry as
humble Children; that they may say with David, Psalm. 131. Lord my heart is not
haughty, nor mine eyes lof^y. neither do I exercise my self in great matters,
or in things too high for me. Surely, I have behaved and quieted myself, as a
Child, that is weaned of his Mother, my soul is as a weaned Child: And so
hope in the Lord, not arrogantly set limits unto the holy One of Israel, nor
prescribe a way, that he must follow; but leave him to follow His own way and
method, with due Submission and Dependence, laying the hand upon the mouth,
when He is pleased to hide himself, and to take another way, then we would
possibly wish, or desire. (5.) To try and exercise their Diligence and
Constancy, in Prayer and Watchfulness. As when the Master delayeth his coming;
so when he hides himself, as if he were not coming, or would not come, many
are ready to fall from duty, and fall a beating their fellow servants, and to
eating and drinking etc. Mat. 24: 48, 94. Therefore the Lord will have all His
People set a watching, as not knowing what hour, or after what manner He will
come; and to exercise them in this duty of Watchfulness and Diligence; he will
come, and not let them know of His coming, nor tell them when, or after what
manner He will come.

The Consideration of this should, in general, teach all His people, as upon
the one hand to guard against, and bewar of these evils mentioned, which Satan
and Corruption, upon occasion of the Lords hiding of His Way, and keeping
Himself under clouds, after the manner mentioned, does provoke and stir up
the soul unto; so, upon the other hand, to mind and faithfully set about the
Duties mentioned, which are especially called for, at such a time. But more
particularly we may mentione some duties, and recommend them to the practice of
His People, in such a day, as this: As

1. This Dispensation calls upon all Gods People, to be observing the Lord in
all His ways and actions, and to mark His footsteps, even when they can not be
seen; to observe His stately goings, in Majesty, like a Prince, that will not
walk in the view of every common Subject, nor suffer every mean person to be
privy to his Secrets of State. These rare and unusual works of the Lord call
for more then ordinary observation. It is a mark of graceless persons, and a
sin bringing-on sad and ruineing strokes, to consider none of Gods ways Job.
34: verse. 26, 27. That is a divine precept Prove. 23: 26. My Son give me thy
heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways showing that this is the Duty of all
the Children of God, as to observe the Precepts of God, so also his Ways and
Workings; and that it can be performed a right only by such, whose hearts are
given away to God; and that it argues an heart fixed upon, and united to God,
as being a native and kindly consequent thereof. At the end of a large
Historical narration of many remarkable passages of the Lord's Providence, the
holy Psalmist thus concludes Psalm. 107. verse. last. Who so is wise, and will
observe these things, even they shall understand the loving kindness of the
Lord. Showing what the spiritually wise will do, and what advantage they will
have by thus considering the singular ways of the Lord. This Considering of
the ways, and workings of the Lord, comprehends these things, (1.) A
believing that God, howbeit unseen, yet is working; though clouds hide Him out
of their sight; yet they do not hinder Him from working; He is working, though
we perceive Him not. (2.) A musing and pondering and dwelling on the thoughts
of God and His ways. As when the Lord says Psalm, 50. Consider this, ye that
forget God, He presses them to a serious meditation and pondering of what was
said. (3) A seeing and observing of a stately Majesty, in the Lords carrying on
his work, after such an hid manner. (4.) A passing of a suitable and wise
judgment on what He is doing, construeing all to the best. This is to consider
wisely of his doing, as Psalm. 64: verse. 9. (5.) A serious observing of every
discovery or appearance, or speaking effect of the Lord's working, to the end
they may speak thereof to others, and declare the Work of the Lord, and be
confirmed in their faith and hope, and encouraged to wait.

2. In such an hiding time, when the Lord is pleased to hold Secret Council,
and to act and carry on his Stratagems, accordingly, it becomes all His
People, to act Faith and Fear; Faith, to believe in hope against hope; and
Fear, to stoup and stand in awe; knowing that He is God, and will act like
himself: How happy is it to get a sight of an Absolute, Invisible Sovereign,
when He is hiding himself, as a stately Prince?

3. As in a time of darkness, when his people sit in darkness, and have no
light, they are called to stay themselves upon God, Esai. 50. So in a time,
wherein the Lord is walking out of sight, and no man sees what He is doing,
His people are called to live by faith. Now the just shall live by Faith Heb.
10. When was this? When he, who should come, was not yet come: and there was
little appearance of his coming When the Vision was not yet speaking Hab. 2:
verse. 2, 3.

4. Waiting, Is especially called for, at His peoples hand, in such a day;
which includes the exercise of Faith, Hop and Patience; Faith, to realize the
thing promised, and give an objective being (as it were) to that which is not
visible, in it self, nor apparent; Hope, to embrace, and to stretch forth the
arms to lay hold on what is promised; and Patience, to keep the Believer in
the Possession of his soul, in the mean time. This was the Resolution of the
holy Prophet Esaias Chap. 8: verse. 17. And I will wait upon the Lord, that
hides his face from the House of Jacob: And I will look for him.

5. It is the Duty of His People in such a day, wherein the Lord is hiding
Himself, and is walking and working under clouds; to be stooping and adoreing;
which comprehends these duties following, (1.) Not to quarrel with, nor to
grudge, fret, nor repine at the Lords taking of this course, for the glory of
his own name. (2.) To look upon and consider Him, as one, whose ways are
unsearchable, and past finding-out: As perceiving Depths that are unsearchable,
in all His ways. (3.) Upon this account, to look and consider upon His Ways
with Fear, Dread and Reverence. (4.) To beware to set limits to the holy One
of Israel; or to conclude that He will not come to save His People and
Inheritance, because he comes not in the way, which we imagine He must come;
as if infinite Wisdom could not find out ways, beyond what ever we can
imagine. (5.) To have high and sublime thoughts of Him, and to speak of Him, as
such an high and exalted Prince, whose ways are out of our reach, and beyond
all our Apprehensions.

6. His Children would, in such a day, labor to li^e nigh God by faith: that
hereby (1.) They may be kept from fainting, while compassed with darkness,
assaulted with Satan's Temptations, who then will be busy tempting Gods People,
to say, there is no hope now, God has forsaken the Earth; He will return no
more. (2.) They may be kept from siding with the Workers of Iniquity, and
from turning aside to evil courses, because there is no manifest appearance of
the Lord's returning to rid His People out of thraldom, and to break the Power
of the Adversary. (3.) They may get some discoveries, now and then, as the Lord
sees good to grant them, of God, even while hideing himself, which may endear
Him unto their soul, and warm their heart toward Him: Such as live thus by
faith nigh to God, in such a day, are fair to see that, which others, living
at a distance, shall not partake of. (4) They may be led of God, by an unseen
hand, in such a dark day; for the meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek
will he teach his way, Psalm. 25: v. 9. And the Secret of the Lord is with them,
that fear him verse. 14.

We come next to speak to the Second Particular, which the Prophet discovered
through this thick cloud: He saw this hid God to be the God of Israel, and the
Savior; and he owned him, as such; and spoke and prayed to him, as such: from
whence we may observe these Three Things,

First, That all the darks and hidden passages of the Dispensations of the Lord
about His People, do not alter or change his Relation to and Covenant Interest
in His People. A forsaking God can and will be a Believers God, notwithstanding
thereof Psalm. 22: v. 1. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? This holds
true of a Church, ay and while He give her a bill of divorce, and excommunicate
her, after she has proven obstinate and incurable in her wickedness: Hence we
find the Lord so often owning a wicked and sinful People, as His, as Psalm. 50:
verse. 7. Hear, O my People, and I will speak, O Israel, and I will testify
against thee, I am God, thy God: And yet the following Verses declare how
unlike to His People they were, And it holds always true of Believers, who
have closed a Covenant with him by faith: And that upon these Grounds,

1. The unchangablness of His purposes, which alter not, according as outward
Dispensations change; but are stable as mountains, and as rocks in the Sea,
that are not moved for all the motion of the sea about them, and all changes of
tides, and tempests: Hence, whom he loves, he loves to the end Ioh. 13: verse.
1. He is no changling in his love, it is like himself, unalterable. Hence also
His gifts and calling are said to be without repentance Romans 11: verse. 29. And,
which is very remarkable; this is spoken concerning the Lords purpose of
calling home the People of the Jews, who have been lying under the weight of
their own doom and imprecation; and are yet as unlike to be delivered, as ever,
of whom the Apostle says, that though as concerning the Gospel, they are
enemies for our sakes, yet as touching the Election, they are beloved for the
Fathers Verse. 28. and as a Confirmation of which, he adds, for the gifts and
callings of God, (or the gift of the calling of God) are without repentance. So
that the purposed gifts, or intended callings of God will, and must be; the
Lord not being as man, that he should repent. A Balaam, when he took up his
parable, could say, Numb. 23: 19. God is not a man, that he should lie, neither
the Son of man, that he should repent: Has he said and shall he not do? Or,
has he not spoken, and shall he not make it good? So said the Prophet Samuel 1 Samuel 15: verse. 29. And also the strength (or the Eternity and Victory) of
Israel will not lie, nor repent; for he is not a man, that he should repent.
And this abides firm, notwithstanding that sometimes we read of Gods
repentings, which is only to import the change of his outward Dispensations,
sometimes to the better Deuteronomy. 32: verse. 36. Judge. 2: verse. 18. Exodus 32: 14. 2 Samuel 24: 16. 1 Chronicles. 21: 51. Ier. 26. v. 19. Psalm. 106: 45. Amos. 7: 3, 6.
Ion. 3: verse. 10. Sometimes to the worse Gen 6: verse. 6. 1 Samuel 15: verse. 35.
And so is spoken of God after the manner of men, who evidence the change of
their mind, by the change of their outward carriage, way and work. Man is a
changable Creature; but with God there is no variableness, nor shadow of
turning Iam. 1: 17. Hence the Lord says of Himself, I am God, and change not.
Mal. 3: 6.

2. The Covenant, in which this Relation and Interest is offered and accepted,
is an unchangable Covenant. Hence we find it called an everlasting Covenant,
ordered in all things, and sure 2 Samuel 23: verse. 5. So Esai. 55: 3. and 61:
verse. 8. Ier. 32: v. 40. Ezech. 37. verse. 26. Heb. 13: 20. It is an everlasting
Covenant, and all things, promised and held-forth in this Covenant, are the
sure mercies of David Esai. 55: 3. Act. 13: 34. And therefore, seeing all the
Dispensations of God, in and about His Church and People, turn upon this wheel,
and run into this channel of mercy, being parts or appendices of the sure
mercies of David, they can make no change or alteration in the fountain, out
of which they all spring; Water, coming out of one and the same fountain, may
run in diverse channels, some greater, and some less, and these channels may
at length run to a great distance from other, and the water in them may not be
alike clear and free of mud; and yet all this diversity, and difference, can
make no difference or alteration in the spring, and wels head.

3. Nay, all those various and discrepant dispensations are but pieces and
parts of that one grand design, which the Lord is prosecuting; to wit, the
glorifying of his great Name and Free grace, in the salvation of his Church and
People through Jesus Christ: And therefore, the difference or alteration, that
is apparent in and among them, is so far from giving ground, to infer any
mutation of the Lords Interest in, and relation to His people; that to a
Spiritual, seeing and believing eye, they do the rather and the more confirm
the same; because such an eye will see the connection betwixt all these as
means, and the great end designed; and will see, that they are all subordinat
unto, and are concurring effectually, in their subordinat place, to the
securing of the end intended, in which they are all meeting together, as lines
in a center drawn from the circumference.

4. Fountain love runs along, in all these various dispensations, and so
Modifieth, Tempereth, Qualifieth, and Orders them, that they can make no
breach upon that firm and everlasting Relation; nor work any substantial
change in the State and Condition of His people: Scourges and Chastisments are
not a casting out of the house, and a disinheriting; but flow from, and are
qualified by fatherly love and care, whatever the witless child suppose, or
imagine: Whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every son, whom he
receives, Heb. 12. 6. Prove. 3. 12.

5. So is it contracted, in the Covenant of Redemption, betwixt Jehovah and the
Mediator Psalm. 89: 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, If his children forsake my Law, and walk
not in my judgments; if they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments.
Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with
stripes: Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor
suffer my faithfulness to fail. My covenant will I not break, nor alter the
thing that is gone out of my lips. The accomplishment therefore of this.
Article of that Covenant, is rather a proof and confirmation of its stability,
and inviolableness; and consequently of the permanency of the Relation and
State, than of any change and alteration in the same; and all the changes of
the dispensations of the Lord toward his People, should rather confirm them,
in the faith of this, than raise doubts or jealousies in their minds.

From whence, by way of Use, we may see, how reprovable many even of the
Children of God are, who measure Gods love, by these outward dispensations; and
accordingly are up or down, in their hops and joys, as these alter to the
better, or to the worse. We do not hereby mean, that they should not be
sutably affected with the various dispensations of the Lord, in and about them;
we do not press a stoical insensibility, which is but a stupidity; for on the
contrary we say, it becomes them well to weep, when the bridegroom is away,
as to rejoice while he is present. When the Lion roareth they should fear and
tremble Amos. 3: 8. When the Lord is angry, they should bear his indignation,
because they have sinned Micah. 7: 9. But the thing here reproved is their
construeing of Gods Mind, Affection and Covenant Relation toward them,
according to these outward dispensations, and the hideings of himself, like a
foolish child, that would think the Mother had forsaken him and cast him off,
each time that she were out of sight, or set him out of her arms: So that the
thing here reprovable, is their drawing wrong Conclusions from these outward
changes; such as these. (1.) God hides Himself, therefore His heart is
changed, and He is no more their Father; His love is altered. His Grace, Favor
and Promises fail. (2.) God hides Himself, and they see Him not; therefore all
are undone, there is no more hope, we are cut off for our parts; as Ezekiel.
37. (3.) God hides Himself; therefore we are cast out of the Covenant, our
state is changed, we have no more any place in his favor, or room in his love;
we are in the state of the dead. (4) The Lord hides Himself, and is out of
sight; therefore all that He has done formerly, and we looked upon, as His
work of grace and love, have been but delusions, and not his work in very deed.
(5.) The Lord hides Himself; therefore His cause shall be destroyed, His work
shall never be perfected; His enemies shall never be overthrown. (6.) The Lord
hides His face, and appears not; Therefore our Salvation is desperate, and
hopeless. These wrong Conclusions and the like are justly reprovable, and argue
a wrong and perverse consideration of the Dispensations of the Lord, quite
contradictory to the Truth here asserted; and therefore should be seriously
guarded against, and such thoughts, when they enter the soul, and occupy the
mind, should be rejected and dismissed with abhorrence, as temptations, and
irrational and antievangelick suggestions of Satan.

Next, We may hence learn, how to answer, and with grounded reason repel the
forementioned sinful Suggestions, and false Insinuations, when the Devil
assaulteth us therewith, to trouble our Peace, mar our Joy, brangle our Hope,
and weaken our Confidence; and thereby bring us, into a Fainting, Misbeleeving,
Desponding and Heartless Disposition of Spirit: For whatever the outward
dispensations of the Lord be, His Covenant stands fast, and His
Covenant Relation abides the same, and His heart and love abides fixed and
unchangable, His purposes alter not, His thoughts take place in all
generations, how great so ever the difference be, betwixt the one and the
other, as to His dispensations in them. And the fixed faith of this would prove
a notable preservative against fainting and faithless fears, and would
Strengthen, Support, and Uphold the heart, in the midst of all these contrary
waves; this would be good and fast ground, whereon the soul may ride at anchor
saifly, in the midst of all these storms, and horrible tempests.

Thirdly, Hence we see the great advantage of the people of God, who have cut a
covenant with the Lord (as the Scripture phrase is) and are become His, and
have an interest in Him, as theirs; Let the Lord's dispensations outwardly be
never so dark, and sad, and such as those, who are utter strangers to the
Scriptures, and to the Lord's way of dealing with His people, would interpret
to be manifest evidences, and demonstrations of God's off casting; yet they may
fing with the sweet Psalmist of Israel, and say, Although mine house be not so
with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all
things, and sure; for this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he
make it not to grow 2 Samuel 23. 5. O how great is this advantage, that they may
by faith read love in His heart, when anger seems to flow out of His hands?
And that his Interest in, and relation to His people, and theirs to Him again,
abides firm and unshaken, notwithstanding of all the outward sore and sharp
passages of his providence. What Joy, Peace and Comfort may the thoughts of
this yield unto His sad hearted people, when troubled, at the consideration of
His sharp dispensations?

Fourthly, Here is likewise great encouragment, and a strong motive to enduce
and persuade unto a closeing of a Covenant with God: And Oh, that all, who are
as yet strangers hereunto, would at length be moved to lay hold on Him, while
his arms are stretched out to welcome and embrace all, who will come.

Secondly, We may hence observe, That there is a discovery to be had of the
standing relation betwixt God and His people, even when the Lord hides
Himself: For the Lord was now hiding Himself, or appearing as such unto the
Prophet; and yet the Prophet saw him withal, to be the God of Israel, and the
Savior. In the former point, we saw, That the relation betwixt God and His
people does stand, notwithstanding of the Lords hideing of His face; and not
appearing openly by acts, suitable to such a relation. But though this be so;
yet His people may want the heart-confirming sight thereof. And now in this
point, we hear, That His people may be helped unto this sight and discovery,
even in such a day, wherein the Lord hides Himself. And that.

1. When the Lord leads them in by Faith, to see His unchangeable Nature,
Purposes and Decrees; as also his Truth, and unchangable Word; together with
the other Particular grounds of this unchangablness in Gods Relations toward
His people, formerly mentioned; the hand of God must lead them in to this
secret chamber, where, discovering the Lord, and His way with His people, they
see his heart abiding the same, however His face may frown, and rodes may be in
His hands. Now when faith gets right apprehensions of God, and wins to a
right discovery of Him, they see this connection, that otherwise would be dark
and questionable; and they see a reality and subsistence in the promises.

2. The Lord helps them to see through the dark cloud, and the black
dispensation, and to read, what is written on the backside thereof; or what
stands behind the courtine of the present sad dispensation: And then they
discover Faithfulness and Unchangablness in God, and Love, Truth and Mercy in
all his dispensations.

3. The Lord blunteth the edge of the temptations of Satan; and lets His Child
see the unreasonablness of what is objected, and the absurdity of the
Inference, that Satan and corrupt Reason would make, and draw from the Lords
way of procedoure: Yea, he helps them to draw the contrary Conclusions, and
that upon certain and approven grounds, confirmed by manifold experience.

4. The Lord discovers unto them the firm connection betwixt these saddest and
blakest Dispensations, and the fair Promises, and the noble Outgate, that is
coming to His people: And then they cannot but see him to be Israel's God, even
when He hides Himself.

5. The Lord thinks good sometime to give, in the darkest day, and in the
darkest hour of the night, some glimpses of His glory, in behalf of His
People; to show, that He is not altogether unmindful of them; that He is not
far away; and that He is about His work, and carrying it on to His glory, and
to their good: And this confirms their faith in His abiding the same,
whatever His dispensations be.

This should let us see, as upon the one hand, the great goodness and
condescendency of God, who will lout down and help his weak people, who are
desirous to fear him, and to walk honestly before him, in a dark day; and will
set a prospect to their eye, whereby they may see, as Moses did from the top of
Pisgah, the promised land, and that great ground of Joy and rejoiceing, that
the Lord has not forsaken His people; so upon the other hand, it should
point-out our duty, to wit, to be living nigh God, even while He is hiding
Himself; and pursuing after an hid God; to the end, He may lead us, while we
are in the dark, and hold us by our right hand, that we stagger not through
unbeleef and fall; but may be helped, through his grace, to a sight of Him, as
the God of His people, even when He hides himself; whereby we should have many
advantages. As

1. This sight of God, in such a day, as it would set us with earnestness to
pray; so it would encourage us to continue instant in prayer, knowing that the
return would come in due time; seeing the Lords mind were not altered, His
affections remained the same, and His relation to and Interest in His people
was not changed; and therefore He would hear and help in due time.

2. This sight would strengthen the child of God unto all Patience in waiting,
when he saw, that the Lord would come, and that the coming of the Lord drew
nigh, he would wait, and stablish his heart in waiting, as the husband man
waits for the precious fruit of the earth Iam. 5: 7, 8. And by this patience,
as he would establish his heart, as this place of James shows, so he would
possess his soul Luke 21: verse 19.

3. It would also strengthen, fortify and confirm their hope: for faith,
discovering this sight, would make the soul stretch its hands through the dark
cloud, to grip the glorious promises, lying hid in the other side, and embrace
them. Those worthies mentioned Heb. 11. though they did not receive the
promises, yet having seen them a far off, and being persuaded of them, they are
said to have embraced them verse. 13.

4. This would keep up their head, and cause them sing in hope, they would
rejoice in the midst of their Affliction; and notwithstanding of all the
present and apparent impossibilities, in the way of the Lords return, and of
recovering his work, they yet would rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of
Glory; because they would see, the Lord would come, and subdue Nations, and
loose the loins of Kings, and open the two leaved gates, and break in pieces
the gates of brass; and cut asunder the bars of iron Esai. 45: 1, 2.

But if it be said, When the Lord is not pleased to lead poor believers, into
these secrets, in a dark night; nor grant them the use of such a lantern,
whereby they may see their way; nor such a discovery of the grounds of the
immutability of this Relation; what can poor believers do in that case? The
answer lies in that, which we may

Thirdly, Observe from these words of the Prophet, as pointing forth the duty
of the people of God, in such a case, after the Prophets example; seeing for
this end this is here set down, to wit, That in a day, wherein the Lord is
hiding Himself, as to the way of bringing about the promised salvation, and
out-gate of His Church and People, it is the duty of all believers, to be
asserting this Relation of the Lord's to, and interest in His Church and
People, as their God and Redeemer; and to be closeing with Him and griping to
Him, as such, let dispensations seem never so manifestly to speak out the
contrary, and be never so discouraging to them, in that adventure: For we see
the Prophet (and doubtless this was left on record, for our instruction, in the
like case, and while under the same circumstances) even while he is beholding
and considering God, as hiding Himself; laying hold upon Him, as Isreal's God,
and as the Savior; and asserting this as a Truth; to which he would stand, and
which he would own, let matters go as they would. This does include these
things.

1. That in such a day, as this, which was mentioned, the People of the Lord,
should look upon it, as their duty, to Profess, Declare, and Avow, that the
Lord is Isreal's God, keeping fast His Relation; and Close with Him, Grip to to
Him, Accept of Him, and Adhere to Him, as such.

2. Thatin such a day specified, they should certainly expect, that he will
answer that Relation, and be indeed a Savior: And Salvation should be looked
for from Him alone, and none else; and from no other airth. Thou art the
Savior.

The first of these is manifest from these Particulars.

1. That no dispensation we meet with will warrant His people to have mistaking
thoughts of Him; or to stand aback from laying hold on Him: For they are not
sent for that end; but rather to drive them nigher to him, and to urge them to
a more firm and fixed adhering to Him. Windy blasts will not cause us hold a
more careless grip of our cloaks, but rather cause us hold them faster.

2. The darker the dispensation be, our need of holding Him fast is the
greater; and so our call the more loud;

3. This is the way, to get the sanctified use of such Dispensations; and to
win to the right improvement of them: And without this, we cannot carry aright
under these and the like dispensations.

4. This is the proper season for Faith to bud and appear in, and to bring
forth Fruit: And this is the native and kindly exercise of Faith, in such a day.

5. This is the only way to get a right frame of Spirit, under such a
dispensation; and to carry as believers ought to do.

6. This is the only way to be kept steadfast, faithful, and unmovable, in
that day of darkness; and without this, the soul is exposed to all the
tempestuous on - sets and blasts of the Enemy. Hereby noly is the believer
kept fast anchored on the rock, that will not fail.

The second Note is likewise clear upon these grounds.

1. Because in such a dark day, Faith should be exercised, and that is the
proper season, wherein faith should appear, and should grow; that is, as it
were, the soil, wherein faith should bring forth fruit. When the knife was at
the throat of Isaak, the Son of the promise, and the first and only sprout and
appearance of that seed, in whom all the Nations of the Earth should be
blessed; yet Abraham, the father of the faithful, believed, that God was
Faithful and True, and would be his Salvation.

2. Thus the Lord is glorified, when, blow storms as they will, and
temptations to a despareing and desponding of heart, be never so multiplied,
and motives to seek salvation and an outgate by sinful and, unlawful ways and
means, doubled; yet the soul is fixed, on Him, and on Him alone, and will say,
Asshur shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses, -- but in God alone,
the fatherless finds merey Hos. 14: 3.

All which may discover our sinful and unsuitable frame, in such a dark day,
when the Lord is, in Glory and Majesty, suitable to Himself, carrying on His
work, out of our sight, and is hiding Himself, that we cannot see him, nor know
what he is doing; so may it point forth our duty, and teach us, what to think,
and what to do, in such a day. And to this end, we may hence learn in
particular, to mind those duties following.

1. In such a day, wherein the Lord hides Himself, we should beware of
entertaining any jealous thoughts of Him: Satan will then be busy, to muster
up all the Arguments and Grounds he can, to cause Believers, at least, turn
jealous of God; and to doubt, if He will appear any more for Zion, to the end
they may faint, and give over Faith and Hope; and then he has gained his
point; and Believers in such a day, may expect this, and fear their own
hearts, that will be too ready to comply with all Satan's Motions and
Suggestions: This therefore would be carefully guarded against.

2. In such a day, the unchangable Purposes of God, His faithful Word and
Promises should be the subject of our Meditation; on these should we dwell, and
ruminate; to the end, our heads may be keeped-up in hope, and we may not
despond.

3. We should beware to make the day darker, by sinful departing from God, and
by giving way to Satan's Temptations: When folks in a dark night are walking
among snares and pits, they will set down their feet with great warriness and
circumspection: so should we do, in such a day, lest we make our Condition
worse.

4. We should observe narrowly, what we can mark, in the Dispensations of the
Lord, that will say and evince to us, according to the grounds of spiritual
reasoning, that God is about His work; and that, though we see Him not, yet. He
in working under ground, and carrying on His projects; to the end, we may be
confirmed in our hope, and strengthened to wait, with patience and faith.

5. We should mind our duty, whatever He do; for that is it we are called to,
and so much the rather, that the Lord hides Himself, should we be diligent in
unquestionable duties; for He meets him that rejoiceth and works
righteousness Esai. 64: v. 5.

6. We should beware to limite the holy One of Israel; let us rather stoup and
adore, and acknowledge Him to be Jehovah, who does what He will.

The Third thing considerable in these words of truth, is, what is imported by
that word Verily: And it wouldseem, to point out to us these particulars
following, which I shall but mention.

First, That it is no light, or easy matter, to win to the faith, and to the
sight of this by says, That God is the Lord, and the God of Israel, and the
Savior, when He hides Himself: For this ejaculation seems to have been, or
is so here expressed, as if it had been the issue and result of some great
inward wrestling, out of which, when the Prophet gets up his head, he cries
out, Verily thou art a God, that hidest thyself, etc. And considering, the
frame of our heart by Nature, and the subtilty of Satan, and his skill and
diligence to muster up all Considerations, in such a day, to our disadvantage,
this difficulty cannot but be great.

Secondly, That this truth is of great moment, being here confirmed by such an
asseveration: It is a truth, useful, and necessary to be believed and fixed in
the heart: For it is attended with great advantages, and the want of the faith
of it, is not only sinful, but most hurtful and dangerous; being accompanied
with many sad evils, and being the cause of dreadful effects and consequences.

Thirdly, That this Truth should be fixed, in our hearts, as a great and
fundamental point, and put beyond all doubt, or disput with us, that He is a
God, that hides Himself, the God of Israel, and the Savior.

The Last Particular here considerable, is the Prophets uttering this Matter to
God, and speaking thus to Him, Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself etc.
Which points forth to us these things.

First, The sincerity and uprightness of heart, in the Prophet, who could thus
speak unto God, and lay the matter before Him, as it was: Which should teach us
to be honest, sincere, and upright in all our carriage, free of deceit and
hypocrisy.

Secondly, The reality of this his Exercise, and outgate; for it was no made
and supposed thing, but real: To teach us so to carry.

Thirdly, That the Prophets heart was more warmed unto God, and that this was
the result of his exercise, in his meditations, that his heart was drawn
nigher unto God; for now he utters the matter, in the very bosom of the
Father. It is well, when our exercises have this issue and outgate.

Fourthly, His open Profession of this matter, was to exalt and glorify God;
for herein is a piece of solemn worship performed unto God; which points
forth our duty, in the like case.

CONSIDERATION XXI. No man can make straight what God has made crooked.
ECCLES. VII: V. 13. Consider the Work of God; for who can make that straight,
which He has made crooked?


IN a day, wherein the People of God are persecuted and afflicted for His sake
and cause, it were a great help and advantage unto a christian and suitable
carriage under that dispensation, to have right and suitable thoughts of God,
and of His divine works. In such a day, we fancy and imagine many things
amiss, in the Providential Workings of God, many things we think we see, that
might be helped, and if we had the disposal of matters, in our hand, should be
quickly redressed; and thus being led away with our own proud hearts, and
insensibly carried down the strame, we fall a censureing of the holy Way of the
Lord, and a quarrelling with Him, because He does not rectify matters,
according to our mind, and does not govern the world, or, at least, the
Church, according to our wishings and wouldings. Now because this frame of
spirit is so repugnant unto the Holy Will of God, so unsuitable unto the
Children of God, so hurtful unto the Soul, and such an Enemy unto the right
deportment of Souls, in the day of Crosses and Affliction, it will be of use to
to speak some thing (if the Lord will help) to rectify our mistakes, and to
cure us of these Distempers.

We think we see many crooked Passages, in God's Way and Dispensations with the
Church, and with ourselves in particular; and we imagine also, we know ways
how to set all these crooks even; But this is really a clear demonstration of
our folly: For the Wise man tells us here, that no man can help any thing,
that they suppose God has made amiss; or make any thing straight, which God
has made crooked, who can (says he) make that straight, which He has made
crooked?

Among several other wholesome Instructions, which Solomon gives us, in this
penetential discourse of his, this is one, That we would Consider the Work of
God, that is, Take notice of what He is doing and working, ponder upon His
works, Meditate upon them, and dwell on the thoughts thereof, and lay to heart
His Providential disposal of all Things, Actions and Events; and His ordering
and mannaging of them all to His own Glory, and according to His own mind and
absolute will and pleasure: And that so, as to acquiesce in what He does, to
rest satisfied with it, and to comply heartily and cheerfully therewith, in all
points, without Murmureing, Fretting, Repineing or Quarrelling. And He adds a
Reason; (which is that we are here mainely to speak to;) for who can make that
straight, which he has made crooked? This question is an emphatick negation of
the thing; and is as much, as if he had said, it is absolutely Impossible, that
any Creature, Man or Angel, can make straight, what God has made crooked. They
cannot Counter - work the Lord; they cannot undo what He has done; they cannot
amend what they suppose is made or done amiss.

This He had said before Chap 1: verse. 15. that which is crooked cannot be made
straight. And here He makes this Improvement of it, and as it were draws
this use from it; That we should consider the Works of the Lord; as if He had
said, The Consideration of this, that no man can make any thing straight, that
they suppose God has made crooked, should move us to complye with, and
contentedly acquiesce in whatsoever God does under the Sun, by His mighty
Power, and according to His unchangable Purpose and Counsel, and to the
everlasting determinations of His holy will.

These words give ground to enquire

1. What are those crooked things, which God has made?

2. How and why it is, that these crooked things cannot be made straight by one
or other of the Creatures?

3. What way we should, upon this account, Consider the Works of God? or what
Improvement we should make of this Impossibility of helping, what we suppose is
amiss, in the Lord's Works of Providence?

As to the first, We may not suppose, that, to speak properly, any thing, that
God does, is crooked; but our corrupt unsatisfied minds look upon many
passages of God's All-ruling and All-disposing Providence, as crooked, and as
such as we would feign have altered, if we had our wills. Some of which we can
only mention, and these we may reduce to two Heads,

1. Touching some things, that are more controverted. 2. Touching some things,
that are less controverted.
As to the more controverted, we shall mention only these following,

1. Not only do our hearts rise up against the Holy and Sovereign Acts of Gods
will, in choosing whom He would unto eternal Life, and in passing by others; as
we see Romans 9. Corrupt Reason, that will not submit unto the Lord and His
ways, spurneth against that saying, that God has mercy on whom He will; and
Jacob have I loved etc. Verse. 13, 15. and responsateth against God, objecting,
upon this account, unrighteousness unto the just and holy One of Israel V. 14.
But also against His holy Executions of these His Holy and Sovereign Decrees.
Paul had concluded, that God had mercy on whom He would, and hardened whom He
would Verse. 18. And corrupt Reason will again carp, and say, If so, why does
He yet find fault? For who has resisted His will? Verse. 19. Unto which the
Apostle must return a sharp and silenceing answer, Verse. 20, 21, 22, 23. Nay,
but O Man, who art thou, that reply (or disputest) against God? Shall the
thing formed say to Him that formed it, why have thou man me thus? Has not the
Potter power over the Clay, of the same lump; to make one vessel unto honor,
and another unto dishonor. etc.

2. So in the matter of the Lord's dispensing the means of grace, and the
Gospel, we wonder at the Lords Way, and cannot understand how it is, that He
should hide this Mystery from Ages and Generations Col. 1. verse. 26. Ephesians 3:
v. 9. should send the Gospel to one place, and not unto another; and why He
should forbid the Apostles to go preach the good news of Salvation in Asia
and in Bithinia Act. 16: verse. 6, 7, Why He should continue the Gospel long
with one people, and remove it quickly from another, and Non-church them: And
why one Nation and People should enjoy the means of grace for many ages; and
others, for many ages, never once have a report of Salvation through Christ,
but be left, from one generation to another, in blackness of darkness, in woeful
Idolatry and Ignorance. This piece of the Lord's work seems so crooked, and
so unlike to, and incorrespondent with, or repugnant to the attributes of God,
as to His Mercy, Loving Kindness and Goodness, unto some, that they, to make up
this supposed gap, and set right this crook in the Lords way, feign and
imagine an Universal Objective Grace; or an Universal Gospel; that is, that God
has given to all Nations, how barbarous so ever, those means of Grace and
Salvation, which, if they would improve aright, would prove saving; and so must
imagine, that the Sun, Moon and Stars, Raines and fruitful Seasons, and other
works of Creation and Providence, do preach out that Mystery of Salvation
through a crucified Christ, contrare to Scripture, and to all Sense and Reason;
or that there is another way to Salvation, than by says in a crucified Christ;
which is also contrare to the Scripture Act. 4: verse, 12. Thus the Arminians,
and Semi - Arminians and Quakers, think to make this crooked work of God
straight; but in vain. We should rather mind that, which Paul has Romans 11:
33. after he had spoken of the rejection of the Jews, and the Lords taking-in
the Gentiles, O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of
God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! Verse.
34. For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor?
Verse. 35. Or who has first given to him, and it shall be recompensed to him
again? Verse. 36. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to
whom be glory for ever, Amen. And mind the purpose of God here, Ephesians. 1: v.
8, 9, 10. and 3: 9, 10, 11.

3, The way of the Lord, in this matter, seems so crooked to Pelagians, and
their followers, Arminians, Socinians and Quakers' with Papists and Jesuits,
that all this contrivance of an Universal Objective Grace, or an Universal
Gospel, will not satisfy them, nor be enough, in their apprehensions, to set
this crook even; but they must further assert an Universal Subjective Grace;
that is, Grace and Power granted to every One, to hearken to the voice of God
calling in Nature, and in the Gospel, to convert and turn themselves, to
believe and repent, if, and whenever they will; because they see not, how it
is consistent with Gods Wisdom and Goodness, to require any duty of man, but
what he gives him full ability to perform, not regairding the stock of
strength, that was once given to man, and was dilapidat by Adam. But, as to
this, how crooked so ever we suppose it to be, we must rest here, that the
Carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is not subject to the Law of God
neither indeed can be Romans 8: verse. 7. And that the natural man receives not
the things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him; neither can
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned 1 Cor. 2: v. 14. and that
Faith is the gift of God. Ephesians. 2: v. 8. And that it is God that works in us
both to will and to do, according to his own good pleasure Phil. 2. verse. 13.
And that Christ is a Prince exalted to give Repentance. Act. 5: v. 30 And that
God is a free Dispenser of His grace, as being obliged to none, and showing
mercy to whom he will.

4. That work of the Lord's covenanting with Adam, as the Head, in the name of
all mankind; and his imputing his sin unto his posterity, who were in his
loins, so that all become borne and conceived in sin, and obnoxious to the
wrath of God, because of that transgression of Adam, according as the Apostle
speaks Rom 5 verse. 12. Wherefore, as by one man sin entr^d into the world,
and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.
And again Verse. 14. Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over
them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression. And Verse.
18. Therefore as by one man's offense (or by one offense) judgment came upon all
men to condemnation. This Dispensation, I say, seems so crooked to some, such
as Pelagians, Socinians, Arminians and Quakers; that they must absolutely deny
it; and say, there is no such thing as original sin, though Paul sa^eth Ephesians.
2: verse. 3. -- that we were by nature (including himself) the Children of
wrath; And David tells us, in his humble Confession of sins to God Psalm. 51
ver. 5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me.
And Job says Chap. 14: v. 4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?
Not one. And to the same purpose Bildad Job. 25: v. 4. -- How can he be clean
that is borne of a Women?

5. For further setting even, what otherwise men think crooked, in the way of
the Lord, they imagine, assert and defend an Universal Redemption; saying, that
Christ has died for all; equally, say some; with some difference, say others:
because it seems a crooked thing with them, and inconsistent with the Nature
and Goodness of God, not to seek the Salvation of all, and not to prepare
means of life for all, and so not to send Christ to die for all and every
mothers son; though we be plainly enough and expressly told in Scripture, that
the Father gave not all to the Son to redeem, but some; and that Christ laid
down His life a ransom for those alone, who were given to him to save, and of
whom he must give an account to the Father, as having undertaken to redeem them
from Hell, Wrath, Satan and all their Enemies; and by His Power, and Grace to
bring them saife home at length, as being their Head, their Husband, their
Shepherd, their Cautioner, their Lord Ransomer, their Intercessour, and Advocat
with the Father; and that these are an all; and called the ^orld, to point out
their natural Original, that Grace may the more appear to be grace; and to
point out their being scattered through the world, and taken out of all
Kindreds, Tongues, Nations, People, Languages; especially now under the Gospel,
in distinction from the days of the Old Testament, when the Jaws were only
the peculiar people of the Lord, and in Judah only was God known, and his name
great in Israel.

6 Further to make God's supposed crooked ways straight, the Enemies of the
free Grace of God imagine* that the will of Man must be left Free, to be Lord
of all, and absolute disposer of the decrees and purposes of God of Redemption,
and of Salvation; so that the Lord must not by an Irresistible Power draw any
home to Christ, contrary to Ioh. 6: 44. Nor create in any a new heart, and take
away the heart of stone, and give an heart of flesh, contrare to Ezech. 11. 19.
and 36: 26, 27. Because they cannot see, how it can consist with Gods Love to
mankind, to prefer one to another; they imagine that God lays the matter
alike to all men's door, standing equally and knocking at every man's door; and
so leaving it to them alike to choose or refuse, to become happy or miserable,
as they please; and so they say, that when God has done all He can or will do,
to save people, their will is at perfect freedom to accept or reject the Grace
of God, and that there is no special saving work of grace upon the heart of
one, more then of another. O what real crooked work do foolish men make here!
How do they darken, deforme and make crooked the glorious straight work of the
free grace of God, wherein absolute Soveraignity, glorious Grace, and the free
Mercy of God shines forth with such a Sovereign Luster, Beauty and Glory?
Paul had other thoughts of the matter, when he said Ephesians. 1: verse. 3, 4, 5, 6,
7. Blessed be the God and Father of ou^ Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings in Celestials, in Christ: according as he has
chosen us, in him, before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy
and without blame before him in love, having predestined us unto the adoption
of Children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of His
will. To the praise of the Glory of his grace, wherein He has made us accepted
in the beloved etc.

7. To salve this same Diana of Free will, the same Persons do deny the Free
and Absolute Decrees of God, touching any thing to be done by Man, whether good
or evil; because they cannot see, how God's Absolute Decrees, concerning this
or that, can consist with the free Actings of man's will, and not impose an
absolute necessity on man to do, or not to do, according to what is decr^ed; as
the stone must absolutely and naturally move down-ward, and the Sun shine, and
all Natural causes act and work; therefore to make this supposed crook
straight, they see no other way, but to deny all such Decrees, and Purposes in
God; not knowing, that as God's decrees determine the event, so they determine
the manner of the events ^alling out; that Natural Causes shall produce such an
event naturally and necessarily, and Free and Contingent Causes shall
in^vitably produce such an effect, but freely and contingently, according to
their Nature: as that the Jews should kill Christ, and do what they did
against him; but yet through no necessity of nature, but freely and of their
own accord, out of malice and enmity; as also that the soldiers should pierce
Christ's side, and not break a bone of Him, and all that most freely, without
any compulsion, or constraint upon their wills: Whereby we might ^ee, if we were
compliant with the holy Will and Workings of God, that the decrees of God are
so far from everting and destroying the Liberty of the will of man, that, on
the contrary, they establish, and confirm the same. But let men imagine it to
be never so crooked, we must hold by this, That God did from all eternity
freely and unchangably ordain whatsoever comes to pass, even the most
contingent things Act. 2: 23. and 4: 27, 28. Prove 16: 23.

8. So to make the ways of God straight and even, which otherwise men imagine
would be crooked, Some, as our Quakers, with others, imagine that People may be
saved, that never heard of Christ, by yielding Obedience to the law and light
of Nature, or by following the guide of the works of Creation and Providence,
or a Light within them, as they speak: But what their condition is, who are
without Christ, the Scripture sufficiently shows Ephesians. 2: 12. -- they are
strangers from the Covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the
world. And that the light of Nature can only help to make Persons without
excuse Romans 1: 20.

But passing these and the like, which are matter of controversy, let us
mentione some others of God's works, which men suppose to be crooked: As

1. When it is as Eccles. 8: 14. There be just men to w^om it happens
according to the work of the wicked; and again there be wicked men, to whom it
happens according to the righteous; that is, when as to the outward things in
the world, It is just otherwise as we would think should be; the wicked
prosper, and their eyes stand out with fatness, they increase in riches, and
have more then they could wish, they are not in trouble, nor plagued as other
men, and there are no bands in their death, as it is Psalm. 37: 3, 4, 5, 12. And
upon the other hand, the Godly man he is oppressed with Poverty and Affliction,
plagued all the day, chastened every morning. This was such a rugged and uneven
path, that the honest Man of God Asaph could not hold his feet in it; but was
like to fall and break his neck, concluding that it was in vain to mind
piety; veri^y (said he verse. 13) I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed
my hands in Innocence. And such a crook was this, that he could not get it set
straight, till he went into the sanctuary of God verse. 17: This mistake made
Jobs friends go so wild, in their reasonings against him; and to conclude him
an hypocrite, because he met with such hard outward dispensations at the hands
of the Lord; for they could not see, how God should deal with a Godly man, as
He dealt with Job; that was so crooked a piece of work, that they thought God
would never have made it. But Job understood the matter otherwise, and told
them Chap. 9: 22. This is one thing, therefore I said it, He destroys the
perfect and the wicked So Chapter 12: 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. he enla^geth upon
this theme.

2. When it is as Eccles. 4: 1. So I returned and considered all the
oppressions, that are done under the Sun, an^ ^ehold, the tears of such as were
oppressed, and they had no comforter; and on the side of their oppressors
there was power, but they had no comforter. That is, when the innocent are
oppressed in their Name, Goods, Rights, and Person, and made to cry out
bitterly because of their oppression; and yet have none to take their part, or
help them, or speak comfortably unto them; no^ power to help and relieve
themselves: but on the contrary, their oppressing enemies have power and might
enough, to bear them more down, and oppress them. This seems a crooked piece
of work, and yet the Lord has so ordered matters, that it is often so with the
innocent. We see what Job was made to say Chap. 6; 14. To him that is Afflicted
pity should ^e she^ed from his friend; but he forsakes the fear of the
Almighty, 1^. my Brethren have dea^ dec^itfully as a brook, as the streams of
brooks they pass away. And How Habbakuk looked upon this Chap. 1: 13, 14, 15,
16, 17. Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can not look on
iniquity; wherefore look thou upon them that deal treacherously, and hold
thy tongue, when the wicked devoureth the man, that is more righteous than he?
And make men as the fishes of the sea, as the creeping things, that have no
ruler over them etc. This seems to many to be a very crooked passage of
Providence, and they think, the judge of the whole earth should order matters
otherwise, and not a few are stumbled hereat, and tempted to think, that God
has forsaken the earth.

3. When it is as Eccles. 7: 15. -- there is a just man that perishes in his
righteousness; and there is a wicked m^n, that prolongeth his life, in his
wickedness. This seems also a crooked passage in the Lord's way and Work, to
many, who look upon the Lord and his way and working with eyes of flesh. How
often has it thus fallen out? Honest Naboth, experienced this 1 King. 21. So did
Ioh Baptist, when he was so basely and unworthily cut off, and that in his
righteousness. So also the Martyrs of the Lord, in all ages. Honest Ier miah
thought this a secret, that he could not be satisfied in, and a ground
whereupon he would go plead with God Chap. 12.

4. Yea, when it is but as Eccles. 9: v, 2, 3. it seems crooked to many, who
would have a visible difference in external things, always put betwixt the
Righteous and the Wicked. And yet we see the Wise Man's Observation was, that no
man knows either love or hatred by all that is before them. All things (says
he) come alike to all; there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked;
to the good and to the clean and to the unclean; to him that sacrifices, and
to him that sacrifices not: As the good, so the sinner; he that swears as he
that fears an Oath. This is an evil among all things, that are done under the
Sun, that there is one event unto all. Our carnal Reason would think, that God
should so rule and govern the world, as that all might be in case to observe a
palpable difference betwixt the Godly, and the Wicked, even in external things:
But we will not get made straight, what God has thus made crooked.

5. So it seems crooked to some, that it is often times with men, as was
observed by Solomon, Eccles. 9: v. 11. The race is not to the swift, nor the
battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of
understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill, but time and chance happens
them all: But things fall out quite otherwise, than men would have expected, or
hoped: And though herein appears a beautiful over ruling hand of Providence,
controlling men's Projects, Designs and Forecastings, and disappointing them of
their hopes, and of what they promised themselves, and made account to be sure
of; because of their wise contrivance and managment of their work unto that
end, yet our carnal Reason would think, it should be otherwise, and that our
pains labor and wise Contrivances should not be in vain; that David, when he
had made such preparation; for building of the House of God, should not miss
of his great desire and wish. But our seeing of crooks in this straight
All-ruling and All-disposing providence, does but proclaim our blindness.

6. Our carnal heart would often times think, that it is a wonderful crook in the
Providence of God, that he should suffer sin to be in the world, which does so
much di honor him, and causes so much trouble and evil, unto all, when he
may and can well hinder it. We often wonder, why the Lord should have suffered
Adam to fall, and bring himself and all his posterity into such a sea of
misery, yea and the whole creation almost; seeing he might have kept him, as
he did the confirmed Angels: And we are ready to think, that it had been
better, if sin had not entered into the world; and thus account this passage of
the Lords Providence to be a crooked thing. And we are ready to wonder that the
Lord suffers wicked persons to live so long to dishonor Him, and commit more
wickedness, and that He does not presently cut them off, or at least restrain
them, as He might do, a thousand ways. As also that he should judicially
harden their hearts; as he did the heart of Pharaoh, that so they may commit
more sin, and believe a lie, as 2 These 2: verse. 11, 12. and not obey the voice
of the Lord, as Esai 6: v. 9, 10. Romans 11. v. 8 Act. 28: 26. Mat. 13: v. 14.
Mark. 4: v. 12: Luke 8: 10. Ioh. 12: v 40. But if our eyes were opened, and if
we were spiritual, we would see a beautiful straightness, where now we think
there is a crook.

7. The Dispensations of the Lord, in and about His Church, do often times seem
crooked to us, when we consult with carnal Reason. As

(1.) It seems not straight to us, that His Dispensations should so
contradict (1.) His Promises, (2.) The Hopes and Expectations of His People.
And (3.) Their Prayers, Desires and Wrestlings. We often think it should be
otherwise; and so allaige that there is a crook and a palpable unevenness in
the Way of the Lord.

(2.) It seems crooked to us, that His Church should be so kept under, and
oppressed by wicked men; and persecuted for His sake, and for the truths sake,
and should be still, as a bush all in fire: For we would think, that God should
keep His own peculiar Kingdom, and his own Flock free from the Oppression and
Tyranny of Oppressing Enemies: Hence we find, that His People have put up many
times a complaint concerning this. See Psalm. 44: verse. 12. and 60: verse. 3. and
94: v. 5 Dan. 9. verse. 16.

(3.) And that this trouble should not be for a short time, like a Summer
shower, that soon blows over; but almost her constant lot from her youth Psalm.
129: verse. 1, 2. so that her lucide intervals, and sun-blainks are but short,
and she is hardly well out of one trial, while she is in the midst of another.

(4.) So it seems crooked, that this trouble should not be light, but very
sad and sharp; the Enemies should make long their furrows Psalm. 129: v. 3.

(5.) That she should not have one enemy to deal with, but many, both together
and successively. The Tabernacles of Edom and the Ismaelites, of Moab and the
Hagarens, Gebal and Ammon and Amaleck, the Philistines, with the Inhabitants of
Tire and Assure Psalm 83: 6, 7, 8.

(6.) That the Lord should not hear or regard the Prayers and Cries of His
people; but should rather be angry at their Prayer. Psalm. 80: 4.

(7.) That the Lord should seem so inexorable, that he would not grant the
suits of his special favorites, and such as have prevailed with Him at other
occasions, interceeding in their behalf, such as Moses and Samuel Ier. 15: 1.
and Noah, Daniel and Job Ezech. 14: 14, 20.

(8.) That the Lord should suffer these wicked enemies to overturne all His own
work; break down the carved work (...) pluck up the vine, which His own right
hand has planted. As Psalm. 80: 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. to burn up all the
Synagogues of God in the Land; cast fire into the sanctuary etc. Psalm. 74: 2,
3, 5, 6, 7. Yea and blaspheme His own name verse. 10. See Psalm. 44.

8. There are also several things, in the Lord's Dispensations with His own
people in particular, that seem to us many times crooked: As

(1.) We think that He should never hide his face from his own faithful ones;
and that they should never be made to cry out with Job Chap 13: 24. Wherefore
hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thine enemy? and as David Psalm 10.
verse 1. and 30. verse 7.

(2.) Or if He contend against them, He should show them wherefore, and not put
them to complain of this, as Job was, who said Job 10: 2. -- Show me wherefore
thou contendest with me.

(3.) We think it strange and uncouth, that the Lord should show himself
terrible unto them, as to Heman Psalm. 88. who was distracted with the terror
of God, and to Job. Chap. 7: verse 13, 14, 15. and 9: 34. and 6: 4.

(4) We are ready to think, that such should never be under Clouds, Fears,
Darkness, sad Apprehensions, and Doubts concerning their state and condition,
Esai. 50: 10. But that always they should enjoy light, and see their happy
condition.

(5.) We think that the work of grace in His people should never meet with a
stop, far less with any decay; but that they should be still flourishing like
the palm tree, and growing like a Cedar in Lebanon.

(6.) So we think, that they should be free, all their days, of the trouble or
at least of the prevailing power of corruption; we think, that enemy should
never assault us any more, or molest our quarters: We think it strange, that
these servants should ever come to ride upon horses, in our souls; and that His
people should be made to cry out with Paul Romans 7: 24. Woe is me miserable man,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death.

(7.) We think it also strange, that they should have so little rest from
Satan, and from his inward hellish Injections, tending to Atheism. Infidelity,
Blasphemy and all Profanity: Seems not that dispensation somewhat crooked,
that Paul met with, after he was taken up to the third heaven 2 Cor. 12: 7?

(8.) It seems many times uncouth to us, that His people have so many sad and
bitter hours; and that they are so far from enjoying Comfort, Joy and Delight,
and from that life of rejoyceing in the Lord continually, which is allowed to
them, and they are called to; that their life is nothing almost but a continual
complaint; sometimes compleaining of the Hardness of their heart, Blindness,
Weakness, Impotency, Treachery, etc. sometimes of the weight of Duties, and of
their Failings and Shortcomings; sometimes of the prevailing of Corruption and
of the power of Temptation etc.

These and the like dispensations of the Lord, in and about his Saints, seem to
themselves and to others sometimes crooked, and very unstraight: and as they
wish it were otherwise; so they suppose it would be more glorious and
honorable to the Lord, if it were otherwise.

Thus it appears, how many things God has made crooked, to our
apprehensions: But now, who shall, who can make these crooked things straight?
This is the Second Particular, in the words, That what God has made crooked no
man can make straight, with all his Wisdom, or Power, or by all the means he
can use or devise; for that which is crooked cannot be made straight Eccles. 1:
15. I know (said the wise man Eccles. 3: 14.) that whatsoever God does, it
shall be for ever: nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it. When
He gives quietness (said Elihu Job 34: 29.) who then can make trouble; and
when He hides his face, who then can behold him? Whether against a Nation, or
a Man only?

And the reason is manifest, because

1. He is Unchangeable, and has fixed all upon Eternal, and Immutable
Purposes. He is the Lord, he changes not Mal. 3^ v. 6. With him is no
variablness, nor shadow of turning Iam. 1: 17. He does all things after the
Counsel of His own will Ephesians. 1. 11. taking Counsel of none Romans 11* v. 34.
Esai. 40: 13, 14. His Counsel has an immutability Heb. 6: 17.

2. He is Almighty; and who can justle with Him, and put Him to take new
Resolutions? He is in one mind (said Job Chapter 23. 13. and who can turn Him? And
what His Soul desires, that does He. So Psalm 115: v. 6. He has done
whatsoever he pleased. I know (said the Psalmist Psalm. 135: 5, 6.) that Jehovah
is great, and that our Jehovah is above all Gods, whatsoever the Lord pleases
that did He, in heaven, and in earth, in the seas, and all deep places. So Job
tells us Chap 9. 4. He is wise in heart and mighty in strength, who has
hardened himself against him, and has prospered? So verse. 12. Behold he takes
away, who can hinder him, Who will say unto him, what do thou?

3. He is Absolute and Sovereign, to do what he will, as the Potter is
absolute over the clay Ier. 18: 6. Romans 9: 10. Esai. 45: 9. And he is
uncontrollable: Who can call him to an account? Who can say unto him, what do
thou? Job. 9: 12. He gives not account of any of his matters Job. 33: verse 13.
For he is greater then man verse. 12.

4. All his ways are done in Wisdom, and all his works Psalm. 104: 24. and 136:
5. And there is no wisdom against the Lord Prove. 21: 30. He has established
the world by His wisdom Ier. 10: 12. and 51: v. 15. He is mighty in strength
and wisdom Job 36: 5. And what then can foolish man, that is like a wild asses
colt, do? With the Ancient is wisdom (said Job Chap. 12: 12, 13, 14. etc. and
in length of days understanding: With him is wisdom and strength: he has
Counsel and understanding: and thence infers, Behold he breaks down, and
it cannot be built again; he shuteth up a man, and there can be no opening
etc. See further to the end of that Chap.

5. All his works are perfect Psalm. 18: verse 30. And then, what can be added to
them, or taken from them to amend them? What is perfect cannot be made better,
or amended, one way, or other. What we then think and account to be crooked, is
Perfect, Straight and Even, and contributeth to make up this complete
perfection of the whole.

6. There are Depths and unseen Mysteries in the work and ways of the Lord,
that we cannot search, and ignorance of which causes the sinstruous
Apprehensions, that we have of them: And how shall we think to amend that,
which we do not understand? His works are great, sought out of all them, that
have pleasure therein His works are honorable, glorious, and wonderful Psalm.
111: 2, 3, 4. Then I beheld (said the wise man, Eccles. 8: ver. 17.) all the
work of God, that a man cannot find out the work that is done under the sun:
Because though a man labor to seek it out; yea further, though a wise man seek
to know it, yet shall he not be able to find it. And again Chap. 11: v. 5. As
thou know not, what is the way of the Spirit, nor how the bones do grow, in
the womb of her, that is with child; even so thou know not the works of
God, who makes all.

The consideration of which should first cause us sorrow, and mourn before the
Lord, for our seeking to amend God's work, as if we could make straight, what
God has made crooked, and set all things in a righter posture, than God has
done. Concerning which, we would 1. Take notice of some of these ways, whereby
we are attempting this vain work. And 2. Take notice of the evil of this sin.

As to the First. We are seeking to make straight what God has made crooked,
when

1. We are in a quarrelling humore Disputing with God, and Condemning him in
our minds, for what he is doing; and Justifying ourselves in our Anger and
Displeasure against the Dispensations, and Ways of the Lord, as did Jonah; who
was displeased exceedingly and very angry, that the Lord spared Ninive Chap. 3:
v. 10. with 4: v. 1. And when the Lord said unto him Chap. 4: verse 4. Do
thou well to be angry? was not for all that satisfied: and again verse 9. when
the gourd was withered, and the East wind blew, and the sun beat upon his
head, he fell again in this distemper; and when the Lord said unto him, the
second time, do thou well to be angry? he answered, I do well to be angry,
even unto death.

2. When our vain Ratiocinations are engaged against the ways of the Lord, in
one particular or other; and we have this or that, to object against that
course, which the Lord takes; as if we would impute iniquity unto our Maker;
and accuse Him of unrighteous dealing: As those whom Paul bringeth-in reasoning
against the truth of God, and saying Rom 9: 19. -- Why does he yet find fault?
For who has resisted his will? To whom he answers Verse. 20, 21. Nay, but o
man, who art thou^, that (answerest again, or disputest against God, or)
reply against God, etc. As if he had said, Has not the Lord Power and
Soveraignity, in that matter, to do what he will; as well as a Potter has over
a bit clay? May not God dispose of His Clay, which he made Himself, as well as
the Potter may do of the Clay, which he made not, and is not the Creator of,
but was created to his hand, by the same God, that created himself? Why then
do thou quarrel with Him, or disputest against Him? Can thou help the
matter? Can thou make that straighter, than it is?

3. When we corrupt the truths of God, and abuse them, perverting them to our
corrupt and licentious Ends, like that saying Romans 6: verse. 1. Shall we
continue in sin, that grace may abound? And again Verse. 15. Shall we sin,
because we are not under the Law, but under grace? And Chap. 7: v. 7. Is the
Law sin? So Chap. 3: v. 31. Do we then make void the Law through faith? These
and the like Objections, which Paul, in his Epistles, preoccupieth, show what
the corrupt heart and reasonings of men are set upon; and how prone they are to
turn the Grace of God into lasciviousness, and to pervert the right Ways of
the Lord. Whereby they clearly demonstrate, how displeased they are at the holy
Truths and Ways of God, and how ready to thraw and pervert them, that they may
become more straight, then they seem to them at present to be.

4. When we Fret, Repine, Grumble and Grudge in our mind, against any of the
Lords Dispensations in and about us, or our concernments. This was the great
sin of Israel, they murmured against the Lord, and against Moses, Exodus 15: and
16, and 17. Numb. 14, and 16, and 17. 1 Cor. 10: 10. They were dissatisfied in
their minds, and repined and murmured against the Lord; and hereby they said,
they would have the ways and dispensations of the Lord altered toward them:
they were crooked, and they would have them made more straight.

5. When our hearts do not sweetly comply with the Ways and Dispensations of
the Lord, or we learn not, nor study Christian Submission. We should submit
ourselves unto the Lord, I am. 4: verse. 7. and humble ourselves under his
mighty hand 1 Pet. 5: v. 6. We should be in subjection unto the Father of
Spirits. Heb. 12. verse. 9. even when he Crosses, Chastneth and Afflicts us
But when we forget this Christian Duty, we declare our displeasure, at Gods
ways and dealings with us; and say, that we would have his work amended, and
that made straight, which He has made crooked.

6. When we are Impatient, and cannot wait God's leisure, but take sinful
courses to deliver ourselves; or sit down discontented, and sinfully long for
an outgate; then we declare our dissatisfaction with God's way, and would have
his dispensations altered, and matters running in another channel: As when the
laboring man would have the day of harvest the next week after the seed is
cast into the ground, he is displeased with Gods Order and Appointment of some
Months interveening: Whileas we should have Patience, and wait Gods time with
Patience, I am. 5: 7, 8. Luke 8: 15. 2 Pet. 1: v. 6. I am. 1; 4. Romans 12: 12.

7. When we are discontented with our own lot, and grudge at others, as having
a better lot, than we have: an evil, which James condemns Iam. 5: verse. 9.
and which plainly says, we would amend Gods work, and set straight what He
has made crooked. As that wicked King was displeased, when he heard the
message of the Lord 1 Kings 20: 42, 43.

8. When we are excessively Anxious and Disquieted in our mind, as to any
passage of Providence, that we meet with, or as to any cross that befalls
us. David checketh his own soul, as to this Ps. 42: verse. 5, 11. and 43: 5.
saying Why art thou disquieted within me? We are discharged to be careful thus
with a sinful anxiety for any thing Phil. 4: v. 6. 1 Cor. 7: 32. But When we
are thoughtful, we clearly say, that we would feign make straight, what God
has made crooked, though Christ has told us, Matthew. 6: 27. that by taking
thought, we cannot add one cubite to our stature.

9. When, though we dar not speak against God, in sending a cross upon us; yet
we are not satisfied with the Manner, or Measure, or Season, or Duration and
Continuance, or the Instrument of our cross; but say, we would choose any
other cross but this: we would be satisfied, if it were not so Bitter, and so
Heavy and so Insupportable: we would have taken it well, had it come upon us at
any other time, than now: we would most cheerfully have borne it, if it had
been of shorter Continuance: and had any other person been the Instrument
thereof, we would have laid our hand upon our mouth: all which and the like,
though they seem to insinuate some sort of Submission; yet are plain
Declarations, that we think the way of the Lord crooked, and that we would have
matters better ordered, and all things made more straight and even, than they
are.

10. When in our prayers, there is not that submission unto the holy and
sovereign Will of the Lord, that ought to be; but rather a limiteing of the
holy One of Israel: and a sinful unwarrantable Importunity, as to things not
necessary, in themselves, nor for us, without submission of soul unto the holy
Will of the Lord, as to the Manner, Time and Measure of the Lords granting of
our suites: When our Prayers are not commensurate unto the Promises, as to
their Substance; nor put up with Submission to God's Will and Soveraignity, as
to the Manner, Measure, Season, Way, and the like circumstances, which the
great God has kept in His own hand.

By these and the like ways, we declare our dissatisfaction with the ways and
works of God, and account them crooked, and think and endeavoure (though in
vain) to make straight, what God has made crooked: An evil at which God is
highly displeased. Woe unto him (says the Prophet Esai. 45: verse 9, 10.) that
striveth with his maker: Let the Potsheards strive with the Potsheards of the
Earth: shall the Clay say to him, that fashioneth it, what make thou? Or thy
work, he has no hands? Woe unto him that says to his Father, what begettest
thou? Or to the woman, what have thou brought forth? And the great sinfulness
of this sin appears in these Particulars,

1. It is a striveing against the Lord, in the place now cited: the word in the
Original signifies a Contending in judgment, as Lam. 3: verse 58. Leading a
process against one, Judging or Sentenceing in judgment; so also a Chideing,
Contending withfighting as Genesis 26: verse 20, 22. So that this sin is a calling
of the most High to an account, and a bringing of Him before our judgment seat,
as Job 33: 13. Where the the same verb is used Why do thou strive against
him? (Or why do thou call Him before thy tribunal, summond Him to compear
before thee, or contend with Him in judgment, or plead against Him) He
answers not, he gives no account of his mat^s to any.

2. It is a rebelling against the Lord. When the People of Israel murmured
against the Lord, and against Moses and Aaron Numb. 14: v. 1, 2, 3. Moses said
unto them Verse. 9. Only rebel not ye against the Lord. So it is said Psalm. 78:
verse 40. How often did they rebel against him, in the wilderness? in the margin.
See Verse. 8.

3. It is a manifest calling his Wisdom in question; and a saying, that He is
not wise enough, to order and dispose matters, aright. As if He were not mighty
in wisdom Job 36: verse 5. Our Wisdom were to cease from our own Wisdom Prove.
23: verse 4. and to believe, though we should not see, that in wisdom, he has
made the heavens and all Psalm. 104: verse. 34. and 136: verse. 5. and has
established the world in wisdom Ier. 10: verse 1^. and 51: v. 15. And not think
to give Him Counsel and Advice, how He should rule the world, for there are
Depths of Wisdom, and of Knowledge in Him Romans 11. 33. that we should think
upon with Admiration; for if in our wisdom, we think to correct His ways, and
quarrel against them, and not comply with them, he will destroy the Wisdom of
the wise, 1 Cor. 1: 19, 20. O what a guilt must this be to proclaim ourselves
wiser, than He is; and better able to order all things aright, at least, what
concerns ourselves! The very hauk will not fly by our wisdom Job: 39: 26.
and shall we think to prescribe Rules to God?

4. It is a calling in question of His Absolute Power and Soveraignity: As if
He might not do what he pleased; but were obnoxious to us, and bound to give an
account of his ways to us, or could do injustice, or wrong to any. As if he
had not that Power over His Creatures, to whom he has given being and all they
have, that the Potter has over the lump of Clay; or we have over our beasts,
which are our fellow creatures, and hold not their being of us. And must not
this be a great sin?

5. When we are sinfully anxious and disquieted with his Dispensations toward
his Church; We call into question His Faithfulness and Care of, and also his
Love to his Church; as if he had forgotten to be gracious, and would be
merciful no more, and cared not that she perished; as Christ's Disciples said
Mark. 4: 38. contrare to 1 Pet. 5: 7. And this, sure, must be no small sin.

6. We hereby proclaim Him to be an imperfect Worker; and say, that He is not
God; for his works, who is God, cannot but be perfect; and his Way also, Deuteronomy.
32: 4. 2 Samuel 22: 31.

7. We profess ourselves hereby able to find out the depths of His ways, and
to search Him out unto Perfection, as was said to Job Chap. 11: v. 7. Why else
will we think to reprove Him, and amend what He has done, as if it were amiss?

8. When we are dissatisfied with His Dispensations toward us, we really
accuse the Most Holy of Injustice; as if indeed He had wronged us, and we had
deserved better at His hands; though all His ways are Judgment, and though He
be a God of Truth and without Iniquity, and just and right Deuteronomy. 42: verse. 4.
Eliphaz said to Job, after he heard his complaints Chap. 3. Job 4: verse 17.
Shall mortal man be more just, than God? Shall a man be more pure than his
Maker? Elihu said well Job 34: verse 17. Shall we condemn him, that is most
just? What a sin must it be, to lay such an Imputation on Him, who has justice
and judgment for the habitation of his throne Ps. 89: verse 14: and who is
excellent in power and in judgment, and in plenty of Justice, Job 37: verse 23?

Next, The Consideration of this should cause us watch against this evil, and
labor for another frame of heart, that will be more complying with the Ways
and Works of the Lord. And for this cause, we should take another look of the
Works. of the Lord, and consider them in another manner, than we usually do:
and this brings me to the Third thing in the Text, which will also lead us to
a further improvement of this impossibility of helping what we suppose is
amiss, in the Works and Dispensations of the Lord.

Thirdly, Therefore let us see, what way we should consider the Works of the
Lord, to the end, we may have a suitable frame of spirit, complying sweetly
with all the crooks that are, or we suppose to be, in Gods Way and Works, for
in reference to this only, shall we speak of considering the Works of the Lord.

We should then consider the Works of the Lord, whether of Creation, or of
Providence.

1. So as that thereby we may become rooted and more settled in the Faith of
this, that He alone is Jehovah above all Gods; and this would do much to quiet
and calm our spirits: For our murmuring at, or displeasure with what He does,
flows from the want of the clear sight and apprehension of the hand of the
only Supreme and Sovereign God therein; Hence, to the end, that people may set
Him above all imagined, false and supposed God's, he reads a lecture to them
of His great works Esai. 40. from verse 12. and forward; and infers once and
again verse 18, 25. to whom then will ye liken God? Or what likeness will ye
compare with him? So he sets forth several remarkable works, that He would
do for his Church, that they may see, and know, and consider and understand
together, that the hand of the Lord has done this, and that the holy One of
Israel has created this, Esai. 41: verse 20. And when we consider His Works so,
as to see Him alone to be Jehovah, the Absolute and Sovereign King, Creator,
Conservator and Disposer of all Things, according to His own will and pleasure,
then our hearts will bow more, and submit unto His holy Determination, and we
will learn to say, with good old Eli, 1 Samuel 3: 18. -- It is the Lord Jehovah,
let him do what seems him good.

2. We should consider the works of the Lord, till we find thereby, that He
alone is the wise Governor of the World, and that there is a beauty of Divine
Wisdom to be seen and observed on all, even on that, which we account most
crooked, in our blind and biased judgments. Thus did holy Job Chap. 12.
contemplate the most crooked like works of the Lord, such as, His breaking
down, shutting up of a man, sending-out waters to overturne the earth, leading
Counselors away spoiled, making the judges fools, removing the speech of the
trusty, taking away the understanding of the aged, pouring contempt upon
Princes, weakening the strength of the mighty, destroying and straitning the
nations; taking away the heart of the chief of the People of the earth,
causing them to wander in a Wilderness, wherein is no way, to grope in the dark
without light, and making them to stagger as a drunken man: and he saw in the
midst of all this verse. 12, 13, 16. that with the ancient is wisdom, even
wisdom and strength; and that he had counsel and understanding. Such a sight,
as this, of the great and wonderful works of God, would cause us put our mouth
in the dust, and adore the Depths of the Counsel of God; and be far from
quarrelling with Him, for any thing he does: and when any thing appears
crooked to us, to suspect our own folly and ignorance, as not seeing in to the
profound Projects, wise and unsearchable Contrivances of the only wise God;
rather than impute folly and ignorance to the only wise God. It were best that
we saw, that we ourselves were beasts Ec^les. (...): 18.

3. It were our wisdom to consider the works of the Lord, so as to find out,
see and observe his Loving Kindness. After a long rehearsal of the mighty and
considerable works of God, both of Creation and Providence; and that both as to
the whole world, and more especially as to the Church Psalm. 104, and 105, and
106, and 107. in end the Psalmist Psalm. 107: 43. says, Who so is wise and
will observe those things, even they shall understand the loving kindness of
the Lord. There is a loving kindness engraven upon all the works and ways of
the Lord, a sight of which would teach us to acquiesce more heartily in all He
does, and submit more sweetly unto the most sour and rugged of His
Dispensations: The faith and the sight of this would make all the works of the
Lord appear most straight and lovely to us: and therefore, that our hearts may
comply mo^e heartsomely and christianly with the works and dispensations of
God, and that we may be kept from so much as desireing to have his ways and
dispensations other then they are, let us study and meditate upon the works
that He does, till we discover therein this mystery of loving kindness, that is
wrapped up in all, and brought about by all, that this great God does in the
world, about and for His Church.

4. We should also consider and contemplate the works of the Lord for this end,
and until we did remark, in some measure, the Purity, Unspotted Holiness,
Righteousness and Integrity of this great Worker, Hos. 14: 9. Who is wise, and
he shall understand these things? Prudent and he shall know them? For the ways
of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them, but the transgressors
shall fall therein. There is, in all the ways of the Lord, whether we see it,
or not, a divine and singular Righteousness; and it is the want of the sight of
this, that makes us quarrel. Jeremiah knew that God was righteous, yet he did
not see it so clearly, as was necessary, in the Dispensations of the Lord; and
therefore he says Chap. 12: 1, 2. as desireous to reason the case with God,
Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? Wherefore are all they happy,
that deal very treacherously? Thou have planted them, yea they have taken root,
they grow, yea they bring forth fruit etc. So Hab. 1: 2, 3. O Lord, how long
shall I cry, and thou will not hear, cry out unto thee of violence, and thou will not save? Why do thou show me iniquity, and cause me to behold
grievance? For spoiling and violence are before me, and there are that raise up
strife and contention. And again verse. 13. -- Wherefore look thou upon
them, that deal treacherously, and hold the tongue, when the wicked
devoureth the man, that is more righteous than ^e? etc* Therefore it would be
our wisdom, so to consider the works of the Lord, as to be confirmed in the
faith of this, that the Lord is Just and Righteous in all He does; and so as to
find new and fresh demonstrations thereof; and then our hearts will be more
calm under all, and more ready to submit to and acquiesce in all that the Lord
does.

5. We would study, dwell upon the thoughts of, and consider the works of the
Lord, till we see and observe in them something of the Stateliness, Excellency
and Majesty of God; for in His works, which are honorable and glorious,
wonderful and powerful Psalm. 111: 2, 3, 4, 6. there are discoveries to be had
of His excellent Majesty: yea a Spiritual eye can discern this, in the most
common, obvious and ordinary of his works: Elihu saw this, in the bright light
which is in the clouds, in winds cleansing of them, in fair weather coming
out of the North, for after this, he adds Job. 37: 21. -- With God is
terrible Majesty. God is indeed terrible in his doing to the Children of men.
Ps. 66: 5. and this we will be convinced of, if we will come and see, and
rightly consider His works. If we were thus studying the excellent works of the
Lord, we durst not censure, or condemn Him, or His works. But would rather
fear; as it is Ps. 64: 9. And all men shall fear, and shall declare the work of
God, for they shall wisely consider of his doing. And this would be our wisdom:
wherefore after much said of the commendation of the works of the Lord, the
Psalmist closes the Psalm. 111. with this verse. 10. The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom. The fear of the Lord, taught and learned by the works of
the Lord, would prove our wisdom. This is one special use that we should make
of His stately doings. I know (said the wise man Eccles. 3: 14.) that
whatso^ver God does it shall be for ever, nothing can be put to it, no^ any
thing taken from it: And God does it, that men should fear before Him. See also
Job. 37. verse 22, 23, 24. and verse. 14, 15, 16.

6. It were good to be so considering and meditating on the works of the Lord,
until we came to have low and abasing thoughts of ourselves: thus did the
Psalmist Ps. 8. contemplate the work of God ver. 1, 2, 3. And then adds verse.
4. What is man that thou art mindful of him? And the Son of man, that thou
vis^test him? And this would stop our mouth, when we were beginning to quarrel,
at any thing He does, and we would soon see cause of silence before Him,
because we would see, that we were but beasts.

7. We would so contemplate the works of the Lord, as to see and observe, how
wisely, steadily, and irresistibly He Orders and Carries on His works, for
throughing and bringing about His designed Ends. It is our ignorance of the
ends and designs of God, that causes us to complean and quarrel, and wish
that His works were otherwise ordered and marshalled; for saw we these, and
con^idered how pertinent and s^teable all the passages of His way, and all the
circumstances of His work, were unto the end designed, we would be forced to
say, Behold He does all things well. When Elihu had been considering Job 37.
the Lords thunder and the great and small rain, the whirle wind and the frost,
and observed how the Lord did weary the thick cloud, and turn it about hither
and thither; he did not satisfy himself with that, till he also got a look of
the special ends, wherefore the Lord did so; that so he might see the beauty,
and splendor, that was therein: therefore he adds ver. 12, 13. And it is
turned round about by his Counsels, that they may do whatsoever he commands
them, upon the face of the world, in the earth. He causes it to come, whether
for correction, orforhis land, or for mercy. And thereupon verse. 14. exhorts
Job to hearken unto this, to stand still and consider the wondrous works of
God: And of Him, who (verse. 16.) is perfect in knowledge. And such a sight as
this of the works of the Lord would put us far from intertaining such thoughts
of God, and of his ways, as we too ordinarily have. If we saw Him, in these
His works, acting as a wise Governor, carrying on His noble and excellent
Designs and Purposes, we would see a necessity for all that He does; and that
no Circumstance might be wanting; otherwise His work should not be perfect, as
it must be. And the faith of His being a God of wisdom, doing all for wise and
holy ends, should quiet us, even though we should not see the Particular end,
which the Lord Intends in this or that Particular work.

8. We would consider also the work of the Lord, and see how thereby He
executes many a time His judgments on the wicked, and how He is pouring out
His red wine, that is full of mixture, and causing the wicked of the earth
drinkout the very dregs; as it is Psalm. 75: 8. And thereby making it appear,
that verily there is a God, that judges in the earth Ps. 85. 11. Yea, even
when He seems most to be favoring the wicked, and His dispensations smile
most upon them, He is but heaping wrath the more upon them, and fitting them
for the day of slaughter. Asaph, that could not see this, when he was under the
Water, saw it clearly, when he went into the Sanctuary; then he understood
their end, and saw that the Lord had set them in slippery places, and they were
brought into desolation, as in a moment Psalm. 73: 17, 18, 19. It was an
heartestablishing sight, which the Psalmist had of the great works of the Lord
Psalm. 92: 4, 5. when he saw verse. 6, 7. that a brutish man knows not, neither
does a fool understand this, when the wicked spring as the grass, and when all
the workers of iniquity flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed for ever.

CONSIDERATION XXII. Judgment upon a Land, because of sin, sometime will not
be held off by the prayer of God's people.
JEREM. 15: 1. Then said the Lord unto me, though Moses and Samuel stood before
me; yet my mind could not be toward this people: Cast them out of my sight,
and let them go forth.


IN a time, when, because of public and abounding sins, the Lord brings on
Public and General Calamities; especially such, as sweep away the Righteous
with the Wicked, and that could not be prevented or held off by all the Prayers
and Supplications of His people, how earnest so ever they have been therein; it
may seem no small piece of difficulty, how a believer shall win to any life; or
to know what a life may be had, in a such a dismal day: It may therefore be of
use to speak a little hereunto, especially seeing this is very like to be the
case of this Generation.

These words, and the like Passages, show us, that indeed there is a time, when
God is so provoked by the sins of a people, that after much abused patience
and long-suffering, He will not be entreated to hold off the stroke, that He is
about to send, or has threatened because of Provocations: Nor shall the
eminentest of His favorites, and wrestlers, who sometime have prevailed as
Princes with Him, be in case to stand in His way, and avert the blow, by all
their Entreaties and earnest Supplications. God was about to bring on this
people of Judah, the long threatened desolation, and did denounce the same by
His Servant Jeremiah, saying Chap. 7: 14, 15. That He would do unto His house
at Jerusalem, which was called by His name, and wherein they did trust, as He
had done unto Shilo; and that He would cast them out of His sight, as He had
cast out their Brethren, the whole seed of Ephraim. And that Jeremiah might
understand the peremp^oriness of this denounciation, He adds verse. 16.
Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up cry nor prayer for
them; neither make intercession to me, for I will not hear thee. The Lord
hereby signifying not so much His will, that Jeremiah should surcease, and pray
no more in their behalf; as the peremptoriness of His purpose and resolution,
to bring on the judgment, so that all his Interceeding and Interposeing should
not avail: And this is again renewed Chap 11: 14. Therefore pray not thou for
this people; neither lift up a cry, or prayer for them; for I will not hear
them, in the time, that they cry unto me, for their trouble. As if He had said,
The decree is now gone forth, neither shall they prevail for themselves, nor
thou for them. Yet Compassionat Jeremiah could not get them forgotten in his
prayers; but interceedeth earnestly with the Lord, in their behalf Ier. 14: 1.
From the beginning to the 10. ver. Whereupon the Lord said unto him the third
time verse. 11. pray not for this people ^or their good. Jeremy again verse.
19. to the end, notwithstanding of this, fell to the work of prayer, and did
earnestly supplicat and interceed for them. But now the Lord tells him Chap. 15:
1. That Moses and Samuel should not prevail in their behalf; and therefore he
may be the better satisfied, to hear that God would not grant his Petitions,
put up for them.

The like we have said four times over Ezekiel. 14: 14, 16, 18 20. Though these
three men, Noah, Daniel and Job, were in it, they should deliver but their own
souls: and again, Though those three men were in it, as I live says the Lord
God, they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters, they only shall be
delivered, but the land shall be desolate. The matter then, which we are to
notice is manifest, to wit, That there is a time, when the sins of a people
come to that height, that God will not spare, upon any humane Intercession: He
will hear no Entreaty. That was an unalterable and inevitable sentence against
the house of honest Eli. 1 Samuel 3: 14. And therefore I have sworn unto the
house of Eli, that the iniquity of Elies house shall not be purged with
sacrifice, nor offering for ever. When the Lord would begin, He would also
make an end, as it is said v. 12. So Esai. 22: v. 14. And it was revealed in
mine ears by the Lord of hosts; surely this iniquity shall not be purged
from you till ye die. There is a time, when the end is come, and the Lord will
judge a people, according to their ways, and recompense upon them all their
abominations; and His eye shall not spare, neither will He have pity: As Ezekiel.
7: 2. to 10. And the Lord will not again pass by them any more Amos 7: verse
8. and 8. verse 2.

Such a time and dispensation, as this, cannot but be afflicting and grievous
to all, that are concerned in such matters: And the Consideration of these
particulars may manifest how sad it is, when the Lord is so provoked against a
People, as no Intercessions of His most highly honored Favorites, upon whose
Entreaties, sometime He has manifested wonderful condescensions of grace, will
prevail to keep off the stroke; no not Moses and Samuel both together.

1. That the Lord has done much at the Prayer and Intercession of these two in
particular, here mentioned, Moses and Samuel: For Moses, see Exodus 32. where
the Lord was so wroth and displeased at the Peoples turning aside so quickly
out of the way, and making the golden Calf, that He said unto Moses verse 9, 10.
I have seen this people, and behold, it is a stiff-necked People. Now
therefore, let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may
consume them: And yet upon the Intercession of Moses, saying Verse 11, 12, 13.
Lord, why does thy wrath wax hot against thy People, which thou have brought
forth out of the Land of Egypt, with great power and with mighty hand etc. It
is said Verse 14. That the Lord repented of the evil, which he thought to do
unto his People. So again Numb 14: v. 19, 20. See Psalm. 99: verse 5. and 106:
v. 23. In like manner, as to Samuel we see 1 Samuel 7. that when the Children of
Israel were in great fear of the Philistines, they said to Samuel Verse 8. Cease
not to cry unto the Lord our God, for us, that He will save us out of the hand
of the Philistines. And upon this Samuel cried unto the Lord, for Israel, and
the Lord heard him. See also Psalm 99: v. 6. Is it not sad, that the Lord, who
sometime did so much upon the Entreaty of these Persons, is now so offended,
that He would not regard their Intercessions, nor spare upon their request?

2. That the Lord has frequently spared, and kept a stroke off His People
upon the interposing of others, as of Amos. Chap. 7: v. 2, 3, 5, 6. When he had
prayed for the People, and had said, O Lord God, forgive, I beseech thee: by
whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small? The Lord repented and said, It should
not be. And again the second time he prayed, and had the same return. So
Nehemiah 9. and Daniel Chapter 9. and Asa 2 Chronicles. 14: v. 11. and Iehosaphat 2 Chronicles. 20. and others.

3. That the Lord has sometimes forborne to strick, when even graceless
Persons, and such, as had no interest in the special favor of God, have prayed
and humbled themselves: as when He spared Ninivee, after that natural People
had humbled themselves: And when that wicked man Ahab, that did evil in the
sight of the Lord, above all that were before him 1 Kings 16: verse. 30, 33.
rent his cloths, and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted and lay in
sackcloth, and went softly, the Lord delayed the stroke, and would not bring
the evil upon his house, in his days 1 Kings 21: v. 27, 29. How sad must it
then be, that He, who sometime has turned from the fierceness of His anger,
and held off the evil threatened upon the crying of graceless Persons, will not
hear the earnest Entreaties of His greate^st Favorites?

4. This dispensation will also appear more sad and afflicting, if we confider
what an high esteem the Lord has for the Prayers and Intercessions of His
worthies. Such an account has He of them, that the expressions thereof are
indeed rare and very remarkable. Let me alone, says He unto Moses Exodus 32: v.
11. as if Moses had been stronger than He, and had bound up His hands; or as if
God could do nothing without Moses's consent or permission. So said He to Jacob
Genesis 32: v. 26. when He was wrestling with Him by prayer and supplication Hos.
12: v. 4. Let me go: as if He could not have gone without Jacobs good leave and
permission: And Jacob is said to have prevailed with God, as a Prince; and has
therefore his name changed into Israel.

5. Add to this end, the frequent promises made of the Lords hearing of such,
in the behalf of others Genesis 20: 7. the Lord said to Abimelech, Restore the man
his wife, for he is a Prophet, and be shall pray for thee, and thou shall live.
So Job. 42: v. 8. The Lord directed Jobs Friends to set him a work to pray for
them, with a promise of success. Go to my servant Job, and offer up for
yourselves a Burnt-offering; and my servant Job shall pray for you; for him
will I accept. How sad then must it be, when the Lord will not hear such. See
also Iam. 5: v. 14, 15, 16.

6. Yea sometimes we read, that the Lord has delivered, when there was no
Intercessour Esai. 59: verse 16, 17. And He saw, that there was no Intercessour.
Therefore his arm brought salvation unto Him, and His righteousness it
sustained Him. Must not His anger then be great, when He will not pity, nor
spare, even though His worthies, whom He highly honors, were standing before
Him, and putting up Supplications, in the behalf of a sinful People?

7. He has said Psalm. 50: verse 15. -- Call upon me in the day of trouble, and
I will deliver thee. Is it not then sad, when iniquity is come to such an
height, that the Lord will not only not hear the People themselves, when they
cry; but also He will not hear the beseechings and entreaties of such, as have
most prevailed with Him, at other times?

8. As also if we consider, how unanswerable this appears to be unto the
Title and Style, which He has got, and the Consideration of which has
encouraged His servants to call upon Him: As Psalm. 65: verse 2. O thou that
hear Prayer, unto thee shall all Flesh come, such a Dispensation, as this,
cannot but be sad and grievous.

If it be enquired, when we may apprehend the time to be such, as wherein the
Lord will hear no Intercessions, no Prayers, nor Entreaties of His greatest
Favorites, in the behalf of a sinf^l People, against whom the Lord is coming
in judgment? I answer, Though we may not be peremptour herein, knowing that
the Lord sometimes takes pleasure to Act, according to a Soveraignity of
mercy; for the glory of His rich Grace and Compassion; and therefore must leave
a latitude unto the Soveraignity of free Grace: Yet if we consider the
condition of this People, of whom this is said; and see what iniquities they
were guilty of, at this time, we apprehend such a thing may be feared, where
the Lord is in the same, or in the like manner, provoked; and when He is coming
in judgment against a people chargable with the same evils, it may be feared,
that no prayer, no intercession of one or other, shall avail to hold off the
judgment. Of these sins, whereof this People, for whom the Lord would hear no
intercession, we shall mention some few, to the end we may be helped to
understand better the language of Gods present Dispensations; and to search and
see, whether there be cause or no, to fear, that judgment inevitable is to be
the lo of this generation.

1. When sins, and rebellion against the Lord, come to an exceeding great
height, and gross and palpable defection is begun and carried on by Court and
Country; then the Lord is engaged to vindicat His Name and Justice, before the
World; that all may see, He is no Patronizer of Wickedness, even in a People
called by His Name. Thus it was in the days of Manasseh, who, with his Court,
committed such heinous wickedness, as was never there before perpetrated, as
may be seen 2 Kings 21: v. 1, to 10. 2 Chronicles. 33: 1, to 11. and wherein the
whole land was involved: Wherefore the Lord threatened 2 Kings 21: v. 12, 13,
14, etc. to stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the
House of Ahab; that is, that He would do with Jerusalem, as He has done with
Samaria, and the House of Ahab; and no more spare those, than He did these. And
(which is very remarkable) this iniquity the Lord would not Pardon,
notwithstanding that Manasseh himself got mercy, and reformed several things
before his death; and notwithstanding of a more universal and general
Reformation, that was in the days of his Grandchild Josiah, that nonesuch
King: For it is said 2. Kings 23: v. 25, 26, 27. And like unto him (i. e.
Josiah) was there no King before him, that turned to the Lord withal his
heart, and with all his soul, and withal his might, according to the Law of
Moses; neither after him, arose there any like him. Notwithstanding (as it is
added) the Lord turned not from the fierceness of His great wrath, wherewith
His anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the Provocations that
Manasseh had provoked Him with all. And the Lord said, I will remove Judah also
out of my sight, etc. And in this same place Jer. 15. after the Lord had said
Verse 1. that though Moses and Samuel stood before Him, his mind could not be
toward them; but that He would cast them out of His sight, to the death, to
the sword, to the Famine, and to the Captivity, Verse 2. to the Sword, to Dogs,
to Fowls, and to Beasts Verse 3. He says Verse 4. And I will cause them to be
removed into all Kingdoms of the Earth, because of Manasseh, the Son of
Hezeki^h King of Judah, for that which he did in Jerusalem.

2. When heinous iniquities, and sins become common and epidemick, in a land,
infecting all ranks of Persons, young and old, rich and poor, Magistrate,
Minister and common People; then an inevitable blow is to be feared: for so was
it with this people, as we see Jer. 5: verse. 1. etc. hardly could there a man
be found in Jerusalem to execute judgment, and to seek the truth: Neither was
this scarcety to befound only among the poor and foolish people; but even among
the great men; for they had altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds
Verse 5. therefore follows Verse 7. How shall I pardon thee for this? And
again Verse 9. Shall I not visit for these things? says the Lord; and shall
not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? So in the two last Verses of
that Chapt. it is said, A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the
Land. The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their
means, and my People love to have it so: and what will ye do i^ the end
thereof. Such Priest, such People were here; and what else but ruin could be
expected? So Ierem. 6: verse 13. and 8: v. 10. it is said, that from the least
of them, even unto the greatest of them, every one is given to covetousness;
and from the Prophet even unto the Priest, every one deals falsely: Therefore
is wrath threatened both upon old and young, and upon all the inhabitants of the
land Verse 11, 12. See also Verse 28. They were all grievous revolters, brass
and iron, they were all corrupters. So is this plainly charged upon them Chap.
7: v. 18. The Children gather wood, and the Fathers kindle the fire, and the
women knead their dough* to make ^kes to the Queen of Heaven. So that Man, Wife
and Children, young and old, were conspiring in one, and with one shoulder
carrying on this Defection and Apostasy from God. So Jerem. 11: v. 13, 14. For
according to the number of thy cities, were thy Gods, O Judah; and according to
the number of the Streets of Jerusalem, have they set up Alt^rs to that shamful
thing, Altars to burn in^ense unto Baal. Thus was this sin become universal
through the whole City Jerusalem, and through the whole Land of Judah: And what
follows hereupon? Therefore pray not thou for this People etc. The like we
find Micah. 3: verse. 11. The Heads did judge for reward, and the Priests did
teach for hire, and the Prophets did divine for Money: And what follows upon
this? Therefore (Verse 12) shall Zion for your sakes be plowed as a field, and
Jerusalem become heaps, and the mountain of the house as ^he high places of
the forest; that is, City and Sanctuary shall be laid desolate. This same was
laid to the charge of this People by Zephaniah, Chapter 3: ver. 3, 4. Her Princes
within her are roaring lions, her judges evening Wolves, her Prophets light and
treacherous Persons, her Priests have polluted the Sanctuary: So that both
Church and State was corrupted: and therefore was woe denounced against her
Verse 1. See also Micah 7: 2, to 6.

3. When Corruption in the Worship, and Ordinances of God, is admitted,
fostered and continued in; and Superstition or Idolatry is brought-in, then an
inevitable stroke is to be feared: for God is a jealous God, and will not hold
them guiltless that take His Name in vain, but will visit the iniquities of
the Fathers unto the third and fourth Generation of those that thus hate Him,
and corrupt His Ordinances: This was also given as a cause of the destruction,
that came on this People 2 Chronicles. 36: v. 14. They polluted the House of the
Lord, which He had hallowed in Jerusalem. So Ezekiel. 5: verse 11. it was
threatened. Wherefore, as I live, says the Lord God, surely, because thou have
defiled my Sanctuary with all thy detestable things, and with all thine
abominations; therefore will I also diminish thee; neither shall mine eye
sparer, neither will I have pity, See also the following Verses, where the
dreadfulness of the blow is laid forth: yea says he Verse 13. thus shall mine
anger be accomplished, and I will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will
be comforted. And all is sealed in end Verse 17. with this, I the Lord have
spoken it. So Ezekiel. 7: verse 20. As for the beauty of his Ornament, he set it in
Majesty: But they made the Images of their Abominations, and of their
detestable things therein. This was their sin, and what follows? Therefore
have I set it far from them, or made it unto them an unclean thing. And further
in the following Verses, He threatens, to give it into the hands of strangers
for a prey, and to robbers, who shall defile it, etc. See likewise Chapt. 8.
throughout, and Chap. 23* verse 38, 39* So Jerem. 9: verse 12, 13, etc. The Land
was perishing, and was burnt up like a Wilderness, that none passes through:
And wherefore was this? Because (says the Lord) they have forsaken my law,
which I set before them, and have not obeyed my voice, neither walked therein;
but have walked after the imagination of their own heart, and after Baalim,
which their Fathers taught them etc.

4. When a land or Church makes defection from God, apostatizeth, breaks
wedlock, renounceth their Covenant relation; then a sword is to be expected,
wherewith the Lord shall avenge the quarrel of His Covenant Levit 26: 25. and
there is ground to fear, that judgment shall inevitably overtake such sinners:
For thus was it with this people of Judah Ier. 2: 9, 10. 11, 12, 13. So Ier. 4:
16, 17, 18. They had forsaken God, and rebelled against Him; and therefore came
destruction upon destruction v. 28. and Ier. 11: 10. Because they brake God's
Covenant, which He had made with their Fathers: Therefore v. 11. He threatened
to bring evil upon them, which they should not be able to escape, and that He
would not Hearken, though they should cry unto Him: And then follows verse 14.
Therefore pray not thou for this people etc. So Ier. 22: 6, 7. The Lord
threatened to make them a wilderness, and Cities not inhabited, in so much, that
Nations shall be astonished, and enquire what can be the cause of this? And the
answer they shall receive is this v. 9. Because they ^ave forsaken the
Covenant of the Lord, their God, and w^rshipped other Gods and srved them. And
in this same place Ier. 15: 6. it is said, Thou have forsaken me, says the
Lord, thou art gone backward; therefore will I stretch out mine hand against
thee, and destroy thee, I am weary with repenting. See what was threatened for
breach of Covenant Ier. 34: v. 17, 18, 19, 20. The Lord said, He would proclaim
a liberty to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine, and would make
them to be removed into all the Kingdoms of the earth, and give all ranks
among them into the hands of their Enemies; and give their dead bodies to be
meat unto the fowls of heaven, and to the beasts of the earth. We see Ezekiel. 16.
how the Lord deduceth along process against them, and proves them to have
played the harlot, and that in a most impudent manner: And how therefore he
says, that He will judge her as a woman, that breaks wedlock v. 38. and make
his fury toward them to rest, and his jealousy shall depart, and He will be
quiet verse. 42. and again v. 59. He says I will even deal with thee, as thou
have done, which have despised the oath, in breaking the Covenant. See the like
charged upon Israel, as the ground of their desolation. Hos. 4: 12, 13, 14. and
5: 4, 5, 6, 7. and 8: 1, 2, and 9: 1, 2, 3. and 13, 16.

5. When this Defection and Apostasy from God in the matter of Religion, is
accompanied with gross immoralities, fearful sins against the Second table of
the Law, which the very light of Nature condemns; then may the guilty fear an
unavoidable stroke, and a blow of justice, that shall not be evited; for the
Lord will not have it said, or supposed by strangers, that He will bear with
gross impieties in His own professed people, and suffer them to exceed the
heathen in wickedness, without control, or punishment: We see this people of
Judah, upon whom inevitable ruin was coming, were charged likewise with many
gross and heinous impieties Ier. 5: 26, 27, 28, 29. There were among them
wicked men, they did lay wait, as such as laid snares, they set a trap, they
watched men, their houses were full of deceit; yea they did overpasse the deeds
of the wicked; and thereupon it follows v. 29 Shall I not visit for these
things, says the Lord? Shall not my soul be avenged of such a Nation, as this?
So Ier. 9: 1. They were all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men, they
bend their tongues for lies like bows, they did proceed from evil to evil,
they taught their tongues to speak lies, and deceived their Neighbors; they
spoke peacably, but in heart they did lay wait: Therefore it is added v. 9.
Shall I not visit them for these things? etc. So Jer. 21: 12. O house of
David, thus says the Lord, execute judgment in the morning, and deliver him
that is spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor, l^st my fury go out like
fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings.
These things were neglected by them; and therefore wrath came upon them, at
length, and there was no remedy Jer. 22: 3, 4, 5, 6. And the Prophet Ezekiel
has the same charge against this people Chap. 5: 5, 6. They changed Gods
judgments into wickedness, more than the Nations, and his statutes more than
the Countries: And therefore the Lord threatened v. 8, 9, 10. to execute
judgment in the midst of them, and to do that unto them, which He had not done
before, and the like whereof He would not do any more: He would bring on them
an unexemplified stroke, and a stroke, that should not have a parallel. And
again Chap. 9: 9, 10. The iniquity of the house of Israel and of Judah is
exceeding great, and the Land is full of blood, and the city full of
perverseness. And therefore it is added, mine eye shall not spare, neither will
I have pity, but I will recompense their way upon their head. Therefore was it,
that commission was given to the Lord's executioners to go through and slay Old
and young, maids and little children and women; yea all, except the marked ones
v. 5, 6. Se also Chap. 16: 46, 47, 48. Judah corrupted her self more than
Samarca, yea more than Sodom v. 49: 50, 41. And Chap 22: we have a large
Catalogue of their sins, see v. 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. And that as the
provoking cause, drawing forth the sword, wherewith the Lord would cut off both
the righteous and the wicked, mentioned Chap. 21: ver. 3. -- 14. And
bringing-on the desolation and scattering, mentioned Chap. 22: 15, 16, 19, 20,
21, 22. Thus the Lord dealt also with Israel, because of their manifold
iniquities, mentioned Hos. 4: 1, 2, 3. there was no truth, nor mercy, in the
land, nor knowledge of God; but there was swearing, lying, killing, stealing,
adultery and blood touching blood. See also Micah. 6: 10, 11, 12, 13.

6. When this defection, and course of sinning is long continued-in, and there
is no wearying of this way, but rather a growing in this Apostasy; then such
may fear, that at length the Lord will come, and will not spare, nor pity, nor
pass by any more; for thus was it with this people of Judah Ier. 16. there are
sad judgments denounced against them, from the beginning to V. 10. And thereof
the reason is given verse. 11, 12. - Because your fathers have forsaken me, and
have walked after other goods etc. And ye have done worse than your fathers;
for behold ye walk every one after the stubbornness of his evil heart, that
they may not hearken unto me. And therefore destruction is threatened of new v.
13. Therefore will I cast you out of this land, into a land, that ye know not
-- where I will not show you favor. So Ier. 32: 30, 31. For the Children of
Israel, and the Children of Judah have only done evil before me from their
youth. And again. This city has been to me, as a Provocation of mine anger,
and of my fury, from the day that they built it, even unto this day; that I
should remove it from before my face. So the Prophet Ezekiel draws up a long
Libel of many Instances of their rebellion, continued in for many Generations,
running in a constant line from Father to Son, from V. 3. to V. 33. and there
we find the sentence given out, As I live says the Lord God, surely with a
mighty hand, and with a stretched-out arm, and with fury poured-out, will I
rule over you And Israel was charged with this same guilt, Hos. 10: ver. 9. O
Israel, thou have sinned from the days of Gibeah. See also Esa. 65: 7.

7. When People become bold and impudent in their sinful courses, then there is
ground to fear a sad and inevitable stroke of Justice: For thus was it with
this People of Judah Ier. 3: 3. -- Thou had a whores forehead, thou
refusedst to be ashamed. And again Ier. 6: 15. Were they ashamed, when they
had committed abomination? Nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could
they blush: And what is added upon this? Therefore they shall fall among them,
that fall; at the time, that I visit them, they shall be cast down, says the
Lord. So Chap. 8: v. 12. in these last mentioned places, the false Prophets
would seem specially to be meaned; yet the circumstances will include others.
When People provoke the Lord to anger continually, to his face, as it is Esai
65: 3. then they become a smoke in Gods nose, and a fire that burns all the
day, and they must expect a recompense from God, as Verse. 5, 6.

8. When People stand chargable with the abuse of many favors, received at the
hands of God; which they have perverted, and mis-improven to the hardening of
themselves in their wicked courses; then it is to be feared, that God will come
at length, and be avenged on such a Generation of Perverters: This iniquity was
also charged upon this People of Judah by Jeremiah Chap. 2: 5, to 9. Their
forgetting the old kindnesses of God, and abusing His favors, defiling His
land, and making His heritage an abomination, is charged home Verse 7. Wherefore
(says the Lord Verse 9.) I will yet plead with you, and with your Childrens
Children will I plead. So Chap. 11. after the Lord had said to Jeremie, Pray
not for this People Verse 14. he adds, as a provoking cause hereunto Verse 15,
16, 17. What has my beloved to do, in mine house, she has wrought lewdness
with many, and the holy flesh is passed from thee, when thou do evil, then
thou rejoicest. The Lord called thy name a green Olive tree, fair and of
goodly fruit. But there was no suitable walking; and therefore it follows,
with the noise of a great tumult, he has kindled fire upon it, and the
branches of it are broken: For the Lord of Hosts, that planted thee, has
pronounced evil against thee, etc. So Jer. 13. the Lord by a similitude of a
girdle, shows how he had caused the whole House of Israel to cleave unto Him,
and the whole House of Judah; that they might be unto Him, for a People, and
for a Name, and for a Praise, and for a Glory: but they would not hear; and
therefore he threatened to make them like unto the marred girdle; and so mar the
pride of Judah, and the great pride of Jerusalem, and make them good for
nothing. See Verse 9, 10, 11. So Chap. 16: 18. he says, And first, I will
recompense their iniquity, and their sin double, because they have defiled my
land, they have filled mine inheritance, with the carcases of their detestable
and abominable things. Thus did they requite the kindness of God, in bestowing
that land upon them, by defileing it with their sins; and therefore He
threatens to recompense their iniquity double. So does the Prophet Ezekiel
Chap. 16. make a large deduction of the favors and kindneses shown to that
people, and give us also a large sum of their abusings and pervertings of
these favors: And therefore is wrath denounced from Verse 36. and forward. This
was likewise charged upon Ephraim or Israel, by Hosea Chap. 7: 13, 15. -- they
have transgressed against me, though I have redeemed them, yet they have spoken
lies against me -- though I have bound and strengthened their arms; yet they
do imagine mischief against me. So Hos. 11: verse 1, 2, 3, 4. Esai. 1: verse 2.

9. When People become hardened in their sins, loving and delighting to wander
out of the way, and glory in their wickedness, as resolving never to amend, and
are therefore tushing at all threatenings, and contemning them; then is there
great ground to fear an overturning blow, that no means shall avert: It was
also laid to the charge of this people Ier. 14, 10. that they loved to wander,
and did not refrain their feet: And what follows upon this? Therefore the
Lord does not accept them; He will now remember their iniquity, and visit
their sins. And then Verse 11. The Lord said unto him, pray not for this People
for their good. Verse 12. When they fast, I will not hear their cry -- but I
will consume them by the Sword, by the Famine, and by the Pestilence. So the
Prophet Ezekiel Chapter 24. sees Jerusalem, in the likeness of a pot full of
pieces; and she is called Verse 6. the pot, whose scum is therein, and is not
gone out of it; she would cast away none of her abominations: and therefore the
Lord said Verse 9. Woe to the bloody City, I will even make the pile for fire
great. Verse 10. Heap on wood, kindle the fire, consume the flesh, and spice it
well, and let the bones be burnt. Verse 11. Then set it empty upon the coals
thereof, that the brass of it may be hot, and may burn: and that the
filthiness of it may be molten in it, and that the soumme of it may be
consumed. She would not put away her scum in time, and therefore the Lord will
put an end to it in her destruction; and He will not be hindered; for it is
added Verse 13, 14. In thy filthiness is leudness, because I have purged thee,
and thou mast not purged; thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any
more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee, I the Lord have spoken it,
it shall come to pass, and I will do it, I will not go back, neither will I
spare, neither will I repent etc. The same was the sin of Israel, for says
Hosea Chapter 7: 10. And the pride of Israel testifies to his face; and they do
not return to the Lord their God, nor seek Him for all this. So Chap. 11: 7.
And my People are bent to back sliding from me: though they called them to the
most High, none at all would exalt Him. They hardened their necks, that they
might not hear God's Words: Therefore the Lord said Ier. 19: 15. that He would
bring upon Jerusalem., and upon the rest of the Towns, all the evil that He had
pronounced against it. It was this same People, of which Zephaniah spaketh
Chap. 1: 12. That were settled on their lees, and said in their heart, the Lord
will not do good, neither will He do evil. Upon which, dreadful and desolating
strokes are denounced, to the end of that Chapter.

10. When a People under their sins, turn brutish, sensual and senseless,
regarding nothing that the Lord is either doing or saying, by His Servants or
Dispensations; but following their pleasures; then an alarming and destroying
stroke, that shall not be turned away, may be feared, according to that Esai.
22: v. 12, 13, 14. And in that day, did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping,
and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth, and behold joy
and gladness, slaying Oxen and killing Sheep, eating Flesh, and drinking Wine:
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. And it was revealed in mine
ears by the Lord of Hosts; surely, this iniquity shall not be purged from you,
till ye die, says the Lord God of Hosts. The like we have pronounced by Amos
Chap. 6: v. 1, etc against such, as are at ease in Zion, put far away the evil
day, lie upon beds of yvory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat
the Lambs out of the Flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the Stall; that
chant to the sound of the viol, invent to themselves Instruments of music,
like David; that drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief
ointments; but they are not grieved for the Affliction of Joseph. Now see what
the Lord threatens upon this account Ver. 7. and forward, confirming the same
with an Oath Verse 8. to show the immutability of this Counsel.

11. When People are so far from taking conviction, and making challenges
welcome, and from humbling themselves before the Lord, in the sense of their
iniquities; that they will justify their own ways, and plead themselves
innocent before God; Then, there being no more hop of their recovery, their
case seems desperate, and they may expect a final blow: For this was also the
sin of this People of Judah; as we see Ier. 2: v. 23 How can thou say, I am
not polluted, I have not gone after Baalim? Therefore Verse 24. their month
must come, wherein they shall be found and taken: So Verse 35. Yet thou say,
because I am innocent, surely, his anger shall turn from me. What follows?
Behold I will plead with thee, because thou say, I have not sinned. So that
the Lord is engaged so much the more, to plead His controversy against them;
and make them and the world both see, by sad effects, how guilty they have
been. Also we see how the Lord justifies His procedour with this same People
by Ezekiel Chap. 11. throughout: they would say, that all these calamities,
which they did meet with, and were yet to meet with, came not on them for their
own sins, but for their Fathers sins; their Fathers (said they) had eaten sour
grapes, and their teeth was set on edge; and therefore they concluded, that the
way of the Lord was not equal: but the Lord, in that Chapter, is vindicating
Himself, and evinceing that they were as guilty, as their Fathers, and did
tread in their Fathers footsteps, approving all that their Fathers did; and
therefore could not plead innocent. See likewise Ezekiel. 33: 11, to 20.

12. When People will go on in their wickedness, and shelter themselves under
an outward Profession of Religion and Piety; then it is to be feared, that God
shall vindicat His Name and His Glory, in the sight of the Nations, and make it
appear that His outward worship and service shall be a scug to no profane
Person: For this was also the sin of this People Jer. 7: 3, 4. Thus says the
Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, amend your ways and your doings, and I Will
cause you to dwell in this place: Trust ye not in lying words, saying, the
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these.
Because they had the Temple among them, they thought all should be well, and
they should never be ruined, do what they pleased: But the Lord, in the
following Verses, manifests that all that should no more save them, than it
saved Shiloh; and then adds Verse 15, 16. And I will cast you out of my sight,
as I have cast out all your Brethren, the whole Seed os Ephraim. Therefore pray
not thou for this People etc. So says the Lord by Esaias Chapter 1: 11, etc. To
what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices etc. The Lord cared for none
of these things, when their outward walk was not answerable to their
profession; He would not hear their Prayers Verse 15. So Esai. 66: 3, 4. He
thereupon threatened to choose their delusions, as they had chosen their own
ways, and that in which He delighted not. See also Amos 5: 21 to 23. Micah
laith his to the charge of this same People. Chap. 3: 11. The heads thereof
judge for reward, and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets
thereof divine for money: Yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, is not the
Lord among us, none evil can come upon us, But what follows upon this? Verse
12. Therefore shall Zion for your sake be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem
shall become heaps, and the mountain of the House, as the high places of the
forest.

13. When iniquity abounds particucularly amongst Churchmen, who should both
by their doctrine and example have reclamed the people from their sinful
courses; then the matter seems desperate, and God must be avenged on all
together; Hence we see this same people charged with this Jer. 2: 8, 9. The
Priests said not, where is the Lord? And they that handle the Law, knew me not:
The Pastors also transgressed against me, and the Prophets Prophesied by Baal,
and walked after things, that do not profit. Wherefore I will yet plead with
you, says the Lord, and with your Childrens Children will I plead. See also
Chapter 6: 14, 15. and 8: 11, 12, 13. There was falsehood among the Priests and the
Prophets, and they healed thehurt of the daughter of Gods People slightly,
saying Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace: And therefore follows Verse 13. I
will surely consume them etc. So Ezekiel. 22: 25, 26. There is a conspiracy of her
Prophets, in the midst thereof -- they have devoured souls, her Priests have
violated my Law, and have profaned my Holy things etc. Therefore (as it
follows Verse 31.) have I poured out mine indignation upon them, I have
consumed them with the fire of my wrath; their own way have I recompensed upon
their heads, says the Lord God. See also Hos. 4: v. 6, 7, 8, 9. and 9: verse 8.

14. When a People lay not God's controversy to heart, when He is pleading the
same against them by lesser judgments; nor are taking warning thereby, but
notwithstanding thereof are going on in their sins; then it is to be feared,
that God shall once for all send a consuming stroke, that they shall not evite:
for this was also the sin of this People, as we see Jer. 5: 3. -- Thou have
stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou have consumed them, but they
have refused to receive correction: So Chap 2: 30. and 12: v. 11. Thus was it
also with Israel Amos 4: v. 6. and forward to the end: several particular
judgments are there mentioned, but they wrought them not up unto a returning to
the Lord verse 6, 8, 10, 12. And then a nameless Judgment, or a Judgment without
a parallel, a judgment that could not be expressed is threatened; and they are
bidden prepare for it verse 12. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel;
and because I willd o thus unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. See
Amos 7. where also several Judgments are mentioned, but the Lord made not yet a
full end: But at length verse 8. He says, I will not again pass by them, any
more: And so again Chap. 8: 2. See likewise Zeph. 3: 7. Esai. 1: v: 5, 6, 7, 8.

15. When oppression and injustice rages among a people, then is there just
ground to fear such an overflowing blow; Violence was one of the sins, that
brought* on the flood on the old world Genesis 6: 11, 14. And for this sin, was
Jerusalem threatened with destruction Esai. 1: 21, 23, 24. How is the faithful
city become an harlot? -- they judge not the fatherless, neither does the cause
of the widow come unto them. Therefore thus says the Lord, the Lord of hosts,
ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies. So Jer.
7: 6. they were oppressing the stranger* the fatherless and the widow, and
shedding innocent blood: As also Jer. 22: 17 18. And therefore are sore
judgments threatened against their King Iohojakim verse 18, 19. that he should be
buried with the burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of
Jerusalem. We see what was threatened against Israel Amos 2: 6, 7, 8. For this
sin, of selling the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of ^hoes, for
panting after the dust of the earth, on the head of the poor, turning aside the
way of the meek, and laying themselves down upon cloths, laid in pledge, and
drinking the wine of the condemned, in the house of their God. See also Amos 8:
4, 5, 6. where this sin of unrighteousnese and oppression is charged upon them;
and then follows verse 7. The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob,
surely, I will never forget any of their works. 8. shall not the land ^remble
for this, and every one mourn that dwells therein? etc. So Mic. 2: 1, 2. the
like sin is charged upon that people* and then it follows V. 3. Therefore,
thus says the Lord, behold, against this family do I devise an evil, from
which ye shall not remove your necks. And utter desolation is threatened v. 4,
5. And v. 10. It is said Arise ye, and depairt; for this is not your rest etc.
See likewise Chapter 3: 1, 2, 3, 4. and again v. 9, 10, 11, 12. Habbakuk also saw
this sin in Judah Chap. 1: 2, 3, 4. Violence, Iniquity, Grievance, Spoiling,
Strife and Contention, no Judgment, but wrong Judgment: Therefore v. 5, 6. etc.
an incredible work of Judgment was to be wrought, and the Caldeans were to be
sent against them. So was the like threatened by Zephaniah Chapter 1: 3, 7, 9. for
the same sin and 3: v. 3. See Es. 5: 23. to the end.

16. When people will not follow Gods way, and turn at His reproof, but go on
in their sin; and when evil comes upon them, use carnal shifts to save
themselves, and run to the arm of flesh; then it is to be feared, that God's
anger shall breakout and burn without remedy: For this was also the sin of
Judah, they would not turn to God, but trust in Egypt and Assyria, in their
strait Ier. 2: 8, 9, 36, 37. So Es. 8: 6, 7, 8. For as much as this people
r^fuseth the waters of Shiloah that go softly, and rejoice in Rezin and in
Remaliah's Son: Now therefore behold, the Lord brings up upon them the waters
of the river ^rong and many, even the King of Assyria, -- and he shall pass
through Judah, and shall overflow and go over etc. So Hos. 5: 13, v. 14. When
Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah his wound; then went Ephraim to the
Ass^rian -- I will be unto Ephraim as a lion, and as an young Lion to the house
of Judah: I, I will tear and go away, I will take away, and none shall rescue.
And again Chap. 7: 11, 12. Ephraim also is like a silly dove, without heart;
they call to Egypt, they go to Assyria. When they shall go, I will spread my
net upon them; I will bring them down, as the fowls of the heaven: I will
chastise them, as their congregation has heard. And again Chapter 8: 8, 9, 10*
Israel is swallowed-up, now shall they be among the Gentiles, as a vessel
wherein is no pleasure: for they are gone up to Assyria.

17. When people, settling on their lees, grow secure, and carnally confident,
as afraid of nothing, as if they were without the reach of God's hand, and all
hazard; then it is to be feared, that God shall make it appear, that He is
stronger, than they: For this likewise was the sin of Judah Ier. 21: 13, 14.
Behold I am against thee, O Inhabitant of the valley, and rock of the plain,
says the Lord, which say, who shall come down against us? or who shall enter
into our habitations? But I will punish you according to the fruit of your
doings -- and I will kindle a fire, in the forest thereof, and it shall devour
all things round about. This was also charged on Israel by Amos Chap. 6: 13. Ye
which rejoice in a thing of naught, which say, have we not taken to ourselves
horns by our own strength? For which cause see what follows Verse 14. But
behold I will raise up against you a nation, O ouse of Israel, says the Lord
the God of Hosts, and they shall afflict you from the entering in of Hemath,
unto the Ri^er of the Wilderness. The like we find Amos, 9: 10* All the
sinners of my People shall die by the Sword, which say, the evil shall not
overtake, nor prevent us. See Ezekiel. 9: 9, 10.

18. When a People have followed these courses of sin, notwithstanding of many
reiterated warnings and admonitions, given by the Lords Servants; then it is to
be feared, that God shall wait upon them with warnings no longer, but shall
once for all send a devouring stroke, that they shall not with all their cries
get prevented, nor taken off them; according to that Prove. 29: 1. He that being
often reproved hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without remedy. And that Prove. 1: 2^. to 31. Because I have called, and ye
refuse^ etc. I also will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear
comes; when your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a
whirle wind -- Then shall ye call upon me, but I will not answer etc. Thus
was it with this People of Judah, Jer. 7: 13. And now because ye have done all
these works, says the Lord, and I spoke unto you, riseing up early and
speaking, but ye heard not; I called you, but ye answered not. Then it
follows Verse 14, 15. Therefore will I do unto this House -- as I have done to
Shiloh. And I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out of my sight,
all your Brethren, The whole Seed of Ephraim: And then He adds Verse 16.
Therefore pray not thou for this People. The same sin is again charged upon
them Verse 25, 26, 27, 28. And then it follows Verse 29. Cut off thine Hair, o
Jerusalem, and cast it away, and take up a lamentation; for the Lord has
rejected and forsaken the generation of his wrath. So Jer. 25. verse 3. the
Prophet tells them in the fourth Year of Je^ojakim, that he had spoken unto them
23. Year, viz. from the 13. Year of J^siah; but in all vain: and Verse 4. that
the Lord had sent unto them all his servants the Prophets; but all was in vain
Verse 7. Therefore sad judgments are threatened Verse 8, 9, 10, 11. even utter
desolation, and slavery under the King of Babylon full 70 Years Verse 12. See
also Chapter 29: 17, 18, 19. and 35: 17. This was Isreal's sin also Hos. 5: 2, and
6: 5, 6, 7. and 9: 17. My God will cast them away, because they did not hearken
unto Him: And they shall be wanderers among the Nations.

19. When People not only will not take warning; but also tush at warnings;
then may they fear, that God shall be avenged upon them; for thus was it with
this People of Judah, Jer 5: 11, 12, 13. For the House of Israel and the House
of J^dah have dealt very trecherously against me -- They have belied the Lord,
and said, It is not He, neither shall evil come upon us, neither shall we see
sword, nor famine: And the Prophets shall become wind, and the word is not in
them. Therefore is destruction by the Caldeans threatened, in the following
Verses 14, 15, 16, 17. See also Ier. 6: 10, 11, 12. So Jer. 18: v. 12, 13. When
the Lord threatened sad days to come upon them, all the use they made of it,
was They said, there is no hop; but we will walk after our own devices, and we
will every one do the imagination of his evil heart We know what that wicked
King did with the roll of threatenings Ierem. 36. but see what followed
thereupon Verse 30, 31. andanother roll is written with additions Verse 32.

20. When People turn so impudent in their ways, and so fixed in their sinful
courses, that there is no moving of them by all the warnings that can be used;
nay, they become enraged at, and persecute such as do admonish them, or exhort
them to amend; then the case seems to be desperate, and their destruction must
come: for thus was it with Judah 2 Chronicles. 36: 15, 16: They mocked the
Messengers of God, and misused His Prophets, until the Lord arose against his
People, till there was no remedy. And what sufferings Jeremiah met with at
their hands, for his faithfulness, his book tells us Chapters 11, and 26, and
38. So was it with Israel Amos 5: 10. They hate him that rebukes in the gate,
and they abhore him, that speaks uprightly. See also Amos 7: 10. to the end.
Upon which followed Chapter 8: v. 2. the end is come upon my People Israel, I
will not again pass by them any more.

How much more may a People, or a generation, among whom not one, or two, or a
few only of those sins are to be found; but all of them, fear, that such a
stroke be coming, that no prayer or humane intercession shall avert? The Lord
tells us by Ezekiel Chapter 14. that when He breaks the staff of bread, and
sends famine, on a land, because of their trespassing grievously, though
these three Men Noah, Daniel and Job were in it, they should deliver but their
own souls Verse 13, 14. And again if He spoil the land by noisome beasts,
though these three Men were in it, they should deliver neither Sons, nor
Daughters etc. Verse 15, 16. So when He brings a Sword upon the Land v. 17,
18. or a Pestilence v. 19, 20. And then adds v. 21. How much more, when I
send my four sore judgments upon Jerusalem, the Sword and Famine, and the
noisome Beasts, and the Pestil^ce, to cu^t off from it man and beast? that is,
how much more shall I go on and devour? And how much less shall they think to
escape upon the Petitions of Noah, Daniel and Job, or upon the account of their
relations to them. So, if upon one, or two or a few of the forementioned sins,
we find, that God will bring upon a land inevitable judgments, and will not be
stopped, in the execution, by the intercessions of Moses and Samuel; how much
more, may we suppose certainly and unavoidably shall judgment overtake a
generation, that is guilty of all those twenty grievous iniquities?

From this matter all of us may learn these lessons.

1. To fear and tremble before this God; seeing He is so just and seyere a judge
and Governor, and seeing it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God.

2. To beware of abusing His Patience: for howbeit it may endure for sometime;
yet it will expire at length, as to its effects; and abused longanimity will
end in unavoidable ruin, and in inevitable strokes of Justice.

3. All, whether Lands or particular Persons, who know themselves guilty of the
evils mentioned, as causes procuring such inevitable rodes, should have to
break off these courses, that will, no doubt, hasten-on irremediable
destruction: It were best to get out of the way of the wrath of God in time.

If it be enquired, what the People of God are called to do, in such a day,
when the place they live-in, is guilty of and continueing-in these grievous
sins, and they can look for nothing but wrath to be poured-out; so that no
Prayer, Fasting, or Supplication shall hold it off? For Answer, Let such mind
those duties following,

* 1 Let them beware to seek great things for themfelves, Ier. 45. The Lord
said to Baruch by the Prophet Jeremy verse 4, 5. Behold, that which I have
built, will I break down; and that, which I have planted, will I pluck up, even
this whole land: and seeke^ thou great things for thy self? seek them not; for
behold I will bring evil upon all flesh, says the Lord. Whence we see, that it
becomes not the People of God, to be too much minding themselves, and their
own things, in such a day; but they ought to be very well satisfied, if the
Lord give them their life for a prey: as He promised to Baruch.

2. They should stoup, and adore this God, who is just and righteous in all His
ways; they should be silent before Him, and put their mouth in the dust: no
quarrelsome thoughts should have place or room, in their hearts. Hold thy Peace
says Zephaniah Chapter 1: 7.) at the p^esence of the Lord God, for the day of the
Lord is at hand: For the Lord has prepared a Sacrifice, He has bid his guests
etc. When the Lord is about to make a Sacrifice in a land, and to give the
carcases of men to the fowls of the Heavens, and the beasts of the field; all
flesh should be silent, and His People especially should quiet themselves, and
hold their peace before Him, without murmuring, or venting any coffeehouse,
at the matter.

3. They should observe the glory of the Lord, shineing forth, in that
remarkable Act of Holy Justice; see His Majesty, Awfulness, Terror, and just
Severity, to the engaging of their hearts more unto Him, and to a glorying in
Him. The black and dreadful day, that was to come upon Judah, was mentioned,
and several things held forth, to make it have a deeper impression Ier. 9: and
v. 22. it was said, that even the carcases of men shall fall, as dung upon the
open field: And then it is added v. 23. Let not the wise man glory in his
wisdom etc. and Verse 24. But let him that glories, glory in this, that he
understands and knows me, that I am the Lord, which exercise loving
kindness, judgment and righteousness in the earth; for in these things I
delight, says the Lord. To tell us, that in such a day especially, the Lords
People should be taking a right view of God, that they may understand and know
Him to be Jehovah and one that exercises judgment and righteousness in the
earth; and withal one, that even then, exercises loving kindness to His own;
and a God that delights in these exercises; and that they should glory in
Him, even in such a day, and delight in that wherein He delights.

4. They would do well to refuge themselves in time, in their chambers, and
shut their doors about them, and hide themselves for a Little moment, until the
indignation be over past: As it is Esai. 26: 20. This is the Counsel of the
Lord unto His people, in a time, when the Lord comes out of His place, to
punish the inhabitants of the earth, for their iniquity. v. 21.

5. They should rest satisfied, though their prayers, in behalf of the land,
have not that success and fruit, that they could have wished; and that upon
these grounds and considerations.

(1.) Out of that Dispensation, howbeit both black and terrible; yet God will
get glory, both of his Truth and Veracity, in his threatenings, at which the
wicked tushed, and would give no credit to them; which carriage could not but
Afflict His people; it could not but grieve themto see those wicked ones carry
so atheistically, as contemning all the Denounciations of wrath; but now when
the day of execution is come, the Lord is seen to be a God of truth, and His
people see then, whose word stands, whether God's Word, or the word of those
wicked sinners Ier. 44: 28. And of His justice in pursueing evil doers, who
said, by their doings, that He had forsaken the earth, or that He was not a
God, that judges in the earth. So also of His Holiness, and Purity: For then
it is made manifest, that He is not, as they imagined, altogether such an one,
as themselves; but that He hates all the Workers of iniquity.

(2.) God will have a care of them, even then, and be a little sanctuary unto
them Ezekiel. 11: v. 16. and cause all things work together for good to them Romans
8: v. 28. He will set a mark upon such, as sigh and cry for all the
abominations, that are done, that the men with the slaughter weapon may not
come nigh unto them Ezekiel. 9.

(3.) He will return their prayers into their own bosom again; so that they
shall not fall to the ground Psalm 35. verse 15.

(4.) He will accept their prayer and intercession, as good service, off their
Hand even though He think not good to grant the Particular, that they ask: And
if they be accepted of Him, in that piece of service, it may suffice and
satisfy.

6. They would do well to be sighing and crying for all the abominations, that
are committed in the land; to be keeping themselves free of that guilt,
mourning over the same, protesting against it, abhorring the same; that they
may be preserved and protected in the day of God's contending, according to
what we read Ezekiel. 9: 4, 6.

7. In the midst of all these desolations, and the effects of the Lords
indignation, burning against a sinful generation, they are called to act faith,
on God, as the true and faithful God, keeping mercy and covenant for ever, and
to wait upon him, in faith, hoping and expecting with confidence, that He will
carry on His work, and make His Kingdom come, and make all this contribute unto
that end. We see what desolation Zephaniah is threatening against Jerusalem, and
the rest of the Cities of Judah for their great sins Cbap. 3. 1, to 7. And
thereafter Verse 8. he infers and presses on them, that would mind the duty
of the day, a waiting in Faith and Hop upon the Lord, saying, Therefore wait
ye upon me, says the Lord, until the day, that I rise up to the prey, etc. And
then follows Verse. 9, 10. For then will I turn to the people a pure language,
that they may call upon the Name of the Lord, to serve Him with one consent,
from beyond the Rivers of Ethiopia, my suppliants, the Daughter of my
dispersed, shall bring mine offering. They should wait in faith for the
accomplishment of all the great and precious promises made to the Church,
notwithstanding of all these sad interveening Dispensations. This was the
resolution of the Prophet Esai Chap. 8. 17. in an evil day, when many should
stumble, and fall, and be broken, and be snared and taken Verse 15. And I will
(said he) wait upon the Lord, that hides his face from the House of Jacob, and
I will look for him.

But it will be said, what shall the righteous do, in the day, when God is so
angry at the whole Land, that He will cut off the righteous with the wicked,
and to this end shall draw His Sword forth out of His Sheath against all Flesh,
from the South to the North, as it is Ezekiel. 21: 3, 4, 5? For Answer, I grant
such a dispensation may be expected, when all Flesh have corrupted their ways,
and even the righteous, who have not gone the length of others, in Defection
and Apostasy, yet have not been valiant for the Lord, and for His oppressed
truth, nor so faithful and zealous for the Lord of Hosts, in their Generation,
as became them: It is then to be feared, that even many of them shall be
sweeped away with the common calamity, as they have been in part tainted with
the common sin, procuring it. And in that case, it is their part to mind these
duties following.

1. To be preparing to meet the Lord, with ropes about their necks,
acknowledging their sin, giving glory unto the Lord, as just and righteous, in
proceeding thus against them with the rest: They should prepare to meet their
God, thus coming in His holy displeasure, to glorify His justice, as the
Prophet advises Israel to do Amos 4: 12.

2. They should be busy to get their peace made with God in time, through
Jesus Christ, that when God shall get glory on their carcases, in the sight of
others, they may get their souls for a prey: They should be mourning as doves
in the valleys, every one for his iniquity, that their sin may be blotted out,
and their souls washen in the blood of Jesus.

3. They should be amending, through the help of the Lord, what has been
amiss, and seeking to Him, and seeking righteousness, and meekness, upon a may
be of being hid, in the day of the Lords anger, this is the exhortation of
Zephaniah Chap. 2: 3. Even to the Godly, Seek ye the Lord all ye meek of the
earth, which have wrought his judgment, seek righteousness, seek meekness, it
may be ye shall be hid, in the day of the Lords anger.

4. If they should not be hid, but the judgment should overtake them, as well
as others, then let them sweetly submit, and lie under the rod, and humble
themselves under the mighty Hand of God, Iam. 4: 10. 1 Pet. 5: 6. and say, with
good old Eli, when sad things were denounced against his house; and it was told
him, that God would judge his house forever, and that the Lord had sworn unto
the house of Eli, that the iniquity thereof should not be purged with
Sacrifice, nor offering for ever. It is the Lord, let Him do what seems Him
good, 1 Samuel 3. 12, 13, 14, 18. He saw it was Jehovah, who could do no wrong;
and therefore he was quiet, and acquiesced to all, that He would do, how sad so
ever it was: He saw Him the righteous Governor and Judge, and said, His holy
Will be done.

5. They should accept of this punishment of their iniquity Levit. 26: ver. 41.
giving Glory to Gods Justice, and have a complacency (for so the word will
import) in that stroke, as being a stroke of Justice, and a stroke, whereby God
will be glorified in His Justice, Righteousness and holy Severity: Thus should
they kiss the rod, and contentedly welcome the Sword of Justice, and kiss its
point, when pierceing their heart, because of their sins.

6. Thus should they say with good Hezekiah, when sad things were denounced
against his Family, Esai 39: verse 6, 7. Good is the Word of the Lord. Verse 8.
It is Iehovah's Word, I have nothing to say against it; holy and righteous is
He, and his Judgments are righteous, His Threatenings are good: And thus should
they with the Church, Micah 7: verse 9. Bear the Indignation of the Lord,
because they have finned against Him.

AMEN.
A TABLE Of the CONTENTS.
THE Introduction. Page 1. Seven Considerations handled at more length in the
first Part, briefly resumed. Page 2, 3, 4.
Consid. VIII.
It is the decreed will of God. Page 5. How trouble is decreed of God, in Seven
Particulars. 8, to 13. How the Consideration of this calmeth the heart, in Six
cases. 15. to 23. How it helps under affliction, in Eight particulars. 23, to
27. How this Consideration is set home, in Three particulars. 28, to 32.
Consid. IX.
It is the commanding Will of God. 32. That suffering sometimes is the Will of
God, cleared in 8. particulars. 34, to 37. The season, wherein People are
called to suffer, cleared 37, to 39. How we shall know, if we be called to
suffer. 39, to 52. How this Consideration is to be improved in 10. particulars.
52, to 61.
Consid. X.
God overruleth afflictions. 62. God has an hand in Afflictions, cleared from
6. Grounds. 64, to 71. The way hereof, cleared in 14. particulars. 71, to 82.
How this Consideration should be improven in 8. particulars. 83, to 101.
Consid. XI.
Christ himself had a suffering life. 102 Twelve particulars, concerning
Christ' sufferings considerable. 104, to 113. How this is to be improved in 7.
particulars. 114, to 125.
Consid. XII.
Our sufferings not comparable to Christ's. 127. The disproportion cleared in 6.
particulars. 127, to 133. How this is to be improved in 7. particulars. 134, to
138.
Consid. XIII.
Sufferings the lot of the Church. 140 Ten particulars, concerning the
sufferings of the Church, considerable 141, to 146. How this ought to be
improved in reference to the Church. 147, to 152. How in reference to our
selves in 6. particulars. 152, to 154,
Consid. XIV.
Other believers have been afflicted. 145 Six particulars to be considered by
such as are afflicted. 156, to 159. Ten particulars, wherein, possibly, others
have suffered more than we. 159, to 170. How little ground of complaint, if all
were known, cleared in 5. particulars. 170, to 173. How the example of others
should be improved in 8. particulars. 173, to 176.
Consid. XV.
Suffering is Gods Gift. 177. That suffering is Gods Gift. 178, 179. Right
suffering is Gods Gift, cleared in 12. particulars. 180, to 187. This Gift is
purchased by Christ. 187. How this gift is beyond the gift of Faith, cleared in
10. particulars. 188, to 192. Five evils that this Consideration would help.
194, to 198. This Consideration informs us of 3. particulars. 199, 200. And
calls for 4. Duties in general. 200, 201. And for 5. other Duties more
particularly. 202, to 204. How comfortable it is in 7. particulars. 204, to
207.
Consid. XVI.
The Sufferings of Christ's Servants are for the good of the Church. 208. Six
advantages, which the Church reapeth by such Afflictions. 210, to 215. How this
is to be improved in 3. particulars. 216, to 218.
Consid. XVII.
The Lord reigns in Zion. 219. How Christ reigns, cleared in 14.
particulars. 220, to 228. Twelve Conclusions drawn therefrom. 229, to 240.
Consid. XVIII.
The time of Affliction is but short. 241. How the Scriptures express this
shortness in 11. particul. 242, to 248. An Objection answered by 8.
particulars. 246, to 256. How this is to be improved in 7. particulars. 257, to
261.
Consid. XIX.
Remember Peter's Fall. 262. Three things good and imitable in Peter. 264, 265.
Three things wrong, and to be shunned by us. 265, to 268. Twelve useful Lessons
drawn from this Passage. 269, to 279.
Consid. XX.
Gods way of delivering his People is often hid and Mysterious. 280. Various
hidings of God. 280. Various Effects of this hiding. 281. What is the hiding
mentioned Esai 45: v. 15. 282, 283. Ten things considerable in the Prophet's
frame. 284, to 294. Singular steps of Majesty sometimes to be seen in Gods
Deliveries. 296. This cleared in 12. partic. 299, to 316. Four Reasons of the
Lords taking this way, in reference to Himself. 319, to 322. Six Reasons of
this, in reference to Enemies. 324, to 328. Two maine ends of this, in
reference to his own People. 329, to 334. Six particulars, which this
dispensation calls for, at the Hands of Gods People. 335, to 339. Three
things observable from the Prophets seeing God, even then, to be the God of
Israel. 340, etc. First, That Gods dark dispensations alter not His Relations.
340, etc. This improved in 4. partic. 346, to 350. Secondly, God may be seen,
when hiding Himself, and how. 350, to 353. How this should be improved in 4.
particulars. 353, to 355. Thirdly, That when God hides Himself, his People
should assert His relation to them, and expect He will answer His relation,
both cleared in several particulars. 356, to 358. Six duties then to be minded.
359, to 361. Two other particulars in the Text cleared. 361, to 363.
Consid. XXI.
No man can make straight, what God has made crooked. 364. Eight crooked
things, which are more controverted. 368, to 377 Six other things in the Lords
Dispensations, which seem crooked. 377, to 382. Eight particulars about the
Church, which seem crooked to us. 383, to 385. Eight other particulars, about
private believers, that seem crooked. 386, 387. How these cannot be made
straight. 389. When we foolishly seek to make straight what God has made
crooked, in 10. particulars. 392, to 398. Eight aggravations of this evil. 398,
to 401. Eight ways of considering the works of the Lord aright, 403, to 412.
Consid. XXII.
Judgment on a Land sometime is not to be held off by Prayer. 413. The matter
cleared from Ierem. 15: ver. 1. 413, to 416. How sad this is, cleared from 8.
particulars. 417, to 421. When such an inevitable stroke is to be feared,
cleared in 20. partic. 423, to 453. How this should be improved, in several
particulars. 456, etc. What should satisfy the Godly, in this case, when their
prayers are not heard, in 4. particulars. 458 What the Godly should do, when
God is about to cut off the Righteous with the wicked, cleared in 6.
particulars. 462
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 51. lin. 14. wong. r. wrong. p. 54. l. 2. their. r. his. p. 65. l. 21.
maice. r. malice. p. 87. l. 25. art. r. are. p. 97. l. antep. and penult.
orders. p. 117. l. 20. fragrant. p. 118. l. 128. put to the. p. 141. l. ult.
Seventy. p. 197. l. 4. aer. r. are. p. 217. l. 17. becomes. l. 18. become. p.
226. l. 21. treasures. p. 255. l. 11. woman. p. 264. l. 10. this r. his. p.
305. l. 9. Crus r. Cyrus. p. 320. l. penult. there r. there; p. 328. l. 9. them
ore r. the more. p. 358. l. 10. noly r. only. p. 422. l. 25. after People add,
were guilty. p. 429. l. ult. r. served.


