LETTERS FROM Sir WILLIAM BRERETON Sir THOMAS MIDDLETON, Sir JOHN MELDRUM, Of
the great Victory (by Gods providence) given them, in raising the siege from
before Mountgomery-castle. AND, How they routed, and totally dispersed His
MAJESTY'S Forces, under the command of the Lord Byron; where they took all
their Carriages, Arms, and Ammunition, and made them fly to Shrewsbury and
Chester. With a List of the names of all the Commanders and Officers taken and
killed in the said service.

Die Lunae, 23 September. 1644.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That these Letters be forthwith
printed and published.

J. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



LONDON, Printed for John Wright in the Old Bailey, September. 24. 1644.

To the Right Honorable, the LORDS, and others of the Committee of both
Kingdoms, sitting at Darby-house in Westminster.
Right Honorable,
THat God who is most glorified by working by the weakest and unworthiest
instruments, has this day given a most glorious victory, and as much
manifested his power therein, as in any day I have been engaged since the
beginning of these wars.

We have relieved Mountgomery-castle, wherein there was closely besieged, and
much distressed the L. Herbert of Cherbury, Col. Price, and most of Sir Tho.
Middletons Officers, and near 500 Soldiers.

We were so very hard tasked by the multitude of our enemies, (who did much
exceed us in number) as that, if the Commanders and Soldiers had not engaged,
and behaved themselves very gallantly; or if we had wanted any part of our
forces, it might have hazzarded our Army, for it was very dubious and
uncertain which way the Lord would incline the victory: it came to push of
Pike, wherein they were much too hard for us, having many more Pikes Our horse
also at the beginning of the battle were worsted, and retreated; but there
was, I do believe an unanimous resolution both in horse and foot to fight it
out to the last man. Indeed there could be no other hope nor expectation of
safety or escape, there remaining no way of retreat, all passages being
entirely in the enemies power (if masters of the field;) and truly if God had
not infatuated, they might easily have interrupted our passage, and made good
diverse passes against us. But our extremity was Gods opportunity to magnify
his power; for when it was most dubious the Lord so guided and encouraged our
men, that with one fresh valiant charge we routed and put to retreat and flight
their whole Army, pursued them many miles, even in the Mountains, and did
perform great execution upon them; slew (I do believe) 500, wounded many more,
took near 1500 prisoners, and amongst them Colonel Broughton, and Col.
Tilsley, who they report to be General majors; there were also taken Lieutenant
Colonels* Major* and Captains, more then twenty; and all their Carriage^ and
near 20 barrels of Powder, wherein they were furnished the night before the
battle; We took also as was conceived) near 1500. or 2000. Arms, most for
foot. Most of their horse escaped toward Shrewsbury, and Chester.

The enemies Army was reported, (and I do believe it) was no less then 4000.
the Foot being the old Irish who came out of Ireland with Col. Broughton,
Warren, Tyllier, and some of Col. Ellis, and some of Col Sir Michael
Woodhouses, and Sir Michael Ernlys Regiment, from Shrewsbury, Chester, and
Ludlow. Our Army consisted of about 1500 Foot, and 1500 horse. We lost not 40
men slame, and I do believe, there was not 60 wounded. Our greatest loss was
of Sir Will. Fairfax, and Major Fitz-Simons, most gallant men. Sir John Meldrum
did with much judgment order and command these forces, and therefore deserves
a large share in the honor of this days success. But indeed the whole honor
and glory is to be given and ascribed to God the giver of victories, and who is
most deservedly styled the Lord of Hosts.

What remains further to be done in prosecution of this victory shall not be
omitted; and if it please God that Newcastle be delivered, and some Scottish
Forces assigned to assist to the taking in of Chester, I hope through Gods
mercy there may be a good account given of all these parts of the Kingdom. To
effect which, no man shall serve you with more faithfulness then

Your humble servant. WILLIAM BRERETON
Mountgomery, September. 18. 1644. We know not how to dispose of these common
prisoners, unless it would please you to order some of them, that will take
the Covenant to be shipped (if God give us. Leverpoole) and transported over
into Ireland, to serve you there.

We have left Sir Tho. Middleton in a good condition in Mountgomery castle,
and the Gentlemen of the Country begin to come in unto him; Sir John Price is
already come unto him, before I came thence. The L. Herbert is come away with
us toward Oswestry.



For the Right Honorable, the Committee for both Kingdoms, at Darby-house in
Westminster.
My Lords, and Gentlemen,
I Formerly acquainted you of our coming hither and of our proceedings in
these parts; and also of the good success it pleased God to bestow upon us.
Since which time the enemy hastened to come upon us, before we could bring in
provisions for our Garrison; by reason whereof I was enforced to retreat with
my Horse unto Oswestry, with some small loss, enely of struglers that lay
loytering behind, leaving all my Foot in the Castle, and hastened into Cheshire
to procure reliese, and likewise into Lancashire to Sir John Meldrum, from whom
I found a great deal of readiness to relieve us in our distress, and to
preserve what we had gotten from the enemy, being 37 barrels of Powder, and
twelve of Brimstone, both which they exceedingly wanted. Sir John Meldrum, with
Sir William Brereton, and Sir William Fairfax marched with 3000 Horse and Foot
toward Mountgomery, and came thither on the 17 of this instant September,
where we lay that night in the field that was most advantageous for us, which
the enemy had possessed themselves of before, and diserted at our coming
thither, placing themselves upon the mountain above the Castle, a place of
great advantage for them; we resolved not to go to them, but to endeavor the
victualling of the Castle; whereupon we sent out parties for the bringing in of
provisons; which the enemy perceiving, they marched down in a body both Horse
and Foot, being in number about 5000. and came up to our ground, and gave us
battle; wherein, after an hours fight, it pleased God we obtained a glorious
victory, having taken many Officers, 1400 common Soldiers, slain 400, and
taken their Ammunition, with a great part of their Arms, and some few horse,
the rest all flying away; the Lord Byron commanded in chief the enemies
forces, and Sir John Meldrum the Parliaments forces, who behaved himself most
bravely and gallantly; and Sir William Fairfax, who had the command of the
horse did most valiantly set upon their horse, and engaged himself so far
that he was taken prisoner, but presently fetched off by the valor of our men,
but sore wounded; our men issued also out of the Castle, and fell upon the
enemies in their trencher, and took diverse of their Officers, and Soldiers,
which they had left to keep their Works; Sir William Brereton with the
Cheshire foot did most bravely behave themselves that day, and did beat the
best Foot in England, as they the very enemies confess, being all Prince
Ruperts foot, and the chosen foot out of all their Garrisons. I shall make it
still my humble suite, that you will please to afford me some speedy course
for present money, for the payment of my Soldiers, for without that I shall
not be able to keep them together. And for the present I shall take upon me
the boldness to subscribe my self

My Lords, and Gentlemen, your humble servant, THOMAS MIDDLETON.
Mountgomery-castle, September. 19. 1644. Since the writing of this Letter it
has pleased God to take to his mercy Sir W. Fairfax, who is even now dead



For the Right Honorable, the LORDS, and others, of the Committee of safety
for both KINGDOMS.
My Lords,
I Have thought fit to give your Lordships a brief account of some passages of
businesses here in Wales, forbearing a larger relation till I shall have a
further time, and larger subject, which in all probability, by Gods assistance,
may offer it self within a short time. I was by the earnest invitations of Sir
William Brereton, and Sir Thomas Middleton easily persuaded to concur with
them for the relief of Mountgomery-castle, besieged by the Kings forces; I
resolved to contribute my best endeavors in that expedition, as well in regard
of the importance of the service, as that Leverpoole was not to be attempted
suddenly by such forces as I had, (being in number inferior to the forces
within the Town,) whereupon I went along with the Yorkshire, Lancashire,
Cheshire, and Staffordshire forces (amounting to 3000. horse and foot,) and
marched to Mountgomery-castle in Wales, which was by a great deal of industry
and resolution, taken in by Sir Thomas Middleton, together with a great deal
of powder, match and brimstone, which (coming from Bristoll) was prepared for
the relief of Shrewsbury, Chester, and Leverpoole: upon our approach toward
the Castle, the Enemy did withdraw themselves in some disorder, the next day
after being the 18. of September, they did take the advantage of the weakness
of our Quarters, the third part of our Horse being employed abroad for
victuals and forage; their Horse and Foot came on, with great courage,
resolving to break through our Forces, and to make themselves Masters of a
Bridge we had gained, the night before: which would have cut off the passage of
our retreat: It pleased God to dispose so of the issue of the business, that
(by the resolution of the Officers, and Soldiers, of Horse and Foot) the Enemy
did loose the advantage they had in the beginning, and were shamefully routed,
by the pursuit of the victory, which continued for the space of three miles:
there are found dead upon the place five hundred, besides many Officers of
quallity killed and wounded, and twelve hundred Prisoners: Sir William Fairfax,
and Major Fitsimons (who carried themselves most bravly) are deadly wounded,
without great hope of recovery, with some other Captains and Officers of our
Horse (...) the Cheshire Foot with their Officers, carried themselves more like
Lions, then men, especially Major Lowthian who commanded as Major General: The
Castle is releeved with victuals, Sir Thomas Middletons Soldiers who were
before as Prisoners, are made free, together with the Lord Herbert of
Cherberie: amongst the Prisoners Major General Tilliseley, Colonel Broughton,
and diverse Lievtenant-Colonells and Majors, with many Captains and Lievtenants,
so that by the blow given here, the best of their Foot are taken away,
Shrewsburie, Chester, and Leverpoole, unfurnished with Ammunition; and North
Wales (which formerly has been the nurserie for the Kings Armies) in all
likelihood, will shake of that yoke of servitude which formerly did lie upon
their necks, and will be reduced to the obedience of King and Parliament, by the
example of Montgomery Castle, which is one of the goodliest and strongest
places that ever I looked upon. The personal carriage and endeavors of Sir
William Brereton and Sir Thomas Middleton has been exceeding great in the
advancement of this service. There is good hope that Leverpoole by famine will be
soon rendered, and that Shrewsbury, and Chester will be at the last gasp,
whereof by Gods assistance there shall be a short trial made. So having no
further for the present to impart to your Lordships, I shall cherish all
occasions wherein I may approve my self

Your Lordships most humble Servant, John Meldrum.
Montgomerie Castle September. 19. 1644. My Lords,
THe intelligence I have had since the closing of my Letter, of a body of
Horse, and Colonel Hunks Regiment of Foot that are marched to Shrewsbury, and
that the Lords Biron and Mullinax are gone back to Chester, I have altered my
resolution touching Shrewsbury, which at the best had no other inducement, but
the hope of a Party within the Town, and the scarcity of Soldiers there. I
am

Your Lordships most humble Servant, John Meldrum.



A List of the Prisoners taken and slain at the Battle near Mountgomery,
upon the eighteenth of September. 1644.
Col. Broghten Sir Th. Tilsley Col. Lievt. Col. Bladwell Major Williams Capt.
Boulton Capt. Edgerton Capt. Bellamy Capt. Floyd Capt. Dolebin Capt. Congrave
Capt. Bowman Capt. Right Capt. Morgan Lievt. Scidney Lievt. Rows Lievt.
Griffith Lievt. Morgan Lievt. Thurland Lievt. Wilson Lievt. Floyd Lievt. Lewis
Lievt. Bowen Lievt. Brickam Lievt. Hager Lievt. Minchle Lievt. Floyd Lievt.
Olliver Lievt. Cavanogh Lievt. Perkins Lievt. Aldeisay Quart. Mr. Snelling
Cornet Persons Cornet Hachkisson Cornet Stagge Ensign Wallis Ensign Williams
Ens. Dutten Ens. Lampley Ens. Parr Ens. Edwards Ens. Clackstone Ens. Harrison
Ens. Contry Ens. Hest Ens. Lagden Ens. Jones Ens. Barker Ens. Price Ens.
Roberts Ens. Richardson Ens. Prichard Ens. Winn Ens. Johnson Ens. Roe Ens.
Right Ens. Erwin
Sergeants.
Simeon Day Francis West Richard Watson Francis Gough Jo. Morgan Jo. Sprigman
Will. Hughs Jo. Davies Tho. Ward Ja. Newin Edward Badcocke Richard Etty Morris
Jones Rand. Griffith Ralph Smith Will. Jackson Ralph Herley Jam. Jefferies
Rich. Morgan Griffith Loyd Samuel Day Will. Williams Jo. Davies Peter Lee Will.
Manning Ed. Philips Jo. Hin Ralph Aston Roger Stanton Griffith Davis John Smith
John Paster Will. Pasley Thomas Colflow Rob. Stanford Isaac Guy Tho. Latham John
Brown John Knowles Robert Barber Sam. Rode Rob. Teade Roger Pyer Nath. Dale
Will. Compton Ralph Williams Rob. Baccott John Hunston Rob. Jones Cornelius
Sedgel Edward Jones Edw. Sulbourne
Corporalls.
George Gro^yer Henry Care Tho. Hall Tho. Cheadle John Hughs Andrew Clift John
Hussy Evan Price Henry Barrow Roger Houlton Law. Ward Henry Harway Rice Lewis
Griffith Jones Edward Wills Evan ap Humphrey Andrew Powell John Eleney Rob.
Price Robert Petts Tho. Tailor James Moore John Wolf John Deley Rich. Barken
Edw. Hayden Tho. Mullenex Griffith Thomas John Green Antho. Carr Gilbert Sorby
Ri^h Key John Hughs John Jude Will. Madders Tho. Lee Joseph Barford John Dillen
Rich. Salmon Tho. Crook Tho. Albott John Williams Peter Lloyd Christopher
Plunkit Hen. Neneley John Chilton John Simpson Roger Morris John Frank
Humphrey Bowlet John Thomas John Sarley Patricke Role William Gilbert Rich.
Walten Antho. Cornet Rich. Leadbeater
Drummers.
Will. Grynes Will. Guy John. Collyer John Perrey Tho. Heyes Robert Trehan
Edward Wamsley James Lawstropp Tho. Deckes Rich. Moore Tho. Hyde.
FINIS.

