BAPTISM AND THE Lord's Supper. Substantially Asserted. BEING AN APOLOGY In
Behalf of the People called QUAKERS, Concerning those Two Heads.

By ROBERT BARCLAY.

LONDON, Printed, and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street.
1696.

TO THE READER
Friendly Reader,
HAving often observed, upon serious Discourse with diverse Persons, concerning
our Principles, their having received general satisfaction, excepting in these
Two Heads, viz. Baptism and the Lord's Supper, and not knowing but that thou
may be at a stand concerning the same, I do here present thee for thy further
information and satisfaction these following Sheets, written and published
several Years ago, upon the same Subjects, by my Father Robert Barclay, in his
Apology Dedicated to King Charles the Second.

The second and more particular reason of their being thus published by
themselves, is, that being Bound up in a pretty large Book, they may not be of
such general Service, in regard that some dissatisfied only concerning these
Two Points, may not much care to Buy the whole.

Being fully satisfied his aim in Penning them, was for thy satisfaction, I
shall commend them no otherways, than by recommending them to thy serious
perusal, not doubting if they be by thee received in the same Spirit of Love,
they were for thy sake designed, they may prove advantageous.

I do likewise advise thee seriously to consider, what woeful consequence have
been procured in the Titular Christian World, since the first Apostasy after
the Apostles Days, about these things, and the setting up of Forms and
Ceremonies in the Church in Matters purely Religious, and relying thereupon, as
there are too many in these Days do, who by grasping at the shadow do lose the
substance. I pray God open the Eyes, and enlighten the Understandings of such,
that seeing the emptiness and insufficiency, as well as folly thereof, they may
with their whole Hearts and Souls lay hold upon him who is able to save, and
that to the uttermost.

I would have none offended that I call those Ceremomonies, which they may
think Essential Duties, without their being first assured they are such.

Although I refer thee to the following Sheets for thy more particular
Information, yet it may not seem impertinent to put thee in mind of that saying
of John the Baptist concerning himself, I indeed baptize you with Water unto
Repentance, but he that comes after me, is mightier than I, he shall baptize
you with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire, Mat. 3. 11. also HE must Increase but I
must Decrease, John 3. 30. likewise that of Paul to the Ephesians, where he
notably argues, as there is but one Lord, one Faith, so there is but one
Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 5. which the Apostle Peter positively asserts is not the
washing away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience
toward God, 1 Pet. 3. 21. These I leave without Commentary, to thy impartial
perusal.

It were greatly to be wished for, that we who covet to be called by that
Honorable Name of Christian, were more inward, less in show, more in
Substance, that our Christianity were more in our Hearts, and less in our
Heads; then would our Religion be pure and undefiled, carrying along with it
that Characteristick mark, of visiting the Widow and the Fatherless, and
keeping our selves unspotted from the World; this is the Description the
Apostle James in his Day gave of True Religion, James 1. 27. this is likewise
the Path the True Christian ought now to walk in, it being only as we here
abide, that we can stand approved, in the sight of our Great Creator, in which,
Reader, as thou art found a Walker, with a single Heart and Eye unto God, thou will know an eating of the Flesh, and drinking of the Blood of the Son of God,
by which thou vvilt know Life, unto thy Soul, according to that saying of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Except ye eat the Flesh, and drink the Blood of
the Son of Man, there is no Life in you; for says he, my Flesh is Meat indeed,
and my Blood is Drink indeed, John 6. 53. 55. This Food is Inward, it is
Spiritual, to the Nourishment of the inner Man, not perceptible to the outvvard
Notions of Carnalminded Men; this is the true Supper of which the Saints do
feed, whereby they are refreshed, to the comforting of their Immortal Souls,
being the same which the Saints in all Ages were partakers of: Which that
thou may come to know, and be made partaker of, by Waiting for, and being
Obedient unto the Appearance of his Grace, Light, Spirit, or Word of Life in
thy own Soul, (that being the only Way) is the Desire of thy Sincere Friend,

Robert Barclay.
London, the 12th. of the 8th. Month, 1695.
CONCERNING BAPTISM.
As there is one Lord, and one Faith, so there is one Baptism; which is not the
putting away the filth of the flesh, but the Answer of a good Conscience before
God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. And this Baptism is a Pure and
Spiritual thing, to wit, the Baptism of the Spirit and Fire, by which we are
Ephesians. 4. 5. 1 Pet. 3. 21. Romans 6. 4. Gal. 3. 27. Col. 2. 12. John 3. 30. 1 Cor.
1. 17.
buried with him; that being washed and purged from our Sins, we may walk in
newness of Life: Of which the Baptism of John was a Figure, which was Commanded
for a time, and not to continue for ever. As to the Baptism of Infants, it is a
mere Humane Tradition, for which neither Precept nor Practice is to be found in
all the Scripture.

WHen God in Condescension to his From whence Idolatries and
Heathen-Superstitions did spring.
chosen people, the Jews, did prescribe to them by his Servant Moses many
Ceremonies and Observations, as Types and Shadows of the Substance, which in
due time was to be Revealed; which consisted for the most part in Washings,
outward Purifications and Cleansings, which were to continue, until the Time of
the Reformation, until the Spiritual Worship should be set up, and that God by
the more powerful pouring forth of his Spirit, and guiding of that Anointing,
should lead his Children into all Truth, and teach them to Worship him in a way
more Spiritual and acceptable to him, though less agreeable to the Carnal and
Outward Senses. Yet notwithstanding God's Condescension to the Jews in such
things, we see, that that part in man, which delights to follow its own
Inventions, could not be restrained, nor yet satisfied with all these
Observations; but that oftentimes they would be either declining to the other
Superstitions of the Gentiles, or adding some New Observations and Ceremonies
of their own: To which they were so devoted, that they were still apt to prefer
them before the Command of God, and that under the Notion of Zeal and Piety.
This we see abundantly in the Example of the Pharisees, The Pharisees the
Chiefest Sect among the Jews.
the Chiefest Sect among the Jews, whom Christ so frequently reproves for
making void the Commandments of God by their Traditions, Matthew. 15. 6, 9, etc.
This Complaint may at this day be no less justly made, as to many bearing the
Name of Christians, who have introduced many things of this kind, partly
borrowed from Many things in Christendom are borrowed from the Jews and
Gentiles.
the Jews, which they more tenaciously stick to, and more earnestly contend
for, than for the weightier Points of Christianity; because that Self yet alive
and ruling in them, loves their own Inventions better, than God's Commands. But
if they can by any means stretch any Scripturepractice, or Conditional precept
or permission, fitted to the Weakness or Capacity of some, or appropriate to
some particular Dispensation, to give some Color for any of these their
Inventions, they do then so tenaciously stick to them, and so obstinately and
obstreperously plead for them, that they will not patiently hear the most-solid
Christian Reasons against them. Which Zeal, if they would but seriously Examine
it, they would find to be but the prejudice of Education, and the Love of Self,
more than of God, or his Pure Worship. This is verified concerning those
things, which are called Sacraments; about which they Of Sacraments so many
Controversies.
are very ignorant in Religious Controversies, who understand not, how much
Debate, Contention, Jangling and Quarrelling there has been among those called
Christians: So that I may safely say, the Controversy about them, to wit,
about their Number, Nature, Virtue, Efficacy, Administration and other things,
has been more than about any other Doctrine of Christ, whether as betwixt
Papists and Protestants, or among Protestants betwixt themselves. And how great
prejudice these Controversies have brought to Christians, is very obvious;
whereas the things contended for among them, are for the most part but Empty
Shadows, and mere Outside things: as I hope hereafter to make appear to the
patient and unprejudicate Reader.

II. That which comes first under Observation, is the Name [Sacrament] which
The Name of Sacrament (not found in Scripture) is borrowed from the Heathens.
is strange, that Christians should stick to, and Contend so much for, since it
is not to be found in all the Scripture; but was borrowed from the Military
Oaths among the Heathens, from whom the Christians, when they began to
Apostatize, did borrow many superstitious Terms and Observations, that they
might thereby Ingratiate themselves, and the more easily gain the Heathens to
their Religion: which practice, though perhaps intended by them for good, yet,
as being the fruit of Humane Policy, and not according to God's Wisdom, has had
very pernicious Consequences. I see not, how any, whether Papists or
Protestants, especially the latter, can in reason quarrel with us for denying
this Term, which it seems the Spirit of God saw not meet to inspire the Penmen
of the Scriptures to leave unto us.

it is not the Name, but the Thing, they contend for:

Answer: Let the Name then, as not being Scriptural, be laid aside, and we
shall see at first Entrance, how much Benefit will redound by laying aside this
Traditional Term, and betaking us to plainness of Scripture Language. For
presently the great Contest about the Number of them will evanish; seeing there
is no Term used in Scripture, that can be made use of, whether we call them
Institutions, Ordinances, Precepts, Commandments, Appointments or Laws, etc.
that would afford ground for such a Debate; since neither Papists will affirm,
that there are only Seven, or Protestants only Two, of any of these
forementioned.

Controversy arises from the Definition of the Thing, as well as from the Name;

way we take their Definition of a Sacrament, The Definition of Sacraments
agrees to many other things.
whether as an outward, visible Sign, whereby inward Grace is conferred, or
only signified: This Definition will agree to many things, which neither
Papists nor Protestants will acknowledge to be Sacraments. If they be expressed
under the Name of Sealing Ordinances, as some do, I could never see, neither by
Reason nor Scripture, how this Title could be appropriate to them, more than to
any other Christian, Religious Performance: for that must needs properly be a
Sealing Ordinance, What Sealing Ordinance does mean?
which makes the Persons receiving it infallibly certain, of the Promise, or
Thing sealed to them.

It is so to them, that are faithful.

Answer: So is Praying and Preaching, and doing of every good Work: Seeing the
Partaking or Performing of the one gives not to any a more certain Title to
Heaven, yea (in some respect) not so much; there is no Reason to call them so,
more than the other.

Besides, we find not any thing called the Seal and Pledge of our Inheritance,
but the Spirit of God; it is by that we are said to be sealed, Ephesians. 1. 14. and
4. 30. which is also termed the Earnest of our Inheritance, 2 Cor. 1. 22. and
not by outward Water, or Eating and Drinking; which as the Wickedest of Men may
partake of, so many that do, do notwitstanding it, go to Perdition. For it is
not outward Washing That outward Washing does not cleanse the Heart.
with Water, that makes the Heart clean, by which Men are fitted for Heaven:
And as that which goes into the mouth, does not defile a Man, because it is
put forth again, and so goes to the Dunghill; neither does any thing which
Man eats, purify him, or fit him for Heaven. What is said here in general,
may serve for an Introduction, not only to this Proposition, but also to the
other concerning the Supper. Of these Sacraments (so called) Baptism is always
first numbered, which is the Subject of the present Proposition; in whose
Explanation I shall first demonstrate and prove Our Judgment; and then Answer
the Objections, and Refute the Sentiments of our Opposers. first part, these
things following, which are briefly comprehended in the Proposition, come to be
proposed and proved.

First: That there is but One Baptism, as well as but One Lord, One Faith, etc.

Secondly, That this one Baptism, which is the Baptism of Christ, is not a
washing with, or dipping in Water, but a being baptized by the Spirit.

Thirdly: That the Baptism of John was but a Figure of this, and therefore, as
the Figure, to give place to the Substance; which though it be to continue, yet
the other is ceased.

first, viz. That there is but one Baptism, there needs no other Proof, than
the Words of the Text, Ephesians. 4. 5. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; where One
Baptism proved.
the Apostle positively and plainly affirms, that as there is but One Body, One
Spirit, One Faith, One God, etc. so there is but One Baptism.

Explanation upon the Text, That the Baptism of Water and of the Spirit make up
this One Baptism by virtue of this Sacramental Union.

Answer; This Exposition has taken place, not because grounded upon the
Testimony of the Scripture, but because it wrests the Scripture, to make it
suit to their Principle of Water Baptism: and so Whether Two Baptisms do make
up the One?
there needs no other Reply, but to deny it, as being repugnant to the plain
words of the Text, which says not, That there are Two Baptisms, to wit, one of
Water, the other of the Spirit, which do make up the One Baptism; but plainly,
that there is One Baptism, as there is One Faith and One God. Now there goes
not Two Faiths, nor Two Gods, nor Two Spirits, nor Two Bodies, whereof the one
is Outward and Elementary, and the other Spiritual and Pure, to the making up
of the One Faith, the One God, the One Body, and the One Spirit; so neither
ought there to go Two Baptisms to make up the One Baptism.

Secondly: If it be said, The Baptism is but One, whereof Water is the one
part, to wit, the Sign; and the Spirit, the thing signified, the other.

Answer: This yet more confirms our Doctrine: For if Water be only the Sign,
it is not the Matter of the One Baptism If Water be the Type, the Substance
must remain.
(as shall further hereafter by its Definition in Scripture appear and we are
to take the One Baptism for the Matter of it, not for the Sign, or Figure and
Type that went before. Even as where Christ is called the One Offering in
Scripture, though he was Typified by many Sacrifices and Offerings under the
Law, we understand only by the One Offering his Offering himself upon the
Cross: whereof though those many Offerings were Signs and Types; yet we say
not, that they go together with that Offering of Christ, to make up the One
Offering: So neither though Water Baptism was a Sign of Christ's Baptism, will
it follow, that it goes now to make up the Baptism of Christ. If any should be
so Absurd, as to affirm, That this One Baptism here, were the Baptism of Water,
and not of the Spirit: That were foolishly to contradict the positive Testimony
of the Scripture, which says the contrary; as by what follows will more
amply appear.

Secondly: That this One Baptism, which is the Baptism of Christ, is not a
Washing with Water, appears first, from the Testimony of John, the proper and
peculiar Administrator of Water Baptism, Matt. 3. 11. I indeed baptize you with
Water unto Repentance; but he that comes after me, is mightier than I, whose
shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and
with Fire. Here John mentions two They that had John's Baptism, had not
therefore Christ's.
manners of Baptisings, and two different Baptisms, the one with Water, and the
other with the Spirit; the one whereof he was the Minister of, the other
whereof Christ was the Minister of: and such as were baptized with the first,
were not therefore baptized with the second: I indeed baptize you, but he shall
baptize you. Though in the present time they were baptized with the Baptism of
Water; yet they were not as yet, but were to be baptized with the Baptism of
Christ. From all which I thus Argue,

If those that were baptized with the Baptism of Water, were not therefore
baptized with the Baptism of Christ; then the Baptism of Water is not the
Baptism of Christ.

But the first is true:

Therefore also the last.

And again,

If he, that truly and really administered the Baptism of Water, did
notwithstanding declare, That he neither could, nor did baptize with the
Baptism of Christ; Then the Baptism of Water is not the Baptism of Christ.

But the first is true:

Therefore, etc.

And indeed to understand it otherwise, would make John's Words void of good
sense: For if their Baptisms had been all one, why should he have so precisely
Contradistinguished them? Why should he have said, that those whom he had
already baptized, should yet be baptized by another Baptism?

Baptism with Water was the one part, and that with the Spirit the other part,
or Effect only of the former.

Answer: This Exposition contradicts the plain words of the Text. For he says
One Baptism is no Part nor Effect of the other.
not, I baptize you with Water; and he, that comes after, shall produce the
Effects of this my Baptism in you by the Spirit, etc. or he shall accomplish
this Baptism in you; but he shall Baptize you. So then, if we understand the
Word truly and properly, when he says, I Baptize you, as consenting, that
thereby is really signified, that he did baptize with the Baptism of Water; we
must needs, unless we offer Violence to the Text, understand the other part of
the sentence the same way; that where he adds presently, But he shall baptize
you, etc. that he understood it of their being truly to be baptized with
another Baptism, than what he did baptize with: Else it had been Nonsense for
him thus to have Contradistinguished them.

Secondly: This is further confirmed by the Saying of Christ himself, Acts 1.
4, 5. Who were baptized by John, were still to wait for Christ's Baptism with
the Spirit.
But wait for the promise of the Father, which (says he) ye have heard of me:
For John truly baptized with Water, but ye shall be baptized with th Holy Ghost
not many days hence. There can scarce Two places of Scripture run more
parallel, than this does with the former a little before mentioned, and
therefore concludes the same way, as did the other. For Christ there grants
fully, that John completed his Baptism, as to the matter and substance of it:
John says he, truly baptized with Water; which is as much as if he had said,
John did truly and fully Administer the Baptism of Water; But ye shall be
Baptized with, etc. This shows, that they were to be Baptized with some other
Baptism, than the Baptism of Water; and that, although they were formerly
Baptized with the Baptism of Water, yet not with that of Christ, which they
were to be Baptized with.

Thirdly; Peter observes the same distinction, Acts 11. 16. Then remembered I
the word of the Lord, how that he said, John indeed The Baptism with the Holy
Ghost, and that with Water, differ.
Baptized with Water; but ye shall be Baptized with the Holy Ghost. The Apostle
makes this Application upon the Holy Ghost's falling upon them; whence he
infers, that they were then Baptized with the Baptism of the Spirit: As to what
is urged from his Calling afterward for Water, to it shall be hereafter
spoken. From all which Three Sentences relative one to another, First of John,
Secondly of Christ, and Thirdly of Peter, it does evidently follow, that such
as were truly and really Baptized with the Baptism of Water, were
notwithstanding not Baptized with the Baptism of the Spirit; which is that of
Christ: and such as truly and really did administer the Baptism of Water, did
in so doing, not administer the Baptism of Christ. So that, if there be now but
One Baptism, as we have already proved, we may safely conclude, that it is that
of the Spirit, and not of Water; else it would follow, that the One Baptism,
which now continues, were the Baptism of Water, i. e. John's Baptism, and not
the Baptism of the Spirit, i. e. Christ's, which were most Absurd.

though the Baptism of John, before Christ's was administered, was different
from it, as being the Figure only; yet now that both it as the Figure, and that
of the Spirit as the Substance, is necessary to make up the One Baptism.

both of them belong to the Essence of Baptism; so that Baptism is not to be
accounted as truly Administered, where both are not: which none of our
Adversaries will acknowledge; but on the Water Baptism is not the true Baptism
of Christ.
contrary account not only all those truly Baptized with the Baptism of Christ,
who are Baptized with Water, though they be uncertain whether they be Baptized
with the Spirit, or not; but they even account such truly Baptized with the
Baptism of Christ, because Sprinkled, or Baptized with Water, though it be
manifest and most certain, that they are not Baptized with the Spirit, as being
Enemies thereunto in their Hearts by wicked Works. So here, by their own
Confession, Baptism with Water is without the Spirit: Wherefore we may far
safer conclude, that the Baptism of the Spirit, which is that of Christ, is and
may be without that of Water; as appears in that Acts 11. where Peter testifies
of these Men, that they were Baptized with the Spirit, though not then Baptized
with Water. And indeed, the Controversy in this, as in most other things,
stands betwixt us and our Opposers, in that they not only oftentimes prefer the
Form and Shadow to the Power and Substance, by denominating persons, as
Inheritors and Possessors of the thing, from their having the Form and Shadow,
though really wanting the Power and Substance; and not admitting those to be so
denominated, who have the Power and Substance, if they want the Form and
Shadow. This appears evidently, in that they account those truly Baptized with
the One Baptism of Christ, who are not baptized with the Spirit (which in
Scripture is particularly called the Baptism of Christ) if they be only
baptized with Water; which themselves yet Confess to be but the Shadow, or
Figure. And moreover, in that The Baptism of the Spirit needs no Sprinkling
or Dipping in Water.
they account not those, who are surely baptized with the Baptism of the
Spirit, baptized, neither will they have them so denominate, unless they be
also Sprinkled with, or Dipped in Water: But we on the Contrary, do always
prefer the Power to the Form, the Substance to the Shadow; and where the
Substance and Power is, we doubt not to denominate the Person accordingly,
though the Form be wanting. And therefore we always seek first and plead for
the Substance and Power, as knowing that to be indispensibly necessary; though
the Form sometimes may be dispensed with, and the Figure or Type may cease,
when the Substance and Antitype comes to be enjoyed; as it does in this Case,
which shall hereafter be made appear.

Fourthly: That the One Baptism of Christ is not a Washing with Water, appears
from 1 Pet. 3. 21. The like Figure, The plainest Definition of the Baptism of
Christ in all the Bible.
whereunto even Baptism does also now save us, (not the putting away of the
filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience toward God) by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ. So plain a definition of Baptism is not in all
the Bible: and therefore, seeing it is so Plain, it may well be preferred to
all the coined definitions of the Schoolmen. The Apostle tells us first,
Negatively, what it is not, viz. Not a putting away of the filth of the Flesh;
then surely it is not a Washing with Water, since that is so. Secondly, He
tells us Affirmatively, what it is: viz. The Answer of a good Conscience
toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ: where he Affirmatively
Defines it to be the Answer (or Confession, as the Syriack Version has it) of
a good Conscience. Now, this Answer cannot be, but where the Spirit of God has
purified the Soul, and the Fire of his Judgment has burned up the unrighteous
nature; and those, in whom this Work is wrought, may be truly said to be
baptized with the Baptism of Christ, i. e. of the Spirit and of Fire. Whatever
way then we take this Definition of the Apostle of Christ's Baptism, it
confirms our sentence: For if we take the first or Negative part, viz. That
it is Water Baptism shut out from the Baptism of Christ.
not a putting away of the filth of the Flesh; then it will follow, that
Water Baptism is not it, because that is a putting away of the filth of the
Flesh. If we take the second and Affirmative Definition, to wit, That it is the
Answer, or Confession of a good Conscience, etc. then Water Baptism is not it;
since, as our Adversaries will not deny, Water Baptism does not always imply
it, neither is it any necessary Consequence thereof. Moreover, the Apostle in
this place does seem especially to guard against those, that might esteem
Water Baptism the true Baptism of Christ; because (lest by the Comparison
induced by him in the preceding verse, betwixt the Souls that were saved in
Noah's Ark, and us, that are now saved by Baptism; lest, I say, any should have
thence hastily concluded, that because the former were saved by Water, this
place must needs be taken to speak of Water Baptism) to prevent such a mistake,
he plainly affirms, that it is not that, but another thing. He says not, that
it is the Water, or the putting away of the filth of the Flesh, as accompanied
with the Answer of a good Conscience, whereof the one, viz. the Water, is the
Sacramental Element administered by the Minister; and the other, the Grace or
thing signified, Conferred by Christ; but plainly, That it is not the putting
away, etc. than which there can be nothing more manifest to Men unprejudicate
and judicious. Moreover, Peter calls this here, which saves, the Antitypos, the
Antitype, or the thing figured, whereas it is usually translated, as if the
like Figure did now save us; thereby insinuating, that as they were Saved by
Water in the Ark, so are we now by Water Baptism. But this Interpretation
crosses his sense, he presently after declaring the Contrary, as has above
been observed: and likewise it would Contradict the Opinion of all our
Opposers. For Protestants The Protestants deny Water Baptism its absolute
necessity to men's Salvation: Although the Papists say, none can be saved without
it, yet grant Exceptions.
deny it to be absolutely necessary to Salvation: And though Papists say, None
are saved without it; yet in this they admit an Exception, as of Martyrs, etc.
and they will not say, that all that have it, are Saved by Water Baptism: which
they ought to say, if they will understand by Baptism (by which the Apostle
says, we are Saved) Water Baptism, for seeing we are saved by this Baptism, as
those that were in the Ark, were Saved by Water, and that all those, that were
in the Ark, were Saved by Water; it would then follow, that all those, that
have this Baptism, are Saved by it. Now this Consequence would be false, if it
were understood of VVater-baptism; because many, by the Confession of all, are
baptized with Water, that are not saved: but this Consequence holds most true,
if it be understood, as we do, of the Baptism of the Spirit; since none can
have this Answer of a good Conscience, and abiding in it, not be Saved by it.

as it has been proved by the Definition of the One The Effects and Fruits of
the Baptism of Christ.
Baptism, so it is also manifest from the Necessary Fruits and Effects of it,
which are three-times particularly expressed by the Apostle Paul: As first,
Romans 6. 3, 4. where he says, That so many of them, as were baptized into Jesus
Christ, were baptized into his Death; buried with him by Baptism into Death,
that they should walk in Newness of Life: Secondly, to the Gal. 3. 27. he says
positively, For as many of you, as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ: and Thirdly, to the Col. 2. 12. he faith, That they were Buried with
him in Baptism, and Risen with him through the Faith of the operation of God.
It is to be observed here, that the Apostle speaks generally, without any
Exclusive Term, but Comprehensive of all: he says not, Some of you, that were
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ; but As many of you: which is as much,
as if he had said, Every one of you, that has been baptized into Christ, has
put on Christ. Whereby it is evident, that Which Effects Water Baptism wants.
this is not meant of VVater-baptism, but of the Baptism of the Spirit; because
else it would follow, that, whosoever had been baptized with VVater-baptism,
had put on Christ, and were Risen with him; which all acknowledge to be most
Absurd. Now supposing, all the Visible Members of the Churches of Rome, Galatia
and Coloss had been outwardly baptized with Water, (I do not say, they were;
but our Adversaries will not only readily grant it, but also contend for it)
suppose (I say) the Case so, they will not say, they had all put on Christ;
since diverse Expressions in these Epistles to them, show the contrary. So that
the Apostle cannot mean Baptism with Water; and yet that he means the Baptism
of Christ, i. e. of the Spirit, cannot be denied; or that the Baptism,
wherewith these were baptized (of whom the Apostle here testifies, that they
had put on Christ) was the One Baptism, I think none will call in question. Now
admit, as our Adversaries Contend, that many in these Churches, who had been
baptized with Water, had not put on Christ; it will follow, that
notwithstanding that Waterbaptism, they were not baptized into Christ, or with
the Baptism of Christ; seeing as many of them, as were baptized into Christ,
had put on Christ, etc. From all which I thus Argue;

If the Baptism with Water were the One Baptism, i. e. the Baptism of Christ,
as many as were baptized with Water, would have put on Christ.

But the last is false;

Therefore also the first.

And again;

Since as many, as are baptized into Christ, i. e. with the One Baptism, which
is the Baptism of Christ, have put on Christ; Then Water Baptism is not the One
Baptism, viz. the Baptism of Christ.

But the first is true:

Therefore also the last.

Thirdly: Since John's Baptism was a Figure, and seeing, the Figure gives way
to the Substance, albeit the thing figured remain, Proved.
to wit, the One Baptism of Christ, yet the other cease, which was the
Baptism of John.

John's Baptism was a Figure of John's Baptism was of Christ's a Figure.
Christ's Baptism, I judge will not readily be denied; but in Case it should,
it can easily be proved from the Nature of it. John's Baptism was a being
baptized with Water; but Christ's is a baptizing with the Spirit: Therefore
John's Baptism must have been a Figure of Christ's. But further, that
Water Baptism was John's Baptism, will not be denied; That Water Baptism is not
Christ's Baptism, is already proved. From which does arise the Confirmation of
our Proposition, thus;

There is no Baptism to continue now, but the One Baptism of Christ.

Therefore Water Baptism is not to continue now; because it is not the Baptism
of Christ.

That John's Baptism is Ceased, many of II. John's Baptism is Ceased, our
Opposers confess.
our Adversaries confess: but, if any should allege it otherwise, it may be
easily proved by the express words of John, not only as being insinuated there,
where he Contradistinguished his Baptism from that of Christ; but particularly
where he says John 3. 30. He [Christ] must Increase, but I [John] must
Decrease. From whence it clearly follows, that the Increasing or taking place
of Christ's Baptism is the Decreasing or abolishing of John's Baptism: so that,
if Water Baptism was a particular part of John's Ministry, and is no part of
Christ's Baptism, as we have already proved, it will necessarily follow, that
it is not to Continue.

If Water Baptism had been to continue a Perpetual Ordinance of Christ in his
Church, he would either have practiced it himself, or Commanded his Apostles so
to do.

But that he practiced it not, the Scripture plainly affirms, John 4. 2. And
that he Commanded his Disciples to baptize with Water, I could never yet read.
[As for what is alleged, that Mat. 28. 19, etc. (where he bids them baptize)
is to be understood of Water Baptism, that is but to beg the Question, and the
grounds for that shall be hereafter examined.]

Therefore to baptize with Water is no Perpetual Ordinance of Christ to his
Church.

This has had the more Weight with me, because I find not any standing
Ordinance or Appointment of Christ necessary to Christians, for which we have
not either Christ's own Practice, or Command, as to obey all the Commandments,
which comprehend both our Duty toward God and Man, etc. and where the Gospel
requires more than the Law; which is abundantly signified in the 5th and 6th
Chapters of Matthew, and elsewhere. Besides as to the Duties of Worship, he
exhorts us to Meet, promising his Presence; commands to Pray, Preach, Watch,
etc. and gives Precepts concerning some Temporary things, as the Washing of one
another Feet, the breaking of Bread, hereafter to be discussed: only for this
one thing of baptising with Water (though so earnestly contended for) we find
not any Precept of Christ.

VI. But to make Water Baptism a necessary Institution of the Christian
Religion, which is Pure and Spiritual, and not Carnal and Ceremonial, is to
derogate from the New Covenant-Dispensation, and set up the Legal Rites and
Ceremonies, of which this of Baptism, or Washing with Water, was one; as
appears from Heb. 9. 10. where the Apostle speaking thereof, says, only in
Meats and Drinks, and The Gospel puts an end to Carnal Ordinances.
diverse Baptisms, and Carnal Ordinances imposed, until the Time of Reformation:
If then the Time of Reformation, or the Dispensation of the Gospel, which puts
an end to the Shadows, be come, then such Baptisms and Carnal Ordinances are no
more to be imposed, For how Baptism with Water comes now to be a Spiritual
Ordinance more than before in the time of the Law, does not appear; seeing it
is but Water still, and a Washing of the Outward Man, and a putting away of the
filth of the Flesh still: And as before those, that were so Washed, were not
thereby made perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, neither are they at this
day; as our Adversaries must needs acknowledge, and Experience abundantly
shows. So that the matter of it, which is a Washing with Water, and the
Effects of it, which is only an Outward Cleansing, being still the same, how
comes Water Baptism to be less a Carnal Ordinance now, than before?

God confers inward Grace upon some, that are now baptized?

Baptisms among the Jews.

Because it is commanded by Christ now under the New Covenant.

First, That Is to beg the Question; of which hereafter.

But Secondly, We find, That where the Matter of Ordinances is the same, and
the End the same, they are never accounted more or less Spiritual, because of
their different Times. Now, was not God the Author of the Purifications and
Baptisms under the Law? Was not Water the Matter of them, which is so now? Was
not the End of them to signify an Inward Purifying by an Outward Washing? And
is not that alleged to be the End still? And are the necessary Effects or
Consequences of it Men are no more now than before by water baptism inwardly
cleansed.
any better now, than before, since men are now by virtue of Water Baptism, as
a necessary Consequence of it, no more than before made Inwardly Clean? And if
some by God's Grace, that are baptized with Water, are inwardly purified, so
were some also under the Law: So that this is not any Necessary Consequence nor
Effect neither of this nor that Baptism. It is then plainly Repugnant to Right
Reason, as well as to the Scripture-Testimony, to affirm that to be a Spiritual
Ordinance now, which was a Carnal Ordinance before, if it be still the same
both as to its Author, Matter and End, however made to vary in some small
Circumstances: The Spirituality of the New Covenant, and of its Worship
established by Christ, consisted not in such superficial Alterations of
Circumstances; but after another manner. Therefore let our Adversaries show us,
if they can, (without begging the Question, and building upon some one or other
of their own Principles denied by us) wherever Christ appointed or ordained any
Institution or Observation under the New Covenant, as belonging to the Nature
of it, or such a necessary part of its Worship, as is perpetually to Continue,
which being one in Substance and Effects, (I speak of necessary not accidental
Effects) yet because of some small difference in Form or Circumstance, was
before Carnal, notwithstanding it was commanded by God under the Law, but now
is become Spiritual, because commanded by Christ under the Gospel? And if they
cannot do this, then if Water Baptism was once a Carnal Ordinance, as the
Apostle positively affirms it to have been, it remains a Carnal Ordinance
still; and if a Carnal Ordinance, then no necessary part of the Gospel, or New
Covenant-Dispensation; and if no necessary part of it, then not needful to
Continue, nor to be Practiced by such, as live and walk under this
Dispensation. But in this, as in most other things (according as we have often
observed) our Adversaries Judaize, and renouncing the Glorious and Spiritual
Privileges of the New Covenant, are sticking in, and cleaving to the Rudiments
of the Old, both in Doctrine and Worship, as being more suited and agreeable to
their Carnal Apprehensions and Natural Senses. But we on the contrary travel
above all to lay hold upon, and cleave unto the Light of the Glorious Gospel
Revealed unto us: And the Harmony of the Truth we profess The Law distinguished
from the Gospel.
in this, may appear, by briefly observing, how in all things we follow the
Spiritual Gospel of Christ, as contradistinguished from the Carnality of the
Legal Dispensation; while our Adversaries through rejecting this Gospel, are
still laboring under the burden of the Law, which neither they, nor their
Fathers were able to bear.

For the Law and Rule of the Old Covenant The Outward Baptism, Worship, Law,
distinguished from the Inward.
and Jews was Outward, written in Tables of Stone and Parchments: So also is
that of our Adversaries. But the Law of the New Covenant is Inward and
Perpetual, written in the Heart: So is ours.

The Worship of the Jews was Outward and Carnal, limited to set Times, Places
and Persons, and performed according to Set, Prescribed Forms and Observations;
so is that of our Adversaries. But the Worship of the New Covenant is neither
limited to Time, Place nor Person, but is performed in the Spirit, and in
Truth, and is not acted according to set Forms and Prescriptions, but as the
Spirit of God immediately acts, moves and leads, whether it be to Preach, Pray,
or Sing; and such is also our Worship.

So like wise the Baptism among the Jews under the Law was an outward Washing
with outward Water, only to Typisie an inward Purification of the Soul, which
did not necessarily follow upon those that were thus baptized: But the Baptism
of Christ under the Gospel, is the Baptism of the Spirit and of Fire; not the
putting away of the filth of the Flesh, but the Answer of a good Conscience
toward God: And such is the Baptism, that we labor to be baptized withal, and
contend for.

Water Baptism had been an Ordinance of the Gospel, then the Apostle Paul would
have been sent to Administer it; but he declares positively 1 Cor. 1. 17. That
Christ sent him not to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel. The Reason of that
Consequence is undeniable, because the Apostle Paul's Commission was as large,
as that of any of them, and consequently he being in special Manner the Apostle
of Christ to the Gentiles, if Water Baptism Adversaries contend) be That
Water Baptism is no Badge of Christians, like Circumcision of the Jews.
to be accounted the badge of Christianity, he had more need than any of the
rest to be sent to baptize with Water, that he might Mark the Gentiles
Converted by him, with that Christian Sign. But indeed, the Reason holds better
thus: That since Paul was the Apostle of the Gentiles, and that in his Ministry
he does through all (as by his Epistles appears) labor to wean them from the
former Jewish Ceremonies and Observations, (though in so doing he was sometimes
undeservedly judged by others of his Brethren, who were unwilling to lay aside
those Ceremonies) therefore his Commission (though as full, as to the Preaching
of the Gospel and New Covenant-Dispensation, as that of the other Apostles) did
not require of him, that he should lead those Converts into such Jewish
Observations, and Baptisms, however that Practice was Indulged in, and
practiced by the other Apostles among their Jewish Proselites: for which cause
he thanks God, that he baptized 1 Cor. 1. 14.
so few; intimating, that what he did therein, he did not by virtue of his
Apostolic Paul was not sent to baptize.
Commission, but rather in Condescendence to their Weakness; even as at another
time he Circumcised Timothy.

Adversaries, to evade the Truth of this Testimony, usually allege, That by
this is only to be understood, that he was not sent principally to baptize, not
that he was not sent at all.

Exposition, since it Contradicts the positive Words of the Text, and has no
better Foundation, than the Affirmation of its Assertors, is justly rejected as
spurious, until they bring some better Proof for it: He says not, I was not
sent principally to baptize; but, I was not sent to baptize.

Confirmation from other places of Scripture, where [not] is to be so taken, as
where it is said, I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice, Matthew. 9. 13. Hos. 6. 6.
which is to be understood, that God requires principally Mercy, not excluding
Sacrifices.

Place is abundantly Explained by the following words [and the Knowledge of God
more than burnt-Offerings:] by which it clearly appears, that burnt-Offerings,
which are one with Sacrifices, are not Excluded. But there is no such word
added in that of Paul, and therefore the Parity is not demonstrated to be
alike, and consequently the Instance not sufficient; unless they can prove,
that it ought so to be admitted here: Else we might interpret by the same Rule
all other Places of Scripture the same way; As where the Apostle says, 1 Cor.
2. 5. That your Faith might not stand in the Wisdom of Men, but in the Power of
God; it might be understood, it shall not stand Principally so. How might the
Gospel by this Liberty of Interpretation be Perverted?

That the Abuse of this Baptism among the Corinthians, in dividing themselves
according to the Persons, by whom they were baptized, made the Apostle speak
so; but that the Abuse of a thing does not abolish it.

lawful and necessary; and that, no doubt, the Abuse abovesaid gave the Apostle
occasion so to write: But let it from this be considered, how the Apostle
excludes Baptizing, not Preaching, though the Abuse [mark] proceeded from that
no less, than from the other. For these Corinthians did denominate themselves
from those different Persons, by whose Preaching (as well as from those, by
whom they were baptized) they were Converted, as by the 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. ver.
of the 3d Chapter may appear; and yet for to That Preaching is a standing
Ordinance, and not to be forhorn.
remove that Abuse, the Apostle does not say, he was not sent to preach; nor
yet does he rejoice, that he had only preached to a few; because preaching
being a standing Ordinance in the Church, is not because of any Abuse, that the
Devil may tempt any to make of it, to be forborne, by such as are called to
perform it by the Spirit of God; wherefore the Apostle accordingly Chap. 3. 8,
9. informs them as to that, how to Remove that Abuse: But as to Water Baptism,
for that it was no standing Ordinance of Christ, but only practiced as in
Condescendence to the Jews, and by some Apostles to some Gentiles also, there
so soon as the Apostle perceived the Abuse of it; he let the Corinthians
understand, how little stress was to be laid upon it; by showing them that he
was glad, that he had administered this Ceremony to so few of them, and by
telling them plainly that it was no part of his Commission, neither that, which
he was sent to Administer.

How we know, that Baptizing here is meant of Water, and not of the Spirit?
Which if it be, then it will exclude Baptism of the Spirit, as well as of Water.

Water Baptism; which is more than manifest. For since the Apostle That which
Converts to Christ, is Baptism of the Spirit.
Paul's Message was to turn People from Darkness to Light, and Convert them to
God; and that as many as are thus turned and converted (so as to have the
Answer of a good Conscience toward God, and to have put on Christ, and be
arisen with him in Newness of Life) are baptized with the Baptism of the
Spirit; but who will say, that only these few mentioned there to be baptized by
Paul, were come to this? or that to turn or bring them to this Condition, was
not (even admitting our Adversaries Interpretation) as principally a part of
Paul's Ministry, as any other? Since then our Adversaries do take this place
for Water Baptism (as indeed it is) we may lawfully, taking it so also, urge it
upon them. Why the Word Baptism and baptizing is used by the Apostle, where
that of Water, and not of the Spirit, is only understood, shall hereafter be
spoken to. Reasons alleged by such as plead for Water Baptism; which are also
the Objections used against the Discontinuance of it.

First, Some Object, That Christ, who had the Spirit above measure, was
notwithstanding baptized with Water. As Nic. Arnold. against this These, Sect.
46. of his Theological Exercitation.

Circumcised; it will not follow from thence, that Circumcision is to Continue.
For it behoved Why Christ was baptized by John.
Christ to fulfill all Righteousness, not only the Ministry of John, but the Law
also; therefore did he observe the Jewish Feasts and Rites, and kept the
Passover: It will not then follow, that Christians ought to do so now. And
therefore Christ Matthew. 3. 15. gives John this reason of his being baptized,
desiring him to Suffer it to be so now: Whereby he sufficiently intimates, that
he intended not thereby to Perpetuate it, as an Ordinance to his Disciples.

Secondly, They Object Matthew. 28. 19. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

great Objection, and upon which they build the Whole Superstructure: Whereunto
the first general and sound Answer is, by granting the whole; but putting them
to prove, that Water is here meant, since the Text is silent of it. And though
in reason it be sufficient upon our What Baptism Christ does mean in Matthew. 28?
part, that we Concede the whole expressed in the place, but deny, that it is
by Water, which is an Addition to the Text; yet I shall premise some Reasons,
why we do so; and then consider the Reasons alleged by those, that will have
Water to be here understood.

First is a Maxim yielded to by all, that

We ought not to go from the literal signification of the Text, except some
urgent necessity force us thereunto.

But no urgent Necessity in this place forces us thereunto.

Therefore we ought not to go from it.

Secondly, That Baptism, which Christ commanded his Apostles, was the one
Baptism, id est, his own Baptism.

But the one Baptism, which is Christ's Baptism, is not with Water (as we have
already proved.)

Therefore the Baptism commanded by Christ to his Apostles, was not
Water Baptism.

Thirdly: That Baptism, which Christ commanded his Apostles, was such, that as
many as were therewith baptized, did put on Christ.

But this is not true of Water Baptism.

Therefore, etc.

Fourthly: The Baptism commanded by Christ to his Apostles, was not John's
Baptism:

But Baptism with Water was John's Baptism:

Therefore, etc.

First, They allege, That Christ's Baptism, though a Baptism with Water, did
differ from John 's, because John only baptized with Water unto Repentance, but
Christ commands his Disciples to baptize in the Name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; reckoning, that in this Form there lies a great difference betwixt
the Baptism of John, and that of Christ.

Answ. I Answer, as to that, John's Baptism was unto Repentance, the Difference
lies not there, because so is Christ's also. For our Adversaries will not
deny, but that Adult Persons, that are baptized, ought, ere they be admitted to
it, to Repent and Confess their Sins; yea, and that Infants with a respect to,
and Consideration of their Baptism, ought to Repent and Confess: So that the
difference lies not here; since this of Repentance and Confession agrees as
well to Christ's, as to John's Baptism. But in this our Adversaries are
divided: for Calvin will have Christ's and John's to be all one; Inst. lib. 4.
cap. 15. Sect. 7, 8. Yet they do differ, and the difference is, in that the one
is by Water, the other not, etc.

Secondly: As to what Christ says, in commanding them to baptize in the Name
of the Father, Son and Spirit, I confess that states the Difference, and it is
great; but that lies not only in admitting Water Baptism in this different
Form, by a bare expressing of these Words: For as the Text says no such thing,
neither do I see, how it can be inferred from it. For the Greek Of the Name of
the Lord, how taken in Scripture.
is (...), that is, into the Name; now the Name of the Lord is often taken in
Scripture for something else, than a bare sound of Words, or literal
Expression, even for his Virtue and Power, as may appear from Psalm 54. 3.
Cant. 1. 3. Prove. 18. 10. and in many more. Now, that the Apostles were by
their Ministry to baptize the Nations into this Name, Virtue and Power, and
that they did so, is evident, by these Testimonies of Paul above mentioned,
where he says, That as many of The Baptism into the Name what it is?
them, as were baptized into Christ, have put on Christ: This must have been a
baptizing into the Name, i. e. Power and Virtue, and not a mere formal
Expression of Words adjoined with Water Baptism; because, as has been above
observed, it does not follow, as a natural or necessary Consequence of it. I
would have those, who desire to have their Faith built upon no other
foundation, than the Testimony of God's Spirit, and Scriptures of Truth,
thoroughly to Consider, whether there can be any thing further alleged for this
Interpretation, than what the prejudice of Education and influence of Tradition
has imposed: Perhaps it may stumble the unwary and inconsiderate Reader, as if
the very Character of Christianity were abolished, to tell him plainly, that
this Scripture is not to be understood of baptizing with Water, and that this
form of baptizing in the Name of Father, Son and Spirit, has no warrant from
Matthew. 28. etc.

For which, besides the Reason taken Whether Christ did prescribe a Form of
Baptism in Matthew. 28.
from the Signification of [the Name] as being the Virtue and Power above
expressed, let it be considered, that, if that had been a Form prescribed by
Christ to his Apostles, then surely, they would have made use of that Form in
the administering of Water Baptism to such as they baptized with Water; but
though particular mention be made in diverse places of the Acts, Who were
baptized, and how? and though it be particularly expressed, that they baptized
such and such, as Acts 2. 41: 8. 12, 13, 38: 9. 18: 10. 48: 16. 15: 18. 8. yet
there is not a Word of this Form. And in two places, Acts 8. 16: 19. 5. it is
said of some, that they were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus; by which
it yet more appears, that either the Author of this History has been very
defective, who having so often occasion to mention this, yet omitteth so
substantial a part of Baptism, (which were to accuse the Holy Ghost, by whose
guidance Luke wrote it) or else that the Apostles did no ways understand, that
Christ by his Commission Matthew. 28. did injoin them such a Form of
Water Baptism, seeing they did not use it. And therefore it is safer to
conclude, that what they did in administering Water Baptism, they did not by
virtue of that Commission; else they would have so used it: For our
Adversaries, I suppose, would judge it a great Heresy to Administer
Water Baptism without that, or only in the Name of Jesus, without mention of
Father or Spirit, as it is expressly said they did, in the two places above
cited.

Secondly, They say: If this were not understood of Water Baptism, it would be
a Tautology, and all one with Teaching.

I say, Nay: Baptizing with the Spirit How Teaching and Baptising differ.
is somewhat further, than Teaching or Informing the Understanding; for it
imports a Reaching to, and melting the Heart, whereby it is turned, as well as
the Understanding informed. Besides, we find often in the Scripture, that
Teaching and Instructing are put together without any Absurdity or needless
Tautology; and yet these two have a greater Affinity, than teaching and
baptizing with the Spirit.

Thirdly, They say; Baptism in this Place must be understood with Water,
because it is the Action of the Apostles; and so cannot be the Baptism of the
Spirit, which is the Work of Christ, and his Grace, not of Man, etc.

Answ. I Answer: Baptism with the Spirit, though not wrought without Christ and
his Grace, is Instrumentally done by Men, fitted of God for that purpose; and
therefore The Baptism with the Spirit ^^scrib'd to Godly Men as Instruments.
no Absurdity follows, that Baptism with the Spirit should be expressed, as the
Action of the Apostles: For though it be Christ by his Grace, that gives
Spiritual Gifts, yet the Apostle, Romans 1. 11. speaks of his Imparting to them
Spiritual Gifts; and he tells the Corinthians, that he had begotten them
through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4. 15. And yet to beget People unto the Faith, is
the work of Christ and his Grace, not of Men. To Convert the Heart is properly
the Work of Christ; and yet the Scripture oftentimes ascribes it to Men, as
being the Instruments: And since Paul's Commission was to turn People from
Darkness to Light, though that be not done without Christ cooperating by his
Grace, so may also baptizing with the Spirit be expressed, as performable by
Man, as the Instrument, though the Work of Christ's Grace be needful to concur
thereunto: So that it is no Absurdity to say, that the Apostles did Administer
the Baptism of the Spirit.

Lastly, They say, That since Christ says here, that he will be with his
Disciples to the end of the World, therefore Water Baptism must continue so
long.

Waterbaptism, then that might have been urged; but seeing that is denied, and
proved to be false, nothing from thence can be gathered; He speaking of the
Baptism of the Spirit, which we freely confess does remain to the End of the
World, yea, so long as Christ's Presence abides with his Children.

Thirdly, They Object the Constant Practice of the Apostles in the Primitive
Church, who, they say, did always Admini-Water-baptism to such, as they
Converted to the Faith of Christ; And hence also they further urge, that of
Matthew. 28. to have been meant of Water, or else the Apostles did not understand
it, in that in baptizing they used Water; or that in so doing they walked
without a Commission.

I Answer: That it was the Constant Practice of the Apostles, is denied; for we
have shown in the Example of Paul, that it was not so; since it were most
absurd to judge, that he Converted only those few, even of the Church of
Corinth, whom he says he baptized; nor were it less absurd to think, that that
was a constant Apostolic Practice, which he, that was not Inferior to the
Chiefest of the Apostles, and who declares, he labored as much as they all,
rejoices, he was so little in. But further, How the Apostles Baptized.
the Conclusion inferred from the Apostles Practice of baptizing with Water, to
evince, that they understood Matthew. 28. of Waterbaptism, does not hold: For
though they baptized with Water, it will not follow, that either they did it by
virtue of that Commission, or that they mistook that place; nor can there be
any Medium brought, that will infer such a Conclusion.

As to the other insinuated Absurdity, That they did it without a Commission;
It is none at all: For they might have done it by a Permission, as being in
use, before Christ's Death; and because the People nursed up with Outward
Ceremonies, could not be weaned wholly from them. And thus they used other
things, as Circumcision, and legal Purifications, which yet they had no
Commission from Christ to do, (to which we shall speak more at length in the
following Proposition concerning the Supper.)

Sameness of the Word, because Christ bids them baptize, and they afterward in
the Use of Water are said to baptize, it be judged probable, that they did
understand that Commission, Matthew. 28. to authorize them to baptize with Water,
and accordingly practiced it.

season they did so far mistake it, as to judge, that Water belonged to that
Baptism, (which however I find no necessity of granting) yet I see not any
great Absurdity would thence follow. For it is plain, they did mistake that
Commission, as to a main part of it, for a Season; as where he bids them, Go
teach all Nations, since some time after they judged it unlawful to Teach the
Gentiles: Yea, Peter himself scrupled it, until by a Vision constrained
thereunto; for which after he had done it, he was for a season (until they were
better informed) judged by the rest of his Brethren. Now, The Apostles did
scruples the Teaching the Gentiles.
if the Education of the Apostles, as Jews, and their Propensity to adhere and
stick to the Jewish Religion, did so far influence them, that even after
Christ's Resurrection and the pouring forth of the Spirit, they could not
receive nor admit of the Teaching of the Gentiles, though Christ in his
Commission to them, commanded them to Preach to them; what further Absurdity
were it to suppose, that through the like Mistake the Chiefest of them, having
been the Disciples of John, and his Baptism being so much prized there among
the Jews, that they also took Christ's Baptism, intended by him of the Spirit,
to be that of Water, which was John's, and accordingly practiced it for a
season; it suffices us, that, if they were so mistaken (though I say not, that
they were so) they did not always remain under that Mistake: Else Peter would
not have said of the Baptism, which now saves, that it is not a putting away of
the filth of the Flesh; which certainly Waterbaptism is.

But further they urge much Peter's baptising Cornelius: In which they press
two things; First, That Water Baptism is used even to those, that had received
the Spirit Secondly, That it is said positively, he commanded them to be
baptized, Acts 10. 47, 48.

But neither of these does necessarily infer Water Baptism to belong to the New
Covenant-Dispensation, nor yet to be a Perpetual standing Ordinance in the
Church. For First, All that this will amount to, was, Whether Peter's Baptizing
some with Water makes it a standing Ordinance to the Church?
That Peter at that time baptized these Men; but that he did it by virtue of
that Commission, Matthew. 28. remains yet to be proved. And how does the
baptising with Water, after the receiving of the Holy Ghost prove the Case
more, than the use of Circumcision and other Legal Rites acknowledged to have
been acted by him afterward? Also no wonder, if Peter, that thought it so
strange (notwithstanding all that had been professed before, and spoken by
Christ) that the Gentiles should be made Partakers of the Gospel, and with
great difficulty, not without a very extraordinary Impulse thereunto, was
brought to come to them, and eat with them, was apt to put this Ceremony upon
them; which being, as it were, the particular Dispensation of John, the
Forerunner of Christ, seemed to have greater Affinity with the Gospel, than
the other Jewish Ceremonies then used by the Church: but that will no ways
infer our Adversaries Conclusion. Secondly, As to these Words, And he commanded
them to be baptized, it declares matter of Fact, not of Right; and amounts
to no more, than that Peter did at that time pro hic and nunc, Command those
persons to be baptized with Water; which is not denied: but it says nothing,
that Peter commanded Waterbaptism to be a Standing and Perpetual Ordinance to
the Church; neither can any Man of sound Reason say (if he heed what he says)
that a Command in matter of Fact to Particular Persons, does infer the thing
commanded to be of general obligation to all, if it be not other ways bottomed
upon some Positive Precept. Why does Peter's Commanding Cornelius and his
Household to be baptized at that time, infer Waterbaptism to Continue, more than
his Constraining (which is more than Commanding) the Gentiles in general to be
Circumcised, and observe the Law? We find, that at that time, when Peter
baptized Cornelius, it was not determined, whether the Gentiles should not be
Circumcised; but on the contrary, it was the most general Sense of the Church,
that they should: And therefore no wonder, if they thought it needful at that
time, that they should be baptized, which had more Affinity with the Gospel,
and was a Burden less grievous.

Fourthly, They Object from the Signification of the Word [baptize] which is as
much as to Dip and Wash with Water, alleging thence, that the very Word
imports a being baptized with Water.

Objection is very weak. For since baptizing with Water was a Rite among the
Jews, as Paulus Riccius shows, even Baptizing signifies Dipping or Washing
with Water.
before the coming of John; therefore that Ceremony received that Name from the
Nature of the Practice, as used both by the Jews and by John. Yea we find, that
Christ and his Apostles frequently make use of these Terms to a more Spiritual
Signification: Circumcision was only used and understood among the Jews, to be
that of the Flesh; but the Apostle tells us of the Circumcision of the Heart
and Spirit, made without Hands. So that, though Baptism was used among the
Jews, only to signify a Washing with Water, yet both John, Christ, and his
Apostles, speak of a being baptized with the Spirit and with Fire, which they
make the Peculiar Baptism of Christ, as contradistinguished from that of Water,
which was John's (as is above shown.) So that, though Baptism among the Jews
was only understood of Water, yet among Christians it is very well understood
of the Spirit without Water; as we see Christ and his Apostles spiritually to
understand things, under the Terms of what had been Shadows before. Thus Christ
speaking of his Body, (though the Jews mistook him) said, he would Destroy this
Temple, and build it again in three days; and many more, that might be
instanced. But if the Etymology of the Word should be tenaciously adhered to,
it would militate against most of our Adversaries, as well as against us. For
the Greek (...) signifies Immergo, to (...) Immergo, Intigo, to plunge and dip
in.
plunge and dip in, and that was the proper use of Water Baptism among the
Jews, and also by John, and the Primitive Christians, who used it; whereas our
Adversaries for the most part only Sprinkle a little Water Those that of old
used Water Baptism were dipped and plunged; and those that were only sprinkled,
were not admitted to any Office in the Church: and why?
upon the Forehead, which does not at all answer to the Word [Baptism.] Yea
those of old among Christians, that used Water Baptism, thought this dipping
and plunging so needful, that they thus dipped Children: And forasmuch as it
was judged, that it might prove hurtful to some weak Constitutions, Sprinkling,
to prevent that hurt, was introduced; yet then it was likewise appointed, that
such, as were only sprinkled, and not dipped, should not be admitto have any
Office in the Church, as not being sufficiently baptized. So that, if our
Adversaries will stick to the Word, they must alter their Method of Sprinkling.

Fifthly, They Object, John 3. 5. Except a Man be born again of Water and of
the Spirit, etc. hence inferring the necessity of Water Baptism, as well as of
the Spirit.

Water Baptism to be of absolute Necessity: And therefore Protestants rightly
affirm, The Water that Regenerates, is Mystioal and Inward.
when this is urged upon them by Papists, to evince the absolute Necessity of
Water Baptism, that [Water] is not here understood of Outward Water; but
mystically of an Inward Cleansing and Washing. Even as where Christ's speaks of
being baptized with Fire, it is not to be understood of outward material Fire,
but only of Purifying, by a Metonymy; because to purify is a proper Effect of
Fire, as to Wash and make clean is of Water. Therefore the Scripture alludes to
Water, where it can as little be so understood: As where we are said to be
Saved by the Washing of Regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. Yea, Peter says expressly in
the place often cited, as Calvin well observes; That In the 4th. Book of his.
Instit. Chap. 15.
the Baptism, which saves, is not the putting away of the filth of the Flesh:
So that, since [Water] cannot be understood of outward Water, this can serve
nothing to prove Water Baptism.

If it be said, that [Water] imports here Object. necessitatem Praecepti,
though not Medii.

I Answer; That is first to take it for Answ. granted, that outward Water is
here understood; the contrary whereof we have already proved. Next, Water and
the Necessitas Praecepti and Medii, urged.
Spirit are placed here together, [Except a Man be born of Water and the
Spirit] where the Necessity of the one is urged, as much as of the other. Now
if the Spirit be absolutely necessary, so will also Water: And then we must
either say, that To be born of the Spirit, is not absolutely necessary, which
all acknowledge to be false; or else that Water is absolutely necessary, which,
as Protestants, we affirm and have proved, is false: else we must confess, that
Water is not here understood of outward Water. For to say, that when Water and
the Spirit are placed here just together, and in the same manner, though there
be not any difference or ground for it visible in the Text, or deduceable from
it, That the necessity of Water is here Praecepti, but not Medii, but the
necessity of the Spirit is both Medii and Praecepti; is indeed confidently to
affirm, but not to prove.

Sixthly, and lastly, They Object; That the Baptism of Water is a visible Sign
or Badge, to distinguish Christians from Infidels, even as Circumcision did the
Jews.

necessary Precept, or part of the New Covenant-Dispensation; it not being
lawful to us to impose outward Ceremonies and Rites, and say, they will
distinguish us from Infidels. Circumcision Circumcision a Seal of the first
Covenant. Water Baptism falsely called a Badge of Christianity. Which is the
Badge of Christianity?
was positively commanded, and said to be a Seal of the first Covenant; but as
we have already proved, that there is no such Command for Baptism, so there is
not any Word in all the New Testament, calling it a Badge of Christianity, or
Seal of the New Covenant: And therefore to conclude, it is so, because
Circumcision was so, (unless some better Proof be alleged for it) is miserably
to beg the Question. The professing of Faith in Christ, and a holy Life
answering thereunto, is a far better Badge of Christianity, than any outward
Washing; which yet answers not to that of Circumcision, since that affixed a
Character in the Flesh, which this does not: So that a Christian is not known
to be a Christian by his being baptized, especially when he was a Child, unless
he tell them so much. And may not the Professing Faith in Christ signify that
as well? I know, there are diverse of those, called Fathers, that speak much of
What the Fathers say of Waterbaptism, and of the Sign of the Cross.
Water Baptism, calling it Character Christianitatis; but so did they also of
the Sign of the Cross, and other such things, justly rejected by Protestants.
For the Mystery of Iniquity, which began to work even in the Apostles days,
soon spoiled the Simplicity and Purity of the Christian Worship; so that not
only many Jewish Rites were retained, but many Heathenish Customs and
Heathenish Ceremonies introduced into the Christian Worship.
Ceremonies introduced into the Christian Worship; as particularly that Word
[Sacrament.] So that it is great folly, especially for Protestants, to plead
any thing of this from Tradition or Antiquity; for we find, that neither
Papists nor Protestants use these Rites exactly, as the Ancients did, who in
such things not walking by the most certain Rule of God's Spirit, but doting
too much upon Outward, were very Uncertain. For most of them all, in the
Primitive Time did wholly Plunge and Dip those they Baptized; which neither
Papists nor Protestants do: Yea, several of the Fathers accused some as
Heretics in their Days, for holding some Principles common with Protestants,
concerning it; as particularly Augustine does the Pelagians, for saying, That
Infants dying Unbaptized, may be saved. And the Manichees were Condemned, for
denying, that Grace is universally given by Baptism; and Julian the Pelagian by
Augustine, for denying Exorcism and Insufflation Exorcism or Adjuration.
in the use of Baptism: All which things Protestants deny also. So that
Protestants do but foolishly to upbraid us, as if we could not show any among
the Ancients, that denied Water Baptism; seeing they cannot show any, whom they
acknowledge not to have been Heretical in several things, to have used it, nor
yet, who using it, did not use also the Sign of the Cross, and other things
with it, which The Sign of the Cross.
they deny. There were some nevertheless in the darkest Times of Popery, who
testified against Water Baptism. For one Alanus, page 103, 104, 107. speaks of
some in his Time, that were burnt for the Many in former Ages testified against
Water Baptism.
denying of it: For they said, that Baptism had no Efficacy either in Children
or Adult Persons; and therefore Men were not obliged to take Baptism:
Particularly Ten Canonicks (so called) were burnt for that Crime, by the Order
of King Robert of France; as P. Pithaeus tells in his Fragments of the History
of Guienne. Which is also confirmed by one Johannes Floracensis, a Monk (who
was famous at that Time) in his Epistle to Oliva, Abbot of the Ausonian Church:
I will (says he) give you to understand concerning the Heresy, that was in
the City of Orleans on Childer-massday: For it was true, if ye have heard any
Ten Canonicks burnt at Orleans, and why?
thing, that King Robert caused to be burnt alive nigh Fourteen of that City,
of the Chief of their Clergy, and the more Noble of their Laics, who were
hateful to God, and abominable to Heaven and Earth; for they did stiffly deny
the Grace of Holy Baptism, and also the Consecration of our Lord's Body and
Blood. The Time of this Deed is noted in these Words by Papir. Masson. in his
Annals of France, lib. 3. in Hugh and Robert, Actum Aureliae public Anno
Incarnationis Domini 1022. Regni Roberti Regis 28. Indictione 5. quando
Stephanus Haeresiarcha and Accomplices ejus damnati sunt and exusti Aureliae.

Now for their calling them Heretics and Manichees, we have nothing but the
Testimony of their Accusers; which will no more invalidate their Testimony for
this Truth against the use of Water Baptism, or give more ground to charge us,
as being one with Manichees, than because some, called by them Manichees, do
agree with Protestants in some things, that therefore Protestants are Manichees
or Heretics: which Protestants can no ways shun. For the Question is, Whether,
in what they did, they walked according to the Truth testified of by the Spirit
in the Holy Scriptures? So that the Controversy is brought back again to the
Scriptures, according to which I suppose I have formerly discussed it.

As for the latter part of the Thesis, denying The Baptism of Infants an Humane
Tradition.
the Use of Infant Baptism, it necessarily follows, from what is abovesaid.
For if Water Baptism be Ceased, then surely Baptizing of Infants is not
warrantable. But those that take upon them to Oppose us in this matter, will
have more to do, as to this latter part: For after they have done, what they
can, to prove Waterbaptism; it remains for them to prove, that Infants ought to
be Baptized. For he that proves Water Baptism Ceased, proves, that
Infant Baptism is Vain: But he that should prove, that Water Baptism continues,
has not thence proved, that Infant Baptism is necessary; That needs something
further. And therefore it was a pitiful Subterfuge of Nic. Arnoldus against
this, to say, That the denying of Infant Baptism belonged to the Gangrene of
Anabaptists; without adding any further Probation.

Concerning the Communion or Participation of the Body and Blood of Christ.
The Communion of the Body and Blood 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17.
of Christ is Inward and Spiritual, which is the Participation of his Flesh and
Blood, by which the Inward Man is daily Joh. 6. 2, 33, 35.
nourished in the Hearts of those, in whom Christ dwells. Of which things the
Breaking 1 Cor. 5. 18.
of Bread by Christ with his Disciples was a Figure; which they even used in
the Church for a time, who had received the Substance, for the sake of the
Weak. Even as Abstaining from things strangled, Acts 15. 20. John 13. 14. Jam.
5. 14.
and from Blood, the Washing one another Feet, and the Anointing of the Sick
with Oil: All which are commanded with no less Authority and Solemnity, than
the former; yet seeing they are but the Shadows of better things, they Cease in
such, as have obtained the Substance.

I. THE Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, is a Mystery hid from all
natural men in their first, fallen and degenerate State; which they cannot
understand, reach to, nor comprehend, as they there abide, neither as they
there are, can they be Partakers of it, nor yet are they able to Discern the
Lord's Body. And forasmuch as the Christian World (so called) for the most part
has been still laboring, working, conceiving and imagining in their own
natural and unrenewed Understandings about the things of God and Religion,
therefore has this Mystery much been hid and sealed up from them, while they
have been contending, quarrelling and fighting one with another about the mere
Shadow, Outside and Form, but strangers to the Substance, Life and Virtue.

II. The Body then of Christ, which The Body and Blood of Christ is Spiritual.
Believers partake of, is Spiritual, and not Carnal; and his Blood, which they
drink of, is pure and Heavenly, and not humane or Elementary; as Augustine also
affirms of the Body of Christ, which is Eaten, in his Tractat, Psalm. 98. Except
a Man eat my Flesh, he has not in him Life Eternal: And he says; The Words,
which I speak unto you, are Spirit and Life, understand spiritually what I have
spoken. Ye shall not eat of this Body, which ye see, and drink this Blood,
which they shall spill, that Crucify me: I am the Living Bread, which have
descended from Heaven; he called himself the Bread, who descended from Heaven,
exhorting that we might believe in him, etc.

Quest. If it be asked then, What that Body, What that Flesh and Blood is?

Answ. I Answer: It is that Heavenly Seed, that Divine, Spiritual, Celestial
Substance, of which we spoke before in the 5th and 6th Propositions. This is
that Vehiculum Dei, What the heavenly Seed is, whereby formerly and also now
Life and Salvation was and is Communicated.
or Spiritual Body of Christ, whereby and where-through he communicates Life
to Men, and Salvation to as many as believe in him, and receive him; and
whereby also Man comes to have Fellowship and Communion with God. This is
proved from the 6th of John, from verse 32. to the end, where Christ speaks
more at large of this matter, than in any other place: And indeed, this
Evangelist and beloved Disciple, who lay in the Bosom of our Lord, gives us a
more full account of the Spiritual Sayings and Doctrine of Christ: And it is
observable, that though he speaks nothing of the Ceremony used by Christ, of
Breaking Bread with his Disciples, neither in his Evangelical Account of
Christ's Life and Sufferings, nor in his Epistles; yet he is more large in this
account of the Participation of the Body, Flesh and Blood of Christ, than any
of them all. For Christ in this Chapter perceiving, that the Jews did follow
him for Love of the Loaves, desires them (ver. 27.) to labor not for the Meat
which perishes, but for that Meat which endures for ever: But forasmuch as
they, being Carnal in their Apprehensions, and not understanding the Spiritual
Language and Doctrine of Christ, did judge the Manna, which Moses gave their
Fathers, to be the most Excellent Bread, as coming from Heaven; Christ, to
rectify that mistake, and better inform them, affirms First, That it is not
Moses, but his Father, that The Origin, Nature and Effects of the Body, Flesh
and Blood of Christ.
gives the true Bread from Heaven, ver. 32. and 48. Secondly, This Bread he
calls himself, ver. 35. I am the Bread of Life: And ver. 51. I am the living
Bread, which came down from Heaven: Thirdly, He declares, that this Bread is
his Flesh, ver. 51. The Bread, that I will give, is my Flesh: And ver. 55. For
my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is drink indeed: Fourthly, The Necessity
of Partaking thereof, ver. 53. Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and
drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you: And lastly, ver. 33. the blessed
Fruits and necessary Effects of this Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ;
This Bread gives Life to the World, ver. 50. He that eats thereof dies not;
ver. 58. He, that eats of this Bread, shall live for ever, ver. 51. Whose
eats this Flesh, and drinks this Blood, shall live for ever, ver. 54. And
he dwells in Christ, and Christ in him; ver. 56. And shall live by Christ;
ver. 57. From this large Description of the Origin, Nature and Effects of this
Body, Flesh and Blood of Christ, it is apparent, that it is Spiritual, and to
be understood of a Spiritual Body, and not of that Body or Temple of Jesus
Christ, which was born of the Virgin Mary, and in which he walked, lived and
suffered in the Land of Judea; because that it is said, both that it came down
from Heaven, yea, that it is He, that came down from Heaven. Now all Christians
at present generally acknowledge, that the outward Body of Christ came not down
from Heaven, neither was it that part of Christ, which came down from Heaven.
And to put the matter out of doubt, when the Carnal Jews would have been so
understanding it, he tells them plainly, ver. 63. It is the Spirit, that
quickens, but the Flesh profits nothing. This is also founded upon most
sound and solid Reason; because that it is the Soul, not the Solid Reasons,
that it is Ilis Spiritual Body, Christ speaks of.
Body, that is to be nourished by this Flesh and Blood. Now outward Flesh
cannot nourish nor feed the Soul; there is no proportion, nor Analogy betwixt
them; neither is the Communion of the Saints with God by a Conjunction and
mutual Participation of Flesh, but of the Spirit: He that 1 Cor. 6. 17.
is joined to the Lord, is One Spirit, not one Flesh. For the Flesh (I mean
outward Flesh, even such as was that, wherein Christ lived and walked, when
upon Earth; and not Flesh, when transposed by a Metaphor, to be understood
Spiritually) can only partake of Flesh, as Spirit of Spirit: As the Body cannot
feed upon Spirit, neither can the Spirit feed upon Flesh. And that the Flesh
here spoken of, is spiritually understood, appears further, in that, that which
feeds upon it, shall never dye: But the Bodies of all Men once dye, yea it
behoved the Body of Christ himself to dye. That this Body and Spiritual Flesh
and Blood of Christ is to be understood of that Divine and Heavenly Seed before
spoken of by us, appears both by the Nature and Fruits of it. First, It Is said,
It is that, which comes down from Heaven, and gives Life unto the World: Now,
this answers to that Light and Seed, which is testified of, John 1. to be the
Light of the World, and the Life of Men. For that Spiritual Light and Seed, as
it receives The Spiritual Light and Seed is as Bread to the Hungry Soul.
place in men's Hearts, and room to spring up there, is as Bread to the hungry
and fainting Soul, that is (as it were) buried and dead in the lusts of the
World, which receives Life again; and revives, as it tastes and partaketh of
this heavenly Bread: And they that partake of it, are said to come to Christ;
neither can any have it, but by coming to him, and believing in the appearance
of his Light in their Hearts; by receiving which, and believing in it, the
Participation of this Body and Bread is known. And that Christ understands the
same thing here by his Body, Flesh and Blood, which is understood John 1. by
the Light inlightening every Man, and the Life, etc. appears, for the Light and
Life spoken of John 1. is said to be Christ; He is the true Light: and the
Bread and Flesh, etc. spoken of in this 6th of John, is called Christ; I am the
Bread of Life, says he. Again, They that received that Light and Life, John 1.
12. Obtained Power to become the Sons of God, by believing in his Name: So also
here, John 6. 35. He that comes unto this Bread of Life shall not Hunger; and
he that believes in him, who is this Bread shall never thirst. So then, as
there was the outward visible Body and Christ's Outward and Spiritual Body
distinguished.
Temple of Jesus Christ, which took its Original from the Virgin Mary; so there
is also the Spiritual Body of Christ, by and through which He, that was the
Word in the beginning with God, and was and is GOD, did Reveal himself to the
Sons of Men in all Ages, and whereby Men in all Ages come to be made partakers
of Eternal Life, and to have Communion and Fellowship with God and Christ. Of
which Body of Christ, and Flesh and Blood, if both Adam, and Seth, and Enoch,
The Patriarchs did eat of the Body, and Flesh and Blood of Christ.
and Abraham, and Moses, and David, and all the Prophets and Holy Men of God
had not eaten, they had not had Life in them, nor could their inward Man have
been nourished. Now, as the outward Body and Temple was called Christ, so was
also this Spiritual Body no less properly, and that long before that outward
Body was in Being. Hence the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4. That the Fathers
did all eat the same spiritual Meat, and did all drink the same spiritual.
Drink: (for they drank of that Spiritual Rock, that followed them; and that
Rock was Christ.) This cannot be understood otherwise than of this Spiritual
Body of Christ: Which Spiritual Body of Christ, though it was the saving Food
of the Righteous both before the Law, and under the Law, yet under the Law it
was veiled and shadowed, and covered under diverse Types, Ceremonies and
Observations; yea and not only so, but it was veiled and hid, in some respect,
under the outward Temple and Body of Christ, or during the continuance of it;
so that the Jews could not understand Christ's Preaching about it, while on
Earth: And not the Jews only, but many of his Disciples judged it an hard
saying, Joh. 6. 60. 66.
murmured at it, and many from that time went back from him, and walked no more
with him. I doubt not, but there are many also at this day professing to be
Disciples of Christ, that do as little understand this matter, as those did,
and are as apt to be offended and stumble at it, while they are gazing and
following after the outward Body; and look not to that, by which the Saints are
daily fed and nourished. For as Jesus Christ, in obedience to the Will of the
Father, did by the Eternal Spirit offer up that Body for a Propitiation for the
Remission of Sins, and finished his Testimony upon Earth thereby, in a most
perfect Example of Patience, Resignation and Holiness, that all might be made
Partakers of the Fruit of that Sacricrifice; so has he likewise poured forth
into the Hearts of all Men a measure of that Divine Light and Seed, wherewith
The Divine Light of Christ does make the Saints Partakers of his Body.
he is Clothed, that thereby reaching unto the Consciences of all, he may
Raise them up out of Death and Darkness by his Life and Light; and they thereby
may be made Partakers of his Body, and therethrough come to have Fellowship
with the Father and with the Son.



I am the Bread of Life (says he) he that comes to me, shall never hungeh;
Joh. 6. 35. and 55.
he that believes in me, shall never thirst: And again; For my Flesh is Meat
indeed, and my Blood is drink indeed. So whosoever thou art, that ask this
Question, or read'st these Lines, whether thou account'st thy self a Believer,
or really feel by a certain and sad Experience, that thou art yet in the
Unbelief, and find'st, that the outward Body and Flesh of Christ is so far from
thee, that thou can not reach it, nor feed-upon it: Yea, though thou have
often swallowed down and taken in that which the Papists have persuaded thee to
be the Real Flesh and Blood of Christ, and have believed it to be so; though
all thy Senses told thee the Contrary: Or (being a Lutheran) have taken that
Bread, in and with, and under The Lutherans and Calvinians Opinion of the Flesh
and Blood of Christ in the Supper (so called)
which the Lutherans have assured thee that the Flesh and Blood of Christ is:
Or (being a Calvinist) have partaken of that, which the Calvinists say (though
a Figure only of the Body) gives them that take it, a Real Participation of the
Body, Flesh and Blood of Christ, though they neither know how, nor what way; I
say, if for all this, thou find'st thy Soul yet barren, yea hungry, and ready
to starve for want of something thou longest for; know, that that Light that
discovers thy Iniquity to thee, that shows thee thy Barrenness, thy Nakedness,
thy Emptiness, is that Body, that thou must partake of, and feed upon: But that
till by forsaking Iniquity thou turn'st to it, come unto it, receiv'st it,
though thou may hunger after it, thou can not be Satisfied with it; for it
has no Communion 2 Cor. 6. 14.
with Darkness: Nor can thou drink of the Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of
Devils, and be Partaker of the Lord's Table, and the Table of Devils, 1 Cor.
10. 21? But as thou suffer'st that small Seed of Righteousness to arise in
thee, and to be How the Inward Man is nourisht.
formed into a Birth, that New Substantial Birth, that is brought forth in the
Soul, naturally feeds upon, and is nourished by this Spiritual Body: Yea, as
this outward Birth lives not, but as it sucks in Breath by the Outward
Elementary Air; so this New Birth lives not in the Soul, but as it draws in and
breathes by that Spiritual Air or Vehicle: And as the Outward Birth cannot
subsist without some Outward Body to feed upon, some Outward Flesh, and some
outward Drink; so neither can this Inward Birth, without it be fed by this
Inward Body, by this Inward Flesh and Blood of Christ, which answers to it
after the same manner, by way of Analogy. And this is most agreeable to the
Doctrine of Christ concerning this matter. For as without Outward Food the
Natural Body has not Life; so also says Christ, Except ye eat the flesh of
the Son of man, and Joh. 6. 53.
drink his blood, ye have no life in you: And as the Outward body eating
Outward food, lives thereby; so Christ says, That he Joh. 6. 57.
that eats him, shall live by him. So it is this Inward Participation of this
Inward Man, of this Inward and Spiritual Body, by which Man is united to God,
and has Fellowship and Communion with him. He that eats my Flesh, and
drinks my Joh. 6. 56.
Blood (says Christ) dwells in me, and I in him; this cannot be understood
of Outward Eating of Outward Bread: And as by this the Soul must have
Fellowship with God, so also in so far as all the Saints are Partakers of this
One Body, and this One Blood, they come also to have a Joint-Communion. Hence
the Apostle 1 Cor. 10. 17. in this respect says, That they being many, are One
Bread, and One Body: And to the Wise among the Corinthians he says, The Bread,
which we break, Ver. 16.
is the Communion of the Body of Christ. This is the True and Spiritual Supper
of The True Spiritual Supper of the Lord.
the Lord, which Men come to partake of by hearing the Voice of Christ, and
opening the Door of their Hearts, and so letting him in, in the manner
abovesaid, according to the plain words of the Scripture, Rev. 3. 20. Behold,
I stand at the Door and Knock; if any Man hear my Voice, and open the Door, I
will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. So that the Supper
of the Lord, and the Supping with the Lord, and partaking of his Flesh and
Blood, is no ways limited to the Ceremony of breaking Bread and drinking Wine
at particular times; but is truly and really Enjoyed, as often as the Soul
retires into the Light of the Lord, and feels and partakes of that Heavenly
Life, by which the Inward Man is nourished: Which may be, and is often
witnessed by the Faithful at all times; though more particularly, when they are
Assembled together to Wait upon the Lord.

IV. But what Confusion the Professors of Christianity have run into concerning
this matter, is more than obvious; who (as in most other things they have done)
for want of a true Spiritual Understanding, have sought to Tie this Supper of
the Lord to that Ceremony (used by Man is not tied to the Ceremony of breaking
Bread and drinking Wine, which Christ did use with his Disciples; This only was
a Shadow.
Christ before his Death) of breaking Bread and drinking Wine with his
Disciples. And though they for the most part agree in this general, yet how do
they Contend and Debate one against another? How strangely are they pinched,
pained, and straightened to make this Spiritual Mystery agree to that Ceremony?
And what monstrous and wild Opinions and Conceivings have they invented, to
enclose or affix the Body of Christ to their Bread and Wine? From which Opinion
not only the greatest, and fiercest, and most hurtful Contests, both among the
Professors of Christianity in general, and among Protestants in particular,
have arisen; but also such Absurdities, irrational and blasphemous What makes
the Christian Religion hateful to Jews, Turks and Heathens?
Consequences have ensued, as make the Christian Religion odious and hateful to
Jews, Turks and Heathens. The Professors of Christianity do chiefly divide in
this matter into three Opinions.

The first is of those that say, The Substance The Papists Faith of Christ his
Flesh and Blood
of the Bread is Transubstantiated into the very Substance of that same Body,
Flesh and Blood of Christ, which was born of the Virgin Mary, and crucified by
the Jews: So that after the Words of Consecration (as they call them) it is no
more Bread, but the Body of Christ.

The second is of such as say; The Substance The Lutherans Faith.
of the Bread remains; but that also that Body is in, and with, and under the
Bread. So that both the Substance of the Bread, and the Body, Flesh and Blood
of Christ, is there also.

The third is of those, that (denying The Calvinists Faith.
both these) do affirm, That the Body of Christ is not there Corporally, or
Substantially; but yet that it is Really and Sacramentally received by the
Faithful, in the use of Bread and Wine: But how, or what way it is there, they
know not, nor can they tell; only we must believe it is there, yet so, that it
is only properly in Heaven.

It is not my Design to enter into a Refutation of these several Opinions, for
each of their Authors and Assertors have sufficiently Refuted one another; and
are all of them no less strong both from Scripture and Reason, in Refuting each
their contrary Party's Opinion, than they are Weak in Establishing their own.
For I often have seriously observed in reading their respective Writings (and
so it may be have others) that all of them do notably, in so far as they Refute
the contrary Opinions; but that they are mightily pained, when they come to
Confirm and Plead for their own: Hence I necessarily must conclude, That none
of them had attained to the Truth and Substance of this Mystery. Let us see, if
Calvin, after he has Inst. lib. 4. cap 17.
Refuted the two former Opinions, be more successful, in what he affirms and
asserts for the Truth of his Opinion; who, after he has much labored in
overturning and Refuting the two former Opinions, plainly confesses, that he
knows not, what to affirm instead of them. For after he has spoken much, and at
last Concluded, That the Body of Christ is there, and that the Saints must
needs partake thereof; at last he J. Calvin's Faith of Christ his Flesh and
Blood Uncertain.
lands in these Words. (Sect. 32.) But if it be asked me, how it is? I shall
not be ashamed to confess, That it is a Secret, too high for me to comprehend
in my Spirit, or explain in Words. Here he deals very ingeniously; and yet who
would have thought, that such a Man would have been brought to this Strait in
the Confirming of his Opinion? Considering but a little before, in the same
Chapter (Sect. 15.) he accuses the Schoolmen among the Papists, (and I Confess
truly) In that they neither The like the Papists.
Understand, nor Explain to others, how Christ is in the Eucharist; which
shortly after he Confesses himself, he cannot do. If then the Schoolmen among
the Papists do neither Understand, nor yet can Explain to others their Doctrine
in this matter, nor Calvin can comprehend it in his Spirit, (which I judge is
as much, as not to understand it) nor Express it in Words (and then surely he
cannot Explain it to others) then no certainty is to be had from either of
them. There have been great Endeavors used for Reconcilement in this matter,
both betwixt Papists and Lutherans, Lutherans and Calvinists, yea, and
Calvinists and Papists, but all to no purpose: and many Forms and Manners of
Expressions drawn up, to which all might yield; which in the end proved in
vain, seeing every one understood them, and interpreted them, their own way:
and so they did thereby but Equivocate and Deceive one another. The Reason of
all this Contention is, because they all wanted a clear Understanding of the
Mystery, and were doting about the Shadow and the Externals. For both the
Ground and Matter of their Contest lies in things extrinsick from, and
unnecessary to the main Matter; and this has been often the Policy of Satan to
busy People, and amuse Satan busies people in outward Sign, Shadows and Forms,
whilst they neglect the Substance.
them with outward Signs, Shadows and Forms, making them Contend about that;
while in the mean time the Substance is neglected. Yea, and in Contending for
these Shadows, he stirs them up to the practice of Malice, Heat, Revenge and
other Vices, by which he establishes his Kingdom of Darkness among them, and
ruins the Life of Christianity: For there has been more Animosity and Heat
about this one Particular, and more Bloodshed and Contention, than about any
other. And surely, they are little acquainted with the State of Protestants
Affairs, who know not, that their Contentions about this What has been hurtful
to the Reformation.
have been more hurtful to the Reformation, than all the Opposition they met
with from their common Adversaries. Now all these uncertain and absurd
Opinions, and the Contentions therefrom arising, have proceeded from their all
agreeing in Two General Errors concerning this thing: Which being denied and
receded from, as they are by us, there would be an Easy Way made for
Reconciliation, and we should all meet in the one Spiritual and true
Understanding of this Mystery; and as the Contentions, so would also the
Absurdities, which follow from all the Three forementioned Opinions, Cease and
fall to the ground.

The First of these Errors is, in making Two Errors the ground of the
Contentions about the Supper.
the Communion or Participation of the Body, Flesh and Blood of Christ to
relate to that outward Body, Vessel or Temple, that was born of the Virgin
Mary, and walked and suffered in Judea; whereas it should relate to the
Spiritual Body, Flesh and Blood of Christ, even that Heavenly and Celestial
Light and Life, which was the Food and Nourishment of the Regenerate in all
Ages, as we have already proved.

The Second Error is, In tying this Participation of the Body and Blood of
Christ to that Ceremony, used by him with his Disciples in the breaking of
bread, etc. as if it had only a Relation thereto, or, were only enjoyed in the
use of that Ceremony; which it neither has, nor is. For this is that Bread,
which Christ in his Prayer teaches to call for, terming it (...), i. e. the
supersubstantial Bread, as the Greek has it; and which the Soul partakes of,
without any relation or necessary respect to this Ceremony, as shall be
hereafter proved more at length.

These Two Errors being thus laid aside, and the Contentions arising therefrom
buried, all are agreed in the main Positions, viz. First, That the body, flesh
and blood of Believers Souls do really feed upon the Flesh and Blood of Christ.
Christ is necessary for the nourishing of the Soul: Secondly, That the Souls
of Believers do really and truly partake and feed upon the body, flesh and
blood of Christ. But while Men are not content with the Spirituality of this
Mystery, going in their own Wills, and according to their own Inventions, to
strain and wrest the Scriptures, for to tie this Spiritual Communion of the
flesh and blood of Christ, to outward Bread and Wine, and such like Carnal
Ordinances, no wonder, if by their carnal Apprehensions they run into Heaps and
Confusion. But because it has been generally supposed, that the Communion of
the Body and Blood of Christ had some special relation to the Ceremony of
breaking Bread, I shall first Refute that Opinion, and then proceed to consider
the Nature and Use of that Ceremony, and whether it be now necessary to
Continue; answering the Reasons and Objections of such as plead its
Continuance, as a necessary and standing Ordinance of Jesus Christ.

V. First, It must be understood, that I speak of a Necessary and Peculiar
Relation, That the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ has no special
Relation to the Ceremony of breaking Bread, neither by Nature, nor Precept.
otherwise than in a general Respect: For, forasmuch as our Communion with
Christ is, and ought to be, our greatest and chiefest Work, we ought to do all
other things with a Respect to God, and our Fellowship with him; but a special
and necessary Respect or Relation is such, as where the two things are tied and
united together, either of their own Nature, or by the Command of God, that the
one cannot be enjoyed, or at least is not (except very extraordinarily) without
the other. Thus Salvation has a necessary respect to Holiness, because without
Holiness no Man shall see God: And the Eating of the flesh and blood of Christ
has a necessary respect to our having Life, because if we eat not his flesh,
and drink not his blood, we cannot have Life: And our Feeling of God's Presence
has a necessary respect to our being found Meeting in his Name, by Divine
Precept, because he has promised, Where two or three are Met together in his
Name, he will be in the midst of them: In like manner our receiving benefits
and blessings from God, has a necessary respect to our Praying, because if we
Ask, he has promised we shall Receive. Now the Communion or Participation of
the flesh and blood of Christ has no such necessary relation to the breaking
of Bread and drinking of Wine; for if it had any such necessary relation, it
would either be from the Nature of the Thing, or from some Divine Precept: But
we shall show, it is from neither; Therefore, etc. First, It is not from the
Nature of it, because to partake of the flesh and blood of Christ is a
Spiritual Exercise; and all confess, that it is by the Soul and Spirit, that we
become real Partakers of it, as it is the Soul, and not the Body, that is
nourished by it: but to eat Bread and drink Wine, is a natural Act, which in it
self adds nothing to the Soul, neither has any thing, that is Spiritual, in it;
because the most carnal Man that is, can as fully, as perfectly and as wholly
eat Bread and drink Wine, as the most Spiritual. Secondly, Their relation is
not by Nature, else they would infer one another: but all acknowledge, that
many eat of the Bread, and drink of the Wine, even that which, they say, is
Consecrate and Transubstantiate into the very Body of Christ, who
notwithstanding have not Life Eternal, have not Christ dwelling in them, nor do
live by him, as all do, who truly partake The Patriarchs and Prophets without
this Ceremony's Use were true Partakers of Christ's Flesh and Blood.
of the Flesh and Blood of Christ, without the Use of this Ceremony; as all the
Patriarchs and Prophets did, before this Ordinance (as they account it) was
Instituted. Neither was there any thing under the Law, that had any direct or
necessary Relation hereunto; though to partake of the Flesh and Blood of Christ
in all Ages was indispensibly necessary to Salvation. For as for the Paschal
Lamb, The Paschal Lamb its End.
the whole End of it is signified particularly Exodus 13. 8, 9. to wit, that the
Jews might thereby be kept in remembrance of their deliverance out of Egypt.
Secondly, It has no relation by Divine Precept; for if it had, it would be
mentioned in that, which our Adversaries account the Institution of it, or else
in the Practice of it by the Saints recorded in Scripture: But so it is not.
For as to the Institution, or rather Narration of Christ's Practice in this
matter, we have it recorded by the Evangelists Matthew, Mark and Luke. In the
first two there is only an Account of the matter of Fact, to wit, That Christ
brake Matthew. 26. 20.
Bread, and gave it his Disciples to eat, saying, This is my Body; and blessing
the Cup, Mark 14. 22. Luke 22. 19.
he gave it them to drink, saying, This is my Blood; but nothing of any desire
to them to do it. In the last, after the Bread The Institution of the Supper,
or Narration of Christ's Practice therein.
(but before the Blessing or giving them the Wine) he bids them do it in
Remembrance of him: What we are to think of this Practice of Christ, shall be
spoken of hereafter. But what necessary Relation has all this to the Believers
partaking of the Flesh and Blood of Christ? The End of this, for which they
were to do it (if at all) is to Remember Christ; which the Apostle yet more
particularly expresses, 1 Cor. 11. 26. To show forth the Lord's Death: But to
Remember the Lord, or Declare his Death, which are the special and particular
Ends annexed to the Use of this Ceremony, is not at all to partake of the Flesh
and Blood of Christ, neither have they any more necessary Relation to it, than
any other two different Spiritual Duties. For though they, that partake of the
Flesh and Blood of Christ, cannot but Remember him; yet the Lord and his Death
may be Remembered (as none Began deny) where his Flesh and Blood is not truly
partaken of. So that, since the very particular and express End of this
Ceremony may be witnessed (to wit, the Remembrance of the Lord's Death) and yet
the Flesh and Blood of Christ not partaken of, it cannot have had any necessary
Relation to it, else the partaking thereof would have been the End of it, and
could not have been attained without this Participation. But on the contrary we
may well infer hence, that since the positive End of this Ceremony is not the
partaking of the Flesh and Blood of Christ, and that whoever partakes of the
Flesh and Blood of Christ, cannot but Remember him; that therefore such need
not this Ceremony to put them in Remembrance of him.

That Jesus Christ calls the Bread here his Body, and the Wine his Blood;
therefore he seems to have had a special relation to his Disciples partaking of
his Flesh and Blood in the use of this thing.

Answer; His calling the Bread his Body, and the Wine his Blood, would yet
infer no such thing: Though it is not denied, but that Jesus Christ in all
things he did, yea and from the use of all Natural things, took occasion to
raise the Minds of his Disciples and Hearers to Spirituals. Hence from the
Woman of Samaria The Woman of Samaria. Joh. 4. 14.
her drawing Water, he took occasion to tell her of that Living Water, which
whosoever drinks thereof, shall never thirst; which indeed is all one with his
Blood here spoken of: Yet it will not follow, that that Well, or Water, had any
necessary The Well, the Loaves the Bread and Wine, Christ takes occasion from,
to show the Inward Feeding.
relation to the Living Water, or the Living Water to it, etc. So Christ takes
occasion from the Jews following him for the Loaves, to tell them of this
Spiritual Bread and Flesh of his Body, which was more necessary for them to
feed upon; it will not therefore follow, that their following him for the
Loaves had any necessary relation thereunto. So also Christ here being at
Supper with his Disoiples, takes occasion from the Bread and Wine, which was
before them, to signify unto them, that as That Bread, which he brake unto
them, and That Wine, which he blessed and gave unto them, did contribute to the
preserving and nourishing of their Bodies; so was he also to give his Body, and
shed his Blood for the Salvation of their Souls: And therefore the very End
proposed in this Ceremony, to those that observe it, is to be a Memorial of his
Death.

But if it be said, that the Apostle 1 Cor. 10. 16. Calls the Bread which he
brake, the Communion of the Body of Christ, and the Cup, the Communion of his
Blood.

I do most willingly subscribe unto it; but do deny, that this is understood of
the outward Bread, neither can it be evinced, but the Contrary is manifest from
the Context: For the Apostle in this Chapter speaks not one Word of that
Ceremony. For having in the beginning of it shown them, how the Jews of Old
were made partakers of the Spiritual Food and Water, which was Christ, and how
several of them, through Disobedience and Idolatry fell from that good
Condition, he exhorts them by the Example of those Jews, whom God destroyed of
Old, to flee those Evils; showing them, that they (to wit, the Corinthians) are
likewise partakers of the body and blood of Christ, of which Communion they
would rob themselves, if they did Evil, because they could not drink of the Cup
of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils, and partake of the Lord's Table, and of the
Table of Devils, ver. 21. Which shows, that he understands not here the using
of outward Bread and Wine; because those, that do Drink the Cup of Devils, and
Eat of the Table of Devils, (yea, the Wickedest of Men) may partake The
Wickedest may take the outward Bread and Wine.
of the outward Bread and outward Wine. For there the Apostle calls the bread
One, ver. 17. and he says, We being many, are One bread and one body; for we
are all partakers of that One bread: Now if the bread be One, it cannot be the
Outward, or the Inward would be excluded; whereas it cannot be denied, but that
it is the partaking of the Inward bread, and not the Outward, that makes the
Saints truly One body and One bread. And whereas they say, that the One bread
here The Sacramental Union pretended, is a Figment.
comprehends both the Outward and Inward by virtue of the Sacramental Union;
that indeed is to affirm, but not to prove. As for that Figment of a
Sacramental Union, I find not such a thing in all the Scripture, especially in
the New Testament: Nor is there any thing can give a rise for such a thing in
this Chapter, where the Apostle, as is above observed, is not at all treating
of that Ceremony; but only from the Excellency of that Privilege, which the
Corinthians had, as believing Christians, To partake of the flesh and blood of
Christ, dehorts them from Idolatry, and partaking of the Sacrifices offered to
Idols, so as thereby to offend or hurt their weak Brethren.

Cry out for in this matter, and are always Noising, is from 1 Cor. 11. where
the Apostle is particularly treating of this matter; and therefore from some
Words here they have the greatest Appearance of Truth for their Assertion: As
ver. 27. where he calls the Cup, the Cup of the Lord, and says; That they who
eat of it, and drink it unworthily, are guilty of the body and blood of the
Lord, and ver. 26. Eat and drink their own Damnation: intimating hence, that
this has an immediate or necessary relation to the body, flesh and blood of
Christ.

Unwary Reader; yet being well considered, it does no ways Evince the matter in
Controversy. As for the Corinthians being in the Use of this Ceremony, why
they were so, and how that obliges not Christians now to the same, shall be
spoken of hereafter: it suffices at this time to consider, that they were in
the Use of it. Secondly, That in the Use of it they were guilty of, and
committed diverse Abuses. Thirdly: That the Apostle here is giving them
Directions, how they may do it aright, in showing them the right and proper Use
and End of it.

These things being premised, let it be observed, that the very express and
particular Use of it, according to the Apostle is, To show forth the Lord's
Death, etc. But to show forth the Lord's Death, and partake of the flesh and
blood of Christ, are different things: He says not, As often as ye eat this
Bread, and drink this Cup, ye partake of the Body and Blood of Christ; but, Ye
show forth the Lord's Death. So I acknowledge, that this Ceremony, by those
that practice it, has an Immediate Relation to the outward Body and Death of
Christ upon the Cross, as being properly a Memorial of it; but it does not
thence follow, that it has any inward or immediate Relation to Believers
communicating or partaking of the Spiritual Body and Blood of Christ, or that
Spiritual Supper spoken of Rev. 3. 20. For though in a general way, as every
Religious Action in some respect has a common relation to the Spiritual
Communion of the Saints with God; so we shall not deny, but this has a
relation to others. Now for his calling the Cup, the Cup of the Lord, and
saying, They are guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ, and eat their own
Damnation, in not discerning the Lord's Body, etc. I answer, that this infers
no more Necessary Relation, than any other Religious Act; and amounts to no
more Christ's Act of Bread and Wine is not o^liging others.
than this, that since the Corinthians were in the Use of this Ceremony; and so
performed it as a Religious Act, they ought to do it Worthily, else they should
bring Condemnation upon themselves. Now, this will not more infer the thing so
practiced by them, to be a necessary, Religious Act, obligatory upon others,
than when Romans 14. 6. the Apostle says, He that regards the Day, regards
it unto the Lord, it can be thence inferred, that the Days that some esteemed
and observed, did lay an obligation upon others to do the same. But yet, as he
that Esteemed a Day, and placed Conscience in keeping it, was to regard it to
the Lord, and so it was to him, in so far as he dedicated it unto the Lord, the
Lord's Day, he was to do it Worthily; and if he did it Unworthily, he would be
guilty of the Lord's Day, and so keep it to his own Damnation: So also such as
observe this Ceremony of Bread and Wine, it is to them the Bread of the Lord,
and the Cup of the Lord, because they Use it as a Religious Act: And forasmuch
as their End therein is, To show forth the Lord's Death, and to Remember his
Body, that was Crucified for them, and his Blood, that was shed for them; If
notwithstanding they believe it is their Duty to do it, and make it a matter of
Conscience to forbear, if they do it without that due Preparation and
Examination, which every Religious Act ought to be performed in, then instead
of truly Remembering the Lord's Death, and his Body and his Blood, they render
themselves Guilty of it, as being in one Spirit with those, that Crucified him,
and shed his Blood, though pretending with Thanksgiving and Joy to Remember it.
Thus the Scribes and Pharisees of Old, though in The Pharisees guilt of the
Blood of the Prophets.
Memory of the Prophets they garnished their Sepulchers, yet are said by Christ
to be Guilty of their Blood. And that no more can be hence inferred, appears
from another saying of the same Apostle, Romans 14. 23. He that doubts, is
damned, if he eat, etc. where he, speaking of those that judged it unlawful to
Eat flesh, etc. says, If they eat doubting, they eat their own Damnation. Now
it is manifest for all this, that either the doing or forbearing of this, was
to another, that placed no Conscience in it, of no moment; so I say, he that
Eats that, which in his Conscience he is persuaded is not lawful for him to
Eat, does Eat his own Damnation: So he also, that places Conscience in Eating
bread and wine, as a Religious Act, if he do it Unprepared, and without that
due respect, wherein such Acts should be gone about, he Eats and Drinks his
own Damnation, not discerning the Lord's Body, i. e. not minding what he does,
to wit, with a special Respect to the Lord, and by way of a special
Commemoration of the Death of Christ.

VI. I having now sufficiently shown, what the True Communion of the Body and
Blood of Christ is, how it is partaken of, and how it has no necessary Relation
to that Ceremony of bread and Wine used by Christ with his Disciples; it is sit
now to consider the Nature and Constitution of that Ceremony (for as to the
proper Use of it, we have had occasion to speak before) standing Ordinance in
the Church of Christ, obligatory upon all; or Whether this Ceremony be a
necessary Part of the New Covenant, and Obligatory?
indeed, whether it be any necessary part of the Worship of the New
Covenant-Dispensation, or has any better or more binding Foundation, than
several other Ceremonies appointed and practiced about the same time, which the
most of our Opposers acknowledge to be ceased, and now no ways binding upon
Christians? We find this Ceremony only mentioned in Scripture in four places,
to wit, Matthew, Mark and Luke, and by Paul to the Corinthians: If any would
infer any thing from the frequency of the mentioning of it, that will add
nothing; for it being a matter of Fact, is therefore mentioned by the
Evangelists: And there are other things less Memorable as often, yea oftener
mentioned. Matthew Mat. 26. 26. Mark 14. 22. Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 23.
and Mark give only an Account of the Matter of Fact, without any Precept to do
so afterward; simply declaring, that Jesus at that time did desire them to Eat
of the Bread, and Drink of the Cup: To which Luke adds these Words; This do in
Remembrance of me. If we consider this Action of Christ with his Apostles,
there will appear nothing singular in it, for a Foundation to such a strange
Superstructure, as many in their Airy Imaginations have fought to build upon
it; for both Matthew and Mark press it as an Act done by him, as he was Eating:
Matthew says, And as they were Eating; and Mark, And as they did Eat, Jesus
took bread, etc. Now this Act was no singular thing, neither The breaking of
Bread was no singular thing, but a Custom to Jews. P. Riccius.
any solemn Institution of a Gospel Ordinance, because it was a Constant Custom
among the Jews (as Paulus Riccius observes at length in his Celestial
Agriculture); That when they did Eat the Passover, the Master of the Family did
take Bread, and bless it, and breaking gave of it to the rest; and likewise
taking Wine, did the same: So that there can nothing further appear in this,
than that Jesus Christ, who fulfilled all Righteousness, and also observed the
Jewish Feasts and Customs, used this also among his Disciples only, that, as in
most other things he labored to draw their Minds to a further thing; so in the
use of this he takes occasion to put them in mind of his Death and Sufferings,
which were shortly to be: Which he did the oftener Inculcate unto them, for that
they were Averse from believing it. And as for that Expression of Luke, Do this
in What it is, To do this in Remembrance of Christ.
Remembrance of me; it will amount to no more, than being the last time, that
Christ did Eat with his Disciples, he desired them, that in their Eating and
Drinking they might have regard to him; and by the Remembering of that
opportunity, be the more stirred up to follow him diligently through Sufferings
and Death, etc. But what man of Reason, laying aside the Prejudice of
Education, and the Influence of Tradition, will say, that this Account of the
Matter of Fact given by Matthew and Mark, or this Expression of Luke, to do
that in Remembrance of him, will amount to these Consequences, which the
generality of Christians have sought to draw from it; as calling it
Augustissimum Eucharistiae Sacramentum, Venerabile Altaris Sacramentum, The
Principal Seal of the Covenant of Grace, by which all the Benefits of Christ's
Death are sealed to Believers, and such like things? But to give a further
Evidence, how these Consequences have not any bottom from the Practice of that
Ceremony, nor from the words following, Do this, etc. let us consider another
of the like Nature, as it is at length expressed by John, c. 13. v. 3, 4, 8,
13, 14, 15. Jesus rises from Supper, and laid aside his Garments, and took a
Towel, and girded himself: After that he poured Water into a Basin, and began
to Wash the Disciples Feet, and to wipe them with the Towel, wherewith he was
girded. Peter says unto him, Thou shall never Wash my Feet: Jesus answered
him, If I Wash thee not, thou have no part with me. So after he had Washed
their Christ's Washing of Feet, and its Manner related.
Feet, he said, Know ye, what I have done to you? If I then your Lord and
Master have Washed your Feet, ye also ought to Wash one another Feet: For I
have given you an Example, that ye should do, as I have done to you. As to
which let it be observed, that John relates this Passage to have been done at
the same time, with the other of breaking Bread, both being done the Night of
the Passover, after Supper. If we regard the Narration of this, and the
Circumstances attending it, it was done with far more Solemnity, and prescribed
far more punctually and particularly, than the former. It is said only, As he
was Eating, Compared with the Breaking of Bread.
he took Bread; so that this would seem to be but an Occasional business: But
here he rose up, he laid by his Garments, he girded himself, he poured out the
Water, he Washed their Feet, he wiped them with the Towel; He did this to all
of them: Which are Circumstances surely far more observable, than those noted
in the other. The former was a Practice common among the Jews, used by all
Masters of Families upon that occasion; but this, as to the Manner and Person
acting it, to wit, for the Master to rise up, and Wash the Feet of his Servants
and Disciples, was more singular and observable. In the breaking of Bread, and
giving of Wine, it is not pleaded by our Adversaries, nor yet mentioned in the
Text, that he particularly put them into the hands of all; but breaking it, and
blessing it, gave it the nearest, and so they from hand to hand: But here it is
mentioned, that he Washed not the Feet of one or two, but of many. He says not
in the former, that if they do not eat of that Bread; and drink of that Wine,
they shall be prejudiced by it; but here he says expressly to Peter, that if he
Wash not him, he has no part with him: Which being spoken upon Peter's
Refusing to let him Wash his Feet, would seem to Import no less, than not the
Continuance only, but even the Necessity of this Ceremony. In the former he
says, as it were passingly, Do this in Remembrance of me; but here he sits
down: Again, he desires them to consider what he has done; tells them
positively, that as he has done The Washing one another Feet was left, as an
Example.
to them, so ought they to do to one another: And yet again, he redoubles that
Precept, by telling them, he has given them an Example, that they should do so
likewise. If we respect the Nature of the thing, it has as much in it, as
either Baptism or the breaking of Bread, seeing it is an outward Element of a
cleansing Nature, applied to the outward Man, by the Command and the Example of
Christ, to signify an inward purifying. I would willingly propose this
seriously to Men that will be pleased to make use of that Reason and
Understanding that God has given them, and not be imposed upon, nor abused by
the Custom or Tradition of others, Whether this Ceremony, if we respect either
the Time, that it was Appointed in, or the Circumstances, wherewith it was
performed or the Command enjoining the use of it, has not as much to recommend
it for a standing Ordinance of the Gospel, as either Water Baptism, or Bread
and Wine, or any other of that kind? I wonder then what Reason the Papists can
give, why they have not numbered it among their Sacraments, except merely
Voluntas Ecclesiae and Traditio Patrum.

That it is used among them, in that the Pope and some other Persons among
them, use to do it Once a year to some poor People.

All, as well as that of the Eucharist, (as they term it;) or whence it appears
from the Text, that [Do this in remembrance of me] should be interpreted, that
the Bread and Wine were every day to be taken by all Priests, or the Bread
every day, or every week by the People; and that that other Command of Christ,
Ye ought to do as I have done to you, etc. is only to be understood of the Pope
or some other Persons, to be done only to a few, and that once a year? Surely,
there can be no other Reason for this difference assigned from the Text. And as
to Protestants, who use not The Protestants use not Washing of Feet.
this Ceremony at all, if they will but open their eyes, they may see how that
by Custom and Tradition they are abused in this matter, as were their Fathers
in diverse Popish Traditions. For if we look into the plain Scripture, what can
be thence inferred to urge the One, which may not be likewise pleaded for the
Other? Or for laying aside the One, which may not be likewise said against the
Continuance of the Other? If they say, That the former, of Washing the Feet,
was only a Ceremony; What have they, whence they can show, that this breaking
of bread is more? If they say, That the former was only a Sign of Humility and
Purifying, What have they to prove that this was more? If they say, The one was
only for a Time, and was no Evangelical Ordinance: What has this to make it
such, that the other wanted? Surely there is no way of Reason to evite this,
neither can any thing be alleged that the one should Cease, and not the other;
or the one Continue, and not the other, but the mere Opinion of the Affirmers,
which by Custom, Education and Tradition, has begotten in the hearts of People
a greater Reverence for, and Esteem of the one, than the other: Which, if it
had fallen out to be as much recommended to us by Tradition, would, no doubt,
have been as tenaciously pleaded for, as having no less Foundation in the
Scripture. But since the former, to wit, the Washing of one another Feet, is
justly laid aside, as not binding upon Christians, so ought also the other, for
the same Reason.

. VII. But I strange that those that are The breaking of Bread not used now in
the same manner as Christ did.
so Clamorous for this Ceremony, and stick so much to it, take liberty to
dispense with the Manner or Method that Christ did it in; since none, that ever
I could hear of, who now do it, use it in the same way that he did it: Christ
did it at Supper, while they were eating; but they do it in the Morning only by
it self: What Rule walk they by in this Change?

These are but Circumstances, and not the Matter; and if the Matter be kept to,
the alteration of Circumstances is but of small moment.

Whole is but a Circumstance which fell out at that time when Christ did Eat
the Passover? For if we have regard to that, which alone can be pleaded for an
Institution, viz. these Words, Do this in remembrance of me; it does as
properly relate to the Manner, as Matter. For how may or can they evince in
Reason, that these Words, Do this, only signify, Eat Bread, and drink Wine,
but it is no matter when ye eat, nor how ye eat it; and not, as ye have seen me
eat at Supper with you, who take Bread and break it, and give it you; and take
the Cup, and bless it, and give it you, so do ye likewise? And seeing Christ
makes no distinction in those Words, Do this, it cannot be judged in Reason but
to relate to the whole: Which if it do, all those that at present use this
Ceremony among Christians, have not yet obeyed this Precept, nor fulfilled this
Institution, notwithstanding all their Clamours concerning it,

That the Time and Manner of doing it by Christ, was but Accidentally, as being
after the Jewish Passover: which was at Supper.

That the whole was Accidental, as being the Practice of a Jewish Ceremony, as
The breaking of Bread was a Jewish Ceremony.
is above observed; May it not the same way be urged, that the Drinking of Wine
was Accidental, as being the Natural Product of that Country? and so be
pleaded, that in those Countries where Wine does not grow, as in our Nation of
Scotland, we may make use of Beer or Ale, in the use of this Ceremony, or Bread
made of other Grain than that which Christ used? And yet would not our
Adversaries judge this an Abuse, and not right peforming of this Sacrament?
Yea, have not Scruples of this kind occasioned no little Contention among the
Professors of Christianity? What Contests between the Greek and Latin
Churches, concerning the Leavened and Unleavened Bread in the Supper.
great Contest and Strife has been betwixt the Greek and Latin Churches
concerning the Bread? While the one will have it Unleavened, reckoning, because
the Jews made use of Unleavened Bread in the Passover, that it was such kind of
Bread that Christ did break to his Disciples; the other Leavened: Therefore the
Lutherans make use of Unleavened Bread, the Calvinists of Leavened: And this
Contest was so hot, when the Reformation was beginning at Geneva, that Calvin
and Farellus were forced Farellus.
to flee for it. But do not Protestants by these Uncertainties open a Door to
Papists for their excluding the People from the Cup? Will not [Do this] infer
positively, that they should do in the same Manner, and at the same Time, which
Christ did it, as well as that they should use the Cup, and not the Bread only?
Or what reason have they to dispense with the One, more than the Papists have
to do with the Other? O what strange Absurdities and Inconveniences have
Christians brought upon themselves, by superstitiously adhering to this
Ceremony! Out of which Difficulties it is impossible for them to extricate
themselves, but by laying it aside, as they have done others of the like
Nature. For besides what is abovementioned, I would gladly The Clergy Taking
Bread, do bless and give it; the Laity must Take and Eat, not Bless it.
know, how from the words they can be certainly Resolved, that these words [Do
this] must be understood to the Clergy, Take, bless and break this Bread, and
give it to others; but to the Laity only, Take and eat, but do not bless? etc.

That the Clergy was only present.

Popish Argument against the Administration of the Cup to the People? Or may
not another from thence as easily infer, That only the Clergy ought to partake
of this Ceremony, because they were only those present to whom it was said Do
this? But if this [Do this] be extended to all, how comes it that all have not
liberty to obey it, in both blessing, breaking and distributing, as well as
taking and eating? Besides all these, even the Calvinian Protestants of Great
Britain could never yet accord among themselves about the Manner of taking it,
whether sitting, standing, or kneeling; whether it should be Hot Contests about
the Manner of Taking it, and to whom to Give it.
given to the Sick, and those that are ready to Die, or not: Which
Controversies, though they may be esteemed of small moment, yet have greatly
contributed, with other things, to be the occasion not only of much Contention,
but also of Bloodshed and Devastation; so that in this last respect the
Prelatick Calvinists have termed the Presbyterians Schismatical and
Pertinacious, and and they them again Superstitious, Idolatrous and Papistical.
Who then that will open their Eyes, but may see that the Devil has stirred up
this Contention and Zeal, to busy men about things of small Moment, that
greater Matters may be neglected, while he keeps them in such a do about this
Ceremony; while they lay aside others of the like Nature, as positively
Commanded, and as punctually Practiced, and from the Observation of which, half
so many Difficulties will not follow?

VIII. How then? Have we not Reason, not finding the Nature of this Practice to
be obligatory upon us, more than those other our Adversaries have laid aside,
to avoid all this Confusion, since those that use it, can never agree, neither
concerning the Nature, Efficacy, nor Manner of doing it? And this proceeds,
because they take it not plainly, as it lies in the Scripture; but have so much
mixed in their own Inventions.

For would they take it as it lies, it would import no more, than that Jesus
Christ at that time did thereby signify unto them, that his Body and Blood was
to be offered for them; and desired them, that whenever they did eat or
drink, they might do it in Remembrance of him, or with a Regard to him, whose
Blood was shed for them.

Now that the Primitive Church, gathered immediately after his Ascension, did
so understand it, does appear from their Use and Practice, if we admit those
places in the Acts, where breaking of Bread is spoken of, to have relation
hereto; which as our Adversaries do, so we shall willingly agree to. As first,
Acts 2. 42. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and
Fellowship, and in Breaking of Bread, etc. This cannot be understood of any
other than of their Ordinary Eating; for as nothing else appears from the Text,
so the Context makes it plain; for they By Breaking of Bread they had all
things in comman; Remembering the Lord.
had all things in common; and therefore it is said, Ver. 26. And they
continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, and Breaking of Bread from
House to House, did eat their Meat with gladness, and singleness of heart. Who
will not wilfully close their Eyes, may see here, that their Breaking being
joined with their Eating, shows, that nothing else is here expressed, but that,
having all things in common, and so continuing together, they also did Break
their Bread, and Eat their Meat together: In doing whereof I shall not doubt
but they Remembered the Lord, to follow whom they had with so great Zeal and
Resignation betaken themselves. This is further manifest from Acts 6. 26. For
the Apostles having the Care and Distribution of that Money, which the
Believers having sold their Possessions gave unto them, finding themselves
overcharged with that Burden, appointed Deacons for that business, that they
might give themselves continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry of the Deacons
appointed for serving at Tables.
Word; not leaving that, to serve Tables. This cannot be meant of any
Sacramental Eating, or Religious Act of Worship; seeing our Adversaries make
the distributing of that, the proper Act of Ministers, not of Deacons: And yet
there can be no Reason alleged, that that Breaking of Bread which they are
said to have Continued in, and to have done from House to House, was other,
than those Tables that the Apostles served, but here gave over, as finding
themselves overcharged with it.

Now as the increase of the Disciples did incapacitate the Apostles any more to
manage this; so it would seem their further Increase and Dispersing in diverse
places, hindered the continuance of that Practice of having things in Common:
But notwithstanding, so far at least to Remember or Continue that Ancient
Community, they did at certain times come together, and break Bread together.
Hence it is said, Acts 20. 7. that Paul At Troas the Supper till Midnight
deferred.
coming to Troas, And upon the first day of the Week, when the Disciples came
together to Break Bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the
Morrow, and continued his Speech until Midnight: Here is no mention made of any
Sacramental Eating, but only, that Paul took occasion from their being
together, to preach unto them. And it seems, it was a Supper they intended,
(not a Morning-Bit of Bread and Sup of Wine) else its not very probable, that
Paul would from the Morning have preached until Midnight. But the Eleventh
Verse puts the matter out of Dispute, which is thus: When he therefore was come
up again, and had broken Bread, and eaten, and talked a long while, even till
break of day, so he departed: This shows, that the Breaking of Bread was
deferred till that time; for those words [and when he had broken Bread, and
eaten] do show, that it had a relation to the Breaking of Bread aforementioned,
and that that was the time he did it. Secondly; These words joined together,
[and when he had broken Bread, and eaten, and talked] show, it was no Religious
Act of Worship, but only an Eating They only did Eat for refreshing the Body.
for bodily Refreshment, for which the Christians used to Meet together some
time: And doing it in God's Fear and Singleness of Heart, does notwithstanding
difference it from the Eating or Feasting of profane Persons. And this by some
is called a By some called a Love-Feast.
Love-Feast, or a being together not merely to feed their Bellies, or for
outward Ends; but to take thence occasion to Eat and Drink together in the
Dread and Presence of the Lord, as his People: Which Custom we shall not
Condemn; but let it be observed, that in all the Acts there is no other, nor
further mention of this matter. But if that Ceremony had been some Solemn
Sacrifice, as some will have it, or such a Special Sacrament, as others plead
it to be, it is strange, that that History, that in many lesser things gives a
particular Account of the Christians Behavior, should have been so silent in
the matter: Only we find, that they used sometimes to Meet together to break
Bread and Eat. Now as the Primitive Christians began by degrees to depart from
that Primitive Purity The Christians began by degrees to depart from the
Primitive Purity.
and Simplicity, so as to accumulate Superstitious Traditions, and vitiate the
Innocent Practices of their Predecessors, by the intermixing either of Jewish
or Heathenish Rites; so also in the Use of this, very early Abuses began to
creep in among Christians, so that it was needful for the Apostle Paul to
Reform them, and Reprove them therefore, as he does at large, 1 Cor. 11. 1 Cor.
11. 17. Concerning the Supper (of the Lord, so called) Explained.
from ver. 17. to the End: Which place we shall particularly Examine, because
our Adversaries lay the chief Stress of their matter upon it; and we shall see,
whether it will infer any more, than we have above granted. First, Because they
were apt to use that Practice in a superstitious mind beyond the true Use of
it, as to make of it some Mystical Supper of the Lord, he tells them, v. 20.
That their Coming together into one place, is not to Eat the Lord's Supper; he
says not, This is not the right Manner to Eat, but, This is is not to Eat the
Lord's Supper; because the Supper of the Lord is Spiritual, and a Mystery.
Secondly, He blames them, in that they come together for the worse, and not for
the better; the Reason he gives of this, is ver. 21. For in Eating every one
has taken before his own Supper; and one is hungry, and another is drunken:
Here it Why the Custom of Supping in Common was used among Christians?
is plain, that the Apostle Condemns them for that, because this Custom of
Supping in general was used among Christians for to increase their Love, and as
a Memorial of Christ's Supping with the Disciples, that they should have so
vitiated it, to eat it apart; and to come full, who had abundance, and hungry,
who had little at home; whereby the very Use and End of this Practice is lost
and perverted: And therefore he blames them, that they do not either Eat this
in Common at home, or reserve their Eating, till they come all together to the
Public Assembly. This appears plainly by the following verse 22. Have ye not
Houses to eat and to drink in? Or despise ye the Church of God, and shame them,
that have not? Where he blames them for their Irregular Practice herein, in
that they despised to Eat orderly, or reserve their Eating to the Public
Assembly, and so shaming such as not having Houses, nor Fullness at home, came
to partake of the Common Table; who, being hungry, thereby were ashamed, when
they observed others come thither full and drunken. Those that without
prejudice will look to the place, will see, this must have been the Case among
the Corinthians: For supposing the Use of this to have been then, as now used
either by Papists, Lutherans or Calvinists, it is hard making sense of the
Apostle's words, or indeed to conceive, what was the Abuse the Corinthians
committed in this thing. Having thus observed, what the Apostle said above,
because this Custom of Eating and The Rise of that Custom.
Drinking together some time, had its rise from Christ's Act with the Apostles
the Night he was betrayed; therefore the Apostle proceeds, ver. 23. to give
them an Account of that: For I have received of the Lord, that which also I
delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus, the same Night, in which he was
betrayed, took Bread, etc. Those, that understand the difference betwixt a
Narration of a thing, and a Command, cannot but see, if they will, that there
is no Command in this place, but only an Account of Matter of Fact: He says
not, I received of the Lord, that as he took Bread, so I should command it to
you to do so also; there is nothing like this in the place: Yea, on the
contrary, ver. 25. where he repeats Christ's Imperative Words to his Apostles,
he places them so, as they import no Command; This do ye, as That (as often)
imports no Command of this Supper.
often as ye drink it, in Remembrance of me: And then he adds; For as often as ye
eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lord's Death, till he come:
But these words [as often] imports no more a Command, than to say, As often as
thou go to Rome, see the Capitol; will infer a Command to me, to go thither.

Ye show forth the Lords Death, till he come, insinuating, That this imports a
necessary Continuance of that Ceremony, until Christ come at the end of the
World to Judgment.

Answer: They take Two of the Chief Parts of the Controversy here for granted,
without proof. First, That [as often] imports a Command, the contrary whereof
is shown; neither will they ever be able to prove it. Secondly, That this
Coming Christ's Outward and Inward Coming.
is understood of Christ's last outward Coming, and not of his Inward and
Spiritual, that remains to be proved; whereas the Apostle might well understand
it of his Inward Coming and Appearance, which perhaps some of those Carnal
Corinthians, that used to come drunken together, had not yet known: And others,
being Weak among them, and inclinable to dote upon Outward, this might have
been Indulged to them for a season, and even used by those, who knew Christ's
Appearance in Spirit, (as other things were, of which we shall speak hereafter)
especially by the Apostle, who became Weak to the Weak, and All to All, that he
might save some. Now those Weak and Carnal Corinthians To Remember Christ't
Death till he come. To Arise in the Heart.
might be permitted the Use of this, to Show forth or Remember Christ's Death,
till he come to Arise in them; for though such need those outward things to put
them in mind of Christ's Death, yet such, as are dead with Christ, and not only
dead with Christ, but buried, and also arisen with him, need not such Signs to
Remember him. And to such therefore the Apostle says, Col. 3. 1. If ye then be
risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sits on
the right hand of God: But Bread and Wine are not these things, that are above;
but are things of the Earth. But that this whole matter was a mere Act of
Indulgence and Condescendence of the Apostle Paul to the Weak and Carnal
Corinthians, appears yet more by the Syriack And likewise the other Oriental
Versions, as the Arabic and Aethiopick, have it the same way.
Copy, which ver. 17. in his entering upon this matter, has it thus: In that,
concerning which I am about to command you (or instruct you,) I commend you
not, because ye have not gone forward, but are descended unto that, which is
less, (or of less Consequence:) Clearly importing, that the Apostle was
grieved, that such was their Condition, that he was forced to give them
Instructions concerning those Outward things; and doting upon which they show,
they were not gone forward in the Life of Christianity; but rather sticking in
beggarly Elements. And therefore ver. 20. the same Version has it thus; When
then ye meet together, ye do not do it, as it is just ye should do in the day
of the Lord, ye eat and drink: Thereby showing to them, that To Meet together
to eat and drink Outward Bread and Wine, was not the Labor and Work of that
Day of the Lord. But since our Adversaries are so zealous for this Ceremony,
because used by the Church of Corinth, (though with how little ground, To
abstain from things strangled.
is already shown) how come they to pass over far more positive Commands of the
Apostles, as matters of no moment? As First, Acts 15. 26. where the Apostles
peremptorily Command even the Gentiles, as that, which was the Mind of the Holy
Ghost, To abstain from things strangled, and from Blood? And Jam. 5. 14. where
it is expressly Commanded, The Anointing with Oil.
That the Sick be Anointed with Oil in the Name of the Lord.

These were only Temporary things, but not to Continue.

Repeal of them?

The Repeal is implied, because the Apostle says, We ought not to be judged in
Meats and Drinks.

be evited to militate the same way against the other Practice? Surely not at
all: nor can there be any thing urged for the one, more than for the other, but
Custom and Tradition.

James, they say, There followed a Miracle upon it, to wit, the Recovery of the
Sick; But, this being Ceased, so should the Ceremony.

Prayer then might as well be forborne, to which also the saving of the Sick is
there ascribed: Yet I shall accept of it, because I judge indeed, that Ceremony
is Ceased; A Ceremony ought to Cease, its Virtue failing.
only me thinks, since our Adversaries (and that rightly) think, a Ceremony
ought to Cease, where the Virtue fails; they ought by the same Rule, to sorbear
the laying on of Hands, in Imitation Thus Laying on of hands.
of the Apostles, since the Gift of the Holy Ghost does not follow upon it.

IX. But since we find, that several Testimonies of Scripture do sufficiently
show, that Such External Rites are no necessary part of the New
Covenant-Dispensation, therefore not needful now to Continue, however they were
for a season practiced of old; I shall instance some few of them, whereby from
the Nature of the thing, as well as those Testimonies, it may appear, that the
Ceremony of Bread The Ceremony of Bread and Wine is Ceased.
and Wine is Ceased, as well as those other things, confessed by our
Adversaries to be so. The first is Romans 14. 17. For the Kingdom of God is not
Meat and Drink, but Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost: Here
the Apostle evidently shows, that the Kingdom of God, or Gospel of Christ,
stands not in Meats and Drinks, and such like things, but in Righteousness; as
by the Context does appear, where he is speaking of the Guilt and Hazard of
judging one another about Meats and Drinks. So then, if the Kingdom of God
stand not in them, nor the Gospel, nor Work of Christ, then the Eating of
Outward Bread and Wine can be no necessary part of the Gospel Worship, nor any
perpetual Ordinance of it. Another is yet more plain of the same Apostle, Col.
2. 16. The Apostle throughout this whole Second Chapter does clearly plead for
us, Col. 2.
and against the Formality and Superstition of our Opposers: For in the
beginning he holds forth the great Privileges Christians have by Christ, who
are come indeed to the Life of Christianity; and therefore he desires them,
ver. 6. As they have received Christ, so to walk in him, and to beware, lest
they be spoiled through Philosophy and vain Deceit, after the Rudiments or
Elements of the World, because that in Christ, whom they have received, is all
Fullness: And that they are Circumcised with the Circumcision made without Hands
(which he calls the Circumcision of Christ) and being buried with him by
Baptism, are also arisen with him through the Faith of the Operation of God.
Here also they did partake of the True Baptism of Christ; and being such, as
are Arisen with him, let us see, whether he thinks it needful, they should make
use of such Meat and Drink, as Bread and Wine, to put them in Remembrance of
Christ's Death? Or whether they ought to be judged, that they did it not, ver.
16. Let no Man therefore judge you in Meat or Drink? Is not Bread and Wine,
Meat and Drink? But why? Which are a Shadow of things to come: But the Body is
of Christ. Then since our Adversaries Confess, It Is but a Sign and Shadow, they
confess.
that their Bread and Wine is a Sign or Shadow, therefore, according to the
Apostle's Doctrine, we ought not to be Judged in the Observation of it. But is
it not fit for those, that are Dead with Christ, to be subject to such
Ordinances? See what he says, ver. 20. Wherefore, if ye be dead with Christ
from the Rudiments of the World, why, as though living in the World, are ye
subject to Ordinances? (Touch not, taste not, handle not: Which all are to
perish with the Using) after the Commandments and Doctrines of Men: What can be
more And which do perish with the Using.
plain? If this serve not to take away the Absolute Necessity of the use of
Bread and Wine, what can it serve to take away? Sure I am, the Reason here
given is applicable to them, which all do perish with the using; since Bread
and Wine perishes with the using, as much as other things. But further, if the
use of Water, and Bread and Wine were that, wherein the very Seals of the New
Covenant stood, and did pertain to the Chief Sacraments of the Gospel and
Evangelical Ordinances, (so called) then would not the Gospel differ from the
Law, or be preferrable to it? Whereas the Apostle shows the difference, The Law
was Meats and Drinks not so the Gospel.
Heb. 9. 10. in that such kind of Observations of the Jews were as a Sign of
the Gospel, for that this stood only in Meats and Drinks, and diverse Washings.
And now, if the Gospel Worship and Service stand in the same, where is the
difference?

These under the Gospel have a Spiritual Signification.

Law, God was the Author of those, as well as Christ is pretended to be the
Author of these. But does not this contending for the use of Water, Bread and
Wine, as necessary Parts of the Gospel Worship, destroy the Nature of it, as if
the Gospel were a Dispensation of Shadows, and not of the Substance; whereas
the Apostle in that of the Colossians abovementioned argues against the Use of
these things, as needful to those, that are dead and arisen with Christ,
because they are but Shadows? And since through the whole Epistle The Law has
Shadow the Gospel brings the Substance.
to the Hebrews, he argues with the Jews to Wean them from their Worship, for
this Reason, because it was Typical and Figurative; is it agreeable to right
Reason to bring them to another of the same Nature? What ground from Scripture
or Reason can our Adversaries bring us to evince, that one Shadow or Figure
should point to another Shadow or Figure, and not to the Substance? And yet
they make the Figure of Circumcision to point to Water Baptism, and the Paschal
Lamb to Bread and Wine. But was it ever known, that one Figure was the Antitype
of the other, especially, seeing Protestants make not these their Antitypes to
have any more Virtue or Efficacy, than the Type had? For since, as they say,
and that truly, That their Their Sacraments confer not Grace.
Sacraments confer not Grace, but that is conferred according to the Faith of
the Receiver; it will not be denied, but the Faithful among the Jews received
also Grace in the Use of their Figurative Worship. And though Papists boast,
that their Sacraments confer Grace ex opere operato, yet Experience abundantly
proves the contrary.

X. But supposing the Use of Water Baptism, and Bread and Wine, to have been in
the Primitive Church, as was also Opposers claim a Power to give their
Sacraments from whence do they derive it?
that of Abstaining from things strangled, and from Blood; the use of Legal
Purifications, Acts 21. 23, 24, 25. and Anointing of the Sick with Oil, for the
Reasons and Grounds before mentioned: Yet it remains for our Adversaries to
show us how they come by Power or Authority to Administer them? It cannot be
from the Letter of the Scripture, else they behoved also to do those other
things, which the Letter declares also they did, and which in the Letter have
as much Foundation. Then their power must be derived from the Apostles either
Mediately, or Immediately; but we have shown before, in the Tenth Proposition,
that they have no Mediate Power, because of the Interruption made by the
Apostasy: And for an Immediate Power or Command by the Spirit of God, to
Administer these things, none of our Adversaries pretend to it.

We know, that in this, as in other things, they make a Noise of the Constant
Consent of the Church, and of Christians in all Ages: But as Tradition is not a
Tradition no sufficient ground for Faith.
sufficient Ground for Faith, so in this matter especially it ought to have but
small Weight, for that in this Point of Ceremonies and Superstitious
Observations, the Apostasy began very arly; as may appear in the Epistles of
Paul to the Galatians and Colossians: And we have no ground to imitate them in
those things, whose Entrance the Apostle so much withstood, so heavily
regretted, and so sharply reproved.

But if we look to Antiquity, we find that in such kind of Observances and
Traditions, they were very uncertain and changeable; so that neither
Protestants nor Papists do observe this Ceremony, as They did, both in that
they gave it to Young Boys and to Little Children: The Supper they gave to
Young Boys and Children.
And for ought can be learned, the Use of this and Infant Baptism are of a like
Age; though the one be laid aside both by Papists and Protestants, and the
other, to wit, Baptism of Infants, be stuck to.

And we have so much the less Reason to lay Weight upon Antiquity, for that, if
we consider their Profession of Religion, especially as to Worship, and the
Ceremorial Part of it, we shall not find any Church now, whether Popish or
Protestant, who differ nor widely from them in many things; as Daleus in his
Treatise concerning the use of the Fathers, Daleus.
well Observes and Demonstrateth.

And why they should Obtrude this upon us, because of the Ancient's Practice,
which they themselves follow not; or why we may not Reject This, as well as
they do Other Things, no less Zealously practiced by the Ancients, there is no
sufficient Reason can be assigned.

I shall not nevertheless doubt, but that many, whose Understandings have been
Clouded with these Ceremonies, have notwithstanding by the Mercy of God, had
some Secret Sense of the Mystery, which they could not Clearly Understand,
because it was Veiled from them, by their sticking unto such Outward Things:
And that through that Secret Sense Diving in their Comprehensions, they ran
themselves into these Carnal Apprehensions, as imagining, the Substance of the
Bread was Changed; or if the Substance was not changed, yet the Body was there,
etc.

And indeed, I am inclinable very favorably to judge of Calvin in this
particular, Calvin's ingenuous Confession commended
in that he deals so ingenuously to confess, he neither Comprehends, nor can
express it in Words; but yet by a feeling Experience can say, The Lord is
spiritually present.

Now as I do not doubt, but Calvin sometimes had a Sense of this Presence
without the Use of this Ceremony, so as the Understanding given him of God,
made him justly reject the false Notions of Transubstantiation and
Consubstantiation, though he knew not what to Establish instead of them: If he
had fully waited in that Light that makes all Things Manifest, and had not
labored in his Ephesians. 5. 15.
own Comprehension, to settle upon that External Ceremony, by affixing the
Spiritual Presence as Chiefly or Principally, though not only (as he well knew
by Experience) there, or especially to relate to it; he might have reached
further unto the Knowledge of this Mystery, than many that went before him.

XI. Lastly, If any now at this Day, In tenderness of Conscience at Ignorance
God winketh.
from a true Tenderness of Spirit, and with real Conscience toward God, did
practice this Ceremony in the same Way, Method and Manner, as did the Primitive
Christians recorded in Scripture, (which yet none, that I know, now do) I
should not doubt to affirm, but they might be indulged in it; and the Lord
might regard them, and for a season Appear to them in the Use of these things;
as many of us have known him to do to us, in the time of our Ignorance:
Provided always, they did not seek to Obtrude them upon others, nor Judge such
as found themselves Delivered, or that they do not pertinaciously adhere to
them.

For we certainly know that the Day The Day is Dawned that God is Risen, and
Worshipped in Spirit.
is Dawned, in which God has Arisen, and has Dismissed all those Ceremonies
and Rites, and is only to be Worshipped in Spirit; and that he Appears to them
who Wait upon him: And that to Seek God in these things is, with Mary at the
Sepulcher, To seek the Living among the Dead: For we know that he is Arisen,
and Revealed in Spirit, leading his Children out of these Rudiments; that they
may Walk with Him in his Light: To whom be Glory for ever!

Amen.
THE END.
BOOKS Printed and Sold by T. Soul, next to the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street.
THe Works of that Memorable and Ancient Servant of Christ, Stephen Crisp;
containing also a Journal of his Life, giving an Account of his Convincement,
Travels, Labors, and Sufferings in and for the Truth Price bound 5 s.

A Collection of the several Writings and Faithful Testimonies of that
Suffering Servant of God, and patient Follower of the Lamb, Humphry Smith.
Price bound 2 s. 6 d.

A Collection of certain Epistles and Testimonies of Divine Cousolation,
Experience and Doctrine; Written by that Faithful, Patient, and Long-suffering
Servant of Christ, William Bennit. Price bound 1 s. 8 d.

The Memory of the Righteous Revived; being a brief Collection of the Books and
written Epistles of John Camm and John Audland: Together with several
Testimonies relating to those two Faithful Laborers. Price bound 2 s.

Truth Vindicated, by the Faithful Testimony and Writings of the Innocent
Servant and Handmaid of the Lord Elizabeth Bathurst, Deceased. Price bound 1 s.

A Catechism and Confession of Faith. By R. Barclay, Price bound 9 d.

No Cross, No Crown. A Discourse showing the Nature and Discipline of the Holy
Cross of Christ. By W. Penn, In two Parts; Price 3 s.

An Account of W. Penn's Travails in Holland and Germany, Anno MDCLXXVII. Price
2 s.

A Brief Account of the Rise and Progress of the People called Quakers. By W.
Penn. Price 1 s.

BOOKS Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street,
and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-Street, 1699.
TRuth's Principles: Or, those things about Doctrine and Worship which are most
surely believed and received amongst the People of God, called Quakers, viz.
Concerning the Man Christ, His Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, Faith in his
Blood, the Imputation of his Righteousness, Sanctification, Justification, etc.
by John Crook: To which is added, somewhat concerning the Difference between the
Persuasions of Reason, and the Persuasions of Faith. By Isaac Penington. price
stitched 3 d.

A Defense of a Paper, Entitled, Gospel Truths, against the Exceptions of the
Bishop of Cork's Testimony. (Against the Quakers.) By W. Penn. price Bound 12 d.

Anguis Flagellatus: Or, a Switch for the Snake. Being an Answer to the Third
and Last Edition of The Snake in the Grass. Wherein that Author's Injustice and
Falsehood, both in Quotation and Story, are discovered and obviated. And the
Truth Doctrinally delivered by Us, stated and maintained in Opposition to his
Misrepresentation and Perversion. By Joseph Wyeth. To which is added a
Supplement by George Whitehead.

The Christian Quaker and his Divine Testimony stated and vindicated, from
Scripture, Reason and Authority. By W. Penn. price Bound 2 s.

England's present Interest considered, with Honor to the Prince, and Safety
to the People. In Answer to this one Question, What is most Fit Easy and Safe
to he done, for Allaying the Heat of contrary Interests, and making them
Consistent with the Prosperity of the Kingdom? Submitted to the Consideration
of our Superiors. By W. Penn. price Bound 1 s.

The Trial of Spirits both in Teachers and Hearers. Wherein is held forth the
clear Discovery and certain Downfall of the Carnal and Antichristian Clergy of
these Nations. Testified from the Word of God to the University Congregations
in Cambrige. Whereunto is added, a plain and necessary Confutation of diverse
Gross Errors delivered by Mr. Sydrach Sympson, in a Sermon preached to the same
Congregation at the Commencement, Anno MDCLIII. Wherein (among other things) is
declared, that the Universities (according to their present Statutes and
Practices) are not (as he affirmed) answerable to the Schools of the Prophets
in the time of the Law; but rather to the Idolatrous High Places. And that
Humane Learning is not a Preparation appointed by Christ, either for the right:
Understanding, or right Teaching the Gospel. With a brief Testimony against
Divinity-Degrees in the Universities. As also Luther's Testimony at large upon
the whole Matter. And lastly, The right Reformation of Learning, Schools, and
Universities, according to the State of the Gospel, and the Light that shines
therein. All necessary for the Instruction and Direction of the Faithful in
these last times. By William Dell, Minister of the Gospel, and Master of Convil
and Caius College in Cambrige. price Bound 1 s. 6 d.

The Defense of the People called Quakers: Being a Reply, to a Book lately
Published by certain Priests of the County of Norfolk, under the pretended
Title of The Quakers Challenge. And containing some brief and modest
Animadversions upon the Book it self. Several Certificates, which Detect the
Errors in those of West-Dereham, and Clear the People called Quakers of the
said Challenge. The Letters that passed between Them and the Priests. price
Stitched 6 d.

Truth and Innocence Vindicated, and the People called Quakers Defended, in
Principle and Practice, against Invidious Attempts and Calumnies. Being a just
Examination of two Books against the said People, Entitled, 1st, A Brief
Discovery, etc. by three Norfolk Priests. 2d, Some few of the Quakers many
horrid Blasphemies, etc. being a Scandalous Libel; Examined by George Whitehead
a Servant of Christ. Containing also many of the repeated Abuses in John
Meriton's Antidote, and Francis Bugg's Pilgrims's Progress. price 9 d.

The Friendly Enquirer's Doubts and Objections answered: Concerning The Light
within the Word of God, the Church of Christ, Gospel Ministers, Ordinances in
General and in Particular, Water Baptism and the Lord's Supper: Together with a
brief Testimony against Oahs and Tithes. First intended and written for the
Satisfaction of some particular Acquaintance; and now published for more
General Ser^^ce. By James Jackson. price Bound 6 d.

Essays about the Poor, Manufactur^, Trade Plantations and Immorality, and of
the Excellency and Divinity of Inward Light; de^onstrated from the Attributes
of God, and the Nature of Man's Soul, as well as from the T^^timony of Holy
Scriptures. By John Bellers. p^^ce Stitched 4 d.

Enchiridion. Containing Maxims Divine and Moral. price Bound 9 d.

The Works of that Memorable and Ancient Servant of Christ, Stephen Crisp;
containing also a Journal of his Life, giving an Account of his Convincement,
Travels, Labors and Sufferings in, and for the Truth. Price Bound 5 s.

The Memory of the Righteous Revived, being a brief Collection of the Books and
written Epistles of John Camm and John Audland: Together with several
Testimonies relating to those two Faithful Laborers. Price Bound 2 s.

Baptism and the Lord's Supper, Substantially Asserted; being an Apology in
behalf of the People called Quakers, concerning those Two Heads. By Robert
Barclay. Price Bound 1 s.

A Catechism and Confession of Faith, By R. Barclay. Price Bound 9 d.

No Cross, No Crown. A Discourse showing the Nature and Discipline of the Holy
Cross of Christ By W. Penn. In Two Parts. The Fifth Editio^. Price Bound 3 s.

An Account of W. Penn's Travails in Holland and Germany, for the Service of
the Gospel of Christ; by way of (...) Journal. Containing also diverse Letters
and Epistles writ to several Great and Eminent Pe^^ons whilst there. The Second
Impression, Cor^^cted by the Author's own Copy, with some An^^ers not before
Printed. Price Bound 2 s.

A Brie^ Account of the Rise and Progress of the People called Quakers, in
which their Fundamental Pr^^ciple, Doctrines, Worship, Ministry and Discip^^^e
are plainly Declared, to prevent the Mistake and Perversions that Ignorance and
Prejudice (...) make to abuse the Credulous. With a Sum^ary Relation of the
former Dispensations (God in the World, by way of Introduction. By W. Penn.
Price Bound 1 s.

The Harmony of Divine and Heavenly Doctrines, Demonstrated in sundry
Declarations on Variety of Subjects. Preached at the Quakers Meetings in
London, by Mr. W. Penn, Mr. G. Whitehead, Mr. S. Waldenfield, Mr. B. Cool,
Taken in Shorthand as it was delivered by them; and now Faithfully Transcribed
and Published for the Information of those who by reason of Ignorance may have
received a Prejudice against them. By a Lover of that People. Price Bound 1 s.
6 d.

Primitive Christianity Revived, in the Faith and Practice of the People called
Quakers. Written in Testimony to the present Dispensation of God, through them
to the World: That Prejudices may be Removed, the Simple Informed, the
Wellenclined Encouraged, and the Truth and its Innocent Friends Rightly
Represented. By W. Penn. Price Bound 1 s.

A Diurnal Speculum; containing, I. A plain and easy Method to find out those
things that are most useful to be known Yearly: And my serve as an Almanac for
Thirty Years; and ma^y other things suitable to the Matter, etc. II. A^
Explanation of Weights, Money, and Measur^^, both Scriptural and Usual, with
sundry Table^ depending thereon, etc. III. Some Remarks o^ England; or a Brief
Account of every County, with the Names, and Days of the Markets, and the Chief
Commodities therein, etc. The whol^ consisting of great Variety, explained by
diver^ Examples, the like in all particulars not extant; as by the Contents
does more at large appear Collected by J. B. Price Bound 1 s. 6 d.

The Arraignment of Popery; bei^^; a Collection taken out of the Chronicles and
^^her Books of the State of the Church in the Primitive Times. I. The State of
the Papist; how long it was before the Universal POPE and MASS was set up; and
the bringing in their Rudiments, Traditions, Beads, Imagies, Purgatories,
Tithes and Inquisitions. II. A Relation of the Cruelties they acted after the
Pope got up, being worse than the Turk and Heathen: New Rome proving like Old.
III. What the People of England, Worshipped before they were Christians. VI. To
which is added, the Blood of the Martyrs is the Seed of the Church. With
several other things, very profitable for all that fear God to Read, Try and
give Judgment by the Spirit of Truth, against the Worship of the Beast and
Whore. Price Bound 1 s. 6 d.

An Invitation from the Spirit of Christ, to all that are a Thirst, to come and
Drink of the Waters of Life freely, which proceed from the Fountain of Eternal
Life: Showing how all may come, that ar^ willing, to Drink thereof to their
full Satisfaction; whereby they may attain unto perfect Health and Salvation of
their Souls for ever in the Lord Je^us Christ. And also, showing what it is
that hin^reth People from being truly a Thirst after the Waters of Life; and
from coming to Drink t^ereof; with the destructive Quality of that which
hindered; and how it may be avoided. Conclude^ with a word to all Singers, upon
a Religious or Spiritual Account. Written by Henry Mollineux. Price Bound 1 s.

Spira Res^^^ans; or the Way to the Kingdom of Heaven, by ^he Gates of Hell; in
an Extraordinary Exampl^ By a Person brought to the depths of Despair (...)
Anguish, recovered by the Mighty Grace and Power of God, and raised to the
heights of Ass^^^nce and Joy. Wherein are some uncomm^n Considerations
concerning the manner of ^alvation and Damnation, Life and Death, Happ^ness and
Misery. With some Fundamental Arguments for the Immortality of the Soul. Price
St^tch'd 4 d.

A few Queries relating to the Practice of Physic, with Remarks upon some of
them. Modestly proposed to the serious Consideration of Mankind, in order to
their Information how their Lives and Healths (which are so necessary, and
therefore ought to be dear to them) may be better preserved. By H. Chamberlen,
Physician in Ordinary to the Late King Charles the Second. price Bound 1 s.

Christ's Spirit a Christian's Strength: Or, a plain Discovery of the Mighty
and Invincible Power that all Believers receive through the Gift of the Spirit.
First held forth on two Sermons, on Act. 1. 8. and after published for the
Instruction and Use of those that are Spiritual, Anno 1645. by William Dell,
Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ price Stitched 6 d.

Truth's Innocence and Simplicity Shining, through the Conversion,
Gospel Ministry, Labor Epistles of Love, Testimonies and Warnings to
^rofessors and Profane (with the long and Pati^^t Sufferings) of that Ancient
and Faithful M^ist^r and Servant of Jesus Christ, Thomas Ta^^or. price Bound 5
s.

A New Discourse of Trade, where^^ is Recommended several weighty Points
re^^^ing to the Companies of Merchants, the Act of Navigation, Naturalization
of Strangers, and our Woollen Manufactures, the Balance of Trade, and the
Nature of Plantations, and their C^^sequences in Relation to the Kingdom, are
seri^^sly Discussed: And some Proposals for erecting a Cour^ of Merchants for
determining Controversies, rel^^ing to Maritine Affairs, and for a Law for
Transference of Bills of Debts, are humbly Offered. By Sir Josiah Child. price
Bound 2 s.

A Light shining out of Darkness: Or, Occasional Queries submitted to the
Judgment of such as would enquire into the True State of Things in our Times.
The whole Work revised by the Author, the Proofs englished and augmented, with
sundry Material Discourses, concerning the Ministry, Separation, Inspiration,
Scriptures, Humane Learning, Oaths, Tithes, etc. With a brief Apology for the
Quakers, that they are not Inconsistent with Magistracy. The Third Edition.
Price Bound 15. 6 d.

God's Protecting Providence, Man's Surest Help and Defense, in Times of the
greatest Difficulty, and most eminent Danger. Evidenced in the Remarkable
Deliverance of Robert Barrow, with diverse other Persons, from the devouring
Waves of the Sea; amongst which they suffered Shipwreck: And also, From the
cruel Devouring Jaws of the Inhumane Cannals of Florida. Faithfully Related by
one of the Persons concerned therein, Jonathan Dickenson. Price 8 d.

A Collection of the Christian Writings, Labors, Travels and Sufferings, of
that Faithful and Approved Minister of Jesus Chr^^t, Roger Haydock. To which is
added, an Account of his Dea^^ and Burial. Price 2 s.

The ^^or Mechanics Plea, against the Rich Clergys Oppression Showing, Tithes
are no Gospel Ministers Maintenance. (...) a brief and plain Method, how that
Tithes (as now paid) are ^oth inconsistent with the Dispensation of the Law,
and Dispe^tion of the Gospel. Also, how they were brought into the Ch^^ch, many
Hundred Years after Christ, and testified againstly several Ancient Christians
and Martyrs. With several Sobe^ Reasons against the Payment thereof. By John
Bockett. (...) 3 d.

The Univ^^sality of the Love of God asserted, in a Testimony to the ^ree Grace
in Jesus Christ. By William Rawbinson. Price d.

A Plain (...) of certain Christian Experiences, Labors, Service and
Sufferings, of that Ancient Servant, and Minister of (...), Roger Hebden.
Containing both Warning, Consolation and Instruction in Righteousness.


