AN HISTORY OF Apparitions, Oracles, Prophecies, and Predictions, With Dreams,
Visions, and Revelations. AND THE Cunning Delusions of the DEVIL, to strengthen
the Idolatry of the GENTILES, and the Worshipping of Saints departed; With the
Doctrine of Purgatory.

A Work very seasonable, for discovering the Impostures and Religious Cheats of
these Times.

Collected out of sundry Authors of great Credit; And delivered into English
from their several Originals,

By T. B.

Whereunto is annexed, A Learned TREATISE, confuting the Opinions of the
SADDUCES and EPICURES, (denying the appearing of Angels and Devils to Men) with
the Arguments of those that deny that Angels and Devils can assume Bodily
shapes.

Written in FRENCH, And now rendered into ENGLISH.

With a Table to the whole Work.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, dwelling in Well-Yard, near the Hospital of
S. Bartholomews the Less, 1658.

TO THE HONORABLE, THE Lord Cholmley, Lord Viscount Kell, etc.
My Lord,
I Should in the first place (if possible) anticipate your wonder; when these
rude Lines shall plainly salute You, Defender and Protector of their
Innocence: Since I, who have thus preposterously run them, am not so happy as
to be known to Your Honor. I shall therefore humbly take leave to declare the
grounds of this my presumption (for I dare not call it otherwise, unless by
your permission). The first is, your unbounded Goodness; to which I am
relatively obliged, and much acquainted by the frequent commemorations of my
nearest Relation, whose Father had the happiness to live and die under the
benevolent influence of Your honorable Service; And, by the Information of
those whose expressions proceed from the dictates of their own Experience,
find, That where You have once obliged any by Your incomparable benignity, Your
favors flowed down infinitely to all Relations. The next is, The Worthiness of
those Learned Authors, by whose Care and Industry these Examples were left for
the use of future Ages: whose Ashes might justly rise up against me, if (being
so unworthy to mention, much less to collect their Labors my self) I should
not commend them to the Patronage of one most Noble and Ingenious: Nor do I
conceive it the lightest consideration, That Your Lordship being acquainted
with these Collections in their several Originals, must necessarily (for the
communicative quality inherent in all truly noble and generous dispositions)
wish they were accommodated to the apprehensions of inferior capacities.

I shall not trouble Your Honor with what Motives I had for exposing this Work
to public View; Since these so much Saducean and Socinian Times, most loudly,
proclaim an eminent necessity of utmost endeavors in this particular: And
since it is the duty of all men, to study rather the Public, than their own
private, advantage.

It being a Stranger, needs the more Encouragement. Besides, being ushered into
this our English World by so unworthy a hand, must consequently participate of
the weakness of my endeavors: But however defective, or exposed to injury,
Your acceptance will abundantly supply it, and your Patronage secure it from
the imputation or prejudice of any Momus.

Should I further question that invincible Courtesy which I hear every where
extolled, I might thereby aggravate, instead of extenuating, my Presumption.
Therefore I shall cease to trouble you further, but with this one request, That
You will favorably interpret my boldness in subscribing my self,

My Lord, Your Honors most humbly devoted Servant, Thomas Bromhall.

A Catalogue of the Authors out of which these Stories and Examples are
selected.
A.
ADon Viennensis. Aelianus. Aemilius. Aeneas Sylvius. Agatinus. Alexander ab
Alexandro. Antonius Beneventus. Antonius de Turquemada. Apollonius. Apulejus.
Artunus. Athenaeus. Aventinus. Augustinus.
B.
BArtholomaeus Bononiensis. Benno Cardinalis. Blondus. Bonfinius.
C.
CArolus Magnus. Caspar Goldwurm. Caspar Peucerus. Cassiodorus Remius.
Catalogus Treverensis. Cedrenus. Chronicon Cassinense. Chronicon Helvetiae.
Chronicon Saxoniae. Cicero. Coelius. Collenutius. Cromerus. Cuspinianus.
D.
DIctys. Diodorus Siculus. Diogenes Laertius. Dion Cassius. Dion Nicaeus.
Dosithaeus.
E.
EGnatius. Erasmus Rotterodamus. Euagrius. Eunapius. Eusebius. Eustachius.
F.
FRanciscus Petrarcha. Francius. Fulgosus.
G.
GEllius. Georgius Agricola. Georgius Sabinus. Gilbertus Cognatus. Gregoras.
Gregorius Turonenus. Gulielmus Mamulsbruciensis.
H.
HAdriani Chronicon. Haithonus Armenus. Hector Boethus. Henricus Coloniensis.
Henricus Erfordiensis. Hermanus Gygas. Herodotus. Hieronymus. Hieronymus
Cardanus. Homerus.
I.
JAcobus Meyer. Jacobus Ruffus. Jason Pratensis. Joachimus Camerarius. Joannes
Agricola, Joannes Baptista Porta, Neapolitanus. Joannes Bodinus. Joannes
Fincelius. Joannes Langius. Joannes Magus. Joannes Meyer. Joannes Saxo,
Grammat. Joannes Trithemius. Joannes Vierus. Jobus Fincelius. Jodocus
Darmudanus. Josephus.
L.
LAurentius Valla. Leonides. Lilius Gregorius Gyraldus. Livius. Ludovicus
Guicciardinus. Lycosthenes.
M.
MAcrobius. Malleus Maleficarum. Mamelburiensis. Manlius. M. Fritschius. M.
Paulus, Venetus. Martinus Lutherus. Marulus. Metaphrastes. Munsteri
Cosmographia. Mutius.
N.
NAtalis Comes. Nauclerus. Nicephorus. Nicetas. Nicolaus.
O.
OLaus Magnus. Ovidius.
P.
PAschasius. Paulus Aemilius. Paulus Diaconus. Paulus Grillandus. Paulus
Jovius. Pausanias. Petrus Ciezus. Petrus Mamorius. Philippus Melancthon.
Philostratus. Platina. Plinius. Plutarchus. Pollux. Polydorus Virgilius.
Pontanus.
R.
RAbanus. Ramulphus. Regino. Robertus Gaguinus. Rutilius.
S.
SAbellicus. Schaffnaburgensis. Servius. Severus Sulpitius. Sigebertus.
Sleidanus. Socrates. Sozomenus. Statius. Stobaeus. Strabo. Suetonius. Suidas.
T.
THeodoretus. Theodoric. Gresmundus. Theopompus. Thomas Patriarcha
Barbasiensis. Turpinus, Remensis.
V.
Valor. Maximus Vincentius. Ulricus Molitor. Volaterranus. Vopiscus. Urbanus.
Urspergensis.
W.
WErnerus.
X.
XIphilinus.
Z.
ZOnaras.
AN HISTORY OF Most strange Fantasies and Apparitions, with the various
sleights and cunning delusions of Devils.
MArcus Brutus and Cassius, who had murdered Caesar, came together to Sardis,
where it is reported, Brutus was accosted with a horrible Vision. He was a man,
naturally very watchful, and one so laborious and continent, that he afforded
himself but a very small part of his time to sleep in. In the day he rested not
at all, in the night very little; and that when (all men being drowned in
sleep) he had neither any employment to do, nor person to converse with. And,
at that time, being engaged in a War, and agitating things of a most high
concernment, he was so careful and intent concerning the prosecution and event
of those affairs, that, having first (for a short space) refresht himself with
sleep after Supper, he wholly set apart the rest of the night for the promoting
of his urgent occasions. And if it happened, that he had finished his business
before, he betook himself to his study until the third watch; when, all his
Centurions and Tribunes were wont to repair unto him. When he was (I say) at
Sardis, and projecting how to convey his Army out of Asia, in the beginning of
the night the Moon began to abate of her wonted luster, the Camp being in a
deep silence. Whilst Brutus was deeply cogitating of some serious matters, he
thought he heard the footsteps of some one near him; whereat he looking back
toward the door, behold, a prodigious Apparition, one of a monstrous and
horrid shape and bigness stood by him, without speaking one word. Brutus, not
without some reluctance, ask't him, What Man or God art thou? or what is thy
business here? The Vision answered, O Brutus, I am thy evil Angel, and thou
shall see me again at Philippi. At which Brutus nothing daunted said again, I
shall then. But when it was vanished, he called together his Servants, who
averred to him, they neither saw nor heard either Vision or voice; after which
Brutus took his rest again. When it was light, he went to Cassius, and told him
of this Phantasm. When, after Cassius was slain at Philippi, whilst he
prepared for a second fight, wherein he was conquered, after he had been Victor
in the first; In the night (as the story says) the same Vision appeared again
to Brutus in the same shape, not speaking a syllable, but so vanished.
Plutarchus in Bruto.

Marcus Antonius became bankrupt at Actium, Cassius of Parma his Partner fled
to Athens; where, in the dead of the night as he lay in his bed ingulph't with
cares and perplexities, he phancied, a man of a monstrous magnitude, a black
and ugly hue, his beard incompt and squalid, and his hair disorderly hanging
down, came to him; And being asked who he was? answered, (...), i.e. thy evil
Angel, or Genius. Being at last affrighted with so horrid a presence, and so
evil a name, he called in his servants, and questioned them, whether they saw
one of such a dress and visage either come in, or go out of his Chamber? and
when they had assured him they saw none such, he again composed himself to his
rest: but presently the same Phantasm haunted him; Wherefore he cast off all
thought of rest, and commanded a Candle up to his chamber, and enjoined his
servants not to depart from him. Between this night and his execution inflicted
by Caesar, was but a very short interval, as you may read in Valerius Max. l.
1. c. 7. and Sueton. in Aug. and Plutarch. in vita Antonii.

DIon of Syracusa, after the Syracusans were made free, and a little before he
was slain by Calippus, as he sat by chance in his Porch in the evening full of
careful thoughts, heard a sudden noise; and looking about him, (it being yet
daylight) he saw a huge woman, in face and habit nothing differing from a
Tragic fury, sweeping the house with a Broom. He, very much terrified, called
his friends, and acquainted them with the sight, and entreated them to stay and
lodge with him that night, for he should sink under his terror, if they should
leave him, and the Ghost haunt him again. The Ghost, indeed, troubled him no
more, but his Son, being almost arrived to Manhood, by reason of some slight
and puerile cross, became so sorrowful and enraged, that he precipitated
himself from the house top, and so perished. Plutarchus in Dione.

ALexander the third, King of Scots took to Wife Joan Sister to Henry the
third, King of England; which Joan dyed without issue: after which he married
Margaret, daughter of the same King Henry, who bare to him Alexander, David,
and Margaret; All these dyed; yet the King not altogether dispairing of an Heir
and Successor of his body, married the third time one Iola, daughter of a
Knight of Draconum; whilst by night they were celebrating the Wedding Feast,
he saw the likeness of a dead Man follow the Dance. The same year the King was
knocked off his horse and slain. Hence arose all that sedition and destruction
which blasted that, formerly, flourishing Kingdom. This fell out in the year
of our Redemption, MCCL. Cardanus de rerum varietate, l. 16. c. 93.

Parma, called by the name of the Tortells, which have a Castle, wherein there
is a Hall; In it about the chimney, an old woman for this hundred years uses to
appear when any of the Family dies, or is like to dye. On a time a gallant
Matron, by name Paula of Barbia, which was one of the same family* when we were
at Supper together at Belzois, told me, that one of the Maids of the house was
very ill, and that the old woman appeared; all were of opinion that she would
dye: But it fell out otherwise, for she recovered; but another of the family
which was well, dyed suddenly. They report, that this old woman, whose Ghost is
now seen, was formerly very rich, and was by her own Nephews murdered for her
moneys sake, and hackt in pieces, and thrown into the Privy, Cardanus, ibidem.

ANtonius Urceus Codrus, a Grammarian of Brixia, the very same night he dyed,
thought he saw one of a huge magnitude, a bald pate, his beard hanging down to
the ground, fiery eyes, carrying Torches in both hands, and terrible all over,
and he spoke to him thus; Who art thou, which walk up and down alone thus
like a Fury, in that time of the night, when men are fastest asleep? Speak out,
what do thou look for? or whither go thou? When he had thus said, he skipt
out of his bed to avoid him, rushing in violently upon him. Bartholomaeus
Bononiensis in ejus vita.

JAcobus Donatus, Patricius of Venice, and also rich, when on a night sleeping
with his Wife he had a taper light, and two Nurses also were asleep in a
truckle-bed with a young child, not a year old, he saw the chamber door open by
little and little, and a man, I know not who, put in his head; the Nurses also
saw him, but no body knew him; The young man being affrighted, as well he might
be, snatched his Sword and Buckler, each of the Nurses great Tapers, into the
Hall they come, which was near adjoining to the Chamber, where all things were
close. The young man comes back with great admiration, the small Infant, which
was well in health, dyed the next day. Cardanus de Rerum varietate, lib. 16.
cap. 93.

Cursius Ruffus, in his family notable for nothing of worth, did act as
Quaestor at Adrumetum, a City of Africa, walking up and down at noon in the
porch, he saw the shape of a woman of a more comely hue, far beyond any mortal
creature, which spoke unto him, Thou art Ruffus, which shall shortly come
Vice-Consull into this Province. He being hopefully advanced with this
prodigy, not long after enjoyed the Proconsulship of Africa by Tiberius
Caesar, whereby the event of the Vision was fulfilled. Fulgosus lib. 1. cap. 6.

EDwinus being banished by Ethelfred King of the Northumbrians, fled to
Redovaldus King of the East Angles. Not long after, when Ethelfred by some in
authority sought to kill him, he began to take great care to secure himself. In
the night, when all was still, one of an unknown face and habit, having met
with him, ask't him what he would give him, if he told him that which would
free his mind from all manner of sadness. Edwinus made him this answer,
whatsoever was his, that he might lawfully request, and was in his power, that
he will freely give him. Then he prognosticated to him, that so soon as he
could make an escape out of his Enemies hands, he should then recover the
Kingdom of his Ancestors, and when he had conquered his Enemies, he should
enlarge it, both far and wide; immediately laying his hand upon the top of his
head, he says; When any one Edwinus, shall come to you, after you enjoy your
own, and shall in this manner lay his hand upon your head; be you then mindful
to keep thy promise. When he had done speaking thus, he on a sudden vanished.
The young man being in a wonderfully manner transported with this Oracle, a
long time ruminating within himself of this matter, durst not open it to any.
But when Ethelfred was slain, he being brought home into his own kingdom by
Redovaldus, being advised by Ethelberg his Wife, the sister of Edbaldus King of
Kent, to embrace the Christian Religion; when he on purpose delayed the
business, and could by no persuasion be made pliable, Paulinus a devout man,
which by long entreating could do no good, in the interim being taught by an
Oracle from Heaven, (as we must believe) came to him, who made stay at York,
and putting his most sacred hand on his head, requested him, that he would call
to mind what that meant. Eduinus being amazed at the Oracles sudden issue,
instantly fell down at the Prelates feet, and was with his fellow Christians
washed in that holy Fountain. Anno 627. Polydor. Lib. 4. Hist. Angl.

MAcchabaeus Cosen German to Ducanus King of Scotland and Banquho Stuart a
valiant man travailing through a forest toward the Court, met three Women of
an unwonted and strange habit and appearance, One of them said, Hail
Macchabaeus, Thanus Glammis, which was a Title of Honor he had lately
received. The second said to him, Hail Caldarius Thanus, another and higher
title of honor: and the third, Hail Macchabaeus, Thou shall hereafter become
King. Then said Banquho, Methinks you are something unkind whosoever you are
to prefer this man not only above all the noble Men of the Land, but even unto
the Throne, and give me no promotion at all. To this the first answered. Yea we
declare unto thee far greater things than these; for this man, indeed, shall
reign, but his dominion shall have an unhappy end with him for none of his
posterity shall ever enjoy his Kingship after him: whereas (although thou shall
not become King thy self) thy posterity for a very long succession shall obtain
and hold the Throne. When these words were ended, they all vanished out of
their sight. At first these things passed as a vain fancy: but when
Macchabaeus first ascended to the dignity of Caldarius, and afterward beyond
all expectation was made King, King Ducanus being slain; and having two Sons,
he began to call to mind the Vision; and inviting ^^^quhones, and his only Son
Fleanches to a Supper, by that means projected both their deaths: but when they
had slain the Father, the Son, by the darkness of the night, made an escape.
At length Macchabaeus was slain by Malcalmus the third Son of Ducanus and after
many Generations the Kingdom fell into the hands of the Successors and
Gran-children of Banquhones Stuart, and remains to this day in the possession
of a daughter and heir of his Family, Cardan. l. 16. c. 93. ex Hectore B^etho.

HOtherus King of the Swedes and Danes, as he was a hunting having lost his
company, as he wandered alone espied a company of Nymphs in a certain Den or
covert, who promised him all good fortune, but withal advised him, that he
should by no means wage war against Balderus King of the Danes who was a
superlatively wise man, and one generated by a secret seed and production of
the Gods. Having spoken these things, they suddenly vanished, and left Hotherus
(who thought he had been in a Cave) in the open field. Some years after,
(having commenced a war against Balderus, but hitherto with very ill success)
he chanced to light upon the same Vision; when he sadly bewailed to them his
adverse fortune, and the sadness of his condition; nor would he cease his
complaints until they had made him a promise of better success. The Nymphs
told him (though he should seldom come off victor yet) that he should lose no
more men then his enemy; and that he should obtain the victory if he could but
find by what means to intercept certain food prepared for the Enemy to augment
his force and courage. So he departed and rallied his forces. And whilst he
diligently watched the Camp of the Enemy, he saw three Virgins go out who
secretly used to carry them provision, whom he followed as fast as he could
run, till at last they came to a house which they frequented; where, by the
help of his Harp; (on which he played most sweetly) he got from them a most
glorious Belt, and the powerful girdle of Victory, and having returned the
same way he went, met the Enemy, and overthrew him, so that the day after he
was wafted over to Proserpina, who was seen to stand by him as he slept. Olaus
Magnus, lib. 3. c. 10.

Julius Caesar, in his civil war, when he had gone as far as the Bank of
Rubicon, is said to have stood at a pause, and considering with himself what a
destruction the passing of that River would be to Mankind: whilst he stayed
upon the bank he had an apparition; A man of an extraordinary bulk sitting upon
the opposite bank playing upon a Pipe made of Reeds: And when, besides
shepherds, many Soldiers, and amongst them some Trumpeters flock't to the
Bankside to hear him, one of their trumpets leap't from him into the River, and
with a very shrill voice began to sound an alarm, and so passed to the other
side. Then Caesar said, Let us go, since the wonderful signs of the Gods and
the wickedness of our Enemies thus invite us: The lot is now past, Sabellicus
l. 7. Enead. 6.

PElopidas, General of the Theban Army, (whilst he encamped about the
Leuctrian field, where the daughters of Scedassus were entombed) saw Scedassus
and his daughters; they lamenting about their Tombs, and cursing the
Lacedaemonians: and their father (who long before for that he had not revenged
so horrid a crime, cursing the Lacedaemonians, killed himself upon the tombs of
his daughters) told him, If he would conquer the Lacedaemonians, he must
sacrifice a red Virgin to his daughters. But when this seemed something too
barbarous a sacrifice, to appease the gods with a humane offering, not
satisfied in his mind about it, at last a young Mare which had never taken
horse, came from the herd and stood in that very place where he had consulted
with the Ghost. And when Theocritus the Prophet saw the Mare was of a yellow
shining color, and proudly reining-in her neck, she pranced and neigh'd, he
called Pelopidas with a loud voice, and said, that this was his offering, and
that he could expect no other Virgin. Then they brought the Mare adorned with
garlands to the Sepulcher, and there sacrificed her: Soon after, the Battle
began, wherein the Lacedaemonians received that memorable overthrow of Leuctria
by Boeotarchus and Pelopidas. Plutarchus in Pelopida.

Gennadius the Chief of Constantinople, under Leo the Great Emperor, was by
night standing at the Altar, and praying to God for the world, a certain evil
spirit appeared to him, which being by him forced away by his making a cross,
answered him thus in the voice of a man; That as long as he lived indeed, he
would avoid, and be at quiet, but afterward, he would leave no way unattempted
to trouble the Church of God. Nicephorus lib. 15. cap. 23. Suidas. Cedrenus*

Henry the seventh Emperor dyed, and the slaughter of the chief Rulers of the
Nation, as Musatus Patavinus, and Franciscus Petrarcha do history it, the
Inhabitants of Mediolanum, in the house-floor of Matthaeus the chief Governor,
who also merited the name af Matthaeus the Great, when Sun was set, an armed
horseman appeared to him far bigger then the shape of man; when many for an
hours space had beheld it, it then vanished away, with great terror to the
beholders. Likewise three days after at the third hour, in the very same
place, two horsemen in the like shape, being seen skirmishing between
themselves, vanished also. Sabellicus libro 1. cap. 4.

TWo famous Merchants, going into France through the groves near the Alps in
Italy, they met a man bigger then the ordinary size of men, he calling them
suddenly, charged them thus; Speak to my Brother Ludovicus Sfortia, and give
him these Letters from me. They being amazed, and enquiring, Who he was? he
replied, That he was Galeacius Sfortia; and straightway he vanished from their
sight. They returned in all haste to Mediolanum, from thence to Viglevanus,
where Maurus lived. They present their l^tters to the Prince, the Courtiers
scoff at them; but they standing stiff in their errand, were cast into prison,
and being put upon the wrack, they showed by their constancy, that there was no
fraud in them. In the mean while with great fear and ostonishment they
deliberated about opening the Letters. All the rest making doubt what to do,
one Galeacius, a Commander in chief feared not. The letter was folded up like a
Bishops Writ (as they term it) very long, fastened with small instruments of
brass. The words whereof were these; O, O, O Ludovicus, take heed to thy self,
For the Venetians and the French have conspired to ruin thee and thy
offspring. But if you will give me a thousand nobles, I will endeavor to
reconcile their high spirits, and to turn away your ill fortune, and I doubt
not to accomplish it, if you do not stubbornly refuse me. Farewell. The
subscription was; The spirit of Galeacius thy Brother. Here some being
astonished at the strangeness of the thing, others laughing at the device, and
most averring, he must put money into his hands; yet lest he should make
himself a laughing stock, the Prince refrained this superstitious prodigality,
and sent home the Merchants again. But in a short while after he was unthron'd
by Ludovicus the Twelfth King of the French, and carried away prisoner. Artunus
Section 1. historiae Medionens. oculatus testis.

Ludovicus Alodisius, who was possessour of all the wealth of the City Imola, a
little after he went from hence, appeared in a private place to the man in his
journey, whom his son Ludovicus sent to a City in Italy called Ferraria,
sitting on horseback with a hawk, (as 'twas his manner in hawking to hold him)
and spoke to him, although in great fear, to bid his son to come that very
next day into the same place; for he would tell him of a business of great
consequence. Hearing that; Ludovicus, both because he was incredulous thereof,
and was also afraid of some treachery, sent another in his stead. That same
ghost meeting him, which appeared before, was very sad that his son came not;
for he said, he would tell him many more things: But at that time he bad him
tell him only this, That twelve years being expired, and one month, the day
likewise being particularly set down, he should be no longer Governor of that
City which he had. The time which the Ghost had foretold of was come; with
great diligence in that very same night, which his Fathers evil Angels
suspected, Philippus his Soldiers, Captain of the City Mediolanum, (with whom
he had made a Covenant, and therefore feared him not) the trenches being hard
frozen, scaled the Walls, and with ladders took the City and its Governor.
Sabeb. lib. 1. cap. 4. Exempl.

Constantinople was besieged by the savage Turks both by Land and Sea, There
was seen at Come a City near adjoining to France, a great company of dogs
whirried up and down in the Air, and after them flocks of diverse kinds of
beasts, and as it were many footmen, first of a slender harness, then pikemen
and other weapon'd men followed after, and horsemen followed them, divided into
Troops, with a great Army set in battle array; They seemed for the space almost
of three hours to be an Army at hand. At length a huge and formidable Man of a
high stature, such as cannot be expressed, as General of the Army, sitting upon
a dreadful horse, advanced, and some other vain Apparitions, the forerunners
of great mischiefs, till night drawing on, whatsoever they saw vanished away.
Which Wonders every body thought did foretell ruin, destruction, and misery to
follow after, which the fates had necessitated; and so it came to pass.
Alexander lib. 3. cap. 15.

Sigebertus reports in his Chronicle, Antiochus by a Divine hand of Judgment
was overturned and cast down in the second year of Mauritius; A certain Citizen
of the place, a man of singular piety, and full of charity, and liberal in his
Alms, saw an old man all in white, with two more with him, standing in the
midst of the City with a handkerchief in his hand, with which striking the
middle part of the City, it suddenly was overturned, houses, men and all. And
his two companions had much ado to persuade him to spare the rest of the City
that stood; so when he had used many comfortable speeches to this good man,
they appeared no more.

Sicilia journying from Catana to Messana upon the 21 day of March took up his
lodging at Taurominium; thence next morning traveling on his way not far from
the Town, he met 10 Pargettors, as they seemed to be carrying with them their
tools, he asking whither they were bound? They answered, To Aetna, (commonly
called, the Mountain Gibellus). And soon after ten more of them, who being
asked whither they all went? returned the same answer, That their Master
Workman had sent them to build a certain Edifice at Aetna; and being asked, who
their Master was? they said, He came a little after them. And suddenly he met a
man exceedingly taller then any ordinary man, with a very long beard and hair,
and blacker then any Crow, so that he might seem to be Vulcan himself, had he
been lame; He without any more complement, asked the Factor, Whether he met his
Workmen? He answered, That indeed he saw certain Men, who said they were going
to build at Aetna; but whether they were his Workmen or no, he knew not; but if
they were, he would be glad to know what moved him to undertake so strange a
piece of Work, as to build in a Mountain so high, and so deep in Snow, that it
is hard for the ablest Traveller to pass there. Then said this unknown
Architect, Although you little credit my words, you shall shortly know, and
your eyes shall bear you witness, that I am able to perform this and much
more, if I please. And with these words he vanished out of his sight. At this
the man became so terrified, that he had like to have dyed in the place; but
with much ado he got back to the Town full of horror, and according to the
custom procured a Priest, was confessed, declared his vision, and the same
evening departed this life. The beginning of the night following, the 23. of
March, there was a great Earthquake, and exceeding great flames of fire burst
out of the top of the Mountain Aetna on the East side, and were violently
carried toward the Sunrising, insomuch, that the Clergy and people of Catana
were so struck with terror, that they all ran to the Church of St. Agatha, to
implore divine assistance, from whence the voice of their prayers, and
excessive weeping, with their doleful ditties, and unanimous cry for mercy,
the bells all the while ringing mournfully, came to the Church dedicated to the
Purification of the Blessed Virgin. And (O wonderful event!) before their
prayers were ended, the fire began to decrease, and in a short time became
utterly extinct. Gilbert. Cognat. libro octavo narrationum.

DAmascius Syrus Simplicius, and some other learned men came out of Sicilie
together, and went into Persia to see King Cosroes; of whose fame and virtue
they had heard great report. In their coming home, as they returned, they found
the body of a man in the field unburied. They abhorring the inhumanity of the
Persians buried it. In the night time the shape or Ghost of an old, honorable
person seemed to haunt one of the retinue, saying, Do not interre that
unburried corpse, let the Dogs tear it in pieces. The Earth is the Mother of us
all, it admits not of that man, who depraves his Mother. When he was awake, he
told his vision to the rest; Wherefore going back again in the morning into the
field, they saw the naked corpse lay in the open field. Agathius lib. 2. seems
to speak of it, among his Greek Epigrams, (...)
(...).
Let this unburied Corpse no burial have,
Our Mother Earth to Mother-wrongers lends no grave.


EDward the third King of England, when on a time the Collectors of the
Tribute-money which was imposed on the people, had brought before him a huge
heap of money given out of that tribute, to make him merry, he suddenly thought
he saw the Devil sporting and playing about the money, and therefore,
abhorring money of this nature, as a detestable thing, they say he presently
commanded it to be taken out of his sight, and to be restored to the people.
Polydor. lib. 8.

Thyana, a City of Asia, (which had rebelled) was taken, Aurelianus the
Emperor being in his Pavilion all alone, very angry, thinking how to destroy
it, he saw with great terror Apollonius Thyaneas the Philosopher appearing to
him, which was dead long since, and advising him; Aurelianus, if thou desire
to be a Conqueror, think not to slay my Citizens. Aurelianus, if thou will be
a Ruler, shed no innocent blood. Aurelianus, be mild, and gentle, if thou will
be a Victor. Calius lib. 17. cap. 13. ex Fl. Vopisco.

Martin the Bishop of Yours in France, was greatly tempted by the Devil. On a
time the Devil appeared to him all in purple, and with a Diadem, in the person
of Christ. Martin seeing this, was amazed; the Devil says unto him; Know
Martin, whom thou adorest: I am Christ, I am going to the Earth, I would first
make my self known to thee. Here when Martin replied not, he says again,
Martin, why do thou doubt to believe in me, seeing thou see me? I am
Christ. Then he being taught in Gods Word by the Holy Ghost, says; My Christ
was crucified and wounded, but I see you in no such habit, neither put I my
belief in you. At this word he vanished. Marulus ex Severo Sulpitio.

German, a Bishop, that on a night when the cloth was laid in an Inn after
Supper, he much wondering at it, was inquisitive, for whom that Supper was
provided? and answer was made, For good Men and Women which straggle up and
down in the night. Whereupon the holy man intended to watch them. And lo, a
great company of men and women came to the Table, whom he charging not to go
away, the whole household looked if they knew any of them. They saying they were
all neighbors, every bodies house being searched, he found them all in their
beds. Whereupon he presently put them all to their oaths, who acknowledged,
that they were evil spirits, or Devils.

MEnippus, the Scholar of the Philosopher Demetrius, a very handsome young man,
when he went to Cenchraea by Corinth, he met the shape of a strange Maid,
beautiful and rich, which said, that she was in love with him; Thereupon she
invited him to go to her house: He being love^smitten, oftentimes kept her
company there, and did think to marry her. She had a house furnished like a
Princess. Apollonius Thyaneus considering all things in that house, cried out,
that she was one of the Fairies, whom some call Hagges, others walking- Ghosts.
Philostratus in vita Apollonii.

JAmblicus that famous Magician, when a certain Egyptian whilst he was making
his challenge, had an apparition to the great terror of all the standers by;
bad them be of good cheer, and not wonder at it, for he knew it to be the Ghost
of a certain Fencer, who was then lately slain in a single Combat. Eunapius in
Aedesio.

Constantine the Great, made Gallus Governor of the East; Julianus being in
great hope of compassing the Empire himself, sought throughout all Greece for
Southsayers and Wisards, and consulted all he could meet with, about the
success of his designs. At last he met with one who promised him great
satisfaction in the foretelling of what future events he should propose. And
having led him into a room beset with Images, the Magician began to call upon
his Devils, and they presently appeared, but (as they are wont) in an ugly
black hue and shape; insomuch that Julianus, being sore afraid, signed his
forehead with the sign of the Cross, whereat the Devils suddenly vanished, as
minded of the victory of our Lord Jesus, and their utter rout and ruin
thereby. Then the Conjurer reproved Julianus for being so timorous: But
Julianus, highly admiring the power and virtue of the Cross, cleared his mind
of the conceit of running after wisards, by this consideration; That the Devils
would never have fled at the sign of the Cross, did they not perfectly hate
that action. Theodoretus, lib. 3. c. 3. Sozomenus, lib. 5. cap. 2.

Mediolanensian Boor, as he returned homewards from his labor, about three
hours within night, saw a Goblin or Spirit follow him, and when he endeavored
to outrun it, make he what use he could of his heels, the spectral fetched him
up, and at last threw him to the ground, when he endeavored to cry out, but
could not. At length when he had lain long on the Earth, all rolled in mud and
dirt, he was found by some who passed by that way, and carried home half dead,
and at the end of eight days gave up the Ghost. Cardanus de Subtilitate.

Lacedemonian having brought the Philosopher Plato out of Sicily, sold him off
to Aegina by the command of the Tyrant Dionysius. But in regard it was a
capital crime for an Athenian to come to Aegina, he was called in question for
his life by one Comandrus: but the necessity of the matter being taken into
consideration, he was sold away for twenty pounds to one Aniceris of Cyrenia,
and by him afterward made free. Afterward the City was taken by Cabria, and
this Comandrus drowned in the Hellespont, who was told, before his death, by an
apparition that this hard fortune befell him, for the hard measure the
Philosopher had received. Laertius, lib. 3.

SOzomenus in the 28th chap. of his 6th Book, tells us that one Apelles, a
Monk, about Achoris in some of the Monasteries of Egypt, did many strange
things, and whilst upon a certain time he was busy at some Smithy-work he had
in hand, there appeared to him a most beautiful and adorned lady tempting him
to lust, whereat he snatched a hot Iron from the fire, and ran it into the face
of the lustful Succubus, who vanished with a hideous cry at the hurt he had
given her.

DAtius Bishop of Mediolana, when for the profession of his Faith he was put
from his place, as he went toward Constantinople, he put in at Corinth, and
there for want of better accommodation he was forced to take up with lodgings
haunted with evil spirits, and at midnight when the Devils began to bray,
bleat, houl, and roar about the house like Lions, and other beasts, the Good
Bishop rose, and thus expostulated with those fiends, or their head. Most
wicked Pluto, thou who said, I will establish my seat in the North and will
become like unto the most High, behold for thy pride thou art become like unto
Swine and Asses, because thou deniedst obedience to thy Maker. The Devils at
his speech were so confounded, they left haunting that house for the future.
Gregor. Turonensis lib. 3. Dialog. cap. 4.

PHlegon Trallianus a Manumisse of the Emperor Adrian, in his Book de
Mirabilibus et Longaevis, (i. e.) of Wonders and Antiquities; relates a
History, which if you will take his private authority, he avers he was
well-acquainted with it, being in a certain City where he was: The Story is
this, Philinnium the daughter of Damostrates the Innkeeper and Charitus, fell
in Love with one Machates, one of her Fathers lodgers, which her Parents very
much misliking, she broak her heart with grief, and was buried with public
solemnity. Six Months after, when Machates was come thither again, Philinnium
came to him and lay with him* received a gilded Cup, and an Iron Ring which he
gave her, and likewise bestowed a Gold Ring, and a Breast-cloth upon Machates,
and so departed. The Nurse saw the Spectral and declared the business to her
Parents, who the next day came and found their daughter with their Guest, whom
they embraced with most passionate acclamations, whilst she spoke to them in
this manner. O Father and Mother, how unjustly do you envy me the happiness of
being two or three days in your house with this your Guest, without doing any
evil at all; ah you will again bewail your curiosity in your choice for me,
when I am gone from him to my appointed station; for alas, I am here but by
permission, and the special license of the Gods. When she had thus uttered her
mind, she was instantly a dead corpse again, and when they had carried her
publicly to be seen, they declared the whole story to all that came flocking
into the Theater. The grave was found open and nothing therein, but the Iron
Ring, and the gilded Cup. The Corpse by the advice of Hillus the South-sayer,
was buried beyond the lines of the City* Machates through grief, became the
actor of his own Trajedy.

HIeronymus in his lives of the Fathers, tells of a certain Monk, who was
enticed to most foul and lustful embraces by a Devil in the shape of a most
amiable Woman, who, when to propagate their lust, she bended forward her
members toward him; seemed like a Mare or Mule, or some bruit creature. And
when he endeavored to accomplish carnal copulation, she making an ugly
howling noise, like a spirit as she was, and a Phantasm, vanished from between
his hands as he embraced her, and left him (wretched man!) miserably deluded.
Vierus l. 2. c. 46. De Praestigiis Daemonum.

Vincentius in the third Book of his Histories, that there was in Sicily under
the King Rogerius, a young man of good courage, and very skillful in swimming,
who about twilight in a Moonshine evening was washing himself in the Sea, and
a woman swimming after him caught him by the hair, as if it had been some of
his fellows that intended to drown him. He spoke to her, but could not get a
word from her; whereupon he took her under his cloak, and brought her home, and
afterward married her. On a time one of his fellows upbraiding him, told him he
had hugged a phantasm; he being horribly affrighted, drew his sword, and
threatened his Wife, that he would murder his son which he had by her, if she
would not speak, and make her original known. Alas poor wretch, says she,
thou undoest a commodious Wife, in forcing me to speak; I should have continued
with thee, and should have been beneficial to thee, if thou had let me alone
with my commanded silence* But now thou shall never see me more. And
immediately she vanished. But the Child grew up, and much frequented the Sea.
In fine, on a certain day, this phantasm meeting him in those waters, carried
him away in the presence of many people.

Marra, there was a very gallant and handsome young Lady, that had refused many
in marriage, and most wickedly kept company with an evil spirit, by the Greeks
termed Cacodaemon, who being with child by him, and by her Parents severity
constrained to tell the father of it; answered, that she knew not where she
was, that a very fair young man did oftentimes meet her by night, and sometimes
by day. Her parents, though giving small credence to their daughter, yet
earnestly desiring to know the truth, who it was that had persuaded and enticed
their daughter to this lewdness, within three days after, the damosel having
given them notice thereof, that he which ravished her, was with her; having
therefore unlocked the doors, and set up a great light, coming into the
Chamber, they saw an ugly foul Monster, of such a fearful hue, as no man can
believe, in their daughters arms. Very many that were sent for, came in all
haste to this unseemly object; Among whom, a Priest of an approved life, and
well disciplined, all the rest being scared away, and amazed, when repeating
the beginning of St. John's Gospel, he came to that place, The Word was made
Flesh, the evil Genius with an horrible outery goes away, carrying the roof of
the house away with him, and set all the furniture on fire. The woman being
preserved from peril, was 3. days after brought to bed of a most deformed
Monster, such as no man (as they say) ever saw; which the Midwives, to prevent
the infamy and disgrace of that family, heaping up a great pile of wood, did
instantly burn to ashes. Hector Boethus libr. 8. hist. Scotorum.

Boethus relates another story in the same place. In the year of our Lord God,
1536. as they were sailing from an arm of the Sea, called Phortea, to traffic
into Flanders, there arose such a violent wind, that the sayls, mast,
tacklings, and all were broken, and the ship also was tossed up and down the
swelling waves, that every body concluded, they must certainly perish. The
master of the ship admiring at that season so huge and unaccustomed
churlishness of the Heavens, (for it was about the Summer-Solstice) when with
loud cries they did not attribute it to the Stars, but to the wiles of some
evil Devils, they heard a voice from the lower part of the ship, of a woman
miserably complaining of her self, that some hee-Devil in the form of a man,
with whom she had many years accompanied with, was at that time with her, and
forced her, she would therefore yield her to the mercy of the Sea, that, if she
perished, who was the cause of so great and imminent danger; all the rest by
the goodness of God might escape safe. A Priest coming to the woman bewailing
her self, to counsel her for her own salvation, and them that were with her,
did piously exhort her, now openly confessing and acknowledging her fault,
earnestly detesting that abominable wickedness, and repenting the fact from
the bottom of her heart, with sighs expressing the same, that nothing should be
wanting on her part, and he knew God would be propitious to her, etc. In the
midst of the Priests exhortation, when the perplexed woman with many sighs and
groans was deploring that heinous crime she had committed, all that were by,
saw a black Cloud come forth out from the pump of the Ship, and with a great
noise, fire, smoke, and ill savor descended into the Sea. Then was it fair
weather, and the Sea calm, and the Merchants went to their desired haven with
their Ship, and nothing lost.

FRanciscus Mirandula makes mention in his writings, that he knew one Berna
called Benedictus, a Priest, 75. years old, who had lain above 40. years with a
familiar spirit for his Bedfellow, in the shape of a woman; it came into the
market with him, he conversed with it, insomuch that all the standers by,
seeing nothing took him for a Fool. He called her Hermelina, as if she were a
woman. I knew also, says he, another, whose name was Pinnetus, who was above
80 years old, he did use the sports of Venus more then 40 years, with another
spirit, which appeared like a woman, and called her name Florina. Utramque
historiam Cardanus recitat. lib. 15. cap. 80. de varietate rerum.

JAcobus Ruffus writes in the fifth Book, the sixth Chapter of the conception of
men, that in our time Magdalena, a Citizens Maidservant was ravished by a foul
spirit, and then took her leave on her repenting, by the order of the Ministers
of the Church; after which she felt such cruel torments and pangs in her belly,
that she thought every hour almost that she should be delivered of a child;
then came forth out of her womb iron nails, wood, pieces of glass, hair,
wool, stones, bones, iron, and many such like.

Wittemberg, in the way to Silesia, when her husband was away, by reason of his
merchandising abroad, was wont to entertain one Concubine or another. It so
fell out, that her husband going forth, one of her Paramouts came in the night
time, and when he had made himself spruce, and satisfied his lust, as it seemed
in the morning like a Magpie sitting on the buttery, he bade his Concubine
farewell, in these words; This was your Lover: and before he had done speaking,
he vanished out of sight, and never came more.

BEnedictus the 8th, by his Country a Thuscane, by the Magic of Theophylact
his Nephew, who had been the Scholar of Sylvester the second, long since Pope,
came to be Pope; He was head of the Church 11. years. After his death, he
appeared to a Bishop which he in his lifetime commonly made use of, sitting
upon a black horse, much lamenting and complaining of the torments of the
damned, and charging me to warn his Brother John the 11th, to bestow that gold
on the poor, which he had formerly buried under ground; whereby he was in hopes
to be freed.

THeophylact, Nephew by his Brother Aldericus of the two Popes, Benedict and
John, came to that dignity, by his Magic, wherein he was always accounted
famous. He called himself Benedict the 9th. He continued so by times ten years.
He was at last strangled in a Wood by one of those spirits, with whose familiar
he was wont to converse. Benno. Historians report, among whom are Martinus
Polonus, and Petrus Damianus, that Benedict was by a Hermit seen near the
Mill, of a terrible shape; for in his body he was like a Bear, in his head and
tail like an Ass: And when he was asked, How he came to be so metamorphosed?
it is reported he made this answer, I wander up and down in this shape now,
because when I was Pope, I lived as void of reason and conscience, without law,
and without God, and have defiled the chair of Rome with all manner of
vileness.

ST. Martin, Bishop of Yours in France, when hard by his Monastery an unknown
Martyr's bones were by the vulgar superstitiously worshipped, that he might not
by his authority corroborate their superstition, took one day with him some of
his brethren, and to the place he goes, where calling upon God, he supplicates
him, to manifest and clear the truth thereof unto him. On his left hand stands
an ugly ghost, he makes his name known, and confesses the truth of the crime,
saying, That he was a common thief, and was put to death for his villainies, and
by the common peoples ignorance was honored for a Martyr. Then Martin makes an
Edict, That the Altar should out of hand be taken away, and by this means
delivered the people from their superstition. Severus Sulpitius in ejus vita.

Simonides Cous supped at Scopas his house in Thessaly, and had sung that song
which he had made on him, wherein many things for ornament sake, (as the Poets
use to do) were written on Castor and Pollux; Scopas told him, he would give
him half according to their agreement for that song, but the other half he must
demand of Castor and Pollux, whom he had equally commended with him. A little
while after comes in a Messenger to Simonides, and tells him, there were two
Men at the gate calling for him very earnestly. Up he arose, and went forth,
but saw no body. In this very interim of time, down falls that very room where
Scopas was feasting, and crushed to death him and all his company. Cicero in
lib. de Oratore.

Constans, it rained ashes, so that Constantinople was in great fear, fire fell
from Heaven, and a most grievous plague mightily increased for the 3 hot
months, A good and bad Angel were seen by every body to go in the night time
about the City, and as often as by the good Angels command, the bad Angel did
smite any ones door, with a javelin which he had in his hand, so many dyed out
of that house the next day. Sigebertus in Chronicis, et Paulus Diaconus, lib.
19. rerum Romanarum.

Constantinus Copronymus, in the month of January, about 4 of the clock there
was an earthquake round about Palaestine, and all Syria, which destroyed many
Churches and Monasteries. And a Plague beginning in Sicily and Calabria, goes
quite through Monobasia and Hellades, and through the neighboring Isles, and
at last it comes to Constantinople. Many perplexed in mind thought they saw some
strange men of a stern look following them, and speaking unto them, and to
enter their houses, and either to wound them there, or cast them forth out of
doors; and so it was indeed in the event. For that infection made houses which
were full empty, and there was such a multitude that died, that all the
Sepulchers in the City and Suburbs being filled, Vaults, Lakes, Vineyards and
Gardens were made places to bury in. Anno Dom. 748. juxta Sigebertum.

Theodoricus King of the Ostrogoths died: For in a while after that he had
slain Symmachus and Boethius, when a great fish's head was set before him on
the table at supper, he imagined he saw Symmachus his head in it, biting his
nether lip in, as if he threatened him, as he himself afterward told his
Physician Elpidius: With which representation he was so affrighted, that at
that time going to bed, he was always saying as long as he lived, That image
amazed him.

Castrobians report that Aristeus Proconnesius, the Poet, going into a Fullers
shop in the Isle called Marmora, died there, and the Fuller shutting up his
shop, went away to acquaint his neighbors, that such an one was dead: this
rumor being spread quite through the City, that Aristeus was dead; suddenly
there came one whose name was Cyzycenus, a Philosopher of Athens, from the City
Artace, who said, that he was in Company with Aristeus at a place called
Cyzicus, and spoke with him. Whilst he endeavored to confirm it, all the
neighbors were in a readiness, having all things convenient to carry men
forth. The house being opened, Aristeus appeared, neither living, nor yet quite
dead, and 7. years after he was seen in Proconnesus, when he composed those
Verses which at this time are called by the Greeks Arimaspei: which when they
were made, he again vanished. The inhabitants of Metapontis in Italy, say that
Aristeus was seen in those quarters 300, and 40. years after, and charged that
Apolloes Altar should be erected, and called by the name of Aristeus
Proconnesius, etc. Herodotus lib. 4.

Leonard at Basil about the year of Christ, 1520. one of no ingenuity, and who
stammer'd in his speech, he was commonly called Lienimannus. He, I know not by
what skill entering that vault which opens to the City Basil, and going further
then ever any yet could, tells of strange and wonderful sights. One going down
into the Cave with a lighted Taper in his hand, said that he must first pass
by an Iron gate, then out of one Vault into another, and then into fair and
flourishing Gardens. In the middle was a Hall to be seen most richly
beautified, and a very handsome Virgin to the middle, with a Golden Diadem
round about her head, downwards she was like an ugly Serpent, she would lead me
by the hand to the Iron chest. Upon that lay two black Mastiffe Dogs, who with
their horrible barking scared away all that came near them. But the maid
restrained them. Then untying the bundle of keys about her, she opend the
chest, and took out all kind of moneys, Gold, Silver, and Brass, whereof by
the Virgins bounty he said he brought much out of the Vault with him. He said
moreover, that the Virgin used to say, that she was by direful imprecations
long since devoted hither, and transformed into such a Monster; but she was
sprung from a royal stem, and thought there was no other way to recover her
safety, then if she received 3. kisses from a pure and undefiled young man. For
then her own form would return to her, and she would give her whole treasure,
otherwise called her Dower, which was hid in that place, to him that freed her.
He averred also, that he kissed twice, and twice took notice of her deportment,
so terrible for overmuch joy of her hoped- for liberty, that he was afraid,
that she would tear him in pieces alive. In this intervall of time it so fell
out that his Nephews bringing him to a baudy-house, he accompanied with an
Harlor. With which foul crime being contaminated, he could never after find the
way to the vault, nor enter it. Whereof, poor Soul, he often with weeping tears
made complaint. Who sees not that this was a Diabolical phantasm? but yet
verily that ancient Roman coin, which he brought out of the Cave, and made
sale of, to many of our City, do plainly show, that some treasure was hid in
that hollow place, which some covetous Devil has in custody, just as the
evil spirits, to their own great peril, do in Golden mines. Lest any should
think these things fabulous, there are some witnesses yet alive, that heard
Lienimannus make relation of all things. After him a Citizen of Basil, in a
very great dearth and scarcity, that he might the better cherish his Family,
went down into the same cave, hoping to find some Money. But he going on a
little way, and finding nothing but Men's bones there, in great amazement
instantly came back again, quite frustrated of his hope. Test Johanne
Stumpffio, in Chron. Helvetiae.

VIncentius reports this out of Helinandus, lib. 3. cap. 27. that, In the
Diocese of Colony there is a famous and great Palace, which looks over into
the River Rhene, it is called Juvamen, where many Princes in former times being
met, suddenly there came to them a small Bark, which being fastened to her neck,
a Swan hall'd along with a silver chain. From thence a young Soldier not known
to any of them skip't forth, and the Swan brought home the ship. Afterward
this Soldier married, and had children: At last remaining in the same Palace,
and beholding the Swan coming with the same Bark and chain, he presently went
into the Ship, and was never seen more, but his children abide there till this
very day. From him in the Castle Clivens. (where you may see also a very high
and ancient Tower, named Cygnea, on the top whereof the picture of a Swan is
whurried to and fro) most bravely wrought, do they derive the ancient pedigree
of the Clivens. Dukes. Vierius lib. 2. cap. 46. de praestigiis Demon.

Persians (Megara being invaded) betook themselves to the City Thebes to
Mardonius their General, by Diana's pleasure 'twas dark on a sudden, they
mistaking their way, went on the hilly side of the Country. There, by the
delusions of Spirits, were armies shooting darts; at the strokes of them the
next rocks did as 'twere groan again, they thinking they were men, that groaned
by reason of their wounds and hurts, never gave over shooting, till they had
spent all their arrows. And when 'twas day, those of Megara being well-armed,
fell upon them that had no weapons very violently, and slew a great number of
their army. And for this successful event they erected an Image to Diana
their Protectresse. Pausanias in Atticis.

Marathon against the Persians, a certain rude, and rustic fellow, both by
shape and habit, helped the Athenians, who when with his plough he had killed
very many of those barbarous people, on a sudden he vanished away. And when the
Athenians made enquiry, who he was, the Oracle made this answer only, Honor
noble Ethelaeus. In that very place they set up a trophy made of white stone.
Pausanias in Atticis. In the same fight Theseus his Ghost was seen by many to
invade the Medes. After that, the Athenians adored him as a God. Plutarchus, in
ejus vita.

Persians under the command of Xerxes, went to Minervaes Chapel, which is
before Apolloes Temple, at the same time lightning fell down from Heaven upon
them, and two stones at the top of Parnassus, making an huge noise, fell down,
and prevented many of them. Whereupon they which were in Minervaes Chapel gave
a great shout, rejoicing much. The Barbarians fled, those of Baeotia made known
their ruin. And they which remained fled straightway to Baeotia reporting that
they saw two huge armed men following after them. The people of Baeotia told
them they were two noble Heroes of their own Country, Phylacus and Autonous,
whose Temples are to be seen. That which was Phylacus his Temple, was the same
way beyond Minervaes, but the Temple of Autonous was hard by Castalia under the
top Hyampeus. The stones which fell down from Parnassus were in Herodotus his
time whole fixed in Minervaes Temple porch, to which the Barbarians brought
them. Herodotus lib. 2.

Greeks were fighting against Xerxes at Salamin it is rumored, that a great
light shone from the City Eleusis, and that there was such a great noise in the
fields of Thria, as 'twere of a great many men, that they heard them even to
the Sea side, from this company which made the noise, was seen a cloud arising,
a little above the Earth, and to go from that continent, and to fall upon the
Ships. Others saw as 'twere armed men reaching forth their hands from Aegina to
help the Grecian ships: they did suppose that they belonged to Aeacides, whom
before the battle they had humbly implored. Plutarchus, in Themistocle.

WHen the Arcadians in a hostile manner came on the coasts of the City Elis,
and the Inhabitants thereof had set themselves in battle array against them,
it is reported that a woman which gave suck to a man-child came to the chief
officers of the Eleans and that she said when she told them 'twas her child,
that she was warned in a dream that he should be put to the Eleans as a
Soldier to fight on their side, the Generals took order that the naked Infant
should be rank't before the Colors, because they were of opinion that the
woman was to be credited. The Arcadians making the first onset, the child in
the open view of them all was Metamorphosed into a Snake: the Enemies being
affrighted with this strange and prodigious sight, presently ran away. This
notable victory being obtained, he was named Sosipolis from the City which was
preserved; this Snake was seen to hide himself. The battle being over, they
raised up a Temple, and dedicated it to its proper genius, Sosipolis. Honors
were ordained for Lucina, because by her means this child was born into the
World. Pausanias libr. 6.

Locris skirmished with the Crotoni, in the Locrensians army were seen two
young men on milk-white Horses; they were the foremost in the fight, who when
they had conquered and subdued their enemies, never appeared more. The Victory
in the same instant it was obtained, was published at Athens, Lacedemon and
Corinth, though places far remote from Locris and Croton, three hundred
thousand of the people of Sybaris were slain by a small number, and the city it
self utterly destroyed. Fulgosus lib. 1. cap. 6.

Ere^rians on a time going from their own City Eubea by ship, and invading the
Country Tahagrus, they say that Mercury led forth some young striplings, and
himself also, who was but a youth, armed only in a wrestlers habit, in
comparison of the rest, forced the Eubeans to take their heels, and for this
very cause they erected a Temple to Mercurius Promachus. Pausanias in Baeoticis.

Romans had against Tarquinius, going to Rome, as the report goes, that Castor
and Poll^x were seen in the battle, and immediately after the fight was done,
the horses being very hot, and trickling down with sweat; messengers also of
the victory were seen in the Market place, where in stead of their well, they
have a house. From whence they consecrated a day to Castor and Pollux in the
Ides of July. In the Roman war, Castor and Pollux were seen to wipe off the
sweat of their horses at the lake Juturna, when their house, which was near the
fountain was wide open. Valerius Maximus lib. 1. cap. 6. When A. Posthumous the
Dictatour, and Manilius Octavus General of the Thusculan forces, did with all
might at the lake called Regillus encounter one with another, and neither for a
long time was worsted, Castor and Pollux, Champions for the Roman party
appearing, utterly routed all their men of War. Idem. lib. 1. cap. 8.

Brutii and Lucani with inveterate hatred, and main strength, endeavored to
destroy the City Thurina, and Fabritius Lucinus, Cos. chiefly by his care would
preserve it safe, but the event was doubtful, both armies being met in one
place, the Romans not daring to enter the fight, a young man of good stature at
first began to exhort them to take courage, then finding them faint-hearted,
and very backward, up he takes the ladder, and away he went to the enemies
tents, through the midst of their army, and scales their bulwark. Then crying
out with a loud voice that he had made the first step to the victory, and thus
he enticed and drew on the Romans to take the Enemies Garrison, and the Lucani
and Brutii to defend their own, thus they stood doubtful to encounter. But he
again by the instigation of his harness, delivered up to the Romans their
prostrate enemies to be slain and taken. For twenty thousand were killed, five
thousand with Statius Statilius General of their Country, were taken, with
three and twenty Colors. The day after when Cos. had told him that he reserved
a garland amongst the renowned, for him, of whose industry he had made use by
whom their quarters were suppressed, and he could not be found that could ask
such a reward. It Is likewise known and believed, that Mars was propitious to
the Romans. Among other things of this nature, these are manifest and clear
tokens, his headpiece pointed with two spires, wherewith his heavenly pate was
covered, was also one Argument. Therefore by the command of Fabritius,
supplication was made to Mars, and testimonial given that his helping hand was
forgotten by all the Soldiers, crowned with lawrells with great jollity.
Valerius lib. 1. cap. 8.

EMpusa or Onocale, an evil ghost, sent by Hecate to them that are in
distress, because she can transform her self into diverse shapes, thence called
so, because it goes with one foot, the other is made of brass, or is an Asses
foot. Some thought it appeared at noon, when sacrifices were offered to the
dead. Aristophanes, in Ranis. Dialog. But, I see a great beast; What manner of
one? An ugly one, and of many shapes. For now it is an Ox, now a Mule, another
while a very handsome woman. Where is it? I Will go near to it. But now it is no
woman, it is now a dog; then it is Empusa; all his face is as 'twere on fire, and
he has a foot of Brass. Suidas.

Lybia which encloseth the Syrtes, sometimes and most of all in a calm season,
do appear shapes of several living creatures in the Air, some of which are
still, some stir: and these sometimes fly from one, sometimes follow after
one, but all of a large stature; they terrify and affright the ignorant. But
they that follow after, environ him they catch, laying cold paws upon him.
Diodorus lib. 3. cap. 4.

Orthomeii commonly report of Actaeon, that there is a field haunted by that
Ghost, which rested on that stone; (which is between the Plataeans and
Megarans). Wherefore consulting Apolloes Oracle, they were charged to bury the
relics or remainders, if they found any, and moreover that they should fasten
that representation of a Goblin, which was made of Brass, unto a stone.
Pausanias in Baeoticis.

Parnassus a hill of Baeotia dedicated to Apollo, Bacchus his feasts are every
other year solemnized, and there do meet and are to be seen a numerous company
of Satyrs, which may be heard for the most part to speak in their own language;
there is Music likewise to be heard. Macrobius lib. 1. Saturnal. cap. 18.

Gellus had a maid that died young, and it is generally believed her ghost walks
to and fro at Lesbos, haunting children; whereupon they impute to this Gellus
the death of any children, that die in their minority. Hence comes the Proverb,
Puerorum amans Gello. Erasmus, in Adagiis.

STrabo in the sixth book of his Geography relates it. That Temese was the
chiefest City of Brutia from Laus, called from him afterward Templa, which
being built by the Ausonians, the Aetolians Thoas his companions did then
enjoy, and when they were expelled thence, the Brutii: at last Hannibal and the
Romans utterly destroyed it. Nere it, was a chapel beset with Olive trees
dedicated to one Polites, Ulysses his associate. This man, because he was
affronted by the Barbarians, was very irefull against them; so that it was
turned into a Proverb, and they would usually say, Take heed Temessaeus his
Ghost is a coming. Then when the Locri and Epizephyrii possessed it, there was
one Euthymus, as says Aelian, that came thither out of Italy, a famous
champion, and mighty strong, who also carried about with him a stone of an huge
magnitude, which he used to show the Locri. He encountered with Polites, and
returned from the duel victor, and so his neighbors by his means were freed
from paying tribute Money, which he was wont to force from them. He also made
him to return with interest, whatsoever he had taken away from them. And from
hence he thinks arose this Proverb To them that make wicked and unlawful gain,
that Temessaeus his genius would come to them, whereby they signified, that
some time or other they must with usury pay back again those things which they
had wrongfully, and by fraud or force, taken from them. Pausanias in Eliacis,
tells the story somewhat otherwise, to wit, that a comrade of Ulysses, was for
ravishing a Virgin killed, and for that very fact his Goblins, (unless they
were yearly appeased by offering a Virgin) used to be very fierce and angry,
and they spared no Sex, nor Age. And him indeed the common people do believe to
be the genius of that place which Euthymus (that noble Champion) returning from
Temessa suppressed, by setting at liberty, and marrying that Virgin, which they
had promised. Erasmus, in Chiliadibus.

Aega, from whence the Aegaean Sea took its name, consecrated to Neptune,
wherein scarce any one could take any rest. Nicocrates told this ex
phantasmatum Dei occursaculis, but now and then they are disturbed and cannot
sleep. Caelius lib. 30. cap. 9. A. L.

C. Caesar Caligula his body was interred, the Gardiners were haunted and
disquieted with spirits. And they said in that house where he died they were
every night affrighted until the house was burnt to the ground. Suetonius.

NEro murdered his Mother Agrippina, finding out, and severely chastening him
for what he had said and done. But he was always after troubled in Conscience
for that wicked act, although the Soldiers, Senate, and people encouraged him
in it, and gave him many thanks for so doing: he often confessed that he was
haunted with his Mother's ghost, and beaten with furies. The Magicians
preparing a sacrifice, he attempted to call upon and entreat the Gods. In the
pilgrimage to Greece he did not dare to appear at the solemnities of the
Eleusinians, because at the beginning of them, the wicked and profane were
summoned by the call of the Cryen. Suetonius.

OTho the Emperor (when Galba was slain) beginning his reign with tortures and
terrors, the first night was so troublesome and grievous to him, that not
sleeping, on a sudden being horribly affrighted, he groaned heavily, and was
found by them which went to his chamber, lying on the floor. Whereupon he
endeavored to pacify and assuage Galba his ghosts, by whom he thought he was
troubled and disturbed. The next day devising what to do a great tempest arose,
he falling down ever and anon, muttered and mumbled: (...), Suetonius.

ZOnaras relates out of Thracesius, Isaacius Comnenus the Empe^our hunting
about Neapolis saw a wild boar of a fearful aspect, which (loosening his
horses reins) he followed, as fast as he could, plunging into the Sea it
vanished, some judged it not to be a Boar, but some Diabolical spirit: In this
interim, a sudden brightness like lightning, so dazzled the Emperor that
striking his horse for fear, and foaming at the mouth, he was laid all along on
the ground in an amaze, and from thence was carried in a fishers boat into the
Kings Palace; he afterward betook himself to a Monastery. Zonaras.

IT is reported by Augustinus, that the Tribune Hesperius had a plat of ground
in the territory Fusalensis, which was sorely haunted by evil spirits, so that
the servants and brute beasts were grievously tormented: being therefore
necessitated by this Domestic misery, he went to the Elders of the Church, and
requested that some of them would vouchsafe to read prayers there. One of them
went his way thither, and prayed fervently, and zealously, he also administered
the Lords Supper there, and immediately that vexatious crew of hobgoblins gave
over coming. Libro de civitate Dei vigesimo, 2. capite 8.

SEverus Sulpitius writes in the life of Martin his first book, and likewise in
Clemens his life, That a certain Monk an hermit, whose father lived hard by
him, who not loving his son carried a hatchet with him, wherewith he cut down
trees, to carry home as he returned; Upon which the Devil in the shape of an
Angel appeared to this Monk, then in the form of his Father he was coming to
him, with a hatchet to kill him, telling him, and averring he came to that end
and purpose, an Hermit advising him to prevent his intent and resolution, and
rather first to kill him, then be killed by him. Thinking therefore his father
coming toward him, and saluting him, to be the Devil, presently killed him,
and on the other side, the Devil instantly throtles the Monk.

Ludovicus the 3d, the City Moguntia was miserably haunted with a daemoniall
spirit. There is in Germany, and in the third part of Gallia, a little from the
town Bingus, where the River Navas and Rhene meet, a country town commonly
called by the name of Camontus, quasi caput montium, the highest mountain.
There in the year 858. a straggling fugitive spirit did many strange miracles,
and played many juggling tricks, so that he was a great vexation and trouble to
the Inhabitants. First he was a deadly dangerous ghost, which none could see,
throwing stones at men, and knocking at their doors. Anon in the shape of a
most pestilent and wicked genius, lying lurking in corners, and Prophesying,
discovering robberies, most infamously branding all manner of delicts, and
stirring up strife and contention among them. By degrees he burnt down their
barns, and small cottages; to one he was more vexatious, haunting him
wheresoever he went, and at last set his house on fire: And that he might
incense all the neighborhood against this innocent man to put him to death,
this abominable forger of lies bragged up and down, 'Twas for his impieties,
that this place was so infamous and execrable. He was made to stand all night
in the cold, for their night hobgoblin by force kept this good man from his
house. He to satisfy his neighbors, carried a hot Iron in his hand, and
receiving no hurt thereby, he approved himself guiltless, yet nevertheless
his corn being cock't up in the fields; This wicked and forlorn creature burnt
down his dwelling house; And when he persisted daily more and more spightfull,
the Townsmen bring the cause before their Governor, or Bishop. The Priests
were to purify and expiate their fields, and Town with holy and devout
prayers, and holy water. This wicked and disturbed spirit at first was opposite
and stubborn, wounding some with stones, but being enchanted with divine
hymns, and by prevalent prayers conjured, was at last bush't, and was never
after seen. When these were gone, came another turbulent Ghost, and says,
While those bald Priests mumbled over and over, I know not what, I hid my self
under one of their surplisses, and heard him by name to take notice of him, who
the night before through my persuasion lay with his hosts daughter. When this
relation was done, making a great howling, the Ghost departed from those
quarters, and vanished up into the Air. Sigerbertus Chron. Hirsaug. Antoninus,
A^entinus lib. 4.

Elves-daunce: of whom this is their opinion, that their Souls, who were
inclined to carnal pleasures and delights, being once parted from the body,
rove up and down the world. Amongst the number of which they reckon them to be,
which yet in this our age do apply themselves in man's shape to the services of
men, taking pains by night, and looking to their horses and flocks; you may see
the footsteps verily sometimes in the grass in a dewy morning, but sometimes
they are utterly consumed. Olaus Magnus libro 3. cap. 11. Septentrional gentium.

Finlandia, under the same dominion of Su^cia, it is called the New Castle,
because built with admirable and rare workmanship, insomuch, that it is doubted,
whether by Nature or Art: For it is situated on a round mountain, having only
one ingresse, and another egresse on the West. This by a great piece of Timber,
fastened with great Iron chains which by strong labor every day, by the help of
some pulleys, by reason of the impetuous waters, is in the night time attracted
by the keepers to one side of the river. By this castle runs an immense and
vast River, of an unknown profundity, coming out from a white pool, which is
caused by a piece of ground, of a black color, especially in the mote about
this Tower, that has and engenders fishes all black, and yet of a good and
savoury relish. But at last passing by Viburgus it makes the Lake to be black.
At this River strange sights are now and then to be seen, and when the
governors of the Castle or any Soldiers are near death, there appears one in
the nightime playing upon an Harp, in the midst of the waters, you may also
hear him. Olaus lib. 20. cap. 19, and 20.

IN Ilandia an Island under the Artick Pole, there is a Promontory, which like
the hill Aetna is continually burning, and there is thought to be the place
either to punish and torture, or discharge all wretched Souls. For there the
Visions of all, which suffer a violent death do appear, so manifest and
apparent to any they meet of their own acquaintance, as if they were alive,
they take them by their right hand, not knowing they are dead; neither do they
apprehend themselves to be in an error, till their spirits vanish away. The
inhabitants of the place do much prognosticate the destiny of their Rulers and
Governors, and whatsoever is done in the farthest part of the World, by the
revelations of these appearances. Idem lib. 2. cap. 2.

ULadislaus the first, King of the Polonians, besieged Naclus the strong Castle
of the Pomerans. There in a Moon-shiny night, the watches often saw troops as
'twere of armed men, riding up out of their open camps, and rushing upon the
camps of the Polonians. When they often did thus, the Polonians were angry, and
seemed to be disquieted, but dare not all come forth into open battle. On a
night when news were brought them that the enemies were come again, they came
forth on a heap out of their camp all in a rage, and running to and fro
assaulted them a great way to no purpose, They which were besieged fearing of
the Polonian riot and having prepared a way for their excursion, suddenly brake
out upon them, and threw wild fire among their works and Cottages, which were
covered with straw and reed, which quickly dispersing it self in many places,
and few remaining in the Castle to defend it, easily burnt their works with a
great part of the Castle. They affirm that the night-Ghosts, representing an
Army in a hostile manner, were they, which by Gods permission vexed and perplexed
the Polonians. Being thus worsted, the Polonians, because Winter was very sharp
in those Regions, and now at hand, and their houses were lost and gone, without
which they were not able to endure the violence and injury of the winter
weather, by these affrights likewise, and sudden alterations they were made
religious, but the Nacli went from thence, not being able to compass their
design. Cromerus lib. 3. Histor. Polon.

Cracoviensis, at a very spacious Lake, by reason of the disturbance of some
evil spirits, neither fit for fishing, nor any other use of Man, being very
hard frozen in the Winter; they say that in the year 1278. the neighbors and
Priests came together, bringing with them their Colors, Crucifixes, and some
other holy and consecrated things wherewith to force and expel them thence,
that they might more freely and securely recreate themselves in fishing, but
throwing in their Net, at the first draught, the fishermen being at strife one
with another, they drew forth but three small fishes only, the one of them an
ill-shap'd terrible Monster with a Goats head, and eyes flaming like fire. At
which all being in an amaze, and running away; That spectrall plunged himself
under the Ice, and running to and fro in the Lake, made a terrible noise and
outcry, and breathing on some of the company, they were miserably ulcerated.
Cromerus lib. 9.

JAson Pratensis in his 29th Chapter tells us a story of a distempered brain of
a Priest, which was troubled with the disease called by some Incubus, or the
Mare, and imagined he saw a Woman of his acquaintance coming to him, which
laying upon him whether he would or no, did most grievously afflict and torment
him.

ALexander in his second book of his Merry days, writes of Alexander, that he
had an intimate friend of an undoubted credit, that took upon him the care of
his friends funeral, and as he was going from thence to Rome from whence he
came, night drawing on, he turned into the next Inn in the road, and there
being very weary, he went to bed. And being all alone, and not as yet settled to
sleep, he said he saw on a sudden the similitude or likeness of his friend
which lately died, coming ^owards him very pale and lean, just like him in the
mouth, as he last parted from him when he lay sick, whom looking wishly upon
for very fear that he was in, he was not himself, he asked him who he was? But
he answering nothing, pulled off his clothes, and w^nt (as it seems) into the
same bed where he lay, and came close to him, as if he would hug him. The other
almost half dead for fear, went to the bed side, and would not let him come
nigh him, he seeing that he was rejected, looks upon him with a stern and
unusual aspect, and taking up his clothes, presently rose out of bed, and
putting them on, and his shoes, went away, and was never seen again. This good
man being thus affrighted was deadly sick, and even at death's door. To that
which has been already spoken, he said likewise, that when he was struggling
with him in bed, he felt his bare foot so cold, as no Ice could be colder.

GOrdian my friend, says the same Alexander, a man of an approved trust,
related to me, when with his comrade he went to the City Arezzo, in his
journey, as it fell our, they wandered far out of the way, by reason of many
turnings and by-places, so that they saw no plough'd or Arable ground, but
only Woods, Groves, and inaccessible places were in their sight, and solitude
it self was enough to terrify them, the Sun therefore approaching the Western
circuit, being weary by their hard travel they sat down together, and within
a while they thought they heard a man's tongue, which going after, on the next
hill they espied three men of a huge wild and terrible form, not of the fashion
of men, in black long Cloaks, in a sad and mourning habit, their beard and hair
hanging down to the ground, who calling and making signs to them, had almost
persuaded and enticed them to them, but in that interim greater then these
appeared of an immense bulk and stature of body, far exceeding man's, and
another also appeared of the same shape, stark naked, leaping and skipping up
and down most strangely, with other unseemly deportments at which sight they
being clearly discouraged, fled away and passing that rugged and perilous way,
could scarce find again that homely Inn where they lodged.

Alexander mentions stories of the same nature in his 4th book, and 9th
chapter, in these words. A very good friend of mine lately, of a good
disposition, and excellent repute, told me what a strange thing, and wonderful
to be related befell him, averring and confirming the truth thereof by many
sufficient testimonials, ( viz) that when he lodged at Neapolis with his
kinsman and acquaintance: at midnight I heard one crying, and calling for
help, when I had lighted a candle, I ran to him to know what the matter was,
and there I beheld the Devil and one of his Furies, laying violent hands upon
a youth in the road-way crying out, and struggling with them; he poor man run to
him, when he came near him and gat good hold on his doublet and hand, and along
time pulling and tugging with them to no purpose, at last he called upon God for
help, and with much ado he set him at liberty. When he had entertained this
young man at his home which was much troubled in mind, he had not power to go
from him. For he was so timorous and horribly affrighted, that he knew not what
he did, believing always he saw that spectral before him. In fine when he came
to himself, he told the whole story from the beginning how it was. He was one of
a perverse and wicked conversation, a despiser of God, and disobedient to his
Parents, whom he had at that time reviled, railed against, and contumeliously
reproached. When they blessed him, he went from them most direfully cursing.

THomas Monachus, a good man, of whose honesty and fidelity I have large
experience: told me seriously, when he was in a Monastery, and Cloisters in the
Mountain of Lucania, he discoursed with many, and after many hard speeches, and
brablings being troubled in mind he went alone by himself through the woods,
where he met one in the shape of a man, of a grim look, an ugly and cruel
aspect, a black beard, a long coat. Who being asked why he stragled alone out
of the way? answered, that he had lost his horse, which he used to ride upon,
and he thought he was strayed into the next fields: and when through many
windings and turnings they went together to look this horse, they came to a
River in the Channel whereof were many obscure and dangerous gulphs. Whereupon
Monachus, that he might the better pass over, pulled off his shoes, the other
was very earnest with him to get upon his shoulders, and he would carry him
over. He yielding his assent, gat fast about the others neck, that went into
the Foord, and espying his feet not to be like other men's, but of a foul and
ugly shape. Taking notice thereof he was terribly affrighted and called upon
Providence for help, which when he heard, he said, presently that ugly vision
vanished quite away, with a querulous noise, and so strong a whirlwind, that it
blew up an Oak not far from thence by the roots, not breaking the boughs; but
he was in such an amaze, that he lay all along, a long time, as 'twere without
a Soul, and unless he had foreseen it, he was persuaded that this devil would
have cast him headlong into the deepest gulphs of this River.

Rome, when amongst the Gabii a certain desperate youth of mean descent,
ill-bred, and of a wicked life, had upbraided, taunted, and defamed his father,
and being therefore tossed and troubled with these furies, he calls on the
Devil, to whom he had devoted himself, and thinks to go to Rome, to plot some
wicked design against his father. In his journey he meets the Devil like some
sour looked fellow, of an uncompt beard and locks; and an old decayed vesture,
who keeping him company, demands of him the cause of his sadness and trouble,
he replied that his father and he had some words, but he had resolved a wicked
design on him. To whom the Devil answered, that he should have the same
fortune, and he would proceed to vindicate his quarrels. Night approaching,
they come to a City, they turn into the first Inn they come at, and together
they lay, the one being fast asleep, the other awake was saying his prayers.
Whereupon that most ugly Diabolical fury brake forth the chamber with such
might, noise, and violence, that he pulled down the rafters, top of the house,
and brake all the Tyles. This young man being affrighted, and almost killed at
this sight, repented him of his forepast life and vicious course, endewed now
with another spirit, leading the remainder of his life afar off, and was a good
example. Haec ille.

Alexander the Lawyer of the City Naples lay sick in his bed at Rome, he saw
plainly before him as he was awake the species of a woman of an excellent
beauty: which when he looked upon, a long while musing, saying nothing, and
bethinking himself he might be deceived. But when he perceived his senses to be
fresh and lively, and that the shape never stirred from him, asked her who she
was, she smiling a little, and answering what he had said, as though she
intended to mock him, having a long time beheld him, went away. Alexander. lib.
2. cap. 9.

THe spirits which go to and fro in houses, are either harmless, or fierce and
cruel ones, the harmless may be termed Lares which at midnight chiefly haunt
houses, and seem by some kind of noise to do something, when as indeed they do
nothing. Wierus writes, that when he was a child, those which are called Lares,
were often heard in the dwellings of his progenitors, which the day before they
came to them, the Merchants buying Hops, used to imitate the sound and noise of
bags rolled down the stairs, (by which trick his father gained much) it being
always a fortunate and true omen. To these were like those which the Germans
call Guteli from the good they do, especially to them that watch and look to
cattle, seldom appearing to any other. And not differing from those, they call
Trullae, who in a counterfeit habit, as well woman's as man's in many other
nations; but chiefly among the Suionae. Now they which are cruel, and
tormenting spirits are called Larvae, which every way affright and disturb the
whole Family.

Test Georgio Agricola libro de animantibus subterraneis. And the fierce ones
indeed, or they which are terrible to look upon, most commonly molest and are
obnoxious to the mettal-men. Such an one was Annaebergius that Hobgoblin, which
killed twelve laborers, or more at a blast in the Cave, that is called Corona
Rosacea, left by that name, although it abounded with Silver, this puff came
forth by opening his mouth when he appeared like a horse, having a long neck,
and horrible eyes. Such another was also Schnecbergius that Ghost, clad in a
black hood, who in the Mine named Georgian, situated one of the workmen which
he took from the ground, in the top of that concavity, which heretofore was
fertile of silver, crushing together his body. Judaeus was by one of these
spirits forced from a very commodious Mine among the Turcae, which often
appeared to them like a Goat, having Golden horns. But some of the Germans, and
likewise the Greeks call the quiet and gentle spirits, Cobalos, in that they
are imitatours of men, for they show themselves merry, they laugh, and seem to
do many things when they are doing nothing at all. Others call them Small men
of the mountains, because they appear as dwarfs, 3. spans long. They seem to be
drowsy dotards, habited like the mettal-men, These are inoffensive to them,
although sometimes perhaps they may provoke the workmen with throwing gravel,
but they never hurt them unless by jeering or railing they provoke them. They
are chiefly seen to work, or haunt those Caves out of which metals may be
dug or at leastwise they hope so. Therefore these laborers are not
frighted from their work, but hereby promising themselves good success, they
are more cheerful, and work more eagerly, wishing for them.

THeodosius the Emperor, having spent and exhausted his treasure by continual
Wars, imposed a new subsidy upon his Cities, only the city Antioch refused to
make payment of it: and not only so, but having made a mutiny, the people in a
contumelious manner, drew up and down the City, the Image of Placella the
Empress (though already dead) fitting and fastening a rope to her feet. Which
villainous act the Emperor, as well he might, took so hainously, that (unless
being persuaded by the entreaties of D. Flavianus the Bishop, and the authority
of D. Ambrosius, he had bin bound by oath to determine nothing against
offenders, till the 13th day was over) he had made there also a great Massacre
among them, as he had done at Thessalonica. Nicephorus lib. 12. cap. 42. It Is
reported that night before this mutiny, a tall woman was seen in the Air, huge
and very great, of a most dreadful and fearful countenance, which running
through the streets of the City in the Air, beat the Air with her fan, making
such a noise, as they used to do, which in dark places excite beasts to rage.
Idem lib. 9. cap. 42.

Italians there was a Governor of a City, which most proudly and covetously
domineered over his Citizens, and by his high words, and fierce deeds was wont
to punish his subjects in a slavish manner, though they did those things he
commanded, and performed them well, yet for small causes did he torment or fine
them. By chance a good honest fellow, though of small substance, poor, and
despicable, did so beat his Lord and Masters greyhound, whereof he was
wonderfully careful, that he thought for it he should be put to death. When
the Governor understood it, being very angry, and with a stern and menacing
countenance grievously chiding him, commanded him to be cast into a most base
prison, and there being fast bound, was kept in a miserable custody. After some
days came they who were willing to observe his commands, as they used to do,
the prison door being fast, and as well the doors as every passage made close,
that he could not get forth, they could find him no where within the Prison,
who searching a long time, and he appeared not, neither was there any step or
symptom of his escape to be seen, they brought the news to their Governor:
which seeming to him incredible, he was strangely amazed. Within three days
the same doors being strongly barred, that very same he, which of late was
deputed to prison, every one being ignorant thereof, was again forced and
thrust into the same Prison, and like to one in an amaze, requested that he
might with all speed be admitted to his Lord, for he had somewhat of
consequence to tell him in all haste, which was not to be delayed. And when he
was presently brought to him, he told him he was released by some of the
infernal crew, that since he could not endure the ugliness of the Prison, he
was grown desperate, and being afraid of his doom, not knowing what to do, he
called to an evil spirit, that he would be helpful to him, and release him
out of that ill-favored dungeon. A little while after the Devil appeared to
him in the same Prison, of a deformed shape and terrible countenance, and that
he had agreed with him that he should free him from thence and all Iron bolts
and locks, and should cast him into the infernal places, great depths, and the
lowest part of the Earth, there he might view and behold all things, the
torments of the wicked and their ungodly places: their eternal darkness and
miseries, loathsome and horrible corners, their Kings and chief Rulers, were
tortured, covered, as 'twere with thick darkness, and tormented with the
burning lights of furies: he saw also the Bishops with their mitres and robes,
richly adorned and beautified with gems, and many other wretched effigies of
all sorts, ages, and ranks, afflicted in several habits, lying along in
profound and deep gulphs, punished in eternal torments, and their damned
wickednesses everlastingly tormented with grief and woe, amongst whom he had
noted many which he knew in their lifetime, and especially an intimate and
familiar friend of his, who while he was living was his companion, and he said
to him speaking unto him, he knew him very well, and calmly required of him,
what business he had there, and what he expected there. He making answer, that
his country was by hard duties and rigid government ent^ralled, was charged, to
tell the Governor, and bid him have a care, that he did so no more, and that
he should not oppress his subjects by burdensome taxes, and unjust
toll-money, for he foretold him that there was a place, which he saw not far
off lefr for him. And that he might not doubt his promise, he says that he
should call to mind, their private consultation and mutual agreement, which
they made when they were Soldiers together, whereof no body knew; which when
he had readily declared and recited not only what was said and covenanted, but
every word, and their promises, whereby they were both obliged to each other:
the governor hearing these things in order, being more serious, and attentive,
was wonderfully amazed, and great trembling fell upon him, when he considered
how those things, which were disclosed to him alone, and never to any other,
that dull pate, and blockish fellow, as 'twere inspired with some deity, should
know them, and repeat them with an undaunted look. To this miracle also is
added, That he asked him, with whom he was talking with in Hell, who appeared
in handsome and neat habit and attire, whether they were any ways punished,
that went in rich apparel, and vestments of Gold; he replied, with everlasting
burning and amongst the greatest torments they were with continual woe
oppressed and tormented, and that which before glittered with Gold and Purple,
was now all flame and fire. He willing to make trial thereof, put his hand
nearer to the Purple, being warned by him not to touch it, and yet it could not
be, but by the blast of heat, the palm of his hand which he put forth to the
Purple, was on fire. For it was almost wasted with blisters and vile Ulcers, as
with some poison. St. Anthonies fire, or some other mischief, that seemed to
spread it self further and further. Moreover they which went unto him, relate
that he, after he was got from Hell, was sore troubled in mind, and his senses
of hearing and seeing were very much stupefied, that he was always musing,
seldom spoke a word (though oftentimes ask't). But he came home with so stern
an aspect, and so deformed a countenance, that whom his wife and children very
well knew; after he came from thence, he was so much altered in his face, and
all parts of his body, that they could hardly believe he was the same man, and
oftentimes his acquaintance and kindred spoke to him, weeping for his
ugliness, and the man's Idea so deformedly altered; he had scarce time to
dispose of his substance, and to give good counsel to his children before his
death. Alexander libro 6. cap. 21. Genial Dier.

Hetrurian ploughing in the fields belonging to the Tarquinii, his Plough going
too deep into the ground, one named Tages, as the story goes, brake forth in
stature like a child, but in Wisdom a grave and discreet Senator, and spoke
to him that held the Plough, he being affrighted, cried out. At the noise
whereof, at the first there was a great concourse of neighbors, then by
little, and little the rumor being farther spread abroad, within few days all
Hetruria was assembled into that field. All hearing this child, that he spoke
many things, his words were carefully observed and written down, from which by
long experience came all their divination; yet so, that if it spread to any
other Nations, the Hetrurians made most and chief account thereof. Franciscus
Petrarcha.

DRusus made Consul and warring with Germany by the name of Caesar Augustus,
and having subdued the greatest part thereof, resolved to go forward, a very
great woman met with him, and seemed to say to him. Whither go thou
insatiable D^usus? Is it not in the power of the fates to see all these things?
but go thy ways, for now the end both of thy life and works is at hand. Then
going home, he fell into a disease, whereof he died. Leonaras.

DUnstan an English Abbot, when by the scurrilous gestures of an Hobgoblin
leaping and skipping before him, he understood that Edmund King of England was
dead, he hastened to the Kings Court, and in the middle of his journey he was
better certified concerning the Kings death. Vincentius lib. 24. cap. 71.

ADrianus Patricius being sent from Basilius the Emperor against the
Carthagenians had in Peloponesus some Ships in their station. On a certain
night the shepherds heard those spirits that haunt thereabouts speaking one to
another, and saying, That the day before the Sicilians or Syracusae were taken
and destroyed. This rumor went up and down from one to another, and at last it
came to Adrian, who calling the shepherds to him, and examining them finds the
report which was brought to him, confirmed by their words, that he might also
by his own ears approve the truth of the news, the shepherds bring them to the
place, where making enquiry of the spirits, and what they were doing, he heard
them say that the Syracusae were taken. Cedrenus.

Polycritus an Aetolian, made by the people chief governor of Aetolia for
three years, married Locrides for her virtue sake, with whom he slept three
nights, In the fourth he died. The woman continued a widow at home. And when
her time to be brought to bed was at hand, she was delivered of an
Hermophrodite, a wonderful strange monster, The neighbors being affrighted at
this chance, brought forth the young child into the market, and calling an
assembly, and gathering together the Priests and inspectors of Monsters, they
consulted about it. Some of them said it did foretell some discord between the
Aetolians, and the Locrensians. For the young one was divided, part was of the
Mother Locrides, and part of the father Aetolus: Others were of opinion that
the Mother should with her young one be carried out of Aetolia, and burnt.
While they are advising on these things, on a sudden Polycritus which lately
died, was among the rabble, clad in a black vestment, he spoke to the Citizens
which were amazed at this spectrall, and at first by entreaties, then by
threatenings, demanded the Infant to be restored to him. Some denying, others
not consenting, Polycritus being very angry snatched up the Infant, and making
many of them run away, as if he was mad he mangled and tore it in pieces. The
multitude cried out, and began to stone him. But he being insensible of their
blows and hitting him, devoured the whole body of the child, laying aside his
head, and presently he vanished. Which fact the Aetolians taking unhandsomely,
and being very anxious what to do, they would send to Apollo his Oracle; the
child's head lying on the ground, began to speak, and in a long discourse
foretold the Citizens, that great misery, and destruction was hanging over
their heads. When they heard this Oracle, they exposed their wives, children
and old people to shift for themselves, they stayed at home, expecting what was
to come. It happened that in the next year there was a battle between the
Aetolians and the Acarnanians, and on either side a great destruction. Plegon
Trallianus de Mirabilibus et longaevis, ex Hierone.

Sicily which was between Octavius Caesar, and Sex. Pompeius, Ga^ienus, the
stoutest man of Caesar his Army, being taken by Pompey his forces, lay on the
shore with his neck slasht and scarce hanging together a whole day, and when it
began to grow darker and darker, a great company of the vulgar being met
together, with groanings and entreaties, he desired them to bid Pompey come to
him as soon as he could, for he was lately set loose from the infernal places,
and had somewhat to tell him; Pompey sent many of his familiar friends, to whom
Gabien said, that Pompey his causes pleased the Gods below, and his devout
parties were an argument of Truth, that he would undertake to pacify them if he
did what he was commanded, and so it fell out. Plinius lib. 7. cap. 52. But the
event it self discovered Satan's mock. Caesar with the Gods above, being
victour, sent Pompey to his underneath.

Tarquinii, which warred with their associates the Romans. They were thought to
be Castor and Pollux. L. Domitius, who first called them in the market, when
then were rubbing and cherishing their horses, which were all of muck sweat,
admired the news. Suetonius faith that they meeting him as he came home out of
the country, bad him declare the victory. A while after, it is reported, that
they smiling on him, handled his beard, and it was, of a black color,
presently made a red beard, (I speak the truth) and therefore this man was
called Aenobarba. Plutarchus in Aemilio.

Rathbodus commander of Frisia, with a Golden Diadem, on his head, and many
jewels thereon, and his vesture wrought with Gold, saying, Most valiant Sir,
who has seduced and mislead you, that you would go from the service of God? Do
not do thus, but be constant in those things you have learnt, and you shall be
advanced to Golden Palaces, which I shall shortly give you for ever. To morrow
therefore receive Vulfrannus, who is the chief teacher of Christians, and
enquire of him, what famous everlasting Mansion that is, which he promises
you; which if he cannot show you, send messengers of both sides, and I will be
their leader, and will show them that Golden house, and most beautiful
Mansion, which I promise: Rathbod. being very careful, related all to his
Vulfrannus, who told him: that these were mere delusions of the Devil. The
Commander answered that he would become a Christian if he would show him that
famous Mansion. They presently send one of Frisia on the behalf of the
Governor, and a Priest on the behalf of St. Vulfran, who going a little from
the Town, they met one of their comrades, who said to them, Make haste quickly,
and I will let you see the glorious Mansion, which is provided for Rathbod the
General. They going on in a spacious way, and places they knew not, saw a way
adorned with diverse kinds of Marble bravely polisht, and a house afar off, as
of Gold; and they came to a street before the house, bestrewed with Gold, and
many Gems. They going into the house of admirable beauty, and splendor, saw in
it a Throne of a wonderful magnitude. Then spoke their guide to them. This is
the Mansion prepared for Rathbod the Commander. To which the Priest being in an
amaze, said to them. If these things be made by God, let them remain for ever;
but if by the Devil, let them perish instantly. And signing himself with the
sign of the holy Cross, their leader was transformed into a Devil, and the
Golden house into mire and dirt. But the messengers were staying in a fenny and
thorny place, and in three days space, finishing their journey, they returned
back to the Town, and found their Commander dead, and related what they had
seen, to S. Vulfran. Anno 718. Vincentius lib. 23. cap. 146. ex Ovone
Presbytero Sigebertus, et Erphordiensis cap. 66.

VAlentinus one of the Bishops of the Church of Millain, defender of the
Arrians, a man very unconstant, and of small reputation, being buried in the
Church of the blessed Martyr Syrus, there was heard by night fearful clamours,
whereat the two keepers being raised, they ran to see what the matter was, and
they espied two evil spirits or Ghosts drawing forth Valentinus out of the
Temple, being fast bound by the feet, and crying out. In the morning they saw
his corpse laid in another place without the Temple. Gregorius Turonensis lib.
4. Dialog. cap. 53. vixit, sub Justino Imperatore.

Wormatia, there appeared a great troop of armed men for many days and nights,
running to and fro; and sometimes back again into a mountain, from whence they
were wont to come. On a certain night a Monk, taking some associates with him,
and fortyfying himself with the sign of the Cross; to the Mountain he goes,
and adjures all that came forth, by virtue of the holy and undivided Trinity,
to tell him their names. To whom one of the company said, We are Phantasmes,
and no living Soldiers, but only the spirits of Men, sometimes warring and
fighting for the Prince of this World, and in a short time after killed in this
very place; The Weapons, Harnesses, and Horses, which when we were alive, were
the instruments of our sin, are now being dead, the tokens of our torment:
whatsoever ye now see upon us is all on fire, though ye cannot see the fire.
The Monk furthermore asked them, If they could receive no help by men. Then the
spirits made answer to him: We may by fastings, Prayers, and especially by the
offering of the body and blood of Christ, and this we beseech you to do. When
they had thus said, the whole company, as 'twere with one voice, cried out,
Orate pro nobis, orate pro nobis, orate pro nobis. And presently they all
vanished into fire, and the mountain it self flamed mightily. Chronicon
Hirsaugiense.

Cicero his nurse* did foretell, that she cherished great good to all the
Romans. These things appearing but dreams and vain phantasms, he in a short
time manifested, that it was a true Oracle. For consulting with Apollo his
Oracle, how she might obtain greatest renown, answer was made by the Oracles,
that she should follow her own ingenuity, the ringleader of her life, and not
the vulgars estimation. Plutarchus in Cicerone.

Sa. bellic. lib. 1. cap. 4. And when Annius Tacitus was Emperor, these were
the Prognostics of his death. His fathers sepulcher opening of its own accord.
Likewise his Mothers Ghost which was long since dead, appeared to him. And his
brothers spectrall with great horror, in various shapes and places. Fulgosus
Lib. 1. cap. 4.

COnstantius the Emperor being converted from the Persian war to quiet Julian
in France, and in a great quandary, not having so good success as formerly,
was much affrighted, with nightly visions. And raising an Army, on a night
between sleeping and waking, he thought he saw as 'twere his father, proffering
a fair handsome child to him; he took it up, and laid it in his bosom,
throwing away the ball which he had in his right hand. Which evidently
demonstrated alteration of the times, though the Interpreters according to
their apprehension, made a more favorable construction thereof. Afterward he
acknowledged to his familiar friends and acquaintances, that his Genius, who
was his Protector and defense had now left him; he that heretofore had
contrived and devised many things with him most familiarly, at that time seemed
ugly and dreadful, as if he would forsake him. These things appeared to him
going from Antioch, toward Tarsus. Cuspinianus.

Jupiter at Apamea both very spacious, and also very famous for diverse, and
most specious Ornaments: which when the Prefect of the East, with the two
Tribunes entering the City, would have demolished, upon the serious survey of
it, they found it to be so firmly workt, and of such huge and solid stone, that
they thought it impossible to ruin so vast and firm a piece of workmanship.
When Marcellus the Bishop, seeing him afraid of the work, desired him to make
for other Cities, and he went to his prayers to God, that he would put some end
to so difficult a work. And in a very short time after, there came one to the
Bishop, who having contracted for a certain sum of Money for his pains,
promised he would fire the foundations of the Temple, and by that means utterly
demoli^* But whilst he was applying his fireworks, a black Devil appeared to
him, and restrained the natural force of that Element. Which when Marcellus
understood, he went into the Temple, and praying most earnestly to Almighty
God, repelled the Magic of the Devil, and presently the foundation took fire,
and when the Piles were consumed, the whole structure went to wrack, and so it
was utterly destroyed. Niceph. lib* 12. cap. 27.

Pilappii inhabit a part of the Peninsula of Scandinavia. Amongst them there is
an innumerable company of spectrals, which converse feast and discourse with
them commonly, nor can they by any means be laid or driven away. They, when
they are most terrified and huspil'd by these Ghosts, bury their dead friends
under their fire-places, or hearths, and give them in charge to take care they
be not molested in that nature: by this spell alone do they defend and save
themselves from the vexations and terror of the Devils. For if they punctually
observe this, no Apparition ever after molesteth them, but if they neglect it,
they are continually terrified and encumbered with the Visions of their dead
friends. At this time they are less infested, and have less incanting amongst
them then formerly in regard the King of Suecia has most strictly prohibited
the use of them, and as much as in him lies, takes care that the Christian
Religion be taught them, and that their Children be brought up therein. Casper
Peucerus de (...).

Bavaria of a most noble extract, was so grieved for the death of his wife,
that abandoning all comforts whatsoever, he betook himself to a solitary life.
At length when he mourned without measure or date, his wife appeared to him in
the night, being risen from the dead, and told him that indeed she had once
finished her natural course in this life, but yet by his importunity she was
now restored to life, and commanded by God to use his society yet longer, but
upon this condition that they should again be married by a Priest: and
furthermore that he should abstain all railing and blasphemous words which he
had formerly accustomed to use, for indeed, this was the principal or only
cause why he had been deprived of her, and that she should again presently
depart this life, as soon as he should but utter any word of that nature. These
things being thus performed, she took care of his household affairs as formerly,
and bare him some children, but was all the while but of a sad and wan
countenance. But many years after her husband coming home in drink, and giving
his maid some hard words, in anger, more then becom'd a sober Man, she went
from the bed to the cup-board, where she was to fetch some fruit for her
husband, and there left her clothes standing at the Chest where the Apples were
kept, without any body in them, and was never seen more. This I have heard
spoken by many worthy and authent^^^ ^^rsons, who affirmed that a Captain of
Bavaria told it to a Cap^^^^ of Saxon for a truth. This Sabinus writes in the
tenth book of his Metamorphoses.

IN the 1045. year of Christ, Bruno the Bishop of Herbipolis, with Henry the
third of that name, went to Boiaria Orientalis, or in the East by water upon
the River Danubius, but not in the same Ship with him. It is a Town of Austria
which they call Greinon; above which there be craggy Rocks, and great heaps of
stone that arise, and lie out into the waters, by reason whereof Danubius (as
they say) is carried with a very great violence, and exceeding noise which may
be heard far off, and froathing by reason of the violence of the water. The
Teutonick hold this for an ominous and most dangerous and destructive place to
Navigators, and call it Strudelon. Bruno (as I said before) accompanied the
King his kinsman in another Ship, and when they dashed upon a very great Rock
in the Sea, the shape of a black Aethiop appeared, a Vision (as the event
testified) sufficiently apparent and ominous, and stood upon the Rock Haleing
to Bruno; Ho ho, Bishop (says he) I am thy evil Angel and whithersoever thou
go, thou art mine; I have nothing to say to thee at present, but thou shall
shortly see me again. Whilst they all abhorred that prodigy, the Bishop having
used that immortal sign of the Cross, and holy Charms, and Verses, the evil
spirit left all there deceived. And this Rock is yet noted for it, on which
there was a Tower built of Stone, without any beam or roof, and from thence
being fitly named, retains it to this very day. From whence having sailed on
for about ten thousand paces, they turned in at the Town of Bosenburg, where
the widow Riclita entertained and feasted them very nobly (whose Husband
Adalbero of Ebersperg had the Dynastry of the Castle of the chief Boiaria,
which is now a Temple, and had died the last (...) before) and desired that
Bosenburg and the farms which in those parts her husband held upon curtesy,
might be conferred upon Welpho the third her Nephew by her brother. The Caesar
came up to supper, and whilst, before Bishop Bruno, and Alemannus President of
Ebersperg, and Riclita stretching out his right hand he consented to all her
desires, upon a sudden, the ra^ters of the house fell and slew Bruno,
Adventinus lib. 5. Annal. Boiorum.

Bohemia oftimes a Monk uses to appear, whom they call Rubezl, and that many
times he is seen in the baths, and does frequently join himself to travailers
that go that way when they are in the woods, and bid them be of good courage,
telling them, that in regard they are ignorant of the way, he will lead them
strait through the woods: whom as soon as he has led into the most path-lesse
places of the wood, that they know not which way to turn themselves, he leaps
into a Tree and makes such a laughter as causes the woods to ring again. This
Monk or Rubezal is the Devil, who having taken to him the shape of a Monk,
plays these pranks.

ON a certain time there was a Monster taken in the Sea, in all things like
unto a woman of a stupendous beauty, and amiablenesse, whom one of the
fishermen, or Sailers took for his wife, when she had been kept in the ship a
while, and had one child by her, three years after when they came to the same
place where the Monster was taken, she leapt out of the Ship into the waters,
and took the child with her. The child perished in the Sea, and she vanished
out of their sight, and was never seen more by any of them. It is an easy
matter (says Luther) for Satan to assume the shape of a Man or Woman. ex
colloquiis Lutheri.

Martin Luther and some other learned men to his Countrey-house at Wittenberg,
and when for his pleasure, he rode forth to hunt the hare, a Hare of an
incredible bigness, and Forces, running very swiftly over the fields, objected
themselves to his view. The noble man being excellently well-mounted, followed
them with a great shour, and presently his horse fell down dead under him, and
the Hare vanished into the Air. This was a truly Satanicall Phantasm.

Christ, Martin Luther related at a Supper, at Islebia, That at Thuringia,
about the mountain which they call Horselberg, certain noble youths, very
intent in the night time in catching of Hares, took in their Nets about eight,
which when they returned home, and hung up, they found to be in the morning
only so many horse-heads, such as are to be found stinking in some loathsome
ditch. Ex colloquiis Lutheri.

Rotenberg a certain man most gloriously attired, and one that bragged of great
Nobility and Riches, did frequent the house of a very honest Man: and had two
companions no less gorgeous in their apparel then himself. He brought a
Fiddler, and a Piper, made Banquets, called Dances, and all under pretense of
marrying the daughter of this good Man, a very virtuous Maid. He affirmed, he
was born to Noble Parents, had immense Riches, Castles, Farms, Towns, and many
of them in Foreign Countries. Nor did he want any thing this world could
afford, but a Wife to his likening, qualified, and educated. This ^^^ortunity
of his guest, and his companions, pleased not the Master of the house, which
caused him to call in the Minister of the place against they came, that so
whilst they were at Supper, he might intermeddle some holy discourse out of
holy Writ. These Colloquies very much offended his guest, and his friends.
Wherefore they desired some other subject, and argued that many witty conceits
and neat jests were more suitable to feasting, and did more exhilarate the
hearts of men then the exposition of holy writ, therefore they would entreat
them to be no more troublesome to them, with discourse of that nature. By which
the Master of the house found what diabolical spirits they had, and being now
well armed against the snares of the Devil, he said to his guests Avaunt, or
depart, O ye wicked Caitifs, you shall have nothing to do with me nor mine, we
are Baptized and Redeemed by the precious Blood of Christ, and he will defend
us against your Diabolical machinations. At these words, this devilish
Impostor, together with his hellish companions vanished, leaving behind them a
most noisome stink, and the dead bodies of three men who had been hanged.
Manlius, in collectaneis.

Gorlitz, inviting some friends to a Supper most exquisitely cooked, and they
refusing to come, he grew so extreme angry, that in a rage he said. If they
will not come, I wish all the Devils in Hell would. This wish was not
frustrate: for immediately a great company of them which he had called for in
his wrath, came to him, which he not knowing at the first sight, went to
entertain them courteously. But when instead of hands they stretched forth
their claws to him, being exceedingly affrighted he well thought what kind of
guests he had in his house. Thus trembling with his Wife he fled out of his
Castle, and left an Infant in the Cradle, and a Fool sitting on a Stove by it,
to see to it. But the Fool brought the Child safe from amongst those fiends.
Jobus Fincelius, de Miraculis.

Basil Council, for recreation sake, went forth into a small Wood, friendly to
confer about the disputes of those times. As they were going along, they heard
a pretty little Bird singing most sweetly like a Nightingale, they are ravished
at her pleasant Music, not knowing what Birds note it should be. Entering the
Wood, they espy a small Bird sitting on a Tree, and singing most pleasantly,
without giving over; they were all very attentive: At last one having more
courage, and better spirited then the rest, speaks thus to the Bird: I adjure
thee in the Name of Christ, to tell us who thou art. The Bird made answer, That
she was one of the damned Souls, and was designed to that place, till the last
day, and then she must undergo everlasting torment. When she had said this, she
flew away from the Tree, crying; O how immense, and of long continuance is
Eternity. Philippus Melancthon says, I am of opinion that this was the Devil
inhabiting there. All that were present at this adjuration fell very sick, and
within a little after dyed. In collectaneis Manlii.

The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head: as if man had power given
him over the Devil, that he might call him forth, and cast him out, when he
pleased. I am not (says Luther) of that belief, to dare to use the commerce of
Devils. And added moreover, what happened to Nicolaus Ambsdorffius Bishop of
Ciz. who as himself related it, and truly acknowledged on a time in the City
Maidenburg, when he was Priest there, sleeping by night in an Inn, he was
awakened by two Noblemen long since dead, before whom went two young men
carrying Torches in their hands, and not being afraid, when there was no
danger, being commanded to arise, he did so. There these Noblemen dictated
Letters to him, which he wrote, and charged him to present them to a certain
Prince: When they had done these things, they vanished. He delivered the
Letters to whom he was commanded.

Rotwil, having the shape sometime of an Hare, sometimes of a Goose, and
sometimes of a Weazel, threatening with a loud voice, that he would burn the
City. Which did not a little terrify the Inhabitants thereof. Pinc^lius, lib.
1.

Saxoni^, Satan taking upon him the form of a Man, came confidently to
Laurentius Donerus, Priest of that place, when he should hear them that were
the next day to come to the holy Supper of the Lord, to make confession of
their sins, earnestly desiring him to hear his confession. Being admitted, he
belched out most horrible blasphemies against Christ the Son of God. But being
convicted by the Minister, with the power of Gods Word, he departed, leaving an
unsufferable scent behind him. Idem.

Fri^urga, a famous City in Misnia, was there a Man renowned for his Religion
and Age, who being very dangerously sick, and almost at the point of death, The
Devil, clad in a prelaticall garb, came unto him, left by chance all alone, and
perplexing and troubling the old Man in that agony, demanded of him, to tell
him in order all the faults which he had committed in his life; and he having
in a readiness paper and ink, would set them all down. But when the old Man by
Gods Word; mightily opposed the Devil's demands, and yet he would not desist
from his importunity, at last says the old Man, Since you press it so upon
me, that I should particularly declare to you my faults; Write then, First of
all beginning thus; The seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head. Which
he hearing, threw down his paper and ink upon the ground, and leaving behind
him an ill favor, vanished away. The good old Man not long after departed in
peace. Doctor Willerus et Manlius, in collectaneis.

Heidelberg a Doctor of Divinity, a favourer of the Gospel, whose servant was
born in Lower Germany, when having visited his Father, and was returning to
Heidelberg, not far from the City, he met an horseman sitting upon a great
horse, by whom he was violently caught up upon the horse; when he perceived
himself to be on horseback, that he might take heed of falling, the other
horseman straightway vanished; but he was snatched off the horse into the air
aloft, and from ^ence thrown down with great force near the City, hard by the
Bridge, where for some time deprived of his senses, he lay as if he were dead;
at last when he had recovered some strength, he apprehended, that he was nigh
to the City, he rose up, and going into his Inn, he lay there half a year,
before he could be restored to his former health.

Germany (they say) walks a Monster, in the bigness of a Man, but in the form
of a dog, that breathed upon them, that were to dye, as if he smelt on them.
And 'twas seen by many, upon whom it breathed not, and they did not dye that
year. They called it the Index of a Funeral; They which feared death was coming
upon them, hastened by Idolatrous Mass to get relief and salvation. Thus Satan
brought Man to Idolatry.

Torga, one born of a noble lineage, walking over ^he Fields to refresh himself,
met one in the habit of a Knight or Gentleman (but it was the Devil)
complementing with him, he takes him to wait upon him, not knowing at that time
what he was, and commits the care of his horses to him. This noble man was very
impious and lived chiefly by robbery and pillage, for which purpose he had got
him a fit servant. On a time when he was to go a journey, he commended his
Horse to him above all things. His servant conveighs the Horse up into a very
high Tower, the Horse out of the Tower knows his Master coming home, and
putting forth his head out of the Turret-window, he neighs aloud, his Master
greatly wondering, asks who it was that carried up his horse thither: that good
servant answers, 'twas he that so carefully performed his Masters commands.
Then were they constrained to let down the Horse again, (being fastened with
Ropes) from the Tower. It happened moreover, that they whom this noble man had
plundered, pursued him, then says the servant to his Master; Master, fly, and
presently he pulls forth a device out of his budget, whereby to prevent the
Horses of them that followed after, and to stop their course. At length being
cast into Prison, he implores his servants assistance. The servant makes
answer, that he was fast bound with fetters, and he could not set him free. The
Master is very urgent, till he persuades his servant to do his endeavor herein
for him. Then says the servant: I will set you at liberty, but upon this
condition, that you stir not with your hands, and make no signs for your
defense. He carries him away being taken from hence, with his chains and
fetters, a great height into the Air. He being amazed, cries out, O Eternal
God, Whither am I a going; and immediately the Devil casts him down into a
Moorish place. Then making haste home to his Wife, bids her go help her Husband
that stuck fast in the Fennes, and was bound with Fetters.

CErtain Monks travailing with their Governor or Father, as they call him,
inned with an Host, that had one of his Chambers haunted with an evil spirit.
The Host being glad of the Holy fathers coming to his house, entertained them
courteously, in hopes they could by their enchantments easily cast forth that
Ghost, and therefore makes a bed for them in that room. At night when these
Holy men were fast asleep, this foul spirit often twitched and pulled them by
the hair, till they made them bald. At length Guardian conjures the spirit, and
charges him to go from thence into the Monastery. This evil spirit does as he
is bidden, and having changed his Colony, was there before the Monks returned
home; he salutes and welcomes them coming in into the Monastery, and proffers
them his service. The Monks entertain him, and point him out his place in the
kitchen, and give him a hood and a bell hanging by him, whereby to know him,
and they often employed him to carry drink, and many other things which they
wanted. When he went for Beer, he would not be cheated of his measure; telling
them; See, I give you good M^ney, do you likewise give me good Measure.
Finally, he hanged the Cooks servant, that often vexed and troubled him, cross
over a beam; throwing sometimes hot water, sometimes dirty water upon him. But
as to his life, he did not prejudice it. The Monks fearing a sad event hereof
made resignation of their office to this their servant. Ex colloquiis Lutheri.

CRescentius, the Popes Nuncio in the Council of Trent, in the year 1552. the
25. day of March, was very busy in writing Letters to the Pope, and continued
his employment till night. Then arising to refresh himself, lo, he saw a black
Dog, of such a bigness as was not usual, fiery eyes, and his ears hanging
down to the ground coming in, and directly toward him he came, and at last he
fell down underneath the Table. Being stupefied and amazed hereat, when he came
to himself, he calls to his servants, that were in a chamber hard by, he bids
them bring a light, and to search out the Dog. And when he could in no place be
found, he took a sad conceit, and falling into a disease, he died. Dying also,
they say he cried out to his servant, to beat away the Dog that came up to his
bed. Sleidanus lib. 23.

Halberstade was there one that abounded in wealth, every day living in riot,
and following his own delight and pleasure that he became so careless of
Religion, Christian piety, and eternal salvation, that he did not stick to
say, if he might always live so here upon Earth, he would never envy God in
the fruition of Heaven. Shortly after (before he was aware) he died. After his
death, every day in the Evening such strange Apparitions were seen in his
stately houses, that every body left them, and no body durst inhabit them. That
Rich Epicure appeared with his guests in the dining room, which he had divided
for his delicacies, and dainties; that servants stood by giving attendance,
with lights in their hands* setting on Golden cups and Vessels upon the Table
and filling it with most gallant dishes: the Fiddlers moreover, and Musicians
were standing by, and no gallantry was wanting, that this rich man usually
enjoyed, when he was alive. By God's permission, and the operation of the
Devil, these spectrals were obvious to the eyes of men, that others might be
terrified from that horrid impiety and ungodliness of the Epicureans.
^incelius lib. 2.

Marchia fell out a very strange thing, which many of great account and credit
did affirm truly so to happen. In harvest time, on a sudden appeared some men
in the fields, at first fifteen, at last twelve, all of an unwonted magnitude
and an odious shape, both first and last were without heads. All these having
siccles did on a cluster reap down the Oats, that the noise of the Iron was
easily heard, yet all this while no Oats were cut. Immediately the report of
this mavelous sight came to the Court, and many, both of the Courtiers and
Citizens went forth, and were eyewitnesses of this miraculous Vision. Many
also going nearer to them, ask of them who they were, and of what Country,
and what they would have? To which they made no reply, but fell stoutly to their
work which they had begun. Some also did dare to lay hands upon them, and to
hold them, but they quickly escaped out of their hands. Whereupon it evidently
appeared to all that were then present, that they were Spirits. That
Illustrious Prince of Marchia having convocated many of his most eminent
Divines, desired to know of them what they thought of this strange prodigy:
Most of them were of opinion, that it was the omen of an ensuing Plague.
Fincelius lib. 3.

July, near Spira, there was a Vision on this manner: Three fishermen, when
endeavoring to catch some Salmon in the River Reine, they lost their labor,
they washed their Nets, and laid them down to sleep. When they had so done, a
Monk coming to them, raised one of the Fishermen, and bid him go on the further
bank of Reine. The Fisherman was obsequious to the Monks commands, and
instantly came six more, in look and habit like to Monks, who going into the
Ship, sailed along with them over the River Reine. These coming forth, the Ship
was with a most violent and swift course brought back again through Reine, and
presently some other Monks entering into the same Ship, passed over the River
as the former had done. At last, the Fisherman being returned to the place,
where he had laid himself down to take rest, shortly after fell sick. On
another night, another Fisherman was awakened in the same manner, to transport
some Monks over the River Reine, who coming to the ship, Says one of the
Monks, this Ship will not hold all that are to go over, you must get a bigger.
And passing over the second time, came 12. Monks, clad partly in white, and
some in black, with ugly hook-noses, and they going into the Ship, were also
carried over, who when they went out, others presently stepped in, and failed
over. But whither the Monks went, and whither the Ship, or how he came back to
the place of his rest, the Sailer knew not. And he also within a small time was
very ill. On the third night the like chanced to the third man, who being
awakened, was likewise charged to make use of a new Ship, to transport more
Monks, who not knowing where to acquire one, seemed to go through rough places,
and rugged Rocks, till he found a Ship that was new made, into which many
Monks, (some of small, others of a great stature, having on black, white, and
several kinds of hoods) were Shipped, passing straitwaies through the same
River, not speaking one word, and when they were come to an uneven place beset
with Trees, they refused to go out, bidding them to Sail on. When the Monks
went forth, the Ship of it self came against the Tide, near the City Spira. The
fisherman not knowing himself; was returned home, and the Ship restored again
into his own place. The Monks, when at first they questioned them whither they
went, answered toward the City Basil to the Council. There is one that
describes these passages in an Epistle, that calls himself Suredabus Cancrinus,
who also displayes and unfolds this Apparition to the life.

Of the same Spectacle, out of an Elegy of GEORGE SABINE.
THere is an ancient City seated on,
The River Reine, not far from Vangion.
People, called Neme^es, enjoyed it; there
Four Roman Generals intombed were.
Caesarean coh'rts made it their seat of old,
Whence the name Spira at this day't does hold.
Here lived one who no noble birth could vaunt,
Of a small fishing Ship, an occupant;
In which when Titan had withdrawn his beams,
He used t'deceive the Tenants of the Streams.
Whilst he his Nets and Hooks did fit and trim,
Of gliding Reine almost upon the brim.
Behold a shape presented to his sight,
Of one he knew not in the edg of night:
His vesture was (as Friars use to wear,)
Such a black coul, his crown was shaven bare,
The Fisher greets him at his wonted rate,
And asks him, What makes him abroad so late?
He answered he was sent from far by's Lord,
Desired him he would waft him over that Foord;
That he might th'sooner gain the other side,
Which curtesy he granted, never denied.
Now the night's near half spent, Boots wai^
Had turned its course, when, in the virid plain,
Behold five more in Hoods toward him came,
Whom he saluted in good Fortunes name;
And ask't them, Whither they so late were bound,
When night had finished half her constant round.
One of the five replied: Dangers constrain
Us thus by night, our safety to obtain.
We are infested by a wicked rout,
That seek to kill us, 'cause we are devout.
If in thee any love of good abide,
Then waft us in thy Boat to the other side;
That we may pass the waters by thy means,
And be not hindered by the swelling streams;
So shall thy labor prosper at thy will,
And so thy Nets the Pish shall crouding fill:
He gave consent, and them his Boat affoarded,
Whereby his Ship they soon and safely boarded;
But then (says he) who shall the fraught defray,
One of them answered, We Have no coin to pay,
(Thou know) to the people since we are so hateful,
They seldom give us ought, but we will be grateful,
If once our fortune shall established be,
We Will well reward thee for thy curtesy.
He loost from shore, now is Ship did gently glide,
Almost in the middle of the pleasant Tide:
When, spissy clouds ore-veild the Stars, the Sails,
Were over-fill'd with storming Southern gales.
The waters roar, with rouling waves; now rain,
Adds to the storm, and joins the Stars to the main.
The Mariner, with horror being struck,
Cries out, What causes this unthought ill-luck?
I saw no presage of a coming shower,
When Sol departed to his Western bower:
No Swallow hovered over the waves, my eyes
Did see no Heron: when the Moon did rise,
She was not black, nor pale, nor Phoebus light,
Abated of its luster near the night.
These words disturbed were, by the storming rain,
And by the raging waves oth' foamy main:
The Ship was near o're-turned by the blast,
The Waves had almost covered the Mast.
The Mariner with stretcht-out hands to Heaven,
Implored thence the divine aid. What even
Thou wicked wretch, do pray? (says one
Oth' five) cease Sirrah, and let God alone:
And then took up an heavy Row, which the poor
Unhappy Man had used to wield before;
With which his shoulders he so basted over,
That even unto death he beat him sore.
At last the Devils wiles appeared; 'twas plain,
There did no part oth' fraud unseen remain.
Their bodies vanished into the whirling Wind,
Nothing was left but stinking smells behind.
Then soon the Clouds were drawn, and day appeared,
The Winds allayed and the weather cleared.
Frighted herewith, e'n senseless he does bie,
With His Ship toth' shore, and there onth' Grass does lie;
'Till Sol appeared, when by a neighbor swain,
Unto his home he is conveyed again.
When telling all to those his friends were by,
Closed up his eyes, and so is said to dye.
When bright Aurora did next Morn appear,
And with her Crocean Chariot the sky did clear.
A passage like to this, the time except,
And better issue to the thing, expect.
When first bright Sol on the top oth' Mountain shone,
A traveller 'gan t'journy all alone.
Whilst he was on the coasts of Vangion,
Just where they placed had the first Mile-Stone,
Behold a Coach, all of a sable hiew,
Filled with Monks, which seven horses drew,
Yoked in order; but one of the four
Wheels, with the axetree, from the Coach were tore.
The Coachman that did rule the reins therein,
Had a most rufull nose, and visage grim.
The frighted traveller stood whilst it past
By him, so found they Spectrals were, at last
The Coach onth' sudden, mounted into the Wind,
When fire and smoke did follow it behind.
And the sad Omens of ensuing war,
A noise as arms in the Air did clash and jar:
He made return toth' City, told it, and t^me
It was made known by good authority.
Therefore to you, wh' in other regions dwell,
I thought my meter bound these things to tell,
And had they wanted an Interpretation,
I would have made it. Now the German Nation,
By their King's discords, heard of naught but jars;
And now their Monks inflamed had the Wars.
This was the Tempest, this the disjoynted Wheel,
This was the smoke and flame, This jointly we will
Commend unto our God; desire him lay
These Tempests, he will be good to them that pray.
MAgdalena Crucia Hispana, in the chief City of all Corduba Baetica, in her
tender years, was (whether by reason of Poverty, or Devotion it is uncertain)
by her poor Parents, placed in the Nunnery of St. Clara* (which she afterward
rebuilt all anew, and endowed with a fair revenue). This Magdalena, I say,
being ensnared by a Devil that appeared to her in the form of an Aethiop using
many sugared and pleasureable enticements with which tender years are most
taken; began to converse very familiarly with him, but with most severe
interminations, that no mortal should be made privy to their familiarity. She
conversing with the Devil almost every day, grew more in knowledge then could
be expected from her youth, and was admired of all that knew her for her
stupendous knowledge, and ingenuity, and singular piety, which the smoothness
of her behavior, and the austerity of her life did seem to manifest; she had
scarce attained the age of twelve years when this evil spirit, taking the
opportunity of bringing her into his full and absolute possession, with
glorious and gilded words moved a marriage betwixt them, and easily for the
experience she had had of her improvement, by his means, was this ambitious
girl persuaded to it. They join hands, are married, and at last lie together.
Magdalena in lieu of a Dower, promises him the use of her body, to discourse
with her, converse with her, and lie with her. The Aethiop on the other side,
promised to make her a large Dower, and that she should by reason of her
illustrious sanctity and wisdom, bear great sway throughout all Spain for
thirty years and upwards, insomuch that she should excel, or at least equal
the most famous that ever went before her. Nor would this lying spirit, in this
particular, seem false that so by this his bride, he might deceive all Spain.
And whenever they enjoyed their stolen delights, his servant (for this
Aethiop for the honor of the business, kept his man) taking her coule, to the
life imitated (like some supposititious Sofia) in the Cloister abroad, or in
the Temple, her countenance, behavior in walking, singing, praying, eating,
and all other the like. And if perchance, when he had wearied his Lady with
pleasures, he went (in pretense of looking that things went right in his
Manor) about the World, at his return he told her all that happened in his
travel worth the telling. So she being taken prisoner of Franciscus King of
the Gauls; so coming to the Knowledge of Romes being sacked, and telling she
was told it by divine Revelation, she grew in great esteem with the chief and
noble Men of the Kingdom, and obtained the dignity of Abbess, all the other
Nuns willingly yielding to such eminent sanctity: and entertaining the
business with exceeding joy in that they conceived great part of the glory,
redounded to them who were her instructours. She was famous for many miracles,
but those only lusory, and vain fancies. In a solemn pomp upon a feast day,
she was taken up into the Air three or four cubits high, and often holding the
Image of the blessed child Jesus in her arms, making her eyes the Sluices from
whence Rivers of tears issued, she did suddenly extend the excrescency of her
hair unto her heels, and by degrees did vanish away. And as often as the Monks
at set times and seasons, did take the Sacrament in the Eucharist-basket, there
always wanted one of the round pieces of the mystical bread (being first of
all diligently reckoned): which Magdalene did openly show that she had it in
her mouth, and that she received it by the administration of Angels. Hence so
much was the fame of her sanctity spread abroad that Highpriests, Emperors,
Kings by their letters commended themselves to her prayers, and therefore did
Charles the fifth's Queen take great care that her Son Phillip should be wrapped
in those swathing clothes, which Magdalene had sanctified by her prayers.
Thirty years at the least being spent in this diabolical marriage, at length
in the year of our Lord, 1546. by Gods blessing and favor, and not by reason
of her Merit, Magdalene returned to her self, and began to detest the Devil,
but the Aethiop taking grievously her apostasy, and after diverse manners
tormenting her, she, beyond all expectation freely discovered her wickedness,
to them whom they call the visitors of that Order, and to them she confessed
her sin, implored help, and was by them imprisoned. Neither did the Devil,
notwithstanding all this, leave the place, but at morning prayers to the great
wonder and amazement of the Monks, was present in the shape and vesture of
Magdalene, and often did perform other her offices. The Monk now abhorring their
Abattesse, whom for twelve years they had entertained, at the last they were
very importunate that the whole manner being found out, Magdalene might be
expelled the Cloister, that so those enchantments might cease. Neither was
there any great punishment inflicted on her, because of her serious repentance
and ingenuous confession; and that, As by her feigned and daemoniacal sanctity,
she had increased the superstition of many, So by her true and Christian
penitency, she showed by this memorable example, that the fountains and
floud-gates of Gods mercy are not damned up, or shut to any repentant sinner.

Clown was scarce got home ere the Devil threw the huge Oak loadned with thick
boughs, a thwart before the house of the Noble man, and shut up the passage by
reason of the thickness of the Tree boughs; and, when the Oak had contracted
an adamant-like hardness, neither could it by any strength or Art be cut, the
Noble man was glad to break a wall on the other side of the house, and to make
a new gate in his other houses, not without great trouble and cost. Fincelius,
book 2.

Phillip Melancthon, sitting alone in her Parlour, her Husband being dead a day
or two before, having for his companion a Monk of tall stature. The husband
spoke to his wife with all the sugared and loving expressions he could, saying,
Be of good comfort my Wife, for I am thy Husband, and weighty businesses have
compelled me to come to thee; when he had almost talked with her a whole hour,
he exhorted her that she would take care that Mass should be celebrated for
him being dead; and going away, he importuned her that she should reach forth
her right hand to him, which being reached out, he colored it as black as a
coal and her hand was marked and blotted with that color all her life after.
Fincelius, Book 2.

Brunsviga in the Village of Gehern, two miles distant from Blomenaw there was
a certain country man, being employed with his horses and Cart, going into the
wood, saw before the entrance of the wood, some troops of horsemen, harnessed
all with black armor, whereat being terrified, he ran back to his house and
reported that a great troop of Soldiers appeared abroad; the Elders therefore
and the Minister of the Word there, accompanying them, hastily went forth, and
almost a hundred persons (some men and some women) went with them, and did see
these horsemen, and they reckoned them to be about fourteen troops, which
immediately divided themselves into two companies, and they being Marshalled
into order, one company stood opposite to the other. At the last there issued
out a tall man of a black hue very formidable, out of each company, and both of
them lighting from their horses, did view accurately each company. Which being
done, they mounted their horses again, the Army being set in rank and file, and
the troops set against one another, the horsemen went forward, and filled the
whole camp; the country men were spectatours of their march until night came
on. But when they heard no further at that time of any war or marching of the
foot or horsemen, they all agreed that it was a prodigy from the Devil, or a
sign of Gods anger. Fincelius, first Book of Miracles.

IN the year 1567. in Trawtenaw, a City of Bohemia, there was one Stephen
Hubener, that gathered such great Riches, built such stately houses, and was so
successful that all admired. And at last falling sick, dyed, and was very
honorably interred. But a short while after his death and burial, his body (or
that which is more likely, the Devil by his Diabolical power, carried about
his body) did pinch many men with such strait embracements, that many of them
died, yet diverse recovered again, who all with one consent confessed that they
were thus clasped or beclipped by this rich man, in that very habit in which
they had seen him alive, therefore the Magistrate of that place, that he might
void or lay this Satanical sight, commanded the body of that man to be dug
out of the grave, after he had lain in the Earth twenty weeks, yet was not
corrupted or rotten, but fat, as young and well fed bodies use to be; the body
was delivered to the Hangman, to be carried away to the place of execution,
where he cut off his head with his Axe, and anatomizing him, took out his
heart, and did cleave it: there issued out of his body blood, as if he had been
alive (witch-like) to sustain punishment, therefore the Hangman threw the body
into the fire, a great company standing by, his head being bound to his feet,
and so he tied neck and heels.

Hammel, a Town in Germany, the Devil in the likeness of a man walked about
the streets of the City, playing many youthful pranks, enticed many boys and
girls to him, and drawing them without the City gates unto a bordering
mountain, he together with them vanished away: which when it was told to the
Citizens, by a wench which was afar off, and secure, they with great care
sought their children in the Rivers, woods, and all about the Country, but none
ever knew why or how they were thus deprived of them. Which History is recorded
in the Annals of that forementioned City, and is read by many Famous and
illustrious men. Fincelius, first book.

Peter Mamorius says, there was a thing happened about the River at Vienna in
France, in some houses of Capland, in the year 1458. that the Devil did give
out, he was the Soul of one deceased, filling all places with his sighs,
clamours and lamentations, wishing he had some prayers made for him, and that
pilgrimages might be undergone, and declaring very many other things, But, said
one to him, If thou would have us to believe thee; say, Have mercy on me O
God according to thy great mercy in Christ: He made answer, he could not do so;
then they that stood by mocked him, and he being fretted went away.

D. Bartholomew Fayus writes, when Nicolas Alberia Vervinensis, had prayers
made at his Grandfathers grave, there came out of the ground a man wrapped
with a sheet, who spoke to a woman, and told her, he was her Grandfather; and,
that he might be delivered from Purgatory, it was needful that they should
sing Mass, and have a Progression into the house of the Virgin Mary; then
uncovering himself, she saw he was her Grandfather; then she procured a great
company of Masses to be said: but when she ceased from their celebration, she
was grievously tormented, and at last he confessed that he was Beelzebub. But
this story being blazed about all France, I shall say no more of it. But now
see another new story which is well-known to the Citizens of Paris, also
printed, which happened at Lutetia, at the sign of the Red Horse in the Street
of St. Honoratus.

A certain man called Metaxarius, when he saw a Niece of his who was an Orphan,
he took her home. Whilst she prayed at her father Gervase's grave, the Devil
met her in the shape of a tall man of black color, and taking her by the hand,
said; Friend, do not fear, thy father and thy Mother are in a good place. But
yet, there should some Masses be said, and she should go a pilgrimage to our
Queen and Lady of virtues, and so straightway they should go to Paradise, to
the Virgin: She asking who he was; he gave this answer, That he was Satan, and
admonished her least she should be afraid: the maid did what he commanded,
which done, Satan bad her take a pilgrimage to St. James. To whom she said, I
cannot take such a long journey: from that time Satan gave not over
importunately to urge her, and familiarly calling her, said, How cruel thou
art; saying, she will not put her shears into her bosom for me, which when she
had done so to satisfy him, that she might free her self from his importunity,
he furthermore asked that she would give him something; at the last proceeding,
so far that he asked one of her hairs; she gave him one: sometimes he assayed
to persuade her to drown her self, and at another time to strangle her self,
and he putting a rope about her neck, had been choked if she had not cried
out, and sometimes her Uncle desirous to defend her, was so beaten, he knew not
by whom, that he lay sick above 15. days, and once the Evil spirit offered to
lie with her and to offer violence to her chastity, but she strongly resisting,
was so beaten with his stripes that the blood gushed out of her body in diverse
places. Amongst those that saw her, there was a certain Secretary of the Bishop
of Valenti^e named Choinius, who told the maid that the best way to drive the
Devil away, was, not to give answer to his words, although he bad her pray to
God, which he never did, but after a blasphemous manner, or mocking that
devotion, using it to created beings; the Devil seeing that the maid would not
answer him, and that he could do no good of her in that case, took her and
threw her upon the ground, and from that time she never saw him after. Bodin
relates these things in his Treatise of Magical Demon. Book 3. chap. 6.

MIchael Curopalates Rancabes Imp. had a certain maid that was his
bond-servant, which at an Eclipse, or conjunction of the Moon with the Sun, was
struck with Madness, and cried to the Emperor, Descend, descend, and give
place to others: this being often done, made the Emperor afraid, therefore
taking counsel of his servant Theodatus Michael F. asked the wench that was
mad, to what house of the Palatinate that might belong or concern, and by what
signs and tokens he might know, When the maid was in her frantic fit; and
asked, she did intimate and signify the Armenian Lion namely, and described its
marks and its fashion. But when she commanded Theodatus to come down from his
Tower, she did Prophecy of two men which should meet him, whereof one of them
sitting on a Mule should be he that should possess and enjoy the Kingdom.
Theodatus went to that appointed place, to search about the thing, and there
knew the man by his token which the girl had before taught them, and so they
perceived that she did not prophecy false, by reason that she was inspired by
the Devil, by whom she was possessed. Cedrenus and Zonaras, tome 3.

ERasmus Roterdamus in an Oration which he writ in the praise of Physic,
says, that he saw a Man, one Phliarius Poletanus by name, who being an
Italian, and not at all skilled in the Dutch, yet perfectly did speak that
language, as though he had been possessed by the Devil. Wherefore he was taken
in hand by a famous Panacean Physician, and giving him Physic, brought out of
him a great sort of Worms, and so freed the man of his disease, and also
deprived him of his Germain language. Cardan de Rer. var. Book 8. chap. 43.

NOrbertus at Nigella using exorcisms to dispossess a certain maid that was
possessed with the Devil, was derided by him, who did repeat the Canticles
from one end to the other, in the mouth of the girl, and after did Interpret it
in the Latin and Germain tongue; but at last a Bishop sharply withstanding
him, he was expelled out of her in the year 1122. As the continuator of
Sigebert has it.

Italy there was a certain Virgin possessed by the Devil, and utterly ignorant
of the Latin Tongue, and being asked by Lazarus Bonamicus, a Bononian
Professor, which was the best Verse in Virgill, she answered, or rather the
Devil out of her. Discite justitiam moniti, and non temnere divos.
Be warned to learn right, and obey the gods.
Manlius, first Book by the relation of Phil. Melancth.

Tingut the voices of Devils and spirits are heard, who call those by their own
names who are walking alone, or else wandering aside from their company, and
feigns the voices of their companions, and so misleading them out of their way,
he hurries them into destructions gulf, sometimes a consort of musical
instruments are heard, but more oftener the noise of Drums. Munsters Cosmograph.
Book 5.

Erphord that for some years together kept a Crow in his house, and when he saw
any silent or sorrowful, he used these words after a jesting manner; O my
Crow, what makes thee so sad, what think thou of? To which, beyond all
expectation, the Crow, or the Devil in it, clearly, and with a lively voice,
recited a Verse out of the 77. Psalm, I have thought of old, and I have had
eternity in my mind, and thus the Devil spoke out of the Crow. Caspar Goldw.
in his Book of Miracles.

HIeronimus Cardanus told his Father that there appeared seven spirits which
did dispute with him about diverse wonderful things, and did enucleate and
unmask hidden mysteries that were before unknown out of the Manuscript writings
of Averroes, of Physicians principles.

Trajan, a Crow, but rather the Devil out of the Crow, began to speak with
humane voice, and cried out of the Capitol in Greek, (...), omnia belle se
habebunt, i. e. All things shall be well; from whence came that distick of an
unknown Author.

Tarpeio quondam consedit culmine cornix,
Est been non potuit dicere, dixit Erit.
Englished thus, A Chough did from Tarpeia's top foretell;
Though things now are not, yet they shall be well.


Bodin says, there was one whose name was Samuel, being but twelve years of
age in the Village of Wantelet ad Laod, he was the Son of a Noble man, Lord of
the Land, who was possessed of the Devil a Month after his Mothers death, and
grievously vexed and buffe^ted, also the Devil had power over his body, and if
any one would withdraw the bo^^ he did retract him again by violence, his
father would not have him exorcised (for Religion's sake which he professed).
And whether or no he was freed from it, the twelfth or thirteenth year he was
past, in which the woman of Vervinens was possessed by an evil spirit, but she
had an exorcism I know not: which History I pass over, because it was related
in diverse books, which are now printed. Italy and Spain abounds with such
demoniacal persons which had need be bound up in chains; those can speak Greek
and Latin, and other tongues which they never learnt (or which is more likely,
the Devil speaks in them): for if at any time that Woman of Vervinensis had
put out her tongue a great length, the spirit then spoke most Eloquently.
Melancthon reports that he saw a woman in Saxony that was possessed, who could
neither read nor write, yet did speak Greek and Latin, and Prophecy of that
cruel war in Saxony, saying; Great misery shall come upon this Country, and
Famine upon this people. Fernelius, in his book of the secret causes of things,
tells, that he saw a possessed Boy speaking Greek, for all that he knew no
letters. Hippocrates, in his Book De Sacro morbo, thought it to be the falling
sickness, but some afterward in Greek did accurately note the difference; For
those who were possessed spoke diverse languages, and prophesied, which could
not be observed in those who had the falling sickness.

Argyropolis Emperor of Rome in the Thracian Province at the bottom of the
Fountain of Curena, there was a miserable doleful noise heard, mixed with
howlings and lamentations not only for once or twice, but continually days
and nights from March to July. And when some came to see the place from whence
the voice was heard, there was another howling thwarted them. I suppose this
miracle did foretell the slaughter of the Romans in Coclosyria. Cedrenus.

CAlligraphus, a reverend man of Alexandria, going out of his house in the
night time, at midnight he saw brazen statues speaking with a loud voice, that
Mauritius the Emperor of Constantinople was slain, together with his children
at Byzantium: going forth in the morning, he related it to Augustulus, who
warned him not to tell it to any, and prescribing a day, in the ninth day,
there came a Messenger declaring the death of Mauritius. Then Augustulus did
publish to the people the Devils Prophecy. Paul. Diacon. Book 17. of Roman
History; and Nicephorus, Book 18. Chap. 41.

HIrcanus* 3d Captain of the Jews, and High Priest, when he had deputed his two
sons, Aristobulus and Antigonus to the siege of Samaria, and the Samaritans
having implored help of Antiochus Cyzicenus, it was reported that in the very
same day in which his sons had entered battle with Cyzicenus, the High Priest
being alone in the Temple, heard a voice that mentioned the new gotten victory
of Antioch by his sons, which he ^and by going forth published to the people,
and a while after his Oracle came certainly to pass. Josephus Book 13. chap.
18.

Romans in a great battle with the Tarquinians sent away L. Junius Brutus
Consul, but in the following night, such an affrightment seized upon the
Enemies, The Tarquinians and the Vejentes in silent troops returned home as
conquered men. The report is, that in the next night after the battle out of
the next wood (which Livy calls Ars^a, and Dyonisius said it was a Holy wood) a
loud voice was heard whether it was the voice of a Faune or Silvaine it could
not be resolved, which happened more then once in the Hetrusian war, which
prodigy did so affright the enemies that they yielded themselves as conquered.
Sabellicus Book 7. Ennead 2. Valerius Book 1. chap. 8.

Caesar fought with Pompey at Pharsalia, C. Cornelius of Patavia, being Augur,
when he had taken augury, at the first sight suddenly turning to those that
were by him; said, now the business is done, now the men begin their work, and
trying his augury the second time, he with a loud voice cried out; O Caesar,
Thou overcomest, they that stood about him, admiring at the thing he took the
Crown from off his head, and swore he would not put it on again until the
business made his art believed or credited. Livius and Plutarch in Caesar and
Pliny, says, there such a noise came when two armies were fighting one against
the other to the augurs sitting on the Patavian Mountains, being bold to affirm
by that, either the world would be dissolved quickly, or Caesar was fighting
with Pompey. Sabellicus Book 7. Ennead. 6. out of the 15th Book of Gellius
chap. 18.

Antonius fell from Domitius, and a great war was expected in Germany, the City
being affrighted, and the people of themselves without any other author,
dispersed the same of the victory, and a report going throughout Rome that
Antonius was killed, and that no part of his army was left alive, it was so
really believed that a great part of the Magistrates sacrificed. But when the
Author of the rumor was sought out, but none appeared, but the news was put
off from one to another, every one clearing themselves of it, and being as it
were labrynthed, and plunged in a vast Ocean, they could not make it appear
from what original or Fountain it proceeded, the fame of which quickly
overspread the City. But a Messenger and letters meeting Domitian in his
journey, leading out the Legions to war, intimating victory, so that one day
was the day of Trophyes and of Fame too, in places distant more then two
thousand five hundred Miles. Plutarchus in Aemilio.

SOsipatra a woman of Alexandrina, at a certain time being amongst her
acquaintance, and a disputation arising about the Soul, she was wrapped by a
certain fury suddenly, she seemed as though her voice was taken away, and was
for a while dumb, by and by she began to cry out, My Cozen Philometor being
transported in a Chariot, is now ore-turn'd in a thorny place, and has hurt
his ellow and his hands are wounded, and a certain man complaining, the thing
was a while after known which confirmed the truth. Eunapius in Aedesio.

THamus an Egyptian Pilot, sailing to Rome late at night near the Echinad
Islands, night being far spent, heard the voice of an unknown Author, which
called him by his own name: they that were in the ship were all amazed, and when
it called the third time he answered; then says the voice, When thou come
into the next Island, the voice being heard as if it were on the foredeck.
Thamus being astonished, and religiously given, obeyed its commands, and
immediately after it had given its precepts, such howling, mourning, and
lamentations was heard in the Air, that all thereabouts was almost dead with
fear. The news quickly arrived at Rome, and Tiberius Caesar commanded Thamus to
be brought before him, and examined, that he might know the truth of it; the
Augures and High Priests consulting about it, they answered, Pana perhaps was
born of Mercury and Penelope. Plutarch relates this in his book of Oracles,
which Oracles then were made dumb, in which place although we may acknowledge
the subtily of Satan, and the Devil being busied about bringing the death of
Christ into question, and to mock it by such a fiction, except he would by Pans
death infer that men's Souls after death should be destroyed, or annihilated.

MOnobazus the King of the Adiabenians, his surname was Barles, being in love
with Helens sister, married her, and of her had Monobazus, and other children
of other wives. At the last lying with his wife big with child, and laying his
hand upon his wives belly, he thought he heard a certain voice bidding him to
take off his hand from her belly, lest he should oppress her young; which as
it was begun with divine providence, so it was likely to have a prosperous end.
He was affrighted with this voice, and showed the thing instantly to his wife,
and he called the Son Izatch that was born at that birth; And by reason of this
prediction he made him Heir to the Kingdom. But he together with his mother
embracing the Jewish Religion, restored Artabanus the King, again to the
Parthian Kingdom, and fortunately fought against the Arabians and Parthians in
the 55. year of his age and 24. of his reign, he died and left the Kingdom to
his Brother Monobazus. Ex Joseph. Book 20. chap. 2.

NIcephorus Phaeus the Emperor, did fortify the Palace of the
Constantinopolitan Tower, in which it was foretold him that he should dye. At
what time the walls of the Palace was builded, in the night season a certain
man sailing on the Sea, cried out after this manner: O Emperor, thou make up
thy walls, and although thou raisest them up to Heaven, whilst that which is
within is evil, the City may be easily taken: He that spoke those things, was
a long time and very much sought after, but never could be found out, the wall
was finished, he perished that same day that he had the keys delivered by him
that had the business committed to him. Cedrenus.

WHen Opicinus Cacia Novaria, being very thoughtfull or Melancholy, walked
alone in his house at noontide, he heard something call him by his name, but
saw no Man, and afterward said, Would thou be willing that thy Son should
dye? To whom he answered, (having no time to consider of it) he would, but
afterward coming to himself, quickly denied that which he had assented to, and
was very sorry for the cruelty of the prodigy; therefore within three days his
son John Baptist having no more, fell sick, and two days after dyed. Fulgosus,
Book 1. chap. 4.

Neroes death, there was a confused murmr mixed with laughter, and a tumult
in the Theater with great mourning was heard when no man was there. In Albania
it rained blood, and both the doors of Mauseolus (in which were the Tombs of
the Caesar's, he being the last of that stock) and the doors of his bed of their
own accord flew open, out of which there was heard a voice calling Nero to him.
Xiphilinus ex Dione.

Antonius Majoragius reported that in the Month of April there was heard, in
Eupilus Lake, a sound, or voice crying after this sort, Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh; The
first part of which had a Musicians song, the latter part of the voice had
their brief, and in those years, nor in any other, were there ever a more
plentiful increase of Wine, Wheat, and other things. Cardane Book 15. chap.
85. de rerum Varietate.

Hircanus the Captain of the Jews, and being also High Priest, a certain sight,
which enquired about his successor, being careful of Aristobulus and
Antigonus his eldest, which he loved above all their other brethren. But when
God had showed the picture of Alexander, the youngest sorrowful that he should
be successful and prosperous in all his proceedings, commanded that he should
be brought out of Galilee, lest he should be in any capacity of having the
Kingdom after him, but the event made the Oracle be believed, for he was
possessed of the Kingdom after Aristobulus who before had slain Antigonus, and
killed the other brother that withstood him, but the other that was contented
with a private life he honored, Josephus, Book 13. chap. 20.

Camillus's banishment M. Cedicitius a vulgar person declared, or gave it out,
that in the night before he was called out of his way (which they call the new
way) by a loud voice and looking back, and seeing no man, he heard a voice
greater then a man's, which spoke thus to him: Go to M. Cedicitius, and tell the
Tribunitian Soldiers, betimes in the morning, they may expect the French
within a few days, The Tribunes despised and laughed at those relations. A
little after this came Camillus's distress, and the Invasion of the French.
Plutarch. in Camillo; et Sabellicus, book 9. Ennead. 3.

LYcurgus happened to come to Olympia, and was a spectator of the games there: it
is reported that this befell him, viz. that there was a voice like the voice of
a man behind him rebuking him and wondering at him why he did not stir up his
Citizens to celebrate that solemnity, he turned himself about, and finding no
man that spoke to him, then he was persuaded it was a divine voice, and
gathered Iphitus and his companions to himself, and made a great feast by which
the solemnity became much more remarkable. Plutarchus in Lycurgo.

Cassius Chaerea, captain of the Guard, with some others, made a conspiracy
against Caligula. And when he was going into the Court, he heard a voice from
among the multitude, commanding him to perfect their designs, the Gods being
their assistants. At first he suspected that their plot was betrayed by some of
the Conspirators, but afterward he perceived, that he was incited thereunto,
either by some that knew it, or by an Oracle from God. On the 3d day therefore
they slew Caius Circensis. Josephus, lib. 19. cap. 1.

PErtharis, King Arithpertus his Son, who being banished by Grimoaldus, and in
his banishment sailing into Britain, was warned by an unknown voice, that
Grimoaldus being dead by Phlebotomy, he should seek for his fathers Kingdom.
Whereat being moved, though he knew not the Author, yet returning into Italy,
within three Months after the death of Grimoaldus, he was made King of the
Lombards. Platina in Dono.

Hostilius Mancinus the Consul, going into Spain, as he was taking Ship at
Hercules his Haven, whither he went on foot, this sounded in his ears:
Mancinus, stay. He being affrighted herewith, turned his journey, and went unto
Genoa; and when he had there shipped himself, a huge great Snake appeared to
him, and presently vanished out of sight. He being conquered by the Numantes,
yielded basely. Valerius Max. lib. 1. cap. 6.

HEnry the third being Emperor, kept the Feast of Pentecost at the City Ments
in Almaine. Where arose a dissension between the servants of the Archbishop of
Mogun, and the servants of Abbas Fuld, about their hire. They went from words
to blows, and fighting with Swords, they polluted the Temple with man's blood.
The Bishops running to them, brake off this bloody battle, and again purged the
Temple. The tumult being afterward pacified, when they sang, Thou have made
this day glorious. The Devil was heard to cry aloud through the Temple. I have
made this day quarrelsome. The Emperor amazed at this strange noise,
endeavored to force away the Devil by giving many Alms, and he himself with
his Nobles, distributed to the poor those dainties which were provided for his
own Court. Nauclerus, Volumine 2. Generatione 36.

Rome being pillaged and undone by a home bred conspiracy) Constans the
Emperor had remained six years in Sicily, he died at Sarogasa a City thereof,
in a Bath called Daphne. For one Andreas went with him into the Bath, and
killed the Emperor by throwing down a Vessel on his head as he was wiping him.
Constans his death was known in the City the same day he died by a voice coming
forth out of the Air. Zonaras and Cedrenus.

BOdin says of Constantinus, who is accounted amongst the skillfullest workmen
of the Mettal-Art in France, and is the most famous in all the Kingdom. I have
heard his comrades, when blowing a long time, no hope or likelihood of any good
appeared, ask advice from the Devil, if they did right, and might accomplish
what they desired: But he replied in one word, Travaillez, take the pains; the
blowers being animated with this, blew so strongly that they brought all to
nothing; and they would still have blown if Constantine had not told them this
was the Devils usual custom, to answer doubtfully: But that word, Take the
pains, employed that Alchymy should be laid aside, and he should fall to some
labor, and honest Art or science commodious to get a living: he is a mad man,
that thinks Gold can so quickly be made, in making whereof nature spends more
then a thousand years.

Thirty days have I bin tormented in Hell; but thou, who gave not to the
poor what I had thee, shall go thither to day, and I shall be translated from
thence into Paradise. The very same day the Devils snatched him away, and 12.
days after his carcass was found in an exceeding high Mountain. Vincentius,
lib. 24. cap. 8.

HEctor Boethius in his 8th Book of the Histories of Scot. relates, that in a
small Village of Scotland scarce 14. Miles distant from Aberdene, there was a
very beautiful young man made open complaint before the Governor of Aberdene,
that he was many Months molested and troubled with a she Devil, (as they call
it) the handsomest that ever he saw, and finally when the doors were shut she
came to him by night, and by her fair speeches forced him to embrace her: when
'twas almost day, she went away making no noise, and trying many ways, he
could by no means be freed from that so great and base vexation. A prudent and
devout Bishop commands the young man immediately to go to some other place, and
according to the Christian Religion to conform himself to prayer, and fasting,
more zealouslly then he used to do, hereby he thought the Devil would be put
to flight from him, when he saw him so intent upon all good works. Upon this
wholesome counsel followed good success: Which when the youth had religiously
performed, within few days after he was clearly delivered from these
Hobgoblins. So the He-Devill did no longer trouble the Woman of Navete, after
her confession, and holy Communion which accompany prayer and fasting. Legitur
in vita Divi Bernhardi. Vierus, lib. 4. cap. 27.

Burgus possessed with Melancholy, acknowledged that she was haunted with
Vergilius his Ghost, having for a long while conjured against it; which we may
the more easily believe, because she was a plain girl, very sincere, and one
who never went abroad; Conjuration not at all prevailing, a Physician gave her
at first some artificial Medicines, then some others to strengthen her, and so
she was restored. Vierus, lib. 4. c. 23. de praestigiis Daemonum.

PHilippus Wesselich Coloniensis, A Monk of the Abbey called Knechtenstein an
upright and pure person about the year 1550: was miserably and sundry ways
tortured by a Ghost, which brought back again the lean Abbot, dead many years
before. Sometimes he was carried under the roof of the house, sometimes he was
thrust between the rafters over the Bell, oftentimes he was on a sudden
conveyed through the wall. On a time he was found, his body being laid over a
pond, and his head lying upon the land. At the last, out comes the Ghost,
relating the cause of his long and manifold trouble: to wit, that this was that
Abbot Mathias Durensis, so many years buried, who tortured him because he had
so exactly drawn, as 'twere to the life, the Virgin Mary's picture, and had not
answered the costs and labors of Novesianus the Limner, who thereby suffered
much damage. This was true. Hereupon he added the manner how he might be
absolved, viz. that this crime could not be expiated, nor he by any means
freed, unless for Religions sake this Phillip would travail into some parts of
Germany (whom for his integrity the Devil thought to be a fit instrument for
his sports) and three Masses were read to procure his liberty, viz. de Trinit.
de Domin. and de Temp. The Divines of Colony consulted to satisfy his request,
and the rest of the Monks desired the same of their Abbot Gerard Strailgen
Morsens. who thought that Phillip was rather to be converted into another
opinion by sounder doctrine, and sharp reproof, that relying on God the Father
of all mercy with a lively Faith, and Christ our only Savior, he might
stoutly contemn the impostures of the Devil, and tell that Ghost returning
back, that he was not under his jurisdiction, that he lived under the rule of
others, and therefore he could not observe his commands. Which being done, The
Ghos^ replied: Tell the Deputy, for he hoped he would confirm his purpose.
Whereupon the Abbot, when he perceived the Devil to persevere, and the Monk
not confidently enough to resist his illusions, instructed him again, carefully
admonishing him to repent, and not to be so prone to hearken to the sleights of
the Devil: but if he continued to hear those spirits, as formerly, he
threatened most severely to whip him, and heavily to beat him. Hereupon the
Ghost seeing his endeavors to be vain, by reason of the Abbots constancy, and
Phillips mind more elevated with trust in God against the fraudulent and
destructive policies of the Devil, never came again, but went some where else.
Vierus, Lib. 4. cap. 29.

ANtonius Surquetus Knight, of the most Noble order of the Garter, and likewise
a Counselor, left behind him a Son, which was base born, who afterward
married a wife at Brugus. This woman within a while after she was married, was
lamentably tormented by an evil genius, insomuch that whithersoever she went,
though in the midst of good and honest Matrons, she was snatched out of their
company, and haled out of one Chamber into another, and oftentimes conveyed
away, sometimes into this hole, sometimes into that, notwithstanding all that
were present did with all reluctance and might endeavor to hold her fast: yet
all this was without any great harm, or prejudice to her body. Every body
believed, and were persuaded that this befell to her by a drab, that envied her
Husband, with whom formerly she was in love withal, for he was indeed (as I
may so say) another Narcissus. In this interim she was with child,
nevertheless was she thus ill-handled. Her time of delivery being at hand,
when there was but one only woman with her, and she sent away the servant to
call the Midwife, this Harlot seemed to come in unto her, and performed the
Midwifes office for her. She for very grief and trouble of mind swounded away:
when she came to her self, she felt that she was delivered of her burden: but
the child appeared not; every body exceedingly wondering at it. But the day
after, it happened that when she awaked, she found the Babe by her in the Bed,
swadled up, which she often suckled. But not long after, when she was asleep,
the Infant was taken away from her, and never afterward found. They said, (I
know not what) Papers with Magic notes were found in the dore-lock. Historiam
recenset Vierus, Lib. 2. cap. 48. de praestig. Demon.

Judith, was by the Devil most cruelly writhed with Convulsion fits, and her
jaws clang together so, that she could not eat; her tongue also sometimes was
so restrained that she could not speak, but made a most hideous and dreadful
noise. Idem, lib. 3. cap. 13.

A Certain Country Priest living at Durweis, about Esweiler, did confidently
promise, that he would set at quiet a pretty young maid named Helena, which was
haunted with a Devil, in a Village called Loes, situated by Aldenhovia, some
of his neighboring Priests being convocated to this solemn sight; and strange
wonder. At last the Devil told this Exorcist having for some while taken great
pains to little or no purpose in disturbing him, that he must now desist, for
about the glass which was set to illustrate him, were many of his copartners,
which would confirm him. This poor Priest giving credence to this father of
lies, goes about by the glass to force them away, but when he perceived that
he labored in vain, being very angry, he brake out into this speech, If thou
can go out of one Christian into another, come forth out of her into me. To
whom the Devil presently replied; What need I tempt him, whom at the last day
I am certain, is my proper right to enjoy. Afterward being desirous to know
what the Devils opinion was concerning the Mass, Johannes Sartorius Parochus
in Leon, asked him in plain English, Why this little maid instantly at the
ringing of the Bell to Mass, was always by him brought into the Temple. To
this question he said, He could not presently make his answer, but he would
consider on it. Actus hic celebratus, Anno 1559. circiter 17. Augusti. Vierus,
lib. 4. cap. 21. de praestigiis Daemonum.

Ventetus shut up close in the County of Horn* were cruelly handled by an evil
spirit. A poor woman in Lent time borrowed three Measures of Salt of the
Virgins, and restored almost twice as much about Easter. Here in the
bedchamber were found small white balls, as 'twere seeds pargetted over with
Sugar, but being tasted, they were salt. In the same place they took notice of
a Ghost walking there, and groaning, they heard also that many Virgins were
called to arise, and to go with her to the fire advertising them, that she was
not well. If at any time they took the Chamberpot to make water, it was by
force taken from them, and they watered their bed. Sometimes they were haled by
the feet out of their beds, and were tickled at the Soles of their Feet, that
with overmuch laughter they were ready to dye. Some had pieces of flesh pulled
off, many had their legs, arms, and Faces writhed the contrary way. Some were
so tormented, though for fifty and odd days they eat nothing but Turnep
Porrage without bread, yet they spued up such abundance of black stuff, like
Ink it self so sharp, that it took off the skin from their Mouth. Some were
lifted up above a Man's height, and instantly thrown down again. When about 13.
friends came to visit and comfort them that were sick, they fell down from the
Table, not speaking a word nor sensible thereof; others lay as if they were
dead with their legs and arms Cross; one was lift up aloft, and although some
standing by, strugled to save her with their hands, yet was she snatched away
above their heads, and thrown down headlong again. Some went upon their toes,
as if they had no feet, or at least no use of them. They climbed Trees also
like Cats, and came down again from them without any alteration of their body.
It happened likewise, that the Governesse of the Monastery (which they call the
Mother) in her perambulation, as she was discoursing with Margaret, Countess of
Burens. was hurt on her thigh; The wound was black and blue, but was healed
again. This cruelty continued evidently full three years, which afterward they
concealed. Vide Vierum. lib. 3. cap. 9.

Colonie, when they were cloistered up in the Monastery called Nazareth; to
whom yet this was added, That though they were for some years before many and
sundry ways troubled, vexed, and perplexed by the devil; yet in the sixty
fourth year, beside other Specttrals often appearing in a terrible manner, they
oftentimes fell flat downward, the lowest part of their body jogging up and
down, as the manner is in the sports of Venus, their eyes being all the while
shut, which afterward they opened to their shame, where being out of wind by
their great pains taking, they took breath. One Gertrud gave a remedy to this
disease, which in the 14th year of her age being included in a Monastery,
merrily underwent these pastimes in her bed, though every night almost with a
consecrated robe she endeavored to chase away her Lover that lay with her.
Which sport, when another Maid that lay in the next bed heard, she trembled all
over, and was tortured with strange kinds of convulsions; sometimes in the fit
she was blind, and though she seemed to be in her wits, yet she uttered diverse
things lightly, and desperately. So did many more beside her. Thus this sore
spread by little and little like an infection, most of all when they did not
first take good counsel. This said Paramour wrote to her Sweetheart dreadful
Letters, afterward found by Johannes Vierus, making diligent search in the
same College. Anno 1562. 25 Maii. Vierus lib. 3. cap. 11. de praestig.
Daemonum.

Bridget near Xanctae. And being there, she ran mad, pranced about, bleated,
roared, and at last was mounted up into the Air, and then strangled. This
distemper grew as it were Epidemical, and infectious amongst the other Nuns;
and at length, from one to another, it seized upon a Child of the Keeper of the
prison, whom he caught twice as he descended, and so saved him. Vierus lib. 3.
cap. 9.

THe Nuns in Hesimont of Neognagus, for some years were haunted, by a spirit
entering in the nightime into the dormitory or Bedchamber, as though he had a
great company with him; he did seem to play most sweetly on the Harp, that he
might allure the Nuns to dance, and then something like a dog leapt into the
bed of one of them, whom they suspected therefore of unchastity. Vierus ibidem.

Coloniensian Province, where for the space of eight years, a Devil in the
shape of a dog, ran all about in the daytime, lurking under the vestures of
the religious Nuns, and did seem to show by the outward motion of their
garments, signs of unchaste actions. Idem lib. 3. cap. 9.

Kentorpian Monastery near old Mark, in the Earldom of Marchland, near Hammon,
were grievously tormented with strange Convulsion fits, they breathed out a
very stinking breath in their fit, or a little after the assault of the same,
which did come upon them sometimes once a day, sometimes oftener, and at some
times troubled them many hours together; the Maids were very sensible of the
coming of the Convulsion fits, and did often affirm afterward, that they could
discern those that stood by, one from another, and could hear; but because of
the convulsion of the tongue, they could not so well speak; some were tortured
less then others: But this was almost common amongst them all* That when one of
them was tossed, the rest also should be laid into several beds, only hearing
a hurly-burly, that they might be vexed in the like miserable manner. The first
that began to be tortured, was Anne Zemgaw, who first complained of a pain of
the left side, or the spleen, and was therefore thought to be troubled with the
Falling Sickness, went to Ariola, who made her believe they were hurted by the
Witchcraft af Elsa the Kamensian Woman, which afterward was burned alive with
her Mother. Hence the Devil got some strength, and did not only begin to
torment them with diverse kinds of Convulsions, but also to provoke them to bite
others, and one another, and that they might strike, and be born up, and cast
down, without hurt, as feathers were, from whence they were supposed they had
no power over themselves: And if they were withheld from beating or striking,
their hearts aked; but if they were let alone, although they did hurt, strike,
or bite themselves, yet they were sensible of no harm. And they thought it
necessary, that each should tyrannize over their own bodies; And if at any time
Anne did speak in her fit, she did it as though another did both breathe it in
and out; but in the interim she understood what she spoke, but the speech being
done, she utterly forgot all her former words; neither did she mind seriously
any thing that was either good or evil, but was as it were in a Lethargy,
without sense, discretion, and judgment, or reason: If any religious man did
speak to her, she seemed to be tortured by Satan; but if at any time other
women did talk to her about their feminine sports, she was wonderfully taken
with them; when they were exorcized, there gushed out of their mouths a great
deal of blood; All the Virgins were so afflicted by the Spirit, were unequally
tormented by him, as he were a Serpent, under the sole of their feet, which
burnt them as if it were scalding water: And although they were diversely
tormented, yet the stomach and nutrition did remain in them all alike. The
Devil did speak often and much out of them that were the youngest, that were
mad; to whom he appeared in a black form, in the shape of a black Cat, or Elsa
Kamensis, or of her mother, or brother; and it was slightly believed, that
they were so cruelly handled by them all; where in the the last place Anne did
firmly purpose in her mind, not to return into the Monastery, where she was
left by her Parents direction; and then she was not afflicted: But if at any
time it chanced, that she had a Letter sent from the Abbatesse of that
Monastery or College, there was a great trembling and horror that invaded her,
and possessed her whole body, as though she were assaulted with the relapse of
her former disease: but after she married a husband, without any sense of her
disease or affliction. Vierus lib. 3. cap. 10. de praestigiis Demon.

JOhn Fernelius relates in his second Book of occult causes, That when a
certain Man was traveling in Summer time, he was very dry in the night, and
rising out of his dream, and being awakened, and finding no drink, he by chance
catched hold on some evil thing which he met; and commanding it, he perceived
that his jaws were shut together as though by a hand, and was like to have
been strangled: and when he was thus besieged and beset with this spirit, he
thought he saw in the dark a great black Dog, and feared to be devoured by it;
who afterward being restored to his right wits again, did relate it all in
order: Many judged, this man, by his pulse, and heat and roughness of his
tongue, and by reason of too much watching, was merely mad and distracted. The
same Author reports, That there was another young man, of a Knights Family, for
some few years by the shaking of his body, was judged to have the Convulsion
fits; for sometimes he would so move and fling his left arm, only, sometimes
his right, sometimes only one finger, otherwhile a leg, and both at other
times, and the trunck of his body with such swiftness, that being laid down,
he could scarce be held in by four servants; But his head laid without being
shaken or stirred at all; and he had his tongue and speech free, and was in his
right mind and senses; yea, in the height of his Convulsions, he was taken with
it at least ten times every day, but was well in the intervals, but something
worn out by pain. It might have been deemed truly the Falling Sickness, if it
had brought madness and stupidity with it; there were the most skillful
Physicians consulted with about it, and they did think it was a Convulsion,
near bordering on the Epilepsie, together with a malignant and venomous vapor
that did beat against the backbone, out of which the vapor came, which did
flow into those nerves, which are sprigg'd from the backbone into the joints
all about, but not into the brain; this cause being taken for granted, that it
might be removed, they ministered to him diverse glysters and strong purgations
of all sorts, and Cupping-glasses were fastened to the roots of the nerves,
nourishing things, ointments, plasters, which first were for purgation, after
for strengthening, to drive away this malignant and poisonous humors; these
doing him little good, they procured him sweating in Baths and in washes, in
the juice of the Ebeene Tree of Guaiaca, which did as little help him, because
all of us strayed far from the knowledge of the truth; for being first taken
with it, in the third month a certain devil, being the author of all this
mischief, did betray himself with a voice, and in uncouth words and phrases,
and sentences, as well Latin and Greek, although the afflicted party was
ignorant of the Greek tongue; he did detect many secrets of Physicians, that he
had circumvented them with much danger, and that they had by their fruitless
Medicines almost choked his body. And as often as the father came to visit his
afflicted son, he going a great way out of sight, cried out, Drive away this
which is coming to him, or wrest the chain from his neck. For by this you may
know, that the French Knights wore gold chains, in which the Image of St.
Michael did hang; the subtle devil did feign, that he feared the Image of St.
Michael, that he might more evidently deceive those that stood by: As though he
feared the picture of any Saint, when he feared not Christ the express Image
of God, whom he was bold to assault, yea, and to tempt. Furthermore, being
asked, Who he was? or by what power he might be removed? he said, That he had
many receptacles, within which he lay hid, and could quietly go to other.

Schiltach in Germany the 14th of the Ides of April, (which day was the very
Thursday before Easter, in the year of our Lord Christ, 1533.) was burned,
being set on fire by a Witch, as Erasmus Roterdamus relates from the authority
of Henricus Glareanus, as also Cardanus in his 19. book de subtilitate. The
Devil made a noise, and gave a hissing sign or watchword from a certain place
in one of the houses. The Officer of the Town thinking it to be a thief, went
to search the place, but found nothing, nor any body; but presently in another
and higher room, the same noise was heard, whither also the Officer went to
catch the Thief (forsooth:) but when he found no body there neither, but heard
the same voice upon the chimney top, it presently struck into his mind, that it
was a Spectrall, and he bid his servants be of good courage. There were
presently two Priests sent for, who when they had used their skill in
exorcisms, were thus answered; That he was a Devil indeed. And when they asked
him, What he did there? He said, he would burn the Town. And when the Priests
threatened him, he told them, he valued not their threatenings, for one of them
was a Whoremaster, and they were both Thieves. Presently after he took a girl,
with whom he had had familiarity for fourteen years, (when in the interim she
came to confession, and received the Eucharist every year once, and who had
communicated but that very day) and having carried her in the Air, set her upon
the very top of a chimney, and delivering her a pot, commanded her to turn it;
which whilst she did, the Town was burned to the ground in no more than an
hours space.

Wittemberg in the year, 1538. concerning good and bad Angels, makes mention of
a certain Maid possessed by the Devil, for whom when prayers were made in the
Church, the Devil ceased his attempts, and made as if he had wholly left her,
that by this deceit he might make her away before public prayers were made
for her. For when as they had remitted their care of her, whilst she went to
the River to wash her hands, she was drowned sooner than could be imagined.

Franckford at Ucadra, there was a Maid, being the daughter of Marcus the
Fisherman, that was taken with a pain in the head, and by a frenzy, one
Georgius a Kulisch, a Citizen, pitying her condition, took her into his house;
at length, when she was possessed of the Devil, she did very wonderful feats,
whatsoever she fingred, whether it was a cloth, any bodies breast, beard,
head, she snatched at it, and afterward she got the Coin that was used in that
Country, and forthwith throwing it into her mouth, she chewed and did eat it;
And she did take away money which was held fast in their hands, at which they
admired greatly. Sometimes of her own accord she offered the moneys unto them;
she often did swallow Needles that she snatched up, and spoke in the idiome and
dialect of High Germany, which she was not used to, and also contrary to the
propriety of her own language; neither was it easy to comprize in words, or in
an enchiridion, what was prodigiously performed and acted by her: Wherefore
they did enquire of Doctor Martin Luther, What was to be done to her in that
condition? Who answered, That she was to be brought to hear godly Sermons, and
there to be interceded for, with constant ardent prayers poured out to God: And
they following Luther's counsel, brought her to Church, where publicly she did
often contradict the Minister that was preaching the Word. But at the last, by
the Divine grace, the prayers of the Church being heard, she was freed from
Satan, and restored to health; neither did there any of that madness or
demonaical disease trouble her after, but was freed from the dominion of Satan,
and whole both in body and mind, and after faithfully did serve the Citizens of
Franckford: The most Prudent Senate of that Commonwealth did command this
Prodigy to be published, Anno 1538.

ANno 1559. not far from Joachims Valleys, there was a Smith had a daughter
excelled in modesty and honesty, being diligently conversant in exercises of
Piety, (by Divine permission) she was set upon by Satan about Lent-time,
oftentimes the devil took her, and threw her upon the ground, as if she had
been vexed with the Falling Sickness; Which thing troubled her Parents so, that
they sought counsel of them that prophecy of future things, by a Pythonick or
divellish spirit. By reason of the wickedness of her parents, the Devil
afterward boasted, that his power was so confirmed and increased: About Easter
Satan began to speak in the Virgin with a humane voice, and often appeared in
the form of a Cuckoo, of a Crow, of Hornets, and other Birds, and did imitate
their voice in every respect; he spoke diverse wonderful things in Virgin,
which would be too great a work to mention them now; And there came a great
concourse of people to the Maid; many strangers did come out of several places
to see this wonder, and heard Satan speaking out of the Virgin; whereupon many
out of a holy zea I did provoke him by words, and undauntedly did hear him
answering. In the mean time, the young woman patiently did endure the cross,
and joined her prayers uncessantly with the prayers of the Church: and as often
as she did call upon the Name of Christ, and requested to be freed from that
evil one, by whom she was oppressed; by and by the Devil did rage upon her with
more outrageous fury, her eyes were swelled, bunching out, her tongue was
twined out of her mouth like as a limber twig, and was extended to the
longitude of a man's hand; her head was writhen and screwed unto her back, and
in a sad and horrible manner Satan did torment her, there was not any
intermission of her sits: If any had enquired how she did, or how the case
stood with her? she answered, her affliction, as by her senses she perceived,
seemed as though she even now were sticked in the bottom of a River to be
drowned; but by the coming of Religious men, she deemed she was snatched out of
the jaws of death. All the Neighboring Priests and Preachers of the Gospel
daily came to her, who talking with the Virgin, the Devil with great derision
answered; And as often as there was any mention made of Christ, he did divert
into some filthy and frothy fable. And being demanded, how he entered into her?
answered, In a draught of Ale, in the form of a fly; for it was two years that
he had vexed her, ere ever she came to a sound mind: her Parents going to a
Witch, was the cause why the Devil had the more power over her. A certain Man,
one Helias Hirsch, singular for piety in that Country, did watch with the
Virgin almost whole Nights, and by his prayers strive against Satan, upon whom
he raged with opprobrious terms, and all the contumelies he could; and as often
as he was about to come forth out of his house, the evil spirit foretold,
saying, Behold, this sacrilegious Helias comes again to afflict me. This holy
and godly man, by the power of Gods Word, did oppose him, and frequently using
the Name of Jesus Christ, drove the Devil to new outrages, as the madness of a
Daemoniack was heard afar off: Sometimes the Devil speaking to Helias, said,
One, dance with me, either go before, or follow, as thou please. To which
things Helias replied, Let thy Dance lead thee into the bottom of Hell. The
Devil answered, Go thy ways, now thou shall see dances. These words being
uttered, he roared and bellowed, and by and by entering into a stove, he
appeared in the shape of a Catt and Dog; these with wonderful leaping did lead
the Dance, and at last vanquished: He played many pranks of this kind: Two
days after Trinity-Sunday the holy Priest did set upon the Devil again,
enquiring of him by what means or power he had possessed her? by the command of
God, says he, from whom I am sent, that I might torment the body, but I cannot
hurt her soul; that I might give notice to Men, that they should abstain from
pride, usury, gluttony, and other sins of that nature: and although it be sore
against my will to promulgate these things, yet I am commanded by God, and
forced to do it: At the last day I know, that I shall have more souls then God
himself will have. To which the Minister of the Word of Schlackwaldensis
replied, Thou lie, says he, O sacrilegious Wretch, for if sinners shall
repent, they shall have salvation; but the eternal God at the day of Judgment,
will thrust thee and thy companions into Hell fire. Why did thou banish thy
self out of Heaven, when God had created thee a glorious Angel. My Seat was not
fixed sure there, says he, Thou may as well spare labor, for I am not
ignorant* how careful thou wast for this Margaret, (so he called the Virgin,
whose name was Anne) and at Whitsontide made prayers publicly to God for her.
I have done so, answered the Minister, and I will not give over to do so yet,
until we precipitate and cast thee headlong hence into hell by our prayers:
these things said, he asked him, Was not thou also sent to afflict Job? What
then, says he? oh that now I had the like power given, that I might scatter
the pestilence. And this conflict did last near two hours: Amongst other
things, the Minister said, Behold, thou that have been the chiefest and
beautifullest of creatures, and the vertex of the Creation, veils thy self
under the ugly mask of a hog, or other unclean beast. O good Priest, answered
the Devil, for often I am metamorphosed into a Hare, and am the daintiest dish
for great Men, Wherefore going now from hence, the Priest asked him, whither he
would go? Some few days being past, the Pious Priest brought out the Maid, and
there in a great Congregation of people they did pray to God, and praised him
with Hymns and Psalms, and as often as Jesus Christ was named, the Devil did
rage with a bellowing and hideous noise, as though a ruin was threatened to
seize on all things: These things performed, they went away. When the Maid was
brought back from the Temple, the Devil roared with his voice as a warlike
Trumpet, saying, Little does it profit you to remove me from this place; for
truly, eight of my companions shall now depart hence. At length, the Minister
of the Word of Schlackenwaldensis, together with ten other Ministers were
called: John Matthesius sent two Deacons out of the Valleys, and from morning
until noon, there was great zeal and study in the company, of praying,
singing, and reading of the Scriptures; this done, they went to dinner: After
they had dined, there came the Minister of the Gospel of Schlackenwaldensis,
bringing with him the Governor of the Castle of Prague: there was present a
great company of Men, with one accord singing praises to, and calling upon
Jesus Christ, and with ardent zeal pouring out their supplications to God, that
they might be heard; and then the Devil was cast out, and flew out of the
window like a swarm of flies: But before he went out, he desired of the girl,
that he might but remain in one part of her body, in the nail of her finger,
and at the last, to be but in one hair; but every one of these was denied to
him. Furthermore, being about to go out of her, he spoke after this sort; All
ye contemners of the Word, Ministry, and Sacraments, all ye that are addicted
to Usury and Gluttony, are mine body and Soul; and namely, he warned and
admonished the Priest of Schlackenwaldensis, that he should call the Citizens
that belonged to his Church, to repentance; for God thirsts after our
salvation, and therefore the Devil was compelled even against his will, to warn
men to repentance. When Satan was cast out, the Maid was carried into her
father's house, and in her right mind, being refreshed in her Soul and body by
the blood of Jesus Christ; and having her sound judgment and right wits again,
she earnestly commended her self to the Ministers of the Church, to be
remembered ^n their public prayers. Fincelius, in his third Book of Miracles.

Trawtenaw, a City of Bohemia, there was a certain Man, who did so gather up
Riches, and erect famous Buildings, and was so fortunate in all his
enterprises, that every one admired at him; at length he fell into a sickness,
and dyed thereof, and was very honorably buried: But a little while after his
death and burial, his body (or rather a Devil, who by his diabolical power
carried his body all about) did clasp and embrace very many men so straightly,
that many of them dyed; yet some of those recovered again, who all with one
consent confessed, that they were thus beclipped and hugged by this rich man,
being in the same habit that they had seen him when he was alive: Therefore the
Governor of that place, that this Spectrum might be laid and repressed,
commanded the body of that man to be dug up, and the grave opened; and
although he had layn in the ground for the space of 20 weeks, yet he was not
rotten, but was as fat and plump, as young and well nourished bodies use to be;
the body was delivered to the hangman then, who carried it away unto the place
where malefactors used to receive their punishment; he cut off his head with an
ax, and when the body was wrapped up, he took out the heart and cut it in pieces,
there gushed blood out of his body, just as though one alive had been to suffer
condign punishment; therefore the hangman threw the body into the fire, being
tied head to feet, and burnt it, a great multitude of men standing by.

CAesarius Coloniensis writes in his dialogue, of a Priests daughter that was
much tormented by a wicked spirit, and was mad; her father was counseled to do
after this manner, That he should send his daughter beyond the River Rhene, and
by that means the Devil departed from her; but he did so beat her father, that
about three days after, he dyed.

Bodinus, in Spain, Italy, and especially Germany, that are possessed with the
Devil for ten or twenty years, that they cannot be driven away; so there were
found some boys of Amsterdam, in the year 1556, who were possessed 30 years,
and the Devils could not be driven away by any Exorcism. That also was a sign
that happened to those that are bewitched, because they did vomit saw-dust,
small pieces of glass, hair, needles, and other such things, which usually
happened or befell to such that were enchanted or bewitched. It is recorded,
That in the year 1554, by a Benedictine Monk of Rome, (whom Cardinal Gondius,
the Bishop of Paris had brought thither) 80 girls and women were possessed,
and had exorcisms, but nothing could be done for six months. To one that asked
the Devil, why he did so possess those miserable girls, he gave this answer,
That he was sent from those Jews that took grievously, that those whose
greatest part belonged to the Jewish Nation were baptized, which is believed to
be spoken by the Devil, because he supposed or thought Theatinus the Pope was
about to die, to whom he was an enemy.

JOhn Vierus in his 5th book, and 14. chap. tells of a girl that was possessed,
which he saw in Germany, and that the Devil gave this answer to an Exorcist,
telling him, That there was need that the Maid should make a religious
profession to Marcodurus, a Town in Germany, and at the third time falling upon
her knees, and celebrating the Mass upon the Altar of St. Anne, she should be
cured; so it came to pass, that the girl was freed, and foretold her of such
a sign of her freedom to come toward the end of the Mass; This done, at the
end of the Mass, the Maid and the Priest saw a white splendid Image, and then
she was freed from the demonaical spirit.

Menilius Dammatinus, the Lady Rosse by name, who from the eighth year of her
age, began to be bound by an evil spirit to a Tree, or to the foot of a bed, or
to a manger in the stable, one hand tied to another by a rope, or a hair of a
mares tail, or with flax, and that with such swiftness, that in the twinkling
of an eye the Devil would have done it, and vanish away. In the year 1552. the
Virgin was brought to Paris, Doctor Picardus and other Divines spent all their
Arts to free her, but nothing took effect. Hollerius Medicus a Physician,
laughing at them, said, she was troubled with the disease Melancholy, but
afterward when he saw the wonder in a great multitude with his own eyes, and
seeing the maiden standing between two or three women to cry out, and by and by
to see her hands so bound as they could not be loosened, and that the bands had
need to be cut, he acknowledged that it was the evil spirit. This appeared to
no man, only the Virgin beheld a white cloud when the spirit drew near to bind
her. Sylvula, of Wonderful Histories, and of Magical and diabolical
Witchcrafts, and of diverse of the Devils delusions.

APollonius being in India with the Brachman-Philosophers, reports that he saw
very strange wonders: he said that these Philosophers at their pleasure could
make it fair and foul weather, bring tempests, or make calms, and could prepare
feasts with all the Vessels fitting for them (yea, he says that they did it in
his presence) when there was none to be seen, who make ready the banquet, or
waited in setting on, and taking off the dishes. And moreover he said that when
they pleased they could make earthquakes the same he affirms that he saw
amongst the Gymnosophists in Aethiopia, who made the trees bend themselves to
the ground, and speak. Fulgosus ex Philostrato.

Africa which do by their voice only, bewitch those who they immoderately
praise, Pliny 7th Book, cap. 2. ex Isigono and Nymphrodoro; hence came the
custom amongst us (which Aristotle, 20. sect. Probl. 34. witnesses) that
being about to praise any thing, we make this Preface, lest our words should be
to our detriment, as God shall save it. Gellius 9th Book, 4. chap. Isigonus
adds, that there are things of the same nature among the Triballians and
Illyrians, who by their sight bewitch and kill some upon whom they look long,
especially with angry eyes, yea one may perceive mischief in their eyes. And
it is more remarkable that they have two Apples in each eye. Apollonides
reported there were diverse women in Scythia of this sort, which were called
Bythyae. And there are kind of people in Pontus called Thibians, and many other
of the like nature, whose marks he says are these, in one eye they have a
double Pupilla, in the other the picture of a Horse, and moreover that they
cannot sink, nor are burdened with any garments. Demon relates a sort of
people called Pharnacians in Aethiopia, not much unlike to these, whose sweat
brings rottenness to those bodies which they touch, and there are women which
every where infect with their sight, having double eyes, or pupilla's in them;
Cicero also is the Author of it, and Pliny in his 7. Book 2. chap. Neuro,
tells of a people of Scythia (who are the greatest enchanters) that they
Metamorphose themselves from men into Wolves. Herodotus, in Book, 4.

RHodus being first named Ophiusa, afterward Tel^hinis, in that the Telchines
inhabited the Island, some call them Wizzards, and say, that they are
Inchanters, and that they sprinkle the water of Styx's lake upon living
Creatures and plants, on purpose to destroy them; and as Diodorus says, 5th
book, 12. chap. they can cause clouds, showers of rain, hail, snow, and change
their proper shapes when they will, etc. Strabo 14 book.

Ephesian Letters, there is mention made of those, who with wonderful facility,
as by a divine inspiration, attained to what they desired; for they report at
Ephesus, there are diverse Notes, and magical voices, by the using of which they
are victorious in every business, as Diogenianus, Eustachius reports by those
Letters, That there were diverse words like to riddles, having no coherence,
written in the feet, girdle, and crown of Diana. Suidas adds, In the Olympian
games, there was one Milesius set in the Ephesian wrestling-Ring, and was able
to do nothing in the conflict, because that Ephesius had some Ephesian
characters written on his ankle. Which being together, was marked, the letters
being taken away, and Ephesius that had tired out thirty, now laid down
himself, vide Erasmus adagies. But that there were many of the Ephesians that
were conjurers, may be gathered out of, that many of them were converted by the
Apostles Sermons, and burnt their magical Books, being of great value; for the
Devils power was great in that place, because the Idol of Diana was set up
there, Act. 19.

Goths were traveled out of Scandinavia, they marched to Scythia; Philimer
their King did retain many of their magical Women in prison, as Jordan Gothus
writes in that history; which sort of women, the King accounted most
pernicious, and by his proclamation banished them into Wildernesses, lest they
should kill the Soldiers by poisons, or weaken their strength, being driven
away for a long while, they wandered about the Woods incestuously, committing
themselves unto the Embracements of their Incubus spirits; from hence they
report, that the Unnes, a cruel generation of men came, which used no humane
language, but a certain Image of speech. Bonsinius second Book, Dec. 1.

Bothnici, Zappi, and Finnones, are excellent Magitians; also the Biarmi, who
live under the Pole, they assume what shape they will; also they know what is
done in the other World by their friends or enemies. Olaus book 1. chap. 1. and
book 2. chap. 18.

IT is reported, that Zoroastres, the King of the Bactrians, found out the Art
of Magic, and has written a hundred thousand of verses upon them (as Pliny
witnesses); Some would have this King to be Mizraim the son of Cham, others
say he was not so; he flourished above eight hundred years before the Trojan
War, which was in Abraham's time; But he, as we read in Clements Itinerary,
being willing to contemplate God, and much given to Astronomy, and minding the
Stars, did strike out some sparks out of the Stars, that the rude multitude
might be astonished at the miracle. At the last, being angry at that spirit
which he often did frequent, amongst a great company of his disciples, as
though he were a friend of the gods, was hurried away to Heaven in a chariot of
lightning. Wherefore his name after his death, was Zoroastres, as much as to
say, A living Star; he lived in the time of King Ninus, with whom he fought,
and foretold when he was dying, that if they should keep his ashes, their
Kingdom should not be destroyed. Suidas.

Perses and Aeta, two brethren, ruled both at one time; this in Pontus, the
other in Taurica, both of them being of a truculent and savage disposition;
Hecate sprung from Perses, nothing inferior in cruelty and immanity to her
father; which while she was a Virgin, used to shoot darts (as the custom was
then); But her greater study was to make poisons; some attribute the invention
of Henbane to her, and was accustomed to experience the nature and strength of
poisons upon strangers; within a short space she attempted to kill her father
by her poison, and thereby unravelled the clew of his life, by whose death she
got the Kingdom; at Taurica she erected a Temple to Diana, at whose Altar she
offered, strangers, whithersoever they came, from Sea or by Land, she did
enact, that they should be sacrificed, and by this means she thought her fame
would be spread in all Countries. Afterward she married her Uncle, unto whom
she brought forth Circes, Medea, and Aegialeum; Circes was instructed in her
mothers arts, and she did use the herball and poisons; She added other things
by her own invention: The Virgin was married to the King of the Sarmatarians,
and by her enchantments killed the King, and was possessed of the Kingdom; whom
because for a time she did tyrannically abuse, and cruelly handle the Nations
that were under her, they expelled the Kingdom. After which, she with a small
company of Women, was reported to keep a deserted Island in the Ocean; but the
likelier report is, that she came into Italy, and rested in the Latian
Promontory: then that Island from her inhabiting there, got the name of Circei.
Medea disdained not domestical Arts, yet endeavored to know the medicinal
use of herbs, and to be skilled in the dialect and number of magical verses,
but was of a far milder disposition, then either her Mother or Sister were,
(who were infamous for their truculency and cruelty) as well with much art as
favor, which she had much with her father; She freed strangers destinated for
slaughter. At length being suspected by her father, she flew to the Temple of
the Sun placed on the Seashore: the Argonautes coming by night from Taurica
into Pontus, showed the cause of their coming unto Medea, she did tell them of
the imminent danger that was likely to befall them from her father, and told
them of his cruelty to strangers, admonished them to beware and take heed:
Counsel being taken, Medea promised to get a helper, to bring to perfection the
proposed comba^e: She did engage her self by oath to Jason, to be his Wife as
long as she lived. Then the Argonautes by night leaving their keepers in the
Temple, went with Medea to get the Golden Fleece, and by her Arts make Aeson,
Jason's father, being an old man, turn young again, and delivered Pelias,
Jason's Uncle, from being slain by his daughters, and lived ten years with
Jason at Corinth. But when she saw ^laucen or Creusa, the daughter of Creon the
Corinthians King, to be preferred before her, she covering her anger, sent a
coat, being poisoned, to the new married Princess for a Present; as soon as
she had put it on, she suddenly burned like fire, and by the like destruction,
Creon and his Queen perished: She openly slew the sons which she had by Jason,
Jason dyed for grief, she flew to the Thebans, there she cured Hercules of his
madness, and from thence being heaved into the Air by Dragons, she flew to
Athens, and married Aegeus, etc. Thus says Diodorus, book 4. chap. 3. Ovid 7.
Metamorph. and Sabellic.

PAseti^ farthing, is a proverb; Pases is of a soft nature, and by Magic has
overcome all mortals; so that by enchantments they prepared a sumptuous supper,
and servitors; she had a farthing minted or made by her, with which she could
buy what she would of them that sold any thing, and would give it them, and
when she pleased it would come to her again: Suidas Appian the Grammarian
remembers her likewise.

Pythagoras was a Magitian, and skilled in those divellish Arts; for when he
had by his magical whispering, bewitched an Eagle that flew muttering over
him, he brought it to him that he might make it tame, and forthwith it was made
gentle. Pythagoras, says Ammonius, showed his golden thigh at the Olympic
games, and used to talk with an Eagle.

SImon Samaritanus, as Ambrosius in Hexameron, and Clemens Pontifex high Priest
testify, in his Itinerary, besides his various and wonderful Arts by which he
contended with the Apostle, he often appeared, sometimes in one shape,
sometimes in another, and was seen to soar a loft with wings like a bird, a
great way, therefore being born up by his magical Arts, and by the Devils help,
he did so extremely mock and bewitch the Romans, that oft-times he made himself
a god; and they made a Statue between the two bridges, superscribing this
title, To Simon, the holy God; he bragged, that by many unspeakable
conjurations, he could call up the ghost of an innocent boy to assist him, and
by that he could make it to do whatsoever he commanded to be done: for the
truth is, he was familiar with the Devil, which he called the soul of the boy,
that he might cautiously cover the pretense of his divinity. Vierus book 1.
chap. 16. ex Clem. lib. 2. Recog.

Galeotide, that by his words could drive away diseases, and could expel
unseasonable weather, and barrenness, and poverty, with his sacrifices, and
cause mutations, and give reasons for getting Riches; they report, that he was
enticed into Creet, by the rewards of Minos, that he might find out that
strange death of Glaucus. Suidas.

APollonius Tyaneus the Philosopher, the son of Apollonius, his mother being
big with child, saw the Devil standing by her, who said, he was him whom she
carried in her womb viz. Egyptian Proteus; hence he was accounted the son of
Proteus; he flourished under Claudius, Caius, and Nero, until Nero's reign, in
which he dyed; he was silent for five years after the Pythagorean manner;
afterward he went into Egypt, thence to Babylon to the Magitians, from thence
he went to the Arabians; and out of all these places he gathered notable
delusions; Suidas Philostratus has written his life: cunning Satan, by the
deceits of this Impostor, would have brought the Miracles of Christ into
question, and would oppose him as his Antagonist; Of which Magnus Anastasius
the Bishop of Theopolis thus writes: In some places unto this day, the acts of
Apollonius stands, and has their efficacy, some of them good for the driving
evil spirits from beasts; others to restrain the inordinate excursions of the
mind, and to expel those things which endamage men; neither did the Devil do
such and such things when he was alive, but also when he was dead, and went
along with him to his tomb, and by his name only did great wonders, to deceive
poor ignorant men, which easily after this manner are deceived. What shall I
say of the magic of Manethon, who was so expert and artificial in these
divellish arts, that he openly derided and laughed at Apollonius, as not being
right instructed in his mystery; for, says he, he ought by his mere words to
do what he pleases, (as I do) not to use any operations or means to it.
Cedrenus in his historical Compendium.

SEdecius a Jewish Physician, made magical places before the Emperor
Ludovicus, and other Princes, he devoured men, together with their horses and
arms, and gulphed up a load of Hay, with horses and Cart and all; he cut off
the head and feet of diverse men, and did put them with their blood into a
basin, he flew through the Air, hallowing like a hunter, and the like pranks he
played, Chronicon Hirsaugiense; and at last he killed Charles Calvus (or the
balld) the King with poison.

Andegavensium, from whence Henry the second, King of England, sprung, there
was a Princess, a notable Maga and a Witch, who was constrained to worship and
reverence the Eucharist, who suddenly flew out of the windows of the Temple,
and was never heard of after. Polydor 13. book.

Mediolensis, near the Comiensem gate, strangled a boy and devoured him; and
when she was wracked for her cruelty, she said, She was persuaded by the
infernal gods, that if she had sacrificed a boy three or four times, she might
do whatsoever she would; Therefore she was bitterly tortured, being laid upon
the wheels cross or latticewise, and so her bones were broken, and she dyed
acruel and lingering death. Artanus history, Mediolan 1 Sect. writes, that in
his time this happened.

JOhn Fernelius relates in his first Book of Occult causes, that he saw a
certain man, who by the strength of his words could cause diverse sights to be
in a glass, and those things which he commanded either in writing or in
express Images, were so lively imprinted, that they might quickly and easily
be discerned by those that sat by, yea, and there were holy words heard, but
filthily bespattered with obscene terms; and after this sort they call upon the
powers of the Elements, and strange uncouth names of the Princes of the East,
West, North, and South, Vierius book 2. chap. 7. of the Devils deceits.

FAcius Cardanus, the Father of Jeremy Cardanus, as he said, had an aeriall
devil to be his familiar for a long time, who a long while used Conjuration,
and it gave him true answers, but when he had shaken it off, it returned him
false answers, he was eight and twenty years a Conjurer, but he was freed from
his familiar about five years* but whilst he retained the spirit, it was very
profitable to him, neither did it always come alone (although for the most
part it did) but sometimes it came with its companions. Cardane, of the variety
of things, 16. Book chap. 39.

JAmes Jodoci de rosa Cortriensis, carried a Ring about with him in which he
thought the Devil was tied by exorcisms, and he did speak for five days
together at the least, and did consult with it about strange things, and
diseases, and the manner of curing them. At the last being bound, and condemned
to banishment, first his ring in a public place, and a great company looking
on, was bruised and broken in pieces with the bea^ing of an Iron hammer by the
Chancellor Done, at Arnhemiae, 14. July, in the year 1548. Vierus, Book 5.
chap. 1. of the delusions of Devils.

John Vemerus a Citizen of Eslingensis whose name was Margaret, was so swelled
by the pains of her belly, that the bigness of her belly almost clouded her
face, and did seem to be ten palms in circumference, she said that there were
creatures of diverse sorts was fed in her belly, when in the mean time she
feigned to be recreated, and refreshed by sweet odours and delicate sauces,
those that stood about her Bed, heard a crowing of Cocks, cackling of Hens, a
gagling of Geese, barking of Dogs, bleating of Sheep, grunting of Hogs, lowing
of Cattle, and neighing of Horses. There came out of her side worms and
Serpents of a wonderful bigness, about a hundred and fifty. Many Physicians
and Surgeons were enquired of, and amongst them Leonhartus Fuchsius Tubingensis
archiatrus. At length came the Physicians of Charles the 5th Emperor, and
Ferdinand, and the Hungarian King, accompanied by some of the Nobles, neither
found they any thing false or counterfeit. When the disease had almost endured
for the space of four years, and her pains did seem to increase more and more,
the Magistrate of Eslingensis sent his Physician, together with three Surgeons,
and a Nurse, that they might open the belly of the maid: they tied her with
thongs, they found her belly finely molded up as with hands very artificially
stuffed with pillows, with diverse arches, by which the roundnesse of her belly
was expressed: the Virgin being uncovered, had a very beautiful body, her
belly was brought into Court, and reserved in the place of Anathematism. The
Mother of this daughter was a Witch, and being examined upon the rack confessed
that by Satan's counsel, and for gain she had done thus, and her neck being
first broken, she was publicly burned, and the daughter having holes boared
through her knees with a hot Iron was condemned to perpetual imprisonment.
Lycosthenes, in his prodigies.

Creet there was one Moses that went about almost a whole year stirring up the
Jews being about to draw them through the Sea, no otherwise then Moses of old
performed. Those Jews gathered up all that they could. At the appointed day, he
drew forth the miserable people, a great multitude of men and Women going with
him, the false Prophet brought them unto a steep place, and there shows them
a promontory unto the Sea, and persuaded them to leap into the Ocean that they
might swim to him being on the other side. And afterward he promised that they
should have a safe journey: Most of them leapt in, being bewitched by his large
promises, but some were drowned, and perished in the waters, others were drawn
out of the waves by Fishermen coming that way by chance; but many of them
followed him, excepting those that narrowly escaped, who returned to the rest
of their company, and did tell of the danger and destruction that others
suffered. In the mean while when these things were transacted, the false
Prophet vanished; therefore they were not much out of their way, who judged him
to be an evil spirit, who by Gods permission did delude that pitiful
multitude and destroyed many. Socrat. 7. Book 38. chap.

ARchas the chief of the Indian Wisemen being instructed by Apollonius, did
tell his name, Parents, manners, and whatsoever happened to him, as if he had
been present at all. Philostratus.

Antiochians desired of Apollonius Antiocheno that he would turn away the
Earthquake by which they were afflicted, sighing, he writ thus in his Tables.
Woe to thee, O miserable City, because thou shall be levelled eeven with the
ground by many Earthquakes, and the River of Orontes shall wash thee to its
banks. Cedrenus.

JAmblicus returned from his sacrifices into City talking with his Scholars,
and by and by fastening his eyes a while upon the ground, says he, Let us go
another way, because not far from hence lies a dead carcass: Some of his
Scholars followed him. But others, amongst whom Aedesius, going forward in
their journey, they met the Cats who had buried the dead carcass. Eunapius.

GOvarus the King of Norvegia had so much skill in the art of divination, that
he could foresee whatsoever was attempted againgst him in Saxony, which was
above a hundred German miles off. Olaus Magnus, Book 3. chap. 13.

Aristotle writes, in the Phasian River at Colchos there is a Mushroom, whose
branch being lopped off by a maid, cast into his wives bed, will cause her not
to love any other man. Alexander, book 4. chap. 1.

PHhilometor began to fall in love with Sosipater, Eustathius's Widow, a most
beautiful and prudent Woman, he was her Cozen, who that he might enjoy her,
used Magical Verses, A great Sophister busied about his Religious Rites, made
her that she should not be married to him. Eunapius, in Aedesio.

CRata Regneri the wife of a Dane, a Champion, being a Witch who made a feast
of three Wood-Snakes, not hurtful to the body, nor destructive to the mind,
she offered the white part of the m^sse made of the white Serpent, to Ericus
her step-child, but the black part distinguished by red marks, made of the two
other, she tendered to her Son Rollerus. Ericus tasting of the mess to his
preservation, being a courteous Man, turned the platter from one side to the
other, saying, Thus as it wonteth to be in a story, to be cast from the hinder
deck to the fore-deck; but afterward he did cat, and obtained the knowledge of
all things, in an admirable manner so that he could understand the language of
birds and beasts. Crata knowing her error, when she saw the inevitable
providence of fate, she began only to commend her Son Rollerus that he might
suffer the fruit of that happy birth by that kind of meat to flow to his
brother: This is that Ericus that deserved the name of Eloquent, and at the
last he obtained the Kingdom. John Saxo Grammaticu^, Book 5. of the History of
the Danes.

SClerus Sethus, under Manuel Comnzenus the Emperor, did entise a Virgin by a
Persian Apple sent to her by a Bawd, and drew her into his love. Nicetas, 4th
book of Histories.

CAjanus, the son of Simeon, who ruled over the Bulgarians, was so expert in
Magic, that as often as he pleased he could turn himself into a Woolf, or any
wild beast. Sigebert, in his Chronicle.

Italian women taking some kind of meats, will so lethargize men's minds, that
they may seem those things to them, as they are not; St. Austin has recorded,
that he heard this of Praestantius, and said, that Praestantius reported, that
his father was made mad by such kind of enchanted meats as these women made,
and quickly fell into a great sleep, and for many days together could not be
made awake by any medicine: And he told, That in that time he had the picture
of a horse, and always bore corn: and he further added the time that he
carried it, the place, and the manner how. The truth of which things being
afterward enquired after, he says, That it was found out, that a horse of
that color, which his father Praestantius did speak of, and in that place
carrying corn, to which he said, That it was a wonderful thing, that women by
their magical art, by giving meats, could make men think to do that to one
being awake, to another being asleep, which without doubt there was no such
thing: from whence in my judgment, that which is said at one time of the
Strigilian Women, is nothing else but a magical dream; although to others it
may seem otherwise. Peradventure those metamorphosings which were caused by
Circes, were like to these, although they give another account of an
allegorical sense for them. The same was showed in an Egyptian Maid, when she
was transformed into a Mare; they brought her to St. Hillarion, who presently
turned her into her former shape. To which the like may be said of a young man,
who by magical women seemed to be turned into an Ass; of whom, when Peter
Damianus did accurately dispute before Leo the high Priest, he affirmed, it was
the effect of Magic, and no fiction. Fulgosus book 8. chap. 11.

Prussia, Livonia, and Lituania, there is a great number of Witches, who at
Christmas before night, laying the picture of a man in a certain place, they
assume the Wolfs face, and go to the Countrey-mens houses in the Woods, and
there fight; and drink off hogs-heads of Ale, kill cattle, and afterward they
count that place of the inhabitants divine; And if at any time there happen any
mischief, as a Wagon overthrown and cast into the Snow, they believe, that he
that it belongs to, shall dye that year; as they have found many times by sad
experience. Within Lituania, Samogetia, and Curio, there is a certain
stone-wall standing, being the ruins of a certain Castle: At this, at an
appointed time there meets 1000 of Wolves, and tryes their nimblenesse in
leaping, and they that cannot leap over this wall, (as those that are fat often
cannot) they are beaten by their chief Governors: And, in the last place, it
is constantly affirmed, that in this multitude there are the great Peers, and
many of their Nobility. Olaus illustrates it by many Examples, lib. 8. cap. 45.
etc. He affirms, That the Duke of Prusia did give no credit to such
Witchcrafts, but caused a certain man, not much skilled in Negromancy, to be
imprisoned, till he should metamorphose himself into a Wolf; but when he saw he
could not, he caused him to be burnt.

URatislaus, Prince of Luca, who first founded Uratislavia, warred against
Grezomislaus Prince of Bohemia, his Nephew. They say there was a woman there,
that foretold her son in law, that wished for the fight, that Uratislaus should
be killed in the battle, and the major part of the people should dye with him;
but he being but a youth, might peradventure escape, if he would be advised by
her. She charged the young man, (that said he would do whatever she commanded)
to kill the first he met withal, and to keep close both his ears in his
pocket; presently making a cross with his sword on the ground, between his
horses forefeet, and kissing it, he got upon his horse, and hastened away:
Uratislaus being slain in the Camp, called Thuscus, the young man, that
hearkened to his Mother in law, fled home safe, but found his Wife, which he
entirely loved, killed, without ears, and holes made in her breast. Thus those
ears which he had cut off from his enemy, in great amaze, he knew to be his
Wifes. Aeneas Silv. in Histor. Bohemia.

APollonius Thyaneus cured the blind, the lame, and those that were tormented
with unclean spirits; he delivered the City Ephesus, that was infected with a
grievous Plague, by showing them an old beggar, which he commanded should be
stoned by the people, who afterward taking away the heap of stones, was found
in the shape of a dog, whom himself affirmed to be a Devil.

recitat. Vierus lib. 4. cap. 10. de Daemonum praestigiis.

DUssus, King of the Scots, was sick of an unknown disease; in the night he
sweat very much, and in the daytime being more at ease, he took his rest. His
body, like to one in a Consumption, was pined away with a lingering disease. His
pulse was as before when he was in health, likewise his senses and appetite to
meat; His Physicians were in despair of his recovery. In the interim, about
that time arose a rumor, not known by what Author, That the King was poisoned
by women, and that they in a Town of Moravia did practice the black art to
destroy the King. Messengers were sent to make peace between Duffus the King,
and the Inhabitants of Moravia, and being by night admitted into the Castle,
are warned of the whole business by a Soldier, who searched out the whole
matter from his strumpet, whose Mother was one of the Witches that poisoned
him. Breaking therefore into their houses, they found one of the hagges having
an Image of wax representing King Duffus, which was made by their hellish art,
fastened on a wooden spit before an hot scorching fire; another was found
muttering a charm, as he poured forth liquor on the statue by little and
little. They being cast into prison, and questioned about the impiety, they
made answer, Whilst the image at the fire was scorching, King Duffus was in a
sweat, but reciting the charm, he should be always awake, and at the melting
of the wax, he should waste away, but it being utterly consumed, the King
should instantly die. They were hired to do this wicked act by the chief
Governors of Moravia. When the women were burnt, Duffus gave over sweating,
and was restored to his health. Hector Boethus lib. 11. Historiae Scotorum.

VItolfus, cihef Ruler of the Helsingians did so deprive those of their
eyesight whom he pleased, that they neither could see houses, that were nigh
unto them, nor certainly to go unto them, he knew so well how to dimm their
eyes with a cloudy mist. Olaus lib. 3. cap. 17. Septentrional.

THe Lappones and Finni in the Northern parts use to make short artificial
javelins of lead, the length of ones finger, these they shoot at a distance
toward them which they wish to be revenged of; who having a canker arising on
their leg or arm, are with extremity of pain dead within 3. days after. Idem,
ibidem.

Isabell, King Alphonsus the 11th his daughter, was given in marriage to
Johannes Galeacius, Governor of the City Millain; Ludovicus Sfortia seeing
her, his affection was so ardent toward her, that he desired her father to
bestow her upon him to be his Wife; and on this manner he by his magic art
brought it about, that Johannes Galeacius for many months was incapable to
perform the conjugall mysteries. Guicciardinus lib. 1.

PYthagoras on a time was seen at Criton and Metapontus on the same day and
hour. Apollonius in Mirabil. historiis.

APollonius Tyaneus being kept in public custody at the Palace, and accused
by Domitianus, vanished clear away out of his sight, and was the same day found
at Puteoli, whither he had sent his Comrade before, and charged him to wait for
his coming thither. When this same man had a book in his hand at Tigilla,
wherein his accusation was included, he did miraculously and strangely cause,
that this book being open, could in no place be found written. Philostratus.

JAmblicus, a Philosopher of Syria, as he was praying, was lifted aloft from
the ground more then ten cubits, his body and vesture was changed into the
color of gold. Prayer being ended, he came again to his former effigies, and
fell down to the ground; viz. these were the illusions of
Magick-contemplations. Eunapius, in ejus vita.

Olaus in his History of the Northern folks, That Oddo Danicus, a grand Pyrate,
roved up and down the deep Sea, without the help of a Ship, and did often,
having enchanted a storm, overthrow his enemies Shippings, and was at last
(being environed by an enemy of greater skill) drowned in a gulf, who by his
slight and cunning charms, did in former times use to dance on the top of the
waters.

OThnius the Magitian brought Hadingus King of Denmark to his own again, when
he was most sadly deluded by the tricks of the Devil and Magitians, and far
separated from his company, on horseback over a great part of the Sea, and
Hadingus through some slits of his rocket under which he lay trembling, palpably
saw his horse feet tread the waves, to his great admiration. Olaus lib. 3. cap.
19.

THespetion, the General of the Gymnosophistae in Aethiopia, by his
incantations enjoined an Elm Tree, that it should salute Apollonius, which the
Tree did, with a very distinct voice indeed, but something like a woman's.
Philostratus in vita Apollonii and Volatteranus, lib. 13. c. 8. Anthropol.

THeotecnus the Magitian under Maximinus, by the power of magic made the Image
of Jupiter to utter Oracles, by which the Citizens were incited to persecute
the Christians, and the Emperor was much ^fferated and exasperated against
them. At last, Licinius having found out his tricks, punished him severely.
Eusebius lib. 9. cap. 3. and 11.

Appion, with the herb Cynocephalaea (which in Egypt is called Osirites, and
prevails against all manner of Witchcrafts, but whosoever gathers it, dies
presently) raised the ghost of Homer, that he might know of what Country and
Parents he was descended. But never durst tell what answer he received. Plin.
lib. 30. cap. 2.

APollonius Tyaneus coming to the Tomb of Achilles, aver'd that the Ghost of
Achilles in his old and known likeness and posture presented it self before
him, and that thereupon the Sepulcher did a little tremble or move, and
presently a young man appeared, at first about five cubits high, but in a short
time he became twelve in stature, and seemed handsomer than can be imagined.
The youth ask't him some frivolous questions, and when he began to be somewhat
too wanton and obscene, Apollonius perceived he was employed by the Devil. He
therefore forced the Devil to depart, and when he was gone, a certain statue
hard by in the likeness of the said youth, fell to the ground. Philostratus.

JAmblicus the Philosopher, tegether with his Scholars, went to Gadara to
certain Baths, the best in all Syria, (or the Roman Empire) except only those
of Baja, to which no Baths could be compared: whilst they were washing there,
there grew a dispute concerning these Baths amongst the young Gentlemen;
Jamblicus smiling, commanded his pupills to inquire, of some of the men that
attended the baths, of the names of the hot ones; but which were much more
pleasant than the rest, and had been named particularly for a long time. They
answer, they understand not the meaning of the names; but that one of them was
called Amor, and the other Anterotes, The revenger of the Injuries of Lovers.
He presently touching the water with his hand, (for he sat perhaps upon the
border of the Well, where the water overflowed and ran out) and mumbling over a
few words, raised one out of the bottom of the water very fair, and of a
comely stature, with his hair as yellow as gold, with a pure white skin upon
his back, who was in every thing like one that washed, or had been bathed. The
young man being astonished at the novity of the thing, he went to the other
Fountain, and did the like there, calling out the other Amor, in every thing
like the former; only that this had darker hair, and longer, hanging down along
his neck. Both these familiars or rather Tutelars, came to Jamblicus, embracing
and hugging him, as if he had been their own natural father, whom he restored
to their former stations; and so having washed, returned from the Bath.
Eunapius, in his life.

Basilius the Emperor dyed, his eldest son Constantinus dyed with him, he so
passionately loved his father, that he would not live after him, but desired
always to see him alive. There was a certain Monk called Theodorus, and
surnamed Santabarinus, preferred to the Government in the Metropolis of the
Enchaitee, who being a most just man, was in great favor with the King, and
with whom the King conversed very familiarly, which, as one he observed to be
very devout, and a great lover of the truth. He promised the King to show him
his son alive, sitting upon a horse under a green leavy shade. The foolish old
man thought the Vision that the minister of the Devil had deceived his eyes
with, had been his son, and that he had embraced his son, when he had nothing
but a Phantasm; and so wholly relied on the credit of this Monk, that he, in
the conceit that his other son was alive, brought the King into suspicion of
his son Leo, whom he had crowned and created King; insomurh, that he imprisoned
him, and there tormented the poor innocent Prince a long while. Cuspinianus out
of Zonara.

Lotharingus, come of an honest stock, being corrupted by the evil example of
his equals and companions, began to frequent Taverns and tipling-houses; all
this while Gilbertus, a kinsman of Nozerenus, to whose care he was committed,
knowing nothing of it. Mean while, a young man, (which proved proved afterward
the Devil in a man) he being drinking with his pot-companions, drew him aside,
and promised him he would teach him, how by saying a certain verse, and some
words which he could easily learn, he might have money at his pleasure; If in
his name he would to his host reckon up a Symbol, and from his heart believe
those things which were in the holy book by him written; nor would ever unfold
the holy Bible. The youth promising him all he desired, he told him the sum of
his art therein; then taking the book in his left hand, holding it down with
his fore and middle finger of his right hand, and muttering out the verse, (in
the French tongue) brass and copper swims about, and gold leaps, and he shaked
off his fingers 60 Crowns, the sum he desired. The Youth does the like, as this
his Instructor did before him, and with the like success; but in great joy
going home with the book, and being much taken with the novelty, opens it, that
he might make another by it. In the middle there was a sphaerical circle, like
an Orb, divided with two straight diametrical lines crossewayes, upon which
there was a picture drawn of a most dreadful shape, horned, and every way like
a Devil; on his right hand were two crosses that joined together, on his left
were the immodest parts, both of a man and a woman, most obscenely placed,
opposite to each other. Presently, as he beheld these ugly spectacles, his eyes
began to darken, and his head to grow light; and whithersoever he went, he
would look back ever and anon, verily believing some body followed him close at
the heels. His Chamber-fellow, a young man, who had observed this Prodigy, was
examined about it, and confessed all the business to his Tutor, at whose
persuasion the papers were cast into the fire, where they remained a full half
hour, without being touched by the fire, (although the matter of them was to all
appearance most combustible) to the very great terror of the young man, and
the amazement of all the standers by. Cognatus, l. 8. Narrat.

Anastasius the Emperor, the Bulgari, a people before that time unknown,
inroded upon Illyrium and Thracia. Against whom certain Roman Captains, made a
voyage with an Army; whom these Bulgari, using Magical devices and straragems,
did bafflle and destroy wholly, except a very few that escaped. Cuspinianus.

SIgebert King of France was conquered, his army destroyed, and himself taken
prisoner by a people called the Hunni, by reason of their enchantments they
used against him. Gregor. Turon. lib. 4. cap. 28.

HAquinus Prince of Norway being to fight against the Danes, by his
enchantments so vexed his enemies, which were of a stupendous magnitude, that
their heads were so sore beaten by the storms, that their eyes were even sore
with weariness and lost their sight, insomuch that they received more
detriment by the Elements than the Enemy. The Biarmenses, a people very near
the Artick Pole, fighting in the North with that most powerful King Regnerus,
by their incantations rose a most violent storm against the Danes, and suddenly
afterward a most hot gleam insomuch that between these two extremes, the Enemy
were both destroyed and conquered. Olaus, lib. 3. cap. 19.

ARngrimus the Swedish Champion persecuting the wood- Finni, or Tories, and in
a conflict having put them to flight, casting three stones behind their backs,
they made them appear to the Enemy like so many Mountains, so that Arngrimus
seeing he was gul'd, recalled his forces from the pursuit thinking that by
those great mountains their passage had been stopped. The very next day
combatting with these same again, when they were not able to stand it out,
throwing Snow upon the ground they made the appearance of a River; And so
frighting the General of their Enemy with this vain show of waters, they again
escaped. But the third day when they saw their party begin to fail, they
yielded themselves up into the Conquerours power. Olaus, lib. 5. cap. 15.

Indusium Necessitatis amongst the Germans, Nothem^t, was much esteemed of old,
with which they used to arm themselves, and then they were shot-free, and
weapon-free, and thereby defended from all manner of bodily harms, and enabled
to undergo any hardship whatsoever untoucht. This also was used by women in
childbed to procure easy and safe deliverance. Hence was it called the shirt
of necessity, because it was put on in the greatest necessities. Thus it was
made. On Christmas day at night, maids of most known chastity, did in the
Devils name, spin yarn out of the mud, weaved the same, and sewed it together.
In the breast of it there were two heads sewed, of which that on the right side
had a long beard, covered as it were with a helmet, but that on the left side
was grim crowned, and like the Devil; on either side was a cross made, in
length it wrought from the neck down to the middle part of a Man, being
complete with sleeves, etc. Vierus writes in his fourth book, and 15. c. of the
sleights of the Devils, That he saw one of them in the Possession of a very
Noble person, left him by his Grandfather, a Soldier, and a most stout man,
and that they were very commonly used in times past, by Kings and Emperors.

Polonians in a battle they had with them at Legnicia in the year of our Lord,
1240. bore very hard upon the Tartars, and when they gave ground, prosecuted
the pursuit. There was in the very rear of the Tartarians, an Ensign whose
Motto was only the letter X and upon the spear of it there was the image of an
ugly black long-bearded man. When as the Ensign-bearer did very much shake and
waver this color, it raised a very thick and black smoke. This cloud did not
only obscure the Tartars from the sight of the Polonians, but killed many of
the Polonians with the stink of it. The Tartarians did this by some
incantations they used, which as well as many other ariolations, and
divinations they very much practice as well in war as upon other occasions, and
do often make conjectures of future events by the entrals of men. The
Barbarians when they saw the Enemy in a fear, rallying and encouraging one
another, they made a great impression upon them, and having disordered their
ranks, made no small slaughter; in which Pompo the leader of the Christians,
with many of his valiant associates died. There was so great a massacre of the
Christians that day, that the Barbarians having cut off all their earrings,
filled nine great sacks therewith. Cromerus, libro 8.

Danes and Suesia, in the year 1563. It is written out of the Danes Castles,
That the Suecian King when he was in his pomp and prosperity, carried four old
Witches about with him, which by their enchanted verses did procure all the
Victories to the Danes, that he could not do any hurt to his Enemy; And those
which were besieged by the Suesian King, were debilitated and made weak, and
unfit for War, so that they were glad to yield themselves captives: And
although at first there was no credit given to the report, yet afterward one of
these Witches was taken captive by a Soldier of Mounsieur Comitis, a
Schwarzenburg Guntheri of the Duke's Army; and those things which she confessed
to him, are written down; Afterward there was found about the Wells, Springs,
and Fenny grounds, a long thread extended out a great length, upon which were
many wooden crosses and pictures, with strange characters described on them.
Vierus says, That they grievously offend against the manifest Commands of God,
that they require such unlawful means or helps from the Suesians; and the
Danes they are afraid of those magical delusions, and divellish deceits and
mockeries. Lib. 2. cap. 33. de Praestigiis Demon.

EMpedocles Agrigentinus the Magitian, writes these things of himself;
Medicamenta quae et mala et senectutem propulsant,
Audies; tibi enim soli ego ista omnia conficiam,
Et sedabis indefessorum ventorum vires, qui in terram
Ruentes flatibus, rura corrumpunt,
Et vicissim si voles, reduces ventos, adduces,
Et efficies ex imbre nigro tempestivam siccitatem
Hominibus, et efficies ex aestiva siccitate,
Flumina foecunda quaeque in aestate spirant,
Et reduces ex Orco defuncti animam viri.
Open now the labyrinth of thy mare-like ear,
And then strange Cures and Medicines thou shall hear,
That will all evils and old age repel,
To thee alone I will this mystery tell;
And thou shall hush the rumors of the wind,
Destruction's beesom when thou do it find,
To sweep the Country with its poisonous breath,
And Dragon-like does storm many to death:
And if thou will that Aeolus should bluster,
It Is in thy power all the winds to muster.
If black big-belly'd Clouds appear again,
As though they would nothing afford but rain,
Then thou shall cause in them a barrenness,
And a great drought, and bring a great distress
Upon poor mortals: and when The Earth is dry,
It shall be sleckt by tears of weeping eyes:
But when it is parcht with Summers sultry weather,
The foaming floods shall then all flow together,
And quench its thirst; yea from black Pluto's den,
With Orpheus thus thou wilt fetch thy friend again.
When for a certain while the winds did so vehemently blow and bluster at
Etesia, that they hurt the grain, he gave order that Asses should be
excoriated, or their skins should be plucked off, and make bottles, and to be so
far extended in the Promontory, that they might receive the wind; And he being
asleep, was called (...), as if one should say, The stayer of the Winds. Suidas.

Lydians, who are called Persici, their Cities being Hierocaesaria, and
Hippaepae; and in each City there are Temples very large, and Vaults in them,
with Altars, upon these are ashes of a far different color then our ashes are;
A Magitian entering in here, covers his head with a gallant attire, where the
wood is laid upon the Altar, and calls upon the name of his god, whosoever he
be, but (reciting a heathenish verse out of a book) where he has prayed, there
shines forth a pure flame out of the wood, the fire being not stirred.
Pausanias, lib. 5. says, he saw this himself.

HErodotus testifies, lib. 7. of Xerxes's Governors, that in a tempest of
three days, they lost four hundred Ships, until the fourth day, that their
Magitians Thety, and the Nereidians did allay the tempestuous winds by their
sacrifices.

CAstabilis is the Phane of the Persians Diana, where they say religious women
go upon hot coals barefoot, and are not burnt, Strabo, lib. 12. Under the
Mountain of Soracte, there is a City called Feronia; it is called by that name,
from a goddess they had, which the bordering people thereabout worship very
much. In the same place there stands a Temple, having a wonderful kind of
sacrifice; For they that are inspired with the Deity, do walk upon burning
coals with their naked feet: And therefore there comes a great multitude every
year, as well by reason of the solemnity and celebration, as to see the sight.
Idem. lib. 5.

TUllius Hostilius the Roman King, in the imitation of Numa Pompilius, whilst
he endeavored to raise up Jupiter Elicius, was struck with lightning when the
Palace took fire. Tussia, a vestall Virgin, being accused of incest at Rome,
that she might be cleared of it, and her innocence and chastity might be
discovered by her prayers, she drew water with a sieve; in the 609 year, after
the City was burnt, Plinius, lib. 28. cap. 2.

ARmiplus, an Egyptian Magitian, in that War which the Romans had with the
Quadi, when there was a cruel skirmish and battle, and the victory hanging in
Aequilibrio, they did not know who should get the battle, by his magical Arts
and Enchantments called upon that Mercury, who dwells in the Airy Region, and
other spirits, and begged of these a great deal of pouring rain, and thereby
did so affright the Quadi, that the Romans got the Victory. Dion Niceus in
Antonino, and Suidas. Some attribute this to Julian the Chaldean.

Finni, that in times past did sell winds to Merchants, offering them three
knots twisted by magical cunning; the first knot being opened, they should
have gentle winds, and soft gales; the second b^ing untwined, they were to have
somewhat more vehement winds; and the third knot being loosed, they should have
tempestuous winds and storms. Olaus lib. 3. cap. 16. ex Sax. Grammat.

Ferdinand the King of the Neapolitans, did besiege very closely the Marcos
Town, being subjected under the Tower or Castle of the Draconian Mountain,
situated near the entrance of the Massick Mountains, and by reason of the
scarcity and want of water, he almost compelled them to yield and surrender
themselves; When the wicked Priests durst by their conjurations cause great
showers, for there were found in the Townsmen who were besieged, who in the
nightime deceiving the Castles Watches, thievously stole to the shore through
rough and hard rocks, bringing with them the Image of Christ crucified on the
Cross, first with imprecations cursing it, and prosecuting it with Magical
Verses; afterward they fall into a frenzy, calling upon Heaven, Earth, and
Sea, for a Tempest. At what time these Priests, the wickedest and
blasphemousest of all mankind, studied by their profane arts to please the
Soldiers persisting in their wicked rites and ceremonies, by which means (as
it is reported) they procured rain, and an Ass being set before the doors of
their house, and they sung an Elegy, as though he were troubled in mind.
Afterward the Sacrament was thrown into his mouth, the Ass making great moan,
and lamenting, as though with funeral songs; at length they buried him quick
before the doors of the Temple. But the rite or ceremony being scarce finished,
the Sky began to be, clouded, and the Sea was begun also to be tempestuous, and
the splendor of the noonday was eclipsed with darkness, and now the Heavens
began to shine with their flashing fiery lightning; then all other light was
obscured, Heaven and Earth trembled with thunder, and Earthquakes, the poles of
the Earth were aguish, the Trees that were eradicated and plucked up by the
roots, they were blown about in the whirl-winds, the rocks that were cloven
with lightning, filled the Air with clamorous noises, and there came such a
deluge by this rain and storms, that the Cisterns and Conduits were not able to
contain it, but the parched stones, and scorched Rocks did diffuse and spread
about every where those showers, torrents, and Rivers which the storm brought;
so that the King whose only hope was to get the Town by want of rain was
frustrated of his purpose, and returned to his old Castles at Savonta.
Pontanus, lib. 9. belli Neapolitani.

Elton Pagum a little mile from Embrica, placed in the Duchess of Clivensis
near the high way, about forty two years since, there was a spirit that vexed
travelers after diverse fashions, beating them, throwing them from their
horses, and overthrowing Wagons, neither was there ever any thing seen but the
picture of a hand, they called it Eckerken, the Neighbors thereabout did
attribute this wickedness to the conjuration of a Witch. Wherefore a hand was
sacrificed to a Sybill Woman named Puiscops, who by right was a servant to the
Earl of Montensis and at the last the hand being burnt, the grievance ceased.
Vierius, lib. 5. cap. 2. de praestig. Demon.

PElopsin an Olympic charriotter, got some spell or enchantment of Amphion,
that the horses in that very plain might always be troubled with an
unaccustomed fury and terror. Pausanias, lib. 6.

PYthagoras called a very cruel savage Bear, of a great bigness who struck
those that looked on him with fear, and fed and nourished him with himself; he
once with a low voice as though he were Conjuring in muttering and whispering
words, he charged him that he should hurt no living creatures: after that, the
Bear going away, went into the Woods, and gathering her Whelps together, and
with much faithfulness she (which is very rare in men) did perform that she
was sworn to. Perhaps from hence (said Augustine) came Pythagoricall
nercomancy, by the numbers of Letters, and by the Moon. And it is certainly
reported that Pythagoras saw an Ox near Tarentum, spoiling the Fabacian Corn
with his eating, as also by the trampling of his feet, as the Neatherd told
him, he counseled the Ox to spare the Corn. The Neatherds wife laughing, I
(says she) have not learnt Oxe-language, but thou seem to be verst in that
kind of learning, and therefore take my place: presently Pythagoras bending
himself to its ears, whispered some Magical words into them; and, that which is
to be admired at, the most obedient Ox, being willing to be taught of o^e that
was wiser then himself, not only gave over tearing the Corn then, but
abstained from eating corn of that sort afterward, and also was freed from his
Neatherd, and was turned from a country rustical swain to a
Citizen-peripatetick, and waxed old at Tarentum, and was fed by men's hands.
Caelius, lib. 19. cap. 1. A. L. Plutarchus in vita Numae. The same Pythagoras,
as Aristotle says, killed a Serpent in Etruria by biting, who destroyed others
by biting. Apollonius in Mirabil. Historiis.

APollonius Tyaneus going from Rome to Byazntium by the Citizens leave, did
expel out of that City, a great company of Serpents and Scorpions lest they
should hurt any one, and did quell and repress the intemperate neighing of
horses at the Randevouz of Princes. The same thing was requested of him when he
came to Antioch, for when the Antiochians were vexed by Scorpions, and gnats,
he made a brazen Serpent, and put it upon a pillar erected on the earth: he
commanded the people to carry reeds in their hands, and run about the City
striking and lashing with their reeds, and to cry out; Let the City be free
from gnats: And by that means the Serpents and gnats were driven out of the
City. Cedrenus.

India, there is a Province called Maabas, famous for precious stones and
pearls, for that Sea being very dangerous for Sea Monsters, the Abrathimins
their Magitians, who anciently were called Brachmans, by their daily witchcraft
do so bewitch the great huge Whales, that they are able to hurt no body; but in
the nightime they let them have their liberty, left there should be any
occasion given to thieves to steal. M. Paulus Venetus. lib. 3. cap. 23. rer.
Oriental.

Holland, as in Rotterdam and Scheidanus, they chiefly live by fishing; those
Inhabitants when they sail out to catch Herring, they bring such plenty of fish
home to Rotterdam, that loads whole Ships. These on a time, drew back their
Nets loaded with stones to Scheidanus; which unexpected misfortune was quickly
attributed to witchcraft: Wherefore they apprehended a woman, which without
delay confessed, that she made it come to pass with her witchcrafts, and that
she flew out of a hole of the window; She showed them a hole of the same
bigness, which she could hardly thrust her finger in, and whilst they were
laying in wait for fishes, she went to Sea in a Cockle-shell, Mossel Sculpitis
called by the fishermen, and there passed over all that space until she came
to the place where the Herrings were, and there with her enchantments, made the
Herrings depart that place, and she stayed in their room: this rumor being
spread abroad, she was committed to the flames. Vierius lib. 5. cap. 8.

THey report that a certain man, one Pasetus by name, that deserved the chief
name for his skill in delusions and Magic, he by his enchantments did make a
Banquet quickly to seem to be made ready, and furnished in all points; again,
when he pleased he could make it to vanish, Suidas. Brachmanns could make ready
Banquets of all kinds, and prepared Messes of meat to be set on the Table, when
they could see no servitours that set them on. Philostratus.

Numa the Roman King, sometimes invited diverse Citizens to a Banquet, and set
homely sordid furniture, and a very sparing mean supper; but it being begun,
there was a speech that he was familiar with a Goddess, and instantly he let
them see his house, was furnished with precious cups, and the Tables were decked
with all gallantry and magnificent feasts. Plutar. in Numa.

WIlliam the Earl of Holland was Crowned by the instigation of the High Priest,
being against Frederick 11. and Conrad. filius Aquisgraci Roman King, returned
to his Colony, and there made a gallant feast to the Princes. In which it is
reported that by the admirable art and skill of Albertus Magnus the
Philosopher, the Trees did flourish in the depth of Winter, and the herbs did
grow. It is said, that the Writers of that Age relate, that they saw him do
this; for this deed it is said, that he had a great Farm given to him, with its
appurtenances, in Trajecto, and to have built a Monastery. Cuspinianus.

Pythagoras did perform the Pythagorian sport by a Looking-glass; he writ
something in blood in the Looking-glass, and quickly the Letters being turned
against the Moon, being in the full, to him that stood at his back, showed the
perfect characters, as it were ingraven'd in the Moon. Coel. lib. 9. cap. 23.
Antiq. lect. ex Suida in voce (...).

APuleius lib. 1. de Asino aureo, haec scribit. At Athens, says he, near and
over against the Paecilean Porch, I have seen a young Chevalier plainly to have
swallowed a sharp dart, pointed with a pile, and presently again without any
reluctance hide within his bowels a hunters lance made of a little stump, in
which part it threatens destruction, and behold the iron of the Lance came out
through his gut behind, and he being a fine finnical boy tending to Mollicies,
by his Serpentine windings did so dance, as if he had no bones to hinder him,
and therefore was ^dmired of all that saw him.

PHilumena, the harlot of Apelles the Heretic, did put in and take out of a
little hole of a narrow glass bottel, a great loaf of bread. D. Augustinum
Sedecias the Jew, did devour and swallow up Soldiers with horse and arms, and
a whole load of a Hay, and flew in the Air.

Andronicus Senior, the Emperor, and young Andronicus his Nephew, there were
Magicians came out of Egypt to Byzantium, to show their art: they did fasten
upon a Platt of ground two or three main masts of a loadned and ballasted ship
with ropes, lest it should totter to and fro, or bend to either side;
afterward they stretched one rope from the top of one mast to the top of
another; furthermore, twisting and doubling another rope that winded to the
ground, they made steps, or a ladder of cords, by which they did climb to the
top; and when one of them went up to play their tricks of activity, he would
stand on the bare top of the mast, now flinging out one foot, then another
upwards, (as though he despised and spurned at Heaven) and then turning
topsieturvy, his head inclining toward the vertex of the Pole or Mast; at the
last, falling on a sudden, one hand holding fast to the rope, and there he
hung swinging and turning about the rope, and whirling about toward Heaven
(being of a vertiginous brain) and toward earth, in a semi-moment just like a
top, afterward bending his leg, he caught hold of the rope with that, instead
of his hand, and there he would be a Supine, viz. hang or lie downwards, and
would then circle and turn himself about after the former manner; By and by he
would stand straight up on the rope, and taking in his hand bow and arrows,
would aim and shoot at a white mark, that was put a great way off, and shoot so
artificially and skilfully, as they that stood on the ground could do no
better: And then again shutting his eyes, taking a boy in his arms, he would go
up to a higher rope, and so would prance up and down from one rope to another;
and one man did do all this.

so belabour that Vessel, being then full of liquor, that it lasted and was
serviceable not long after. Another there was that set a long spear upon his
head three fathoms long, and from the top downwards, the rope net-wise was
folded, or stairs made by it, and a Boy did ascend to the top, sometimes
shifting hands and feet until he came to the spears top, and then he descended
again, and he that carried the spear on his head, walked all the while. Another
would throw up on high a Globe, or a round ball of Glass, and then when it was
falling again, would catch it with the extremest parts of his nails, and
sometimes by his elbows, now one now another, but some that were not very
expert, fell and perished. And whereas there were above forty came out from
their country, almost twenty of them came to Byzantium, and they traveled all
over, gathering a great deal of Money of the spectators, and some came for
profit, some to show their art for ostentation sake. Gregor. lib. 8.

MIchael Sicidites Magus, Manuel Comnenus being Emperor, who would not suffer
nor allow of such sights, which did effacinate the peoples eyes, but sent all
these Divel's, companions to them which he would have banished; when he saw a
little ship in in a large place of the Palace, in which potts and dishes were
transported, he by his magical verses caused the Mariner to be squeesed and
crushed, and made him no sooner leave to strike and dash the potts together,
then they were all resolved to dust: a little while after stroaking his beard,
he began to lament, and the mist being past, he deplored himself, that he was
so handled by some irefull diety; and being asked why he broke his ware in
pieces, he with much grief declared, that, being very busy rowing with his
Oars, there was a horrible great Serpent, that extended it self over the
earthen Vessels, and that he saw it with staring eyes, as though it was ready
to devour him, and no sooner began to leave off rowing about, than that all
the pots and platters were broken and crushed to pieces. This Magitian played
another prank, something like this, for washing in a Bath, he began to quarrel
and wrangle with them, by and by he went out of the Bath, a little after some
others through fear and haste running out together, and treading upon one
another, did leap out of a Channel, in which there was hot-water, and when
they skipt ou^ of it, they were as black as Pitch, and they were thrown out of
the Bath, and were soundly kicked. Nicetas 4. book.

GRegory the 7th, as Cardinal Benno says, that when he pleased, he could so
shake and strike his sleeves, from whence fire, like sparks, would come out of
them, and so deluding the eyes of the simple by those petty miracles, as a
sign of his holiness.

WIth the Ostrogothians is a great lake or Gulf called Veter having a
pleasant, but a very long Island, which is as it were its Center, and contains
two parish Churches in it; under one of which there is found to be a den or
cavern with a unequal hollow entrance, and of an unmeasureable unfathomed depth,
into which some men out of a tympany-like ostentation descend with lighted
torches, and long threads to fathom it, and find how deep it is, as did one
Gilbert by name, and others, they met a famous Magitian, who was overcome and
bound formerly there by his own Master Catillus, over whom he presumed to
domineer and insult, for his hands were tied with a little rope, and certain
Gothish and Ruthenien characters were enscribed on it, and so was cast down into
this den by his master; Gilbert remained there being immovable; diverse did go
into the cavern, not without great danger, to see these strange enchantments.
Afterward the law forbad any to go down themselves, or persuade others to go
down, under that peril that they were likely to undergo, viz. death, and so
the mouth of the den was stopped up with stones. Olaus Magnus, lib. 3. cap. 20.

ANtonius Heliogabalus with his Magical arts and enchantments, did Conjure up
the departed Souls of Severius his father especially, and Commodus, and many
others from out of Hell, who tell him of future things, he esteemed highly of
Apollonius Cyaneus Cappadocian who flourished in the reign of Domitian, and
honored and praised him much, and took care that a monument should be made for
him, because he was the greatest Conjurer. Dion ex Xiphil.

Arrian, when he understood by Magical fopperies who should reign after him,
whose name should begin with Theta, he gave command that all those should be
slain whose names began with that letter, as the Theodorans, Theodotans,
Theodulans, and a certain valiant Man Theodosius coming out of Spain, his
father who afterward ruled Theodosii. Wherefore many being affrighted,
anagramatized, and changed their names. It was given out that this divination
was made by a Libanian Sophister Jamblicus by name, the Scholar of Proclus,
when there was many killed, he commanded the executioners to enquire out the
Authors of this divination, Jamblicus fearing much the Princes cruelty, took a
cup of poison and dyed. Socrates, lib. 4. cap. 19. Sozomenus, lib. 6. cap. 35.

ANdronicus Comnenus Tyrannus did consult with one Seth a Magitian, (having his
eyes put out by Manuel the Emperor) about his Successor and his private enemy
that watched for him; About the beginning of September, the Devil showed him in
muddy waters the letter Sigma, and afterward Iota; therefore Andronicus
thought that these letters decyphered Isaurus, to wit, Isaacius Comneus, the
Nephew of Manuel the Emperor, who coming out of Isauria, had appressed Cyprus
by his tyranny. Much search about the business was there at that time; when
the spirit with a great noise flickered in the water, within the exaltation of
the cross, answered, Therefore vain (says Andronicus) is this Oracle; for how
can Isaacius in so short a time come from Cyprus, and take my Kingdom from me?
And for this cause he slighted such divinations and prophesies. But when one
said, Surely Isaacius Angelus was dead, or else that Oracle would have been
verified concerning him; and he said further, That they imagine things that are
afar off, and in the mean time neglect those things which are under their feet;
and so he was incensed against the diviners art, and puffing, slighted
Isaacius Angelus, as a tender soft pusillanimous fellow; by whom a while after,
he was deprived of his Kingdom and life too. Nicetas, lib. 2.

EUphrosyna, the Wife of Alexius Angelus, the Emperor of the Byzantines, when
she desired to know future contingencies, did give up her mind to all kind of
wicked divinations, and acted many unlawful things: she cut off the bill of a
Porcupine hogg, which she saw ready with its piked bristles and cruel teeth, to
fall upon a Lion in Hypico; and she chastised with many stripes, famous
Hercules Image, the gallant workmanship of Lysimachus, lying upon a Lioness
skin, and deplored her fortune, leaning with her head upon her hand; neither
was she satisfied or contented with this, but did mangle and break in pieces
diverse other Statues and Images, and knocked them on the head with hammers:
some certain Pedlars diligently taught birds to imitate humane words, so that
in the streets and porches they would sing with their ordinary voice, Justitia
Politica, (...). Nicetas.

Galerius Maximinius, a persecutor of the Christians, there was one Theotecnus
at Athens, who was an enchanter, and a cruel enemy to the Christians, and did
as much as in him lay, to cause the Christians to be accused and brought before
the Emperor; and by this deceit he did it, by his conjurations and Sorceries
he caused Jupiter's image to utter these words; Speak to Jupiter, that these
Christians may be expelled out of the City and fields, and banished, as being
enemies to him. The subtilty of this wicked Magitian easily took effect under
such a wicked Prince. Eusebius, lib. 8.

JAson the son of Aeson, Nephew to Pelias the Thessalonian King, wishing to do
something worthy of memory, and to imitate some heroic deeds of Persius and
others; Pelias did consent to his desire, not that he might increase the glory
of his youth, nor add splendor to it, but hoping that he would quickly be
slain in some warlike Expedition or other; for he feared his brother Aeson,
lest by the help of his son, he should get the Kingdom from him. In the mean
while, he promised him aid for his War, if he would prepare for a Voyage to
Cholcos, to get the Golden Fleece. Then was Pontus inhabited by the Barbarians
and wild Nations, and they were so cruel to strangers, that they slew all them
that sailed thereabouts; Wherefore Jason makes a Ship near the Pelian Mountain,
of a greater bigness and bulk, and which had greater furniture, then in those
days they usually had; for there was only then used some little Ships or
Frigots: The rumor of this thing was spread all through Greece, so that he
invited many gallant young men, of their own accord, to come to his War; Jason
chose the chief of them that desired to go with him, which number was four and
fifty. Of these who were famous, was Castor and Pollux, Hercules, Telamon,
Orpheus, Atalanta Schenei, besides Thespius's sons, and the author of the
Voyage, Jason. The Ship (we will not say, when dipped in the water) was called
Argo, from Argos its builder, who also took care of repairing her, when she was
sailing on her Voyage; or else named Argos, for her admirable swiftness,
because the Ancients called any thing that was swift, Argon; they preferred
Hercules to be their Captain, the chiefest for Virtue and Fortitude. The wings
of fame flying all abroad the Country, did bring news, that all those that
sailed with Jason to Pontus, perished by a mortality. In the first place,
Pelias made Jason's father to drink Bull's blood, he slew his brother Pomachus,
being but as yet a boy. Alchimede his Mother was designed for death; for all
she was a Woman, yet she did one very memorable thing with a manly courage;
when she fled into the inmost recesses of the Palace, and there begging of the
gods, that they would reward and revenge such impiety, she ran her self
thorough with a sword: Jason returned back into Thessaly, and the Argonautes
promised him to do what they could to revenge such an heinous wickedness, if
he would fight against the City. Medea promised, that by her craft she would
kill Pelias, and would deliver the Kingdom unto them without any danger, and
that she would do her task too; for she was to instruct them in every thing;
and she from the Palace was to give signs of the whole Affair (smoke by day,
fire by night) to the Keepers of the Watchtower on the Seacoast; therefore
preparing Diana's Image, which was unequal and hollow, in which she hid diverse
kinds of venomous things. Afterward by her medicines making her hairs gray,
and her face to be so rugged and wrinckled, that she seemed to all that looked
on her, to be an old woman; then taking Diana's image, went forth into the
City, and stirred all up to superstition, as though she came from the Northern
Countries for the King and Citie's good and welfare; diverse worshipped her
religiously as a Goddess, all the whole people was so besotted; and they
brought Medea into the King's Palace: These things much increased Pelia's
superstition, yea, and his daughters were so bewitched by Medea's Enchantments,
that they were persuaded that she was a goddess, that was come for the
prosperity and felicity of the Kingdom; for she did affirm, that Diana was
carried through the Air by Dragons, and that she had gone about the greatest
part of the World, and that she might be perpetually worshipped, they ought to
choose the most Religious King they could get; and moreover, that the Goddess
had commanded her, that with some Medicines, she should take away the old age
from Pelias, and turn him young again. At which words the King admiring,
commanded Medea to try the experiment upon her self, that they might believe
what she said. She required, that some pure water might be brought her by one
of his daughters, and when she had shut her self up in her bed, she anointed
her body, and by the strength of herbs she was reduced to her former age; It is
reported, that she by her enchantments caused a Goddess in the likeness of
Dragons to fly through the air, and supported by the Hyberboreans, which seemed
to turn toward Pelias; Pelias esteemed very much of Medea, and diligently
commanded his daughters to do what she commanded, and be observant of her, and
whatsoever she gave in charge to be done about her body, that they should do
it: In the following night it is reported, that Medea should say, that it was
necessary that the body of Pelias should be boiled in Copper, which when the
Virgins were about to do it, they required one experiment, that they might give
trust to her words; then there was a Ram that was kept in the house for many
years, to whom she promised to the Virgins, if she should first boil that, she
would afterward restore it into its former condition again. When the Virgins
did consent, they relate, she did boil the body of the Ram, which was divided
into little pieces, and by her medicines brought forth the figure of a Lamb out
of the kettle; which being done, and believing Medea, all the virgin-daughters,
except Alcestis, (who for her eminent Piety, abstained from doing violence to
her father) they slew their father by beating of him: Then it is said, That
Medea, lest that they should boil the body of Pelias, made as though she would
first perform her Vow to the Moon, and commanded the Virgins with their lamps
to ascend to the top of the Palace, and there in the Cholchians tongue, made a
long speech, to drive away the time, and gave the sign to the Argonautes that
the time was now come of performance of the thing; they out of a prospective
glass, saw fire, and then supposing the King was dead, came swiftly, demanding
the City, and going upon the walls, and with glittering drawn swords, went
straightway to the Palace, killed all the watches that withstood them, etc.
Diodorus, lib. 4. cap. 3.

JOhannes Teutonicus, very famous in old time, his Father was a Priest, and by
reason of the good opinion of learning that was had of him, he was preferred to
Halberstatensem Parish, to which none but Noblemen and true begotten
legitimate, were to be admitted; but he was much despised of his colleagues for
his base birth: he invited them to a sumptuous Banquet, and taking occasion,
asked them whether or no they would see their own fathers. And when they told
him that they earnestly desired that he would do so, and by his Magical art,
he made appear horrid ghastly spectrums, representing the shape of Cooks,
Stable-grooms, fools, ^usticks, whose faces they confessed themselves, that
they had sometimes seen at their fathers houses. But Teutonicus did Conjure up
his father in the comeliest, beautifullest shape he could, with canonical
Priestly habit, in a fat Visage. The shadows being passed away, he asked his
guests whose father now they judged to be the nobler: they being affrighted,
(as it were Planet-struck) and confounded with shame, went every one home to
their own houses, and after they never troubled Johannes, who was ennobled by
his virtue, if not by his extraction or birth. Johannes.

NIcholas Venetus, in his Indian History, tells of a Pilot of India, when the
winds did cease, invoking his God which he called Muthian, and that at length
he went to a certain Arabian, and that the Man being impulsed by some invisible
spirit, ran along the Vessel, till he came to a Table, that for that purpose
was fixed to the Mast, and devoured certain coals that lay thereby: and calling
for a Cocks blood, when they had killed one, and brought him the blood of it,
he drank it off, and when he had done, asked them what they desired? and when
the Pilot answered, Wind, he re-demanded what wind, and when he told him an
East Wind, he promised them for three days they should have it at will, and
admonished them that they would be careful to improve the opportunity. When
the Conjuration was past, the Arabian remembered nothing of what he had
Prophesied, done or suffered, but to a minute of the time, all things fell out
accordingly. Cardanus de subtilitate, libro de Daemonibus.

Jerome writes in the life of Hilarion the Eremite. That in a Mart Town of
Gaza, a young Man languished for the exceeding love he bare to a young maid a
neighbor of his, who when he could do no good by frequent courtings,
touchings, jestings, noddings, whisperings, and other allureing dalliances, the
common exordiums of the decay of chastity; he went to Memphis, that so having
made known his condition, he might be instructed by the Magitians, how to
circumvent this young Lady. And after he had been disciplined for a years time
by the Priests of Aesculapius, he returned, and hides under the threshold of
the young maidens door certain Magical words, and enchanting figures, graven in
plates of Cyprian brass. Suddenly the maid grows mad, and casting by the
decent binding of her head, tears her hair, gnasheth with her teeth, calls upon
the name of the young man; such was the ecstasy of her love that made her raging
mad. Her Parents bring her to a Monastery, deliver her to an old man;
immediately the Devil howling, confesses; I have suffered violence having
been brought hither against my will, how bravely did I delude people by
Memphian dreams, O the crosses and torments that I suffer. Thou would have me
go out, and I am fast bound under the threshold. I will not go out unless the
young man that holds me bound, dismiss me. Then the old man says Great is
thy fortitude, who art bound by the drawings out of threads and plates! tell why
thou wast so bold as to enter into a young maid, the servant of God? That I
might preserve her a Virgin. Thou preserve her, thou betrayer of chastity? Why
did thou not rather enter into him that sent thee? To what purpose should I
enter into him who had my colleague the Devil of love? The holy man did not
command him to seek out the plates or gravings, lest the Devil might have
seemed to have quitted the enchantments, or he to have given credit to the
Devils speech, affirming the Devils deceitful, and dexterous in
dissimulation. Moreover having restored the young maid to her former right
wits, he much blamed the Virgin for committing such faults, whereby the Devil
should enter her. These things, Hierome.

Hadrian the sixth, the pestilence seemed little restrained by the touching of
the sick that so increased, that many dead corpse were to be seen in the
streets, and cross ways, and in few days that seemed to depopulate the City,
but that a certain Greek, by name Demetrius Spartanus, the common people
favoring him, undertook the work of removing the Plague, no man being so bold
as to forbid his superstition. For a wild Bull, the half of whose horn he had
cut off, putting a Magic verse into his right ear, suddenly he made him so
tame, that casting a small thread about his whole horn, leading him which way he
pleased, he immolated him at the Amphitheater, to appease the divine power, nor
did he wholly deceive the hope of the credulous multitude, for by the
prosperous offering of that vain sacrifice the sickness began to assuage.
Jovius, lib. 21. As his kinsman concerning that matter of observation, and
worthy animadversion, writes, in the year of Christ, 1522. a most grievous
pestilence invaded Rome; There was then a certain Greek, who had a long beard,
with an ugly aspect, who professed himself to be (...), that is, a helper of
evil, he promised if he should have thirty pieces of Gold to him and his heirs
monthly, to cause a cessation of the Plague; The Romans accept of the
condition. He commands to bring him a black bull, and find out a new well in
the suburbs of the City: in the dead of night he comes to the bottom of the
hill Marius, where he found the Bull prepared, and the Well; he sets upon
making a rope, and as he was weaving that, sometimes with a high, and sometimes
a low voice, I know not what he murmured out, in Greek; the clamor of his
voice was heard by many spectators: afterward he casting a rope about the neck
of the Bull, they report the Bull being made tame and gentle, he led him thrice
about the Well, then casting the Bull prostrate upon the ground, the Bull
making three weak or harmless kicks, presently with little reluctance,
suffered him to cut off his horns; which done, he commanded the Bull to be led
by the shepherds thorough the seven gates of the City, and the seven
highways, and afterward to be let loose that he might return to the fields
and pastures, wherein he was wont to feed. They that were there, then said,
that he lifting up his eyes toward Heaven, and making I know not what kind of
humming, they saw Stars falling, and innumerable likenesses of dogs, and
Wolves, and such kinds of living Creatures, to fly all about, etc. Things being
finished in this manner, the Magitian being returnned to the City, took such
course with the Roman Magistrates that they commanded by public edict that no
one should of three days kill any four-footed beasts, the rulers of the City
who were then absent, when they returned, commanded the Greek impostor to be
apprehended, and cast into Prison; scarce escaping the threats of the people,
he was punished with eternal banishment. The Magic book which he used, was
publicly burnt. Gilbert. Cognatus, lib. 8. of Narrations.

ANtonius Benevemus, lib. 8. concerning the hidden causes of sicknesses, thus
writes; A Maid of the age of sixteen, was pulled with griping grief in the
bottom of her belly by infernal spirits, and falling into horrid clamours, her
whole belly did on a sudden so swell, that one would have thought she had gone
eight months with child; She had an exhausted voice, and sometimes casting her
self upon her bed, and joining her feet to her neck, she leaped up, and falls
upon her feet again; casting her self down, she immediately again started up;
this she often did by turns, but by little and little coming to her self, and
somewhat refreshed, she was asked how she did; she was wholly ignorant what had
passed: but we inquiring the causes of this sickness, thought this evil to
proceed from the suffocation of the matrix, and evil vapors drawn upwards, and
then striking the heart and brain: But when she could not be helped by Physic,
she was wonderful fierce, looking about her with a stern countenance, fell at
length to vomit, whereby she cast up long and crooked nayls, brass pins, with
wax and hairs conglomerated; and lastly, a gobbet of such magnitude, that the
gorge of no creature whatsoever could wholly devour; and when she had done this
often, I my self, being a spectator, conceived her to be possessed with an evil
spirit, who whilst she did these things, amazed the beholders. Wherefore being
afterward detected by more manifest signs and arguments, she was committed to
the Ecclesiastical Physicians; for we have heard her prophecy, and seen her do
those things besides, which go beyond the power of sickness, and exceed humane
understanding.

CA^danus relates in his fifteenth book, concerning the variety of things, of a
certain honest Countreyman and friend, who might more easily have been
deceived, then deceive, who told to him, that he had many years labored of an
unknown disease, at what time by his enchantments he vomited glass, nails, and
hair: and though at length he were restored, to the very day he relates these
things, he did affirm, that he thought he had a huge heap of broken glass in
his belly, and a sound or noise as one should shake a bag full of broken
glass, by which he was much vexed, and also that he the seventh hour of every
eighteenth day, although he numbered them not, had so many blows on his heart,
which was a huge trouble to him for eighteen years since his recovery; who sees
not the actions, legerdemanes, and vexations first and last, that the Devil
puts upon those whom he finds fit, by their simplicity, for his delusions.

Pago Bevenstestet under the Duke of Brunswick, a Maid named Margaret, daughter
of Henry Achils, twenty years old, in the year 1562, on the holy day of the
Visitation of the blessed Virgin, about to wipe or make clean her shoes,
draws out her knife, and goes to a place fit for that purpose; the Maid having
lost her strength by a long Fever, was yet weak; contrary to her expectation,
in comes to the house a woman somewhat old, and asks her, Whether she were
yet troubled with her Fever? and whether she were free from her disease? It
was answered her by the Maid, As yet I have not been able to go out of the
house: The shoes being made clean, she puts the knife in her bosom; which
when afterward it was diligently sought by her, she saw a black dog of an
horrible shape, lying upon his belly under the table, which with grinning
showing his teeth, went away; presently it seemed to the Maid, that from her
head to her feet did flow something, as it were, of a cold humor; to whom
happened also a defect of the Mind or Soul, and she becomes as dead without
sense to the third day, wherein at last she begins to breathe again, and
affirms, that she certainly knew, that that knife which she had taken out of
the sheath of her Sister, did stick fixed in the left side of her own body, for
that she did perfectly feel pain in that very place; by which she was so
exercised, that being bowed double, she was forced to lean upon a staff, after
three months there begun to appear and stand out on her left side above the
Spleen, betwixt her two lowest spurious ribs, an Imposthume of the bigness of
a Cocks egg, and like the Moon, by whose increment or departure, she either
swelled or grew quiet. The thirtieth of June, there issued out of the Ulcer
such store of matter, that the swelling was somewhat remitted, and then as it
were the point of a knife appeared; the Surgeon of Duke Henry, sent for from
the Castle of Wol^senbuttel, took out with instruments the point of the knife
standing out under her ribs, and cured the Ulcer. 10 Vierus lib. 3. cap. 12.
concerning the impostures of Devils.

Erstetting Fugestat; Uricus Newsesser, a Husbandman, when he was tormented
about one of the sides of his ribbs with the cruel torments of griefs, upon a
sudden he feels with his hand an Iron nail under his unhurt skin, which a
Surgeon, a servant, there dug out with his knife; notwithstanding his griefs
ceased not, but daily waxed worse and worse; wherefore when the wretch saw
there was no remedy of his grief, but by dearh, he taking a knife cut his own
throat. Therefore being dead, he was brought to be buried the third day; there
were present then Rosenbader of Wissenburg, a Town of the Noricks in Germany,
and John Estentet, a servant attending about such business, who, a greater
company beholding, fell suddenly upon opening the ventricle of the dead
Husbandman, wherein they found very long and smooth wood, four Steel culters,
partly sharp, partly like a Saw with teeth, and two rough tools of Iron, every
one whereof did exceed the length of a span, and there was like the cover of a
Globe: but that thou will most admire, is, how so many and so great tools could
be contained in the cavity of his Ventricle, and by what art they are carried
in; certainly by no other, then the cunning and deceit of the Devil, Joan
Langius, in his Book 1. Epistle med. 28. and Vierus, Book 3. Chapter 8.
Concerning the legerdemain of Devils.

Hesden in a field called Leodren, for Religion's sake, went to Jerusalem,
stayed after his companions at Jerusalem that he might celebrate the holy time
of Easter there, which his other companions omitted; and being afraid
afterward, lest by that delay he had lost the opportunity of conveying himself
to Europe, he made haste toward the Sea at Joppa, and therefore was weary in
his journey, and meeting with a Knight, who showed himself so compassionate,
that he took him up behind him, and that very day, to the great admiration of
all his, was carried into his own Town Hesden; where it being declared how it
happened, the Inhabitants thought him mad, he went to the Temple of St. James
in Spain, and returned again before his companions were come back from
Jerusalem; when that was affirmed by them, that he stayed behind them at
Jerusalem, then what he had told them concerning the celerity of his return was
believed. Fulgosus, Book 1. chap. 6.

BOccatius of a Noble Lombard, who had entered himself a Soldier for Jerusalem,
to gain the Holy Land, and departing, left to his wife part of his ring, which
had his coat of Arms engraven upon it, with this condition, that if he returned
not within three years, with this earnest and symbol, she might marry another
Husband, he being taken Prisoner in Judaea, and carried into Egypt to the
Sultan (whom his Father had entertained a good while traveling into Europe,
though unknown) for the Hospitalities sake of his Father, his own Wisdom and
dignity, he presently so pleased the Sultan, who by daily familiarity
approveing his behavior, he valued him more then all he had. The three years
being finished he fell into great sorrow, the cause whereof the Sultan having
diligently searched out, calls a Magitian who took that care that he caused him
being fast a sleep in a precious bed, and loaded with a great burden of Gold,
and precious stones to be carried in the last night of the three years into the
chief Temple in Joapia, a City in Lombardy. The Tutor affrighted with the
sight, flies, and with other things of the Vision, relates in Egypt which he
saw meeting him, making have to the house of his Wife who was to take home
another Husband the next evening.

JOhan. Baptist. Port. Neopotalitan, in his Book 2. of Natural Magic, thus
writes, There falls into my hands, a certain woman somewhat old, who of her
own accord, undertook to inform me, within a certain time, what those things
are which suck the blood of Infants in their Cradles, in the form of a night
Owl, which men call a Scritch Owl; she commands all that were come along with
me witnesses, to go out of doors, and casting off her clothes, rubbed her self
very much with a certain Ointment; we perceive through the chinks of the door,
that by virtue of the soperiferous Oil, she fell into a deep sleep, we out of
doors discover great beatings, and pinings, but so great was the force of her
deadly sleep, that that took her sense from her, when the strength of her
Physic began to decrease and grow weak, we return from without to the place,
and she being called from her sleep, began to tell many raving dotages, that
she had passed Seas, and Mountains, giving us many false informations. We show
her black and blew sores caused by the beatings which we heard, but she most
stiffly denies.

Apollonius Tyaneus to have received of Jarcka, the Prince of the Indian
Philosophers, a gift, as it were, of Divine power, that he was partaker of very
great secrets every other day, Alex. from Alex. book 2. chap. 19.

AUgustine concerning the City of God, book 18. chap. 18. says, When we were
in Italy, we heard of certain women keeping Victualling-houses, and using evil
arts, who by cheese given to whom they pleased, turned them presently into
beasts, to carry necessary burdens; which having performed, and returning to
their former state, could perfectly remember all which in the mean time
happened to them. Apuleius also himself, in his book which he inscribed by the
title of The golden Ass, reports, That it happened to himself, having taken
poison, his humane soul remaining, that he was transformed into an Ass, etc.
but it is manifest, that these are legerdemaines, and delusions of the Devil,
deceiving the Soul and senses of men by vain conceit.

VIncentius reports in his Speculations, he tells us in his book 3. chap. 109.
and William of Malmsbury, Monk, in his History, in the time of Peter Damianus,
That there were two old women Inneholders, that is, such as gave entertainment
to travelers for their money, (for an Inn is properly called a public place
of entertainment for money) which old women living together in the same house,
and exercising the same art of Witchcraft, when a stranger came alone, they
transformed him into an horse, a swine, or an Ass, and sold him for a certain
price to Merchants. A certain day a young man appearing, by his gesture a
Stage Player, being entertained of them, and eating meat with them, was by them
transformed into an Ass: they gained much by him, who showed many wonderful
tricks to passengers; for at the command of the old women, or any sign they
made, he turned, or moved which way they pleased; for his understanding
perished not, though his speech ceased, whereby the old women got much money;
which being perceived by a neighbor, he for great sum of money bought the
Ass; but the women conditioned he should so keep him, that he should not go
into the water. His keeper for a long time kept him from the water, but at last
was so incautelous, that he brought him to a pool in the neighborhood, where
he a long time wallowing and tumbling, he was restored to his own proper shape;
and when his keeper raised him up to see whether it were his Ass or no, he
told him who he was; the servant told this to his Master, his Master tells
the same to Pope Leo; the old women being converted, confess it. The Pope
doubted hereof; but a most learned man, Petrus Damianus manifested to him, that
it might be true, by the example of Simon Magus, who had imprinted upon
Faustinius his own image or likeness.

MIchael Verdunus, and Peter Burgottus, Shepherds, having contracted with the
Devil, could when they pleased, by the use of a certain ointment, transform
themselves into Wolves, and killing men, and other creatures, they ran away
amongst other Wolves, as people imagined. They were burnt alive in the Diocese
of Bisnutina, in the year of Christ, 1521. Vierus, book 5. chapter 10. concerning
the legerdemains of Devils.

IN the year 1348, on the eighth Calends of February, In Norway a most great
Earthquake did happen, as it is recorded at Pannonia, Illiricum, Dalmatia,
Carnis, and Histria, which lasted withou- any intermission for the space of
forty days; the Earth was variously shaken, wonderful works were showed,
Moravia and Bavaria felt the loss of twenty six Towns and Castles thereby
thrown down, as it is related in the acts of that year; Men and Beasts
perished, Walls, Temples, Buildings were overturned, whole Cities overthrown;
moreover mountains burst asunder, squeezed that ruinous destruction and loss
of men: for two Mountains (as it were) ran to the devoured Cities, and being
drawn violently to the Town of Elisa, killed all living Creatures that were
therein; the gaping of the Earth, that thereupon ensued, partly remained as the
Earthquake left it; but some part of it growing wider, swallowed up all before
it, the soil being so fallen into it, that there was no possible passage. Fifty
men, and more rusticks, many kindreds, with Cattle, were overwhelmed, and
bodies were reduced into Statues of salt. Conradus of Meydenburg, an excellent
Philosopher and Mathematician, speaking of this tempestuous Earthquake, says,
That these Statues were seen by him and the Austrian Chancellor at Charmum.
Aventinus in his Annal of the Bozori, book 7.

OSgillus, King of the Swedes and Goths, an exact observer of Justice and
Equity, lost the love of many of his Nobles that disliked such severity, who
being enraged at him, procured a Bull charmed with magical incantations, and
placed him in a highway, wherein the King passing was set upon, and by his
horns was killed, and so lost his Scepter. John Mag. in his book 8. chap. 13.

PHilip Melancthon reports, that he was told by Christopher Gross and Sigismund
Galenius, that a certain Virgin of Bononia, that was conversant amongst men two
years after her death, and who was at a Banquet whereunto she was invited, not
tasting any meat, and sitting amongst other Virgins, by chance a Magitian
present knowing the fraud of the Devil, says to them that were present; This
pale Maid has been dead, and coming straight to her, takes from under her
right shoulder, an enchantment, whereupon she appeared an ugly dead corpse. This
enchantment had been performed by another Magitian, and thereby the Devil had
carried about this corpse all this while.

Sffordia, with the raging love of a Virgin, became almost mad by the violence
of his passion; he being intimately acquainted with one skillful in the Magic
Art, was to^d by him, that he would by his skill so work, that the Maid with
whom he was so much in love, should come to him, so that he would abstain from
the embracing of her; the young man promises continence; presently the young
Maid being most beautiful, enters his bedchamber, by words and gestures
declaring much love; which he seeing, upon his first beholding her, he was so
wrapped out of himself, and unable to command his affectionate passion, embraces
her very courteously; whereupon the Virgin presently falls down dead, which did
infinitely torment both him and the Magitian, who by his enchantments so worked
at length, that the Devil entered her body, and by his motion of the Devil, the
Maid returned home; she was intent to her accustomed labors, but wholly pale
and silent. After three days her Parents got Divines to her, who when they had
seriously conversed with her, the Devil went out of her, and she falling down,
appeared a mere ugly base carcass; blood is the cause of a good color, and
lively spirits; these the Devil cannot create: God only our Creator can. Out
of the Colloquies of Luther.

Italian, by name Andreas, a jugler of Satan, coming up and down amongst the
Sepulchers, and leading a red blind dog, by which he did many prodigious
things; sometimes in the middle of the Market, Andreas (a great company
standing about him) would cause them to throw down upon the ground gold,
silver, and Iron rings, behind this dog, which after he had mixed together, the
Dog at his command would deliver every one of them as they were taken asunder
to his proper owner; in like manner diverse sorts of coin and moneys being
confusedly heaped together, he would at his Masters command in order discern,
and deliver to the right owners; and if he were asked, who were fornicators,
adulterers, or men of great authority and credit, he would most certainly
declare; and if any such required the knowledge of any thing from him, he would
suddenly satisfy them: wherefore some did not doubt to affirm, that he was
possessed with a Pythonical or Satanick spirit. Cron. Head. part. 2.

Valens was Emperor of the Romans, Libanus, a Rhetorician, and Jamblicus, the
Master of Proclus, are reported by the divination of a dunghill cock, to have
found out who should be Emperor after Valens; and moreover, after this manner
it was found out; Twenty four letters are written in dust, and a grain of Wheat
and Barley is put to every letter; then the Cock, certain verses having been
recited, is let loose, and they conceived out of what letters he took the
corns, the same being joined together, would declare the thing that was
inquired after; which when they had done, the Cock took the corns out of the
letters TH E O D. They read the letters, but yet esteemed the signification
doubtful; for it was conceived, that either Theodosius, or Theodorus, or
Theodotus, were designed thereby. It being known, according to my relation,
Valens suspected many that had those names, being also sought out by the
diviners themselves.

JOhn Faustus, a filthy beast, and a sink of many devils, carried about with
him an evil spirit in the shape of a dog; At Wittenburg, when the Edict of the
Prince to apprehend him was promulgated, he fled away; so coming to Norimburg,
and being set down to dinner, he began to be very much troubled, and suddenly
paying what was due to the Host, went his way; he was scarce gone out of the
doors, but the Sergeants inquire concerning him: at length, the fates
compelling him, being brought to Wittenburg, he sat down, being very
melancholy, his Host desired him to tell the cause of his sorrow; his answer
was, I pray you be not terrified this night, though you hear a huge noise, and
the very shaking of the whole house; in the morning they found him dead in his
chamber, his neck being turned topsie-turvy. No wonder, that the Devil is wont
to give such rewards to his servants.

Frederick of the Austrian Family, challenging to himself the Title of
Emperor, against Lewis of Bavaria, Emperor, waged a cruel War, in which
Frederick being taken, was for three whole years detained prisoner in a Castle
near the famous Town Naburg, situated by the River Nabus. In the mean time, a
certain Magitian coming to Duke Leopold, the brother of Frederick, promised,
that he would free him out of prison, and take such care, that within the space
of one hour, he should be safely conveyed into Austria; Leopold promised great
rewards to the Magitian, when he should effect his promise. When night was
come, both of them went into a Circle designed, and prepared by Magical
incantations, the Magitian by his charms, raised a spirit, which appeared in
the likeness of a Man, receives the Mandate to bring Frederick home, if he did
not refuse to follow him: Therefore the spirit immediately in the night, comes
to the Captive Prince, saying to him, Thy Brother Leopold has sent me hither
to take thee out of Prison; Wherefore arise, and mount this Horse, and I will
safely conduct thee to thy Brother. To whom Duke Frederick answered, Who art
thou? Ask not who I am, says the spirit, but without further delay mount this
horse, if thou desire to be delivered out of Prison, then great fear and
trembling seized, not only upon Frederick, but also upon all that were with
him; but they signing themselves with the sign of the Cross, the spirit
vanished away, and returned alone to the Magitian. In the Chronicle of Hedion,
book 4.

John, an Almain, a Priest at Halberstadium, was so skillfull in the Magic
Art, that upon Christmas Eve in the morning, he said Mass thrice. First at
Halberstadium. Secondly, at Moguntia. Thirdly, at Colonia, by the swiftness of
his Horse which he rode upon, which with incredible speed, carried him from one
of these Towns to the other. Many very prodigious things are written, which
this Priest did by his Magical Art.

IN the year of our Lord, 1272. came to Cruce natum, a Town in Lower Germany, a
Magitian full of tricks and Legerdemains who cut off his servant's head
publicly in the Market place, the people being spectators, and within half an
hour, joined that to his body which lay as it had been dead, upon the ground;
the servant immediately recovering life, and becoming as sprightful as ever he
was. He was seen carried up and down in the Air, and making a great noise, he
seemed to be a-hunting to those that beheld him often times. He seemed also
sometimes (to them that stood gazing at him) to be an armed man that did
greedily devour a Cart or Wagon of Wine or Wood and the Horses too.

Hedion. book 5.

Ahena, a certain Magitian cured many madmen by herbs which the Devil had
showed him. Moreover he had commerce with him, and took daily advice of him for
curing of diseases: it happened that there was great dissentions twixt him and
a neighbor of his, a Carpenter; in their railings and brawlings, the Carpenter
did exasperate and vex the mind of the Magitian with some bitter and
reproachful speeches. After some Months were expired, the Carpenter fell into
a dangerous disease, and as one having forgot all former discontent between him
and the Magitian, seeks to him to cure him of his most miserably afflicting
sickness: The Magitian counterfeiting himself appeased and much his friend,
whilst he promised his utmost endeavors to cure him, in the mean time he
resolves, having this opportunity, to revenge the wrongs he conceived, and
gives him a potion composed of venomous herbs, which as soon as the Carpenter
had taken, his body was cruciated and tormented with such extreme pain, that he
suddenly gave up the Ghost. The wife therefore of the Carpenter with his
kindred, accuse the Magitian of manslaughter, for which cause he is convented
before the Senate at Ahena, and being examined by torments, he confessed this
murder, and other impious and most wicked deeds, and that he had learned his
Magic of a certain old Woman in the neighborhood, which lived at the Wood
Hercynia for which most horrible and flagitious arts, they caused him to be
tied to a stake and burnt to death. Manlius, in his Collections.

MArtin Luther using many words concerning Witches, tells that his Mother was
many ways vexed by an inchantresse, a neighbor, insomuch that she was wont for
fear to show her much kindness, and by entreaties and courtesies, used to
procure her good will: for this Witch did so torment her Infants by
enchantments, that with continual crying, they expired their lives. And when a
certain Preacher in his Sermon declaiming against such kind of Witches, and
alluding to her impiety, he was so infested and infected with enchantments,
that he had no way to escape destruction; for by these Witchcrafts, the ground
so shrinked from his feet as he went, that he could not stay himself, but was
thereby forced into the River, being unable to stay himself till he was cast
therein. And when it was enquired of Luther whether it were possible that such
things should happen to the Godly, he answered. Yes certainly, for our mind or
Soul is subject to a lie, yea our body is obnoxious to death and afflictions;
and I am persuaded that my sicknesses, (God permitting) infest me by
enchantments: but God, though he suffer his Elect to fall into such calamities,
yet he delivers them from the same.

Luther, the power of Satan greatly appears in these Witches; for two ways
does God show his power, by suffering the Devil to assail men by Witches;
first, to punish the sins of the wicked: secondly, to try the pious and
faithful, and for their glorious approbation which they will obtain by their
perseverance in faith: for without the permission of Almighty God, the Devil
can hurt no man; for the Lord says, He that touches you, touches the apple
of mine eye: And Christ, Without the Will of my Father, a hair cannot fall from
your head.

ALexander the sixth, when he was Cardinal, spent his time both day and night,
in contriving how he might obtain the Popedom; and that he might more easily
accommodate his desire, he set his study upon the Satanical Art of Magic, and
so far proceeded therein, that he promised the Devil diligently to observe him,
if he would satisfy him in those things he inquired: He desired that the Devil
should take the shape of a Pronotarie; Satan therefore according to his wish,
appeared to him in the form of a Pronotarie at the day appointed, and promised
to tell him whatever he demanded; He desires to know whether he should obtain
the Pontificial dignity? which when Satan affirmed, he moreover demanded, how
long he should continue in that dignity? To which question the Devil so
answered, That Alexander understood him to promise the Popedom to him eighteen
years, but he reigned only eleven years and eight days; the eleven years
being expired, he falling into sickness, commands one of his servants to go
into the upper Conclave, and bids him bring him the book that lay upon the
Table, in which Magical Arts and incantations were taught; the servant
ascending, and opening the doors, he finds Satan sitting in the C^air of the
Pope, clad with the Papal ornaments: affrighted, with which Vision he returns
to the Pope, and tells him what he had seen: The Pope hearing this, compells
him to go again, to see whether the Devil did continue there? the servant
coming thither again, found the Devil sitting in the same habit, who demanded
what he would have of him? The servant answered, That he came thither for the
Pope's book. To which the Devil replied, What do thou call the Pope? I am
the Pope. When the Pope being sick, by his Minister, heard these things, he was
greatly afraid, and easily understanding how the case stood with him, by his
own command he was carried into the inner Conclave, whither as soon as he was
come, the Devil taking the habit of a Post-messenger, comes and knocks
hastily at the door, and being let in, comes to the Pope lying in his bed, and
tells him, that the time was now expired, and therefore he must speedily depart
this life: Whereupon there arose contention, whereby those who were present,
understood the strife betwixt them, to be concerning the number of the years;
but Satan evidently demonstrating to him the reason, that the number of the
years were expired, went away; and in a very short time after, the Pope gave up
the ghost.

GRegorius Martinus told Martin Luther, 1538, a story much to be bewailed, of a
certain Virgin, that instead of tears, wept drops of blood; being brought to
that miserable condition, by the malice of an Inchantress, and that the Witch
was present, though she took no notice of it when she poured out such tears; He
said, that it was not convenient that there should have been any delay or
putting off the punishment hereof; nor that Lawyers or Judges needed to hear
any further testimony, evidence, or demonstration. Furthermore, he added as
follows; Within these few days, (says he) there was brought to me a Case
concerning Wives; a Wife did endeavor to kill her Husband by poison, and when
the Woman was examined by tortures concerning this matter, no confession of the
truth could possibly be extorted from her; for Witches remain mute,
notwithstanding torments, which they nothing value, the Devil does so
dexterously stop their mouths; therefore when what they have done by
witchcraft, convinces the Witches according to this example, there ought such
course to be taken with them, that the example may be a terror to others.

Norburg, (with two women that were his accomplices) he and they, by diabolical
tricks which they used, when they were not observed, stole men's goods, of which
being at last detected, they were apprehended and cast into prison together;
and a rich Woman, who was till that time reputed a Matron of good conversation,
was confessed by the women, to be guilty of the same wickedness of stealing
and fornication, which by their legerdemaines they exercised; and therefore she
was likewise cast into prison; but the chief Magitian himself, though put to
great torments, would confess nothing; and when it was conjectured, his art,
and spirit or familiar, was in the hair of his head, they cut away his hair.
Whereupon he confessed all his notorious wickednesses, and after a few days,
first the two women, and immediately after the Magitian, were deservedly hanged.

Malleus Veneficarum. And although the power of Satan be great, and that God
suffers him sometimes to ex^rcise his mischievous cruelty against some men
for their sins and unbelief; yet sometimes also it pleases Almighty God, by
the envy of the Devil, to try and prove his own dear Children; Nevertheless, we
are assured, that their very hairs are numbered, and that not so much as one of
them can fall to the ground contrary to his will: therefore we may easily arm
our selves against the power and snares of the Devil, if we diligently beware
and take heed of sin, and persevere firm and constant in faith and prayer. But
because the Devil has to this day showed his greatest power amongst Papists,
therefore I will declare some examples out of the forenamed book, by which it
most manifestly appears how great the power of Satan is, and what inveterate
envy and malice he has toward mankind; He who desires to see variety of
discourse to this purpose, let him peruse the said Author.

Austin in his third book, and second chapter, de Civitate Dei.

Ratisbone one of two Witches which were burnt to ashes, being one that waited
upon a Bath, confessed, that she was compelled by the Devil, to use several
means to seduce a chaste young Virgin, the daughter of a certain honest and
very rich man, to lie with the Devil; to which end the devil thought it his
best course to invite the Virgin to his Chamber, upon an Holy Day, where he
might talk to her in the shape of a young Gallant; which having often assayed,
the Maid always signing her self with the sign of the Cross, his design was
frustrate.

Argentinum staying alone at her fathers house, upon a Sunday there came to her
a certain old woman of the same Town, who after many scurrilous words which she
used, she invites her to go along with her to a place where she should see all
the handsomest gallants of the Town; the young maid overcome by the obscene
enticing words of the old woman went along with her to her house, they were no
sooner come to the house, but the old woman says, we will go up to the chamber
where the young gallants whereof I spoke of are, but take heed you sign not
your self with the sign of the Cross. The young maid hearing what the old
woman said to her, as she followed her up the stairs, was struck with sudden
fear, and therefore she signing her self with the sign of the Cross, by
prayers commends her self to Almighty God. Whereupon the Devils vanished;
which the old woman perceiving, with a grim and devilish countenance, raging,
and cursing the young maid, thrust her out of doors. Ibid.

IT was likewise confessed by this woman that waited at the Bath, who was
formerly spoken of, that she was likewise deceived by an old woman, who brought
her to the Devil in a way, to whom she prostituted her self, and that he in
every respect, performed the office of a lustful man, and was always prepared
for that; and that for eighteen years denying the faith, she served the Devil
in diabolical letchery.

Brixiensian Diocese, a young man being inamoured with a certain young maid,
much desired to have her to wife, but I know not upon what occasion altering
his affection, married another, at the solemnization of the marriage, not
having altogether forgot his old love, amongst others, invited his former
paramour, who refused not the invitation, and when the honest Matrons and
Virgins offered their gifts, this impudent beast comes forth, and casting her
hands toward the bride; says to her, From this day forward thou shall not
enjoy one day of health. Which words, when they understood the levity of the
impudent curtesan, they took no great notice of; but the Nuptials being ended,
by the force of Enchantments, she lost the strength of all her members, and for
ten years most miserably afflicted, she kept her bed, and then ended a most
pitiful life.

Westraviensian territories, bordering upon the confines of the Diocese of
Argentinum, having married a Lady of an illustrious family, being by
enchantments deprived of natural strength, for begetting issue, could by no
means understand the reason thereof. It happened that after he had been three
years married, he going to the City of Menses, to expedite some business which
he had, that he fell into the company of a certain woman, who for some years
before his marriage, had been his Concubine, whom he distasted not for what had
formerly passed betwixt them, nor did he suspect her concerning the Witchcrafts
with which he had been afflicted, but kindly talks to her of their old love,
which he was pleased to acknowledge, and inquires of her, her condition, and
whether she were in good health; She perceiving the pity and goodness of the
Earl, inquires of him, whether he were in good health, he answered, That he was
well, and that all things succeeded happily and prosperously with him. She
amazed for a little while was silent; which when the Earl perceived, he by
gentle speeches, invited her to discourse; whereupon she inquires his Wives
condition, he answered that she was well: She again asks whether he had any
Children by her. The Earl answered, I have had three Sons by her, she bare me
one every year. Then as one stupefied, she was silent. Says the Earl, then
pray thee my dear, why do thou so accurately inquire of the condition of me
and mine, I do not doubt but thou rejoycest at my felicity: then, said she, I
am heartily glad, but cursed be that old woman, who firmly swore that by her
witchcrafts, she would make you unable to perform the rites of Marriage with
your espoused Lady, the knowledge whereof the Well that stands in the middle of
your Court will give you; in which an earthen pot is cast, being filled with
enchantments, of which the old woman did affirm that so long as it should lie
there, your power of rendering Nuptial rites should utterly be wanting, but I
understand now, and rejoice at it, that what she spoke was vain and frivolous.
The Earl hearing these things, wisely dissembling the business, makes haste
home and causes the Well to be drawn or emptied of all the water that was in
it, finds the Earthen pot, which being burnt, he recovered his former
strength and vigor. ibid. Concerning the manner how Witches use to take away
the Members of men, read in the Book called Malleus Venificarum, cap. 7. p. 2.
It is to be thought impossible that such members should be so occultly pulled
or taken from the bodies, but by the legerdemains of the Devil.

B^esiacus in the Basiliensian Diocese, a young Wench afterward by means of
her art, made one of the Society of Witches, she was brought by her Aunt (who
was afterward burnt at Argentina) to an upper Chamber of the house, where
there were together five gallant young men clothed in green; then the old woman
says to the Maid, Choose which of these young men thou please to be thy
husband; which when the young maid refused, she did most grievously beat and
hurt her.

Basiliensian Diocese, a Priest of the Town of Oberweiler was of opinion, That
there were no Witches in the World; and passing hastily over a bridge, he met
a certain old woman in as great haste as himself; to whom he would not give the
way, but threw her off the bridge into the mire; whereat the old woman much
enraged, gave him bitter and contumelious language, saying; -- Thou shall not
escape revenge for this; which words he regarding not, nor well understanding,
went home, but in the night he was become so weak and feeble below his girdling
place or middle, that he could not possibly rise out of his bed; so that he was
fain to be carried by two, as often as he went to the Church, or to visit the
sick; after this affliction had continued for the space of three years, this
old woman (whom he had not without cause suspected) falls sick, therefore she
was advised to go to the Priest to confess her sins; and although at first she
refused, yet at length persuaded thereunto by her Mother, she was by two
fellows carried to his house, and there confessed her sins to him, but made no
mention of her witchcraft; her confession finished, she says, Know thou by
whom thou wast bewitched into this weakness? The Priest answered mildly, I
know not; quoth she, Thou have suspected me, and that not without cause, I
brought upon thee the evil that thou art afflicted with for that thou did
cast me off the bridge into the mire, but my departure out of this World is now
at hand; I will therefore cause that within a few days after my death, thou
shall recover thy health; which happened accordingly, for according to the time
for which she had contracted with the Devil, she died. And within thirty days
after, the Priest recovered his former health and strength.

Lausanensian Diocese, a certain Witch caused the Family of a neighbor to be
plagued with a grievous barrenness, not only all the beasts and cattle, and
other domestic living creatures were unfruitful, but the wife of the family,
by the Witchcrafts of this fellow, being made unfruitful also, had seven
untimely births: when at last the Witch was taken and examined, he confessed
that in a hole dug under the threshold of his door, there lay hid a serpent,
which as soon as removed, the misery of barrenness would cease, which as soon
as ever it was effected, fruitfullnesse was restored to the whole family. ibid.
cap. 6.

Reichshoffen, being with child, got to her house, some weeks before the time
she expected deliverance, a Midwife. There was in the said Town a famous
Witch, of whose company and discourse, the Midwife advised the Gentlewoman who
was great with child, to take special heed; but after some days, she for
recreation sake, went to the Castle, and met with certain women come together
to a feast, where this Witch was also, who touched or stroaked the belly of the
Lady with both her hands, as it had been in the way of salutation. Whereupon,
she presently perceived her young one to move in her Womb with great pain and
grief, whereat wonderfully affrighted, she returns home, and tells the Midwife
what had befallen her, who with a sad countenance, cries out, We have lost the
child; which came to pass accordingly, for she had an untimely birth, and that
in such manner that at one time she was delivered of the head of the child, at
another of the feet, at another of the hands, and so of the rest. Ibidem.

Argentinensian Diocese, one whose name for modesty sake I conceal, had at his
house one of his Tenants cutting wood, whom a Cat of a vast magnitude at
unawares set upon, which when he had driven from him by blows, another more
fierce joyneth to the former, against whom, whilst he more sharply contends, a
third comes, so that at first he was put to a strait, being for^'^ to use the
utmost of his strength against three such maine and cruel Cats, neither could
he drive them away, and free himself from them without the receiving of many
hurts and wounds; which Combat being finished, the man falls to his work,
presently two Sergeants, apprehend him and carry him before the Judge, who
being exceedingly moved with rage and fury, commanded them to cast him into an
ugly prison, his groaning and often sighings, nothing availing him for clearing
or making manifest his innocence; and the Judges anger did daily increase
exclaiming against the wicked fellow (as he called him) who would not
acknowledge his villainous doings; after three days were passed, upon the often
importunities of others, the Judge sends for him to the Senate to receive his
judgment, when he was come to the Senate, the enraged Judge could not with
patience look upon him; he (poor man) falls down upon his knees, and humbly
begged that he would hear him speak for himself, the Judge sadly laid to his
charge that he had grievously wounded the three chief Matrons of the Town, and
yet was so impudent that he denied the wickedness which he had so villanously
perpetrated within a few days past; which the poor wretch hearing, answered,
that he had never hurt any Woman in all his days: the Judge on the other side
thundered out, that it was notoriously known, that he so hurt these
Gentlewomen, that they lay in their beds with all their members and parts of
their bodies so out of joint, that they were not able by their own proper
strengths, so much as to turn themselves from one side to the other; he again
denies that he ever hurt these gentlewomen; But, says he, I well remember,
that upon that day whereon I was apprehended, and, for that cause, was cast
into prison, I being set upon by beasts, used all the vigor and strength I had
to quit my self of them and drive them away, which words amazed all that were
present. They enquire by what beasts he was set upon, then he declares all that
was done very orderly. The truth being thus discovered, the Judges seek what
they can to hush up the business, and procure what silence they could for the
preservation of the honor of the Matrons.

Basiliensian Diocese, in the Confines of Lotharingia and Alsatia, a Gentleman
of great fame did inveigh against an old woman with somewhat bitter language;
who thereby enraged, determined to take most speedy revenge of him, as she
said; which threats he little valued, yet the very night after there arose a
blister in his neck, which when he scratched, it overspread his whole face and
neck, and an horrible form of Leprosy made ugly his whole body: being in this
condition, and suspecting the Witch guilty of Enchantments, he sends for his
friends, with whom he might best advise and take counsel, and declares the
whole business, especially the threats of the old woman. What need is there of
many words? the woman is taken, and being exercised with torments, and
examined, confessed the fact; and the Judge inquiring diligently into the
manner and cause; says she, I boiling with revenge for the contumelious words
which he spoke against me, returning home, met there with a malign spirit, to
whom inquiring of me the cause of my grief, I told the whole business, and
sought to him for revenge; whereupon the Devil asked me, What evil I desired
to be inflicted upon him? I answered, I desire that his face may be so blown
up, or swelled with a continual tumor, which may make him most ugly to behold:
Says the Devil, going from me, I have already struck him with a more loathsome
plague then thou desire; which when she had confessed, she was deservedly
burnr to ashes. Serun. Part. cap. 11.

Constantiensian Diocese, betwixt the Towns of Brisacum and Friburgum, a
leprous woman told to many auditors, that she falling out with another woman,
and many railing words passing betwixt them; as soon as she came home, a sudden
wind blowed upon her which came from the house wherein the woman dwelled
(opposite to her) with whom she had contention, with which she conceived she
was so struck, that she was thereby infected with a Leprosy, whereof she could
never be cured.



Oenipontus, returning home from a Garden, she had adjoining close to a
woman-neighbour, and having perceived that this neighbor of hers came often into
it, but suspecting her a Witch, durst not so much as reprehend her for it; yet
she of her own accord, without any provocation of the honest woman, meeting
with her, with brazen-faced impudence flying into the very face of her, says,
Thou suspectest that I often pass through thy Garden. To whom the other woman,
fearing to brawl or chide with the Witch, answers pleasantly only in these
words; Your paths in the grass declare what trespass you have done me. Then
the VVitch, much troubled that she could procure no occasion to brawl with her,
went away murmuring; within a few days after, the other woman was afflicted
with most immane griefs of her belly, and most acute gripings in both her
sides; insomuch, that she was not only afflicted with continual pains, but did
also disquiet all her neighbors, with continual pitiful cryings out and
lamentation; and when multitudes who came to visit her, that (if possible) they
might relieve and comfort her, amongst the rest, a Potter comes, to whom the
witchcrafts of this woman were well known, and perceiving the cause of her
sickness to be no other then Enchantments, he commanded the Husband of the
afflicted woman to search, whether he could find under the threshold of his
door any enchantments; where amongst many other witchcrafts, was also found a
waxen Image, about the length of an hand, which being bored through, had two
pins fastened on both sides, the one right over against the other; which
witchcrafts being removed, and cast into the fire, she was freed from those
most grievous gripings, cap. 12.

AT Zabermus in the Argentinensian Diocese, a Witch, being a midwife, came to a
certain honest and godly woman, offering her service near the time of her
delivery, who knowing her infamous by her witchcrafts, dismisseth her with
pleasing words, feigning, that her pains, when time should require, would be
very acceptable to her; but when the time came, neglecting her, and making use
of another Midwife which she sent for, she conceiving in her breast the
feminine flames of anger, eight days after the birth, in the night, with two
women comes into the Chamber of the woman that lay in, and makes haste to her
bed; whereupon the woman in childbed endeavoring aloud to call upon her
Husband, finds her tongue and all her members stupify'd. Then the VVitch
standing in the midst between two women, said, Behold, this scurvy creature
scorned I should be her Midwife; but I Will be revenged of her. The two women
that stood on each side of her, interceded for the woman, saying, They never
knew or heard any hurt by her. But she again thus broke out passionately,
Because she has vexed my Jublits, i will vex hers; but for your sakes her pain
shall be suspended for half a year; and then putting her hand upon the woman's
belly, her guts appeared to come out as it were, and the Witch rolled something
into them; afterward, the women being gone, the childbed woman being come a
little to her self, called her husband, and tells him the whole business. He
comforts his wife, and bids her be of good cheer, for these were but vain
terrors, and such as women in childbed were usually infested with. But she
answered, O she threatened I should endure this misery after half a year, but if
now they are gone, I find no more hurt by it, I will rest confident upon thy
opinion. She had also an Archdeacon to her son, to whom she revealed the
business. When the six months were over, she began indeed to be most
grievously tortured with pain in her belly, so that night nor day she could
take any rest, but continually groaned and shrieked out most miserably; Nor in
all these torments did she forget God, whom she still implored for his
assistance, and who heard and delivered her: For on a day when she went to
stool, all that filth came from her. Then she called her Husband and Son, and
said, Now I hope you are convinced it was no vain imagination that I told you
of; who ever saw me eat thorns, sticks, and bones? For there she showed them
Rose-briars a hand length, then sticks and bones, and other rubbish, whereby
she was so tormented. [ Ibid. cap. 3.]

thing, hid himself in the house, that so he might find out the mystery, and by
that means saw the horrid rites of both the sacriledg and oblation; He saw the
Infant, held up by no humane means, by the impulsion of the Devil ascend up the
chimney by the Pothooks, looking with an ugly Satanicall look; the Mother in
the mean time calling upon the Devil with her usual diabolical rites and
acclamations. Which when the man saw, (to his amazement) he was very earnest to
have the Child christened without delay; and taking with him some neighbors,
and his daughter who carried the child, for the next Village he is bound in all
haste, where the Parish Church stood; and having as he went along, told two of
his neighbors of the business from first to last, when they came to a bridge
they were to pass over, he drew his sword, and putting it to his daughters
breast, vowed she should there immediately dye, if she did not convey the child
over the River without humane power; for I will not have him go (says he) over
the bridge, but of himself let him be conveyed immediately to the other side.
And when the good woman wondered at this rigor in the man, and sought to
persuade him, he yet insisted upon his demands the more resolutely, until he
forced his daughter to call up the Devil, and make him convey the Infant over
the River without any visible means. The Child being baptized, he having
sufficient testimony against his daughter, when the time of purification was
over, accused wife and daughter, who being brought before a Magistrate, and
convicted of that most impious crime, were both deservedly burnt. [ Ibidem.]

Suevia, a Countryman walking over his ground to see his Corn in a dry season,
with a little girl, a daughter of his with him, wished that it would rain a
good shower. The Maid hearing her father say so, out of her childish simplicity
told him, She could easily procure that for him. The Father wondering at the
child's words, asked her, how could she do such a feat? O, (says she) I learnt
that of my Mother: and added, That she could easily cause it not only to rain,
but hail, and raise a great tempest, and that her mother learnt it of a Master
she converst with; and that whenever and whatsoever she required of him, was
presently performed; but that her Mother had strictly charged her to tell no
body. The father being terrified at these things, asked her if she had ever seen
this Master. The girl answered again, that she had seen many come in and go
out, who her Mother told her, were their Masters and Loving Lords. Her father
again demanded, if she could just then raise a shower or storm? She replied; I,
if she had but a little water: He therefore brought her to the River, where
calling upon this Master, she presently caused it to rain in her father's
fields alone, and not in his neighbors, as he had commanded her. The man
seeing that, bid her also make it hail, but so, as but in one field which he
showed her; this she presently effected. And then being fully resolved his wife
was a Wi^ch, he brought her before a Magistrate, there convicted her of the
crime, and burnt her; his daughter being put to holy exercises, and by sacred
means, was delivered from the power and wiles of the devil. Ibid.

Fach, a Judge commanded his Sergeants to apprehend a Witch, and bring him to
execution: but they were so annoyed with loathsome stincks, and struck with
such a terror in the business, that they utterly despaired of effecting it.
The Judge (his name was Peter) insisting more earnestly upon the performance of
his command, again exhorts them, that they would take courage and lay violent
hands upon the Witch, for now the appointed time was come, wherein the detected
crimes of this impious person must be punished; by which encouragements, being
animated to repel the fascinations of the devil, the VVitch was taken, and
brought to execution.



Job will evidence the same thing, what is not only the power, but how extreme
the malice of that evil Spirit.

you can possibly gather: and if thou will see him, follow me into the bottom
of the Cellar, and I will show thee who consumes thy estate. Whither when they
were both come, the Monk by his adjurations, made the Devil that lay hid
there, show himself to his brother. And presently a beast of an immense
bigness, and so fat that, without much ado, he could not move himself,
appeard, which when the Monk saw, he said, O what a gainful Inn do thou
keep, and turning to his brother, said, Behold that beast thou have pampered by
thy fraud, for whatsoever thou fraudulently gottest from any man, this ugly
beast devoured. Therefore hearken to me; Be faithful and upright in thy
dealing toward all men, use an equal measure, and defraud no body; and after
four years I will come again, and then divide my Fathers estate with you. His
Brother follows the Monks counsel, and as much as he went backwards in the
world before, he now came on, and in a short time had such experience of divine
goodness, that he was Master of a great estate. At four years end, came his
brother the Monk, to see what condition his brother was yet in, who received
him with great alacrity, and told him he had followed his advice, desiring to
see the beast now again, in which the Monk gratified his brother, and commanded
the beast that lay hid in the Cellar to appear, which when he came was so lean,
his bones would scarce hang together. Then says the Monk to his brother, now
it is time for this guest to get hence and seek another Host. But if thou shall
hereafter order thy affairs with the like Justice, thou shall always learn
experience of the great blessing of our great and good God.

Bodinus, in Vallis (which is a name of the Suburbs of Laodunum) a certain
Witch by her enchantments, freed a woman from her disease, who was most
grievously afflicted, and thus she effected it. Falling down upon her knees,
and looking toward the ground, she called upon the Devil very often, and with
a loud voice, that he would cure the Woman; and pronouncing certain strange
words, gave her a morsel of bread to eat, and by this means the woman
recovered. Which kind of cure is plainly such, as if the sick woman had prayed
to the Devil for health, than which it were better to endure the most painful
death. Daemonomaniae, lib. 1. cap. 6.

Lutetia, in a Noblemans house there, I saw a young man by often reciting
certain French words in the presence of many honest people (which I think not
good to mention at this time) make a seive dance, and move at his pleasure, And
that he had a Familiar to help him is manifest, for that when he was gone, and
another repeated the very same words, he could effect nothing of that nature by
it. Idem. Lib. 2. cap. 1.

NO Countryman (says the same Bodinus) is ignorant, that if two Verses out of
the Psalms be recited while the Milk is a c^urning, there will no butter be
produced by any Art. I was at Chillis of the Valesians, when a boy standing at
the maids heels, hindered the butter to come or gather: but she threatening
curses from God upon him, if he did not cease and remove his Verses, made him
speak somewhat preposterously, and backwards as 'twere, and then the Butter
came after she had spent almost a whole day about it. If you put but a little
Sugar into the milk, it will make no butter; for this proceeds from an
antipathy in nature, and by the same reason, if but a little Cyprian-brasse be
cast into a Furnace of Iron it will never melt, but turn to ashes, and
therefore the Forge-men when they kindle the fire, see that there is none in
the Furnace, nor any one near the Chimney.

Italian born, used at Lutetia in the MDLXII. year of Christ, muttering out
with all some kind of words, and by this conceit, gave answers aright to some
that consulted her: but most were deceived by it. Joachimus Camerensis tells us
that Hieronymus the Stage Player, whose son became Chancellor of Mediolanum,
had a ring that spoke, or rather a Devil speaking in a Ring, which rightly
rewarded the Master of it at last, for it caused him to be excommunicated and
cursed. Bodinus, Daemonom. lib. 2. cap. 1.

Tolosa exercise (...), or rod-Magick, and with a low voice murmr out some (I
know not what) words, till the two ends of the rod met, and touched each other.
But when it profited nothing to the cure of the affected, he blamed their
incredulity, and cutting it into pieces, he caused it to be put about the necks
of those that had the quartane Ague, for their remedy. Ibidem.

Ligula, which boys practice with impunity, and with high impudence, some
bragging of it. Nor is this a new thing, for we read in Herodotus, that Amasis
King of Egypt was so bound in this nature, that he could not have to do with
his Wife Laodice, till with exorcismes and solemn prayers he was freed. Paulus
Aemilius also testifies in the life of Clotarus the second, that his Concubines
used this trick against Hermamberga. Some Epicurean Philosophers laugh at this
miracle, because these Artists in knotting the Ligula that are abroad, make
people wonder when they see that they can by no means cure the same. And
therefore the Canon says thus, If at any time by Witchcraft and sor^ery
through the hidden, but always just Judgment of God permitting, and the Devil
preparing them, thy copulation is hindered, repair to God by humble confession.
Out of which place we may note four or five Axioms, or undeniable positions.
First, That copulation may be hindered by Witchcraft, which all Divines
unanimously confirm, and Thomas himself upon the fourth book of Sentences, in
the 24th distinction, where he says; That a man may be restrained in that
particular, as to one woman, but not otherwise; and in his last chapter of
Frigid things. The second is, That it is done occultly, but by the permission
of God in just Judgment. The third, That it is performed absolutely by the
Devil. The fourth, That in this case God is to be repaired to in Fasting,
which last head is chiefly to be observed, least those that are troubled with
these things (as many do, and as the Devil desires and intends they should)
run to Diabolical means for remedy.

Rioleus, general Ambassador to the Blesenses told me, that a little boy was
seen tying this knot under his hat, whilst Matrimony betwixt two was
celebrated in the Church, and that the boy being seized on, escaped with the
knot. Whilst at Pictavium I acted as Vice-Procurator in the year 1567, there
was brought a case before me of this nature; which when I told to my Landlady,
a very virtuous woman, she (as if most skilled in that Art) in the presence of
Jacobus Bauvasius an Attorney in the cause, declared there were above fifty
ways of tying this knot, whether to tie a married man, or a woman only, that
the one despising the other's infirmity, might run after adultery, but that the
man for the most part was bound, but seldom and hardly the woman, and that they
might be bound for a day, a year, or ever, or for as long as the knot should
last, unless it were dissolved. That there was a knot, whereby one might be
brought to love another, and not to have reciprocal returns, but extreme
hatred; and that there was another way to make two love one the other most
affectionately; but if they came to lie together, that they should scratch with
their nails, and beat one the other most inhumanely. As I heard at Tholosa,
there were two thus illigated for three years space, and then reconciled, and
had a very fine child. And (which I most admire) the woman whilst she was
ligated, declared she had little tumors like warts rose upon her as signs of
children she should have had, but for this ligature. She said, there were knots
to be made to hinder procreation, and not hinder copulation, that there were
men could not be ligated, and some that might before marriage, and some after;
but those few, and the Urines of men might be stopped by this trick, whereof they
were not few that dyed. I found a poor boy almost dead with this thing; and the
man that did the feat, loosed again the knot, and so gave his urine vent. And
not many months after, this very Sorcerer dyed of a like ligature.

Picts, the chief Quaestor of Niortum, when a new-married wife accused a
Neighbor of hers for restraining her husband, in the year of the World, 1560,
he caused her to be cast into a very loathsome prison, threatening her she
should never come thence till the man were loosed; and after two days the
imprisoned woman gave leave to the married people to enjoy each others bed; and
when the Judge heard the man was freed, he freed the woman from prison.

Germany they often deprive men of, by making them run up into their bellies.
Sosprengerus tells of a man of Spira, who when he thought he had lost his
premises, sent for Physicians and Surgeons to search for them, who found no
scar or wound at all; therefore he repaired to the VVitch he had offended, and
appeased her, and so was cured. Also a Citizen of Ratisbone furnishes us with
another example, of one who violently laid hold upon a VVitch, and threatening
to strangle her, compelled her to loose him from that nodus. All these Bodinus
relates in chap. 1. of his second book.

INsulanus, Abbot and Lord of the Novallians, who now is sent Ambassador to
Constantinople by the King, and Polonus (who is also called Pruniskus)
Ambassador for France, told me, that one of the greatest Kings of the World
being very desirous of the knowledge of the number of his years, and the time of
his death, sent for Jacobius, a Sorcerer, who when he had ended Mass, and
consecrated the Host, commanded a firstborn son, or man-child of ten years
old, who was provided for the purpose, to be beheaded presently, and putting
the head upon the Host, pronounced certain words, and inscribed some characters
not necessary to be known by us; Then he asked the head, what he would have?
which answered only two words, I suffer violence. At this the King was enraged,
and cried, Take away the head; and presently in that fury dyed. This story is
very common in the Country, wherein it was acted, and very certainly reported,
although there were only five persons present at the thing. These things thus
writes Bodinus.

JOhannes Charterius, that wrote the History of Charles the VII. tells us how
one Guilhelm. Edelinus, a Doctor of Sorbon, was condemned for Sorcery upon
Christmas Eve, in the year, 1453, who confessed he had often in the nightime
been carried abroad to a great meeting of Magitians, where he always renounced
God, and adored the Devil in the shape of a Goat, kissing his posteriors.

Lochii, to the Burdegalensian Sands (which are distant no less than fifteen
days journey, or more); when the man saw himself in company with Magitians,
Witches, and Devils, (in a humane, but horrid shape) a thing very unusual to
him, and in a strange Country, he began to bless himself, and say, Good God,
where are we now? At which words the whole company vanished. Then he understood
that he was naked, and was forced so to wander up and down the fields till
morning, when he light upon some Countryman that set him in his way. And so
making the best shift he could, he returned to Lochium, where he accused his
Wife positively of all these things before the Magistrate, who commanded her to
be apprehended: But she mi^igating the business as much as she could,
confessed the most part of the business, and acknowledging her fault, returned
from her wickedness.

Lugdunum, rose in the night, and taking a gally-pot out of her closet,
anointed her self with it, muttering some words withal; a stallion that lay
with her that night, observing her, when he could not see her, rose to look for
her; and when he found nothing but the gally-pot, taken with novelties and
curiosity, he also, as he had seen her before, anointed himself with the oil
that was in it, when he immediately found himself to be amongst a great company
of Witches and Sorcerers in the fields about Lotharingia, whereat he was much
amazed. But in the first place calling upon God to assist him, the whole
company disappeared; and he, finding himself all naked, returned to Lugdunum,
accused the Witch, who confessing all the business, was burnt for it.

A Thing of the same nature befell a Nobleman of Maldunum, who by some words of
a Milner, together with the instigation of his own curiosity, was induced to go
amongst a company of Witches to see fashions forsooth; but when he was among
the thickest of them, an extreme horror seized of him, insomuch, that although
he did not invoke Divine aid, the devil said with a very loud voice, Who is
this that is so fearful? And when he sought to depart their company, the
Witches all vanished. And when he returned, he intended to discover the
Sorcerers, but they fled for their safety. Bodinus Daemonom. lib. 2. cap. 4.

Paulus Grillandus, a Lawyer of Italy, a man very well experienced in the facts
of Witches and Sorcerers, That there was certain Countryman not far from Rome,
in the year of the world, 1526. who when he saw his Wife rise naked in the
night to anoint her self, and that thereupon presently she was gone out of his
sight, and could not be found in the house, the next day provided himself of a
good cudgel wherewith to be labor her sides, until she should tell him
whither, and to what end she so conveyed her self last night, which she
presently doing, he pardoned her, upon condition that she would convey him
amongst her fraternity. She the next day anointed both her husband and her
self, and then they were presently mounted each of them upon a Goat, and so
presently brought amongst the murster of Witches. Now his Wife had forewarned
the man, he should by no means name God or Christ, unless in scorn and opproby
to him: when they were thus in the crowd, the wife appointed her husband to
stand a little aloof till she had saluted the Prince of them, (who was most
magnificently clothed and guarded about with a great ring of men and women;
all honoring and waiting upon this their Lord) and that by so doing, he should
see the whole of the business. When they had done thus, they began a
ring-dance, (which is now taken up among the Countrey-people) that dancing
backwards, they might not see one the others faces: It may be to the intent
they might not know, nor accuse one another, if perhaps they might be arraigned
in the presence of one another, after: which Triscalanus did, to whom Charles
the Ninth gave leave and liberty, that he might discover his fellows. He told
him, being in a great assembly of young men, That there were many there that
adored and worshipped a Goat in their meetings, and kissed his very posteriours
(or arse-hole in plain English, if you will have it so). Then by reason his
back was toward them, he not seeing them, they danced together, and the devils
copulated together in men and women's shapes. After their dancing, the tables
were covered and furnished with meat; the woman then moved the man to salute
the Prince, and sitting down with the rest of the company to the table, seeing
the table furnished with meat, he called for salt; and when salt was brought to
the table, before he tasted any thing, he said grace, which being ended,
presently men, meats, and table vanished away, and he was left desolate alone,
being very cold, and not knowing where he was; As soon as it was day, he came
to some shepherds, of whom being asked, Whether he knew where he were? He
answered, That he knew himself to be in the Beneventanian Earldom, in the royal
command of the Pope. These things were done a thousand miles from Rome, from
whence traveling, he was forced to beg his meat and raiment, and at length
coming home upon the eighth day after, poor and lean, he apprehended his Wife;
by whom many more being accused, and confessing the truth, they were all hanged.

Spoleto, of the age of thirteen, said, that she was brought by an old woman
into the company of Witches, and seeing the convention of them to be so
wonderfully numerous, she cried out, Blessed God, what means this? which as
soon as she had pronounced, all vanished away; and the poor girl, being found
early in the morning by a Shepherd, told the whole business to him, who
bringing her home, the Witch was accused by the Maid, and, being found guilty,
put to death by fire.

Paulus Grillandus in his Book de Sortilegiis writes, that being invited by a
certain Nobleman to the Castle of Saint Paul in the Dukedom of Spoleto, coming
thither, he told him of three sage matrons, one whereof trusting in his promise
that she might freely speak without danger, confessed that fifteen years since,
she was brought by a sage old Woman into the company of Witches, where the
Devil being present, obliged them by an oath to renounce God their Creator,
Faith, and Religion, and to be faithful to him, and that with their hands laid
upon a book of most obscure writing, he also bound them to some solemn services
to him in the night, and that they should whenever he commanded them upon
Holidayes, or set days, come whithersoever he should conduct them; the Devil
on the other side promised to them mirth and felicity eternal: she confessed
further that at that time she killed four men, many Cattle, and brought much
hurt to the fruits of the Earth, and if it happened at any time that she came
not to their meeting, without she were able to give good reason for it, she was
so vexed that she could neither sleep nor take any rest; when She came to their
meetings, She heard the voice of a Man which called the Devil little Lord, and
sometimes Mr. Martinetus; and as soon as ever She had anointed her self with a
certain unction, She mounted a Goat that stood ready at the door, and held by
the hair and tail; by which Goat She was suddenly conveyed unto the great
coverture of Beneventum, where She found a very great company of Witches and
Inchanters. There when She had vowed allegiance to the Devil, She danced, sat
at Table, and last of all, every Devil concopulated with her, or him they had
to their peculiar protection; and when they had thus done, every one getting
upon their own Devils, returned particularly, with the same incredible
swiftness that they came thither, and that also they did privately at home
adore the Devil, when this was all confessed, and compared to the confessions of
two more there were many others accused who acknowledged the crime, and
together with their ointments and powders, they were all burnt alive.

Tarquamadas of Spain, amongst others you have this more modern story. That a
Magitian being very importunate, at last persuaded a companion of his that he
would be a most happy man, if he would but be of his Faith, and come to their
meetings. And when he had given him his consent, he on a night took him by the
hand, and speaking some words, they were both carried through the Air to a
great company of Witches in which an incredible company of both men and women
compassed a Throne, whereon sat the greatest of the Devils in the shape of a
Goat, to whom all of them went to kiss en la part masuzia quatenta (which, to
those that understand Spanish, is those parts which are not fit to be named in
English). When this new-comer saw this, he said to his companion that he could
no longer patiently behold these things, and presently calling upon God with a
loud voice, they all disappeared with a great tempest and Whirlwind, and left
him alone there, who was three whole years before he could reach his own
country again.

BOdinus also writes, That Joanna Halveria, born at Verberium in the Country
of the Compedoensians, did confess, that by the decree of the Council, by the
confirmation of the Judge Sansifianus his Mother was condemned to the fire, and
that he being twelve years of age, was offered by his Mother to the Devil in
form of a black man, with sable apparel, boots and spurs, and a sword at his
side, having a black horse at the door, and using words to this purpose; Behold
my daughter, which I have espoused to thee; and to her, Behold thy Love, in
whom thou shall be happy. And that from that time she renounced God and her
Religion, and that he lay with her, as men use to do with women, and she found
no difference 'twixt him and other men, but that his seed was cold, and that
the Devil once asked her, Whether she would be gravidated by him, which she
refused, lib. 2. cap. 7.

Potezanian Witches, held by Andreas Fertius the Kings Deputy over the
Laodunensians, where diverse were burnt, out of whose confessions some things
follow. Margaret of Bremontinus Wife of Noeles Lavertus, walking with Mary his
Mother the Monday next after into the convent at Franquisanum near Lognium,
which stands in a Meadow, her Mother putting a Broom betwixt her legs, and
speaking some words (here omitted) suddenly both She and her Mother were
carried to a place where they found Joanna Roberta, Joanna Guillimina, and
Maria the Wife of Simon Agnus Guilelina, the Wife of one Grussus, with whom
were six Devils of humane shape horrid to behold, etc. And after some dancing
with them, the Devils lay with them, and had to do with them; and that one that
took her to dance with him, after he had saluted her twice, lay with her for
half an hour together, and that the seed he spent was very cold. Joanna
Guillemina assents with her in these things, confessing that it was very true,
that at least half an hour they were in copulation, and that the seed she
received was very cold.

Johannes Meyerus who most accurately wrote the History of Flanders, That in
the 1459th year of Christ, there was a very great company of both men and Women
burnt in the Town Atrebantium, who mutually accused one another, that they met
in the night, danced, and lay with the Devil. Likewise Jacobus Sprangerus, and
four of his colleagues also tell us, that from the mouths of many wise and good
men, they have been confirmed that many Witches had at the stake in Germany
confessed, and in particular at Constantia and Ratisbon in the year 1485, that
the Devil lay with them after they had by his instigation denied both God and
all Religion. And that not a few had repented, and turned off themselves from
that wickedness, and confessed that whilst they were Witches the Devil had
often to do with them. It is written likewise that very many came, and freely
acknowledged, though no man accused them, that they had been guilty formerly of
commerce with the Devil being Witches, to these things Spangeus adds, that
Witches did very often copulate with the Devil, in the sight of the Sun, or
clear day, and did strip themselves in fields and Woods, and were often seen
naked in the fields, and were sometimes taken by their husbands in the manner
with devils which they conceived to be men, and therefore they set upon them
with Swords whereby they could do no execution upon them. Paulus Gralandus, a
Lawyer of Italy (who knew very many Witches) does declare in his book de
Sortilegiis that he was commended by an Abbot of St. Paul's at Rome, in the
year 1526. in the Month of September, to take cognizance of three Witches, who
amongst other things, confessed that every sorceresse had a particular Familiar
to commerce withal, in the History of St. Bernard, we read there was a Witch
who usually copulated with the Devil; her Husband not perceiving her, though he
lay in the same bed with her.

IN the flourishing Garden of Antonius concerning Turquomeda of Spain. I found
another History concerning a noble Spanish woman, who related that she was
induced by an old Witch when she was eighteen years of age, and from that time
she had to do with the Devil; which was burned alive, and unpenitent, being a
Cerdenate. The same does declare that another did repent, and was put into a
Monastery. Adamus Martinus the Laodunensian Proctour of Confession, told me
(says Bodin) that he had a Witch of Biebra (that is a Village two miles
distant from Laodune) in question, in the Jurisdiction of D. Boan, the Captain
of the Verumandians, in the year 1556. who was first condemned to be hanged,
and afterward to be burnt; but she was delivered alive to the fire by the
fault of the Hangman, or rather the just Judgment of God, who did so
demonstrate, that the punishment should be equal to the offense, neither was
there any mischievous act that did more deserve fire. Therefore she confessed,
that Satan (whom she called her companion) was wont to have to do with her, and
that she did feel his cold seed.

Pictavius in the year 1567. performing my office amongst the under servants of
the general Proctour, I took two filthy and beggarly Magitians, which did beg
alms at a rich man's house; who being denied, did cast in Witchcrafts, and all
the household being driven into fury, died mad. Daemonum, libro 3. capite 1.

Lutetia a Magitian, who only touching with his hand, did cure a Quartane
Fever, but he was in no wise cured that would not believe that he could cure
him. And there was a certain Italian old woman at Audes curing diseases in the
year 1573. who when she was inhibited by the Judge to cure any more diseases,
called a Court of Parliament, her cause was pleaded Eloquently, and likewise
Learnedly, by D. Johannes Baltruus, Lawyer to plead the cases of the
Parliament; fellow officer with the Lord of Matratius, and my Countreyman; but
it is proved that the means by which she cured, did disagree with nature, as
with the Brains of a Cat, which is poisoned; the head of a Crow, and other such
like things; which things do plainly convince, that it was not done by the
strength of the excellent Oil, or of the healthful Ointment (which many good
men, and lovers of the poor do make) but by means beyond Nature, or by charms
of healing.

JOdocus Darmudanus does write in Praxi crim. cap. 37. that there was a Witch
at Bruga in Flanders, having the greatest repute of Holiness, because she
could cure innumerable diseases, but first she did take care for this, that
they should believe that she could cure them, afterward she did make known
fasting days, and commanded that Pater noster should be said diverse times, and
that they should go to Compostella at St. James's, or to St. Arnolds, but at
length she was convinced of many Magical charms, and deservedly punished.

Johanna Harvilleriae, which (as we said before) was cast alive into the fire,
confessed that she cast in charms, that she might kill a man which had beaten
his daughter, but he having excelled her witchcrafts, suddenly felt pain in his
loins, and his whole body. But when (as she was greatly renowned for the fame
of her Art) it was told the man that the grief could not come to him from any
other person, then she promised that She would work means whereby he should
recover, and took him into her custody: to that end She did require it
earnestly of the Devil by entreaties, and She did labor by many means (which
it does not concern us to describe) for his healing, which Satan answered it
could not be done. And therefore She saying to him, that for that cause he
should come no more to her, the Devil answered her, that he would not come. A
little after the sick man died, and the Witch hid her self, but although she
was hid, she is found, and suffered deserved punishment for her wickedness.

BOdin writes that he saw a certain Arvernian Captive at Lutetia, in the year
1579, sometimes curing Horses and men, with whom was found a very large book,
full of the hairs of Horses, Cattle, and other beasts of all colors. This man
if at any time he cast his Charms on a horse, he consulted, and having the hair
of that so he did cure him, that he might deliver his Witchcrafts to another,
but he took no money, and if he did take it, he affirmed that he did not care
for it: And therefore he walked about in a very old Cassock, replenished with a
thousand patches. But when once he had cast his Charms upon the horse of a
certain Noble man, being asked, he cured him, transferring his enchantments
upon the servant of the same man: he answered, those that came again to have
him cured, that they must know of the Noble man, whether he had rather lose his
servant, or his Horse? In which thing the Noble man being in doubt, and
striving to be advised; the servant died, and the Magitian was apprehended.

I Heard from the Lord Turnerius the Aureliensian Counselor concerning
Hulinus Parvus the Aureliensian Materiarius. This man by chance being deadly
afflicted by Magic, did take care that a man should be sent for, (who promised
that he would drive away all diseases, being suspected of the Magic Art) that
he might cure him. But he answered that he could not restore health to the man,
unless he should transfer the disease to his son then sucking. The Parent
consented to the murder of his son, to observe the thing, that the malice of
Satan might so much the better be discovered. The Nurse having called it to
remembrance, fled away with the child, while the Magitian was touching his
Father to cure him. The Father being cured by his touch, the Magitian does
require the child to be brought, which being not found, he suddenly cried out,
I am undone, where is the child? and when he was going away he had scarce put
his foot out at the door, when the Devil killed him presently, and his dead
carcass was as black, as if any one had dyed it with a black color on set
purpose.

Nauntes, (which was accused of casting in charms to her neighbor) that the
Judges commanded that she should touch the woman that was troubled with the
charm, which is done very often by the Judges of Germany in the Imperial
Camera; she refused, but seeing her self to be compelled, she cried out, I am
undone, and together touched the woman that was afflicted with the enchantment:
she recovered, and the Witch being dead fell down, her dead carcass being
condemned to the fire. I received the story from one of the Judges that was at
the Judging of him.

Tholosa, that a certain Student of Bordeaux, said to his friend, being very
sick of a quartan, that he would give his Fever to one of his enemies; but he
answering, That he had no enemy; he said, Give it therefore to thy servant. At
length, when it was a doubt of conscience to him to do it, the Magitian said,
Give it me; Then the sick man consenting, the Magitian dyed, being oppressed
with the Fever; and the sick man revived. Bodin. lib. 3. cap. 2.

Gregory the Turonensian, lib. 6. cap. 35. that the Wife of King Childebert, as
soon as she heard that her son dyed by a mischievous act, in her feminine fury
she commanded a great number of Witches to be apprehended, burned, and put upon
wheels; which acknowledged, that the King's Son was killed by them, that they
might save Mummo, a great Magistrate: Therefore Mummo being taken, and put on a
horse, he said, That certain oils and potions were given him by the Witches, to
procure (as he thought) the favor of Princes; and he commanded the hangman
that did torment him, to tell the King, that he perceived no grief from him.
Then the King commanded that he should be stretched on the wrack, and sharp
points of iron to be put between the nayls of his feet and hands, as it is the
custom of punishment in the East, which was without the breaking of members;
the pain was intolerable. After some days being carried to his men of
Bordeaux, he dyed.

Quaesitor Sprangerus does bring an example; when he knew that there was a
Counterfeit Magitian among the Insprugensian Witches of Germany, who seeing his
poor neighbor to be most heavily afflicted, as if her bowels were incessantly
pierced with swords: I will try, says he, if thou art troubled with charms,
and will cure thee. Then poured melted lead into a round iron thing with a hole
in the midst, being full of water, and putting it to the sick woman, and
uttering certain words, which it does please me to conceal, he perceived
certain Images in the hardened lead, by which he knew that she was afflicted
with charms. This being done, he took the husband of the woman with him, and
both beholding the upper post of the door, they found a waxen Image set up in
honor of a victory, at whose two sides two Needles did stick, with other dust,
grains, and Serpent's bones, all which he cast into the fire: But the woman,
when she had given her soul for a pledge to Satan, and the Magitians, to whom
she had gone for her health, was recovered.

OGerius Terrerius, a most learned Physician, when I was at Tholossa, hired
handsome houses, and situated in a very good place at Bursa, for very little,
in the year 1558, because an evil spirit did trouble the Inhabitants of them,
being not right owners; which he did no more care for, then Athenodorus the
Philosopher, who durst dwell in a house forsaken by the Athenians, and the
Inhab^tants, because of an empty spirit: But when he heard that thing which he
never believed, that he could not go to the Cellar safely, neither sometimes
take rest, having admonished Lusitanus a certain Student, to be in the City,
who did exhibit hidden things to be seen in the nail of a little boy, he caused
that this Student should use his art: But a girl full of knowledge, said, That
she saw a woman most exactly adorned with most precious chains and gold, which
did bear a torch in her hand to a certain pillar: and therefore Lusitanus
answered the Physician, that he should take care that the ground should be
dug in the Cellar at the pillar, that he might find the treasure. The
Physician rejoicing, commanded it to be dug up. But when he thought the
treasure was almost found, a whirlwind arising extinguished the light, and
going out of the vent of the Cellar, brake fourteen foot of the battlements of
the walls in the neighboring houses, part whereof fell together into the porch
of the door, part into the vent of the Cellar; part upon a woman carrying
water, whose water-pot was broken. There was nothing ever after heard of the
Spirit. Lusitanus the day after, being more surely certified of the whole
matter, said that the spirit carried away the treasure, and he wondered because
it did hurt the Physician, who after two days related the History to me. These
things were done on the fifteenth day of December, in the year 1558. the Heaven
being fair and clear as it is wont to be in Halcyon days. And we at the same
time saw thorough the battlements of the next house that were cast down, and
the porch broken to the Shop. Bodin Daemonomaniae, Lib. 3. cap. 3.

MElancthon does bring a History very like to this: Ten men were overwhelmed by
the ruin of the Tower Magdeburg, when they did dig to find treasure; which
Satan had showed them. Gregorius Agricola in his Book de Spiritibus
subterraneis writes, that at Annaeberg, in that ruin, which is called the
Town of Roses, there was a spirit in the shape of a Horse that killed twelve
men, and made them withdraw from the mine full of Silver, which Magitians found
by the help of Satan.

Lugdunensian, in the Temple of the Virgin Mary, that there was Campellanus of
Lutetia, who with his companions revealed the treasure of Arcolius near Lutetia
by Magick-Art: but when they thought to have the Chest in which it was hidden,
it was carried away with a Whirlwind, but part of the wall fell upon him, by
which he was made lame for the whole term of his life. And when the
Noribergensian Priest had found the treasure by the help of Satan, and long ago
was about to open the box, the house was abolished with a fall.

Lugdunensian practitioner in the Law, that he with his companions went in the
night, that they might seek out a treasure by uttering Conjurations, and when
they began to dig, they heard a voice as it were of a man, which was put on the
wheel, most horribly crying to the thieves: so they were turned to flight: but
evil spirits in the very same moment pursuing them, slew them even to that
house from whence they came, and they entered it with so great a noise that the
Host thought it had thundered, and from that time he swore that he would never
seek after treasure. Bodin.

BOdin also proves by an example that sorcerers can bewitch men's eyes, and move
laughter, and make the spectators astonished concerning Triscalanus that
Magitian, which said of a certain Curat, all the Parish Priests being present;
See ye that Hypocrite, who feigning to bring a Register, does bring
play-papers! Then the Curate willing to show that he brought a Register, he
seemed to himself to have play-papers, and whosoever were present, seemed to
themselves to see papers, so that the curate cast away his book of account, and
went away ashamed. But others coming a little after, gathered up the Register
book, being freed from that likeness of Papers: by which thing it was manifest
that Satan did delude men in many things, and also bind fast every ones eyes.
For those which were not present at the former action, when the sorcerer cast
his delusions before the eyes of those that were present, did see a true book
of account, when others on the contrary did perceive but an appearance of
papers, etc.

Germans being about to search, what Witch had made a horse feeble and
decaying, did draw the bowels of another horse to certain houses, and not
entering the gates, but a Cellar or Cave under ground, did burn those bowels.
Then the Sorceress which had committed that evil, feeling the pain of the
Colic all within; She runs streightway to the houses, where the bowels
were burned, that she might ask for a burning cole; and her pain did cease. But
if the doors were not opened, the houses were darkened, ringed with horrible
thunder, and threatened ruin, unless those that were within would open the
door: which Sprangerus writes, that he observed, and saw in Germany.

D. Antonius Lonanius, the King's general Legate, that there was a Sorcerer at
Ribemont, who having pronounced certain words, did discover another by a sieve.
All the names of those that were suspected were brought, and when the name of
that man who was in the fault was brought, the sieve did move uncessantly, and
the Magitian accessory to the same fault, came, which being found, the Sorcerer
was condemned. Bodin lib. 3. cap. 4.

Bodin the King's general Procurator, sometimes related to me, When all his
cattle remained in a Village at Moldena, that it was told his Wife, that a
certain beast must be slain, which here it does not please me to declare; and
he ought to hang it with the feet upward under the threshold of the stable,
with pronouncing certain words (which it is not needful here to insert); this
being done, there did none of his cattle perish. Idem. ibid.

JOhannes Martinus performing his turn of Ruler of Laodunum, declared to me,
that when he was to try a Witch by the Authority of S. Proba, (for she had
tormented a Mason with so great sickness, that his head did hang down almost
between his legs, his body being crooked, which evil he did suspect to come to
him from the sorceresse) the Judge having regarded it well, he commanded, that
word should be brought to the Witch, that she by no other means could save her
life, then by healing the Mason. And therefore she commanded a swathing band to
be brought home by her daughter; she calls upon the Devil, casting her
countenance on the ground she muttered certain charms before them all, and
delivering the swathing band to the Mason, she gave commandment that he should
be washed in a bath, and that which was shut in the swathing band, should be
put into the Bath with these words: Get thou gone in the Devils name. She said
that there was this and no other means of recovery. These things being done,
the Mason was cured. But yet before those things were seen in the Bath, she
being willing to know what was in the swathing band (which she had forbidden to
be done) they found three little corns in it: But the Mason while he was in the
bath, perceived as it were three great fishes in it, when he came forth of it,
although they did seek them very diligently, yet neither the fish, nor the arm
was found. The sorceresse was burned alive, and remained without repentance,
Idem. lib. 3. cap. 5.

horto Antonii de Tarquamedia, lib. 3. of a certain Magitian, who said to a
rustic man, whom he saw bitten by a mad-dogg, That he was one that delivered
from harm, that he might not lose his life. And when he pricked his nose thrice
to let forth blood, he was cured.

CA^olus Martinus, Governor of Laodunum, being certified, that a poor woman in
the valley (that was the name of the Laodunensian Suburbs) was bewitched by a
Sorceress her Neighbor, and taking pity of her, he threatened death to the
Witch, unless she took away the disease from her Neighbor. She fearing,
promised to heal her; and therefore she came to the beds feet, looked
steadfastly on the Earth, joined her hands, called on the greatest Devil with a
loud voice; afterward renewed her prayers, repeating some unknown words, and
delivered a crust of bread to the sick person, which in the same moment began
to recover. This being done, the Governor returning home, did appoint that she
should be apprehended, and be burned as soon as might be; but she was not seen
in those parts from that time. Idem. ibid.

Vitriacus Francus, who was assigned to all the greatest meetings of Brusis, in
the year, 1577. When we wanted his help, I did earnestly solicit him, that we
might assist each ^ther in the public burden, lest he should go out of his
place before the States were dismissed; he answered, That he had a certain
friend who lay sick to death, he was sent for by him, and was made his heir, he
thenceforth was sick five or six years, his members failing him, and therefore
his father being advertised, that there was a man in Flanders, who could cure
his son, went hither presently: The Sorcerer unfolded the disease of the son
(which he had never seen) to the Father, and sent him away into Lusitania to
another Magitian (whose name he told him) living in the King's Court. The
Father bearing this patiently, went into Lusitania, where the Magitian said to
the Father (before he did only proffer to speak); Friend, thy son shall be
cured in a short time, go into France, thou shall find a certain man named M.
Benedictus, toward Noviodunum, about 20 miles from thy house, (but there are
many of the same name) this man shall cure thy son. And therefore the Father
wondering that he should undertake so great travail, that he might seek that
afar off, which was near, took courage, and went to M. Benedictus. But he said
to the Father, Thou have spent very much labor going into Flanders, and
Lusitania, that thy son might be restored, Go, command him to come to me, I am
he, that will heal him. The Father answered to these things: Now he has not
gone out of his bed for above these 5 years, and has not truly the least
faculty of moving in him. But at length, with no little trouble, the sick
person was brought thither, and he was eased in part, but yet he was not long
well. Idem. ibid.

JAcobus Sprangerus the Commissioner, to enquire after the crimes of Magitians,
by the same argument does write, that he saw a Bishop in Germany, who being
very sick, he knew by an old witch, that he was sick by witchcraft; neither was
there any other way to recover his health, then that the same witch should
perish by enchantment, who had cast the charm upon him. The Bishop wondering,
sent with all speed to Rome to the Pope Nicolaus, V. that he might get leave to
be cured by this means. The Pope, which did love him singularly, did grant his
request with this small sentence, that of two evils, he should fly the worst.
The Letters Patents being brought, the Witch said, Seeing that it pleases the
Pope and the Bishop, she would perform it. So in the middle of the night the
Bishop was restored; but the Sorceress which had bewitched him, fell into the
same disease from which he was freed. But in the mean time, that Sorceress,
which dyed, would never consider, but uncessantly committed her self to Satan,
to recover her health.

Poictiers in France, in the year 1571. Charles the eleventh King, after dinner
commanded, that Triscalanus (whom he had pardoned, that he might disclose the
partakers of his fault) should be brought to him. He confessed before the King,
and a great assembly of his Nobles, the manner by which Sorcerers are conveyed,
their dancings, sacrifices offered to Satan, detestable copulations with
Devils, having shapes of men and women: Moreover, he added, That dust was taken
by many, with which they killed men, cattle, and fruit. Every one admiring at
these his sayings, Caspar Collignius, Admiral of France, (for he by chance was
present) said, That a youth was apprehended in the field of Poictiers, some
months before, being accused concerning the death of two Noblemen, he
confessed, that he was their servant, and he saw them with dust cast into the
houses, and the corn, saying these words: A curse on that fruit, on that house,
on that Region: And therefore he having gotten this dust, took it, and cast it
into the bed where those two Nobles did lie; so both were found dead in the
bed, but swelling, and very black. The Judges did discharge the boy. Then
Triscalanus hearing that, discovered also many things of that kind. But it may
be believed, if the King (whose body otherwise had the strongest joints and
complexion) had commanded this Prince of Magitians, and his other followers, to
be burned together, that God would grant a longer and more blessed life to him
for these Judgments. For the Word of God is always manifest unto him, that he
who quitteth a man worthy of death, does return his deserved punishment on
himself; as the Prophet said to King Achab, That he, because he had showed
favor to a man that did deserve death, should dye. Ibid.

Rochell, who was wounded to death, of whose health all Chirurgions did
despair, was so ordered by the help of a certain Magitian, that he could walk
and speak some days; indeed Satan, and not any other, did bear him, that he
might show his power to the Magitians. Ibid.

JOachimus Camerarius does declare in his book, de natura Daemonum, When by
chance a certain Butcher went by a Wood in the night, he heard a noise, and
dancings; and therefore having sought the thing diligently, coming, he saw
silver cups, which things, (as soon as the Sorcerers and Devils were
separated,) presently the Butcher took, and the day after brought them to the
Magistrate: so they, whose marks were in the Cups, did accuse others, being
summoned to the Court, and were all deservedly punished.

Pictavium, in the year, 1564. the history of which execution I learned as well
from many in the same place, as also from Salvertus, President of the people of
Poictiers, (who was then sent for to hear the Judgment with Daventonius the
President of Poictiers, with other Judges); and all in that region know it.
Three men with one woman being Sorcerers, were condemned to be burned alive
together, when they were proved guilty of the death of very many men and
cattle; dust being brought to them, as they did confess, by the help of the
Devil furnishing them, which they hid under the ground of Sheep-cotts, and the
threshold of houses. But they declared, That they were wont to go thrice to the
greatest meeting, whither innumerable Magitians came together to a certain
cross-way where Feasts are solemnized, which did afford them the use of an
Image; there was before them a great black hee-Goat, speaking to those that
were present with humane reason, that they should leap all into the circuit of
his embracements; and then every one with a burning candle kiss his
hinder-parts: This being done, the Goat was consumed with fire, of whose ashes
every one took, that therewith they might kill the Ox of an enemy; this man's
Sheep; that man's Horse; that they might torment this man with feebleness,
that man with death. Last of all, the Devil with a terrible voice did thunder
out these words; Revenge your selves, or slay: So every one did return by the
help of the Devil the same way that they came. The President Salvertus, a most
virtuous man, said moreover, that it did appear from ancient acts; for
Magitians were condemned for the same cause 100 years before, and by the like
confessions; and that it was done in the same place at the same cross. Two of
these did repent, and two dyed in their obstinacy.

Potezana, which Adrianus Ferreus the King's general Vicar imparted to me at
Laodunum. In it their confession is after this manner; That they near Lognium
at the Trenquisanian prison, certain words being uttered, were carried away
with brooms, and there found others furnished with brooms ready at hand, and
with them six Devils, whose names are kept. After that they had forsaken God,
they being kissed, adored the Devils in humane shape, but yet having very bad
countenances; and danced, having them in their hands: afterward the Devils had
to do with the women, but they required the dust to kill cattle: Lastly, it was
appointed, that they should meet in the same place eight days after, on Monday
at the beginning of night; and when they had tarried there three hours, they
were carried back.

BOvinus the Ruler of Gulick, being sent Ambassador to Biturgium by name, among
the Blesensians, affirmed, that there was a Witch burned, he being Judge, whom
her daughter accused, because her Mother had brought her to the meeting, and
gave her to be instructed by the Devil; She among other wickedness confessed,
that she danced in the circuit of the Goat, and at length she related the
several gestures of the multitude at the last time, and in what manner they
made use of the dust. This man says, that he had a child killed by her,
another a horse; and he, a tree. But one being found to have done nothing from
that time, received many strokes on the soles of the feet, and was derided by
all others; She also added, That it did behove them to have fresh powder often.
Bodin. lib. 2. cap. 4.

was adjudged to dye, because she said she could by no means rest, unless she
had killed a man, or committed a mischievous act.

Bodin, That Turnerius a Learned man, an A^reliensian Counselor, told me,
That there was a speech all abroad, and found out true, that the convention of
Witches was kept at the Cleriacus, and that Devils declared there, whatsoever
was done in diverse Nations, because they do reduce the several deeds of men, as
it were, into a brief History of all person's actions; and this is the manner
of divination which Sorcerers use. But that Sorceress, whom we mentioned, would
not stir from the sentence given, saying, She did prefer death before so great
torments of the Devil, from which she could not be quiet even for a moment.

Languiana did sing when they were dancing, Har, har, Devil, Devil, leap
hither, leap thither, play here, play there; others said, Sabbath, Sabbath,
(that is) a quiet holy day, having their hands and brooms lifted upwards, that
then they might certainly testify, with how great cheerfulness of mind and
diligence they did worship and adore the Devil, as also that they might
represent the worship which is due to God.



Turettanian President, that he saw in Delphiratus a Witch which was to be
burned alive, therefore she lying down in the fire, saying, Remain ye at home
with my body, she was taken away in a trance, and because she understood
nothing, her Master smote her with very heavy strokes of a rod, and then also
that they might see whether she had departed this life or no, the fire overcame
the parts which are most sensible, neither did they any further watch her; and
therefore lying (esteemed by her Master and Mistress) dead, she was left there:
she was found lying in her bed the next morning. Which when her Master
admiring, enquired what had happened to her? She crying out, said in her own
language; Ah Master! How have you beaten me? Her Master manifesting this to the
neighbors, a certain man said, It is a Witch: and therefore her Master did not
desist till she acknowledging the thing, did make manifest that she had heard
the meeting of Magitians in her mind. So moreover, she confessed other offenses
which she had committed, and she was delivered to the fire. Bodin. in
Daemonomaniae, lib. 2. cap. 4.

JAcobus Sprangerus the Quaestor, who did examine many Witches, does write that
they did confess, when they seemed to be taken away by the spirit, yet it
might seem otherwise in the body. We have had another example in our memory at
Bordeaux, in the year 1571. when persecution was instituted against the
Magitians of France. A certain old woman at Bordeaux being a Witch, confessed
to the Judges, that she was carried with others, every week where a great
Hee-Goat was adored, by which author they did deny God, and did promise that
they would serve the Devil, every one did kiss his privy parts, and after
they had danced each one did receive the dust. Then D. Belotus, master of the
Bills containing supplications, (when the sorceresse said that she could do
nothing, except she was brought out of the Prison) being willing to try the
truth of the thing, did command her to be brought forth; and when she had
anointed her self being naked, she fell down as if she were dead, and void of
sense, afterward coming to her sense and rising after five hours, she declared
many things which were found to be so, as she had said in diverse places. A
certain Earl of the order of men of arms, did relate this History to me, who
does live yet, and was present at that experience. Olaus does testify that it
is frequent in the Northern parts, and that their friends do watch the body of
him that is in a trance very diligently, until with great grief he does
return, and bring with him his ring, letter, or knife, who is absent 300.
miles. Idem. ibid.

Nauntes in the year 1549. Therefore when they promised that they would show
before many, in an hours space, what was done ten miles in Circuit, they
presently fell down dead, and did lie void of sense three hours: arising, they
did relate whatsoever they had perceived in the whole City of Nauntes, and a
longer Circuit, having observed places, deeds, and men, all which things were
found presently. And therefore all they being accused, and found guilty of many
mischievous acts, were condemned to be burned. Idem.

BAro of Razii (who at Nauntes being condemned for his Magical charms suffered
punishment) not only confessed, that he killed eight children, and deprived
others of understanding, and sacrificed his own young son to the Devil, and
that in her Mothers womb, that he might gratify Satan as much as it was
possible, but also prostrating himself upon his knees in his chamber, did adore
Satan appearing in humane shape; and did sacrifice with Incense to him. Satan
did promise many admirable things to him; and namely, that he should be great.
But at length seeing himself Captive, and oppressed with the most bitter evils;
confessed all things, and suffered the uttermost punishment. Bodin. lib. 2.
cap. 6.

Sprangerus, when he had intelligence of a certain sorceresse, which he
condemned to be burned, that she confessed, (how she was a Midwife) that she
taking children out of the Mothers Womb, did present them to the Devil by
lifting them aloft into the Air; afterward she put a great pin into their
heads, so that the blood might not run out: then carrying them to be buried,
going in the night she dug them up, boiled them in a furnace, did eat the
flesh, and did keep the fat for her use. By this means she killed forty
children: she was a Dane at Basilea.

CAzereis was a Witch at Tholossa, who having brought the blessed bread to the
Altar, went away to drown her self, and when she was brought home again; she
confessed that she infected the blessed bread with poison; the bread was cast
before Dogs, they dye. She being in bonds, was in a trance more then six hours,
void of all feeling; afterward rising up, cried out she was wonderful weary,
and sent back the Messengers from many places with certain signs and marks.
When she was near her sentence of condemnation, and Judgment was ready to be
past upon her, she called upon the Devil, saying, That he promised that there
should come such vehement storms and showers that she might not be burned. But
for all that she was not defended from the violence of the fire. Bodinus
Daemonoman. lib. 3. cap. 3.

Bodinus in lib. 2. cap. 5.) is so wonderful and admirable as the
Metamorphosing of men into beasts, and to be turned out of the shape of a man
into that of a beast. Yet the truth is, that this is practiced among Magitians;
and both divine and profane Histories do prove it certainly. In the book of
Inquisitions against Magitians, which I have often mentioned; we read of one
Statius a certain Magitian that he suddenly and oftentimes flew, and escaped
out of the Bernates field, out of the midst of his enemies (for he had very
many) and he could never be slain; but when he was asleep, he left two of his
Disciples Hippo and Stadlinus which were the chief Magitians in all Germany,
who raised tempests, caused lightning and great storms.

Dolensi, and the sentence was published the 18th day of January in the year,
1573. about Aegidius Garnerius, Lugdunensis. Which Judgment is not fit to be
inserted here at the present, when Aurelius at Eligium Giberium at Paris with
Peter Hayanum, commended to the French Presses; only we will set down the chief
heads of those Articles that he was accused and convicted of. And first, That
this Garnerius at Michaelmas time at the wood, in the Chasten^yanian Vines,
which are a quarter of a mile from Dolensis Town, took a young wench of ten or
twelve years old, with his hands, which seemed like to Wolves feet, and tore
her to pieces with his teeth, and so devoured the flesh of her thighs and arms,
and brought part of her to his Wife. And about a Month after, he got another
girl in the same manner, and killed her; and being about to eat her, unless
three men (as he himself confessed) had hindered him. And about fifteen days
after he strangled a boy of ten years old, in the Vines of Gredisaniorum, and
did eat the flesh of his legs, thighs, and belly. And lastly, He slew a boy
thirteen years of age (being then in the shape of a man, and not of a Wolf) in
a Grove of the Perusan; and being very hungry (as he of his own accord
confessed) if he had not been hindered, would have eaten him also: Therefore
for these reasons he was condemned to the flames; The Sentence was put in
execution.

Vesontion, made known to, or discovered by John Boinus the Inquisitor, in the
year of our Lord, 1521. in the Month of December, the cause was sent into
France, Itally, and Germany, which Vierius, lib. 6. of Witchcraft, chap. 13.
relates at large, but I will run over a few heads of it; Peter Burgottus, and
Michael Verdunus, was found guilty, and confessed that they had renounced God
and their Faith, and had given themselves to the Devil; Therefore Michael
brought Burgot in that street of the Carlonian Castle, where each of them had a
Candle of green wax burning, with a dull obscure flame; and so they danced and
sacrificed to the Devil. Afterward they confessed, that anointing themselves,
they were transformed into Wolves, running with great celerity and swiftness;
then again being turned into men, and a while after into Wolves, and in that
shape had copulation with she^Wolves, and had the same pleasure with them as
they were wont to have with Women; Furthermore it was confessed, that Burgottus
with seven Wolves feet and teeth, did tear to pieces and cruelly macerate a
boy, and had quite devoured him had not some Countrymen driven him away. And
that Verdunus slew a young maid gathering pease in the Garden, and was driven
away by the Lord of Cunea. And in the last place, that there were four young
lasses devoured by them at a certain place and time, whose age they did relate,
and that they could destroy men by casting a certain kind of dust or powder.

D. Bordinus, the Kings General Factour, or Solicitor, did tell me of another
example that was sent to him out of Belgia, with the whole Judgment, signed by
the Judges and Clarks and Notaries; which was concerning a Wolf that was
wounded in the hanch or Thigh with a Dart, which afterward being turned into a
Man laid in his bed with the Arrow in him, and being plucked out, he that was
wounded acknowledged it, this was proved at that time, and in that
forementioned place, both by his own confession, and by diverse other
testimonials.

JOb Fincelius writes, that at Padua there was one man fell mad, and his
Wolvish feet being cut off, instantly he appeared a man that was stumped, or
had his members cut off, by which example (says Bodinus) the Judgment against
Witches is confirmed, and a great company of Witches in the shape of Cats were
wont to congregate and gather to the Castle, and there were set four or five
men, who were set to watch them all night, and then a great multitude of Cats
did invade, and set upon them, one of them was slain, the rest were sore hurt,
and wounded, but many Cats being cut and hurt, afterward turned into women,
were found to be sore slash't. But because the thing seems so incredible, the
sentence and Judgment is mute and silent. Petrus Marmorius in his book of
divinations, says, that he himself was an eyewitness of this transformation
of Men into Wolves in Lubaudia and Henry Coloniensis in his Vol. de lamiis of
Witches, affirms it for an undoubted truth, and also Ulricus Molitor in his
book which he dedicated to Sigismundus Caesar, setting down the disputation
that was made before the Emperor, and proves by many reasons, and also by his
own experience, this strange Metamorphosing of men into Wolves, and tells of
one that was thus transformed at Constance, who was accused, convicted,
condemned, and confessing it, was executed. This is showed in many books that
are set forth in Germany, one of which relates that there was a Christian King
who was lately deceased, that oftentimes turned himself into a Wolf, that he
might be the Prince and chief of Magitians. And the truth is, this kind of
VVitchcraft overspread all Greece and Asia, and some of the VVestern
countries, as our Merchants say, that there were some that were put in the
stocks, and imprisoned, who turned themselves from the shape of men into
Wolves. Therefore in the year 1542. Sultan Solomon, getting invested in the
Empire, there was such a company of Wolves at Constantinople, that the
Emperor was in arms marching against them with his Praetorian Soldiers, and
compelled a hundred and fifty of them to fly, and vanish out of the City, all
the people being spectators. Job Fincelius in his second book de Mirabilibus,
and the whole Country agree to this. The Germans call these Wolves Werwolf, the
French, Loups garous; Picardians, Loups Warous, as if thou should say, diverse
Wolves (for the French put G in the room of W) the Greeks call them (...), and
(...), the Latins, Versipelles, as Plinius (not Ovid) writing of this
Metamorphosis. Pomponatius and Theophrastus, the chiefest Princes of
Philosophers in their age, do confirm that certainly there was such a
transformation of men into Wolves. Casper Peucerus, son in law of Phillip
Melancthon, writes, that formerly these seemed always but as mere fables and
fictions to him; but at last he was forced to believe that which so many
Merchants of good account and credit did confirm in Livonia, many being
accused, convicted, and confessed, and so were executed, and therefore he sets
down the manner which they observe in Livonia: for every year about the end of
December, there was a knavish fellow who did stir up all the Magitians, that
they might have a Congregation in such an appointed place, and if they did not
appear there, they were corrected by the Devil with an Iron rod, so that the
common rout were a great while after their Captain, who marching before,
Millions followed to a certain River, and passing over it, they were
transformed into Wolves, and would fall upon men and beasts, and brought great
detriment to the Country: and twelve days after rowing again over the River,
they reassumed the figures and shapes of men.

Languetus B^rgundus, a Learned man, negotiating about important affairs with
the Duke of Saxony, and also with the King of France for his Lord and Master:
here he tolled a story not much unlike to this; He said, That having some
business with an old man in Livonia, the thing was known amongst the people, I
have about me some letters of a certain German, who was a Pensioner of King
Henry the second, written to the Constable of France, by which he certifies the
Constable; the which Intelligence was given at Mosch in Livonia: and
furthermore he adds, In those Countries where Herodotus seems to place the
Neurians, among whom there were those that could change themselves into Wolves,
which was a common and usual thing in Livonia; many things which were related
by Herodotus, seeming incredible, following Ages have found to be true. And the
same Author says, That there were Magitians, that by certain short sentences
allayed that tempest in which Xerxes had above forty Ships sunk and cast away:
And we read in Olaus Magnus, lib. 3. cap. 18. of the Lappi that could sell
storms, and calms, by unloosing some ropes, which all Mariners know by
frequent experience.

John Tritemii, in the year 1470, of a certain Jew, Bajanus by name, the son of
Simeon, who when be pleased, could transform himself into a Wolf, and vanish
out of sight, and made himself (...), invisible.

Herodotus has written of it 2000 and 200 years since, and Homer 40. but
Pomponius, Mela, Solinus, Strabo, Dionysius. Afer, M. Varro, Virgilius,
Ovidius, and sixty other; and so Virgilius upon this, Has herbas, atque haec
Ponto mihi lecta venena,
Ipse dedit Moeris; naseuntur plurima Ponto:
His ego saepe lupum fieri and se condere sylvis Moerin.
These herbs and poisons culled, me Maeris gave,
Not a few such the briny Marshes have;
By this I often Maeris a Wolf have seen,
When in the covert woods h'as hidden been.
And taking these, into a Wolf was changed,
Hiding my self, into Maeris Woods ranged.
But Pliny, lib. 8. cap. 22. wonders, that Authors should agree about this,
That men, says he, should be turned into Wolves, and again return unto their
proper shape, we ought to esteem false, or believe all that which we find
recorded in fabulous Annals; this he durst not affirm, fearing lest he should
be believed; for among the chiefest of Greek Authors he brings Evanthes upon
the stage, who says, That in Arcadia, there was one of the Antaean Nation that
did swim over a pool, and was transfigured into a Wolf, and after some few
years coming to the same pool again, and when he did pass over it again, he
received an humane shape. And Agriopas, who writ of the Olympionick games,
tells of one Demaenetus Parrhasius, who tasting of the intrals of a boy that
was sacrificed to Jupiter Lycaeus, was changed into a Wolf, which M. Varro, the
most learned of all the Greeks and Latins, as Cicero testifies, brings it in
for an example, and confirms it for an undoubted truth. Olaus Magnus speaking
of the Countries of Pilapiae, Narbonia, Fincladia, and Angermania, says, These
are heathenish Nations, and full of wicked spirits and Conjurers; And in his
History says, That men are turned into beasts by them: And he that desires
more examples, of which there are millions, (which for brevity sake we will
omit) let him consult Olaus, the Saxo Grammaticus, Fincelius, and William
Brabantius; I pass by Ovid's Metamorphosis, who intermingled many true things
with his fabulous stories; but that which he writes of Lycaon, the Arcadian
King, turned into a Wolf, is not incredible; Territus ipse fugit, nactusque
silentia ruris
Exululat, frustraque loqui conatur.
Affrighted he did fly, run, howl, and walk,
But oh alas, in vain he strives to talk!
Obtaining silence in the Country there,
As he was mute or silent every where.
Neither is that fabulous, which Homer relates of Circes the Witch, and of
Ulysses's companions being turned into hoggs, when St. Augustine in Civitate
Dei, brings in the same History, (although wonderful, in his opinion) and he
says, that story of the Arcadians on the Alps was often in his mind; that many
prating talkative women instructed in wicked arts, would give something in
their cheese to Travelers, by which incontinently they would be turned into
cattle, that they might bear necessary burdens; and then afterward when they
had done their work, come to themselves again, as we have showed before, etc.

William the Archbishop of Tire; Sprangerus the Inquisitor relates the same of
a young English Soldier in Cyprus, that was turned into an Ass by a Witch;
and when he would have swimmed back unto the Ship where his companions were, he
was beaten back by clubs, and went back to the Witch, and was by him so used,
until the Ass was seen in the Church to fall down on its knees, and to do
those things which could not possibly be performed by any brute beast, or mere
animal; then they apprehended the Witch which they suspected to have handled
him in that manner, and brought her before the Judges; and after three years
was past, he was restored to himself, and she was executed: The same we read in
Ammonius the peripatetick Philosopher, that commonly there was an Ass
ordinarily at the hearing of his Lecture.

Egypt, as our Merchants report, and Belonius in his Observations, printed at
Lutetia, says, That there was a Stage Player, which he himself saw in the
Suburbs of Cayxus, a Town in Egypt, who had a Dialogue with an Ass, and spoke
with it, and discoursed with it very familiarly; and he affirmed, that the Ass,
as he knew by its signs, gesture and voice, did show and intimate, that it took
wonderful well whatsoever he spoke to it. And if the Master had commanded the
Ass to pick out the beautifullest woman in all the company, and would eye her
narrowly in all her parts, and would draw near very boldly and confidently to
him, it would make much of him. If the Master had given out, That there should
be some barn or granary prepared for his Ass, then it would have showed a great
deal of exultation more then ordinary, and a great many such kind of tricks it
played; and many such like things at large declared in Belonius. I would speak
more of them, but I fear that there will be bounds put to them; and I could not
have put them in my creed, had I not been an eyewitness of them amongst the
Cayxian people.

Vincentius writes of, in Speculo, lib. 3. c. 109. that there were two guests
which were Witches, which sometimes were wont to change men into beasts; and
when they had turned a young man, a Player, into an Ass, 4
who that he might be in his right wits, did show great sport unto Travelers;
he was bought by a Neighbor with a great price, who said, they would not hold
their bargain, nor perform their Covenant, and if he should chance to go to a
river, and so escape, therefore the Ass after a few days were spent, went unto
the next Pool or Lake, and dipping twice or thrice in it, reassumed its
pristine shape. Peter Damianus, a man to be reckoned amongst the chief of his
age, when he was diligently enquired of, of the Master and the Ass, and of the
female Witches, he confessed it, and of those that saw the Ass turned into his
humane shape, it was related before Pope Leo the 7th, and after it was a long
while disputed on both sides pro and con, before that Pope; at last it was
concluded on the affirmative part.

Lucian and Apuleius Atheistical men, to be turned into Asses, who said that
this happened to the Witches by the Thessalonian women, who therefore were
enemies to them that they might know for certain whether this was true or no,
for both of them were (...) atheistical and accused of the Magical Arts.
Wherefore Apuleius turns every stone, and uses by all means and arguments in
his Apology that he might wash off that accusation of Witchcraft and Sorcery,
wherewith he was defamed, etc. Bodinus, lib. 2. cap. 6.

lib. 5. Inquisitorum, it is recorded, that in the year 1488. in the
Constantian Diocese, there were Storms, Hail, Lightning, and Tempests, which
hurt the corn for the space of four miles, the Country men in veighing against
the Magitians, there were two of them apprehended, Anna de Mindelen and Agne,
which were first attached, and when they were examined, they confessed a part,
that one day they went into the field with a little water, and although one of
them knew not the others mind or Counsel, yet they confessed they dug a
little hole, or a little ditch, and that about noontide, throwing a little
water into the hole or ditch, and stirring the water about, using some certain
kind of unknown words, and calling upon the Devil; then this being done, they
both went home, and so raised the Storm: Both of them were burned.

Constantian-field, which when she saw all the neighbors of her Village to be
merry, and dancing at a marriage, and taking it grievously that she was not
invited thereto; in the day time she was transported by the Devil to a hill
near unto the Village, (the Shepherds seeing her) and because she had not water
which she should throw into the ditch that she might stir up the tempest (for
she confessed that she observed this ceremony) she made water, and stirring
that about in the ditch, she spoke some certain words; by and by the Heavens
which now were (as I may say) all Crystalline clear, were muffled with Pitchy,
Jet-like clouds, foul and black masks, and a great shore of hail came quickly
upon the dancers in the Village, and the VVitch returned into the Village
again, they seeing her, did all verily believe that she had raised the tempest,
and laid hold on her, and the Shepherds did give in their testimony that they
saw her carried through the Air: which she being accused of, and convicted,
acknowledged it, and was burned.

Pontanus 5. libro, The French of Suetia, besieged in the Neapolitan Kingdom
by the Spaniards, when all things were parched with drought and heat, and the
French in their battle having a great scarcity of fresh water; some Priests
being Magitians, did draw-about the Crucifix in the Streets in the night time,
and with innumerable railings and blasphemies, they went their procession, and
threw it into the Sea, afterward they gave the consecrated host to an Ass,
and brought him to the Church Porch, and there buried him alive; then after
some Verses, and horrible blasphemies (which is not fit to be mentioned) there
came great dashing showers, and made almost a deluge, and so by this means
raised the siege, and were freed from the Spaniards, there was one in the year
1557. who threw all his Images and pictures into a Salt-peeter pit; and
afterward there was abundance of rain.

Biturgia, Neither only does the Devil exercise his power, not only in
raising of Tempests, Hail, Lightning, and about Corn and beasts, but also upon
Men, but chiefly upon wicked men, and those Witches (which were burnt at
Patavius in the year of our Lord, 1564. which we have mentioned) confessed that
in those conventicles in which they were congregated together, they worshipped
the Devil in the shape of a Kid, and when they were about to depart the place,
they heard a great voice pronounced by the Kid, Either ye shall be revenged, or
else ye shall dye: and so there were many men and beasts slain by him, leaving
no other means of preserving life.

NIderius writes, that sentence was pronounced by him against one Stadlinus of
the Lausanensian Diocese, who confessed that seven young Children were killed
in the VVombs of the Mothers, and so also brought barrenness upon all the
Cattle that belonged to his family, and being questioned about the matter, gave
answer that there was a certain beast, whose name we keep secret, that was laid
there by him at the threshold, which being taken away, B^rrennesse ceased in
his house.

WE read in the Monstreletian History of a short Witch that was taken by a
Priest, who had two Toads that she had Baptized, which she used to Magical
uses, which I should esteem as ridiculous, were there not daily examples that
confirmed it; When Sir John Martin, put in stead of the Governor of
Laodunensis, condemned a VVitch of S. Proba to be burned, who shook off two
great Toads which they found in her Coffers. The Froisardian History witnesses
that there was one Curio with the Suesionians who asked Counsel of a VVitch
that he might be revenged of an enemy who counseled him that he should Baptize
a Toad, and give it some brave name, and give it the Sacrament; which he did,
and many other things which is not to be expressed here, he confessed. Five
Inquisitors after Witches, declare these things amongst others, that examined
a VVitch, which confessed that she put the consecrated bread in a Napkin which
she ought to have swallowed down, and hid in the Cup where she nourished the
Toad and put to it the powders which she had given her by the Devil, and so
she muttered some few words (which is not fit to be mentioned here) and so
sprinked the Sheepfold thresholds over which the Cattle were to pass over the
aforesaid powder, therefore she was apprehended, and burned.

Valerian Witches in Subaudia which was Printed stood to be sold; we read that
casting a certain kind of powder upon Plants, they will quickly wither and dye.
I have (says Bodinus) in my power some Judgments that are sent unto me by that
worshipful Gentleman, the Lord of Pipemontens de barbu Dorcaea which by a
Statute of Parliament 11. of January, 1577. one was sentenced to death by the
Governor of S. Christopher, to Sanlisium which decree was confirmed and
established, and condemned to be burned, and afterward the Witch confessed that
she had killed three men by casting a little powder wrapped in a sheet of
Paper, into that place by which they were to journey, and murmuring these
words. In the name of God and all Devils, and other Conjuring diabolical
words. Which is not fit to be inserted in this place.

NIderus writes, who examined abundance of Witches, that he saw one, who only
by his voice could kill men, and another that did turn up and down, her
neighbors Ghost being a horrible spectacle. Anglus also writes (of whose
History we have formerly spoken) being the Physician of the Palatinate Princes,
that in the year 1539. there was an Husbandman of Ulrichus that was afflicted
with such kind of enchantments, Neusessurus by name, through whose skin there
was an Iron nail stricken, and was so gnawed and tormented in his bowels; and
despairing of remedy, strangled himself, and was anatomized, and cut up in the
sight of all the Citizens, and there was found in his body a Staff, four Steel
knives, two plates of Iron, and a bottom of hair. And therefore no wonder is
it, if the Thessalonian Witch at Pamphila caused a Woman's belly to swell and be
tympanized, as if she had been about to bring forth three births, and for the
space of eight Months she carried about her this burden. In like sort did
that Martinian Witch, which killed the German, not by poison, as Tacitus says,
or by a Cocks Egg, but by the help of the Devil. And also that Witch in the
Constantiensian Diocese, that did so puff up a man's body, as though he had the
leprosy, and a little after troubled his mind. Sprangerus and other Inquisitors
took care that she should be burned. The same Sprangerus relates, he being the
cause of it that there was another burnt on the borders of Basil, and Alsatia,
which confessed that she took grievously a contumely that was offered to her by
a good honest man, a Husbandman, when she was asked what mischief she desired
to be done unto that Husbandman that did so reproach her, to which question she
gave answer, That she would have his face to swell. Not long after the
Husbandman was infected with a Leprosy; these things she afterward confessed
to the Judge, that she was not able to do such a thing, but that it was done by
the Devil; by which argument we prove that all these things are done by the
Devil, who so insinuates and accommodates himself to the wills of men that use
him, that whosoever should cure his enemy, should be killed by his sociate or
companion.

Sprangerus's Story, of one Plumberus, a certain Conjurer, who lived at
Lendenburg in Germany, whom the Devil taught to shoot at, and pierce a
Crucifix with Darts before Venus feasts, by which means using some kind of
wicked words, and shooting and darting into the Air, he could daily kill and
slay three men which he saw and knew, although they were encloystered, and shut
up in the narrow circumference of a little Tower, and sometimes did deliberate
and consult whether he should destroy them or no. But at last the Countrymen
did rear him in pieces, without any Law-like Judgment after he had committed
many bloody murders: These things were done in the year 1420. Bodinus
Daemonom. lib. 2. cap. 8.

Pedemontanians, one Caralius by name, who seemed to be an Hermophrodite, and
when this Epicaene entered into other houses, and a while after they did kill
men; therefore the Hermophrodite was attached and apprehended, and did discover
the conjurations and the conventicles of all the Witches, and many of their
diabolical acts, (for there were almost 40 Witches) which did anoint the
outward handle of the gates to kill men; this was done, and happened in the
year 1536. And the same fell out afterward at Geneva in the year 1568, where
the Plague raged for the space of seven years, of which there dyed many. Cardan
writes, That he saw a certain Witch at Patavia, which quickly killed a boy
while she only gently touched his back with a rod. Glauca being a zealous Witch
of Medea, and the daughter of Creon, King, who married Jason, whom afterward
she slew, who sent her a golden Crown on the Marriage-day; and when Glauca did
set the Crown upon his head, there shined out a flame, by which he instantly
was burned, as Euripedes writes in Medea, (...), he says, Non venenis tuis sed
pharmacis, not by thy poisons, but druggs and Medicines.

Biebrane Witch, which was burnt at Laodunum, in the year 1556; This Witch did
debilitate and weaken men, and strangely screwed them awry, and destroyed
beasts and fruit; but at that very instant when she was burned, all these
ceased, as we have had intelligence of the Judge who examined her; besides, the
same Judge reported to me, That when the Witch threatened a certain woman, that
she should never after give suck, it so happened, that her milk instantly dried
up; and although she bore many children, yet her breasts were dried up: but the
Witch being burned quickly, her breasts abounded with milk; I heard this of a
certain Nobleman, that her Aunt did put an obstacle, or did cause her to be
barren, and bring forth no children; but when she dyed, she confessed that she
might get a place for her children: but after her Aunt dyed, and as soon as the
clew of her life was unravelled, or within a short while after, the Lady was
with child, and bore 2. or 3. children after she had been married eleven years.
Bodinus.

VIerus tells a story of a certain Conjurer which he saw in Germany, who in the
daytime, in the sight of the people, ascended, flew upwards toward Heaven;
and when his Wife caught him by the feet as he was flying up, she was taken up
together with him, and snatching hold on a Maid, snatched her up too, and they
hovered a good while in the Air, the multitude stood wondering at the miracle. A
like Example we read in the History of Hugh Floriacensis, a Mantisconensian
Earl, howling with a great voice, O friends, help me, was caught up into the
Air and carried away, and wasn ever seen after. The same Vierus relates, That
he saw men snatched into the Air by devils. And it was required of a certain
Magitian in Germany, who promised, that he would bring out the Books of
Franciscus the first, King, out of the Madrid Tower; he was transported through
the Air out of Spain into France; but for all this nothing was done, which was
much feared, lest that they should rush upon the Captain, and break all the
necks of the ruinators. So there was a Jewish Magitian, Sedechias by name, who
(as John the Tritemian Abbot relates) did shoot a man thorough the Air, and
tore his body, and gathering up his limbs, knit them together again, as did
Simon Magus, Nero being present, who did gulf up a load of Hay, with Cart and
Horses, and drivers, in the sight of all the people.

The End of the First Book.
THE VVonderfull History OF SPECTRALS; AND The several Devices and Delusions of
Devils and Evil Spirits. The Second Book.
Of Oracles, Prophecies, and Predictions of Devils.
TElephus, the King of the Mysons, who did prohibit and interdict the Grecians
from descending or going into the lower Countries, when he obstinately pursued
Ulysses amongst the Vines; but being hindered, he fell upon the trunk or stump
of a Vine; Achilles was a great way off, who shot a Dart into the King's left
thigh; but Peace being made, and the Greeks returning to their own Country,
Telephus was a long time afflicted with the pain of the wound; and when he
could not be cured by any means, when he was in great extremity, he was
admonished by Apollo's Oracle, That he should make use of Achilles and
Aesculapius his sons; so he instantaneously sailed to Argos, lest he should be
denied of the remedy that was promised him by the Oracle; Achilles with Machaon
and Podalyrius took care of his wound, and in a short space, that which the
Oracle did predict came to pass.

CRoesu^, the King of the Lydians, when he had parted with o^eson, as Atium, he
had another son that was dumb, and for the cure of it, he left nothing undone,
no stone was unturned; and then he sent to enquire of the Oracle at Delphos, to
whom Pythia answered: (...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
Thy speechless son, great King, Croesus high race,
Wish not his words to hear, thy longed-for Grace;
One day thy boon shall thee distress, when thou
Shall have with force what thou requestest now.
The event did give credit to the Oracle; for the Gardi being taken by Cyrus,
when a certain Soldier rushed upon the King, his dumb son cried out with a
loud voice, when before he never spoke word, (...), O thou man, kill not
Croesus; so that Croesus by his own fault lost his Kingdom, who by the words of
his son, saved his life. Herodotus lib. 1.

Minyae relate or tell the story about Hesiod's bones, after this manner; The
Plague raging upon Man and Beast, they sent some to consult with the Oracle,
who received this answer, That to cease the Plague, there was only this one
remedy; for if they did but carry Hesiod's bones out of the Naupactian field,
into Orchomenium, otherwise their malady could not be cured: And again they
asked of the Oracle, In what part of the Naupactian field that should find
them? Pythia gave answer, That a Crow would show them the place. And when they
returned back into their Country, and those that were sent enquiring for it not
far from the way side, saw a Crow sitting on a stone, and there they dug,
and found Hesiod's bones in the concave of the Monument, with this inscription,
Pausanias in Boeticis.

ATheniensis, the son of Catatreus the Cretian's King, when he asked counsel of
the Oracle, had this answer given, That the fates had decreed, that his Father
should be slain by him; and desiring to shun that fate, of his own accord,
together with many other Volunteers, went away into the mouth of Rhodes, which
is called Camiros Catatreus, by the instigation of his only son, took his
journey into Rhodes, desirous of bringing his son into Creet; It was night time
ere he came into the Island, and there was a fight and a contention rise
between his Companions and the Inhabitants of the Island, Althemenes coming with
his help, unwi^tingly he slew his father with a Dart; for which cause
Althemenes being struck with great sorrow, and not being able to bear the
Atlantean burden of that grief, he did forsake the company of men, and wandered
alone through deserts and uncouth paths, and he being spent with grief, dyed.
Diodorus, lib. 5. cap. 13.

AMphio^'s house being wholly consumed with the Plague, Laius succeeded in the
Thebane Kingdom; he taking to Wife Jocasta, Creon's daughter: and when he
wanted children a long while, consulting the Oracle, Whether or no he were to
have any children? received this answer, It was not good for him to have
children, because if he had, there would proceed from him a son that should
kill his father, and by such an unlucky fortune should contaminate his house;
therefore Laius commanded the Infant that was born, that he should be thrown
away, his feet being manacled in iron chains, from whence he was surnamed
Oedipus, from the swelling of the wound: The household servants when they did
not cast forth the Child which they had given to them, they did delivered it to
a certain woman servant, whose name was Polybia; and when he came to man's
estate, Laius appointed and gave order, that they should consult the Oracle
about the Infant that was exposed and sent abroad. Also Oedipus being certified
by whom he was so exposed; and going to Pythia, to get intelligence who were
his Parents; so when he met with his Father at Phocidis, though they did not
know one another, Laius did very imperiously command Oedipus to give him the
way. Oedipus moved with anger, slew Laius, not knowing he was his Father.
Diodorus, lib. 4. cap. 6.

PArysadas, the King of the Bosphorean Cymmerians, had three sons, Eumelus,
Satyrus, and Prytamis, who when their father was dec^ased, strove and contended
for the Kingdom; Eumelus by the help of Ariapharnis the King of the Thracians,
slew Prytamis; Satyrus oppugning the Palace, received a wound in one of the
muscles of his arm, and so perished by it; therefore Eumelus being possessed
of, and invested in the Kingdom for five years space, by a strange accident was
slain; for when he returned home to his house out of Scythia, he hastened to a
certain sacrifice, where there was a Chariot running to the Court, and it was
carried upon four wheels, in which there was a Tent or a Pavilion, the horses
were affrighted, and so carried him away; When the Chariot-driver could not
hold the reins, the King fearing lest he should be cast into ditches,
endeavored to leap out of the Chariot, and his sword being involved and
sticking in one of the wheels, he was cut with it, falling cross upon it, and
so was slain instantly. It is also reported, that Saty^us was warned of the
Oracle, that he should have a care of a Mouse, therefore he suffered none of
his Subjects to take that name, and ^^d much in fear of houshold-mice, and
field-mice, and gave warning that the boys should kill the Mice, and stop the
holes that they might not enter into the Rooms: At last he ended his life,
being wounded in a muscle of his arm. Eumelus asking counsel of the Oracle,
received answer, That he should have a care of those things that he had carried
to his house; therefore he would not rashly enter into his house, unless first
his young men had viewed the top and bottom of it; but when he was slain by
reason of the Chariot wheel, because of the Tent that was carried in the
Chariot, they all thought that the Oracle was fulfilled. Diodorus Siculus, lib.
viges.

CTrus the King of the Persians marching to Istrum against the Massagetes and
Essedonas, he consulted Orpheus's head in Lesbo; and asking the Oracle, of the
event of the Wars; had this answer, (...), i. e. Similem exitum, ut ego,
habebis, Thou shall dye the same death that I dyed of; the event gave credit to
the Oracle: for Cyrus was slain by Tomyris the Queen, who cut off his head, as
Orpheus's was by the Thracian Menadians. Philostratus testis.

POlycrates the Samian Tyrant, after he had taken the Rhene Island, and
consecrated it to Apollo, there was set up gallant Plays at Delphos; and also
sent to consult Apollo's Oracle, Whether he should call those Plays Delion, or
Pythian? The Oracle answered, They shall be both Pythion and Delian Plays to
thee; intimating, That he should soon dye; and therefore it was made a Proverb.

Julius Caesar, by many evident and wonderful Prodigies; for a few months
before that time, when the Husbandman by the Julian were brought into the
Capuan Colony to cast down the old Monuments, to build new Villages; and they
did it more accurately, in that some Antiquarians that searched, found some
brazen Tables in a Monument, which did give notice to them, that Capys, the
builder of Capua, was buried there; and there was found there that brazen
plate, in which was written in Greek this sentence; When the bones of Capys
shall be discovered, then shall it come to pass, that one of Julian- blood
shall be slain by the hands of his Kinsmen. And presently after Italy was
punished with great slaughter. And lest that any should think this thing
fabulous and commentitious, the Author of it is Cornelius Balbus, one of
Caesar's Favorites. Suetonius.

TItus the Emperor had this of the Oracle, He should dye in the same manner
that Ulysses perished and dyed, (...), by the Sea; Ulysses was slain by his son
Telegonus, by a Wray-spear, that is, by a weapon of that fishe's bones, instead
of an Arrow; And so Titus was killed by his brother Domitian with the poison of
a Sea-Hare. Coelius, lib. 26. cap. 30.

JUstinianus, the Roman Emperor, about the year of our Lord, 533, sent one
Mundus, a Captain, into Dalmatia, against the Ostrogoths, who inhabited
Salonas; And when he went out with his son Mauritius to behold the Camp, he was
slain by the Goths; and so fulfilled the Oracle, and freed many from their
fear. But there were some who said, That there were some Prophetical Verses
pronounced by one of the Sybills, whose opinion was, that Mundus was to perish
with his issue, where at length Africa was to be taken by the Romans; But then
Justinian did restore Africa to the tame Vandals: This Prophecy of Sybill did
much perplex and affright many men, who did expect, that there would a sudden
destruction come upon the whole World: But the event, death, and end of this
Captain Mundus and his son, did show, that such like Prophecies were obscure
and ambiguous, and how fallacious the Artificers of Magic were. Aventinus,
lib. 3. Annal. Bojorum: et Johan Magnus, lib. 10. cap. 14.

MAnuel Comnenus hoping that the thread of his life should be extended, did put
himself into a Monastical habit, so that he ended both his life and his reign
together; who had reigned eight and thirty years, excepting three months; to
which continuance of the Empire, that old Oracle seemed to allude, -- Tui
prehendet,
-- te Postrema nominis. viz.
The last part or syllable of thy name will put Finis to thy life.
For (...) the last syllable of the name of Manuel, with the Greeks, does
comprehend or complete that number. Nicetas, lib. 7.

XErxes beginning War with the Grecians, when he was vanquished and overcome at
Salamina, he constituted Mardonius, that he should prosecute the War in his
name; But when he little availed and prospered at the Plateas, when he fought
and flew, his fame began to be mute; Mardonius left a great Treasure in the
Tent which he had buried in the ground: Polycrates the Theban, enticed with
hope of it, did buy the field* But when he had a long time made scrutiny and
search for the Treasure, and yet did not find it, he consulted Apollo's Oracle
at Delphos, by what means he might find the Treasure? Apollo answered him in
these words, (...), Turn every stone; And when he did so, it is said, that he
found great store of gold. Erasmus in Chiliadibus.

AFter that twelve Kings had created Setho to be King of Egypt, and making a
strict covenant between themselves that they should not entrench one upon
another, and so by a sure conspiration did rule Egypt: but in the mean while,
it was known by the Oracle, that he that should sacrifice or offer in an Iron
vessel should only obtain the Egyptian Empire. Not very long after, it came to
pass that when by chance, when all the Kings stood in Vulcans Temple in the
manner of sacrificers, the chief Priest of the Temple, numbering each of them,
except Psammetichus who stood in the last place, took the Phiall, and offered;
and he being compelled by necessity, took off his Helmet, and sacrificed
therewith, then he bore his Censer as the rest of the Kings did: the thing
being minded, and observed, incontinently they that stood by, remembered the
Oracle, and consulting together, they judged Psammetichus to be worthy of
death. But by chance it happened to be known. The greatest part of the Kingdom
being shaken off, the other Kings did relegate and dismiss by their Law,
another part of them into the fenny part of Egypt, and that the rest should
abstain from that: Psammetichus did take very ill that ignominy, and underhand
took private counsel how he should revenge that contumely: therefore in the
interim it was told by the Oracle out of Latone, which was in the Buti City,
accounted the truest of all those that the Egyptians had, that he should use
the help and aid of the brazen men that should issue out of the Sea, and that
they should vindicate Psammetichus, and inthrone him in great dignity. Not much
time was spent ere that the Jonians mixed with the Carian viewing all the
Sea-cost thereabouts, that they might rob thereabouts, and being driven by
Storms and Tempests, did voluntarily steer their course into Egypt: therefore
one of the inhabitants seeing them land, and come on shore, affrighted at the
uncouthnesse and strangeness of the thing, being full of fear, related it to
Psammetichus that the brazen men were come. For the Egyptians, until that
time, had never seen an harnessed Soldier, then he perceived that the fatal
time was come; and quickly he entered in league with the Jonians, and with
their companions, and got them on his side, for the appointed war with many
promises; and Psammetichus aided with these helps, quickly destroyed the Kings
by whom he was relegated and dismissed, and all the Country was yielded to
him. Sabellicus lib. 4. Ennead. 2. ex Herodoti, lib. 2.

MAnuel Comnenus Emperor, having a Son born, that he might make his birthday
more famous, did entertain his noblest Citizens (as the custom was) with a
sumptuous feast, carrying boughs in their hands, and called his Son Alexius,
not only that he might honor him with his Grandfathers name, but for the
Oracles sake, who by ambages and doubtful speeches gave answer that so long
the stock of the Comnenian family should endure as the name did comprehend the
letters (...), per A. Alexius; per J. Johannes; per M. and A. Manuel, and his
son Alexius, not obscurely did signify. Nicetas lib. 5.

Baeotia being spoiled and devastated by the sury, violence, and war of the
Thracians, they who over-lived the slaughter, went into the innermost concavest
den where the Oracle was, That there they should take up their seats, where
they should see the white Crows. By and by in Thessaly near the Pagaeatican
promontory, when they were objected there to their sights, there were
discovered to be white Crows, which being wet in Wine, the boys sent out
de-albifyed and anointed with brine or plaster. Coelius, lib. 57. cap. 11.

Teu^ri-Cretensians sought themselves out new habitations, and asking advice of
the Oracle, received this answer, That they should there fix their station, and
inhabit where (...), hoc est, terrae ^ilii eos adorirentur, where the sons of
the Earth should set upon them. They wandering about Mysta and Cili^ia, at last
came into Troy, where they fell asleep; then a great company of domestical
mice did eat and gnaw the strings of their Bows and Shields, so that when they
awaked and rose up, they could make no more use of their Bows, therefore they
thought that the Mice were the Enemies that were foretold to them by the
Oracle; and sat down and lived in that place, and builded the Town Sminthe,
because the Cretans call mice (...). Eustachius, Iliad.

Phrygians being carried by Aeneas their Captain into the Laurel field, were
not willing to go any further, but listened to the Oracle, that it might show
them some future events, and contingencies, the Oracle told them, That there
they were to have their permanent dwellings, where for hunger they should be
driven to eat their Tables: Which not very long after their repulse happened, and
then they remembered, and made themselves bread-trenchers, which was for their
meat, that for want of it they eat; and then there was a cry from one to
another, that now they were destroyed, and dead men because of their error,
for there should they have their Mansions and dwellings, where they should eat
such kind of Tables for want of meat, which words were received with favor and
consent by all them that stood about. It is not very evident where they
rejected that answer of the Trojan: some think at Dodonaeum, others in the Tent
Cottage of Ida in Erythris, which Sybill did inhabit, a Maid-prophetesse and
dweller there. It is also said that the Trojans were commanded to sail to the
Western Countries until they were driven into that place where they should be
forced to eat their Tables for want of bread. And when that happened they knew
that time was come that they should end their wandering, and that they were
arrived at the fatal land. Sabellicus, Lib. 7. Aeneid. 1.

THe Lacedaemonians were led into the Tarentine Colony by their Captain
Phalanthus, a Spartane; the Oracle at Delphos predicted, that when he did
observe rain under Aethra, then he should be Master or overcomer of the field
and City. But when he himself by the clew of his own reason, could not trace
out the meaning of the Oracle, neither knew what it meant, nor consulted any
interpreter, he made ready his Navy to go into Italy; and there when he had
overcome the barbarous Nations, and neither could compass field nor City when
it came into his mind, that it was utterly unpossible that that which the
Oracle said should be, and began to suspect it, whether it was the voice of God
or no, because it could never come to pass that it should rain, when it is a
pure Crystalline serene Heaven, which the Greeks call Aethra; His Wife very
lovingly did comfort him by all means, who did so despond and despair, and
sometimes leaning his head upon her knees, and killing flies, her tears for
sorrow of heart, and the hard fortune of her husband, trickled down, that her
hope was so frustrated. Wherefore opening the sluices and floud-gates of her
eyes, she did bedew and wet her Husbands head; then were the knots of the
Oracle unloosed, for the name of his Wife was Aethra. Therefore in that very
night which followed that day, he took the City, and a rich Sea-Town of the
Tarentines. Pausanias in Phocicis.

COdrus, an Athenian King, sprung out of Thrace, when the whole Attick Region
was destroyed with the Peloponnesian War; he advising with the Oracle, had
this answer, That they should be Victors, whose Captain perished by a warlike
hand; therefore putting off his Kingly regal habit, he was like to a common
Soldier, and offered himself to the force of his enemy; and one of the adverse
Soldiers struck him with his weapon, and so he voluntarily run upon his own
death; and was willing rather to perish himself, then that the Athenians should
perish. Cicero in fine lib. 1. Tusc. quaest. et lib. 5. de finibus.

Xerxes made War with the Grecians, the Lacedaemonians enquiring of the Oracle
about the event of the War, they received this answer from Pythia, That the
Athenians were to be overcome by the Persians, but that the Spartan King was to
be killed in the field. Mardonius says, the Athenians being relinquished and
left, three hundred of the Lacedaemonians were slain with their King Leonidas.
Herodot. lib. 8.

Romans making War against Pyrrhus the Epirotes King, Paulus Aemilius received
this answer from the Oracle, That he should be the Victor, if he should build
an Altar in that place where he saw a man swallowed up in his running. A few
days after he saw Valerius Torquatus swallowed up in the ground; and therefore
he built an Altar there, and got the Victory, and sent an hundred and sixty
Elephants to Rome, carrying Towers on their backs. Plutarchus in Parallelis.

Cimbrick War Batabaces came to Pessinunte, being Priest to the Mother of
great Idaea, he brought the Goddess out of the Temple, to declare Victory to
the Romans, and of the great glory and credit of the War which was to come:
And when the Senate was agreed on it, and for Victory sake had determined to go
to the Temple of the Goddess of Victory; and when he was comeing ^or^h to make
his Oration to the People, that he might declare these things to them, A.
Pompeius, the Tribune of the people, did hinder Batabaces, calling him a
deluder, a deceiver, and plucked him out of his Pulpit with great indignity,
when the thing it self spoke for it, and commended his words; and when Pompeius
returned home with whispering and muttering speeches, such a Fever bore him
company, (as every one knew) that he dyed within seven days after. Plutarchus
in Marii vita.

Vejentes in a sharp and long War were driven within the City Walls by the
Romans, and yet the City could not be taken; and the delay did seem no less
burdensome and intolerable to the besiegers, then to the besieged, the immortal
gods by a wonderful miracle did make way for them, that they might accomplish
their desired Victory; on a sudden the Albane Lake or Gulf not being at all
increased by any showers from Heaven, neither had it any addition from any
inundation from earth, did overflow its banks; and for inquisition sake to know
the reason of it, Ambassadors were sent to Apollo's Oracle at Delphos, to know
the reason of it; They received this answer, That the water of that Lake should
be diffused thorough the fields; for so even should the Vejos be overrun, and
brought into subjection by the Romans: And before the Legates might proclaim or
declare, a Southsayer of the Vejentians was taken by a Roman Soldier, (for
they wanted Interpreters of their own) and he was brought into the Tents, and
did prophecy and predict: Therefore the Senate being warned by a double
admonition and prediction, almost at the same time did obey the Oracle, and was
possessed of the City. Valerius Maximus, lib. 1. cap. 6.

Dorienses did often attempt to take Elea against Augea's posterity, whose King
was then Eleus, they were commanded by the Oracle, that when they sailed back
again, they should make Trioculus Captain; And by chance Oxylus met him sprung
out of, and begotten of Aemon of Thoas his son, being a banished man in
Aetholia, playing in the Sun, unwittingly he killed a man; And when he had
blinded a Mule of one of his eyes, Orespontes ingeniously conjectured, that the
Oracle belonged to Oxylus, therefore the Captain being elected, they passed to
Peloponnesus in a ship; for he conceived, that by a Foot-Army they could not
attempt to break thorough the straits; so the Dorienses obeyed, and they
presently got Elea. Pausanias, lib. 5.

Lacedaemonians were always overcome in War by the Tegeans: they asked advice
of the Oracle, How, and by what means they might so please their gods, that
they might overcome the Tegeans? Pythia answered, That Orestes the son of
Ag^me^non, his bones were to be brought to Lacedemon; and they doubting and
being uncertain of the place in which they were hid; The Oracle answered, (...),
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).


To this purpose: There Is an Arcadian lives in a Cot,
Where wind is by two hulls together got,
Where type on the antitype, one dint is set
Upon another, where lie buried yet
The spoils of Agamemnon: if that ground
And Cot thou purchase, there they may be found.
When no man could understand the Oracle, Liches, one of the benefactors of the
Spartanes, came to Tegea, and sitting down in a Brazier's Shop, wondered at his
works. To whom the Smith said, Why do thou wonder, O thou stranger, (says
he) at these? thou would much more wonder, if thou should see a Sepulcher
which I have found, by digging a Well under ground, in which I saw bones seven
cubits long, which I again buried in the earth. Then Liches instantly called to
mind the Oracle within himself, and conceived, that those two winds which the
Oracle had spoken of, were the bellows of the Smith; and that the anvil was an
antitype: for he was to suffer in rowing back; and that the hammer was a sign
or emblem which struck the Anvil, of evil, first passive, because it suffers
from the hammer; afterward also active, because it was invented for men's
destruction. And Liches ruminating with himself, did communicate this thing to
the Lacedaemonians, and feigning an escape, returned to the Tegeans; and he
bought the skeleton, of the Smith, and privily carried the bones to Lacedemon:
And then it came to pass, that the Lacedaemonians overcame the Spartanes in
War, almost at that very same time in which Cyrus took the Kingdom from
Croesus. Herodotus, lib. 1.

IN the reign of Tiberius the Emperor, there was an Oracle given out at Rome,
in these words; Bis ter trecentis circumvolventibus annis,
Seditio perdet Romanos.
Ere thrice three hundred Snakes incircled be,
Rome by Sedition ruined you shall see.
Which they did think came to pass in Nero's time, which fell out near that
time; the people repeated these words, when part of the City was wickedly burnt
by Nero; Nero to pacify the people, said, That there was never such words
spoken: Which done, the people sung this Sybills verse, Ultimus Aeneadum matrem
necat Induperator. The last of the Aenea's Family shall kill his Mother, he
being Emperor. Which happened; and whether it was an Oracle from God, or from
a prophetic spirit that was amongst the people, or by a guess that they had
from the state that things was then in, I know not; for Nero was the last of
the Julian-Family, which sprung from Aeneas which ruled. Xiphilinus, in Nerone.

Spaniards into America; the King of the Island which, after the name of the
Finders, they called Hispaniolam; he consulted the Idol of Zemus, and
religiously underwent a Fast for five days together, also much whipping, that
he might know what would become of his Kingdom. The Devil answered, That there
were bearded, which should be armed men, that should take away the Kingdom by
force, and that by one fatal blow, they by their swords should anatomize many
bodies, and that they should oppress the Inhabitants by cruel servitude. The
King hearing the words of the Oracle; and that he might appease the wrath of
the gods, he epitomized and comprehended in a verse which they call Arentum,
which he would have to be sung at their Festivals, with solemn ceremonies;
therefore many of the Inhabitants when they saw the Spaniards-first come into
the Island, they consulted how they might escape, remembering the Oracle. Petrus
Cieza, tom. 2. rerum Indicarum. cap. 33.

SArdanapalus, an Assyrian King, was besieged by Arbaces a Mede: ^n the City of
Ninus, there was an Oracle given to his Ancestors, That Ninus could never be
taken, unless the Enemy should make a River to the City, which he verily
believed could never be taken; and therefore he thought he could bear out the
siege, and also expected aid to come to him. When he had held out the siege for
the space of two years, by lethargiz'd and idle besiedged persons the River by
continual showers did flow to a very great height; and when it had deluged a
good part of the City, and had cast and thrown down the Walls for the length of
twenty furlongs; The King thinking the time of the Oracle was come to pass,
despaired of remedy; and lest that he should be taken of the enemies, he burnt
the Palace: Arbaces creeping thorough the ruins of the walls, was made King.
Diodorus, lib. 2. cap. 7.

Hesiod, that he should have a care of the Temple of Naemean Jupiter; when
therefore he took his flight from Nemean at Peloponnesus, by chance he came
into Oeneon of Locris, where there was a Temple of Jupiter Naemean; and being
in that place, unawares he was slain by Amphiphane and Ganetor, the sons of
Physigeus, because they believed their Sister was deflowred by him, and that
Stesichorus was sprung from him by that illegitimate means. Thucyd. apud
Gyrald. Dial. 2. hist. P^et.

EPaminondas the Thebane received this from Apollo's Oracle at Delphos, That he
was to have a care of Pelagus, which he thought was to be understood of the
Sea; wherefore it was his greatest care, lest he should be carried or
transported any where by Galleys, or by any other vessel: But the Devil had
forewarned him, not that he should avoid the Sea, but a Grove that he was to
eschew at Mantinea, whose name was Pelagus, where he dyed. Pa^sanias in
Arcadicis and Suidas.

Cambyses, a Persian King, out of the City of Latona of Butus, that he was to
yield himself to the fates in the way to Ecbatanis; he understood it of
Ecbatana of Meda; but when he was in Syria, after the death of Apis the
Egyptian god, he got upon his horse, his sword was naked, wounded the King in
the thigh, tormented with fear and grief; and he asked What was the name of the
next Town? and when he knew that it was Ecbatana, he did acknowledge his
error, and dyed despairing. Herodotus lib. 3.

PYthia did prophecy and predict the death of Philip King of Macedonia, in
this manner: -- Taurus adest, and finis adest, ferietque minister*
Et Graecis pariter,
O utinam fierem Jovis ales in aethere juxta
Thermodoontis aquas, procul ut bella horrida ab alto*
Despicerem; victus flet at hic qui vicit obivit.
A Bull being present, thy end's not absent far,
The servant over the Greeks shall domineer;
O that I were Jove's Bird eagling on high,
Towering always near to the azure sky,
Over Thermodonian waters for to see
Such crimson and such scarlet Tragedy,
Where conquered shall bewail with weeping eye,
The Conqueror conquered, by the fates shall dye.
This doubtful speech King Phillip interpreted on his side, and thought that
it was predicted by the Oracle as though Perses were to be sacrificed in the
manner of a sacrifice. But the meaning was far otherwise which signified quite
contrary, to wit, Phillip being amongst a great company of men amongst the
sacrifices where there ought to be a crowned Bull sacrificed, and therefore he
was very glad, and sacrificed joyfully, supposing afterward to have his
tutelar Gods to help him to bring Asia under the dominion of Macedonia, and
when he offered great oblations in honor of the Gods, and his daughter
Cleopatra, which came of his Wife Olympias, was espoused to Alexander the King
of the Epirots his Brother, he commanded that the Marriage should be celebrated
in Aegis the City of Macedonia, and many out of all the parts of Greece flocked
to that jolly wedding, and magnificent consorts of Music, and contention in
it, and also a great feast made to receive the friends and guests, he in the
midst of the ceremonies invested in a white garment, was slain by Pausaunias
one of the guard, at the Thermodonian River near Chaeronea, where a little
while before he had got a famous victory of the Grecians: for Pausaunias took
hainously that he was complained of for ravishing of Attalas the Niece of
Olympias and was often derided of the King for it. Diodorus lib. 16. and
Pausaunias in Arcad.

Delphick Oracle what he might do that he might come and attain to a full and
perfect age; Pythia commanded him that he should avoid Quadrigas, which he
understood, was meant a Cart drawn with four horses; which hearing, he gave
order that all Carts throughout his whole Kingdom should be removed, and would
not go into Boetia, which was called Quadrigas. At the last he was slain by
Pausaunias, who carried a Cart and four Horses engraven in the hilt of his
Sword. Valerius Maximus, libro primo. Cicero de fato. Plutarch, in Alexandro.
Others say, that when he encircled and rid about the Thebane Marsh, which was
called Currus, he was slain.

AESchylus the tragic Athenian Poet, was told by the Oracle that he should dye
by a blow; therefore being a banished man in Sicilia, he did eschew roofs lest
he should be oppressed by their ruin, or knocked on the head by their fall:
but it happened that sitting on a stone in the Country, with his head uncovered,
and an Eagle flying on high called Morphos, (whose sole property it is to break
the Sea shellfish) and being hallucinated and deceaved by the whiteness of
his bald pate, thinking it to be a chalky stone, let the shellfish fall upon
it, to have the shellfish broken, and so Aeschylus perished by that fall and
stroke. Idem. lib. 9. cap. 12.

DAphidas the Sophister, when he Ironically had consulted the Delphick Oracle,
whether he might have an Horse upon which he might be carried; The Oracle
answered that there might be found one, but that he should be so troubled and
vexed by it, that he should dye. A while after he went to Attalus the King,
whom he had formerly offended, and was apprehended, and so precipitated, and
cast down from a stone, was called Equus. Cicero de fato. Et Valor. Max. lib.
1. de Miraculis.

Dionysius the Seniour, Tyrant of Syracusa, acted a Tragedy to the A^henians in
their Bachanalian feasts, and when he by all their suffrages and voices was
declared Victor, one of the Queristers or chanters of the Musical company,
thinking that he should have some great reward if he were the first Messenger
that should relate the Victory, sailed in all haste to Corinth. And there found
a Ship that was to go to Sicily, and boarding on it with prosperous winds and
gales sailing to his desired Haven, and arriving at Syracusa, and then
incontinently related the Victory to the Tyrant, and was gratified with great
rewards. Dionysius was exceeding glad of the news, and offered gratulatory
sacrifices to his Gods, and celebrated great feasts, banquettings, and
Bacchanalians; and when he had invited his friends and familiars indulging and
overcharging himself with too much wine, fell into a grievous sickness by
reason of his too much gulphing of Wine. But when he was told by his Gods that
he was to dye, when he had overcome his betters. He taking the Oracle in this
sense, to wit, as having reference to the Carthagenians, that they were better,
stronger, and more warlike men then he. Wherefore having many conflicts,
bickerings, and skirmishes with them, if the victory seemed to hang in
equilibrio, i.e. eeven balance, or rather his side was likely to have the
Praestat, he was wont to make the two Wings of his army to fly away and to be
ore-come of their own accord, least he should seem to overcome his betters, but
yet for all this Matchevilian Policy, he could not escape the sentence which
the fates had determined against him. But being an indifferent good Poet, was
adjudged by the A^henian suffrages to overcome better Poets; therefore the
truth of the Oracle being in some measure accomplished, and fulfilled, the term
and date of his life ended. Diodorus, lib. 15.

ALexander the Epirot's King, being called into Italy by the Tarentines, and by
the lots of the Dodonean Oracle, he was warned to have a care of Atherusia, and
the City of Pandosia; for there he was to yield himself to the fates, for this
cause he sent betime into Italy, that he might keep a distance from Pandosia a
City of Epirus, and Acheron its River, which the Thesprotian bosom received,
it flowing out of Molossis, standing hellish black jet-like pools and bays.
But no humane providence or foresight could eschew fatal necessity, which for
the most part rushes soonest into that which is aimed most to avoid. Oftentimes
Alexander had overcome the Brutians and Lucans in battle, and had taken many
of their Cities. In the mean time, he had fortified and strengthened three
Monuments not far from the Pandosian City, which did grieve and molest the
borders of the Lucans and Brutians, and did grievously oppress the Country
thereabouts. But continual showers did so deluge and overflow the fields that
lay between, and so the army being parted into three, could not get help from
any other. Alexander, not being able to get supplies, made two Bulworks or
Castles of defense, therefore they environed with their siege, the Captain
parting with, and losing a great part of his riches and provision: There were
of the Lucans exuls and banished men about Alexander 200; by this means, they
with their party promised that they would bring the King into their power,
either alive or dead. Therefore the King daring to adventure, broke through the
midst of his enemies with his out-spread waving hands and arms, and killed the
Captain of the Lucans, fighting with him hand to hand, and gathering together
his army into one, he with a full body came to the River, the strength of whose
Tide a little before had broke down the bridge, and when he consulted of an
escape over it, being not fathomed by him, and his Army being tired out, and by
chance one blab'd forth the name of the River, which was much hated by the
King, and so exclaimed and cried out, Art thou called Acheron, which being
known, he made a great haesitation whether or no he should pass over the
River: and when he so delayed, one Sotinus a servant, gave warning that the
Lucans did seek places to lie in wait for them, and when the King thought that
they were ready to rush upon him, with his naked Sword, he leapt into the
River. A Horse on the overthwart bank stood to receive him; which when one of
the Lucans had wounded him with casting a Dart, and the streaming Tides carried
him down (his Spear sticking fast) toward the enemies Camp dead, and they
tearing it to pieces, and cutting it in the midst, one part they sent away, the
other was kept for to be mocked, which they a long while battered with stones
and darts, and at the last they delivered it to a Woman, that she might keep it
to be a ransom to redeem her Husband and children which were captives on the
adverse party, and they sent away the bones of the burned body to their enemies
at Metapontus, from whence they were further sent to Cleopaetra, and to her
sister Olympias, the Mother of Great Alexander. Strabo* lib. 6. Valerius
Maximus, lib. 1.

THere was an old Oracle came from the Altar of Jupiter Ammon, concerning the
death of Annibal the famous Carthagenian Captain. Lybyssa corpus teget tuum.
Lybyssa shall be thy grave. Anniball did suspect Africa, and that his burial
should be in Carthage, and thought he should end his life there, for there is a
fabulous place of Bythinia: beside the Sea not far off, there is a little
Village called Lybyssa, and by chance Annibal was banished there; and because
he always suspected the mollities, and tenderness of the King of Prussia, and
abhorred the Romans, therefore he opened seven subterraneal holes or passages
before his house, or out of his Tent, and diverse foramina or oilet holes made,
in which there was many secret conspirators, privately combineing together. And
when he received that commandment of T. Quintius Flaminius the Roman
Ambassador which he had desired and obtained of the King, he attempted a
flight through the private holes; but when he fell into the Kingdoms snares,
he determined to kill himself. Some report him to wrap his neck in his Cloak,
and commanded his servant that he should infix his knee in his posteriours, and
twine and twist him hard, until he should dye. Livius lib. 8. Decad. 4. and
had poison given him, which he had power to mix and mingle himself, and taking
the cup himself, said, We free at last the Roman people by this days work,
when he believed that it was expected there should be a long and a tedious
death of that hated old man, and by this means they say Anniball perished.
Plutarchus in Flaminio. Pausaunias vero in Arcadicis; that when he got upon a
horse, he of his own accord, wounded his hand, and had not rid far when a
Fever got hold of him by reason of the inflammation of his wound, and that he
dyed within three days. And so the fatal name of the man whom the
Nicomedienses called Lybyssam, fulfilled the Oracle.

APpius Claudius in a Civil war, in which Cn. Pompeius falling out with Caesar,
breaking the league, bringing both detriment to himself and to the
Commonwealth, desirous to find out the spring and root of that great sedition
(for he excelled in strength the Achaian Empire) he compelled the chief
Governor of the Delphick Tripos, to descend into the inmost concave that they
might know certain things; consulting with the Oracles, they were almost
choked such a damp and stinking vapor of that divine, or rather diabolical
spirit was drawn in by them. Therefore an inspired Virgin by the instinct of
the Deity, and with a horrid voice, sung with such quavering sounds of words,
uttered the destiny, or Oracle. For it is nothing (says she) to thee; in this
Roman war, thou shall get the Valley of Euboea: but he thinking to be
admonished by Apollo's Oracles, lest there should arise any contention or
difference about it, departed into that Region and Country which is between
Rhamminta, that noble and renouned part of Micka and Caristum, bordering upon
the Chalcidick Sea, lying between, got the name of Euboea, where he was spent
and consumed of a disease, before the Pharsalian combat and fight, and he
possessed that burying place which was foretold him by the Devil. Valerius
Max. lib. 1. cap. 8.

Antianaean Oracles gave an Item unto C. Caligula that he should have a care of
Cassius, therefore he gave order that Cassius Longinus the Pro-consull of Asia
being a Lawyer, to be put to death; but before he had satisfied his tyrannical
desires, he was slain by Cassius Chaerea, not being able to eschew his fate.
Rutilius, in vita Cassii.

MIchael Comnenus Palaeologus Emperor, grieved with a pain at his heart, and
being much troubled and perplexed with the fear of death, he asked those that
stood about him, what was the name of that place. When he had heard the name of
Pachonii and Allages, with a great sigh, he said, that there was he to finish
his life, and that his death was decreed by the fates, and therefore bitterly
accused himself, that before that time he had not blinded and plucked out the
eyes of that honest man Pachonius, for that an Oracle was publicly reported to
be given out concerning the Emperor, that being deceased Pachonius should
succeed him in the Kingdom, and being deceived and blinded with the love of
ruling he had not hastened to make Pachonius unserviceable for the Empire.
Gregoras lib. 5.

Olympos, whose name was Libethra, which Mountain stretched it self forth into
Macedonia, not far from which City there is Orpheus's Tomb and Monument, and
there was formerly an Oracle had from liberi patres, to the Libethrians out of
Thrace, that their City should be raced out, and destroyed by a swine, when the
Sun first should see Orpheus's bones. And therefore they being so well versed
and accustomed to the Oracle, that they never mistrusted any thing, neither did
they believe that there was any wild beast endued with such strength that could
deface such a City, which relied no less upon their own confidence then it is
great strength. But when it pleased the Gods that these things should come to
pass, a certain shepherd at noontide being weary, laid down beside Orpheus
his Tomb. And by chance falling asleep, in his dream began to chant and to sing
Orpheus Verses in a sweet and delectable tone, and by that sweet chanting,
those shepherds that were hard by, and those Plowmen that were plowing not far
off being much taken with it, left their work, and ran to hear the sweet song
of the sleeping shepherd, and there when they joggled and justled one another
nearer and nearer to the shepherd, they threw down the Pillar, and that being
cast down the Urne was broken up, which done, the Sun saw Orpheus's bones:
Therefore in the following night, a great deal of rain came, and the River
sides (being one of Olympus streams) cast down the walls of the Libethrians,
and o'returned the holy Temples and buildings, and destroyed all the men and
beasts which were within the walls. Pausaunias in Baeoticis.

Siph^ian Ilanders, by reason of their silver and gold-Mines, are very rich,
heaping up great Treasures, and yearly did send their tenths to Apollo at
Delphos; they inquired of the Oracle, Whether they were to possess their
present enjoyments long, or no? Pythia answered; (...),
(...)
(...).
When you a Market-House, and Council-Hall
Erect all white, beware, a cunning blade
With wooden Troops, and with red Ensigns shall
Thy Coasts and Thee with cruelty invade.
The Event confirmed the Oracle; for the Siphnians at that time had a
Marketplace and a Councel-house built of white Parian Marble; when the Samians
instantly came themselves to Siphnum, and sending a Ship with their
Ambassadors to the City, which was (as all ancient ships used to be) painted
red; the Messengers did require ten talents; the Siphnians refused: The Samians
possessed themselves of their fields, and slew many of their City, and took
many prisoners, which the Siphnians redeemed for a hundred Talents; Then at
last (although it was very late) they understood the Oracle, of a wooden Army,
and a red Ship of Legates and Ambassadors, Herodotus, lib. 3.

Messanensians in Sicily, Carthaginenses urbis suae lixas futuros; Which they
understood in this sense, that the Carthagenians were to be slaves of the City
Messana, and to be serviceable to them, and by this hope were puffed up with
pride; therefore they attempted to oppose themselves against Hamilcar the
Carthaginian Captain; but their City being taken, at the last they understood
the equivocall sense of the Oracle; for Hamilcar did command the Carthaginian
Soldiers, like servants, that they should demolish and pull down all their
houses, and that they should leave nothing unruinated and not pulled down, and
to burn all, and to spatter the ruins all about; neither was there any delay
for his commands, they did ruinate the walls, and o'return the buildings with
such violence, that the multitude hasting, and being urgent, in a short time
they had finished the work, all the Monuments were presently abolished; and the
manner of the place was utterly blotted out, and the ground, where the City
formerly stood, did appear so overthrown, and trampled, that scarce any tokens
of habitation could be any where discerned, etc. Diodorus, lib. 14.

Phocenses being miserably vexed with War by the Thessalians, sent to consult
the Oracle at Delphos, concerning their affairs: and their Ambassadors,
received this answer; Mortalem atque. Deum jubeo decernere ferro:
Victor uterque, aliud sed enim mortalis habeto.
The god and man I do command to try
It out by sword, who shall have victory:
They both are conquerors, I do confess,
But yet the mor^al shall the god possess.
The Phocenses being pusled with this dubious Oracle, and not at all
understanding the meaning of it, sent out three hundred Scouts, who were all
slain even to the last man, with their Captain Gelo. This slaughter struck the
Camp with a very great terror. And at last they were come to that height of
desperation, that they brought together their Wives, Children, all their goods,
and whatsoever they could wrap or wring, as gold, silver, and rich clothes, and
amongst the rest, the Ensigns of their gods, and building about them, a very
great Pile, they left only thirty men to look to them, with strict charge,
that when they were in fight with their enemies, if they saw any thing go cross
or against them, they should first slay their wives and children, and then cast
all the goods upon the Pile, and then put fire to it; and lastly, that they
should either kill one another, or run desperately upon their enemies weapons;
from which amongst the Greeks all cruel and immane Councels and Designs were
called Phocica, or Phocensian. Things being thus ordered by the advice and
counsel of Tellias, an Elian Prophet, they draw out against the enemy, and
being resolute, rush most desperately in amongst them, and being acted with
utter desperation, plied their hands so furiously, that they obtained the most
absolute and signal victory that ever any Age could boast of. Then was the
Oracle plain and obvious to every ordinary understanding. For according to
their custom in War, the Generals on both sides gave to their Soldiers
tesserae, or marks to be known by from the enemy, as we do our Watchword. And
these happened then to fall pat with the answer of Apollo: The Thessalians
giving Etonia Minerva; and the Phocenses the Founder of their Country, Phocus.

Lacedaemonians having received the most healthful and good Laws of Lycurgus,
after his death being (as we say) pricked with provender, and not content
longer to enjoy their ease and quiet, puffed with the conceit of being more noble
then the Arcadians, they consult Pythia, whether they might not attain the
possession of that whole Kingdom to themselves entirely? To whom she returned
this answer; (...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
Would thou Arcadia have? a precious boon,
Yet I will grant many fruit-eaters soon
Arcadia enter shall, these it impair;
And this I grant thee, Thou shall there a fair
And plenteous harvest reap their Land about
All rich, with fetters thou shall measure out.
When the Lacedaemonians had received this answer, they declined their assault
of the rest of Arcadia, and only set upon the Tegeates, taking fetters along
with them, to wit, that having an Oracle to that purpose, they might bring the
Tegeates into captivity; and so make use of their fetters. But having fought
them, they themselves were vanquished, and those that came alive into the
enemies hand, were fettered with those very ropes they had brought, and put to
mow and till the Tagean Land, being restrained within the length of their
fetters. Those very fetters remained in the Temple of Minerva Alea at Tegea,
within the memory of man, being hung up as a Trophie for that victory.
Herodotus, lib. 1.

CLeomenes, King of the Spartans, consulting the Oracle at Delphos, had this
answer, Eum Argos esse capturum; which runs either thus, That he should take
Argos; or, That Argos should take him; or he the Argians: Which Oracle
understanding in the more favorable sense, he was very confident of taking the
City Argos: but when he had surrounded some Troop^ of the Argi in a Grove, and
there burnt them, asking who was the Deity of that place? and being told it was
A^gus, he complained, the Oracle had deluded him; and then quitted all hope of
conquering Argos. Herodotus, lib. 6.

PHilomelus the Phocensian, having taken the Delphick Oracle, began to compel
Pythia to tell him something of the future event of the affairs of his Country;
At whose imperious carriage the woman being much moved, said unto him, Sir, you
may do what you please. At which words Philomelus very much rejoiced, taking
them as a most apt answer to his demands, and the prediction of his future
success; and presently hereupon gave out in writing, That the Gods had
licensed him to do what he pleased; and after the custom calling together the
people, in a speech he made to them, expounded the Oracle, exhorting them to be
of good courage for the future; and after this wholly bent his resolution and
endeavors for military designs. There happened also a Prodigy in the Temple of
Apollo, in this manner; An Eagle hovering over the roof, cast her self down to
the very ground, and followed some Doves that were carried into the Temple,
preying upon them at the very Altar; which those that pretended skill in
matters of that nature, expounded, an undoubted token of the good success of
Philomelus and the Phocensians in the Delphic War; which lasted nine years
dubious, but at last terminated with the destruction of the Phocenses. Diodor.
lib. 16.

CRoesus demanding of the Oracle at Delphos, Whether he should reign long, or
no? received this answer from Pythia; (...).
(...)
(...).
Whenso'ere a mungril Mule shall have the Crown,
Wanton well fed, shall frisk it up and down
With His tender hoofs; then fly and make no stay
To ask what is the news; away, away.
Craesus concluding with himself that there would never any Mule reign over the
Medes instead of a Man, thence inferred that his rule should be perpetual: not
understanding that by a Mule, was understood Cyrus; because he was descended of
two several Nations: his Mother Mandane being of a better extract then his
father Cambyses. For she was a Mede, and Astyages the King his daughter; and he
but a Persian when they were subject to the Medes. Herodotus lib. 1.

ARcesilaus being driven from his Kingdom with his Mother Pheretima, being at
Samos; solicited all persons he could meet with in hope to regain his Country;
and having got together a very considerable army; he sent to Delphos to consult
the Oracle there about his return into his own Kingdom: to whom Pythia
returned this answer. During the time of four Battus's, and as many
Arcesilaus's, to wit, eight Generations of men Apollo, has granted thee to
reign; and further dehorts thee to endeavor. And likewise persuades thee when
thou art in thy own seat, to remain in peace; But if thou find a furnace
full of Pitchers or pots, be sure thou boil them not, but fling them out; and
if thou do fire the Furnace, take heed of entering a place that is compassed
with water, for if thou do, thou shall perish, and the Bull do what he can.
Arcesilaus taking those forces he had gathered in Samos, returned to Cyrene,
and having recovered his Kingdom, and somewhat settled his affairs, not minding
the Oracle, he called his adversaries to Judgment, and those that he could lay
hold on, he sent to Cyprus to be executed; whom the Cnidians when they were
brought into their Country rescued, and sent them to Thera. Some that had
privately conveyed themselves into a strong Tower-building combustible matter
round, he burnt the Tower and all. When he had done, he began to remember this
was that the Oracle had forbidden him, and went out of the City Cyrene fearing
the death predicted, for he conceived Cyrene to be that circumfluous place he
was warned to avoid; and betook himself to the King of Barcaeans called
Alazeris whose Niece he had married, where some as well Barcaeans as Cyrenean
Exuls espying him walking in the forum set upon him, and divided both his and
his Cosen Alazeris heads from their bodies. Herodotus lib. 4.

NEro Caesar being warned by some Mathematicians that the ruin of his Empire
was portended by the Stars, but some of them differed in opinion in one thing,
and some in another, at last being sick, he sent to Delphos to be resolved what
should be the fate of his state; and received in answer this, That he should
beware of the 73. year. Which when he heard, being an inconsiderate man, and
scarce above thirty; he so wholly gave himself up to security, that he feared
nothing, concluding that the Oracle had promised him a peaceable reign during
his whole life, and that he could not dye before the appointed year set down by
the Oracle, insomuch that he arived to that height of insolence, vain conceit,
that having lost some precious jewels in a tempest; he was confident the
fishes would export them to land for him, as they were in duty bound, in his
conceit: With these fond extravagancies was he elevated, even till on a sudden
he was left destitute by all his friends and subjects, and forced to a most
ignominous end, so well did Apollo's Counsel steed him. But least this father
of lies should seem to deliver any untruth, the night before his death he made
Nero hear a voice, cursing the name of Nero, and extolling that of Galba, that
so he might understand it was by the will and institution of the Oracle that he
fell; for Galba succeeded him for the space of seventy three years. Petrarcha
ex Suetonio.

Xerxes the Son of Darius, having dig'd up an old Monument of Belus, found an
Urne of Glass, in which a dead Corpse lay in Oil, but the Urne was not full,
but empty a hands breadth from the hips of the body, near which there stood a
little Pillar or column, on which was contained written, that it should go ill
with him that opened the Sepulcher, and did not fill the Urne: which when
Xerxes had read, he was taken with much dread and horror, and commands
presently Oil to be powered into it, with which it was not full, he therefore
commands again more Oil to be bestowed upon it, and found that the Urne was
nothing fuller, than before; yet he continues seeking to fill it, till he found
that all his labor was in vain, and then the Monument being shut, he departs
in great grief and sorrow, he had fifty myriads of men in an army designed
against the Greeks, but returning* he miserably ended his life, being killed by
night in the streets by the hands of his own son. Aelianus ex Herodoti, lib. 3.

SYlvester the second, formerly called Gilbertus, a Frenchman (as ^hey say) by
evil arts obtained the Popedom. When he was a young man, he was a Monk in a
Monastery of Florence situated in the Aurelian Diocese, but leaving the
Monastery, the Devil followed him, to whom he wholly surrendered himself; he
came to Hispalis a City of Spain to study, being very desirous of learning; in
which he was so great a proficient, that in a short time, of a Scholar he
became chief Master. Martinius testifies that Robert, King of France, and
Lotharius, a man famous by Nobility and learning who was afterward created
Archbishop of Senosenses were his Scholars; Gilbertus therefore, provoked by
ambition and diabolical desire of governing, first by largeness and gifts, he
obtained the Archbishopric of Rhemes, then of Ravenna, and lastly the
Popedom it self, the Devil helping his endeavors herein, but upon this
condition; That after his death he should be wholly his, by whose assistance he
had got so great dignity; he moved the Devil to tell him how long he should
continue Pope; the Enemy of mankind answering (as he is wont) ambiguously, If
thou shall not come near Jerusalem, thou shall live long. When therefore in the
fourth year and first Month of his Popedom the tenth day, he had sacrificed
in the great Church of the Holy Cross at Rome, he knew that by his fate he was
to dye forthwith: he therefore repented and acknowledged his wickedness before
the people, and renouncing all ambition and diabolical fraud, he exhorted all
to a good and pious life.

Boetians wasted the Seacoasts of Attica, and the Athenians were about their
expedition against Aegrina, there comes an Oracle from Delphos that the
Aeginetians could not be hurt for thirty years; in the thirtieth year when the
Aeginetians had dedicated a Temple to Aeacus that things might succeed with
them, they began their war with them; but as they made violent war against
them, so they received many losses and brought great detriment to themselves,
and at the last were in great extremity when the Athenians heard of this
Oracle, they likewise dedicated a Temple to Aeacus, which is now to be seen in
their Marketplace, but they thought they were not to forbear war for thirty
years, which time they heard to be fatal, but that if they forbore war they
should receive many wrongs from the Aeginetians. Herodotus lib. 5.

THe Wisdom of the Persian Magies and their skill in divination is kept in
memory by many Monuments, who as they fore old many things, so they predicted
by many secret signs the cruelty that Art^xerxes Ochus afterward exercised
against those he sub^ued, and the miserable slaughter that ensued, for when
Ochus subdued the Government of the Persians, one of them advised a certain
Magitian, one of the Eunuchs to observe (the Table being covered) upon what
mea^ (amongst all that the Table was furnished with) the King should first lay
his hands, who intentively marking Ochus with both his hands stretched out,
with his right hand he hastily took to him a knife, and with the other the
biggest loaf upon the Table, which with flesh upon the board he carved, and ate
heartily and cheerfully, these two Prophets hereupon concluded, that there
would ensue during his reign, fruits of the Earth in great plenty, and a
seasonable time to gather them, but frequent slaughters. Elianus lib. 2. et
Diodor. lib. 17. Bibliothecae.

Pedasensians which live above Halicarnassus, it is reported that as often as
any adverse fortune is ready to seize upon the Amphiensians (who live near that
City) a huge beard suddenly grows upon the chin of their chief Priest of
Minerva the Goddess, which happened twice amongst them. Herodotus, lib. 8.

BEleses a Chaldean, exhorted Arbares General of the Medes, to invade the
Kingdom of the Babilonians, promising to him certain victory, which after two
years, and much loss by slaughter given and received on both sides,
undermining the City of Ninus King of Sardinapalus, he desperately burned the
Kings Palace, and obtained it. Diodorus, lib. 2. cap. 7.

THales the Milesian, perceiving that the next year would be a very plentiful
season for oil, (by the rising of the seven Stars,) bargained aforehand with
his customers for all that years oils at a greater rate, than otherwise, by
reason of the great plenty, he could have sold them for. And likewise
foreseeing the next year there would be a great scarcity, he aforehand bought
up many men's oils at a cheap rate; and the year following sold them very dear,
and thereby became rich. Fulgos. lib. 8. cap. 11. and others. Pliny ascribes
this piece of Policy to Democritus, and says, That Sextius a Roman used the
very same cunning at Athens. This man commanded his body, when he was dead,
should be buried in a very obscure place of the Milesian fields, foreseeing
that there should be a forum or common Mart erected there by the Romans.
Plutarchus in Solone.

AT Mnesarchis the common Crier Boetus was told by the Chaldaeans, that his son
should be victor in Contentions. Wherefore he would have had his son become a
Fencer. But afterward he set to write Tragedies, and therein was indeed the
victor of all others. Gellius, lib. 15. cap. 20. who relates it out of
Theopompus.

Augustus fortuned to fall on that very time that Cataline's Cause of his
Conjuration was a pleading in Court. And his Father Octavius staying a little
longer than ordinary, excused himself, for that his Wife was newly brought to
bed. P. Nigidius, then present, looking his birth-hour, is said to affirm, That
then was born the Lord of the whole World. He being at Apollonia, went with
Agrippa to Theogenes his Chamber; But when Theogenes had predicted most high
things, as he thought, of Agrippa's birthday, betwixt fear and shame, lest his
destiny should prove inferior, could hardly be persuaded to tell his Nativity.
And when he declared it, Theogenes is said to have danced about with joy, and
to have worshipped him; which somewhat animated Augustus; so that he afterward
published his destiny, and stamped a Coin, with the sign of Capricorn, in which
he was born. Sabellicus, lib. 8. Ennead. 6. ex Suetonio.

Livia bore Tiberius, Scribonius the Mathematitian promised great matters; yea,
and that he should reign one time or other; but without a regal diadem: For
then you must understand, the power of Caesar's was altogether unknown and
unheard of amongst them. Suetonius.

Tiberius Caesar, that he might learn the Art of the Chaldeans had a teacher,
one Thrasyllus. As often as he consulted about these kind of matters, he went
into a private and out-house, suffering no one to be privy to his business, but
one freeman only. He was altogether unlearned, but of a robustious strong
body, and had gone before him through roughs and craggs (for the house stood
upon a rock); and this Thrasyllus his Art, Tiberius was resolved to try. For as
he returned, if he suspected him of any fraud, he had resolved to precipitate
him down a rock in his return, that there might no one remain privy to this his
levity. After he had most exquisitely told Tiberius how he should be Emperor,
and many other future events, he asked him, If he could calculate his own
birthday? He answered, Yes; and looking into his destiny, the more he looked,
the more he quaked and trembled, and at last cried out, That some eminent and
imminent danger attended him. When Caesar saw this, he ran to him, embraced
him, and told him what his danger was; promisi^g him, for that he knew it, he
should be safe of it. On a time Tiberius as he was walking on the Sea shore
with him in much perplexity of mind, Thrasyllus advised him to be of good
comfort, and hope better things; but when he grew so dejected, that he was
almost ready to cast himself into the Sea, being in great fear of his father in
law Augustus, Thrasyllus espying a Ship come sailing toward them, affirmed to
him very confidently, That that very Ship brought him good tidings. The ship
being put into the Haven, he received Letters from Augustus and Livia, whereby
he was recalled to Rome, according to his hearts desire. Dion in Augusto.

Claudius the Emperor, a little before his death creating Consuls, predicted
to them the month wherein he should dye; and having assured them of the very
utmost limit of his time, in his last counsel he did obtest, that his sons
should live brotherly and lovingly, commending them to the Senate, and
professed it again and again to them that were present, (and who were very
sorry, desiring the contrary) that he should dye as he had told them. Suetonius.

NEro being born early in the morning before Sunrising, a certain Astrologer
looking into the course of the Stars, said, That he should reign at Rome, but
should kill his own Mother, which when Agrippina his Mother heard, she said,
Let him kill me, so he may be Emperor. The event declares, that the Astrologer
predicted truth. Xiphilinus in Nerone.

AScletarion, a Mathematician, being brought to Domitian the Emperor, because
he was so bold as to predict somewhat concerning his end; when he did not deny
but he had reported those things which by his Art he foresaw: Domitius growing
very angry, commanded him to tell him what his own end should be; and he told
him, To be torn to pieces by dogs, and that very shortly. Whereupon he
presently commanded him to execution, and that body his should be burnt to
ashes, and that the ashes should be buried, to try the truth, or rather to
disprove the falsehood of his assertions. But Fate would not be altered; for
when the pile and all was prepared, an exceeding shower of rain came so
violently, that all the executioners and company left the dead body by the
pile; and, that while, the dogs came and tore it. Whilst he was at Supper,
Latinus his Jester telling him this amongst the rest, of that days fables and
conceits; he was so enraged, as if from this time he had been past hope of
life, and lay obnoxious to all the strokes of malevolent fortune. Sabellicus ex
Suetonio.

DOmitian the Emperor, superstitiously given to Mathematical Predictions, and
thereby being informed of the time of his death the day before he was killed,
having fruit brought him as a Present, he commanded them to be set by, and kept
till the next day; and says, If I may, I will make use of them. And then then
turning to them who were next to him, he says; The Moon tomorrow being in
Aquarius will look red and bloody, which demonstrates some horrid wickedness,
as all men throughout the World expect. He being advised by Mathematicians, to
take heed of the fifth hour of that day, was solicitous to take their Judgment,
What great mischance would come by reason thereof, who said, That it portended
great mutation in the World. He therefore when that day came, sitting idly, and
scratching a little Wart on his forehead, he broke it, so that some blood ran
down his face; which seeing, he said, God grant I have no greater hurt then
this. And enquiring what a clock it was? it was answered purposely, That it was
the sixth hour; though it was the fifth hour, which he so much feared;
whereupon thinking all danger past, he joyfully rises, intending to refresh
his body: but instantly his Chamberlain Parthenius came to him, telling, he was
to speak with one in his Bedchamber upon an important business; whither
coming, he received from him and his confederates seven wounds, whereof he
dyed, in the forty sixth year of his age, and fifteenth year of his reign.
Sabellicus, lib. 4. Ennead. 7.

HAdrian the Emperor was not only excellent in other Arts, but also in
Astronomy, which Marius Max. does so far declare, that he knew all things
concerning himself; insomuch, that he foreshewed his Acts which he should
perform every day, even to the last hour of his life. It is manifest, that he
told Verus, whom he adopted, That the Fates show to terrene creatures what
shall be done, beyond which nothing can proceed here: He wrote to that very
year, yea and the month of that year in which he departed, and showed, that he
could not outlive that month. Fulgosus, lib. 8. cap. 11.

SEptimus Severus Pertinax is said to have been a most skillful Mathematician:
When his wife Martia, the Mother of Bassianus was dead, he calculated the
Nativities of all about him, and finding that Julia, though not nobly
descended, yet by the Planet under which she was born, it was signified, that
she should be Empress, he took her to wife, who was the Mother of Greta
Valeteranus. The same man travailing toward Brittanie, told, That he should
not thence return, and that in the roof of the Palace, in which he used to sit
in Judgment; he left his predictions in writing, so that all men might see them
wholly, except that part of them which treated of the hour of his birth.
Xiphilinus Dionis Niraei abbreviator, in Severo.

A Certain Egyptian from the Mendosian coast, coming to Constantinople, went
into an Inn, the hostess whereof was a skillful Midwife, who as soon as she
had drawn some Wine for her guest, tells him with an extended loud voice, that
a friend of hers now in labor of her third child was in great danger unless
she had speedy help, whereupon she suddenly left the Egyptian, went and helped
the woman from the misery of her travel or labor, and returns to her guest,
who being angry for her absence, she relates the cause of her stay. He exactly
observed the time and hour of the day; Go, said the Midwife, and tell the Woman
in childbed that she has brought forth one that shall be able to do more then
the Emperor; which said, she carouseth a whole bowl of Wine, and told what the
Infant's name should be, and accordingly afterward he was named Ablabius: who
had such excess of fortune, that in the time of Constantine the Great, he was
made Praetor, by which office he could do more then the Emperor. Eunapius, in
vita Aedosii.

Jews, Astrologers and Magitians, promised Zira Prince of the Arabians, Empire
and long life, if he would demolish the Christian Temples and Images of Saints,
which he put in execution: but before a whole year came about, he died, and his
Son intended to punish the Impostors, but they fly into Isauria (where Leo, who
after Theodosius the third Emperor was cast down, was called Isaurus) they
find a boy of mean birth, but endewed with a most excellent and towardly wit
and genius; they tell him that he should be Emperor, and that so confidently,
that they swore by many Oaths, that the event should answer their predictions,
if he would but do what they desired; and he promised to do what ever they
prescribed. Afterward Leo obtains the Empire; in the ninth year after, they
require the performance of his promise and seek nothing but that he will
abolish the pictures of Christ and his Mother. The Emperor in observance of
his promise puts down all Images, and heavily punished all that worshipped or
kept them. Cuspinianus Zonara.

SImon Prince of the Bulgarians, led his Army against the Crabats, and fighting
them in narrow places betwixt Mountains, lost all his Army, a certain man named
John, a Magitian and Astronomer comes to Lucapenus the Roman Emperor, and
advises him that he should send some body who might cut off the head or top of
a Pillar which was placed over the Arch made in the remembrance of the Victory
of Xerolophus, and over against the Sunsetting, promising that thereupon
Simeon, (to whom it was fatal) should presently perish, and in the same hour
the head of the statue was cut off (as it was afterward found by diligent
inquisition made) that Simeon died by the grief or sickness of his heart.
Cedrenus.

Guido Maltraversus, Earl of Patavia, and Knight of Lucius, had a Son called
Nicholas by Constantia the daughter of Obicius Marciones an Estensian, whom
Jambonus Andreas, as well a Magitian as an Astrologian, did predict a
pernicious Citizen to his country, and moved his Father if possibly he could
to dis-inherit him. Guido dies, whereby Nicholas becomes powerful in Riches
and credit, conspires with Canes Scaligerus, the destruction of his Country:
whereupon is raised a most bloody war, in which as it is reported, an hundred
thousand men and upwards were slain. So the event proved the prophecy of
Jambonus true. Bernhardus Scardoneus Blandus, lib. 8. Decad. 2.

French men having to their General Guido Appius, and fighting against
Martinus, besieged the Town of Livius, at that time when the Sicilians
celebrated the French Vespers. Guido Bonatus, Prince of the Forolivensian
Astronomers, and without doubt a Magitian also, foretold the Earl of
Mount-ferrat, that the day before the Calends of May, he should make a sally
contrary to the expectation of all men, whereby he should obtain most assuredly
victory over his enemies, but that he should receive a wound in his hip; and
being a skillfull Physician and Surgion, he took with him Ovalls, Glisters, and
necessary things with him to bind up his wound, when he sallied out against the
Enemy; nor was the event contrary to this presage, for the French were
overthrown. Platina in Martino. 4. Blandus lib. 8. Decad. 2.

ANtiochus Tibertus excellent in Chiromancy, P^romancy, and Physiognomy at
Cresena, foretold to Guidon a servant, whose surname was Guerra, that upon
suspicion of infidelity, he should be killed by his intimate friend; To
Pandulph the Tyrant he also told that he should be banished to Malatesta in
Armenia, should in extreme poverty dye a banished man; and not long after
Pandulphus killed Guidon, for that he was jealous of his fidelity; and commits
Antiochus himself to Prison, that he might try the event of his presages.
Antiochus so far prevailed with the daughter of the Jaylour that he obtained of
her a rope, by which he was let down out of the Prison into a Ditch, but being
by the noise of his shackles discovered, he was taken as he was flying away,
and brought back heavily beaten for his escape, and he and the maid both
secured. At length Pandulphus, a banished man, poor and forsaken of all men,
died in a poor Inn. So many things were portended to befall Tiberius himself,
which notwithstanding his warning, he could by no means avoid. Jovius, in
Elogiis.

PEtrus Leonius of Spoleto, a famous Physician who first opened a door to the
learned Art of Physic publishing Galen's most studious labors therein, he was
a most dexterous Astronomer and Magitian, and therefore knowing that his sudden
death was portended to him by the danger of water to avoid frequent
Navigations, he departed from Petavius and the Venetians to Umbra and Spoleto;
Shortly after being invited to the company of Lawrence a Physician, he by the
fallacious Art of Astronomy predicted to him recovery of his health and present
deliverance from a sickness, under which he grievously labored, which made
him neglect all means to obtain his former health by rejecting Lazarus
Placentinus an illustrious Physician, who sent to him by Lewis Sfortia, brought
Physic to him, when it was too late by reason of his neglect. Wherefore
Antiochus blamed and hated of all men after the death of Lawrence, whether by
his own desperate action, or by the violence of Peter the Son of this Lawrence
it is uncertain, he was precipitately drowned in a stinking ditch belonging to
a Town near adjacent. Jov. in Elogiis.

BArtholomaeus Cocles, a Bononian. Scholar to Antiochus, and a most exquisite
Palmist and Physiognomist, warned Goricus the Astrologer, that he should
beware, lest he suffered most violent tortures when he was at Leucas. But he
not minding his advice in his Ephemerides that a little after he made,
predicted, that Joannes Bentovolus should be thrust both out of his Country and
Government, for which the Tyrant caused him to be five times tossed in a cord;
And so he received the reward of his Art. This same Cocles told one Coponus,
that he would very shortly commit a most horrid murder; and also told Hermes
the King's son, That he should be banished and killed in fight. Hermes
therefore commands Coponus to kill Cocles his evil Prophet. Cocles foresaw his
danger of death by his art, and therefore wore a private helmet to defend
himself, and always carried a great two-handed sword. But Coponus in the habit
of a Porter (whilst he was earnest in unlocking his door, which Coponus had
before prevented, by putting a little wire into the lock, that he might have
the better opportunity for his design) beat out his brains with an Ax: and
being questioned for it, alleged no other thing for the fact, but that he was
incited thereto by Cocles his own self, telling him that he must be a
murderer, and nothing else. Jovius in Elogiis.

Frederick the second, Emperor, much reverenced Rodolphus the Haspurgensian
Earl with exceeding observance, though he had but a mean estate, and valued not
at all men far more potent; and being demanded a reason thereof by the
Emperor; he answered, I know that Rodolphus shall be Emperor, and when thy
Issue shall decline, his renown shall be spread abroad far and near, though he
be esteemed by few at this time: Neither did his presage want a true event, for
in the year of our Lord, 1273. in the Calends of October, he was chosen King of
the Romans by the Princes of Germany at Franckford, when he besieged the
Palace. Cuspianus, in Caesaribus.

WHen the Mathematicians looked into the Geniture of the Great Sfortia, and
observed the excellent positure of the Stars, and their admirable sites and
aspects they predicted to him, High Empire, immortal glory, and a happy
offspring: but at length they added, That he should not attain old age, but
should perish by an untimely death. Jovius, in ejus vita.

BRaccius, the excellent Montenensian Duke, seeing the body of his Enemy,
Sfortia the Great, drowned in the River of Piscaria, fell a praising the dead
man with most exquisite Encomiums, which of right belonged to him: but he not
being freed from so great danger of a present battle, showed to his Soldiers a
more cheerful countenance; because he, being conscious of a fatal secret, had
learned from Astrologers, that Sfortias indeed was to go before, as taken with
a violent death, but a little after himself also, as it were with the like lot,
should undergo the same fortune of departure: He scarce lived over the fifth
month, when as for thirteen months space, making assault at Aquila; and it
being in vain besieged, at length in a memorable battle, being overcome and
slain by the sword of the Sfortian Soldier, he fullfilled both the truth of
the Stars, and many prophets. Jovius, in the life of Sfortias.

Uladislaus Jagellon, King of the Polanders, Sophia his wife brought forth
sons, Uladislaus and Andrew Casimir; There was at Cracovia, Henry a Bohemian, a
famous Astrologer, and studious of Magic; this man foretold, That an Infant
new born, should be long-lived, but unfortunate; and that he reigning, Poland
should be afflicted with great evils and calamities: but his brother Uladislaus
was to be most famous, and most victorious: and unless Nature's destinies
should envy a longer life to him, he should command many Nations. Both which
things the issue afterward proved; For Uladislaus, who was chosen King of
Poland, and King of Hungary, being slain at Varna by the Turks, in the 20th
year of his age, gave not satisfaction to this famous hope. But Casimir, who
succeeded his brother in the Kingdom of Poland, reigned 45 years, lived 64, was
bent rather on the Lituanian huntings, than on the Commonwealth. Cromer. book
19. and 29.

BAsil, a Mathematician, but most certain soothsayer, a certain Greek, foretold
the murder of Alexander of Medicis, Duke of the Florentines, to be committed by
Laurence Medices, his near kinsman; he not only showed him the murder, but
also the certain smiter, who should be intimate with him, of a slender form, of
a boxy-coloured countenance, and of a doubtful silence, almost not keeping
company at all with others in the Court. Also unto Cosmus of Medices they
promised for certain, forasmuch as in the very marking the hour of his birth,
he had a happy Star of Capricorn, as once Augustus, enlightened with a
wonderful aspect of Stars agreeing together, it should come to pass, that he
should increase in a wealthy inheritance. Alexander indeed hearing it, and
Cosmus smiling, when as a great number of his kindred was to be consumed by
death, before any, even a small inheritance, could come unto him. Jovius.

JOhn Liechtenberg, in the yearly predictions of his Ephemeris, as I may so
say, admonished the Prince of Bavaria, in a serious manner, both by writing and
painting, that a Lion should seek hiding places for fear of an Eagle. He
despised it; but not long after he was assaulted with a grievous War by
Maximilian the Emperor. Agricola in Germane Proverbs.

PAul Farnese the 3d, chief Bishop, seeing he was most skillfull in Astrology
and Magic, writes to his son, Peter Aloyse, who had by force entered on the
tyrannical Government of Placentia and Parma, that he should beware of the
tenth day of September, of the year 1547, as unlucky to him. The father indeed
could warn, but the son could not avoid the danger; but by Conspirators,
Augustine Landus, and James Scott, Earls of Placentia, in his own Castle, under
pretense of talk, he was slain; and being a long time hung up by the privy
parts, he was exposed to be cruelly torn in pieces by the people. Sleidan. 19
book of Commentaries.

Xanthians, that had a bridge laid over the small River Lycus, in which were
said to have been brazen Tables, wherein letters were engraven. The Empire of
the Persians was sometime to be overthrown by the Graecians. The tables with
the bridge being shaken down, a little before that it was fought at Granicum by
Alexander the Great, they had fallen into the channel of the River: Alexander
being much moved at the report of the tables, when as for some time he had
stood doubtful, into which part he might chiefly bend the course of victory,
turning to the right hand, he subdued with wonderful speed all the Seacoast
from Lydia even into Phaenicia. Sabellicus book 4. Ennead. 4. out of Plutarchs
Alexander.

Carthagenian war, besides many things seen and heard, which were accounted
instead of wonders; a verse or song of Martius being curious, and sounded at
the same time, brought the greatest care to the City. That being by a most true
event proved, gave no doubtful credit of the things that were to be. He had
written, who ever that Martius was; O thou Trojan born, flee thou Cannae the
River of Romana, neither let strangers constrain thee to join in battle in the
field of Diomedes: but neither shall thou believe me, until thou shall fill up
the field with blood and the River shall bring down many thousands of thine
slain out of a fruitful land, into the great Sea for fishes and birds and wild
beasts which inhabit the Earth, unto these let thy flesh be for meat. Because
these things were in great part represented before the eyes of men (for the
common sort were acquainted both with the fields of Diomedes, and when they had
fought at Canna) there was the greater care of procureing another Verse; which
was written in these words: Ye Roman enemies, if ye will drive away the
impostume, which comes from far Nations, I Judge, plays are to be vowed to
Apollo, the which let them be faithfully done every year to Apollo, when the
people shall give a part in public, let private persons prepare to use them
for them and theirs. Over these sports the Praetor or Major shall be chief, he
who shall administer the greatest right to the people and the multitude. And
let the ten chief men, or Decemviri after the custom of the Greeks perform
holy things by sacrifice. These things if ye shall rightly do, ye shall always
rejoice, and your affairs shall wax better, for that God shall put out the
stubborn enemy, which feeds pleasantly on your fields. This verse being
openly interpreted, sports were vowed to Apollo, and solemnized in a Circle.
Sabellic. book 4. Ennead. 5.

PRocopius the Tyrant being slain by Valens the Emperor, the Walls of
Chalcedon (because the Citizens of that City had favored Procopius his party)
were made equal with the ground. The which while it was done, they found a
table of stone in their foundations, on which these words were written: When
Nymphs shall nigh the holy City dance,
And ways adorned with garlands; and by chance,
After the wretched walls for placing baths
Shall be converted, burning in maddish wrathes,
A thousand shapes of men for greedy prey
From diverse Nations thou shall see (I say)
With forces strong, alas, to go beyond
The Istrian and Cimmerian Sea-ey bond,
Then Scythick people, then the Maesian Land
Shall be destroyed with slaughter's bitter hand.
When at the length unto the Men of Thrace
The covetous lust of gain leading a Trace;
The cruel barbarism shall make a breach,
It shall be quenched by lot's partial reach.
This Prophecy was not then understood, but was afterward fulfilled, when
Valens had built a conveyance for water, and had brought abundance of waters to
the City. For, the walls being overthrown, he made use of the stones for the
conveyance of the water, which he called Valense by his own name, that he might
gratify the Townsmen, and the baths might be helped by this bringing of
water, although some called them Constantius his baths. At length, Clearch,
Governor of the City, in a place whose name is Taurus, afterward called, The
street of Theodosius, built Nymphaeam, or a washing-place, that he might show
the grace and pleasantness of the water brought in. By these buildings, the
stony tabl^s signified the coming even now, of the Barbarians, who in Thrace it
self, after destructions or robbings of the people made, were all slain.
Cuspinian, in Valens.

Justine the Great: the City Edessa was miserably defiled with uncleanness;
and of the River Scirtus, and in the bank of the River a Table of stone found,
written on, in Hieroglyphical or mystical Egyptian letters to this purpose:
(...).

That is, The River Scirtus shall dance or leap for the mischief of the
Citizens. Cedrenus.

Alexander the Great going out of India to Babylon, Nearchus Admiral of the
Navy, who had returned from the Ocean, being carried into Euphrates, shows
him, that certain Chaldeans had gathered themselves together, who warned him,
that he should abstain from Babylon. He being nothing moved, went forward
notwithstanding, where he perished. Plutarch, in Alexander.

L. Vitellius for the favor of Herod the Tetrarch, would lead an Army against
the Arabians, they report, Aretas, King of the Arabians, (news being received
of the dispatch of Vitellius,) to have gathered by sooth-sayings, that it was
impossible for that Army to have come to the rock. For one of the Captains was
first to dye, either he which may prepare the War, or he by whose command it
may be provided, or him against whom it is to be moved. Neither was the
divination vain. For when Vitellius was as yet at Jerusalem, a message being
brought concerning Tiberius Caesar his death, he made the Expedition void.
Josephus, book 18. chap. 7.

APollonius an Egyptian, foretold the death of Caius Caligula, Emperor of the
Romans, who for that cause being sent to Rome, was brought to Cuius that day,
in which he was to dye the death. Xiphiline, the abbreviatour of Dio, in
Caligula.

APollonius the Tyanean, the son of Jupiter, foretold, That Cilix, a certain
man beyond measure lascivious, should be killed on the third day; and that so
fell out. Philostratus, in his life.

LArginus Proclus foretold openly in Germany, That Domitian, Emperor of the
Romans, was to dye the death; on which day he departed out of life. And when
for this cause, by him who was chief over the Province, he was sent to Rome, he
then also affirmed it should be so. Therefore he was condemned for a capital
matter. But Domitian nevertheless could not escape the danger of life, because
on the same day he was killed. Xiphiline.

JUlian, Emperor, moving against Constance, pierced Illyricum, daily espying
the intrails of beasts and birds, that he might contemplate of the issue. At
which time a certain Soldier lifting up the intrails with his hand, being
fallen flat on the ground, he cried out, many hearing him, The Trojane was
fallen, Constance should dye with the Mopsocrenians in Cilicia. The which, he
says, should be by and by verified from Ambassadors. Cuspinian.

ALexander Severus, Emperor, when as he spoke unto his Army in France,
desiring to begin his speech from a lucky word, fortune brought a contrary one,
the which was received as an evil token; for he began, Heliogabalus the
Emperor being slain, beginning his speech from the Emperors death. But when
from thence he went unto the Persian War, an outrageous woman spoke these words
in the French tongue; Go thy way, neither promise victory to thy self, neither
rely thy self on the faithfulness of thy Soldiers. That which was rightly
told, the event taught, he himself not long after being killed by his
Soldiers. Fulgosus, in book 1. chap. 3.

Maximines in the Julian Marketplace, (when they came against the Senate with
an Army) with her hair spread abroad, and a black garment, calling on the
Maximines with a great voice, fell down dead before their feet. After a few
days, the Army slew the Maxinines in the same place.

Dioclesian, as yet warring in lesser places, stayed at Tungrim in France, in a
certain Tavern, and had familiar company with Druys a certain woman, and she
blamed the niggardliness of the man, he is reported to have answered in jest,
not in earnest, Then he would be liberal, when he should be Emperor. To these
words she says, Do not jest, O Dioclesian, plainly thou shall be Emperor, and
also thou shall kill a Boar. Which word indeed of the woman, he taking in the
room of a-fore token, began diligently to follow wild Boars in hunting; not
understanding, to wit, the riddle of the Prophecies, which the issue afterward
declared. For Numerian, Emperor, had been slain by the faction of Arrius
[Aper] which signifies a Boar. Which thing being brought to light, the
Soldiers chose Dioclesian the revenger, and with one accord salute him
Emperor. He therefore after an assembly had; whereby he might fulfill the
saying of Druys, thrusts Aper through with his own hand; adding that of Maro --
Aeneae manu dextra cadis --
Thou fall'st (thou do not stand)
By great Aeneas his right hand. Cuspinian.


ZEno Emperor of Constantinople, asked some secrets of Marian, a most wise
Earl, Who should succeed him in the Empire? He answered, One of the
Silentiaries shall take thy Empire and Wife; but me thou shall unjustly kill.
Both of these the end proved in its time.

AGilulph, Duke of the City Taurina, when as he brought unto Authar King of the
Longobards, his Bride Theodelinda, the daughter of the King of Boiaria, had a
Sooth sayer with him, who by the stroke of a Thunder bolt foretold unto him,
that a little after, he should enjoy the Bride her self, and the Kingdom: and
that thing the issue proved to be true. For Authar being killed in War,
Agilulph succeeded him in his Kingdom and wedlock. Paul Deacon, of the deeds of
the Longobards, chap. 14.

ANtonine the son of Sosipater and Eustathius the Cappadocian, had a school at
Canobicum the door of Nilus. He foretold to his Scholars, that after his death
the Temples of Serapis (a god of the Egyptians) should be overthrown. The event
confirmed the prophecy, under Theodosius the Emperor. Eunapius, in Aedesio.

REmex a certain Rhodian, being estranged or angry in his mind, began to
witness with a loud voice, that before the thirtieth day there should be very
great slaughters and robberies at Dyrrhachium in Greece, and fire and flight,
but the Navy it self to return home. When Cn. Pompey, who being Praetor, was
chief over the Navy, had heard that, and had told it unto three men, Cicero,
Varro, and Cato, all being moved; also some of them are said to be exceedingly
affrighted. But the space of a few days coming between, Labienus fleeing out
of the battle in Thessaly brought news of the overthrow of the Legions, and
that the Army of Pompey was scattered in a great battle; by and by the public
corn was snatched out of the barns, and scattered abroad through the whole
City; they that were there, having departed with a headlong flight, were both
forsaken by the Rhodians, and being unwilling to follow, the ships were burnt.

PRocopius in his third book of the Vandall-war shows, that there was wont to
be an old Proverb tossed up and down in Carthage by the children, that Gamma
should sometimes persecute Beta, and again, Beta, Gamma. I think the childrens
sport to have looked hitherto, that between neighbors there might oftentimes
rise discord. But this childish saying was wrested unto the event of things,
because Genserick King of the Vandalls had expelled Boniface. Afterward
Belisarius, Gilimer. The Proverb arose, not from what happened, but was a
Riddle of the Carthagenian Children, as an Oracle of that which happened
afterward. Erasmus, in his adagies.

Leuctrian field, of the daughters of Scedasus, which they call Leuctrides from
the place. For by chance, when they were by force ravished by the
Spartan-guests, they had been buried in that place. That so cruel and wicked
act being committed, their father having wished for curses on the Spartans,
when he could nor by request obtain revenge from Lacedemon, stabbed himself
upon their Sepulchers. From thence the Prophesies and Oracles daily foretold
the Spartans they should avoid and turn away the Leuctrian revenge by the gods.
But that thing many did not so understand, but doubted of the place, because
also a little Town placed on the shore of Laconia is named Leuctron. Besides
there is a neighboring place of that name in Megalopola of Arcadia. At length
the Lacedaemonians being in the Leuctrian field of Baeotia over come with a most
cruel slaughter by the Thebanes, lost their rule. Plutarch in the life of
Pelopidas.

M. Anthony [the triumvir or] one of the three chief men of Rome, a certain
Magitian of Egypt, who had often moved Anthony that he might withdraw himself
from Octavius Thy fortune (says he) O Anthony, is of it self famous and large,
but when it cleaves to Octavius, it is continually blunted. Thy demon or
spirit fears his Genius or Angel: and when as it is of it self high and
cheerful, yet at the approach of this, it is made low and fearful. He the
more easily gave him credit, because whether by lots, or pairs of Cocks and
Hens, or Quails committed to hand; Anthony was always inferior to Octavius.
He therefore being stirred with these things, going with Octavia, from whom he
had already begotten a little daughter out of Italy, sailed unto Athens.
Sabellicus in his ninth book, Ennead. 6.

Roman weapons to go beyond Ctesiphon a Town, and the Captains that dared to
do it, were to receive punishment. They think M. Crassus purposing that thing,
to have perished with his Army. M. Ulpius having attempted to go beyond
Trajanum, recovered not Italy, and to have lost five Provinces on the other
side Tygris presently, and he had been better not to have undertaken the
journey, he wasted, and almost consumed his legions of Soldiers with long
pains. And although the Conqueror drew out his bounds farther, yet he profited
not much; desiring to go beyond Ctesiphon, Tygris being overcome, Valerian was
taken by Sapor King of the Persians. But Odenatus Palmyrene, a conqueror of
Roman Majesty, came beyond Tygrim, even to Ctesiphon. Carus, Emperor, led the
Army of Probus, a large conqueror, from the Sarma^ian War into Persia, he
wasted the Enemies Kingdom, he vanquished Seleucia compassed about with
Euphrates, the which Aelius, the true Antonine, had in times past taken. And
then he requiring or assaulting Ctesiphon, and willing to proceed farther,
either a disease, or the stroke of a thunderbolt in a troublesome and
lightning heaven took him away. Cuspinian.

SYbill prophesied of the destruction of Antichrist: (...).
Again, he then an evil time shall see,
When his own Net will his destruction be.
Some understand by the snare or net, the place, wherein Antichrist is to be
choked. Theodore Bibliander, a most learned man, of the Art of Printing, whose
matter is flax steeped and glewed together, to wit, paper, with this flax
Antichrist shall be dispatched, because it is that in which the holy Gospel of
Christ, and all the Prophets (being written together) are contained: by whose
authority, as it were, by the breath of Christ's mouth, the three-headed Beast
shall be brought to destruction.

PSammeticus took away Tementes, King of Egypt. The god Ammon had answered
Tementes, asking counsel of the Oracle concerning the Kingdom; That he should
beware of the Cocks. Psammeticus using familiarly Pigritatus, a Carian, when he
had known from him, that the first or chief Carians put Cocks on the top of
their heads, he understood the mind of the Oracle, and hired a great multitude
of Carians, and led them toward Memphis, and pitched his Camps beside the
Temple of Isis, in the Palace, which was distant from the City five furlongs:
and a fight being begun, he got the victory. From these Carians, a certain part
of Memphis was called Caro-memphites. Polynaeus, book 7. and Herodotus.

SYbill foretold, That the warlike glory of the Macedonians gotten, Philip the
son of Amyntas reigning, in the times of another Philip should go backward: The
glory of Macedon's people, of Arcadia's Kings,
What Philip reigning, sometimes profits, sometimes losses brings.
For one, the greater of the two, his Captains shall impose
On people strange and Cities, but (forsooth) by Western foes:
The less shall tamed be in years to come, and by and by
Illustrious honors he shall lose by Eastern destiny.
For the Romans, who are to the West, by the aid of Attalus, and the Mysians,
who lie toward the rising of the Sun, deprived Perseus the son of Philip, both
of his Kingdom and life. Pausanias, in Achaick affairs.

Boleslaus the chaste Prince of the Polanders, in the Territory of Cracovia, a
certain Man-child having teeth, on the same day in which he was born, spoke
distinctly, and point by point, until being a young beginner in Christian
Religion, he lost both his teeth, and the use of speech. But another six
months old in the City of Cracovia, spoke, That the Tartarians should come;
and he foretold, they should cut off the heads of the Polonians: and being
asked, he answered, he knew that thing from God, and that evil hung over his
own head also; which after the twelfth year came to pass.

HAl^ Abenragell, makes mention, That in the King's Palace he saw an Infant
bor^, which, scarce as yet twenty four hours were finished, began to speak, and
make signs with the hand. At which thing the King being exceedingly astonished,
a greater miracle happened: For he says, The King standing by, and my self
also with many others, the Infant cried out, saying, I am unhappily born to
disclose the loss of the Kingdom, and the destruction and desolation of the
Nation. Which words being pronounced, he fell down dead. Coelius, book 29.
chap. 14.

PHerecides the son of Bades, a Syrian, a heater of Pittacus, walking on the
Samian shore, when he had seen a certain Ship running with full sayls, he
foretold, That a little after, it should be sunk; and it happened, he beholding
it. Laertius and Apollonius in their History of wonderful things. Also
Apollonius the Tyanean, having gotten a Vessel fit enough to sail in, when he
had reached Leucas, about to go to Achaia, Let us go down, says he, out of
this Ship. But she, although then quiet, a little after was overwhelmed.
Philostratus. Mithridates besieging Cyzicum, Aristagoras said, he had received
from Minerva, that he being a pleasant singer, would bring the Trumpeter into
the Lybick Sea, therefore he bade the Citizens to be of good courage. And
straightway the South Wind blowing more strongly, Mithridates his Navy was
troubled, and their warlike Engines for the most part cast asunder. Coelius,
book 20. chap. 24.

THey tell, that Pherecydes sometimes thirsting in the Island Scyrus, desired
water from one of his Scholars; the which when he had drank, he pronounced,
That after three days there was to be an Earthquake in that Island; which
saying, as the end proved it true, he brought back great glory. Apollonius,
History of Wonders.

GLaucus the son of Epicydides, a Spartan, when as he had received a great sum
of money from Milesius, a guest, under the name of a depositum or pledge, and
after his death, his sons had required the money. Glaucus after four months
avouched, that he would give an answer. In the mean time he enquired of the
Oracle at Delphos, Whether by denying (through a suborned oath) the money laid
up with him, he should make a gain? Pythia answered; It may indeed, for
bold-fac'd Glaucus, turn to present gain,
Thus by an oath to conquer, and by robbery to detain
The moneys. Afterward it is death to swear, but he the man
That consciously regards an oath, sustaineth with his hand.
But of the oath the Lad is always mindful, neither he
With hands nor feet as swift does make approach, but if of thee
He takes hold, will all thy house and progeny destroy,
But th'after stock of swearer just, shall better things enjoy.
Glaucus being affrighted with that answer, prayed for pardon or leave. But
Pythia affirmed, the same is to tempt God, and to do it. Glaucus indeed being
returned home, restored the money to the young men of Milesim, but not long
after, his whole house and offspring was wholly put out. Herodotus, book 6.

ALphonsus, King of Arragon and Sicily, besieged Neapolis; a certain man came
to him of a reverend countenance, and foretold, that he should conquer the City
about the Calends of June; but not much after, a doubtful battle was to be, in
which the Captain should be taken, persuading him, that he would not commit
himself to so great danger. The former part of the Prophecy was true; For on
the 4th of Nones of June, he reduced the City into his power. A little after
being about to fight in battle against Anthony at Caudola, in the Campanian
field, his friends dissuading him, and objecting unto him the Prophecy; he
answered; Death indeed will not affrighten a valiant man, much less doubtful
Oracles. A battle being made, he was overcome and taken at Caudola, Aen. Sylv.
book 2. Com. on Panormitan's Alphonsus.

AGathius in his second book of the Gothish War, says, that, the Germans to
have used sometime women for Prophetesses; likewise with a most true event:
Plutarch in Caesar calls them holy women; and they guessed at things to come,
by the whirlpools, and noise of Rivers. Coelius, book 18. chap. 20.

ABaris the son of Seuthias a divine of the Hyperboreans, or those above the
North Wind, wrote Oracles in the Countries which he wandered through, which are
at this day extant. He also foretold earthquakes, Plagues, and the like, and
heavenly things. They say when he had come to Sparta, that he warned the
Laconians of turning away evils by holy things, which things being finished,
no Plague afterward was at Lacedemon. Apollonius in Hist. of Wonders.

AeDesius the son of Chrysanthius a Philosopher of Sardis had a body so nimble,
that it exceeded the belief of all and was plainly carried up on high. There
was such a nearness to him with a god. that there was no need of a Crown of
bays to be placed on his head, but true Oracles, and framed to the proper
likeness of a spirit blown up by a power. He only beholding the Sun, would
power forth speech, although he neither knew the Law or order of Verses, nor
yet well knew the Rules of Grammar. Eunapius.

Sparta, before the Altar of Augustus, in the Market place a brazen portrayture
of Agias. They say this Agias to have divined unto Lysander that he should
conquer the navy of the Athenians at the River Aegos, besides 10. Galleys with
Oars, which by flight betook themselves into Cyprus. Pausan. in La^on.

PHilumena a soothsaying maid, whose familiarity Apelles the heretic, or as
some will, Severus used. To this maid the Devil by an Apparition, in the habit
of a boy answered; sometimes saying, he was Christ, sometimes Paul. He also
wrought miracles, amongst which that is a chief, that he cast a great loaf of
bread into a glasse-viall of a most narrow mouth: and lifted him up with the
tops of his fingers unhurt, and with that bread alone, as with meat given her
from God, he said she should be contented. Augustine is witness.

Augustine in his first book against the Academicks, delivers that there was
a man at Carthage; by name Albigerius, of a reproachful life* who had known
all secrets, so that when he was asked a question by a Scholar of Romantian,
unto whom Augustine writes for trialls sake, what thing he though of? He
answered, a Verse of Virgil. when he was again asked by the same Scholar what
Verse? he repeated that. Cardane of diversenesse of things, Book 8. chapter 43.

ISaac Angel, Emperor of the Greeks, going to Radaestum, a Sea-City, came to
Basilacius, a man of an unaccustomed life, and who had obtained that opinion
amongst all, as that he could foresee and foretell things to come. He uttered
words confused, disagreeing among themselves, and doubtful. The paps of women
coming to him being searched, and their Ankles handled, he drew out dark
Oracles or speeches, and to many questions he answered nothing, and finished
his divinations with runnings to and fro, and mad gestures. There stood little
old women by him, his kins-women, who explained to those that asked Counsel,
what those behaviors of Basilacius might foreshew of things to come, and
interpreted his silence as a wise speech. He answered nothing to the Emperors
saluting him, neither gave he thanks by a silent nod of his head, but leaping
hither and thither like a mad man, cursed those that came to him. Constantine
of Mesopotamia, especially who was then most familiar with Isaac. At length
with a walking staff which he carried in his hands, the eyes of the Emperors
Image, which was painted in the wall of his privy Chamber of speaking, being
scraped out, he also endeavored to take the cap off from his head. The
Emperor despising him as a doting or raving person returned. But not long
after, he was by his brother Alexius deprived of both eyes and Empire, and the
opinion of Basilacius was confirmed, the which had been at the first uncertain
and doubtful in many things. Nicet. book 3.

HEctor Boethius in the Scottish affairs says, it was a common report, that
Merline was begotten by the copulation of a spirit called Incubus, and a
British woman of a Noble blood, of whom Vincent. in 21. book History 30. thus
tells. King Vortiger, counsel being taken what he ought to do for defense of
himself, commanded cunning workmen to be called unto him, who should build a
most strong Tower. But when as the Earth swallowed up their works, they
persuaded the King, that he should search out a man without a father, with
whose blood the stones and mortar might be sprinkled, as if by that means the
mortar would be made firm. Therefore the young man Merline by name, was found,
who with his Mother is brought before the King, who confesses he was conceived
by a spirit in Man's shape. This Merline revealed many dark things, and foretold
things to come. For he opened that under the foundation there was a lake, under
the Lake two Dragons lay hid, whereof one being red, did signify the people of
the Britains, but the other being white, of the Saxons: and he also
prophesied, that Aurelius Ambrose, Hengist being overcome, and Vortiger burnt,
should reign. Vier. b. ^. chapter 46. of the Delusions of Devils.

Coelius writes, there was in his Country a poor desolate woman in a low or
obscure place named Jacoba, out of whose belly he himself (and indeed an
innumerable company of others, not only at Rodigium, but also almost all
Italy) heard the voice of an unclean spirit, very small in deed, but yet, when
he would, distinct, and altogether to be understood; when as the mind of the
great ones that was greedy of that which was to come, desired oftentimes this
belly-speaking woman to be sent for, and stripped of all her clothing, lest
any thing of secret deceit should lie hid. The name of the Devil was
Cincinnatulus. He much delighting in this name, a little after answered to one
calling for him. If thou shall demand of things past and present, what things
might be most hidden, he gave oftentimes wonderful answers. If of things to
come, always most false. But also his ignorance he sometimes more truly
discovered by an uncertain muttering or humming. Coelius Book 8. chapter 10. of old
readings.

ADrian Turneb, the Kings professor of the Greek tongue, testified that he saw
Peter Brabantius a crafty man, very like to Euriclus Aristophanes: who as often
as he would, so often he spoke from the nethermost part of his body with
unmoved lips: and by this imposture or cousenage of the Devil, he blinded the
eyes of many in many places. For when he would be lovesick, for a certain
beautiful maid of Paris, nor could persuade her mother, that he might espouse
her to himself; at length when they willingly and on both sides talk together
of this matter, he utters a voice out of his body, in which the dead husband
of the poor woman seemed to complain of the greatness of the punishments,
which he should endure in Purgatory for the mistrustfullnesse of his Wife,
because she denied her daughter so often desired by Brabantius a most excellent
man, with which complaints she being affrighted, and pitying her Husband,
assented to the request of the Knave: who notwithstanding, it sufficiently
appeared, sought not so much after the daughter, as a dowry appointed her by
her Father in his will. For six Months after, when as he had wasted the maids
goods, the wife and Mother in Law being left, he fled away to Lugdunum. There
he had understood, that a certain Merchant and very rich banker dyed. Who
seeing he was accounted a most unjust man, for that he had scraped together all
things by right and wrong in his life time, he comes to his Son Cornutus, his
only heir, walking in a Porch behind the Churchyard, and intimates that he
was sent thither that he might teach him what was needful for him to do. But
while he says he was to think rather of his father's Soul and good name than
of his death, while they speak, a voice resembling his father, is unexpectedly
heard: the which when Brabantius gave out of his belly, he feigned himself
nevertheless to be in a wonderful manner astonished. But his son was moved with
this voice, into what condition his father had fallen by his injustice, and
with what torments of Purgatory, both for his own, and his sake he should be
troubled, for that he had left him an heir of unjust goods, and which could by
no means be pardoned, unless by a just satisfaction made by his son, and due
alms conferred on them who at that time chiefly wanted, and those were the
Christians taken by the Turks. Therefore the man, who when he spoke, he should
believe, that this was sent by Godly men to Constantinople to redeem them, and
that he was sent therefore to him from God for that thing's sake. Cornutus, no
ill man, although these words heard of gifts, he regarded not, yet because that
of money seemed a hard word, he answered he would take deliberation, and bad
Brabantius return to the same place the next day. In the mean time being
sorrowful, he a little doubted of the place in which he had heard the voice,
that it was shady and dark, and fit for men's lying in wait, and an Echo.
Wherefore the day after, when he brought him into another open plain place, and
let with no brambles or shades; where nevertheless the same song was
repeated while they spoke, this also being added, that six thousand French
Crowns being presently numbered to Brabantius, he should repay three Masses
every day for his fathers salvation, otherwise there would be no redemption out
of Hell. From whence his son being tied in Conscience and Religion, although
with grief, yet he committed so many to the faithful dealing of Brabantius,
all lawful witness of the thing received and paid, being neglected. His
father being freed from the fires and Vulcans strokes, for the future was
quiet, nor any more called upon his son. But wretched Cornutus, (Brabantius
being let go) when as he was more merry then usual, and his other Tablers
could not sufficiently admire it; straightway as soon as he declares the cause
to those enquiring it, he was presently so laughed at by all, that for grief,
after some days he dyed, and followed his father to enquire the truth of the
thing from him. Vierus, Book 2. chap. 12. Of the Delusions of Devils.

AMphiaraus son of Oicleus, a Soothsayer and Prophet, whom when Adrastus, King
of the Greeks called Argivi, would lead unto War against the Thebanes, he
refused, and that he might not be compelled, hid himself, because he foresaw
that he should there perish; yet by the deceit of his wife Eriphile, (whom he
had corrupted with a Jewel) he was betrayed, and being against his will drawn
to War in Baeotia, in that place, which afterward was called Harma: he was by
the gaping of the earth, with his Chariot and Horses, swallowed up. Statius in
Thebaides.

ACtius Navius, a Lad, and that thou may laugh the more, a Shepherd, Priscus
Tarquinius reigning, taking on himself, the use of a Sooth-sayer's crooked
staff, becoming indeed suddenly an Augur, from the Swine-herd, through the
report of the thing divulged, he was called forth to the King. Whom the King
beholding, and perchance scorning both his age and habit, tried in this manner:
Whether (says he) that which is now in my mind, may be done, or may not, I
ask? Navius when he had finished his divination, answered, It might be done.
But the King thinking to mock him; But (says he) I did meditate, that I might
cut this whetstone with a razor. He with wonderful constancy replied; Thou
may therefore; And the razour being snatched up, in the sight of the King
standing amazed, and the people, he cut the whetstone. From thence divination
was sacred to the Romans.

L. Sylla was at Nola, that he might encounter with Marius the Elder, his mind
being very much troubled, because he thought it a very hard thing; Posthumous
the Soothsayer, who did do a divine thing, he being present, both his hands
being stretched out to Sylla, said, That he should command him to be bound, and
after that to be slain; else the victory of that battle would remain in his
power, and he should get a happy success, because he had been bidden then by
an Augural knowledge to foresee it. For the day after, Sylla entering into the
City of Rome, drove out Marius from thence, and fulfilled his mind, as he had
wished. Fulgosus, in book 8. chap. 11. out of Plutarch in Sylla.

SPurina had foretold to C. Julius Caesar, That he should beware of the 30 next
days, as fatal, whose last was the Ides of March. And when by chance both had
come in the morning into the house of Calvus Domitius to the office, Caesar
says to Spurina, What know thou that the Ides of March are now come? And
he, What know thou, that those are not yet past? The one had cast off fear,
as though the time mistrusted was finished; the other thought, that indeed the
utmost part of it was not void of danger: Would God the divination had rather
deceived the Soothsayer, than security the Father of his Country. V^lerius,
book 8. and Suetonius.

AGrippa, the Nephew of Great Herod, of the son of Aristobulus, being cast into
bonds by Tiberius, Emperor, because he seemed to favor Caius, stood before
the Palace, among certain others a like bound, leaning for grief on a certain
Tree; on which when as an Owl had sat, one of those that were bound, by Nation
a German, beholding the Bird, enquired of the Soldier, Who that Man in purple
was? And having known that it was Agrippa, a most noble man of the Jews, he
asked the Soldier, that he might have leave to come nearer unto him; for he
desired to know some things concerning his Country. Which being obtained by
request, and an interpreter taken, he says, O young man, so sudden and
unexpected change of fortune indeed makes thee sad, neither will thou easily
believe thy escape to be nigh at hand, divine providence so ordering thy
affairs; But I call thy Country-gods to record, that I go not about to flatter
thee, nor to feed thee with vain comfort. It cannot be, but that the course of
things being changed, thou shall escape forthwith out of these bonds, and come
both unto the largest dignity and power, even to the envy of those unto whom
thou have seemed miserable. Thou art to have also a happy departure of life,
children being left in the succeeding of wealth. But remember, when thou shall
again see this Bird, that the fifth day from it shall be destinous unto thee.
These are the things which the heavenly ones show to thee, by sending this
Bird; Therefore I entreat thee, that as soon as thou shall perceive that
happiness to be shown thee, do thy endeavor, that we also may be taken out of
these adversities. He was a true Prophet. For six months after, Tiberius dyed.
Caius succeeded in the Empire, who made Agrippa King. Josephus, book 18. chap.
8.

Spaniards call a people Adelittans, and Almagonens, who from the flying of
Birds, from the voice, from the meeting of wild beasts, and of very many other
things do divine, what good or evil thing is to happen; lastly, they have books
most diligently written with all prognosticall divinations. Of these some are
Dukes, and as it were Masters, others Earls and Scholars. There is also
another cunning of these, to search out the passage, not only of horses, and
beasts, but also of men, by a clothed or covered, by a naked, by a hard
ground, by small stones, by great stones, as that the number of those who
passed by, does not at any time almost deceive them; who by a fit word may be
called Searchers. These showed forth a notable example of their Art in the War
which Ferdinand waged against the Moors. For when as a hundred Saracen's
horsemen had avowed to their King, never to return, unless they had shown forth
some famous act against the Christians; and had privily come through ways
unpassible, and to fall upon the Christians garrison: The Searchers somewhat
perceiving their way and number, made the Watch acquainted of their lying in
wait; and they having followed the horsemen, they constrained them, being shut
in on both sides to yield themselves in the channel of a brook, being tied
together in a long rank with one rope. Laurent. Valla, book 1. of Histories.

ALexander, Emperor, in the year of the Lord, 904, as Sigebert writes, was
idle, being given to riot and Magic; He having demanded of his Juglers,
Whether he was to live long? he received an answer, If he had taken away from
the brazen Boar in the Theater, his teeth and privy members. By which saying
they did signify, that he was given to gluttony and lusts, from the which, if
he did not abstain, he would hasten his death: that which fell out. For after
bathing, yielding himself to banquets and sports, a vein being broken, he dyed
with an issue of blood. Zonaras and Cedrenus.

SImeon, Duke of Bulgarians, had brought War on the Crobatians: it is told to
Lacapenus, a Roman Emperor; there was an Image placed in the top of Xerolophus
his vault, toward the West, that was turned into the shape of Simeon; the head
of which Image, if it be cut off, the death of Simeon should not be far off.
That being done, the same hour it was told the Emperor, he to have dyed of a
pain of the stomach. Zonaras.

Gades there is an old stone in the brink of the Sea, most excellently graven
upon the passage with Saracens work, downward broad and squared; upward
narrowed, and of so great an height, as a Crow is wont to fly on high; upon
which is the Image of a man lifted up of Copper, raised up on his feet, having
his face toward the South, and a great Club holding in his right hand. Which
club, as the Saracens deliver, shall fall out of his hand, in the year in which
a King to be in France, shall be bo^n, who in the last times shall subject all
Spain unto Christian Laws. And straightway as soon as the Saracens shall see
the Club fallen, they shall all flee from their treasures laid in the earth.
The Saracens deliver, That Mahomet, while he was yet alive, built that Idol,
and engaged a certain Legion of devils thither by the Art of Magic, the which
holds it so strongly, that it could never be broken by any, neither does it
suffer Christians to come to it without danger, but only Mahometans, and that
Birds sitting on it, it suddenly kills them. Turpine of Rhemes, with
Eufordiensis, chap. 68.

Biarmians, Laplanders, Bothnians, Finlanders, Northern people, there is this
often kind of magical divining: The Magitian goes into a closet, content with
one companion and his wife; he smites a brazen Frog or Serpent with an hammer,
upon an anvil, with certain strokes, and turns up and down hither and thither,
with a muttering of verses; and straightway falling, is snatched into a trance,
and lays along for a short time as dead. In the mean time he is most
diligently kept by his foresaid companion, lest a fly, gnat, or any other
living creature should touch him. Being returned to himself, he shows a ring
or little knife, in token of his dispatched embassage, and declares unto his
hires by certain signs what is done. Olaus, book 5. chap. 17.

JAnnes, the Master of Theophilus the Emperor, was wont to foretell things to
come, by the prophecy and juglings of a basin. When as sometime the Barbarians
making use of three Leaders, did annoy the Roman power, the Emperor bade him
hope well. Between brazen Images, which were in Euripus of the Circle, a
certain Image with three heads was reported to stand; Therefore Jannes
commanded three brazen hammers to be framed, and them to be delivered to men of
strong hands, who at an appointed hour of the night, came with him unto that
Image, and when he had commanded them, they should valiantly smite the heads,
while they, as it were, with one stroke and force should cast down on the earth
those heads. A great part of the night being now finished, Jannes came with
those men unto the Image, and repeating a magic verse, takes away the
strength that was in the Image, he bade the men with all their force to smite
the heads of the Image. By two of their most strong strokes, two heads of the
Image shook off; the third striking something more slackly, he bended indeed,
yet plucked not away the head wholly from the body. After the same manner was
it done with the Captains of that Nation: For an inbred sedition arising, two
of the Captains were slain, the third received a wound, but not deadly. The
Barbarians therefore being deprived of their strength, returned home. Cedrene.

APollonius Tyaneus, when he disputed in Ephesus, being almost separated from
his soul, and with inbent eyes, as if he had been in the present thing, said
often, Smite the sinner Stephen, smite him: And at last added, The Tyrant is
dead; who was heard with the great admiration of all that were present:
afterward they received that on the same day, and the very moment of hour,
Domitian the Emperor was slain at Rome, by a man whose name was Stephen, as
Apollonius had then declared. Fulgosus, book 1. chap. 9. and Xiphiline in
Domitian.

STephen the Hagio-Christophorite, (it is the name of an office) but for his
wickedness otherwise called Antichristophorite, after that he knew from the
Devil, by Sethus a Magitian, destruction to hang over the head of Andronicus
Comnenus, by him whose name had its beginning, [ J. S.] he appointed Isaac
Angel, whom Andronicus despised as a low-spirited man, to be laid hold of, and
first to commit him to custody, and then by the Judgment of Andronicus the
Tyrant, to kill him. Therefore entering into the Chamber of Isaac in the
evening, he commanded Isaac to come down, and to follow him. But he delaying,
he brought force. Isaac defending himself, kills Stephen, and going into the
Temple with his sword drawn, he goes up into that Seat where Manslayers,
explaining their wicked deed, desire pardon from those that go in and out. But
a multitude of the City in great number, presently flow together unto the
Temple. The Uncle of Isaac helps him in the same, Ducas, John, and his son
Isaac. Moreover, others entreat the mingled multitude which had ran together
into the Temple, and afterward did run to it, that it would stay with them,
and help according to its power, those that were placed in the greatest danger.
Thus therefore Isaac finished the whole night, that he might not think of the
Kingdom, but might pray against destruction. But by earnest supplication he
obtained this, that a certain man of that company shut the doors of the Temple,
and lights being brought in, he instantly persuaded them by his example, that
they would not depart home. When it was day, all the Inhabitants of the City of
Constantinople were present, they all prayed God, that, Andronicus being driven
away, Isaac might enjoy the Empire. Andronicus, who was then absent from the
City, the murder of Stephen being known, did nothing else, but admonish the
Citizens in a short writing, that they should cease to attempt new matters.
Whereof this was the beginning, He that has punishment, is taken away. But in
the morning, many running together, Isaac is saluted Emperor of the Romans,
when as one of the Churchwardens had put the Crown of Constantine the Great,
which hanged over the Communion Table drawn down from the stairs, on his head,
he was consecrated. Now when as the Emperors horses adorned with Golden
trappings, were brought by the Crossing of the Cionians, one being by a
Horse^rider pulled away by force, is taken, and is brought unto Isaac. He, that
horse being Mounted on, departing from the great Temple, Andronicus giving
counsel to himself for flight, enters the Palace, and the saluted Emperor
is confirmed. Nicetas.

WIlliam Earl of Holland, King of the Romans, Frisia being subdued, when as
nigh to a certain City he had found a Sepulcher adorned with wonderful work,
and did ask, Whose it was? The Citizens answer: None hitherto was buried there;
but by some hidden destiny it is reserved for a certain King of the Romans.
When therefore the Conqueror did ride with a few men, seeking a place to turn
aside in, that he might bring back his army the more safely, he fell in the
Ice. The Frisians who lay hid, break out and before the King could be helped,
being partly cut, partly choked in his helmet, he perished. The Frisians their
neighbors being called together, drive out the Hollanders, and slay them in
the year of the Lord 1255. Thus by those of the same Town, according to the
Prophecy, the King is laid in that Tomb, in the ninth year of his reign. But
his son Florentius, the fifth of that name, after twenty seven years brought
his Fathers bones out of Frisia into Zeland, Medioburg; and laid them in a
Monastery of Nuns of the Praemonstratian Order, founded by his daughter
Richard^, and increased by subsidies, in the year of Christ, 1282. Cuspinian.

Gothia two Tombs are seen, being huge Stones in the place of way-marks or
Crosses, having the bodies of two brethren laid in them, unto whom it had been
foretold by a soothsayer, in their first youth it should come to pass that
they should dye by mutual wounds given. To decline the destiny, they undertook
a travel unto the farthest, and most contrary parts of the World. In their
utmost old age, at length returning into their country, when as any one hoped
his brother to have long since died, not far from the Town Jonacum, they met
one another unknown, and Salutation being on both sides given and received,
they rested under the next pine tree. By and by their Dogs wrangling, they also
brake forth, first to quarrellings, then to mutual wounds, and drawing out
their Soul, and acknowledging themselves to be brethren, they dyed in mutual
embraces. Olaus, in his first book of Northern Customs. chapter 37.

SIgthune King of Swethland, while he offered sacrifices to his gods at Upsala
the Mother-City, an answer being received by the sacrificers, he learned that
by a fatal necessity, the highest destruction and death did hang over his head
from the metal of Gold, and therefore he was chiefly to take heed of it: by
iron, or Steel, and other metals he could never be forced or killed. Wherefore
seeing he thought himself invincible, he attempted dangers of Wars. He had a
most beautiful daughter, Gro; This, Schi^ld King of the Danes required to be a
Wife to his Son Gram. But her father had already betrothed her unto a most
Noble Champion, the brother of Sumblus King of the Finlanders. Therefore Gram
thinking himself to be despised by Sigthune, being clothed about with skins of
wild beasts, with great hazard he came to the Palace of Sigthune, observing a
time until the maid going forth, he might allure her unto a mutual love, and
being allured, and of her own accord willing, he might bring her away. Yet
first, Bessus his companion, through the greatest force of wit, brought on the
mind of the Virgin unto the love of his King. Therefore the maid nothing
relenting, being brought into his Denmark, he loved with a great love, and
begat of her Guthorme, afterward King of Denmark, and a daughter, wife of
Sibdager King of Norway. Sigthune the Father of the maid, suddenly taken away,
follows the Danes with war, to revenge the wrong by weapons. Gram, carrying a
club in a Giant-like manner, the which Gold being powered on it, he had made the
weightier, slew Sigthune his father in law, too venterously approaching with
his head, leaving by that deed, not an unprofitable instruction to the Kings of
the Swedes, that they believe Gold is more to be feared then Iron. John Magnus,
Book 2. Chapter 6.

Sempronius Gratchus, two Snakes were found, they afforded a sad token. For it
was shown by the Soothsayer, if he had sent away the male, his Wife must dye in
a short time; but if the Female, himself. The which when Sempronius had heard;
loving Cornelia his Wife very much, he sent forth the Female. He kept his Wife;
and himself a little after departed out of life. Polydore Virgil, Book 3. Of
Wonders.

M. Marcellus being inflamed with the glory of the Syracusans being taken, and
Hanniball; they being forced, first to flee from him before the walls of Nol^,
endeavored with the greatest diligence, that he might either strike down the
Army of the Carthagenians in Italy, or might drive them out of Italy, and by
solemn sacrifice he searched out the pleasures of the gods. Which first
sacrifice fell down before the little hearth, his liver was found without a
head, the next had a double head of the liver. Which things being looked into,
the soothsayer answered, the entrails pleased him not, because the first
appeared maimed or mangled, the second too joyful. So M. Marcellus, that he
might not attempt any thing rashly, the night following, daring to go forth
with a few, for seeing or viewing sake, being enclosed with a multitude of his
enemies in Brutia, he equally brought a great grief, and damage to his Country
by death. Valerius, ^ock 1. chap. 6. and Plutarch. in Marcellus.

ANiharis King of the Longobards, brother of Garibald, King of the Bavarians,
^oo^ Theodelinda his bride in the Veronian field. Not far from thence, a tree
being struck from Heaven, Agigulph Duke of the Taurinians, a soothsayer being
asked Coun^ell of, received an answer. Theodelinda the Virgin to marry
Antharis; but a little after, to be a Widow, for Agilulph. The issue confirmed
the promise of the Sooth-saying. For Antharis, when he had fairly reigned six
years, was taken away by poison at Tiotnam. The Longobards gave power to
Theodelinda his Wife, for her mildness, and too much courtesy, that it should
be lawful for her to take that Husband whom she desired, and they promised
they would have him for their King. But she chose Agilulph. The Marriage was
solemnized at Mediolum, where by the agreement of all, he is declared King of
the Longobards or Lombards. Bonfine, Book 8. Of the first Decade.

BAtabaces in the Cimbrian War, a Priest of the great Mother ^dea, came to
Pessinunt. This man brought word that the goddess had shown him in his
passage, that a victory and great glory of war was to come to the people of
Rome; When there was an approvement of the Senate, and it had decreed a Temple
to the goddess for Victories-sake: A. Pompey Tribune of the common people
forbade him going into the assembly, that he might utter these things to the
people, calling him jugler, and with disgrace drove the man out of the place of
their Common Pleas. Which thing most of all commended his sayings. For as soon
as the assembly being dismissed, Pompey returned to his house, so great a force
of a Fever possessed him, that it was manifest to all, and much spread abroad,
that he died within the seventh day. Plutarch. in the life of Marius.

L. Sylla being returned out of Asia against Cinna and Marius, he tells that in
Silvina of Pontium, Servus a mad man to have spoken to him, who said he showed
to him from Bellona, that he should have the Palm or conquering Crown, and
Victory of the War. The which unless he should perfect, the Capitol was to be
burnt: and that happened on the same day, which he had foretold, which was the
day before the Nones of the fifth Month, which now we call July. Plutarch in
Sylla.

CReophilus in the bounds of the Ephesians, says, those that built Ephesus,
when they were greatly in doubt of the place at length they sent unto the
Oracle, those which should ask, where the City was to be placed. But the Devil
answered, Where a fish had evidently shown, and a wild Boar had taught. But
there is a report, that where the Fountain now called Hypelaeus, is, and the
holy Haven, certain fishermen provided a dinner. Then a certain one of the
Fishes leaped out together with the dead coals, and fell down into a bundle of
Chaff; a green turf is presently inflamed, in which a wild boar by chance lay
hid, who being much affrightned with fire, ran through a good part of a
Mountain, even thither where Trachea is now called, and fell down, being
wounded with a dart, where now the Temple of Pallas is erected. Then the
Ephesians possessing the Island, when they had inhabited it twenty and one
years, in the twenty and second they built Trachea, and afterward Corissum, and
there raised up the Temple of Diana in the marketplace, and of Pythius Apollo,
in the haven. Athenaeus, Book 8. chap. 11.

Locrians a wooden Dog, having such a History. For a lot was rendered unto a
certain Locrian, there he should build a City, where a wooden Dog had fastened a
biting on him. For which cause when he had sailed unto the other shore of the
Sea, he trod upon a (kunosbaton) that is, a Dog, bush or bramble, a kind of
thorn, from thence when he thought the Oracle to have an end, he built the
Cities, which the Locrians call or esteem Ozolae. Coelius, Book 17. chap. 28.
out of Athenaeus Book 2. chap. 33.

LEonides in his fourth book of the people of Attica, says, when Thymaetes the
younger brother, who was a bastard, had beheaded Aphidantes, King of the
Athenians, he himself reigned at Athens. Whereby it was brought about, that
Melanthus the Messenian a banished man from his Country, received an Oracle,
where he was to dwell, to whom it was answered, where it should be received for
gifts from guests, setting feet and heads before him in a supper, the which
afterward happened in Eleusina. For when as they had a certain solemn feast
according to their country manner, and had spent all the flesh, and the feet
only, and heads had remained, these very things they brought to Melanthus.
Athenaeus, Book 3. chap. 9.

BYzantium, before called Lygos, was built by the Lacedaemonians. Pausanias
being Captain in the most narrow Sea of Europe and Asia, unto whom it was said
by the Oracle of Apollo Pythius, that they should place it against blind seats,
that is the Megarians; who built Chalcedon in a barren soil of the Country, a
wealthy bank being let pass. Strabo, book 7. This City, Constantine the Great,
who passed over the seat of the Empire, from the City of Rome into the East, to
restrain the inroads of the Parthians, compassed with new walls, being warned
from God, and adorned it with most high Towers, and stately buildings, that it
might be thought rather the habitation of gods than of Emperors. This City,
when the Emperor would name Nea, the common people from the builder called
Constantinople. Cuspinian.

Trojanes of building a City, who, Aeneas being Captain, had come into Italy.
They say she was great with young, and to have come to the Altars, being
stricken with the hands of the sacrificers; thence, to have sit down on a
little Tomb, four and twenty furlongs from the Sea, in a place surely hideous,
and very difficult. Aeneas mindful of the Oracle, followed the Sow aloof off,
with a few that were by chance present, lest being nigh the trace, she should
turn from the destinous way. But then contemplating the nature of the place,
when as he perceived nothing in it which might invite him to the tillage of it,
being doubtful in his counsel, he was vexed, neither could he bring it into
his mind, that such unfit seats were shown him by destiny. And he was now late
busied in advising of that one thing, whether he ought to be there, or should
go as yet farther. When as from the next place a voice without an Author, was
given, which commanded the Trojans to remain there. Only they should go
forward to build, other things they should leave to the destinies. Others are
Authors, that the shape of household gods was here in a dream set before the
eyes of Aeneas, by which he was commanded to fortify the place. But whatever
kind of Oracle that was, it is a certain report, that the Sow being the day
after found with a numerous company of young, which she had brought forth in
the night, to have confirmed the truth of the Oracle. The Tomb therefore was
fenced with work done in haste, in which afterward Ascanius, who succeeded his
Father Aeneas, built the City Alba, that is, white, so called from the color
of a Sow. Sabellicus, Book 7. Of the first Ennead.

TArquinius Superbus, or the proud King of the Romans, began to found the
Temple of Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva, vowed by his grandfather in the Sabine
War, in the high and rocky part of the Tarpeian hill, the roughness of the
place being first corrected. But when he had determined to consecrate the
floor, according to the custom, and the compass of this space had embraced
certain Chapels of most ancient work; which because they were to be
unhallowed, that the workmen, all fear of Religion being taken away, might
demolish, they say, that then there were mockings of evil Demons, or devils,
that other power had yielded up their divination to Jupiter, and the Goddesses,
only Terminus (some add also Juventa) could not be moved from their seat: And
that thing being taken for a token of a stable, and remaining Empire; A chapel
to have afterward remained unmoved in the middle part of the Temple. There is
also a certain greater wonder offered to the workmen. A man's head was found
with a fresh gore, by those who wrought in the lowest part. Tarquine (for none
thought not that to be wonderful) asks counsel of houshold-prophets. These
referring all the praise of that kind of learning unto the Hetruscians, brought
tidings to the King, that he should send into Hetruria to enquire. The
Hetruscian Prophet answered, It would be, that the Tower of the Empire, and the
head of affairs should be there, where that wonder had appeared; and now from
thence, the place began, from Tarpeium, to be called the Capitol. Sabellicus,
book 5. Ennead. 2.

ALexander the Great, moving his Camps from Troas, came to the Temple of
Minerva. There is a Priest, Alexander by name, when he had seen before the
house of Ariobarzan, who was President of Phrygia, an Image struck down on the
ground, and other strange sights of no small moment, he came to the King, and
in a great horse-exercise, confirmed, That he should be a Conqueror;
especially if he did join his companies in battle about Phrygia. He added
thereto also, That he should kill the Captain of his enemies with his own
hands: But all those things were shown to him by the gods themselves, and
chiefly from Minerva, which was to be an help to him for the performing things
prosperously. Alexander received the foretelling of this Priest with a joyful
mind; and presently honored Minerva with most large sacrifice, and dedicated
his bucklet unto her, and by and by brought out another that was most firm for
him: With which he being armed, entered the first fight, where he carried away a
famous victory. Diodore, book 17.

WHen the Grecians had gathered Ships together in Aulis, a Haven of Eubaea, to
go to Troy, and an Altar being built, they sacrificed under a Plain Tree; a
Serpent of a wonderful bigness creeping under the Altar, went up into the top
of the Plain-Tree, and enclosing a Sparrow's nest hanging on an outmost bough,
he devoured eight young ones, and the mother her self taken by the wing, and
presently himself stiffned into a stone. Calchas, a Prophet, interpreted the
divination. The Greeks should besiege Troy nine years in vain, at length in the
tenth year to take and overthrow it, the glory of such a deed to remain for
ever. Ulysses in Homer. Iliad. 2. repeats the History.

ALexander the Great, assaulting Gaza; a Crow flying over, a certain turf or
lump of earth being let down from on high, smote the shoulder of Alexander, and
then sitting on a Towr besmeared with slime, she being infolded by the tough
matter, was taken by the wings. Plutarch says, she sat in an Engine, and
there, being ensnared in a knot of ropes, to have stuck fast. Aristander the
deviner beholding that thing, said it would be, that the City would be in a
short time taken, but it is a danger, lest some wound the King would receive
that day. And both indeed happened. Sabellicus, book 4. Ennead. 4.

COelius Pontius, when a Pie had sat on his head, declaring the law, and the
Soothsayers had answered, the Bird being let go, there would be a victory of
the enemies; but she being killed, of the Commonwealth; yet he who had
oppressed it, should dye: he presently killed that bird. From which it fell
out, that Coelius himself, with forty others, was slain. Volatteran. book 14.
chap. 2. Anthro pol.

ALexander the Great, an Expedition into Asia being undertaken, after he moved
to the War, both other wonders of the gods were shown, and also a sign of
Orpheus at the hill Libethrum, there was a Cyprus Tree, which issued forth
about that season with a plentiful sweat. All being affrighted with that
wondrous sign, Aristander bade him be of good courage, he should carry on thing
never to be blotted out, and famous, which should afford much sweat and pains
to Poets and Musicians, singing them forth. Plutarch, in Alexander. The same
Alexander besieged Tire now the seventh month, and while he refreshes almost
the whole Army from their former labors, but brings a few to the walls, that
his enemies might not have respite, Aristander the diviner, sacrifices being
slain, when he looked into the intrails, he confidently affirmed by the Crow,
That that City was without doubt to be vanquished. Which receiving his saying
with a mock and laughter, because it was the last day; the King seeing him
troubled, and favoring always his Prophesies, forbade hereafter, that to be
numbered the thirtieth day, but the twenty eighth of the month; and a sign of
the Trumpet being given, he set upon the wall more sharply, than from the
beginning he had begun to do. When the City was not sloathfully assaulted,
neither those that were in the Camps were at rest, but ran together to bring
help, the Tyrians were broken, and Alexander took the City that day. Plutarch,
in Alexander.

Syracusans being besieged by Nicias, went up to the Temple of Hercules,
because they had not a long time performed solemn rites to Hercules, and they
offered sacrifice. The Priests being Soothsayers, declared unto the Syracusans
joyful intrails and victory, if they did not begin the conflict, but beat back
their force. For Hercules in defending himself being first forced, overcame
all. And so going forward, they made a very great and sharp Sea-battel in the
very Harbor, and overcame the Athenians. Plutarch in Nicias.

Sylla, when he was sent with an Army to the Sociall War, at Laverna, a tempest
lighted into a great bosom of earth, and out of it a great fire brake, and
lifted up a light flame to Heaven. But the fortune tellers told, That an
excellent man, and excelling in beauty, and famous, was to let loose the City
unto present storms, when he had taken the highest command. Sylla says, this
man to be himself: For a shining hair of a golden color is peculiar to his
face. But he would not blush if he take virtue or valor to himself, so great
and famous deeds being done. Plutarch in Sylla. In the same War, when he
sacrificed before the Pretor's house, he suddenly beheld a Snake sliding down
from one part of the Altar, which being seen, he forthwith by the encouragement
of Posthumous a Soothsayer, drew forth his Army for the Voyage, and took the
most strong Camps of the Samnites. Which Victory laid the steps and foundation
of his future and most large power. Valor. Max. book 1. chap. 6.

Scipio Africanus, when he had found that Army which laid Carthage equal with
the ground corrupted, he amended it. But they report, the hilt of his sword
springing with much blood, to have foreshewn the end of the War: the which,
when it was oftentimes wiped off, a little after it was more bloody: For that
monstrous thing, said the Soothsay^rs, does signify a great slaughter of the
enemies. Suidas.

Pericles out of the field; and Lampo the Prophet, as soon as he saw the strong
horn, and firm, sprung out of the middle of his forehead, to have said, The
power of two factions that were in the City, of Thucydides and Pericles, were
to be brought unto one, with whom this wonder had happened. But Anaxagoras,
when he had dissected the bone of the head, to have shown, that the brain
filled not up its seat, but in manner of an egg, the sharp part to have rolled
out of the whole shell, in that place, from whence the root of the horn drew
its beginning. And indeed they who were present, had, at the present,
Anaxagoras in admiration: a short time after, Lampo, when as the wealth or ayds
of Thucydides being broken, the whole Commonwealth had fallen back into the
hand of Pericles. But both of them might conconjecture rightly, as well the
Naturalist, as the Prophet. The one, who well followed after the cause; the
other, the issue; for it belonged unto his office to consider whence it had
proceeded, and how it had sprung forth; to this man, to foreshew, what there
was at the time of its nativity, and what it should betoken. Plutarch in
Pericles.

Alexander the Great set upon the Persians, they say Darius (when he first
began to reign) commanded the Persian sheath or scabberds for their darts to be
made after that fashion which the Greeks at that time used, and then many of
the Chaldean Prophets foretelling, That the Empire of the Persians should be
translated to them, of whom he was King, he imitated the fashion of their
sheaths for darts. It happened accordingly; for Darius being overcome and taken
by Alexander, the Empire of the Persians was translated to the Greeks.
Sabellicus, lib. 4. Ennead. 4.

Maximinus the Father being set on fire by the Sun, and his Spear being struck
by a Thunderbolt, was cloven through the Iron and all, from the very top to
the bottom thereof; from which the Soothsayers gathered, That there would arise
out of that Nation, Emperors of the same name, who would continue but for a
short time: Which came to pass; for the Father and Son, called by the name of
Maximinus, in a short space after ruled the Empire together. Sabellicus, lib.
1. cap. 4.

DIon prepared a Navy of Ships in Zazinth against Dionysius; Miltas, a
Thessalian Prophet, observing a Martinel or Martin, which flying amongst the
ships, lighted upon the very top of the stern of the ship wherein Dion was:
thereby was caused to fear, (as he privately told his friends) that the
magnificent things which he was about to perform when they had flourished a
small time, would decay and come to nothing. Plutarch. in Dion.

Dionysius Syracusanus was put away by the Tyrant Dion, at which time an Eagle
snatched from one of his guard a Lance, wherewith sublimely mounting, at length
she let it down into the deep; whereupon the Prophet said, That the Eagle was
the minister of Jove, and that the Lance was the Ensign of principality; and
therefore he concluded, That the Prince of the gods would work the subversion
of the Tyrant. Plutarch, in Dion and Theopomp.

Croesus, King of the Lydians, fought against Cyrus King of the Persians with
equal success, and staying at Sardis; upon a sudden all the Suburbs were
filled with Snakes, which the horses while they were going to grass, devoured;
they whom Telmisses consulted about what happened, said, That there would come
a foreign Army which would overcome the Natives; for, say they, a Snake is a
child of the earth, and a Native; but a horse is an enemy, and stranger. In the
mean time, Croesus was taken of Cyrus, and stripped of his Kingdom. Herodotus,
lib, 1.

Dion was about to raise War from the Island Zazinth, against the Tyrant
Dionysius, at the solemn vows and sacrifices, the Moon was eclipsed; moreover,
ecliptic circuits, and the shadow which m^eteth the Moon, was no strange thing
to Dio, who thought the Earth the object of the Sun: but because he desired to
elevate the minds of his astonished Soldiers, he called for M^ltas the
Thessalian Prophet, who when they were all called together, made a learned
Oration, wherein he advised them to be of good courage, and assure themselves
of great success; for that god had declared himself defective by the eclipse,
by reason of the presence of their illustrious Leader; and that there was
nothing more illustrious then Dionysius the Tyrant, by the glorious splendor
of whom, they should overcome the Sicilians as soon as they should there
arrive. Theopompo Plutarch. in Dio.

Dionysius the younger to the gods, portended great prodigies, at that time
when he most tyrannically put away Dion, the Sea was so high by a tide, that it
overflowed the Castle; yet within four and twenty hours the water was so sweet,
that it was potable, and that many who tasted thereof, declared the same: Which
thing Plinius remembers, in his book 2. cap. 100. Swine brought forth piggs
that had all their parts, but that they wanted ears; the Prophets expounded
that, to portend defection and rebellion, and that the Citizens should be no
longer obedient to the Tyrant; and that the sweetness of the water signified a
vicissitude to the Syracusians, by alteration of their sad and heavy times,
into better and more comfortable. Theopompus and Plutar. in Dion.

ACtius in Bruto writes, Tarquinius Superbus had a dream to this purpose, That
a Shepherd came to him and brought him two Rams, and that he immolated one of
them, and that he saw a survivour, who rushing upon him with crooked horns, he
was with a sudden impetuous force cast prostrate upon the ground upon his
back, and casting his eyes toward Heaven, he perceived the Sun to pass
through a new orb and unaccustomed way; which when he had related to
Interpreters, they advised the King to take heed, lest he whom he accounted
rude, a beast and monster, being armed with wisdom, should drive him out of his
Kingdom; and that what was showed him by the Sun, portended a change to the
people: which happened accordingly; for Brutus, whose brother the King had
oppressed, and whose wit he but sported and mocked at, drove away the King, and
Kingly Title; and the Roman State was so altered, that instead of one perpetual
King, it begun to have yearly two Magistrates. Petrarcha de Somniis, ex
Ciceronis, lib. 1. de Natura Deorum, Accii Bruto.

HIppocrates, the most valiant Duke of Athens, being alone, chanced to see at
Olympia, a sight portending strange things; for when he had immolated the host,
the pots (as they were ordered) were full of flesh and water, and without any
fire put to them, grew so hot, that the water boiled over: which portent,
Chilon the Lacedemonian, who by chance came thither, beholding, first persuaded
him, that he should not bring his Wife thither, being fruitful. Secondly, if
he had a Wife, that he should put her away; and if she had born him ever a son,
he should resign him: but Hippocrates not observing the counsel of Chilon, but
promoting his son Pisistratus, he invaded the Tyrant at Athens. Herodot. l. 1.
Sabel. l. 6. Ennead. 2.

Thebes in Boetia, in the Temple of the Law-giving Ceres the time when by the
conduct of Epiminundas, the people of Leuctrica overcame the Spartanes, the
Spiders had woven white webs about the Valleys, the Macedonians now by the
conduct of Alexander the Great, invading the Coasts, there presently appeared
sights portending ruin and destruction to the City, all things were filled
with black workmanship. Pausanias in Boeoticis. This sign was three months
before Alexander came to Thebes, about that time, the Statues which stood in
the Common Hall, were seen to send out of the huge gravings abundance of sweat,
besides these things, it was testified to the Magistrates, That the Pond or
standing Lake which was at Onchestus, sent forth a noise like to the Lowing of
Cattle, and that there was in Dirces a certain horrid bloody shape, which
swimmed upon the water, and there were not wanting some of Delphos, who said,
That the top of the house which the Thebans built, appeared to the Phocensian
people to be full of blood; the Prophets said, That the Web did portend the
gods migration from the City; the shape of the Heavenly bow, perturbation, and
various sorts of molestations; the sweat sent from the Statues, extreme losses;
and moreover, the blood which was seen to appear in many places, showed, that
bloody slaughter would ensue at Thebes. Diodor. lib. 17.

AT Saguntum, before it had suffered the misery which Hannibal afterward
inflicted upon it; amongst many and daily monstrous sights which were seen, A
child which was almost born out of his Mothers belly, returned back to the
Mothers womb again: Which Prodigy, the prophets said, did foreshew a
destructive War, imminent and fatal destruction; so that it was utterly
overthrown by slaughter. Alex. lib. 2. cap. 31.

ARchilaus, Tetrarch of Judea and Idumea, was sent for, being accused of
Tyranny by Caesar, to Rome; who after hearing the accusations of his enemies,
and his own defense, banished him to Vienna in France, and taking all his
substance from him before he exiled him, in the tenth year of his Government;
before he was sent for to Rome, he told to his friends this Dream; He saw ten
ripe ears of corn full of wheat taken away by Oxen; and considering that his
dream was worthy to be taken notice of, he consulted with interpreters of
dreams concerning it; who disagreeing concerning the meaning thereof, Simon,
one of the Essaei, to wit, one that abstained from flesh, wine, and women, as
all the Jews of that Order did, (making an apology) said, That this vision did
portend change to Archilaus, and that to the worse; for that Oxen did signify
misery, because this kind of creature is under continual labors; and
furthermore, it foreshewed mutation of things, because the ground being turned
by the labor, retains neither the same place nor form; but those ten ears of
corn, show the number of ten years, for that they go about by annual turnings,
and that immediately there would ensue an end of the domination or rule of
Archilaus: so did this Jew interpret the dream. Five days after this vision,
Caesar sends a procurator to Judaea to summon Archilaus before him, Joseph. l.
17. c. ult.

Mediolanum, seven days before the Lieutenant Governor Barnabas was taken by
his Cosen Galeacius, there was such vehement lightning, that the hangings of
his Inner Chamber were burnt with a Thunderbolt, and his Ensign being a marble
Viper, was shattered in pieces. A Prophet then, a domestic, whose surname was
Medicina, in the nones of May, observed the unhappy conjunction of three Stars,
(he had formerly predicted much) and then he endeavored to retain him whom he
saw running precipitately toward his destruction, which was thereby threatened;
but such was the hidden power of his fate, that he went on his way, being
wretchedly infatuated. Jovius in Barnaba.

ZEnon the Emperor hearing of the discomfiture of his Army, lees into a little
Castle sited upon an hill, which the people called Constantinople; which
considering immediately after his coming thither, he with sighing said to his
company; Poor man, Is it the sport of the gods, who have thus deluded me? for
the Prophets did confidently affirm, That it behoved me to be at Constantinople
in the month of July; whereupon I thought I should have been in the City, but
(poor wretch as I am) I am only in this little Hill, which bears the like
appellation.

Harold, who bragged that he had a familiar spirit; told Frederick the second
that he should die in the Florentine field; Therefore, in that his last journey
from Thuscia to Apulia, he used all possible care to avoid it; but falling into
a grievous Fever, he was forced to lie at the Castle of Apulia, six miles
distant from Luceria (which they call Florentinum) as soon as he remembered the
prediction of Hariolus, and the name of Florentinum, he perceived that the end
of his life was at hand. Collenutius, l. 4. Historiae regni Neopolitani.

Ezelinus a Roman, and Albericus brethren, bloody and fierce men to have been
the sons of Adebheida, a Lady of the Noble blood of the Tuscans, of so high a
wit and discretion, that (beyond belief) as well by observing the Heavens and
Stars as Magical Art, she foresaw things to come. Many Predictions which
accordingly fell out, were demonstrated to her Husband and Children, and
especially this one; That on the day of her death, she pronounced three Verses
in manner of an Oracle in which she cha^ted forth the might, and progress, and
the very place of the death of her sons, and it appeared by the events
nothing of the Prophesy but came to pass. Now I shall say nothing of
Albericus, whereas Ezelinus was admonished to take heed of Cassanum, being
ignorant thereof by reason of the obscurenesse of the place, he ever most
studiously avoided the Castle Cassanum, bordering upon the Paduans and
Hetruscians, supposing it the fatal place; at length after he attained the age
of seventy years, whilst with all his might he warred against Mediolanum, his
terrible and insolent spirit making him hated by almost all the Longobards, he
was by them circumvented, for having passed the bridge, and finding himself in
extreme streights, and inquiring the name of the place, as soon as he heard
Cassanum named, and remembering the confusion threatened by it, clapping his
spurs to his Horse, he ran headlong into the River before him, murmuring to
himself, O inevitable fate, O my Mothers presages, O how was Cassanum hid from
me! And before he could well swim over the River, he was fallen upon by an
innumerable Army, who had possessed themselves of the brink and banksides of
the River. Petrarcha.

MAchabaeus King of the Scots, fearing Magduffus, being admonished by
Soothsayers, was told by a woman a Fortune Tellers, that he should not fall by
the hands of any man that was born of a woman, and that he could not be
overcome before the wood Bernen were carried to the Castle Donusinna, which was
a great way distant. Therefore he falsely thought himself invincible, and free
from all stratagems and deceits of his enemies, having cut down the wood
Birnen, and carried every stick to the Castle, wherewith he compassed the
Castle the day before he was overcome: to be short, he was slain by Magduffus,
who was not born, but cut out of his Mothers belly. Cardanus de rerum
varietate. Lib. 16. cap. 93.

ANtonius of Leva animated Charles the fifth, Emperor, to war upon on France,
and undertook to be General of the Army, although he had been informed by the
Oracles, that he should be afflicted with cruel sickness, dye in France, and
rest at the Church of St. Dionsiyus, which he interpreted should come to pass
by his extending his Victory to Paris it self; but it fell out far otherwise.
For the Caesarian Army which he led, was wasted with a Flux, and he, spent by
watchings and griefs, died near the City Narbo in France, and was buried at
Saint Dionysius. Sabellici supplementum, 20.

AMilcarus, Duke of the Carthagenians, besieging the Syracusians against
Agathocles, was told by a Sooth-sayer (who gathered this conjecture by the
observation of the entrals of beasts) that the next night after he should sup
with the Syracusians, who when he conceived he should have obtained Victory
over them, by a sally which they suddenly made out of the City, took him
Prisoner, and carried him to sup with the Syracusians, contrary to his will,
where by cruel torments he died.

Velitri consulting an Oracle there, where Caesar was born were answered long
before from the top of the wall, which by its height threatened heaven, that one
who should be born in that Town, should be a great commander in the World, in
confidence: whereof the Citizens did immediately, and long afterward, make war
against the Romans; at last by what afterward they saw, it appeared that by
what was showed, the might of Augustus Caesar was portended. Suetonius.

HAdrianus Cornetanus Cardinal, not drawn thereto by malice but an ambitious
desire of reigning, looked after the death of Leo the tenth: For he conceived
an assured hope of obtaining the Papacy by the Oracle of a
fortune-telling-woman, who telling to him, asking fortune of her, many things
past of his public and private fortune, most exactly true: she also constantly
affirmed that one Hadrian, an old man, of obscure birth, a great and studious
Scholar, who by degrees obtained sacred honors by his own merit, and not by
the favor of great men, as soon as Leo departed this life, would succeed him in
the Papacy: all these descriptions he conceived did congruously and apparently
belong to him. For he was born at a poor Village called Cornetus, in the coasts
of Tuscany descended of a poor family almost sordid, only by the benefit of
his learning, attaining the dignity of sacred orders. The Oracle of the old
Woman proved true, but Hadrianus the Cornetanian was deceived, for he did not
succeed Leo; but one Hadrian, an old man, a Batavian, son to a poor labourer,
being illustrious by his learning, after Leo, obtained the prodigious felicity
of the Papacy. Jov. in Leonis vita, lib. 4.

Alexander the Great, determined to fight against the chief City of the
Oxodracian Indians, a certain man called Demophon, being one of those that used
to make ostentation of predictions, came to the King, and told him, that he had
observed by Augury, that there was great danger portended to him by reason of a
wound which he should receive in fighting against the Indians, and therefore he
admonished Alexander to divert his intention from invading that City: who
rebuked him for going about to apall the courage of valiant men, and providing
all things necessary for his March, he leading a great Army, arrived at the
City, and intending to storm it, he placed his Artillery against it, and making
a breach in the wall, broke into the City, killed many, and pursued those that
fled to the very Castle; and whilst the Army of the Macedonians were seeking to
scale the Walls, He, without any cunctation, snatching a ladder, and
artificially bearing his buckler over his head, he falls a scaling the wall,
and used so much celerity therein, that before the drowsy Barbarians could get
to the wall to defend it, he got to the top thereof: the enemies durst not
approach to grapple with him, but put him hard to it by Darts and Arrows which
they threw and shot at him. The Macedonians with two ladders which they had
reared to the Wall, did often endeavor to scale the wall, and relieve Alexander,
but were still repulsed by the enemy. Wherefore he being destitute of any help,
alone, and loaded with defensive and offensive Arms, leaped into the very
Castle, and most valiantly defended himself against the Indians, who violently
ran about him, but he seeing a tree near the Wall, stepped unto it, and leaning
his back to it, made it so much his defense, that they could not come about
him; and now laying about him at his enemies by dint of sword, though he showed
great courage by his most valiant deeds, which, like a Royal King, to the
astonishment of his enemies, he demonstrated, insomuch that he seemed to desire
nothing but a glorious death, receiving many shots and blows upon his helmet
and buckler, yet at length an Arrow which was shot at him, lighted a little
under his pap or breast, and there sticking, he was constrained by violence of
his pain to fall upon his knees; which an Indian who was enraged by a wound
which he had received from him soon perceiving, furiously marched to him, and
fell upon him, but was by one blow with his sword suddenly dispatched. The King
then catching hold of a bough of the Tree within his reach, helped himself off
his knees, and begun to provoke his enemies to fight; in which interim
Peusestes, one of the Squires of the Kings body, scaling the Wall, was the
first that came to the defense of his Prince, and after him many more, who put
the Barbarians to flight, and delivered Alexander from further danger.
Diodorus, lib. 17.

Syrian, born in Apemea, whose name was Eunus, who delighted in Magical
enchantments, and circulatory legerdemains, served amongst the Eunensians in
Sicilia. This fellow would take upon him that he could by instinct and
revelation from the Gods, who appeared to him in his sleep, tell things to
come; shortly after, he bragged that he could foretell future events, not only
for that the gods appeared to him asleep, but also waking, and that they
plainly told him of things to come: when as by many of his Prophesies, he was
found a notorious liar, yet in the mean time some things came to pass
according to his predictions, which was a reason that no man questioned him for
his false Prophecies, but what he chanced truly to foretell, was so observed
and applauded, that the people shortly had a high esteem of him; at last he
devised to blow a flame of fire out of his mouth with a certain fanatic fury,
he Prophesied like as it had been one of the Priests of Apollo, to which
purpose he had a nut, or something of like nature bored through, in which he
put fire, and combustible matter to nourish it, and putting it into his mouth,
and blowing, sometimes sent forth sparks, and sometimes flames, this fellow was
used before any defection, to brag that the Syrian goddess did appear to him
in his sleep, and tell him that he should obtain regal dignity; and he did not
tell this only to the ordinary sort of people, but likewise he daily related
the same to Antigines the Eunensian his own Master: his relation raising much
laughter, and Antigines taking great delight in his prodigious lies, had him as
a jester to wait upon him at his feasts, and would enquire of him concerning
state affairs, and what would become of all the company, and when he answered
them all with great confidence, and promised that it would come to pass, that
he should show great lenity and clemency to his Lords, he raised great laughter
amongst them. The common people raising a tumult, come to this Eunus, and asked
him if the gods favored their enterprise: he approving the thing, persuaded
them to go on therein, and presently four hundred of his fellow servants,
taking him for their Captain, brake into the City, and made such a horrible
slaughter, that they spared not very sucking Infants, and this was the
beginning of the servile War which made such horrible destruction in Sicily,
that Rutilius at length with much ado, made an end of it. Diodorus Siculus,
lib. 34.

Thermopilae long Mountains passing through Graece to the Egaean Sea, three
hundred Lacedaemonians were to fight against Xerxes, Megistias Acarnas, a
Propher of the race of Melpodes, told that it was apparent, That death was
imminent over all their heads; though Leonides offered openly to dismiss him,
that he should not undergo such hazard of his life, yet he would not depart,
but also caused his only son to go along with him, and be a Soldier; all the
rest of his Fellow Soldiers which were discharged of their service, went their
ways; the Thesbiensian and Theban Soldiers went on, and continuing with the
Lacedaemonians, they all perished together. Herodotus, lib. 7.

Domitian the Emperor commanded Ascletario to be burnt, and Larginus Proclus
to be hanged, for that they foretold the day of his death: the one of these
Fortune Tellers was sent by the Governor of the Province of Germany, to Rome,
where he constantly affirmed what he had predicted concerning Domitian, and
named a certain day, not long too, wherein the verity or vanity of his Art
might be judged; therefore it pleased the Emperor to defer the execution of
his sen^ence till that day; upon which, his prediction came to pass: wherefore
by the favor of the noble Roman, he was freed. P. Aerodius Suetonio.

GRillandus says, That Perusinus was the greatest Magitian of all Italy, who
singing Mass upon a certain day, and coming to that part of it at which he was
to turn to the people and say, Orate pro me, etc. he said, Pray for the Castles
of the Church, who are now expiring their lives: and at the same instant, the
Soldiers of a Castle, twenty five miles distant from Perusium where he said
Mass, were slain. The like story we read in Philip Comineus, of a certain
Italian Archbishop of Vienna, who in the presence of King Lewis the 11th,
celebrating Mass upon the day of the Epiphanie, at the Church of St. Martin at
Turon, when he offered the Pax to the King to kiss, pronounced these words;
Peace to thee, O King, thy enemy is dead. And it appeared, that Charles Duke of
Burgundy dyed the same hour at Nanceum in Lotharingia. Cominaeus tells many
things of this Archbishop, which seem to be the certain effects of mere
Witchcraft.

Of the Dreams, Visions, Revelations, and other such kind of Legerdemanes and
mockeries of Evil Spirits.
AGamemnon, leader of the Greeks against Troy, when he had taken Briseides from
Achilles, Thetis interceding Jove for her son, that he would subject the
Graecians to the Trojans, till they really perceived, and found by woeful
revenge, what loss, trouble and vexation they had caused to Achilles, by their
injurious dealing with him: Jupiter sends a dream to Agamemnon, wherein he
commands him to draw out his Army, (...), for now he should take Troy. Jove
cannot lie, (that he full well knew) yet he well saw that he could not take the
City that day: Jupiter played or sported with him by the abstruse meaning of the
word; for the adverb (...), signifies in the Greek, not only present, but
instant; and has that latitude, that it signifies past, and not much past; and
to come, and not far off; Jupiter therefore meant by (...), the tenth year,
which was then present, which was not long from the destruction of Troy. But
Agamemnon interpreting, or construing his Dream to mean the present day, he
drew out his Army immediately, and received a great overthrow. Iliados. b.

CYrus King of the Persians, leading an Army against the Massagetians, being at
rest, dreamed, that he saw Darius the eldest son of Hystaspes, having two
wings, with the one whereof he overshadowed Asia; and with the other, Europe.
This Darius being twenty years of Age, at this time was left by his father at
Aristimentum in Persia; Cyrus awakened out of his dream, and suspended with
this nocturnal vision; and casting many ways what should be the meaning
thereof; at last said, That thereby was revealed to him from the gods, that
Hystaspes and his son Darius did lie in wait to surprise him and his Kingdom,
he used therefore his utmost endeavors to return into his own Country, the
Massegetians being conquered, and leaves his son in his place; but that Vision
foretold, That Cyrus should be shortly overthrown, and that ere long Darius
should obtain his Kingdom: which came to pass, after a short reign of
Cambyses, which came betwixt this and Darius his Conquest. Sabellicus, lib. 6.
Ennead. 2.

SOcrates foresaw in his dreams, that his Scholar Plato would be an excellent
Orator and Philosopher; for the day before (he being brought to him by his
father) Socrates in his dream saw a white Swan fly into his bosom, which by
his musical striking of his wings, filled the Air; which Dream, as soon as
Plato was brought to him, he declared. Pausanias in Atticis.

HIppocrates in his Epistle to Philopomenes, relates his Dream thus; That
meditating solicitously of Democritus, (to whom being called to cure the
Abderitani, he says, that health would meet him in the morning). I saw, quoth
he, Aesculapius, and as we were both before and even at the ports of the
Abderitari, Aesculapius appeared not, as his pictures speak him, mild and
gentle, but with squalid habit, and an horrid aspect; and there followed him
Dragons, a fierce kind of creeping creatures, of huge length, hissing in
deserts and lawnes; he had in his company likewise, men that followed him with
boxes of medicaments handsomely closed up: immediately he reaches forth his
hand to salute me, which, God knows, I most joyfully embraced; I desired to
wait upon him, and to serve him in his administering Physic; but he answered,
for present 'twas not needful; for this goddess of mortals and immortals will
conduct thee, being a stranger: Whereupon turning my self, I beheld a goodly
fair Lady neatly and gloriously adorned, about whose eyes there appeared such a
circle of shining splendor, that exceeded the glorious brightness of Stars.
He thereupon departed, but the Lady taking me kindly by the hand, leads me on a
grave pace through the City; and when we approached near a house, wherein I
thought I should have been entertained, she departed like a ghost, saying, To
morrow I shall find you with Democritus. To whom as she was going away, I said,
Dear Lady who are you? and how may I call you? Truth, says she, but she that
thou see coming toward thee, (and presently another Lady not uncomely
appeared to me, of a more bold aspect, and more fierce) whose name she told me
was Opinion, and that she lived with the Abderetani. When I therefore awaked
from my Dream, I conceived the interpretation of it to be, That Democritus
needs not a Physician, God departing from administering of Physic, when there
is no matter or sickness which requires it; but that Truth, which always
dwells with Democritus, says he, is in health; and that Opinion which says
he is sick, remains amongst the mad Abderetani.

ALexander was descended from Hercules by Carinus, and from Aeacus on his
Mothers side by Neoptolemus, as it was verily thought. It is reported, that
when Phillip King of Macedon first courted Olympiades, taken with her beauty,
(by the help of her brother Arybba, whom Diodore in his sixteenth book calls
Arymba) whose friendship he obtained, he stole her away from her Parents, and
married her, and that the night before they enjoyed nuptial rights, in a dream
he thought he saw Jove touch his belly, being descended from Heaven in thunder;
whereupon there was a huge fire which arose, and presently dispersed it self
into flames all about. The same Philip, a short time after his marriage,
dreamed, That he sealed his Wives belly, and that the sculpture of the seal, as
it seemed to him, was the Image of a Lion; which vision he declaring to some
that took upon them the interpretation of dreams, they advised him to set a
strict Watch or Guard upon his Wife; but Telemesus said, She would bring a
Lyon-like child, for that no vain thing is to be sealed; therefore the dream
signified, that she would have a child of perfect animosity and courage.
Plutarchus, in Alexandro.

SOphocles did often dream, that Hercules speaking to him by name, called him
thief, because he had stolen a golden vessel out of his Temple. And that being
detected and brought before the State, he confessed himself guilty of the theft
whereof Hercules accused him; wherefore from that time ever after, the Temple
was called by the name of Hercules his Temple. Fulgosus, lib. 1. cap. 5.

ANnaeus Seneca, a Senator of Rome, being commanded by Claudius, the Emperor,
to undertake the Tutorship of Nero, as yet a child hopeful, by a towardly
genius; the night after he received him, (as it is reported) he dreamed, that he
had to his Scholar Caligula, whose famous cruelty had appeared to the World:
Not long after the conditions and manners of Nero changing, or rather being
detected, appearing, he proved himself to have a soul void of humanity;
insomuch, that it was admired, because he was so like Caligula, how it could
otherwise come to pass, but by the transmigration of Caligula, his soul out of
Hell, into Nero. Petrarcha ex Suetonio and Dione.

EUdemus a Cyprian, a familiar friend of Socrates, traveling into Macedonia,
comes to Pherae, a rich and famous City of Thessaly, but oppressed and brought
somewhat low, by the inhumane tyranny of one Alexander, he was there taken with
such heavy sickness, that Physicians despaired of his health; who thus
afflicted, dreams, that he saw a gallant young man, who coming to him, assured
him of three things to come, That he, though now extremely sick, should shortly
recover his health; That the Tyrant of that City should dye within a few days;
And that he within five years should go to his own Country. And the two first
did manifestly come to pass accordingly; for he beyond all hopes recovered his
health; the Tyrant was slain by his Wives brothers: the third was somewhat more
obscure; for about the end of the fifth year, as he was going from Sicily,
where he then lived, to Cyprus, he was taken out of this World by Wars at
Syracusa: we find, that Interpreters of Dreams excuse the not coming of Eudemus
home according to the dream, by saying, That by death his soul was delivered
from the bonds of his body, and returned to her Country. Petrarcha.

ASpasia, the daughter of Hermotimus, after her Mother Phocensis dyed in
labor, together with her child, being educated in penury, and want of a
Parent, yet modestly and handsomely she often dreamed, that she saw one, who
told her, that her fortune should be such, that she should be married to a
gallant and honest Gentleman; it chanced to the Maid, that a swelling rose upon
her very chin, most ugly to behold, which was a cause of much grief both to her
father and her: whereupon her father brought her to a Physician, who undertook
to cure her, upon condition that he should give him three Staters, (which is
worth seven shillings of our English coin) for his pains; When the father said,
'Twas more then he had, the Physician dismissed the young Maid uncured, who
thereupon was most grievously tormented, so that she ate nothing; that night,
an opportune sleep seizing upon her, she had a Vision, wherein she heard these
words. Be of good courage, and trouble not your self with Physicians, but take
a Rose of Venus, and beating it together into a salve, apply it to your
swelling. Which when she awaked, she accordingly performed, and her swelling
was clean taken away, and Aspasia so far transcended all the Ladies of her
time, in glorious beauty, virtuous life, and incomparable carriage, that Cyrus
King of the Persians, enamoured with her excellencies, first married her, and
after his death Artaxerxes took her to Wife. You may read the Story elegantly
set forth by Aelianus de varia historia, lib. 12. a principio.

Plinius, the Mother of a certain Soldier who served in the Praetory, dreamed,
that she ought to send to her son the root of a wild Rose-Tree, or Sweet-brier,
which she had seen and observed in a Grove the day before by reason of its
beauty, to drink in milk: This happened in Laretania, being the nearest part of
Spain. And it came to pass, that this Soldier having been bitten with a
mad-dog, whereby he grew so ill, that he began to fear the waters, and show
many symptoms of his infirmity; he received a Letter from his Mother, wherein
she desired him to make use of the Medicine which was showed her in his Vision;
which he observing, and performing, became presently free from the misery he
was in; and not only he, but any that afterward upon like occasion, made use
of that medicine. Plinius, lib. 25. cap. 2.

AESculapius of Athens prescribed by Oracle to Plutarch an Athenian, and
Domninus a Syrian, who bruised by I know not what chance, did spit blood, that
they should be filled with Swines-flesh; but Plutarch, though by the Law of his
Nation he was not forbidden Swines-flesh, and therefore might have made use
thereof according to the prescription, utterly refused it, and awakened from
sleep, stretching forth his arms in his bed, and beholding the Statue or Image
of Aesculapius (for he lay in the porch or entry of the Temple) he said, Why
did thou prescribe this cure to an Hebrew or Jewish Lord? for neither had
thou bid him to be filled with Swines flesh. Which words when this man had
spoken, Aesculapius (a most sweet sound being uttered out of the Image)
prescribed him another way of curing the disease. But Domninus, having followed
the dream otherwise than the instructions of the Syrians, do lead unto, not the
example of Plutarch, he both then and ever afterward a^e that flesh: and it is
reported, if at any time it had ceased one day, the disease to have waxed
worse, until they were fullfilled. Suidas.

Persian, Epixyes by name, a Noble Lord of the upper Phrygia, laid wait for
Themistocles, going down unto the Sea by reason of business pertaining to
Greece, after that he fled to Xerxes, Pisidians being long since provided, who
in the Town, which they call [ Leontocephalon] (that word signifies the heads
of Lions) that they might kill him, walking in the night. To whom they say, the
Mother Idea being set before him by a dream, to have said; O Themistocles,
avoid thou the head of Lions, least thou run into the Lion. For this thing
therefore I require from thee the handmaid Mnesiptolema. From whence
Themistocles being overwhelmed with fears, the goddess, being worshipped,
declined the Kings way, and being gone past that place, he now sat down with
others in the night. But when one of the beasts which carried his Tent, had
slidden into the River, the servants of Themistocles opened the arris hangings,
being made wet, to dry them. In the mean time the Pisidians run to them with
their Swords. But when they could not sufficiently see through those things
that were dried, unto the Moon; They thought they were the Tents of
Themistocles, and that they should find him resting within; when as now going
nearer privily, they carried away the Arries, the servants being intentive,
flew upon them, and quickly took them. So he having rid himself of the danger,
in reverence of the goddess, which had been presented before him, he built the
Temple of Dyndimena at Magnesia, of whom he made his daughter Mnesiptolema a
Nun. Plutarch. in Themistocles.

Lucullus going to Hellespont, built or fitted a Navy for the Mithridatick war.
Being brought to Troas, he turned aside in the Idol Temple of Venus. Being
asleep in the night, he seemed to see the Goddess standing by him; who said,
Why sleep thou, courageous Lion here,
When numerous Dogfish is next present there.
He arising, his friends being called unto him, put forth the dream, it being
as yet night. Some of Troy were also present, who showed him, that there were
five of the King's Galleys with Oars at the Haven of the Achaians, thirteen
which bent their course into Lemnos. Therefore he presently lets loose, and
obtained these; he killed their Lieutenant or chief Commander. Isidore, etc.
Plutarch in Lucullus.

Arcorius, a Physician of Augustus Caesar (when two Armies of the Romans had
stood in the fields of Philippi, here the Army of Octavius and Anthony, there
of Brutus and Cassius, and the next day they were to join battle) received a
Dream from Minerva, that he should warn Octavius laboring with a grievous
disease, least by reason of health being against, he should not be present in
the next battle. The which when Caesar had heard, he commanded him to be
brought in a horse-litter into the battle, in the which while (for the getting
glory) he had watched and warded above his strength, he was freed of his
disease, and was freed from the Soldiers of Brutus, thinking of his murder,
and robbing his Camps, and striking through the empty Horse-Litter with Arrows
and Darts. Cicero, Book 3. Of Divining, in Augustus.

SEleucus was the son of Antiochus, who was one of Alexanders Captains. He had
Laodice for Wife; who, that night in which she conceived Seleucus, it seemed to
her, being at rest, that she lay together with Apollo, from whom she had
received a ring engraven with the shape of an Anchor, and that he was found in
the bed, and to be kept with diligence. Laodice gave him unto Seleucus (being
well taught concerning his birth) going with Alexander into Asia. It is added,
that Seleucus, and those begotten by him, had their thigh marked with a
natural Anchor.

Romans being once shut up in difficult places by the Samnites, were greatly
pressed upon; P. Decius, then Tribune of the Soldiers, he saw himself in his
sleep, to lie between most thick wedges, dying with much glory. By which dream,
the most valiant man, most thirsty after glory, yet not so much affrighted, as
encouraged unto the desire of his promised end, began to decline no kind of
danger: and being admonished by friends, that he should fight the more warily,
he opened unto them his dream and purpose. Then notwithstanding being (beyond
thought) unhurt he brought the army out safe from the jaws of their enemies.
But after three years passed between, the late truth was brought to sleep. For
in the Latin War, himself being Consul, sacrificed himself for the
Commonwealth: and being brought into the middle of the enemies Armies, he dyed
with such glory, that he stirred up his son unto the like desire of an
hereditary death. These almost after this manner, are both written in the
Annals of Rome, and related by Tully.

C. Gracchus saw the shape of his brother Tiberius (who was killed in the
sedition of the field Law) in his sleep, saying. He might delay as much as he
would, yet he must perish with the same death, by which he had died. Which also
happened. For when after most destructive Laws published, he had possessed the
Mount of Aventine with an armed multitude, by Lucius Opimius he was slain.
Cicero in Book 1. Of Divination. Plutarch, in the life of the Gracchians.

CAlpurnia the Wife of Julius Caesar; saw in her rest, that night which was the
last he lived on the Earth, that he was slain with many wounds, laying in her
bosom: and being exceedingly affrightned through the cruelty of the dream,
ceased not to entreat him, that the next day he would abstain from the Court.
But he not moved with a Woman's dream, thought to do that, he earnestly desired
to go to the Senate, in which the hands of Parricides were brought on him;
where, by Brutus and Cassius he was slain. Valerius, Book 1. chap. 3.

Cornelius Sylla, not only foresaw his death, but also wrote somewhat of it:
For in the twenty second Commentary of deeds done by him, two days before he
deceased, he set to the last hand; and says, the Chaldeans foretold him, That
where he had famously lived, he was to depart in the flowr of happiness. He
tells also, That his son, who had dyed a little before Metella, was seen in a
dream to stand by him in an unusual garment, and to have prayed his father,
that he would lay aside cares, and would go forward with him to his Mother
Metella, there with her to live in rest. Plutarch. in Sylla.

Alexander, book 3. chap. 26.

Sfortias, the day before he departed from Orthona against Braccius, who
besieged the City Aquila, in the year 1425, dreamed about the morning, That
being overwhelmed with a deep heap of waters, was conversant in the greatest
danger of his life, and to have beheld a man in a Gyant-like shape very like to
D. Christopher, of whom even with a great and often repeated voice, he besought
help in vain. But he being nothing warned by his dream, departing by Orthona,
in the cross passage of the small River Aternus, (which at this day has its
name from the Town Piscaria) while he brought help unto a Lad, his
Armor-bearer being in jeopardy, his right hand being stretched forth, pitching
in the muddy Foord, his horse, although famous, failed in his hinder legs, and
so his armor weighing him down, he was drowned. Jovius, in his Life.

MAlpaga, an Archer, was not an unacceptable servant unto Galeatius Sfortias,
Duke of Mediolum, among his household-servants. This man, the day before that
Galeatius was killed, he saw in the night, at the time of rest, as if himself
had been present at the thing, him being thrust through with wounds made, to be
put together with his father in the same Coffin. That which afterward he
waking beheld to be done, Galeatius being dead, while a proper coffin was made
for him. Which sight, the same Malpaga, before the Duke was killed, being
through fear astonished, had told unto his Earls. Fulgosus, B. 1. chapter 5. Of
Examples.

MArk-Anthony Taurell, Earl of Guastella, when he warred in the Kingdom of
Neapolis, in that War which Ferdinand the Elder, King of Arragon, waged with
Renatus King of Andegavia, in the standing Camps, which he had in the Country
of the Brutians; arising in the morning from his bed, he told those his
Soldiers who had stood about him, that he saw in his sleep, that he was
drowned in the water: and therefore decreed to abstain from swimming, to which
he had accustomed himself. But when at noonday after sleep, being clothed
with a Soldiers warlike garment naked from above, he had come to walk to the
neighboring Lake, and saw some of his Soldiers swimming, being unmindfull of
his night-dream, and perchance the destinies so drawing him, letting himself
down with some others into the Lake to swim, according to the dream that he had
seen, he was drowned, when as none of his Soldiers could bring him help.
Fulgosus, book 1. chap. 5.

HOrace Perusine, servant of the Feasts or Junkers unto Alexander of Medices,
Duke of the Florentines, a little before that he was killed by Lawrence of
Medices, was vexed with a Fever, from a vapor, as is meet to be believed, of
black choler, he had a sight thrice in the night, in the which he beheld the
Prince to be stabbed by Lawrence: Which images of things, drove the sickman,
that he told it to Paschall the Prince's Physician, to be related to the
Prince. But Paschall, carefully doing duty, found the Prince in that mind, that
he said it was a fable of a dreaming sick man; admiring, why the whole house
had conspired together for hatred of Lawrence: The Supply of Sabellicus, book
22. out of Jovius.

BAptista of Cardanum, studying at Papia, on a certain night, as soon as he
arose, tried to kindle a sparkle of fire. In the mean time he hears this
voice, Go, my son, go to Rome. And he saw a great brightness, like a bundel of
burning chaff. He being affrighted, his fire-light being laid aside, lay hid
under the bed, until his chamber-fellows returned out of the University. When
they returned, thinking him to be sick, they knock at the door, he opens it.
Straightway, to them enquiring the cause, he answers, He thought his Mother
to be dead, and told what he had seen and heard, and also wept. They turned the
thing into a jest; partly laughing at him, partly comforting him. The day
following, when as yet he had not received a message concerning his Mothers
sickness, he was certified of her death, that she breathed out her soul in
that very hour, wherein he had perceived these things. The Town of Cardanum is
absent from Papia forty two miles. Cardane, Of the variety of things, book 15.
chap. 84. tells this of his Kinsman.

ULysses after his return into his Country, being affrighted with often
contrary dreams, called together most skillfull Interpreters, telling, that a
certain Image was seen by him, of a very laudable beauty, between the
countenance of a man and a god, suddenly to be sent forth out of the same
place. The which, to him desiring to embrace with the greatest desire, and
stretching forth his hand; it was answered unto him in a man's voice, That such
a conjoyning was wicked, because it was of the same blood and birth: for
thereby the one would destroy the others work. And then to him more eagerly,
asking it, and desiring to learn perfectly the causes of that thing, a certain
sign arising from a male, came between his sight, and that second power or
jurisdiction of his cast upon him, to have disjoined both. Which thing, all who
were present, pronounced to be destructive with one mouth, warning him to take
heed of the layings in wait of his son. So, Telemachus by his fathers will, is
banished into the fields which were in Cephalenia. He himself going apart into
hidden and separated places, endeavored to avoid the force of the Dreams. At
the same time, Telegonus, whom being sprung from Ulysses, Circe had brought up
at the Island Acaea, when he was of ripe years, going to search out his father,
came to Ithaca, bearing in his hands a certin spear, whose top was armed with
the bone of a Sea tortle, to wit, a token of honor of that Island, in which he
had been brought up. Being instructed where his father Ulysses lived, by the
keepers of the ground, being at his first passage more mistrusted, is
forbidden, when as he more eagerly resists, he is on the contrary repulsed,
he begins to cry out, It was an unworthy act that he should be forbidden from
the embracement of his father. So Telegonus being thought to come to bring
force on the King, he is more sharply resisted, for it was not certainly known
to any, that Ulysses had also another son. But the young man when he saw
himself the more exceedingly, and by force, to be repulsed, being raised up
through grief, kills, or being greatly wounded, weakeneth many of the
keepers. Which things after they were known to Ulysses, he thinking the young
man to have been sent by Telemachus, going forth of doors, casts the Lance
which he had wont to carry for his own defense against Telegonus. After that,
the young man escaped this stroke, he sends a notable dart against his present
father. When Ulysses fell down with the stroke, he gave thanks for his fortune,
and confessed it was very well done by him, because being slain by the force of
a strange man, he had freed Telemachus, a most dear son to him, from the
wickedness of parricide. And holding back the residue, he asks the young
man, who he was, and from what place risen, who durst kill Ulysses the son of
Laertes, famous for counsel and war? Telegonus then knowing it was his father,
tearing his head with both his hands, uttered a most lamentable weeping, being
exceedingly tormented for the death brought by him on his father. Dictys, in
book 6.

PIndare, a Lyrick Poet, his age being now finished, seemed to see Persephone
to stand by him in his sleep, and to complain, That she only of all the gods
was not adorned with his verses. But when he had come unto her, he should also
make an hymn on her. Indeed, a little after, and even before the tenth day from
that dream, he finished the duties of life. There was at Thebes a certain old
woman, joined to Pindare by kin, and very much exercised in singing forth many
of his songs. Pindare showing himself to her at the time of rest, sung a song
on Persephone. She being presently awakened, wrote down all things which she
had heard Pindare singing, through a vision in her sleep. Truly in that song,
amongst other sirnames of the hell-goddess, is Chrysenius, to wit* from the
golden rains; which thing, it is sufficiently manifest, to have served for the
snatching away of Proserpina. Pausanias, in his Boeoticks.

Phayll King of the Phocians, after the Temple of Delphos spoiled, he scarce as
yet having come to his command, such a show by a dream, was set before him.
Among the things offered to Apollo, there was a very old image of brass, of a
man, whose flesh being consumed, his bones alone were left. They of Delphos
said, it was dedicated by Hippocrates the Physician. Phayll seemed to see
himself made like to this. And a few days after, pining away with leanness, he
fulfilled the issue of the dream. Pausanias, in his Photicks.

Messena, in the twenty first year of the War, Aristodemus, King of the
Messenians, seemed at the time of rest, to see, when as now arms being taken
up, he was to go forth to battle, the intrails of sacrifices being placed on a
table, his daughter (whom six years before being sacrificed for the safety of
his Country, he had slain with his own hands) standing by him in a black or
mourning garment, and her breast being naked, showing her wounds: and then the
intrails being removed from the table, the weapons being withdrawn, her self to
be endowed with that golden crown and white garments. He therefore thought this
dream to betoken death unto him, because the Messenians lift up the Nobles
being crowned, and covered with a white garment. And without delay, when by the
devoting of his daughter, he saw he could nothing profit his Country, at his
daughter's Tomb he brought death on himself. Plutarch. in Cleomenes.

ALexander King of Macedonia, first knew by a dream, that the right hand of
Cassander would prove mortal to him, before that in the end he felt it. For he
thought himself to be killed by him, when as he had never seen him. At then,
sometime coming between, after that he had come into view, the image of his
night-fear being disclosed, as soon as he knew it to be the son of Antipater, a
Greek verse being added, which raises up the truth of the dreams, he beat back
the suspicion of poisoning now prepared against his head; whereby it is
reported he was slain with the hand of Cassander. Valerius Maximus, book 1.
chap. 7. Sabellicus, book 6. Ennead. 4.

ALcibiades taking a sleep, thought himself in his sleep to be covered with the
cloak of his Concubine. The truth whereof straightway followed. For Critias,
when he saw Alcibiades very much to prevail in favor and authority,
endeavored to take him out of the midst of them. Therefore he sent Tisimen (or
as others name him, Susametres) and Bagous, that they might kill him. He when
he was with his Leamond, being killed in her bosom, and was cast away
unburied, was covered with the garment of his Concubine. Justine, book 5.
Plutarch. and Probus, in his Life.

Croesus, first with the greatest fear, and then also with grief. For of his
two sons, he thought that Atys the more excelling both in great nimbleness, and
endowments of body, and ordained for the succession of the Empire, was taken
away from him by the sword. Therefore whatsoever did belong to avoid the
bitterness of a denounced slaughter, the father's care in no part ceased to
turn away. The young man was wont to be sent to wage Wars; he was kept at home.
He had an Armory filled with plenty of all kinds of weapons; that also he
commanded to be removed. His Earls used to be girded with the sword; they were
forbidden to come near. Yet necessity made way for mourning. For when a wild
Boar of huge bigness wasted the tilled places of the Mountain Olympus, with
often destruction of the Country People; and help was humbly besought of the
King against the unaccustomed evil, the son wrested by force from his father,
that he might be sent to slay him, indeed so much the easier, because the
cruelty not of the tooth, but of the sword, was laid up in fear. But while all
were diligently bent on a sharp endeavor of killing the swine, a stubborn
chance of a hovering force, turned the lance sent from Adrastus, that he might
smite the wild beast, out of the right way into him: and indeed would have that
right hand especially aspersed with the fault of a wicked murder, unto whom the
defense of the son was committed by the father. Valor. Maximus, book 1. chap.
7. and Herodotus, book 1.

POlycratis, daughter of a Tyrant, of the Samians, she seemed to see at the
time of rest, her father to be on high in the air; who should indeed be washed
by Jupiter, but, anointed by the Sun. She being affrighted with this vision,
warned her father, that he should not go to Oraetes the Governor of Cambyses
at Sardis. But he obeying not the saying, was fastened to a cross by Oraetes.
Herodotus, book 1.

Hipparchus the son of Pisistratus, was presented in his sleep, the image of a
tall man pronouncing these verses; (...),
(...).
Bear (Lion) things unsufferable, suffer with bearing mind:
There is no wicked man, to whom he will not repay in kind.
In the morning he would refer these words to the Interpreters of dreams. But
straightway the Vision being despised, he neglected it, and went away into the
solemn fight, where, by Aristogiton, and Harmodius, Gephyraeans, he was killed.
Herodotus, book 5.

SImon of Athens, when as he moved an expedition against the Persians, his Navy
being now ready, he had such a dream. An angry Bitch seemed to bark at him, and
to utter thereupon a voice mixed of a man's voice, and a dog's barking, in
these words; Be gone, thou art to be a friend
To me, and to my whelpish kind.
Astyphilus Posidoniates therefore, a divining man, and familiar friend of
Simon, affirmed death to be foretold him, using this argument: The dog is an
enemy to him whom he barks at: but to an enemy none is dear, or a friend, but
when he dies. Moreover, the mixed voice, shows the Mede an enemy, whose
Armies are mixed of Greeks and Barbarians. The end proved the dream to have been
true: for not much time after Simon dyed of a disease in the siege of Citium
Plutarch. in his Life.

WHen as a certain one had seemed to repeat a verse of Homer's unto Socrates;
(...)*
Thou shall indeed on the third day
To Phthia come, full fraught with clods of clay.
He said to Aeschines, I shall dye on the third day. Phthia was the Country of
Achilles. And his friends endeavored to persuade Socrates, that he should flee
into Thessaly, because there he had good friends. But he drew (...), from
[(...),] that is, to kill or corrupt. And the third day after, Hemlock being
drunk in prison, he perished. Laertius, in his Life.

ATterius Ru^^us, a Roman Knight, when a Sword-play was set forth by the
Syracusans, he saw himself in the time of sleep, to be thrust through by the
hand of Retiarius. And the next day he told it in the place of beholding unto
the sitters by. Afterward it fell out, that in the next place from the Knight,
Retiarius was brought in by the Sword-player. Whose face, when he had seen the
same man said, he thought he should be slain by that Retiarius, and forthwith
he would depart thence. They, his fear being shaken off, by their speech,
brought the cause of destruction to the miserable man. For the Sword-player
being compelled into that place, and cast down while he endeavors to strike
him lying along, kills Atterius being thrust through with his Sword. Valerius
Maximus, in the first Book, chap. 7.

JUlius Caesar, not much before he died, in his sleep sometimes he seemed to
himself to fly above the Clouds, sometimes to join his right hand to Jupiter.
Moreover in the same night, when he lay in his bed, all the doors of his
Chamber, and likewise the Windows being set open, he was affrighted both with
a noise and light, and the Moon shining bright, he marketh Calphurnia being
fast asleep, to utter dark words, and undistinct sighings. She imagined that
she lamented him whom she held thrust through, in her bosom. Others deny that
sight to have been set before her. But when as a Pinnacle had been (by the
decree of the Senate) adjoined unto Caesar's house, as Livy is Author, as it
were for an Ornament, and enlarging it, Calphurnia having imagined (at the time
of rest that to have slidden down) she seemed to her self therefore to mourn
and weep. But when light had approached, she asked Caesar, if by any means it
might be brought to pass, that he might not go forth, but might adjourn the
Senate unto another time. But if he did esteem her dreams but as a lock of
Wool, yet he should ask Counsel of the Soothsayers, and Sacrifices, concerning
things hanging over his head; Whence there was some suspicion and fear set
before him also, as it seems: For he took notice of no superstition before
the woman was grieved or vexed for that thing which she then saw. But as soon as
the Soothsayers told him, satisfaction could not be made, many sacrifices being
now slain, he determined, Anthony being sent, to dismiss the Senate. In the
mean time Decius Brutus, surnamed Albine, whom Caesar, for the trust which he
had to him, had written amongst his second heirs; seeing he was a companion of
the conspiracy of the other; Brutus and Cassius fearing lest if Caesar should
pass away that day, the matter would have been told abroad, he mocked the
Soothsayers, and reproved Caesar; and being taken by the hand, led him forth.
And so that day, in the Court, being thrust through, with many wounds he was
wretchedly slain. Plutarch.

CAesar being slain, the people diligently sought after the conspirators being
hidden. Helius Cinna the Poet, one of Caesar's friends, had the night before, a
fearful dream. It seemed to him that he was invited by Caesar to supper; but
when he refused, he was led by the hand against his will, and struggling. This
man, hearing the body of Caesar to be burnt in the Marketplace, although he
had his Vision mistrusted, and was also held with a Fever, came for the
honors sake of him into the Marketplace, As Soon as he was seen one of the
common people told his name to another which asked him, he to another:
straitway it spread through all, that this man was one of Caesar's smiters. For
there was among the Conspiratours, another of his surname, Cornelius Cinna:
whom because they thought this was he, by and by, a violent force being made,
they in the very marketplace, tore him in pieces. Plutarch. in Caesar and
Brutus.

NEro (Provinces a little after falling off from him) was affrightned with
evident signs of Dreams, and significations of things to come, and all things
both old and new, he never wonting to dream before. At length his mother being
killed, he saw at the time of rest, a Ship, the stern by violence wrested from
him governing it, and to be drawn by Octavia his wife into the most narrow dark
places. And by and by to be filled up with a multitude of winged Ants,
sometimes to fetch a circuit from the Images of Nations dedicated to the
Theater or view of Pompey, and to be driven away in their progress: an ambling
Nag, in which he very greatly delighted, the latter part of his body
transfigured into the form of an Ape, and only his head being whole, to utter
forth shrill neighings. Suetonius.

GAlba the Emperor, a little before his death, had set apart out of his
Treasure, a Jewel set forth with Pearls and precious stones, to beautify his
Tusculane-Fortuna. That on a sudden as more worthy of a famouser place, he
dedicated unto Venus of or in the Capitol. But the next night he saw Fortune
complain in his sleep, of the Jewel being taken away: and in good earnest to
threaten, that she would snatch away himself, and also those things which he
had given. The Emperor being affrighted in the dream, most early in the
morning, those being sent before, who should make ready the Divine thing, ran
into Tusculanum: and he found nothing besides warm embers on the Altar, and an
old man clad in black beside it, holding Frankincense in a Glass dish, and
unmixt Wine in an earthen cup. Suetonius.

DOmitian dreamed that Minerva departed out of the holy place, denying that she
could defend him further, because she had been disarmed by Jupiter. The same
man dreamed, that a Countryman came to him with a Sword, and Minerva, who was
placed in his Chamber, to have cast away her weapons, and the same to go down
out of a Chariot, which was drawn with black Horses, into a great gaping of the
Earth. He was presently slain by his layers in wait. Xiphiline, in his life.

ANthony Caracalla, Emperor, a little before that he was thrust through by
Martial, Tribune of the Soldiers, and prepared a setting forward out of
Antioch, his father Severus stood by him with a Sword in his sleep; and says,
Even as thou have slain thy brother Getas, so will I kill thee. Anthony
therefore awaking out of sleep, never doubted the end of his cruelty, and life
to be at hand when as before also the Diviners had foretold the like things.
Dion. Nycaeus.

Dionysius of Syracusa, as yet containing himself within a private habit, a
certain woman Hymeraea, of no obscure stock; while she took rest, in her
opinion climbed up to Heaven, and there the seats of all the gods being viewed,
she takes notice of a mighty man, of a yellow color, a freckled face, bound
with Iron chains, covered underneath with the Throne and feet of Jupiter. And
the young man being asked what Captain, the favor of beholding heaven had
used, who he was? She heard that he was a cursed destiny unto Sicily and Italy,
and that being loosed from bonds he was to be a destruction unto many Cities.
The which dream she the day after by speech divulged. And then, after that
fortune, an enemy to the liberty of the Syracusans, and hateful to the lives
of guiltless ones, cast Dionysius, being freed from his heavenly custody, as
it were a certain Thunderbolt, into idleness and rest, as soon as Hymeraea
beheld him entering the walls among a dissolute rout, for the honoring and
beholding of him, she called out, this is he whom she had seen in her sleep.
That thing being known, made the Tyrant careful to take the woman out of the
way. Val. book 1. chap. 7.

WHen Cicero followed Julius Caesar into the Capitol, and told him, the last
night Jupiter was seen by him, who with a Golden chain had let down a little
boy of a wonderful towardness from Heaven, unto the Gate of the Capitol,
unto whom he had afterward given a whip in his hand: Octavius being then
beheld whom Caesar had brought into the Capitol for paying a vows sake, he
knew that to be him whom he had seen in his sleep: His triumphs and Son, being
truly a scourge to the too much proud Nobil^ty of Rome, made Cicero his dream
certain. Fulgosus, book 1. chap. 5. and Xiphil. in Augustus.

Catulus, the Capitol being dedicated, at the time of his rest, he saw Jupiter
to have chosen one out of many children cloat^ed in Purple robes, to whom he
had given the Roman ensigns to be carried in his hand, and the night following,
when sleeping, he would drive away that very child out of Jupiters bosom,
Jupiter said, that he should not remove the child, because he kept him for the
safeguard of the Roman Commonwealth. On the morning following, he by chance
lighting on Octavius, by his shape and garment knew, that that was he, whom he
had seen at the time of sleep. Fulgosus, book 1. chap. 5. and Xiphilin.

Vespasian the father, his own Royal office; and of his sons. For when he was
as yet a private man in Achaia with Nero, he saw it told him (at his rest) by
an unknown person, that his happiness shall begin when a tooth should be taken
away from Nero. Therefore being awakened, he on whom he first happened, was a
Physician, who showed him a tooth that he had pulled out of Nero. Therefore not
much after the death of Nero followed, likewise of Galba, and after them the
discords of Otho and Vitellus, yielded the first beginnings and strength to
Vespasian for rule. Fulgosus, book 1. chap. 5. Moreover Nero himself saw (at
rest) Jupiters Chariot to be sent into the house of Vespasian: which words when
they wanted interpreting, Josephus the Jew said they did betoken the Roman
Empire to Vespasian. Xiphiline in Vespasian.

JUlian being chosen Emperor by the Soldiers in France against ^is will, said
to some of his more dear friends; On that night which had gone before the day
of his being declared Emperor, a certain likeness (was seen by him) of some
Genius or Paynim, which said these words unto him in a chiding manner: Ere
while (O Julian) I attend at the porch of thy house, hiddenly much delighting
to increase thy dignity, but as often as being repulsed, I have departed: and
(the opinion of many agreeing) neither now indeed am I received, I will go cast
down and sorrowful; yet that I will keep in remembrance in my heart, that I
will dwell no longer with thee. Cuspinian.

NEptune seemed unto Stipo the Philosopher in his sleep, to be angry* because
he had not offered [ Hecatombe] that is, the sacrifice of an hundred beasts, as
the custom was. But the Philosopher being nothing disturbed at this sight,
answered: What say thou, Neptune? Do thou so come hither as a boy with thy
complaint, because money being mutually taken, I have not filled the City with
a savor? But according to the bigness of a familiar thing, I have sacrificed
unto thee some very small fishes. At these words Neptune smiling, he seemed,
his right hand being plucked to him, to have said unto him: For thy great
favor, I will bestow on the City of the Megarians, plenty of [ Apues] or very
small fishes. The which also they deliver to have happened.

Hippias the son of Pisistratus, while being a banished man he ambitiously
seeks after Kingly Authority, at Maratho, a night-shape of his mother, with
whom he seemed to copulate, at the time of rest, was brought before him. For
which thing the interpreters answered him, that Authority Royal was largely
signified unto him, and he being put in mind thereof by his dream, and full of
hope, not long after enjoyed the dominion of Athens. Herodotus, book 6.

Dionysius of Syracusa, when she had conceived him in her womb, she seemed to
bring forth a Satyr; and an Interpreter of wonders; being consulted with, she
knew with a certain issue, that he was to be the most famous and most mighty of
the Grecian blood. Valerius, book 1. chap. 7.

Astyages Cyrus his grandfather by the Mother side, the birth of Cyrus having
respect unto the Empire of all upper Asia, two dreams of his being
fore-messengers of it, endeavored in vain to shake off Mandanes his daughter,
because he had seen in his sleep, her urine to have overflowed all the Nations
of Asia, not to a most excelling man of the Medes, lest the glory of the
Kingdom should be passed over into that family, but by assigning her unto
Cambyses, a man of a mean fortune of the Persians, and by commanding her son
Cyrus to be put out; because he (times being quiet) likewise had thought,
through the offspring of Mandanes, the vine sprung forth would have increased
so far, until it would over-shadow all parts of his dominion: but truly he was
disappointed, by endeavoring, through man's counsels, to hinder the happiness
of his Nephew, appointed unto him by the judgment of the heaven-lies. Valerius,
book 1. chap. 7. Herodotus, book. 1.

THey report, That Cyrus, King of the Assyrians, dreamed, the eldest of Prince
or Duke Hystaspes his sons, with two wings to overshadow, with the one, Asia;
with the other, Europe. Therefore after his son Cambyses, Darius the eldest son
of Hystaspes having obtained the Kingdoms, subdued Europe and Asia. Herodotus,
book 1. and Justin.

MIthridates the son of Ariobarzanes was a companion to Demetrius son of
Antiogonus, and his equal, and had Antigonus in reverence, a man evil neither
in deed, nor in the opinion of others. An unlucky suspicion happened to
Antigonus, concerning him by reason of a vain dream. For (at his rest) it had
seemed to him, to have set a wide field with branches of gold, from thence
first grew golden corn. A little after, he, when he had returned thither, found
nothing but stubble; and when he was very greatly grieved, he heard the voice
of a certain one, who said, Mithridates, the golden corn being mowed down, went
away into the Euxine Sea. He being much troubled, opened that sight to his son,
being first brought to an oath of silence: and that thing also, that he
determined by any means to kill Mithridates. Demetrius (this thing being known)
was grievous sorrowful, and when as he being a youth, according to his manner,
being at leisure, had come to him, not daring for the tie of the oath, to warn
him by words, drew him apart by degrees from friends; and when they were alone,
his Spear being turned upside down, he wrote, he beholding him, Flee
Mithridates: and he, the matter being understood, fled away by night into
Cappadocia. But destiny proved the foolish Dream of Antigonus to be true, by
and by: for Mithridates possessed a large and good Country, and was the author
of the Kingdom of Pontus, which the Romans under about the eighth King,
overthrew. Plutarch. in Demetrius.

ACtia, the Mother of Augustus Caesar, sleeping in the Temple of Apollo, she
seemed to be co-mingled with a Dragon, and the months for bringing forth being
fulfilled, she brought forth. Moreover, before she brought forth, she dreamed,
that her bowels were carried on high into Heaven, and were powered forth into
the whole World. The same night, Octavius saw in his sleep, that he sprang out
of his mother's womb. When the Infant was now born, Nigidius Figulus, a
Senator, presently foretold unto the Father, the highest royal authority unto
his son. Xiphilin. and Sueton. in Augustus.

Octavius, when he led an Army through Thracia, and had asked counsel of the
Oracle of Bacchus concerning his son Augustus; the night following he presently
seemed to see his son more sumptuous than in a mortal shape, with a
thunderbolt and Scepter, and the spoils of Jupiter the most excellent great,
and a chariot covered over with a shining crown of Bay, twelve horses of an
exceeding whiteness drawing it. Q* Catulus, after the dedication of the
Capitol, for two nights together dreamed; in the first, The most excellent
great Jupiter, many boys in robes of purple playing together about the Al^ar,
separated one, and to have laid into his bosom the singe of the Commonwealth
which he carried in his hand; and in the night following, to have observed,
that he, the same child being in the lap or bosom of Jupiter Capitolinus, when
he had commanded to be withdrawn, was forbidden by the warning of the god, as
though he should be brought up for the safeguard of the Commonwealth. And the
next day beholding Augustus meeting him, not without admiration, he said, he
was most like to the Lad of whom he had dreamed. Some unfold the first dream of
Catulus otherwise, as though Jupiter, many boys together clothed in purple
robes, requiring a defender from him, had shown one among them, unto whom they
should bring back all their desires, and had brought his kiss untouched with
his fingers, unto his mouth. Marcus Cicero having followed C. Julius Caesar
into the Capitol, he by chance told the dream of the foregoing night unto his
familiar friends: a boy of a free countenance, let down from heaven by a golden
chain, to have stood at the doors of the Capitol, and Jupiter to have delivered
unto him a whip. And then suddenly Augustus being seen, whom as yet unknown to
most, his Uncle Caesar had brought to sacrifice, he affirmed him to be he,
whose likeness at the time of sleep was presented before him. Suetonius.

Vespasian the Emperor was so sure always of the offspring of him and his,
that after daily conspiracies against him, he dared to affirm to the Senate,
Either his sons were to succeed him, or none. It is said also, that he saw a
certain balance (at rest) placed in the middle part of the Porch of the
Palatine-house, with an equal beam, when as in the one scale, Claudius and
Nero stood; in the other he and his sons. Neither did the thing deceive, when
as both commanded so many years, and with the like space of time. They say,
Nero, in his sleep, was in his last days put in mind, that he should bring
forth the Chariot to the most excellent great Jupiter out of the Vestry, into
the house of Vespasian, and into the Circle.

ADrian, the day before he was ordained Emperor, saw at Antioch of Syria, in
his sleep, a fire to fall from Heaven on the left part to his neck or throat,
straightway to creep on the right; with which fire, ^e seemed to himself to be
neither sore afraid, nor hurt. Dion. of Nicaea, and Xiphiline in Adrian.

ALexander, while he assaulteth the City of Tire for 7. months, with
Bullwarks, Engines, and two hundred oar-gallies on the Sea side, saw Hercules,
at his rest, stretching out his hand to him from the wall, and inviting him.
Apollo seemed to say to many of the Tyrians in the dreams, that they should
pass over unto Alexander, for neither should those things which should be done
in the City be effected by them. But they as traitors of the wickedness found
out, bound the Image of Apollo with chains, and fastened him to the foot of a
pillar with nails, calling him a favourer of Alexander. Another shape was set
before Alexander in the night. A Satyr was offered to him. The which when he
endeavored quickly to take, it withdrew it self; at length, after many
entreaties and runnings about of his, it came into his hand. The diviner, the
name being divided asunder, not absurdly answered, SaTuros. Tire shall be
thine, because [ Sa] with the Greeks, signifies thine. They show a spring, at
which next after sleep, he saw the Satyr. Plutarch. Alexander.

EUmenes, when he thought Neoptolemus and Crater to move against him, and
provided to move by night; by and by being overcharged with sleep, a wonderful
Vision was offered to him. He seemed to see two Alexanders at a battle joined
between themselves, and both to lead all the wings: hence, to the one came
Minerva; to the other Ceres, for help. A sharp conflict being begun, that being
scattered for whom Minerva stood, Ceres, ears of corn being divided asunder,
weaved a crown for the Conqueror. This being seen, he conjectured it was the
second to him, who for a very good field, and at that time having a famous ear
of Corn in the knop of a Rose, did fight. For it was full of sown seed, and
pease yielded a bright show, the fields having long grass in great plenty. He
was now more raised up; after that he understood Minerva and Alexander to be a
sign of battle to the enemies. He therefore gave also Ceres and Alexander a
sign to his Soldiers, that they should redeem their head and weapons with the
Crown made of ears of Corn. A battle being joined, he slew Neoptolemus and
Crater. Plutarch. in Eumenes.

TImoleon, chief Commander of the Corinthians, a Navy being prepared for help
of the Sicilians, against Dionysius the Tyrant, and all things being delivered
or supplied, which an Army had need of, the Priests of Proserpina seemed to see
Ceres and Proserpinae to go far from home, adorning themselves, and with
Timoleon, saying, They were to sail into Sicily. Wherefore they provided an
holy Galley with oars of Corinth, named Drabus. He had seven Corinthian ships,
The Leucadians afforded the tenth, when he loses from these parts; when it
was late in the night, and he was carried with a prosperous wind, on a sudden,
the Heaven seemed to him to be cleft, and a plentiful and clear flame to have
been powered forth upon the ship. From thence a Torch lifted up, that was proper
to the mystical or hidden things, and accompanying and holding the same
course, what part of Italy the Governors most especially desired, it was
brought into that. The Prophets affirmed this show to agree with the Dreams of
the Priests, and that the goddesses were at hand in this voyage, and to shine
before them with this shining brightness. For Sicily was holy to Proserpina,
for there they fable she was allured, and that this Island was given her for a
nuptial gift. And truly after this manner was the Navy confirmed. Plutarch. in
Timoleon.

Hannibal, Captain of the Carthaginians, was detestable to the Roman blood; so,
of a certain foretelling whose not only wakings, but also very sleep was
ominous unto the Roman Empire. For he drew forth an Image agreeeble to his
purpose, and desires; and he thought a young man more noble than in a mortal
shape, to be sent unto him from Jupiter. By whose warning, at first, his eyes
following his steps into no part, straightway a ready will of keeping an humane
wit being feared, looking behind him, he perceives a Serpent of a huge
greatness, with a stirred force, treading every thing whatsoever he had met
with under feet: and after him, showers breaking forth with a great noise of
heaven, and the light rolled up within very obscure darkness. And then being
astonished, he asked, What that Monster was, what it might betoken? This is a
Captain; thou see (says he) the desolation of Italy; therefore be silent,
and leave other things unto silent destinies. Valor. Max. in book. 1. chap. 7.

AMandatus is a servant from Mardonius unto the Oracle of Amphiaraus, to
enquire about those things which they should execute. But he thought, in his
sleep, a servant of the god was standing by him, at first indeed to drive him
back by word, as if the god had been absent: but straightway, as less obeying,
to thrust him also with his hand. Last of all, to him stubbornly abiding, to
have dashed a great stone in his head. (...), That is, But these things were
mis^sounds of things to come. For Mardonius was overcome at Plataea in a great
battle, and being smitten with a stone, was slain. Caelius, book 19. chap. 15.
out of Plutarch.

XErxes, the son of Darius, King of the Persians, was about to bring war on the
Greeks; Artabanus son of Hystaspes, the Uncle of Xerxes, exceedingly withstood
it. Xerxes although fretting, yet he had purposed to obey Artabanus. But the
destinies urging him, he had the same dream twice. He saw a man in a noble
likeness, chiding him, because he deferred to bring War on Greece. The thing
being talked of with Artabanus, he constrained Artabanus clothed with the
King's garments, to take a sleep in the King's Throne. The same resemblance was
also presented before the eyes of Artabanus: Therefore he incensed Xerxes unto
the War of Greece, with no less diligence than before he had withstood: indeed
the evil fate of Xerxes so urging it, that the most proud King might pay the
punishments of his rashness and pride. The same Xerxes seemed to himself to be
crowned with an Olive-grass, with the boughs of which Olive the whole Earth was
overwhelmed, and presently the Crown, tied fast about his head, vanished: This
dream was more famous and sure than the former. Xerxes had affrighted the world
with Warlike preparation, and now seemed to triumph over Greece, Athens being
taken, when as he was by the diligence of Themistocles broken, he was forced by
a shameful flight to shift for his life. Herodotus, book 7.

Spartans, Callicratidas being Captain, were to fight at Arginusa in a
Sea-battell with the Athenians, the diviners on both sides dissuading them. For
the head of a sacrificed beast lying on the shore, dispersed the Lacedaemonians,
being drawn through the rage of a wave; the Soothsayers showed, all these
things betokened that the Praetor of the Navy was to perish in that combat.
Which thing being heard, they say Callicratidas answered, he should withdraw
nothing from the Spartane worthiness, if by fighting he should fall. But unto
Thrasibulus the Athenian, who being then Praetor, led the Navy, and to whom that
day, the top of Royal Authority had come by lot, by night this dream appeared.
It seemed to him, together with six other Praetors, to act the Tragedy of
Euripides, whose title is inscribed, [ Phoenissas] in the common Theater. But
it seemed his adversaries acting the Tragedy, whose name is [ Supplices], the
Cadmean Victory to have happened to them, and all to have perished, by
imitating the Captains, who had pitched their Tents for the assaulting of
Thebes. These things being heard, a Prophet being called to interpret, they so
expounded it, that seven Captains were to fall in that battle. But the holy
things otherwise openly promising Victory, he bade the Captains, that it may be
showed unto their companions alone concerning every ones death, but that they
divulge a Victory (betokened by those very holy things) throughout the whole
Army. A battle being joined, Callicratidas, some Ships of the Enemies being
first overcharged, dyed; the conquest remained in the power of the Athenians,
25. Ships being lost, 77. of the Enemies sunk. They fought on both sides, with
little less then four hundred Ships, and that battle is mentioned to be the
greatest of all, which indeed Greeks with Greeks ever fought. Diodore, in Book
13.

Pyrrhus King of the Epirots besieging Sparta, such a dream was offered. All
Lacedemon being stricken with a Thunderbolt, seemed to him thereby to be set on
fire, and he thereupon to leap for joy. He being stirred up with gladness,
commands his Captains, that they set the Soldiers in order, and expounds the
dream to his friends; as if he was to vanquish the City. Unto which thing when
as others wonderfully agreed, the sight pleased not Lysimachus. He says, he
feared, least as the places that were blasted with Thunderbolt, remain
inaccessible, so the god signified to Pyrrhus, that he was not to enter the
City: When as Pyrrhus answered this man, Those were mere delusions, and full of
uncertainty, but that every man holding weapons in his hands, ought to bring
into his remembrance. Optimum id augurium, pro Pyrrho exponere vitam.
Of Divination that is the chief,
For Pyrrhus to adventure life.
In the first of the morning he sets upon the City. But the Lacedaemonians not
sluggishly and beyond their strength, defending themselves, he was constrained
to loose the siege. Plutarch. in Pyrrhus.

CN. Pompey, having followed King Mithridates unto Euphrates, fell by night. At
which time it is blazed by report, that Mithridates saw a resemblance in his
sleep, which foreshewed him things to come. It seemed to him to sail in the
Pontick Sea, with a prosperous wind, and now to foresee Bosphorus, and
courteously to speak to those that were carried together with him, as who
rejoices in his sure and undoubted safety: but suddenly he was found forsaken
by all, and tossed in a small broken piece of a Ship. His friends standing by,
stirred him up, being busied with those troubles and Images, showing that
Pompey was at hand. A fight therefore (instead of a bulwark) being begun, he
was overcome. Far more then ten thousand were slain, and the Camps were taken;
Mithridates himself with a draught of eight hundred Horsemen with him brake
through the Romans. By and by the rest sliding away, he is left alone with
three, among whom was the Harlot Hipsicratia, who had always been of a manly
boldness: Wherefore the King called her Hispicratia. But then she being
clothed with a man's Persian garment, and carried on a Horse, neither seemed
she to be weary in body from the tediousness of the flight, neither the Kings
body and horse being taken care of, was he tired until they came unto the
Tower or Castle Inor, where the Kings Money and Treasures were heaped up.
Thence Mithridates took his precious stones, which he distributed unto those
that assembled unto him out of the flight. Moreover he gave a deadly poison to
a certain friend of his to be carried with him, lest any one should come into
the enemies hands. From thence he strives to go into Armenia to Tigranes. Which
thing, when he forbade him, and had pronounced a hundred talents on his head,
the Springs of Euphrates being passed by, he bends his flight through Colchis.
Plutarch in Pompey.

BEfore the Pharsalian fight, it seemed to Cn. Pompey by night in his sleep, he
entering into the Theater, the people to applaud him; and that he adorned the
Temple of Venus the Conqueresse with many spoils. This sight partly raised him
up, partly made him careful, fearing somewhat, least Grace and famousnesse
should come from him unto Caesar's family chanting on Venus, and some Panick
fears awakened him out of sleep: In the fourth watch over Caesar's Camps, where
all things were quiet, a great light shined out. A flaming Torch kindled
thereby, was brought into Pompey's Camps. Caesar himself said he saw this,
while he went about the Watches. The same Author, in the same place.

HEcuba being great with young, she seemed to bring forth a burning Torch,
which burned Asia and Europe. She not long after brought forth Paris, by whose
unchaste loves, the country of Troy being destroyed, their forces being wasted,
Greece was consumed by a long war, and undone. Sabellicus, book 1. chapter 1.
Volatteran. book 18. Anthropol.

CAmbyses King of Persians, saw Smerdes (in his sleep) sitting in the Kings
Throne, to touch the Heaven with his Crown. He for that thing, fearing lest his
Brother Smerdes should possess the kingdom; sent Prexaspes to kill him.
Neither yet could he avoid even this by his brother-killing Murder; whereby
Smerdes the Magitian, who feigned himself to be the true Smerdes Son of Cyrus,
should the less invade the Kingdom. Cambyses going up to horse, being wounded
in the Thigh with a Sword, died. Herodotus, Book 3.

Darius had moved out of Susa against Alexander, being supported with a
multitude of Armies (for he had six hundred thousand Soldiers under his
Ensigns) trusting to a certain dream, the which (the Magitians flattering him)
had interpreted more than according to the likeness of truth. The troop of the
Macedonians seemed to shine together with a great brightness of fire. But
Alexander to wait on him in the habit wherewith he had been clothed, when he
was [ Ascandes] that is, a Messenger, or [ Ascantes] that is Chamberlain to the
King: And when he had entered into the Temple of Belus, to have been withdrawn
from before his eyes. By these things (in my opinion) God foreshewed that the
Macedonians were to carry on honorable and famous matters, and Alexander to
obtain Asia; as Darius had enjoyed it, being of a Messenger or Chamberlain,
made King, but in a short time to lay down his life with his glory. Plutarch.
in Alexander. Curtius has delivered, that the King imagined the Camps to shine
with a great brightness. Sabellicus, Book 4. Ennead. 4.

THey report, Domitian to have dreamed that a bunch sprang out from him behind
a Golden neck; and to have had it for certain, that a more blessed and joyful
condition of the Commonwealth was foreshewn to be after him. As indeed it so
fell out in a short time, through the abstinence and moderation of following
Princes. Sueton.

EZeline, surnamed Monk, a bloody and most cruel Tyrant, at his rest saw the
fortune of his sons, that night in which he first came together with his wife,
who was by name Adela, a Tuscian, of the stock of the ancient Earls of
Montaion. For he seemed to himself to see a little hill, in which a Roman Town
was (in the Patavine field) placed (the which he commanded, and was thence
called Romanus or a Roman) so to be carried up and exalted, that it touched
heaven with its top, and the same a little after, to be melted as Snow, and so
to be let down, that it could no more stand up. The chances of his sons brought
this effect: For the elder Son, and he Ezeline by name, possessed the rule of
Verona, Patavium, Vincentia, Feltrium, and Cividal, and Marchia. But the
younger, Alberick, entered on the Kingdom of Tarvisium, and other places. But
afterward, fortune changing, in the two hundred fifty and sixth year, above
the thousandth of salvation, when as the Pope and the Guelphians together, had
moved war against Ezeline his son, he lost Patavium, with the whole land. But
when he trusted that he should possess the City of Mediolum by craft, and for
that thing had passed over the River Abdua, being besieged by his enemies,
overcome in battle, a wound being received, being taken nigh to Soncinum, in
that very same place he died, and was buried. His brother Alberick being
stricken with fear by this chance, when as he distrusted that he could keep
Tarvisium, he betook himself into the Castle of Saint Zeno. Where, in the year
of Salvation, 1200. being betrayed by his own Soldiers, he came into the power
of his enemies. There having beheld six sons to be killed before him, and his
wife Margaret with two young maids to be burnt, he himself being cut through
all his limbs by piecemeal, he saw (as his father had in his dreams) his Roman
stock, or nation, to be ended. Fulgosus, book 1. chap. 5.

Phalaris saw Mercury (whose Image holding a goblet in his hand, she worshipped
at her own house, among the shapes of gods) in her dreams to sprinkle blood on
the ground out of that goblet, and being dashed on the pavement, to bubble
back, until by little and little it overflowed all the house up to the top.
That which was seen in one, the bloody cruelty of her son made true in many
houses. Ponticus Heraclidus is the Author of this Vision, a learned man, as
says Tully, and Scholar of Plato. Petrarcha.

AMilcar Captain of the Carthaginians, besieging Syracusa, seemed to hear in
his sleep, that the next day after he should sup within the walls of the
besieged City. By that thing being turned to a hope of Conquest, he being
cheerful, set the Army in order in the morning to besiege the City. Unto him
considering and attempting such enterprises, as often comes to pass, a great
uproar arose in the Camps, the Carthagenians and Sicilians disagreeing among
themselves. The Townes-men laying hold of the occasion, come suddenly forth of
the Gates, and their enemies being scattered, the Conquerours take their
Captain, desiring to succor their ranks being disturbed, and therefore
neglecting himself. And so being brought into the City, supping in fetters, he
understood what a false expounder of the dream he had been. Valor. Max. Book 1.
chap. 7. and Cicero, Book 1. Of Divination. Artemidore writes, a show was
presented to a certain one in his sleep, as that he should sup with Saturn; and
it so happened, that the day following, he was cast into Prison. Caelius, Book
13. chap. 21. Of Book of Antiq.

JUpiter commanded T. Latinus, a man of the common people, in his sleep, that
he should tell the Consulls that he was not pleased with the neighboring
Circean plays, of the leaders of the dance, which thing, unless being heeded,
it were satisfied by the renewing of sports, no small danger of the City was to
follow. He fearing least with some disprofit unto his Religion, he should
extol the highest command, kept silence. And straightway his Son, being taken
with the sudden force of a disease, died. He also at the time of sleep, being
asked by the same, whether he had sufficiently weighed the great punishment of
his royal command neglected, continuing in his purpose, was recompensed with a
weakness of his body. And then at length by the counsel of his friends, being
brought in a horse-litter, unto the Consuls Judgment Seat, and from thence to
the Senate, the order of his whole chance being explained, with the great
admiration of all, the strength of his members being recovered, he returned
home on his feet. Valerius, in book 1. chap. 7. Cicero, in book 1. Of
Divination. And Livy, book 2. Decad. 1.

Tartars inhabit beyond the Mountain Belgia, the Sea lying between. Changius,
or their first Emperor, saw again a white horseman, who had foretold unto him
the Empire, in his sleep, that it was the will of the immortal god, That in the
Mountain Belgia being passed over, they should go forward into the West, and
subdue all Kingdoms. But as soon as they had come to the Mountain Belgia, in
that part which the Sea flows on the Mountain, that they should go down, and
their faces being turned toward the East, they with nine bowings of the knee,
worship the immortal God. Changius obeyed, and all his people being led out, he
compelled them to continue all night in prayers. The morning being come, he saw
the Sea to have went back from the Mountain, nine feet, and on that side he led
his whole Army on dry ground through the waste wildernesses into Asia. Haithon
the Armenian in his book of the Tartars.

HAnnibal, Captain of the Carthaginians, had decreed to carry away a golden
pillar, being found in the Temple of Juno Lucina. But being not sure, whether
it was of sound gold, or whether it was gilded with gold nigh the superficies,
by solemnizing an assembly, he tried it, and being made sure, that it was all
of gold, he was confirmed in his purpose of snatching it away; unto whom the
shape of Juno seemed to be present, while he dreamed: she admonished him, that
he should abstain from covetous and sacrilegious enterprises; threatening, if
he proceeded, that she would deprive him of one eye wherewith he should see the
ground, or the Sun; with which sleep, the Captain otherwise cruel, and who
feared no god, there was no Religion, as was written of him, yet it is
delivered, being moved, he daring to move nothing out of the place of that very
gold, which had fallen out of a hole while he tried it, he took care to have a
warlike Engine made, and to be placed on the top of the pillar. Petrarcha.

VAlens, Emperor, in his sleep, saw a certain man, saying these words unto
him; Be gone with haste unto great Mimas: thee the grievous force
Of destiny, dreading thy self, shall from thy life divorce.
He being awakened out of sleep, asked the standers by, What place was called
Mimas? And when at length, a certain one of the Grammarians or Orators, who
follow the Kings Court, had said, Mimas was a Mountain of Asia, of which Homer
had made mention in his Ulysses: And to aerie Mimas. The Emperor laughing,
answered, What necessity enforces me of seeing this place, and seeking a lot?
But when, fighting against the Alanians, the Emperor was burnt in a little
cottage about Adranopolis of Thracia, the Barbarians departing from thence,
some Soldiers of Valens diligently searched out his dead carcass. In that
cottage where he perished, was found an old grave of a certain ancient man,
with this Inscription, Mimas a Governor of the Macedonians, was here laid.
Therefore that dream of Valens was fulfilled. Cuspinian.

Julius Caesar in his sleep, before that he had moved into nether France, and
brought offensive weapons on the City, when at his rest, it seemed to him, he
ravished his mother: By which dream, the expounders stirred him up unto a most
large hope, having interpreted, That the rule of the world should be given him.
The same dream they mention, was offered to Hippias, son of Pisistratus, with
no unlike issue, who being his succeeder in tyranny, used his Country more
cruelly. For a night resemblance of his Mother, with whom he seemed to
copulate, is said to be set before him at the time of sleep; for which thing
the Interpreters answered, That rule was largely betokened unto him. And he
being put in mind by his dream, and full of hope, not long after he enjoyed the
dominion of Athens. For this is that Hippias, who having attempted a tyrannical
power, not without cruel wickedness, was more outrageous and unbridled than
his father, when as being a banished man, he had changed his soil, he moved
wicked arms against his Country. At last conspiring with Darius, being slain
in the Marathonian fight, he yielded punishments to his Country and
houshold^gods. But another son of the same Pisistratus, Hipparch, who exceeded
the cruelty of many Tyrants, when as he oppressed his Country and Citizens with
a cruel Lordlinesse, a conspiracy being made against the life of the Tyrant, he
was, by Armodius and Aristogiton, most valiant young men, not without the
safety of all, slain: whose names being devoted to freedom, lest at any time it
should be lawful to institute servants, the Athenians established with an open
abhorrency. Alexander, book 3. chap. 26.

SAbacus, King of Aethiopians, possessed the Kingdom of Egypt fifty years,
which being finished, the god, which is worshipped at Thebes, was seen to say
unto him, His reign over the Egyptians should not be happy, nor of long
continuance, unless, the Priests of Egypt being all slain, he should pass
through the midst of their dead carcasses with his. This dream being often set
before him, he called together all the Priests on every side, and what things
he had received through the dream being told them: He would not, he says,
build a remaining destruction for any one in Egypt, but had rather abstain from
the Kingdom of Egypt, being pure and free of all wickedness. Diodore the
Sicilian, and Herodotus, book 3.

SEthon, King of Egypt, Priest of Vulcan, when as he despised the Egyptians,
he made use of a foreign Soldier, and stripped the Egyptians of their fields.
For this wrong, it came to pass, that after Sennacherib King of Arabians and
Assyrians had invaded Egypt with a great Army, the Egyptians would not help
him. Then the chief Priest, void of counsel, betook himself into the Garret or
Chamber of his House, and there bewailed before the Image, how much he was in
danger. Therefore while he was lamenting, sleep crept on him, and while he
slept, the god seemed to stand by, exhorting him, that he was to suffer no
hurtful thing, if he went to meet the Army of the Arabians, for he would send
him helpers. The Priest trusting to these dreams, those that were willing of
the Egyptians being taken, Merchants, or Factors, and handycraftsmen or
laborers, he pitched his Tents in Pelusium; for, in this, is the Egyptian
invaded. When he had come thither, in the night, a great multitude of
field-Mice suddenly arising, gnawed asunder both the quivers, bows, and also
the rains of the bucklers in the Camps of their enemies; so that the next day,
the enemies being naked of weapons, made flight, many being lost. And now in
that Temple of Vulcan, the King stands in stone, holding a mouse in his hand,
and by letters saying these words; Who so looks on me, let him be godly.
Herodotus, book 2.

Of Miracles of Devils, or of diverse deceits and mocks of evil Demons, to
strengthen the Idolatry of the Gentiles.
Vesta warranted (the fire being gone out) a woman Scholar of the Virgin
Aemilia, to be safe from all blame, who worshipping, when she had laid a Cyprus
garment (the which she had a very good one) on the hearth, the fire suddenly
shone out. Valerius, book 1. chap. 1.

Aeneas to have placed houshold-gods brought from Troy, at Lavinium; thence
being brought over to Alba, by his son Ascanius, the which he had built, to
have returned again to the ancient Chapel: and because that might be thought
to be done by man's hand, being brought back again to Alba, to have signified
his will by another passage. Valor. Max. book 1. chap. 8.

Egyptians, but almost all the World anciently worshipped Isis for her
Miracles: for this goddess healed the diseases of those that were not well in
health, in their sleep; and they who did obey her counsel, were cured beyond
thought. Also those that were weak in their sight, or in other part of the
body, humbly entreating the virtue of the goddess, were restored unto their
former health. Diodore Siculus, book 1. chap. 2. of Ancient Things.

Aesculapius among the Epidaurians, they who came to pray to the god, they
sleep; and in their sleep, do learn the reason of recovering health. And then
they put squares in the Temple, containing the names of those that were cured,
and the manner of curing. Pausanias, in his Corinthian affairs. There was the
same custom among the Romans, even to the Times of the Antonines, that which
we may understand from a Marble Table of Rome found in the Temple of
Aesculapius in the Island Tiberia, and by the Mapheans kept even to this day,
in which these words are read, rendered out of Greek in the Latin speech, as
witnesses Jer. Mercurial, a most Learned Physician, in his first book of
exercise. In these days the Oracle told Caius, a certain blind man, that he
should come to the holy Altar, and should bend his knees; he should come from
the right part to the left, and should place his five fingers upon the Altar,
and should lift up his hand, and put it upon his own eyes, and he saw well, the
people being present, and giving thanks because great miracles were done under
our Emperor Antonine. The god answered by the Oracle unto Julian vomitting up
blood, being despaired of by all men, that he should come, and should take from
the Altar Pine-kernells, and should eat them together with honey for three
days; and he was well, and, being alive, openly gave thanks in the presence of
the people; the god gave an Oracle unto Valerius Aper a blind Soldier, that he
should come, and take the blood of a white Cock, mingling honey with it, and
should make a washing water, and should use it three days upon his eyes, and
he saw and came, and openly gave thanks to God. Lucius being troubled with a
pain of the side, and despaired of by all men, the god gave an Oracle, He
should come, and take ashes from the Altar, and should mingle it together with
a precious Pearl, and should lay it upon his side, and he was in health, and
openly gave thanks to God: and the people gave thanks together with him.

ARistides a Rhetorician of Smyrna, when as an Earthquake was at hand, was
commanded by Aesculapius to go a little before, unto the ancient house, and on
the top of the little hill Atys to perform holy things, and to build Altars;
the which when he had scarce finished, the Earthquake arising, so shook indeed
all the Country lying between, that it left no house to resort unto, but it
came not to Atys, not touched any thing beyond it. Stobaeus, in 3. speech.

Veians being vanquished and plundered by Camillus, it seemed meet, to carry
away the Ensign that was in Junoes Tower unto Rome, as he had vowed. Artificers
being called together unto that thing, Camillus performed holy things, and
having prayed the goddess, that she would embrace the endeavor of the Romans,
and being willing, that she go with her favors unto the gods inhabiting Rome:
they say, the Ensign spoke with a low voice, she was willing, and to agree by
nodding. Livy delivers, that while he prayed, Camillus to have handled the
goddess, and invited her, thereupon some of the standers by, to have answered,
she was willing, and to agree and follow willingly. Plutarch. in Camillus.

ALexander the Great making a Bulwark in the Sea to vanquish Tire, suddenly a
Whale of incredible bigness, swam to it and one part of his body being bended
on the bulwark, he stood there a long time, with the great affrightment of all
beholders. He again swam out, at last into the Sea. Hence a very great Religion
or superstition possessed both, thinking that to betoken, Neptune would be a
helper to the Macedonians, his mind being inclined even unto that which they
desired. One told that such a kind of sight appeared to him in the City, as
though Apollo had said, The City of Tire should be forsaken by them. That thing
when the common people thought it was feigned by that man in favor of
Alexander, and now some young ones would stone him, he being withdrawn by the
Magistrates out of the midst of them, fled into the Temple of Hercules, and so
by the safeguard of the god whom he had implored, he was freed from punishment
at hand. But the Tyrians in nothing more. They worshipped him with much
superstition, who linked Apollo's Statue and Image with golden chains, and so
by that means they supposed him to be so fettered, that he could no more depart
from their City; but for all that, their City was taken, and Alexander took off
the golden chains and fetters from Apollo, with which the Tyrians had linked
him, and commanded, that he should be called Philalexander; and so he finished
that magnificent sacrifice unto Hercules. Diodorus, lib. 17.

PHillippides the Athenian, being sent Ambassador and Legate to Lacedemonia,
about the invasion and breaking in of the Persians into Greece, returning home
again much reprehended the delays and stay of the Lacedaemonians, who would not
bring out their Army before the full Moon, and meeting Pan, or the god Pan, in
the Parthian Grove, who promised that he would aid the Athenians in the fight
at Marathon, which was to be a while after. And so from this sprung the honors
that the Athenians vouchsafed to the god, or gods messenger. Pausanias, lib. 1.

Mithridatick War, when Mithridates besieged and hovered over Cyzicum with the
wings of his Army, the gods seemed to favor the Cyzenians, and to approve of
their fortitude, and to excite it by some perspicuous and transparent signs and
tokens at sundry times, as well as at Proserpina's feast then instant. When
they wanted a black Ox to sacrifice, they brought one made of breadcorn
artificially made in paste, to the Altar; but the holy or consecrated Cow which
was at feeding, afterward to be sacrificed to that Goddess, was at pasture
over Sea with the rest of the flock of the Cyzenians; in that same day leaving
the rest of the flock and herd, swam over alone to the Town, and willingly
offered it self to be sacrificed; moreover, their goddess appeared in a dream
unto Aristagoras the public Schoolmaster; Truly, says she, here I am, and I
drive and force the African Fiddler or Musician into the Trumpeter of Pontus; do
thou therefore command thy Citizens to be of good cheer. The Cyzenians
marvelled much at this speech; and as soon as it was break of day, and that the
bright Luciferian Star, Phoebus's harbinger, did periwigg the horizon with his
silvered locks, the Sea began to boil, as though a huge wind had agitated and
stirred it, the quaverings, machines, and engines of the King's wall, and the
famous (yea supererogating works) of the Thessalian Nicomedes, with their great
noise and crack did prophecy and foretell what would come to pass; afterward
a very stormy Southwind did rise, which in a semi-moments space did so palsy
and shoulder-shake a wooden Tower of the height of a hundred cubits, and
other machinaments and fortifications, that it levelled their sky-towring tops
with the ground. But some relate it thus; That Minerva was seen in Visions to
very many, to whom she appeared in their dreams, sweat trickling down her, and
showed part of her embroidered garment or veil which was rent, and that she
said, She was even now come from ayding the Cyzenians. But Mithridates being
almost famished, (although not in Hungaria) gave over the siege, and returned
into Bythinia, Lucullus following him. Plutarchus.

Boetians being enslaved and captivated by the Thracians, when they plumed
their feet, and flew into the Trophonian den, it was told them in a Dream, That
Bacchus was to be their helper; they fell upon the Thracians being drunk,
(having Bacchus with them also) they redeemed one another, and built a Temple
to Bacchus their redeemer; as Herac^dus Ponticus writes.

Cleomenus, King of the Spartans, after the Argians were vanquished,
sacrificing in Juno's Temple, a flame of fire streamed out of the breasts of
the Image; which was an evident sign that Argos was not to be conquered by
assault; for if the flame had issued out of the head of the image, it would
have intimated, That he should win and take the City from the Tower: but when
the lightning sprung out of her breasts, then all was done that the gods would
have done. Herodotus, lib. 6.

Pharsalia, in which Pompey was overcome by Caesar, which was foreshewed and
written by great and wonderful signs and wonders, in Elide, there was an image
of Victory which stood in Minerva's Temple, which had its back to the gate, and
in that same day that the battle was fought, of its own accord it turned
toward the door. At Antiochus in Syria, and in a Town by the Red Sea called
Ptolemais, twice in that very same day there was such a noise heard about that
City, as though there were a great mutiny and murmuring of Soldiers about the
walls, and there was the noise of a Drum heard in Pergamus's Temple. Valerius,
lib. 1. cap. 6.

Attila, the King of the Hunni, made an attempt about the intrenching upon the
borders of the Roman Empire, the images of their gods was not only seen in the
night, but also in the day time to command every one to pray for himself, and
that crimson and bloody drops came from Heaven, and two headed monstrous
Infants were born, and many of their consecrated houses and Temples were struck
with lightning, and a voice was often heard, Cave tibi Italia, O Italy, take heed
to thy self. Bonfinius, lib. 3. Decad. 1.

Troy, the fire in Minerva's Temple did spare, to burn the sacrifices that were
laid upon the Altars; the common people being much troubled at this thing,
flocked together to Apollo's Temple to the Altar there, and laying the parts of
the intrails upon it, and fire being put to that, on a sudden all things began
to be disturbed, fell to the ground; by which Spectacle all the people being
entered in, much afraid and dismayed, incontinently there came an Eagle with a
huge noise, and snatched away apart of the intrails, and carried them to the
Grecian ships. Dict. lib. 5.

CAesar Augustus in one part of the Capitol, erected a Temple to thundering
Jove, which he had vowed in the Cambrick War, and did frequent this dedicated
place daily, and he thought he saw in his Dream, Jupiter complain, that he had
taken away his worshippers; and that he answered, that there was the Thunderer
set for his Porter; And by and by, he decked and encompassed the top of the
dedicated place with little bells, which then in a manner did hang and were
pendant upon the gates and doors.

ZOnaras Annalium, tom. 3. relates, That under Anastasius the Manichaean
Emperor, a Magitian, a most wicked man, that had set up a brazen Image to the
Goddess Fortune, in the shape of a Country woman, whose feet being brass,
stood in a ship which was of the same metal, in the City of Constantinople;
which aforesaid ship was either eaten away by hungry time, or broken by some
other secret means, so that some fragments were taken away from it. And for
this cause, ladened ships could not arrive any more at Byzantium; but
whenever they approached near to it, they were driven back again by the
violence of the winds, and unless they had brought their bagg and baggage in
long Vessels or Ships rowed with Oars, perhaps the people might have been
famished; which thing continuing for a good while, at last the Magistrates took
care of the business, and the cause of this dysaster, they enquired of a
Magitian, a notable diviner, and so, that the broken pieces and fragments of
that brazen Ship being diligently sought up, and gimmer'd and set in their
proper places, then the Sea or Harbor was filled with voyage, navigation, and
little ships; but as soon as they knew certainly the obstacle, at the last, the
fragments were dislocated; and whatsoever ships were to arrive there, by the
strength of the winds, were cast and driven back; and the thing being
discovered, the Ship was renewed and made up again with great care and pains.

THere were in a Tower in Athens Olive Trees, dedicated to Pallas, which were
called Moriae Halirhotius the son of Neptune, did attempt to cut them down with
an Axe, because, by reason of their making and production, he was overcome by
Minerva and as he was a hewing of them, struck himself by the axe and by that
wound he perished. Coelius, lib. 12. cap. 20.

Aesculapius was not born of the Nymph Coronis but of an Egg of a little Crow,
because the Greek word (...) signifies both a little Crow, and also a Nymph so
called, as Luc^an in his Dialogue, de falso vate affirms. It is reported of the
Ancient Priests, who included and put a very little Serpent into a wind-Egg of
a Crow, and studiously anointed it with wax, and hid it in a certain myery, and
by and by an Altar was erected in that place, and he called the people together
to a Sermon, or Oration, and when he had declared openly before them all, that
he was about to show himself to be a god. After the Oration was ended using
some unknown uncouth words, he invocated and called upon Apollo and
Aesculapius, that they would be propitious and fortunate, and draw near to that
City. Afterward dipping a water-pot into a deep place, to fetch up some water,
he brought up the water, together with that Egg, which he broke, a great
company being by, and finding in it a young Serpent, he brought them all into a
wonderful admiration, but afterward showing a Serpent of a great bigness in
a gloomy place, a few days being spent, moving it self artificially, he said
that it was so appointed, that he should declare that the god Aesculapius was
the son of Apollo. And afterward Serpents were committed to his tutorage and
care, and his badge or arms was a staff linked about with a Serpent. Ut scribit
Dercilus Natalis Comes Mythol. lib. 4. cap. 11.

Rome, there was one Atronius Maximus, that led through the Circle or Theater,
his servant that was sore beaten, tied and chained to a Gibbet before the
concertation of the spectators, for this cause Jupiter was angry and commanded
one Annius that he should tell the Senate of this, and that he was not pleased
with a fast so full of cruelty; and he smothering this, his son dyed suddenly,
and for unveiling and declaring Jupiters counsel, the second time, was cured
of a great weakness that tainted and debilitated him; so at last by the
counsel and persuasion of his friends, he was carried in his couch to the
Senate, and when he had scarce finished his declaration he recovered his
health, and went out of the Court on his feet, therefore the Senate did
consult, and also by the Maevian Law that those Circean days were to be added
to pacify Jupiter, and therefore was called Lustratius, not from the Gibbet as
some conceive from the Greek words (...), but from the redintegration and
renewing and making up of the breach, as Varro thinks, quia instaurare, he
says, is instar novare. Macrobius, lib. 1. Saturnal. cap. 11.

Argonautes report that going out of Sigea, they were tossed and tumbled with a
cruel Tempest, and almost all of them in such a great danger despairing, they
by their prayers called upon Orpheus, together with the Samothracian Deities,
that they would deliver them from this eminent danger. When the Myniae were in
the belly of all the danger, expecting no good issue, unless they were brought
forth of it, a twofold light of Castor and Pollux shined about their heads (as
it is said) and not long after the Sea began to be more calm, and for this
cause the Divinity of these two young men was esteemed very highly of; and
those sub^taneous Castorean fires that blazed in the Sea, were called Gemini,
and they glittered like as they were the pictures and effigies of Joves
twy-forked lightning which sometimes did sit upon the point of the hairs of the
Soldiers, that were in their night-watches, at other times upon the fore-Masts
of Ships, and wandered up and down other parts of the Ship, and with an audible
sound were wont to go about. But they were a bad sign and a sad omen, when they
came solitary and alone, as signifying the drowning of Ships; but when they two
came together, they were a happy sign: No sign in the Zodiac more fortunate
then Gemini, and were fore-shewers of a happy voyage: but it is said that by
the same argument they are believed to fly and depart when Helen comes, which
is a threatening and ominous symptom; this thing in that place was reputed a
miracle, and therefore Castor and Pollux were religiously worshipped by the
Mariners, and so the people being arrived safely at their port, for their safe
deliverance did solemnize their rites, and Ceremonies unto the Samothracian
gods. Sabel. lib. 5. Ennead. 1.

MArcus Tullius relates in his first book of Tusculane Questions, that
Trophonius and Agamedes, building a Temple unto Apollo and worshipping that
god, did require a reward of their labor nothing that was certain, but that
which should be best for Man. Unto whom Apollo about three days after did show
that he would give them that which they desired, who as soon as he began to
shine (for by Apollo is meant the Sun) they were found both dead in the morning.

CRoesus the King of the Lydians being overcome by Cyrus, and put upon a Funeral
pile, that he might be burned, with a loud voice called thrice upon Solon: and
Cyrus, understanding the cause of it, commanded the fire to be extinguished,
but a little while after when the fire prevailed much against him, and waxed
very fervent, he invocated and called upon Apollo, that if ever there were a
grateful sacrifice or offering to be given by him, that he would free him from
the present evil; on a sudden therefore black pitchy Clouds orespread as it
were with a black veil, the fair and serene face of the Heavens, and bucketted
down whole cataracts of liquid showers, and so put out and quenched the fire.
Herodotus, lib. 1.

XErxes bringing a great Navy against the Greeks at the end and extremity of
the Magnesian Land, the Athenians are reported to have called upon the
North Wind, they received of an Oracle which they had, that they should invoke
and call upon his son in law, to help them, for Boreas had Orythuia Attica the
daughter of Erechtheus the King. Therefore whilst they laid siege in Chalcide
they invocated Boreas and Orythuia, that they would help them, and destroy the
Ships of the Barbarous, even as they had done before about Athon: and Boreas
performing the same, they went thence, and extructed to him a Grove near the
River Ilissus. But in that Shipwreck, they that speak of the fewest, say not
fewer then forty ships were cast away and sunk of Xerxes Navy; and an
innumerable company of men lost, and a great treasure of Money spent, besides
diverse ladened or Merchandising Ships, and Barks, and Fisherboats. Herodotus,
lib. 7.

Vulcanian hillock hard by Agrigentum, there are certain green logs and pieces
of wood, which being put upon the Altar, if their prayers be just and
righteous, of their own accord they will kindle and catch fire; but if their
requests be unjust and unreasonable, there will be no sign of comburation or
burning. Fulg. lib. 1. cap. 6.

ROmulus in the Sabines War which was transacted about the Capitol, and the
Palace, and high Tower, when he could in no wise stay the shameful flight of
his Soldiers in that skirmish he did vow to dedicate a Temple unto Jupiter
Stator, the Stayer, if he would take away that aguish fear from the people that
were about to fly, and would but stay the Romans against their enemies the
Sabeans; and that they that stayed behind, should be the Victors: scarce had he
said his prayers, ere he obtained his request for the wings of the Army being
repaired, the battle did not only hang in Aequilibrio, but the Sabines were
repelled (who a while before exulted for their Victory) even unto Curtius's
Lake, and was beat back with great detriment and slaughter. Sabellicus, lib. 2.
cap. 5. ex Plutarchi Romulo.

Numa Pompilius? (who succeeded Romulus being called into the Kingdom out of
the Sabine Courts) how prevalent was his prayer, and how daring and bold which
was ready to allure Jupiter out of heaven. A thing (of which there is
sufficient witness) not only believed, but attempted of others likewise.
Tullus Hostilius, who after him was possessed of the Kingdom, who did not
undergo nor perform the sacred rites wisely when his whole house was set on
fire, and burned by lightning. Sabel. lib. 2. cap. 5.

TUllus Hostilius when he had Marshalled and ordered his army to march toward
the River of Tibris and Anienis, and in the Fidenates and Vejentians; and
knowing the imbecility and want of strength of the Albanes against their
enemies, he vowed to sacrifice twelve Samians to Mars, and so quickly became
the Victor or overcomer of the Army, who now was so accounted by right of
Victory, and also was grown by hope and strength unequally matched to his
enemies. Ibidem.

Tucia, and appeared most eminently in a Vestall there. Whether the confidence
of the woman in this Case, or the obedience of the evil spirits is greater, is
a great doubt; being commanded to plead her own cause, and to vindicate and
clear her self from her aspersion, which was put upon her by her accuser, and
the Vestall was desired that if she had all her time carried and demeaned her
self chastely, and piously in her Ceremonies, that she should hold and fix her
self with her anchora spei, upon the Rock of confidence; so she made her
requests to her gods, and going to a bank of a River, having many accompanying
her, that they might know the event and exit of the business, she brought a
sieve full of the Water of the River to the High Priest (before whom her cause
was formerly pleaded. There is also added to this miracle, that her accuser
being very narrowly sought after, never appeared more. Ibidem.

Claudius, that was the worshipper or Idolizer of the same Ceremony, and when
her too too loose life had contracted some calumny, who did endeavor to wash
off the blot, and to dispell that cloud that encurtained her glory, and to blow
away that fume of opinion that was in the minds of most men, did attempt to
remedy this malady by some such apparent testimony which would require more
admiration of the succeeding Ages to wonder at it, then faith to believe it:
this Vestall (Virgin shall I call her?) first humbly praying, and tying her
belt, quickly removed a Ship which carried Juno, sticking in the Tiberine
sands, and drew it against the stream, which a great deal of the Roman strength
and force (though vi et armis) after very many encounters could not stir nor
remove. Sabellicus, Lib. 2. cap. 5.

ADrian the Emperor, Lucius Commodus being adopted, and hoping for the Empire,
commanded Severianus, and Fuscus his Nephew (which seemed to take the surrender
of the Empire grievously) to be slain, much suspecting and envying them; one of
them being four score and ten years old, the other but eighteen. But Severianus
before he was to be strangled, called for some fire, and, burning incense; he
said, Vos, o Dei, testor me nihil mali commississe: i. e. Be ye my witnesses, O
ye gods, that I have done no evil to Adrian, I wish only this mischief, that
when he shall desire to dye, he shall not be able. And thus one of them yielded
to the fates. Afterward Adrian, in a great sickness, often desired death in
vain, and often strived to be his own executioner (by reason of his wicked
heir); his Epistle which intimates this is extant, for he writes thus; How
miserable a thing is it to desire death, and not to dye. Dion. Caessius, in
vita Adriani.

Athenians were infected with the Plague, they had an Oracle from Pythia, that
the City was to be purged by sacrifice: they sent Niceas the Son of Niceratus,
to a ship, who called Epimenedes out of Creet. He proceeding after this sort,
Olymp. 27. did purge the City thus: they took sheep that had black and white
fleeces, and brought them into Areopagus, and from thence permitted them to go
whither they listed, and appointed several to accompany them, and that
wheresoever they should lie down, they should sacrifice several of them to
peculiar gods. And so the pestilence was quenched, hence was it that Altars
were often found in the Athenian Villages without any name. Which by chance was
to the unknown God, upon which occasion, Saint Paul began to Preach Christ to
the Athenians. Laertius.

Persians being or'ecome and beat back to Platea a City in Boetia. Apollo
answered the Grecians (consulting about a sacrifice) that they should rear up
an Altar to Jupiter the Liberatour and freer, but before they had solemnized
the ceremonies, they appointed that all fire should be extinguished through the
whole Region which was polluted by the Barbarians, and that they should kindle
all their fires out of that pure fire on the common hearth at Delphos.
Therefore by and by the Magistrates of the Grecians going all about, commanded
all them that used any fire to extinguish it. Euchidas of the Plataeensians,
promised that as swiftly as that could be done, that he would bring fire from
the goddess, and so he went to Delphos, and so purging his body by sacrifice,
and washing it with water, being Crowned with Laurel, took fire from the
Altar, and running backwards, went toward Plataeas, and before the setting of
the Sun, returned, and in that very same day measured and traveled a thousand
pa^es, so the Citizens were saved, unto whom he delivered the fire, but he
quickly fainted, and a while after died: the Plataeensians did bury him in the
Temple dedicated to Diana at Euclia, and did superscribe this Tetrameter Verse.

Euchidas Delphos cucurrit, et die reversus uno est.
Euchidas unto Delphos one day run,
Returned again ereth' setting of the Sun. Plutarchus, in Aristide.
Hercules the son of Alcmena, offering sacrifice to Jupiter in Olympia, when he
could not drive away the flies, it is said that the Elii called the driver away
of them (...), and did do sacrifice to him, and when the sacrifice was offered,
on a sudden all the flies flew beyond the River Alpheus. Therefore was it
reserved and kept by the Eleans to drive away flies from Olympia, and the same
ceremony was used. Pausanias, lib. 5.

AUrelian the Emperor, when he came against the Marcomannians unto Mediolanum
a Town in Italy, he writ to the Senate that they should look into the
Sybillaean books, what rites were necessary to crave the help of their gods.
Which when the Senate had done so, and had it revealed by a divine revelation
more then by any humane strength or counsels, the Barbarians durst not go
beyond their prefixed limits, affrighted by such terrible sights and Wonders,
and so a clear path was laid open for Aurelians Victory. But he, least that he
might not seem ungrateful not to acknowledge his help from Heaven besides the
great rewards of this Victory, and Thanksgiving being given through the whole
City of Rome, he gave fifteen Millions of the weight of Gold, and a great
treasure of Pearls, for a remembrance thereof. Fulgosus, lib. 1. cap. 1.

Persians commanding Asia when they had spoiled and ransack't all the Holy
places and Temples of the Greeks excepting the Temple of Semidea Rhea which was
in Castamus Cherronesus, neither fortified with Walls nor Watches, and left it
unviolated, the plundering Robbers pilling and poling all places, and this was
that place which was only left unwalled, and that might of all other been
taken without danger, they report the cause to be this; the universal
beneficence toward all men, for she did teach and instruct the sick in Dreams,
the cure of their diseases, and did recover very many that were desperately
sick. Furthermore, those Women that were in Travel, she delivered them from
the peril of Childbirth. Diodorus, lib. 5. cap. 17.

WIthout Crotonis anciently there was a Temple dedicated to Juno Licinia and
was very strict and hallowed with many Religious ceremonies, and where was a
Grove that was hedged about with high Firre-Trees: in the Center and middle
thereof there was a feeding place, a grasse-plot where all kind of Cattle was
fed, which was sacrificed to the goddess, and had no keeper, the flocks
overnight would stear themselves of their own accord to their Stables, being no
ways liable either to the injury of men or beasts, there was a great wonder
and miracle related of an Altar there which was in the day time, never was
there any ashes blown away by the violence of the Winds. Sabellicus, lib. 3.
Ennead. 5.

Pelasgus, they devoted the spring to their gods, being able to perform their
vows, they neglected to perform it, therefore being exagitated and vexed with
a grievous pestilence, and enquiring of their Oracle, the cause of that evil,
the Oracle answered, (...), that having whatsoever they would, they have not
given that which they promised, therefore to pacify the Deity, they were to pay
the tenths. Dionys. Halicar. lib. 1. Eusebius. lib. 4. praeparat. Evangelicae.

Italy the Rock of the Posidoniacorians there was such a miracle used: for
there was a hunter in that Country which is called Andragathia; he was wont to
dedicate the heads and feet of those things, which he had killed to Diana, and
affix them to the Trees, and when he had taken a great Boar in contempt of the
goddess, he said, he would only offer the head of it to her, and tying it to
a certain Tree, one day when he turned a little out of the way, to shroud
himself from the heat of the Sun being then Noontide, he slept under that
tree, under which he had tied the head of it, and fell asleep; then did the
garter dissolve and untye of it self, and the head of the Boar fell upon his
head so that he dyed. Diodorus, lib. 4. cap. 3.

OEneus the King of Calydonia, there being a great plenty of all Kind of grain
in Oetolia, and when he had sacrificed to other gods, only Diana excepted, the
goddess being angry, sent a Calydonian Boor of a great bigness, to destroy
the neighboring Region thereabout: and Meleager to stay this, being in full
strength, taking many consorts with her, killed the Boar, and so by the consent
of all, she obtained the reward of the slain beast, that was, the skin of the
Boor. And when in a hunting time he was with Atalanta, the daughter of
Schaenei, being much enamoured of her did concede and grant to her that skin,
which was his reward for killing that wild beast. Which being done, and Thestes
sons being Hunters together with him, taking it very ill to prefer a stranger
Woman before them, and disapproving Meleagrus's fact, they by their traps and
ambushes, took the skin from Atalanta, when she should return into Arcadia;
then Meleager, as well agitated by love, as exagitated and excited by ignominy,
at first he admonished those robbers that they should restore the reward of
Virtue which was given to that Woman by him, but they, contemning his words, he
slew them all, for they were the Brethren of Althea: but she being much grieved
for their slaughter, execrated and cursed Meleager, and begged of the immortal
gods, who had heard her prayers, that they would put an end to the life of her
Son. some say that in Meleagers birth, the destinies appeared to Al^hea in a
dream by night, and said, then should the life of her Son Meleager be expired,
when that wood (which was a quenched charcolled firebrand) was burned out: the
child being born, Althea thinking that by saving that Wood, she should also
save the life of her Child, she diligently reserved and kept it. Afterward
being grievously tormented, and vexed by the death of her Brethren, she burned
the fireband, and then the cause of her sons death came to light, and repenting
her of the fact, she hanged her self. Diodorus, lib. 4. cap. 2.

STymphalus a River in Arcadia, makes a great Lake or Gulf, and percollating,
and being filtred through the Veins of the Earth, insinuates it self at length
into the Argolick field, and there its name is changed; for Stymphalus it is
called Erasinus in the days of Pausanias: this miracle happened, when a solemn
rite was very cursorily performed by the Arcadians to the Stymphalian Diana;
and in the first place the rites, for their country being Pretermitted,
incontinently the Grove fell upon that cavern, under which the River Stymphalus
did drain and sweat through the Earth's pores, therefore the mouth of the
passage (by reason of the interveining rubbish) being damned up, and the water
making a reflux and flowing retrogradely, the water did spread and expand it
self over all the adjacent fields no less then 400. paces, and made a great
pool or Gulf. And so by chance it happened that a hunter chasing his Heart,
when she had stuck her self in the dirt of the fen, being chafed with grief of
mind, swam through the water, and he had not left off the pursuit after her,
ere a great chasma or Gulf both swallowed up him and the wild beast together
(they report) that by and by the standing water finding the channel of the
River, and following it, so that the whole Lake was drunk and dried up in one
day, the ceremony being more preparedly and magnificently made to Diana.
Pausanias in Arcadicis.

GLaucus the son of Sysiphus, who ruled at Potnia despising Venus's Rites, was
torn in pieces by his Mares, which used to draw his Chariot. Servius, lib. 3.
Georg.

HErcules did erect a magnificent Temple to Jolaus his Nephew, and instituted
many hallowed rites to be consecrated in it, and if the inhabitants should be
wanting at the accustomed ceremonies they quickly began to be made dumb, but
when again they should obey, they were to be restored to their former
soundness. Alexandr. ab Alexandro lib. 2. cap. 14.

CYanippus Syracusanus because he had neglected to sacrifice unto Bacchus; the
god, being angered and provoked, made him run into such drunkenness, that
meeting his daughter Cyane in the dark, although she resisted, he defloured
her. But she snatching a ring from her father that did obstuprate her,
delivered it to her Nurse, that it might be for a mark and sign of him that
violated her. But afterward when a grievous pestilence did invade and come
upon the City, for such a heinous perpetrated wickedness, there was an Oracle
given out by Pythias, that the Author of that impiety should be sacrificed to
the freeing and liberating-gods. Therefore Cyane being conscious of these
things, slew her father, haling him to the Altar by the hair of the head, that
the gods might be pacified. Dositheus, lib. 3. rerum Sicularum: et Plutarchus,
cap. 39. Paral.

Phocis at the Tithorean Temple of Isis, for Religion, the holiest of all them
that ever the Grecians consecrated to the Egyptian goddess, for neither is
there any inward access into it by any, but to those whom Isis in dreams seems
to call to her, beloved before the rest: to this Tithorean Isis are two Fairs
yearly celebrated in the Spring and in Autumn, the Merchants or Factors build
them up Shops and Stalls of Reeds, and of any other matter that they can light
on. At the last on the third day they that come to Merchandise there, buy
slaves, but in the afternoons apply their minds to their devotions. They
sacrifice sumptuous Oxen, and Hearts, but Geese and Meleagrides, birds, more
parcimoniously, etc. Sometimes they say, a man is profane when the pile begins
to be burned, that through curiosity and self-confidence dare go into it. And
to him if there shall seem all places filled full of Hobgoblins, and such
domestical homely spirits, notwithstanding if he turn back to Tithorea, and
relate all that which he has seen, he quickly dies. Pausanias in Phocicis.

Cabirorians, the Thebanes cannot escape condign punishment for their
unexpiable wickedness; for when the Naupacti a profane Generation of men,
durst usurp those things that were consecrated by the Thebanes, not long after
they paid for their fraudulent impiety. Also those Persians of Xerxes Army,
when Mardonius was their Captain, having their fixed station or standing Camp
in Baeotia, one part of which not doubting to enter into the Temple of the
Cabirorians, whether drawn thither by the desire of a great prey, or out of the
contempt of the Deity, all of them were stricken with madness; part of them
cast themselves into the Sea, part of them precipitated themselves from high
rocks: and when Alexander in a battle had or'ecome the Thebanes, and did
destroy and depopulate the City and fields with fire and Sword, those of the
Macedonians that broke into the sacred Temple of the Cabirorians all of them
either by lightnings or by fire sent from Heaven, were slain; Such was the
Religion of that Temple from the beginning. Pausanias in Boeoticis.

PEntheus the King of the Thebanes when he had grieved Liber his father, and
reviled him with many contumelious terms and other things, he did very
insolently, but at last that he might pry into those hidden sacrifices of
Women, went to Cytheron, and climbed into a Tree, and from thence he saw all,
which when the mad Priestesses of Bacchus saw with a great violence, they tore
him being alive, in pieces, and pulled limb from limb. They say, there was an
Oracle given at Corinthus, that they should make inquisition for, and seek out
that Tree, and the finders out thereof should be worshipped with divine
honors, therefore by the Item or inkling given by that Oracle, there was two
wooden pictures found of his Father, Liber, put in the repository of the
Temple: besides two mouths which were anointed with red lead, they name the
other Lyfius Bacchus. Pausanias in Corinthiacis: Euripides writing of the
daughters of Bacchis Cadmus, and their sisters the Simeles which brought up
Dionysius, did mention one Pentheus, that each of them tugged away the parts of
his body. Natales Comes Mythol. lib. 5. cap. 13.

Potitians had obtained the rites of the consecrated things of Bacchus, which
was assigned for a gift to their nation by him, as an heritage, Appius Claudius
the Censor being the Author of it, did transfer it to the servilest basest
office of their servants: therefore all that were above thirty years of age,
Adulti, were slain and destroyed, and the name of the Potitians, divided into
twelve Families, quickly was quite extinct. And Appius for his part was made
blind. Valerius, lib. 1. cap. 2. Livius, lib. 2. Decad. 3.

Terentius Varro overseer for the Temples, when he made Circes plays in the
Temple of Jupiter, he put a boy of admirable beauty, a player, to keep the
watches. Which being done after many years it was as well expiated, as
remembered: for a great while after, being made Consul, fighting at Cannus, he
prospered so ill, that he almost lost fifty thousand Romans that were slain.
Valor. Max. lib. 1. cap. 2.

ANnibal and Himilco being two Carthagenian Captains, besieging Agrigentum,
commanded their Soldiers that they should cast and throw down all the
Sepulchers and Monuments, and so by that ruin draw and contract a great heap
of rubbish and to bring it to the Walls; neither was the Army slow to execute
this command, nor to bring this work to pass: but whilst they were digging
there, a great reverence of Religion and awe of the gods began to seize on some
of the minds of the Army. For the Tomb and Sepulcher of Thero, a Monument of
great labor and labor and Art, shaken by lightning, trembled: which miracle
being procured for some of their Priests, when they saw the multitude make
haste to pull it down, labored with all might and main, to stay and forbid it;
and suddenly a pestilence invaded the Camp, which destroyed many, neither did
it wrest a few into diverse afflictions and calamities in which Annibal the
Captain himself dyed. As also those that did watch by night, did think they saw
spectrums and ghosts, and the shadows of them that were dead walking and
wandering in shades. And Himilco gave over spoiling of the Monuments, and
quickly performed his Rites to his gods, sacrificed an Infant to Saturn, and
drowned a whole company of Priests to appease Neptune. Diod. lib. 13.

ILus when he saw Minervaes Temple on fire, running in haste, took up Pallas's
Image which fell from Heaven, and instantly he was struck blind. A while after
the wrath of the Goddess being appeased, he recovered his sight again. Plutar.
cap. 34. Paral.

PEgasus bearing the Images of Dionysius out of Eleutherae a City in Boetia
into Athens, the Athenians did neglect their god, neither did they receive him
(as the custom was) with pomp. Wherefore their god was angry, and infected the
privy members often he men with a grievous disease. And enquiring of the Oracle
by what means they might be freed from this punishment, had this answer, that
they should receive their god with pomp and honor. And so from this they
carried through the whole solemnities, pikes adorned with green leaves, as well
publicly as privately. Natales Comes, lib. 5. cap. 13.

Japigans did take out the Images of the gods out of the Temples, who
boastingly said it was fit that they should give place to those that are most
potent. And because of that, they were smote with darts and fire from heaven.
And there did appear Darts afar off, which were shot out of the Clouds. And all
their children unto this day are shaven unto the skin, and wear long mourning
Gowns, and are to all, more rare then good men. Athenaeus, lib. 12. cap. 7.

WHen the Aeginetae invaded the Epidaurians, and carried away the Olive Tree
Images of Damiae and Auxesiae, by reason of which the Epidaurians yearly were
constrained to bear the rites to Erictheus at Athens (for by that law they had
granted the Epidaurians power of their Olive Trees) the Epidaurians refused to
let go their bargain; Therefore the Athenians sent a Cart into Aegina to fetch
back the Statues, that they might bring the Images as though they had been made
of their wood, therefore they endeavored with might and main, and ropes cast
about, to draw the Statues into their Ships. But as they drew them, the Images
fell on their knees, and from that time they always remained in that posture.
Moreover, when there was a great Thunder and Earthquake, the Rowers were made
mad, and wounded one another grievously, and slew all, save one that was the
Messenger of this slaughter, who betook himself to Phalerus. Herodotus, Libro 5.

ARtabarus a Persian, the son of Pharnax who had a commission from Mardonius,
for the Circuit of 60. miles, when he rushed into Neptunes Temple, and wickedly
and irreligiously upon his Image, in the siege of the City he was much troubled
with the flux of the Sea, and being constrained to raise his siege, when he
with his Army retreated into Pallenes, he lost a great part of it by the
overflowing Tides of the Sea. Herodot. lib. 8.

PUb. Scipio Africanus Minor, when he had granted leave to his Soldiers to
take Carthage, a certain Soldier going into the Temple of Apollo, did attempt
to bereave the Image of the Golden Vestment: for which thing Apollo being
angry, caused that those sacrilegious hands should be found cut off, among
those fragments of the Clothes and the skirts of the Trunk or body of the
Image. Valor. Max. lib. 1. cap. 2.

Grecians convented and met together in Aulis being to sail to Troy. Agamemnon
going a pretty way from the Army, seeing a she-Goat about Dianaes Grove
(ignorant of Religion) which was in that place, smote it with a Dart, not long
after Diana being angry, sent the Pestilence into his Army, a certain Religious
Woman affirmed that Diana was vexed for the death of her she-Goat, in which she
much delighted, and that she would have punishment of the Army for such a
sacrilegious fact, and that she could not be appeased before he that was the
Author of this wickedness, did sacrifice his eldest daughter, etc. Dictis,
lib. 1.

PAncrates Arcadicus, in inscriptis Marinis operibus, declares the fish
Pompilus, called also Nautillus, is not only in esteem with Neptune, but with
all the gods in Samothrace. When the Golden kind of men as yet lived, Epopaeus,
of the Icarian Island, fishing together with his son, and seeing that he could
catch no other fish but Pompills, he did not refrain from eating them, but he
with his son did eat them all. But shortly after he suffered for his villainy.
For a Whale coming to the Ship, swallowed up Epopaeus in the sight of his son.
Moreover Pancrates does relate, that the Pompilus is an enemy to the Dolphin,
and that they let the Mechi go Scot-free when they have eaten a Pompill, for
they become unprofitable; and being troubled after they have eaten them, the
water casts them on the shore, where they are food for Cormorants and Gnats.
Athaeneus, lib. 7. cap. 7.

Apollo at Delphos, in that part of Parnassus, which is shadowed most with
Woods and Trees. But a Wolf violently killed him sleeping, and afterward every
day, he did make the City resound with his howlings. When the men of Delphos
began to think that it could not be done without some divine providence,
following the beast, they found the Gold which was taken away by sacrilege,
and for the memory of the thing, they dedicated a Brazen Wolf to Apollo.
Pausanias, lib. 10.

SAmbicus a certain man of Eleus (a City of Thrace) together with some other of
his companions, threw down many Brazen Statues, and sold them. Afterward
attempting greater things, he spoiled the Temple of Diana their Guardian. For
her Temple was in Elis (a City of Achaia) which they called the Temple of
Aristarchus. But he being apprehended presently after, when he refused to
betray his companions, he was torn with new devised torments, amongst which he
lost his life. Plutarch. in problemat. Graec.

PHilomelus, who first possessed the Temple of Apollo at Phocis restrained his
hand from the holy things, which necessity did permit him to take. But
Onomarchus which succeeded him, spent much of the Money in War. Phyallus the
third, the brother of Onomarchus, took away a great number of the gifts which
were consecrated in the Temple; to coin Money, to pay his hired soldiers* And
truly having received 120. Golden bucklers dedicated by Caesar King of the
Lydians, which weighed two Talents, he cast them aside to make money, and
likewise three hundred and sixty Golden Cups, which weighed twenty pounds, and
the Golden Images of a Lion and a woman, so that all those things were valued
at thirty Talents of Gold, and all those things which were coined of the Gold,
according to the account of Silver, did amount to four thousand Talents. But
all the Captains did spend the sum of above six thousand Talents out of
silver things, which were consecrated as well by Croesus, as others: that if
the whole value of the Gold and silver were accounted, it would amount to more
then 10000. Talents. But all these were heavily punished for their impiety and
contempt of the Deity. For Philomelus fighting against the Boeotians, the
revengers of sacrilege, being wounded in many places, was shut into a certain
sleep place, whence he could not easily get out (a punishment which sometimes
was wont to be inflicted on Captives); he being afraid, cast himself headlong
thence, and in the same manner, paying a due punishment to the Deity, he died.
Diodorus, lib. 16. Onomarchus having his Army vanquished by Philip the son of
Amyntas, swimming to the ships which were bound for the Athenian shore, died in
the Sea. Phyallus was consumed with a perpetual contagion. But Phalecus which
after all them took away whatsoever was left of the gifts, lived long enough in
fear, and diverse great dangers, not that his fortune might be thereby better
then the other companions of the wicked mischief, but that being tormented for
a longer time, and made more known to many by his misery, he might undergo a
more famous and much mentioned calamity. Being tossed about with very much
wandering, when he did resist Cidonia in Creet, he was stricken dead by thunder.

Fulvius Flaccus did not escape unpunished, because he carried the Marble tiles
that were to mend the Temple of Juno at Lacinium, to the Temple of warlike
fortune, which he made at Rome. For it is affirmed that after this deed he was
not long in his wits, but also yielded up the Ghost, by very great grief of
mind when he heard that one of his two sons (which were waging war in
Illiricum) was dead, and the other dangerously sick. By whose fall the Senate
being moved, took care that the Tyles should be carried back to Locrus (a City
in the uttermost part of Italy which was named Magna Graecia.) Valerius, lib.
1. cap. 2. and Livius, lib. 42.

Persians, under the conduct of Xerxes, came to the most famous Temple at
Delphos with an intent to spoil it, great miraculous things were presented to
their sight. The evil Demons (whose habitation without doubt the same was)
never saw a greater prey of men offered to them, then with that Tempest, they
could appoint the same new superstition to Xerxes, and the whole World which he
took with him. Two Rocks being suddenly smote down from the top of Parnassus,
tumbled down upon the enemies lying under, and broke in pieces many that
resisted. Moreover lightning being cast down from the Heavens with Thunder, and
the holy arms moved out of the inner part of the house of their own accord,
and a braying heard in the next Temple of provident Minerva, did overthrow the
Barbarians suddenly, so that they cast themselves headlong down from the steep
places of the Mountains, as if they were driven with madness, upon whom the
men of Delphos casting stones and Darts made a great slaughter. And by these
various Phantasms, the Temple remained unviolated. Trogus says, that the men
of Delphos found four thousand men, whose whole hands were consumed by
lightning, and the filthy tempest, and at length they proclaimed openly, that
by how much the greater the offense of the gods was than the offense of men, by
so much* they ought to use more sudden and grievous punishment. Diodor. lib. 11.

Thereon King of the hither Spain, was driven with rage to abolish the Temple of
Hercules, which is at the Gades, (two Isles at the further end of Spain beyond
Granate) having furnished his army of Ships with necessaries, the men of the
Isles of Gades came against them, being carried in swift Ships, and battle
being given, it was weighed in an equal balance as yet, but on a sudden the
Kings Ships were put to flight, and therewith being caught with an unexpected
fire; they burned. Very few of the enemies which remained being taken, did
declare, that Lions did appear to them standing on the Decks of the Ships of
the Gades, and suddenly their Ships were burned with beams sent in, such as are
painted on the head of the Sun. Macrob. lib. 1. cap. 20.

Scythians having gone out of their bounds, had spoiled the Temple of Venus
Urania in Ascalon a City of Palaestine (for it was a very ancient Temple) the
goddess smote them and their Children with an effeminate disease, which they
whom the Scythians call Enareas, can only cure. Having enjoyed the Empire of
Asia 28. years, at length being taken to a Banquet by Cyaxares King of the
Medes, they were murdered, when they were merry in their Cups, as it was agreed
upon before. Herodotus, lib. 1.

ALexander, the son of Phillip of Macedon, when he had overthrown Miletum the
best fenced City of Jonia, his pillaging Soldiers thronged into the Temple of
Ceres. But Milesian Ceres revenging the fact, did cast flames of fire, which
did strike the robbers blind. Valerius, lib. 1. cap. 2.

Pyrrhus King of the Epirots returning out of Sicily, passed by the people of
Locrus, he spoiled the Temple of Proserpina notable for much Religion among the
inhabitants of Locrus, saying in derision: Unseasonable devotion is
superstition, and to gather Riches together without labor is Wisdom. But the
day after that he had committed that sacriledg, his Navy being tossed with an
ugly tempest, all the Ships which had the holy Money, were driven to the shore
of Italy. With which misfortune being affrighted, he commanded that the Money
should be sought out, and laid up again amongst the ancient treasures of the
goddess. Neither had he any good fortune afterward. For being tossed with
many mischances, at length entering into Argos, he died miserably. Suidas and
Livius, lib. 9. secundi belli Punici.

Himilco Prince of Carthage (having brought almost all Sicily under his
subjection) besieged Syracusa, he spoiled all the Temples, but in the first
place, the Temple of Ceres and Proserpina. And while he studied how to gird his
Camp, and encompasse his Tents with a wall, he demolished all the Sepulchers
almost at the next Work to build his Wall, amongst which he spoiled the
Monuments of Gelon of Demareta and his Wife, anciently builded with wonderful
work. But in a short time after he suffered deserved punishment for his
sacrilege and impiety so arrogantly committed against the gods. For shortly
his affairs went to wrack, all things being begun to be made worse, and
afterward when courage increased by little and little in Dionysians, and he
was accustomed to weary them with often sallying out, and fight with light
eruptions, they always returned Conquerours at all skirmishes. Also vain
tumults among the Soldiers and sudden terrors were often stirred up in the
silence of Midnight throughout the Camp, by which they did run to Arms in vain,
the cause of it no man knowing, and their Tents being turned upside down with
earthquakes, afterward they perceived their enemies to break out of a bulwark
upon them. A pestilence invaded the Camp of the besiegers in the Moor with a
burning heat, which consumed the number of 150000. Dionysius making use of that
occasion, set fire on his Navy, and drove them to such extremity, that he
compelled the Tyrant to buy a safe return for him and the Carthagenians with a
reward of three hundred Talents, having left and betrayed his companions. Being
returned into his Country, he did lead a life exposed to the reproach of all,
and was so miserable, that he went about the Temples of the City in a very thin
Coat, declaring his impiety, and exhibiting his punishment to the Deity, having
confessed his wickedness against the Gods. Lastly despairing, he killed
himself wilfully, leaving a great fear to the Citizens of violating Religion.
Diodorus, lib. 14.

Delos was heretofore the chief Emporium of all Greece and that only fenced
with Religion, it defended all the inhabitants from the injuries of all others.
But Menophantes a certain Commander of the Armies of Mithridates, who being
driven by the command of the King, or his own insolence, arose against the
Island, and invaded it with his Navy, having neither the defense of Walls, nor
Arms. Where all things being beaten down, taken away, and pillaged, at length
he laid the very City eeven with the ground. In that destruction he cast the
Image of Apollo (proudly being taken from its seat) into the Sea: That, being
brought by the raging of the Sea to the bounds of the Boeotians at Laconia,
named the place Epidelium. But neither Menophantes, nor Mithridates himself did
escape the wrath of the god. For not long after the calamity of Delos, when he
was carried into the Sea, the Merchants which had escaped his hand, slew
Menophantes. But the god compelled Mithridates to lose his courage, having lost
his Kingdom already, and being driven to and fro by the Romans, he could rest
no where. There are some which say that he begged, as a great favor, from one
of the Mercenary Barbarians, to be killed. Pausanias, in Laconicis.

Graecians had dragged out by force, and killed those who came to pray in the
Temple of Neptune, in the City of Helires, a great and sudden Earthquake did
not only overturn the very walls, but also defaced the very foundation of the
City, that there was not so much as any tokens left, whereby it might be known
to future ages. And they record that another such destruction happened. Helires
was encompassed with a deluge of the Sea in the winter season, and the very
Grove of Neptune was so overwhelmed with that inundation, that the tops of the
highest Trees could hardly be discovered: which coming to pass, the whole
City with its inhabitants was suddenly destroyed as well by the most violent
motion of the Earth, as the most abundant overrunning rage of the Sea. In the
fourth year of the Olympiad. 191. Pausanias, in Achaicis.

Lacedaemonians were enraged against the Inhabitants of Ilota, which worshipped
at the Temple of Neptune Asphalius (that is) the safe, as Suidas says, (which
is at Teneros); Sparta was shaken as well with vehement as frequent impulsions
of the Earth, that not one house escaped ruin, except four houses amongst all
the rest which escaped unruined. Pausanias, in Achaicis: et Aelianus, Libro 6.
variae Historiae.

Cytharoedes did dispute in contending for the honor of Juno at Sybarum, for
that was the cause that provoked the Sybaritans to that contentious
disputation, and when they had mutually gone to arms, Cytharoedes fled with his
Stole to the Altar of Juno: but they forbore not to lay violent hands upon him
in that place, but a little after they saw blood sprinkled about the Temple, as
if it had issued out of a continually-flowing Fountain. But when the Sabaritans
had sent to ask counsel at the Oracle of Delphos, they received this answer:
Stand off, my Sacred Tables come not near;
Whose hands are drench't in blood, should Justice fear.
Which fresh distilling, thee forbids to venture,
Into the threshold of my Temple t'enter.
Good fates to them can never be foretold,
Who to stain Junoes Temple dare be bold.
The Muses harmless servant thou have slain,
The god's revenge for which, thou must sustain.
Who perpetrates base wilful facts, may know,
He Is sure to suffer heavy Judgments blow,
Inexorable toth' unjust immortalls prove,
Descended though by birth from mighty Jove.
Who on their necks, and childrens childrens dear,
Justly will heaped vengeance send to bear,
Neither was revenge delayed. For when they waged War with the inhabitants of
Crotonia, they were overcome by them, and their City was overthrown. Aelianus,
libro 1. de var. Histor.

Halesius, near Mantinea, was the Temple of Warlike Neptune, built by
Trophonias and Agamedes, with Oaken boards, forbidding entrance not by the
opposition of any bolt, but only with a small Woollen rope drawn before it,
which had a secret force to drive men away. Never any one entered into this
Temple, besides Aepytus King of Arcadia, who having lost his Son as soon as he
entered into the Temple, he was smitten blind by the sudden force of the
Seawater, boiling out of holy fountains, and not long after died. When the
Emperor Adrianus did build it up again, he did set overseers amongst the
workmen, lest any one should look into the ancient Altar, or suffer any rubbel
to be carried from it to any other place. Pausanias, in Arcadicis.

Lycaeus of Arcadia was the Altar of Jupiter Lycaeus, whither no man could
come. If any one entered despising the Religion of the place, it was certainly
requisite that he must dye within the space of that year. It is a wonderful
thing also that (as they say) as well men as beasts, which by chance come into
the circuit of this place, have no shadow of their bodies. And truly a Hunter
cannot follow wild beasts that fly thither, but standing at the entrance, he
cannot perceive any shadow that they have. It is certain that the men of Syena
a City of Aethiopia, do show no shadows from their bodies at that time of the
year, when Cancer is in Conjunction with the Sun. But in this Lycaeus it does
happen in any part of the year. Pausanias, in Arcadicis.

THey report that in Cerynaea a City of Achaia, was the Temple of the
Eumenides, dedicated by Orestes. They believed that if any one entered in hither
to see it, polluted either with slaughter, or any incest, or kind of impiety,
he being troubled in mind, would presently be cruelly terrified. Wherefore the
entrance of the Temple was forbidden to all that strived otherwise. Pausanias,
in Arcadicis.

Erisichthon a certain Thessalonian had cut down the Grove of Ceres, she sent
to him perpetual hunger, and caused that he should never be satisfied with
meat. He had a daughter named Mestra, very well skilled in Witchcraft, whom he
often sold, being turned into diverse forms of living Creatures, which running
away a little after, would return to her father having taken her former shape,
and so she helped her fathers hunger according to her ability. Lastly, he was
driven to so great hunger, that he eat his own flesh. Natales Comes, Mythol.
libro 5. cap. 14.

Cambyses King of the Persians, came to the Theban Egyptians, he sent fifty
thousand to destroy the Ammonians, and commanded that they should burn the
Oracle of Jupiter Ammon. Therefore when they had gone seven days on their
journey along the sands, and dined between the City Oasis and the Ammonians; a
strong South Wind overwhelmed the whole Army with heaps of Sand carried along.
He being gone against the Macrobian Aethiopians with the rest of the Army, when
having scarce finished the fifth part of his journey, wanting Victuals, he
returned to Memphis. Where when the Egyptians did make Holy Day for the
Apparition of Osiris; (in the shape of a Bull) he supposed that they had done
it for his disgrace, as if they had reproached him for his misfortune: he
killed the Priests and Egyptians playing, he wounded the Bull of Osiris, by
which wound afterward he pined away. A little after he killed his brother
Smerdes, and his Sisters, suffering punishments worthy of his wickedness.
Herodotus, Libro 21.

Persians burned the Anactorian Temple of Ceres in Eleusis. Afterward, when
they were conquered at Plataea (a City of Baeotia) by the Graecians, with a
very great slaughter. Not one of the Persians was seen to enter the Temple of
Ceres, which was there, nor lying about the Temple, as if the goddess did
drive away those, who had destroyed her Temple. Herodotus, Libro 9.

SUidas does rehearse, that there was one Anagyrasion a quick spirited man, (so
named from the place Anagyrus in Attick) who, because an old man, his
neighbor, cut down his Grove, thus revenged himself. The Concubine of the old
man, cast a raging love upon his, who when she could in no wise penetrate the
breast of the young man with the sense of her love, she voluntarily accused him
before his father, that he did not cease to appeach him of Whoredom. His
father being persuaded by the Woman, did throw his son headlong from the top of
the house, and killed him. Afterward repenting his deed, he hanged himself.
Lastly, the woman cast her self into a Well. He does write the Author of this
thing, Hieronymus in opere de Tragaediarum Scriptoribus. Hence arose that
Proverb; Anagyrum commoves.

Erasmus:

AESculapius grieving that a great part of a Grove, which was dedicated to him
at Coos was cut down by Turulius one of the officers of Antonius, to make his
Ships, but in that wicked service the parties of Antonius being overcome,
Turulius was condemned to die by the command of Caesar, who brought him to the
place which he had violated, and caused, that being slain there, by the
Caesarean Soldiers, he might suffer for the same destruction and overthrow of
the Trees; (whereby the force of that Deity was made known) and that he might
obtain freedom to those that were yet standing from the like injury.
Afterward the god increased his worship, which was had always in very great
esteem among the Inhabitants. Valerius, libro 1. capite 2. Lactantius, libro 2.
de Origin erroris, capite 8.

POllux Onomastici libro 5. writes that amongst the Athenians, (...), that is
to say, Virgins of Diana, were wont to be consecrated or initiated before they
were marriageable, there was a Law decreed at Athens, that no maid should be
given in marriage to a man (...), that is to say, unless she had performed
those sacred rites to Diana, which they used to solemnize in the Month of
January. Libanus in his Oration which he made in praise of Diana, shows that
the Virgins used to put on a garment which they named Crocota, being of the
color of Saffron, and that they were not to exceed the age of ten years, nor
under five, Diana was thought to be pleased with them, who for the like
occasion, seemed to conceive some anger. They report that there was sometimes
in Athens a Bear which was made so tame, that she was nothing at all offensive
to any, but did freely feed here and there at her pleasure, wandering about, no
one receiving any hurt thereby. It happened that a young maid playing somewhat
too sportively with the Bear, who enraged therewith, suddenly and violently
snatcheth her: which her brothers seeing, threw fiercely with Darts, and killed
her, for which cause the pestilence began to rage abroad about the Country
thereabouts. The Oracles being consulted, the gods answered, that the sickness
would not cease unless they compelled some Virgins (...), that is, for the
destruction of the Bear, to kill some Virgins in the honor of Diana. Caelius,
lib. 26. cap. 19.

Tanagrean Boetians had a Temple dedicated to Mercurius Creophorus for that
Mercury did avert the Plague, when they carried about the Walls a Ram, for
which cause he appointed that he who carried the Ram should be attended by
Tanagrean pipes, or music; he of the young men who was esteemed by all to
excel the rest in beauty, in the feast day of Mercury, carrying a Lamb upon
his shoulder, went round about the walls with it, which was a most present
remedy against the Plague. Pausanias, in Boeticis.

Numa, the pestilence which raged all about Italy, wasted Rome also; The
Citizens struck with fear, deliver a brazen target sent down from heaven by
divine power; Hereupon they tell the King wonderful stories, that they
received of Aegeria at Camene, and that those arms were sent for the safety of
the City, and that they were to be kept with an eleven more, which were to be
made of like figure amplitude and form, that no thief for his profit might be
able to invent the similitude being heavenly things, and that he ought to
consecrate the field at Camenes, and the Meadows lying about it, where they for
the most part met with him, and that they should consecrate the Well which
watered the field to the Vestall Virgins, the water whereof does purge and
water all penetrables. To these having given credit, they tell that the disease
presently departed. Plutarch. in Numa.

PHalesius a private man builded the Temple of Aesculapius at Naupactum from
the foundation. On a certain time the God which was worshipped at Epidaurus,
sent Anites a Noble woman, to him, when he was very sick, and almost blind, to
make Verses, with signed Tables. The woman seemed to her self to receive them
in a dream. But the thing was proved by the event. For when she was awake, she
held the sealed Tables in her hands. Therefore when she came to Naupactum, she
bid Phalesius to look upon the letters having taken away the Seal. At first he
thought that a blind man could not see the letters. But being in good hope that
Aesculapius had sent him something to cure him, unsealing the Tables, he looked
upon the wax, and forthwith he perceived himself to be eased of the calamity of
his sight. Pausanias, in Phocicis.

SEsostres the King of the Egyptians being dead, his son (which Herodotus
calls Varro) receiving the Crown, and taking his Fathers name, he in no wise
imitated the glory of his Father. But was afflicted with the same misfortune as
his Father. For being blind, either by the common nature of his Father, or, as
some say, for his impiety against Nilus (into whose belly he threw a Dart) he
was compelled to fly to the assistance of the gods, and having made diverse
sacrifices to appease the Deityes, for a long time he had no help. After ten
years he received an answer, that the god which was worshipped in Heliopolis,
being appeased, he should look upon the face of a woman, which knew no man
carnally besides her own Husband: so beginning from his own Wife when he had
many, he found none that was uncorrupted, besides the wife of a certain
Gardener, whom he took to Wife after he had received his sight, but he burned
all the rest in a certain Village. Which place the Egyptians afterward
called, The holy Turf. But he giving thanks to the god of Heliopolis according
to the Oracle received, he erected two Obelisks of one stone, eight foot broad
and an hundred high. Diodorus, lib. 1. cap. 4.

Adrian the Emperor being very sick, that she was admonished in her sleep by
the gods, to exhort him, not to kill himself, although he seemed to languish
under a tedious disease, because in a short time he should receive his health.
The same woman did put out her own eyes, because the health of the Prince did
not answer in time according to her report. Lastly also, she was admonished to
kiss the knees of Adrian, and wash her eyes with the water which was in the
Temple, and having followed the advice of her dream, she presently received her
sight. In like manner a certain man being come from Pannonia, which was blind
from his birth, having touched Adrian, obtained his sight, and Adrian was
restored to his former good health.

AMasis King of the Egyptians, married a Wife, (which some would have to be
the daughter of Battus, the son of Archesilaus: others, of Critobulus, a very
honorable man amongst his people) by name Ladices, with whom when he lay in
bed, he could not perform his marriage duty, as when he made use of other
women. When it was so a long time, Amasis said to her, Thou, O Wife have
bewitched me, and therefore thou can not escape by any policy, whereby thou
might not perish by the worst death among all women. When Ladices could not
appease Amasis by denying it, she vowed (within her self) to Venus, that if
Amasis might copulate that night with her, she would send an Image to her at
Cyrena. Her wish being granted, Amasis copulated with her, and afterward as
often as he lay with her, he performed his matrimonial duty, and afterward he
loved her dearly. And Ladices performed her vow, having made a Statue, and sent
it to Cyrena, which remained whole till the time of Herodotus, being placed
without the Cyrenensian City. Herodotus, lib. 2.

Milo Epirota, had cast a spear at Laodamia the daughter of Pyrrhus, which fled
to the Altar of Diana, as to a defense, the goddess revenging her, he ran mad,
whereby he died within the space of 12. days.

Jupiter Ascraeus, a herd of Goats belonging to Helicarnassus being brought to
the Temple, stood, and the prayers being ended, one of them, (no body guiding
it) went forward till he came to the Altar, which the Priest taking,
sacrificed. Apollonius, de Hist. Mirab.

Boeotia they think that Hercules does shut and open the Temple of Ceris
Micalessia every night. Moreover they put all the Apples which Autumn brings
forth, at the feet of the Image, and they remain very fresh the whole year.
Pausanias, in Boeoticis.

Nyssaenes between Tralles and Nyssa, not far from the City, by name Achrata,
where is a place belonging to Pluto, encompassed with a sumptuous Grove. Also
the Temple of Pluto and Juno, and the Den of Charon, admirable by nature, which
is above the Grove. They report that sick people that desire to be cured by
these gods, do go thither, and tarry in a Village near the Cave with those that
are skillfull in the holy things, who sleeping, receive cures for them in their
dreams. The Priests calling for the remedies of the gods, do oftentimes lead
them into the Den, where remaining as in a Cave, they spend many days fasting
and sleeping: sometimes those that are sick, do receive health in their own
Dreams, by the guiding and advice of the Priests. Strabo, lib. 14.

EPidaurus a City of Peloponesus, being ennobled by the famousnesse of
Aesculapius, who (as the ancients write) has cured diverse kinds of diseases.
But the Temple was filled with a multitude of sick people, and Tables hanging
up, in which the diseases that were cured were written. In the same manner it
was in the Island Coa, and likewise in Trica. The City was situated in the
innermost Closet of the bosom of Saronicus. Strabo, lib. 8. The same Strabo
writes that there was a famous Temple of Aesculapius at Tetrapolis, which City
was inhabited by the Jonians and Carians. That Temple was full of an
innumerable convention of sick people, troubled with diverse diseases, and the
walls were every where covered with painted Tables, wherein were written the
diseases and names of them which were cured by that god.

THey record that there is a Temple of Minerva Ilias, in which Dogs are
nourished, to whom it is given naturally, as also by some certain knowledge, to
fawn upon the Graecians when they come, but follow the Barbarians with barking
wheresoever they show themselves. Coelius, lib. 23. cap. 30. Antiq. lect.

Hercules of admirable structure in the beast-market of Rome, into which (they
relate) neither Dogs nor flies can enter. As no bird can enter into the Temple
of Achill^s before Borysthenes. Alexander ab Alexand. lib. 2. cap. 14.

Pallas at Methon, a City of Peloponnesus, Diomedes dedicating an Image,
because before that, he received damage by most violent Winds in those parts,
blowing very unseasonably, which presently after ceased, when they prayed to
the goddess, and afterward no such calamity came upon the Inhabitants. From
whence she got the name Minerva. Coelius, lib. 20. cap. 24. Antiq. lect.

Greece was troubled with a continual drought, and the rest of Greece was no
less distracted for want of rain, which was without Isthmus, than all
Peloponnesus; they sent to Delphos, that they might know by the Oracle the
cause and remedy of the calamity. There Pythia answered, that they must appease
Jupiter, but they must make use of Aeacus to sue for them, so that he is
willing to obey. Therefore when they had received that answer, they sent out of
every City, to entreat Aeacus to undertake the entreaty. He, having finished
the sacrifices to Jupiter, and offered the vows, replenished all Greece with
abundance of rain. For the memory of the thing, the Citizens of Argos, did
erect statues for the Ambassadors. Pausanias, in Corinthiacis

Aristomenes of Messene, is worthy to be seen in a College of Messene, (a City
of Achaia in Greece) which they say in good earnest, is not empty, and a
monument set up for honor of the body not present. For although he, being
driven from the Spartanes, died in banishment, yet by the command of Pythius
Apollo, his bones were carried back into his Country, and such things were
ordained to be holy. They bound a Bull which was destinated to the Altar, to a
Pillar not far from the Tomb. He, being mad, and raging because of his bonds,
did strive to go away. Which if the while the Bull moves nimbly, and danceth
according to that, it is ominous to the Messenians: but if on the contrary, the
Bull shall stand immovable, they interpret that it portends some calamity to
them. The Lacedaemonians report the Heroic Aristomenes to have been at the
Leuctrican fight 187. years after his death, who assisting the Thebans against
them, wrought so, that he afflicted them with a great discomfiture.
Pausanias, in Messenicis.

Pachinum, a Promontory of Sicily, Apollo Lybistinus is worshipped with great
devotion; for when the Lybians were about to invade Sicilie, their Navy having
arrived at the Promontory, Apollo being invocated by the Inhabitants, sent the
Plague amongst their enemies, and destroyed almost all of them with sudden
death; whereupon Lybistinus was added as a surname to him. Macrobius, lib. 1.
cap. 17.

Persians, Xerxes leading them to the Chapel of Minerva, which stands before
the Temple of Delphos, as they came thither, upon a sudden a Thunderbolt from
Heaven fell amongst them, with the two heads of Parnassus, being rent from the
rest of the Mountain, with an horrid noise tumbled down, and intercepted very
many of them; whereupon from the very Chapel of Minerva came most joyful
vociferations and jubilations. The Barbarians committing themselves to flight,
departing from Delphos, they published their great discomfiture; those which
escaped of them, fled to Boetia, reporting, That two armed men more noble then
any of humane nature could possibly be, pursuing them. These two they said were
Natives, and Heroic men at Delphos, the one Phylacus, the other Antonius, the
Temples dedicated to them being there to be seen; That dedicated to Phylacus,
stands by the way above the Temple of Minerva; and that which was dedicated
to Antonius, near Castalia, under the whirlpool Hyampeum. Herodotus, lib. 8.

Sabine War which was waged against the Romans for ravishing the Virgins, The
Romans made haste to shut the gate which was at the foot of the Viminalian
Hill, (which afterward by occasion of what happened, was called the gate of
Janus) because the enemies did rush upon it; after it was made fast, flew open;
and when again and again the third time the same thing happened, more armed men
came to the threshold of it, because they could not shut it, to make it good
against the enemy. And when the enemies fought most fiercely on the other side,
it was presently given out, That the Romans were overcome by Tacitus; for which
cause, which defended the gate or entrance of the City fled. And when the
Sabines had made an irruption into it through the gate, it is reported, that
from the house of Janus, by this passage, the great power of torrents
scattering water all about broke out, burning the great and vaste numbers of
their enemies with scalding waters, and devouring them with rapacious gulphs.
Macrobius, lib. 1. Saturnal, cap. 9.

THe holy sheep of the Sun; which are at Apollonia in the bosom of Ionicum,
which in the day time feed along the River side, which flows out of the
Mountain Lacmonen through the Apolloniatan field into the Sea; and chosen men,
honorable by birth and Riches amongst the people, keep them lodged in the
night in a Cave not far from the City, the people every year making new
election, for that the Apolloniatae by a certain Oracle were brought to put an
high value upon the Sheep. There a certain Gentleman called Evenius chosen to
take the care of looking to the Sheep, upon a time fell a sleep, and Wolves
entering into the Cave, killed sixty of them; which when the Apolloniatae
understood, they condemned him to the loss of his eyes for sleeping when he
should have watched: upon execution of which sentence, their cattle ceased to
bring forth young ones, and the earth to yield her fruit, and they had Cattle
at Dodona and Delphos. The Prophets being asked the cause of this present
evil; answered, because they had unjustly deprived Evenius the keeper of the
holy sheep of his eyes, and that the Wolves were sent by the gods, and that
their punishments for this wrong should not cease till he was satisfied by
those who had perpetrated this wrong to him whatsoever Evenius himself
conceived due satisfaction; and then that the Gods would so bless them, that
they would find themselves happy. The Apolloniatae keeping these Oracles close,
chose certain Citizens to perform them, who come to Evenius sitting in a
station for the purpose, and sitting down with him, discourse of other things,
at last came to speak of the miseries of the times; which making as an
introduction to speak of his wrong, they demand of him what mulct he would wish
the Apolloniatae to undergo for his full satisfaction, who having not heard of
the sentence of the Oracle, said that he desired two mannours which he
conceived the greatest revennues belonging to the Apolloniatae, and a house
which he knew to be the best in the City: the Citizens presently assented, and
telling what directions they had received from the Oracle, and buying the
Mannours of the Owners thereof, gave them to Evenius, who presently thereupon
obtained divination from the gods, whereby he grew famous. Herodotus, Libro 9.
cap. 7.

Pilappii inhabit that furthest part of Scandinavia, bordering upon the frozen
Sea, and almost enclosed with the Sea; These neither till the ground, nor
nourish any cattle, but the Tarandus or Buff which they make use of in the
Winter when the waters are glazed, and all things made stiff with the Frost;
for they live by hunting and fishing, and they have ever hitherto worshipped
wood and stones; when they went on hunting, fishing, or began any other
business, having used certain adjurations, they endeavor to move out of their
place their gods which they consult; which if they easily perform, they
conceive they favor their enterprise, and promise success; but if they cannot
move them without much trouble, they think their success is denied; and if they
cannot possibly move them out of their places, they conclude, that their gods
are offended; And therefore they think they are to be appeased by a certain
sacrifice, which they order in this manner; They have a brazen vessel, wherein
are the pictures of all kinds of four-footed Beasts, of Birds, and Fishes,
which are common and plentiful amongst them; they have the image of a Frog
made of brass annexed to a piece of Iron fastened to the middle of the vessel
like a plumb; afterward using adjurations, they beat upon the vessel, and into
the picture of whatsoever creature the Frog does thereupon fall or leap, as
soon as the frog had but touched it, they procure a living creature of that
kind; they kill it, and hang the head thereof upon a Tree which they account
holy; the rest they cook or dress, and consume with their friends which they
call about them; and according to their sacred rites, (as they think) they
anoint themselves with that wherewith the host is boiled; such holy rites
finished, (as they say) they have learned by experience, such things they
undertake, succeed prosperously. Olaus Magnus.

Of Sathan's wonderful Legerdemains, Deceits, and Impostures, used, for the
setting up, and establishing Idolatry, by Invocation of Saints departed this
life, worshipping of Statues and Images, and for confirmation of the doctrine of
Purgatory, contrary to the preaching of St. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
THeodosius the Emperor, unjustly suspecting John Damasne, a Monk, of
betraying the Secrets of the Empire to the Persians, with whom he had been
prisoner, punished him with the loss of one of his hands; he therefore
imploring help of the blessed Virgin, as he was before her Image, had his hand
restored, and perfectly united to his arm in the sight of many, though it had
for many days been fixed to the doors of the Church. Fulgosus, lib. 1. cap. 6,

NIcephorus, lib. 15. cap. 23. relates, That a certain Jew of the
Arch-Synagogue was taken as the Author of a tumult, raised at Constantinople in
the time of Leo the Emperor, and condemned to fearful torments, in the midst
whereof he cried out with a loud voice, O God of holy Sergius, help me! holy
Sergius, thou have known me and mine innocence. The Judges suspecting, what he
spoke to be cunning dissimulation, condemned him to be burnt; who when he was
in the midst of the flames, there appeared two horsemen arrayed in white robes,
who for many hours kept him preserved and untoucht by the fire; which the
people with much wonder beholding, at length, running into the flames, snatched
him away.

Levinua was carried through the Towns and Garrisons of that part of Flanders
which lies to the Seaside, those who were sick of the Palsy, deaf, lame, and
troubled with other diseases, were suddenly cured. And two Wax Candles, put out
by the wind; as soon as they were brought to the bones of the dead Virgin,
kindled by virtue thereof. Jacobus Meyer, ex scriptis Dryonis tunc temporis
Morinorum Episcopi.

Martin the fourth, (who had been warlike enough) and recovered their former
health, by using such devotions there, as were then used at the Sepulchers of
the dead. Platina.

Ladislaus King of Hungary was carried, the keepers thereof sleeping, and the
beasts feeding, without any inforcement went to Varidinum with such celerity,
that the keepers could not keep company with it, neither could any man by any
means possibly stay it; As they were committing the body to the Sepulcher, the
face of a certain man (which they say had a loathsome smell) turned toward his
back, and hanged upon his shoulder, having tried many ways for help, and
finding none, comes to the Sepulcher, and cries out with a loud voice, O Holy
Ladislaus, I have wronged thee, holy Prince forgive me: And, the incensed
divine power appeased by his humble and hearty veneration, his chin was brought
to its proper place, and he perfectly restored. Bosinius, lib. 4. Decadis, 2.

Prague in Livonia, by the persecution of the Abdeberti, losing a finger for
the faith of Christ, the executioners or cutters off of his finger, threw it
into a River in the Country of the Vandals, in which Country he had often
preached; which a fish presently swallowed; whereupon the fish shined with a
circle of glaring flame: the Fishers espying it, and taking it for a wonderful
portent, after great industry used to catch it, at last obtained their desire;
and having taken out the bowels of the fish, they found the finger shining with
a glaring light. Idem, lib. 1. Decadis secundae, historiae Ungar.

GEnarius of Beneventum having his head cut off for professing the faith of
Christ, it and his blood put into a Vial, were kept in two several Churches;
and when they were both solemnly carried through the City, the blood which was
congealed into a ball; when it did but touch the head, dissolved into as fresh
blood as it was when it flowed from the Martyr at his decollation; and when it
was taken from his head, it congealed again into a round form as it was before:
And that we might be more assured of the truth hereof, we had the testimonies
of them who were diligent observers, and eyewitnesses of the same. Fulgosus,
lib. 1. cap. 6.

VAlens the Emperor, an Arrian, when he would have translated the Head of John
the Baptist to Constantinople, could not possibly get the Coach wherein he had
put it, to be moved or stirred, and therefore was forced to desist and leave
off his undertaking; but Theodosius, an Orthodox Christian, did afterward with
much facility translate the very same head. Fulgosus, lib. 1. cap. 6.

Otho and Philip, Emperors, the bodies of eleven thousand Virgins, three of
them Kings, were seen to return to the Temple of Colonia, from the Abbey of
Fuldenses in Thuringia, whence they had been translated from Colonia. In the
morning betimes, whilst they sung the Psalms appointed by the Church for
nocturns, the Abbot and Monks of that Monastery saw the bodies of the three
Kings going out of the Temple, which not long after were found in the Temple of
Colonia, whence they had formerly been translated, Idem, ibidem.

John, a devout giver of alms, was dead, a certain woman for three days
together continuing at his Sepulcher, weeping, for that she feared lest a
writing (which she had delivered to him, and wherein was contained a great sin
which she had committed, and which she had declared unto him) should come to
the hands of any body that should know and divulge it; the Eleemosynarian
appeared to the woman, and delivered the schedule sealed, in which the former
writing was blotted out, and written instead thereof, For my servant John's
sake, thy sin is blotted out. Metap. in vita ejus.

German called Conradus, repenting heartily of his sins, comes to Rome,
Hildebrand then Pope, commands him to wear instead of a shirt, a covering
next his skin, tied together with five chains stamped with letters, containing
a catalogue of his sins, and commands him to visit the holy places all the
world over, and there to pray for pardon, that he might have remission of his
sins: he obeys; and traveling long and far, not omitting in his pilgrimage to
visit Jerusalem, at length he comes to Hungary, where he visiting the
Sepulcher of the holy King Stephen, in the Church called Alba Regalis, and
having humbly cast himself down in prayer, before the Altar, from the first
hour to the ninth, being seized on by sleep the Kingly Saint appears, saying,
Rise quickly my friend, thou can not by my merits or help, obtain pardon from
the Tribunal of Almighty God, but go yonder to the Monument of my son Emericus,
who by his Virginity procured great favor from Almighty God; whereupon he
calling on the name of that Saint, found, that the chains wherewith he was
tied, fell all in sunder, and the stamps which were set upon them clean gone,
so that they appeared plain; insomuch, that there could no sin of his be
read, there not remaining so much as one small letter. Ever after, this Temple
was visited with such devotion, that innumerable Votaries came to it from very
remote places. Bonfinius, lib. 1. Decad. 2.

Turks at Nicopolis, in the time of Sigismund the Emperor, when many went into
the field where that battle had been fought, they heard a voice amongst the
bones of the dead, sounding forth the names of Jesus Christ the Savior of the
World, and the Virgin Mary; and looking amongst the dead corpse, they espied out
a head, which said, Why stand ye gazing so stupidly here? I am a Christian, who
was slain here before confession, and therefore my sins are not yet expiated;
the blessed Mother, Mary, causes that I am not afflicted with eternal
punishment, and has so preserved me, that I have yet my speech to confess my
sins, and declare my mind to the holy Apostles; wherefore I pray you send for a
Priest to receive my confession, and give me absolution. He being asked, How he
had deserved so great favor from the Virgin? answered, She was my peculiar
Patroness all my lifetime, seven Feasts every year all my lifetime I celebrated
in honor of her, and did most strictly fast, eating nothing but bread and
water the eves of all those Feasts; of all my Patrons and Patronesses she was
chiefly relied on by me. A Priest from the next Town being sent for, he making
an exact confession, received absolution; whereupon silenced, he rested in
peace. Bonfinius, lib. 3. Decad. 3.

MErcurius, a certain Hungarian, brought up at the Albensian Temple, when the
King, Ladislaus, had commanded the Tomb of St. Stephen to be searched, to see if
any of the Relics were taken away; being all alone, having retired himself
into the holy Quire, with a doleful countenance, and sad heart, bewailing, that
he could not so much as see, much less obtain a kiss of the sacred body; a
young man in the dead of night appeared to him, who was beautified with
incredible comeliness, having a most cheerful countenance, and arrayed in
white apparel, carrying somewhat wrapped in a fine cloth, said to him, Mercury,
receive what thou have so earnestly desired, and be sure highly to esteem this
precious gift committed to thy trust, keep it with care and diligence, and view
it when time servs. The sacred Nocturns devoutly finished, Mercury going to a
private place, opens the cloth, and finds the right hand and ring of the holy
King; shortly after, he being chosen Governor of a Monastery, built of wood,
situated at the foot of the hill Carpathius, which divides Transylvania from
Hungary, neither daring to trust himself, nor any one else with the hand, he
hides it in the ground, and appointed every day some of the Monks to watch it,
lest any man should steal it away. Then that Monastery sought to King
Ladislaus, to be of the order of the King's hand, by whose Edict, the Pope's
consent obtained, it was so established; Then the whole College of Priests
declaring to the King the whole story hereof, he repairs the Monastery, so that
he made it most beautiful to behold, and endowed it with great revenues in the
year of grace, 1078, and now they call it, The Abbey of the King's right hand.
Bonfinius, lib. 1. Decad. 2.

Bruno, Bishop of Hildesia, was solemnizing the Octaves of the Nativity of the
blessed Virgin Mary, she appeared to him in the Temple, to whom the Bishop
falling upon his knees, cries out, O Queen of Heaven, wherefore vouchsafest
thou to come to me, a wretched poor man? To whom she answered, I rejoice that
thou art the author of the solemn celebration of the memory of my Nativity,
whereby such honor accrueth to my Son. Which said, she vanished away: From
this time ever after, the Octaves of the Nativity of Mary were kept holy.
Chron. Saxon.

Nicolaus, a familiar friend to the Treasurer of the Bishop of Quincclesia, as
he was coming to the King Uladislaus at Buda, where he sometimes used to
reside, saw in the Air a great light, which dazzled his sight, and with the
noise thereof making an hideous clashing, stupefied his hearing; he was so
affrighted, that he fell to the ground surprised with the strangeness thereof,
and looking up toward heaven, he saw the shape of the Virgin, with her Son,
having a glorious shining circle about them in the Air, steering their course
toward Buda, and that he at that very instant showed it to a certain stranger,
called Boennus, and his Wife, and to his own Carter, to be taken notice of with
reverence, it being the very day that was appointed for celebrating the memory
of the Conception of the Virgin Mother of God, which the Hungarians ever after
observed with more devotion than formerly they had done. Sabellicus, lib. 1.
cap. 1.

SAroltha, the Wife of Grisa, Duke of the Hungarians, being great with child,
saw Stephen the first Martyr, who appearing to her said, Woman, trust in the
Lord Jesus Christ, and assure thy self, that I by Divine commandment am to
inform thee, that thou shall shortly be delivered of a gallant and fortunate
son, who shall enjoy the Diadem of the Kingdom of Pano^ia; and he shall be so
excellent a man, that Panonia shall never have the like after him to their
King: and whereas I am Stephen the first Martyr, who shall assist thy son, let
him have my name. Which spoken, he vanished away. Saroltha, confirmed by her
dream that these things should come to pass, accordingly commanded holy
devotions to be used at all the Altars of the Protomartyr; and in the year 909
the child was born. Bon. l. 1. Decad. 2.

Nicolas Tollentinates told by an Oracle, what issue they should have, vowed a
pilgrimage to Barium, where when they had continued long at their devotion in
the Church of the Saint who is there worshipped; by chance, or rather
providence fell asleep, wherein they were instructed with an unthought-of
advertisement, and their former hopes of issue much increased, by assurance of
success to their vows and solemn devotions, nor were their prayers in vain,
for greater and more blessed rewards followed then the heart of man could
presume, that of unholy Parents, a Saint should be born. Sabellicus, lib. 1.
cap. 1.

HAldricus the Leodiensian Bishop was afflicted for about a whole year with a
Canker, and could receive no hopes of help from Physicians. Wherefore he
commanded his servants to carry him to the Temple of Martin. Where, when for
seven days together he had with sighs and tears continued his devotion before
the Altar wearied, he fell asleep, and dreamed that he saw Martin and Briccius
together, discoursing concerning his sickness, and that Martin signed his
forehead with the sign of the Cross, and with a staff which he carried in his
hand touched that part of him which was diseased. Therefore being awakened, for
joy he cries out with a loud voice, to whom his servants (wondering at the
noise) run with speed, and removing the cloth wherewith the sore place was
bound, found that it was whole, and that there only remained a scar in the
place where the Canker had been. Fulgosus, lib. 1. cap. 5.

Brundulum an holy Temple of Saint Michael, unto which one Temple the people of
Clodia, Matemancum, and the Venetians themselves came with great Zeal to do
their devotions. It happened also that at Senogallia, a certain man called
Sergius, a Prince in wealth and Authority, was afflicted with a grievous
disease, who heard a voice in the night, which said, if he would make a vow to
visit the holy Temple of Saint Michael, he should recover his health. Whereupon
he made a vow, and according thereto leaving his Country soil, visited the
Temple, and bestowing great gifts upon it, returned home to his own house being
freed from his sickness. Egnatius, lib. 1. cap. 6.

JOhn Orphanotropus brother to Michael Emperor of Paphlagonia the Physicians
despairing of his cure, in his sleep he saw Nicolas the Great, who admonished
him to go to Myra, assuring him that as soon as he came thither, he should
recover his health. He therefore speedily repairs thither, where deservedly
bestowing upon the Clergy of that place, Ointment and other rich and precious
gifts, and encompassing the famous City of Myra with a most strong wall, he
returns home perfectly cured of his disease. Cedrenus.

HEnry the second, Emperor, when he took with great pain an exact view of the
Cities of Apulia, was so miserably infested with the stone, that almost all men
despaired of his recovery, but he sustained his sickness with so great
patience, judging it to be as a rod of correction for his sins sent to him from
Almighty God, that as he ascended the hill Cassinum, desiring the intercession
of Saints, Saint Benedict, and Saint Scolastica; for Physicians could do him no
good: He saw, in his sleep, Benedict standing by him, and with a Knife to have
opened his privy members, and took out a great stone, making the wound whole,
and putting it into the Kings hand, who awakened from his sleep, seeing and
perceiving the great miracle, called his guard to him that they might fetch his
Prince, to whom he showed this great miracle, which transcended humane capacity
and belief, together with the scar of the incision, out of which the stone had
been taken. Therefore giving immense thanks to the most good, great, and
immortal God, and giving to the Temple of Saint Benedict, most great gifts and
offerings, and endowing it with great possessions, and yearly rents near
adjoining thereunto: He departed from Cassinum. Cuspianus.

MAnuel a Captain under Theophilus the Emperor, who had disapproved the
worship of Images, and then wavered in his Judgment concerning the same, fell
into a grievous sickness, insomuch that it was verily believed he would dye
thereby, certain Monks of the Monastery of Studium, to whom it was showed that
he was dying, came to him, and approaching to his bed side, found by his
breathing that he was yet alive, and delivered to him the joyful tidings, that
he should recover his health; how can this be, says he, speaking with a weak
and low voice, the faculties of his Soul being much weakened, and his body
dried up with heat, the Monks answered, All things are possible with God,
therefore if when he should recover his health, he would endeavor that Images
might be restored according to the decrees of the Ancients, they assured him
that he should be restored to life and health: which when they had with much
certainty declared, they departed. In a short time after, his sickness was
assuaged, and, his natural faculties restored to their former strength, he was
altogether freed from his sickness. Cedrenus.

Julian travayling with much haste toward him then in Persia, being forced for
want of an Inn, to go somewhat out of his way to a Church which was near,
reposed himself all night therein, whether sleeping or waking, he knew not: he
saw in the night many of the Apostles Congregated, complaining of the
contumelies and disgraces of the Emperor cast upon the Church, taking counsel
amongst themselves, what was to be done; and having deliberately spoken of it,
and many things more, they appearing as it were perplexed, two of them rising
up in the midst of them, advising them to be of good cheer, making have to
destroy the Empire, they left that counsel or conference. The man who had this
admirable Vision, neglecting the journey he had begun, that he might see the
issue of his Vision, stays another night, and sleeps in the same place, and
sees the same assembly; to whom upon a sudden, they which the night before went
to fight against Julian, came in, as returned from their journey, and declared
to the company, that Julian was dead. Sozomenus, lib. 6. cap. 2.

NAuglerus, lib. 2. Generatione decima-tertia, reports that Basil Bishop of
Caesaria Cappadocia, by reason of Julian his threatening to destroy Caesaria as
he returned from the Persian War, proclaiming a fast to be kept for three days
in the Temple, to implore the help of Almighty God in the Church of the Virgin
Mary, after finishing whereof, he saw in his sleep Mercury a Soldier lately
dead; who by the command of the Virgin Mary, killed Julian, and that the arms
hanging over his Tomb were gone thence: and the keeper of the Church demanded
what was become of them, said, he knew not, but did affirm by Oath that they
were there the last evening; Basil therefore returning to the Hill, called
others up, and told them that Julian was dead, and going with them to the
Sepulcher of Mercury, found his lance restored to the place it used to hang
all bloody. But Hermanus Gyges, in storibus temporum, reports this in the time
of Julian, not by Basil, but Blasius a certain Bishop of Cerastenses.

EDward the third, King of England, having almost reigned his twenty fourth
year, there was a Ring brought him from Jerusalem, by certain men who came
thence, which he long before had privately given to a poor man, who obtained it
as an alms which he sought for the love that the King bore to Saint John the
Evangelist: and not long after falling sick, having learnt the most absolute
virtue of a Christian, which is contentedly to resign his Soul to the most
great and glorious God, he was buried in the Temple of Westminster, and shortly
after canonized a Saint; The ring was long after kept with great veneration in
the same Church, which was a present cure to all infeebled and weak members of
Men and Women, and by the touch of it the falling sickness was cured, hence it
came to pass that the Kings of England were wont on Good- Friday with many
ceremonies to hallow the Ring, the which whosoever put upon his finger, should
never be troubled with this disease. Polydor. lib. 8.

THe Statue of Saint Paul, an old piece, which Andronicus Comnenus Tyrannus
adorning with Gold, placed in the Church of holy Quadraginta, which wept when
the time approached that Andronicus was destroyed; Andronicus hearing thereof,
commanded his servants to find out whether that were true: to which service
besides others, his beloved servant Hagiocristophorita Stephanus by stairs
ascended (for the Statue was in a high place) and wiped the eyes thereof with
fine linen, whereupon tears more plentifully fell from them, as if they had
flowed from a spring, which with great amazement he told. Andronicus struck
thereupon with great grief, often shaking his head, he said; Paul wept for the
great destruction that is to come to himself, for he accounts it his own cause,
for he most cordially loved Paul, and did infinitely esteem his sayings, and
was as well beloved by Paul. And not long after, hanged up by the heels, he
expired his life by horrible torments. Nicetas, lib. 2.

LEo the fifth of Ironomacum, his Mother, as it seemed to her, saw in the
Temple of the Virgin Mary at Blachernes, a certain woman; her son apparelled
in white, following her, and the floor of the Church being besprinkled with
blood, another woman carrying a Spear in her hand, commanded a vessel to be
filled, and to be given to the Mother of the King; which refused by her, she
said to her, Thy son destroys and gluts himself with the blood of all that
worship we; wherefore I and my son are not without cause moved with wrath
against him. The Mother of the King affrighted out of her sleep, presently
declares what she had by Vision, and earnestly desires him to desist from the
persecution of Images: But he, like the deaf Adder, stopped his ears, though he
was somewhat afraid, and the more, for that the dream of another was declared
to him: For Tarasius the Patriarch appeared to a certain man, calling
vehemently upon one whose name was Michael, that he should go to Leo, and kill
him, in revenge of them, whom most impiously and cruelly he had put to death
for their Religion. And not long after, while he was in the Temple at divine
service, he was slain by the conspiracy of Michael Traulus. Cuspinianus.

BArdus Durus, a little before his destruction, dreamed, That as he was making
haste with the Emperor Michael, to the solemnization of a certain holy day, to
the great Temple, whither when they approached near, they followed certain men
apparelled in white, who led them to Seats about the Tribunal, wherein they saw
a certain old man sitting alone, whom he thought to be Peter, chief of the
Apostles, at whose feet Ignatius was cast down, whom a little before they had
severely bound and castigated in revenge of the wrongs he had done: moreover,
Peter delivering a sword to one of them who stood by, commanding that
Theorgistus (for so he called Caesar as obnoxious to divine wrath) should be
placed amongst those who stood on the left hand, and cut in pieces, and
Asebotecnus; by this name he deciphers that Emperor as an impious son.
Cedrenus.

A^brose the Mediolanensian Bishop, the bodies of the Martyrs Gervasius and
Protasius, it not being known to that day, where they lay, they appearing to
him in his sleep, such as when they were found. So at Jerusalem in the seventh
year of the reign of the Emperor Honorius, it appeared to Gamaliel Lucianus a
Priest, by dream, where the body of Stephen the Protomartyr, and the bodies of
the sons of Abiba lay; nor did he give credit to his dream or Vision, till the
same was thrice presented to him in his sleep; and then seeking for the bodies,
he found them in number and form according to his Vision, the Church keeps a
holy day for the invention of Stephen at this time in testimony hereof.
Fulgosus, lib. 1. cap. 5.

SOzomenus gives a large narration, how Pulcheria, sister to Theolosius found
out the forty Martyrs, which suffered under Lucinius at a certain placed
Sebastes, in Armenia, whose relics as by digging she caused to be searched
for. Thirsus the Martyr appearing to her, suggested and admonished her to
translate them to him; and afterward the forty Martyrs in a military habit
splendidly apparelled, manifested themselves to her. Sozomenus, lib. 9. cap. 2.
Nicephorus says, that Stephen the Protomartyr appeared to Pulcheria, whose
relics when the Citizens of Constantinople desired to take away and keep with
them, he says, the Mules which drew the Coach, wherein the relics were spoke
with a voice like to men.

Calemorus, belonging to the Nice-President, Chophares near Eleutheropolis in
Palestine, the Prophet Zacharias, who taking into a certain Orchard, showed the
places dug, wherein his relics lay. Sozomenus, lib. 9. cap. 8.

Venetians, That it was not for a long time known in what place the body of St.
Mark lay, and that it was either by divine power translated from the place
wherein it had there layn, or was stolen away; but upon public warning of a
solemn day, set apart to fast and pray, and observation thereof accordingly,
the Citizens following the Clergy to the Temple of the Saint, they say this
miracle happened, that an arm rising out of a side of the Church, appeared to
the anxious and solicitous multitude; whereupon with great joy they remove the
body, and lay it in a more honorable place; moreover, it was decreed, that it
should only be lawful for the Prince, and Procurators of the Temple, to come
to the most sacred Tomb of St. Mark. Sabel. lib. 3. Ennead. 9.

SAint Benedict appeared to Pope Urban in his sleep, and said, Doubt not but my
body rests at Cassinum; and for a testimony of the certainty hereof, thou
rising with thy brethren to perform the office of the Church for Nocturns,
shall be cured of the Plurisie wherewith thou art now afflicted. The event
proved directly according to the Vision. Chronicon Cassinense, lib. 4. cap. 5.

BAsilius Macedo, who afterward obtained the Empire of Constantinople, when he
was a child, lost his father. His mother much afflicted with poverty, resolved
by her labor in service to maintain her self and son, coming to Megalopolis at
night; because poor woman, she wanted wherewithal to defray her charges at an
Inn, she went to the Church of Saint Diomedes, and being wearied with her
travel, fell asleep; the holy Martyr that night appeared to a certain Deacon of
that house (which had not yet taken the orders of a Priest) in a dream, and
commands, that he take into the house the King which lay out a doors, in a
ditch close to the porch of the Temple; The Deacon awakened with his dream,
went out and finds Basil, a young youth asleep, and thinking it a sleepy
phantasm, returned into the Temple, and falling asleep again, he was again and
again awakened with the same Vision, wherein he was strictly admonished, that
he should fetch in the King; therefore at length he goes to Basilius, and
raising him from his sleep, courteously invited and led him into the Temple,
and helped him to all necessary accommodation, whereof he then stood in need:
This Deacon had a friend and kinsman at that time, a servant to Theophiliza,
who for his affinity was familiar with the Emperor Michael and Barda Caesar
his Uncle by his mothers side; this Deacon declares to his brother the vision
he had seen, and desires him, that he would help this Basil, whom according to
the command he had in his vision, entertained into the service of some Prince,
who preferred him to his Lord Theophiliza; and presently these two brothers
tell the dream to Basil, and bind him by oath to requite what kindness he had
received from them, when ^e should enjoy his Kingdom. Cuspinianus, ex Zonara
and Cedreno.

ELfred, King of England, heavily afflicted with the loss he received by the
victory of the Danes over him, Bishop Chulbert appeared to him in his sleep,
saying, England is justly scourged for her former sins; but Almighty God looks
with mercy and compassion upon the meritorious prayers, sufferings, and tears
of his distressed servants and Saints: thy Kingdom is with much cruelty
extorted from thee, but after a short time of affliction thou shall be
gloriously restored, and firmly settled in thy Land; and this shall be the sign
of the certainty of what I tell thee, Thy fishers shall this next day come to
thee laden with infinite store of fish; And, which increases the Miracle,
though the waters be frozen, so that humane reason cannot possibly hope for any
such thing, and the coldness of the weather is such, that it seems a most
ridiculous thing to endeavor to catch fish; yet what I say, shall come to
pass, and when thou art in prosperity, remember thy deliverance, and the
messenger thereof; his mother had the like Vision, both of them awaking, tell
their dreams, and immediately the fishers come to them with abundance of fish.
Vincentius, lib. 24. cap. 40. ex Holinand. Et Willielmus, lib. 2. cap. 14. de
gestis Anglorum.

Hungus, King of the Picts, a Christian, was to fight with Athelstane King of
England, in aid of the Scots; in the night, the Armies both of Hungus and
Athelstane, saw in the Firmament a shining cross in the form of St. Andrews
cross, resembling the Greek letter ch, which was cause of fear and terror to
them. But Hungus warned by a dream, encouraging his Soldiers, assured them,
that the cross was a sign of Victory to them; which accordingly came to pass.
Cardanus, lib. 13. de rerum varietate, cap. 81.

EDgar King of the Scots, being about to fight against Donaldus, was admonished
by a dream, that he should bring with him the standard of St. Cutbert;
therefore having performed some accustomed holy ceremonies and devotions, he
took the standard out of the Monastery, and the Soldiers belonging to Donaldus
forsaking him, he was taken without sedition or blood shed. Cardanus, ibidem.

ULadislaus and Geysa, brethren, as they were setting their Army in order to
fight a battle against Solomon, King of the Hungarians, an Angel was perceived
by Uladislaus, to put a crown of gold upon the head of Geysa; who as soon as
his brother informed him thereof, vowed to dedicate a Temple, in the place
where he should obtain the victory, to the blessed Virgin; and the Enemies
being overcome, deliberately advising concerning the same, where hard by a
Church dedicated to St. Peter, behold, a Stag which had a most remarkable head,
with broad interwoven horns, upon whom most shining shapes appeared, he made
toward a Wood, and there stood at gaze, where the Temple was afterward built,
the Soldiers following after the Stag, and seeking with their arrows to shoot
him, he fled into Danubius, and was never afterward seen. Ladislaus much taken
with this wonderful sight, says, No doubt but this was the Angel of God; but
what was that appearance of a face in his horns? presently says Geysa, They
were not horns, but wings; nor shapes of bright faces, but most glorious
shining feathers; but where he stood at gaze, is the place wherein we are
directed to build the Temple; wherefore hard by the Church of St. Peter, they
built a Temple to the blessed Mother. Bonfinius, lib. 3, and 4. Decad. 2.

THe night before Theodosius joined battle with Eugenius at the Alps, he
dreamed, as Paul Diaconus and Nicephorus write, that two men gloriously
apparelled in white, sitting upon white horses, commanded him to begin his
battle by the break of day, for it was decreed by Divine providence, that he
should victoriously overcome his enemies; and that they declared their names to
be John the Evangelist, and Philip the Apostle, and that a certain Soldier had
the like dream, is reported by Theodoretus, lib. 5. cap. 24.

MAssaclerus sent by the Emperor Honorius against Gildo to regain Africa from
his brother, who ambitiously affected the Empire, in his sleep dreamed, that he
saw the Mediolensian Bishop, Ambrose, (a dead man long before) with his
pastoral staff to strike the ground thrice, and thrice to say, Here, even in
this very place. And the next day, Massaclerus with much facility overthrew
Gildo. Fulgosus.

Antioch, Andrew the Apostle appeared to a Priest, named Peter Pontius, one
endued with simplicity, void of fraud, and showed to him the Spear which
pierced our Savior's side, which lay buried in a Temple dedicated to St.
Peter; upon finding whereof, the besieged City, oppressed with famine, were so
far encouraged, that they made a gallant Sally, whereby they overcame Corbana
who besieged the City by command and advice of Belfech Turca King of the
Persians, he being encouraged thereunto by divination, gathered from the flying
of birds; the Bishop of Nicene carrying the Lance which had pierced our
Saviors side, amongst the Troops of those who sallied out in array against the
besiegers. Emilius.

Romans and Rossians, those who came from Constantinople to John Zimisca,
auxiliaries to the Emperor, did by divine providence assist the Romans: for as
it is reported, a storm did violently beat in the faces of their enemies, and
furthermore a mighty horseman was seen of many, who running amongst the Romans,
broke the Ranks of the Enemies; and it appears it was Theodore, for that a
Religious Woman of Byzantium, dreamed the night before that fight, that she saw
the Mother of God with a great company, who said, O Theodore, thy dear friend
John, and mine too, is in a great strait, being now in battle. Wherefore bring
him speedy help, she told her dream to certain honest friends of hers, who
observing the time, found that it was the very night before the last day of
their fighting. Ut Zonoras, Tomo 3. indicat.

ARiulphus Duke of Spoleto, fighting against the Romans at Camertes, and
obtaining Victory, inquires of his Soldiers who it was that behaved himself so
stoutly and gallantly in the battle; they answered, 'twas a Prince: Whereupon
he replies, he was more powerful then any mortal man, for when ever I was
assaulted fiercely by the enemy, he with a Buckler defended me from their fury:
then going with all possible speed to Spoleto, seeing the Temple wherein the
body of Saint Sabinus is intombed, he asked what Church it was; when they
answered, It was the Temple of Sabinus, he hastily leaps from his horse,
calling his Soldiers, who as they say always waited diligently upon him,
walks into the Church, and seeing his Image, he presently with an Oath affirmed
'twas he that protected him from the violent assaults of his numerous enemies;
whereupon 'twas presently believed that Sabinus was the most pious Patron of
Soldiers. Ariulphus would not for any thing have wanted the experience of this
Protection of Saints, which is so frequent amongst Christians. Bonfinius, lib.
8. Decad. 1.

Sfortia for the honor he bore St. Leonard, Christened his Son which he had by
Catella Alopa, sister to Pandulphus Alopus, after his name, for that he dreamed
he saw Leonard in the same shape he is usually pictured in Churches, coming to
him being a Prisoner with relief, breaking the Iron bars of the window of the
Prison, and with his power loosing his shackles. The event proved this Vision
to be very true, for the day following this blessed dream; Jacobus Gallus King,
by sedition was driven out of the Neopolitan Kingdom, and lost both Rule and
Liberty, and Sfortia was delivered out of Prison, and to the great content of
all was restored to be Master of the Horse. Jovius, in vita ejus.

Ferdinand first King of Aragon, the City Neopolitane in a most flourishing
condition, and the Kingdom free from all calamity, it is manifest that
Cataldus, about a thousand years before that time, an holy man had been Bishop
at Tarentinum, and that the Citizens thereof did worship him as their Patron,
in the midst of the night, he again and again appeared to a Minister of holy
things, who had lately taken the order of Priesthood, having been educated
amongst those who vow chastity, that he should without delay take out of the
ground a little book which he in his life time had writ, and hid in a private
place, wherein some divine writings were, and bring it to the King, giving
little credit to this dream although he saw him in his sleep very often, and
always of the same shape and fashion; being all alone early in the morning in
the Temple, he plainly appeared to the Priest with a Mitre, in such Bishops
weeds as he used in his life time to be aparrelled in, advised him, as he
desired to avoid great punishment, that the next day without further delay, he
should dig for the Book which he had written, and which was hidden as he had
formerly showed him by Visions, and bring it to the King, the Priest and people
went the next day to the place, wherein for many ages, this little book had
been hid, and found it bound with a leaden cover, and locked, wherein it
appeared, that the destruction of the Kingdom, miserable calamities, and sad
times were at hand, whereof the King was warned we have learned by experience
that this Prophecy was fully executed, and showed it self to be so divine, that
not long after Ferdinand himself, either by the justly incensed wrath of
Almighty God, or other inscrutable causes of his divine will, could avoid what
he was so fully admonished of, but in the very first appearance of War,
departed this life, and Charles the eight King of France, with a strong hand,
having an huge Army of Neopolitans, invaded the Kingdom: and Alfonsus the
eldest son of Ferdinand, after his fathers death, having but newly undertaken
the government of the Kingdom, was thereof deprived, basely running away, and
dying in flight as a banished man; shortly the second son of Ferdinand, the
hopefullnesse of whose youth had endeared him to all men, to whom upon the
death of his brother, the Kingdom fell, was entangled with a miserable and
fatal War, died of an immature death in the very flower of his age;
afterward, the French and Spaniards obtaining the Kingdom, divided it,
chasing away Frederick, another Son of Ferdinand the elder, with a larger Army,
wherewith they invaded the Kingdom, took to themselves all, whether holy or
profane, plundered Towns and Cities, laying all waste, committing most vile
and filthy immanities. Alexander ab Alexand. cap. 15.

JAmes the son of Zebedee appeared to Charles the Great, three seve^all nights,
and did exhort him to drive out of the Country of Spain, in which his body
rested, the Saracens; and assured him for his labor and travail therein, he
should obtain an everlasting crown. Henricus Erphordiensis ex Turpino Romensi
Episcopo refert. cap. 68.

Florence, assured of the expedition of the Normans into France, carry the body
of Saint Benedict to Aurelia, conceiving it a more safe receptacle from the
Enemy, at the coming of the Normans, they burnt the Abbey of Florence, and
laid it wast, the night following, Saint Benedict appeared to Count Sigillosus,
to whom the care and defense of that Monastery was cammitted, and in a Vision
heavily chideth him, because he had not resisted the Normans, when they fell
upon the Monastery. The Earl awakening, presently fell to his arms, and with a
handful of men pursues the enemies laden with plunder, following them with a
swift course, fiercely falls upon them, and by the help of Saint Benedict,
kills them every man, and redeems all the Prisoners and booty. Robertus
Ganquinus, lib. 5.

CHildebert being King of France, the Arch-Angell Michael again and again
admonished Anbertus the Abrencatensian Bishop, that wholly in the Sea, which by
reason of his eminency is called his Tomb, he should build a Church in memory
of him; requiring such veneration to be given him in the Sea, as was exhibited
to him in Gorganum: in the mean time a Bull which was taken by a Lion, was
found bound in that place. Whereupon the Bishop was commanded the third time,
that he should lay the foundation of the Temple, where he should find the Bull,
and as he should observe the ground beaten with the feet of the Bull, he should
draw the compass of the Temple which he built in honor of Saint Michael, and
from that time, as in the Mountain Gorganum formerly, in that place also now in
danger of the Sea, the worship of the Angel was begun. Sigebert, Anno Dom. 799.

AGnes Wife to Leopold Marquess of Austria desired her Husband to design some
place wherein to build a Monastery that the praises of Christ and his Mother
might therein be said. From a Castle seated in the Mountain Cecium over against
Danubia, a gentle Western wind snatched from the head of Agnes a vail, and
whirled it into a Wood hard by, which when Leopold nine years after in his game
of hunting, found undecayed, being as fresh as when 'twas lost, in that very
place he built the Monastery desired by his Wife. Cuspianus, in Austria.

Caesar busied in diverse Wars, the Longobards conspired and entered into
covenant by oath, to be subject to Conrade only; to the reducing of whom to
obedience, Caesar came to Mediolanum, (where the Bishop thereof had as it were
the Government) and besieged it: during which time, most fearful thunder there
stupefied and terrified the people, and (as it was reported by them) the Bishop
and others saw in the Air (whilst that tempest lasted) Ambrose threatening
cruel miseries to Caesar; to be short, the Subburbs being burned, the Emperor
removed his siege in the year of our Lord, 1013, and left them to the enjoyment
of their covenant, according to the account of Sigebertus, 1039.

COlomannus, King of the Hungarians, resolving with himself to destroy by fire
Jadera, a City of Dalmatia, for her frequent revolts, dreamed, that Nicolas who
in times past had been a Bishop of the Jaderensians, appearing to him, (for the
wickedness which he in his mind had determined) caught him by the hair of the
head, and scourged him heavily with a golden whip; insomuch, that awaking, he
both felt and saw the marks of his beating. Therefore though Jadera was a City
given much to seek after innovations, he winked at their folly, and suffered
them therein without molestation. Bonfinius, lib. 5. Decad. 2.

SAint Bernard coming to Spira, read in the Statue of the blessed Virgin these
consecrated Inscriptions; Oh Clement, O sweet, oh holy Mary, mother. Then
presently as they report, a voice out of the Statue said, God save you,
Bernard. But he suspecting the Legerdemains of the Devil, answers, Paul
forbids a woman to speak in the Church. They say, this Image remains to this
very day behind the walls of the Temple of Spira.

MEdericus, an Abbot at Edunum, put his cloak upon a Monk, burning with
libidinous cogitations, whereby he was delivered from that misery, and the
Devil, the provoker thereof, was heard, departing from him, to howl; and the
Monk afterward, according to his vow, continued undefiledly firm and constant,
freed from so much as the least itch or lust of uncleanness. Another brother of
the Society, gathering together, and taking the relics from the table of
Medericus, repressed the unquietness of his restless wandering mind; whereas
formerly he had by the instigation of the Devil, been so far deluded, that he
could by no means possible stay in the Church, but always before Divine
Service was done, he ran out of the Church. Marulus, lib. 5. cap. 7.

GEnovepha, when upon the Sabbath about the time of Cocks crowing, coming into
the Church of Saint Dionysius, the Torch which was carried before her, was by
chance put out, the Virgins in her company being much troubled thereat, lest
they should thereby suffer filthiness or horror, she commands the Torch to be
delivered to her; which as soon as it was but touched by her sacred hands,
lighted of it self; which, carried to the sick and languishing, cured most of
them. Bonfinius, lib. 5. Decad. 1.

Leo the fourth quenched a fire by the sign of the cross, which had long raged,
destroying many houses of the Saxons and Longobards, and was making toward the
Church of Saint Peter, when he extinguished it upon the eighth day from the
Assumption of the blessed Mother of God, which day ever after was kept holy,
not far from the Temple of St. Lawrence without the walls.

Calixt, there was such an huge and exceeding fire, having consumed almost all
the City, and imminently appearing to be ready to seize upon the Monastery, the
Monks took the corporal of the Challice, which thrown into the fire, it most
miraculously was forced to retreat, not daring to proceed further; besides, the
Citizens saw a certain hand which drove back the fire from the Monastery. The
violence of the fire had no power at all to burn the corporal, or do it any
hurt at all. Chron. Cassinense.

WHen, for fear of the Normans, the relics of Martin were translated to
Antisiodorum, the Monks disagreed amongst themselves; some of them contending,
that the Temple should be called Martin's Church; and others, the Church of
Liborius, who had first been worshipped there; whereupon, a leprous man is
placed betwixt the Statues of the Saints, and prayers are made with great
devotion, that they would exercise their power: whereupon a voice out of the
Tomb of Martin, says, Thou art made whole by me from thy Leprosy on the one
side, the other I leave to my brother Liborius to heal; for strangers ought
always to be honored. Then the sick man urning himself to Liborius, his other
side was immediately cured. Platina, in vita Stephani.

Jerusalem, brought a small part of the towell wherewith our Lord wiped the
feet of his Apostles before his last Supper, to Cassinum; It not being believed
by many, certain men, superstitiously desiring to prove the truth, cast it upon
hot burning coals: whereupon it presenly put on the color of linen; but as
soon as it was taken out of the fire, it received its former form. Chron.
Cassinense, lib. 2. cap. 34.

Bononia, a Cock was dressed, served up to the table, and carved with much art,
one of the guests said, It is impossible Saint Peter should restore this Cock
thus carved, to life again; immediately upon his words, the Cock leapeth up,
restored to life, and clapping his wings together, scatters the broth which was
in the dish, into the faces of them who sat at the table; the blasphemer was
immediately punished with an hereditary Leprosy. Vincentius, lib. 25. cap. 64.

Alexandria, a very religious man, had a certain Philosopher to his neighbor,
named Evagrius, addicted to the Grecian superstition, who had been
Schoolfellow to the Bishop; this man, the Bishop desiring to convert from his
foolish worshipping of false gods to the says of Christ, called him often to
him, and disputed with him; but the Philosopher more and more averse to the
Christian faith, (as it is reported) spoke to the Bishop in these words; Verily,
reverend Bishop, besides other things, which I dislike of your opinion, I can
by no means approve of the judgment of you Christians, who say, That the end of
the world is to be, and that all dead bodies shall then arise, and that every
one shall have reward at the last for every good deed which he has done; he
that moved with mercy gives to the poor, lends it to God, and shall receive
it an hundred fold, and life everlasting. The Bishop, excellently affirming and
proving, that nothing of the Christian Religion was vain; Evagrius departed not
yet fully satisfied in his mind: But after a while, Amighty God joining with
the Bishop's doctrine, he believed, and was baptized; and being rich, he
brought to the Bishop three hundred pounds in gold, to distribute to the poor;
but upon this condition, that he should give it under his own proper hand in
writing, that Almighty God would restore it. The Bishop received the money, and
giving him a writing under his hand, (as he desired) divided the money amongst
poor people that were in great necessity. The Philosopher having for some years
led a godly life, lying upon his deathbed, commanded his children, that when
he should be dead, they should put this writing into his hand, and so bury him;
which being performed accordingly, the Bishop the third night after in his
sleep saw Evagrius, who spoke to him thus; Reverend Bishop, come to my grave,
and receive thy writing, for my debt is paid me an hundred fold; but that it
may more plainly appear to thee, I have subscribed it with mine own hand. Early
in the morning the Bishop sent for his sons, and when he perceived by them that
the writing was buried with Evagrius, he went with the Clark of the City to the
Sepulcher, which opening, they found the Philosopher sitting, and reaching out
his hand with the Paper in it: which when the Clarks would have received, he
refused to deliver to any of them; but to the Bishop extending his hand, he
delivered it, and so lay in his Sepulcher in peace, the Bishop showing openly
the writing in the sight of all men, thus newly subscribed; Evagrius the
Philosopher, to the most holy Bishop Sinesius, My very good Lord; Know holy
Father that I have received an hundred fold what I delivered to you; and
therefore I have sent you this writing with my hand and name subscribed, to
show that I can require nothing from you. Which when it had been read to the
people, he commanded the scedule subscribed by the hand of the Philosopher, to
be safely set up and kept in the Library. Cedrenus.

Constantinople, in the Monastery of the holy Mother of God, in the Church near
the Sepulcher of Holy Sopina, the Image of the blessed Virgin Mary holding an
Infant in her arms which Saint Luke had limmed in a table in the life time of
the Virgin Mary, was placed. This picture is called Odigatria; that is, a
leader or conducter, because she appeared to two blind men, and led them to her
Church, and there restored to them their sight: the Citizens of Constantinople
besieged by the Saracens upon a Tuesday made procession with this Image the
whole day throughout; fasting, praying, and fighting; at the same time, a
certain Citizen advised them that they ought to fetch that Image, and all of
them unanimously to pray to her in this manner. Holy Mother of God, who have so
often delivered us, now save us from the enemies of thy Son; If it be thy
pleasure, thy Image should not be drowned in the Sea, overwhelm the enemies
therein, which when he had said he privily thrust the Image under water, and
there holds it, and immediately thereupon there arose such a violent storm that
drowned some, and broke into splinters the rest of the Ships of the Sarazens,
so that they were all destroyed.

EVagrius out of Procopius tells us that a Citizen of Adessa, in despair to
defend their City against Cosroes the Persian, sent the picture or Image of
Christ which he himself had made, to Abbagarus: who when the City was ready to
be taken, drew the Image to the ditch of the City, and threw it into the water,
against the enemies piles; Which done, the works of wood, and heaps which
Cosroes had made for his foot-Souldiers to go upon, being presently burnt, were
reduced into ashes.

Nicecius the Lugdunensian Bishop; Aigulphus coming from Rome, brought some of
them with him, which a Priest bestowed upon him, which giving to one in a
draught of cold water, who was visited with a Fever, he presently recovered
his health. Gregorius Turonensis.

cap. 84. de gloria Confessorum, tells us of a wonderful Revelation of
Valerius the Cosoranensian Bishop: he says that Theodore, the Bishop finding
two Sepulchers, and doubting whether belonged to Valerius; watching a whole
night, he invocated Valerius that he would please to declare and manifest to
him the place wherein he was buried, taking two Vessels of Wine and placing
them before the Sepulchers, he said, which of these two shall be augmented or
fuller with Wine, it will thereby appear a manifest testimony, that the
Sepulcher of Valerius is placed by it: the day following, he found one of the
Vessels running over with Wine, which was placed by the Tomb of Valerius.

Ebronius Master of the Horse in France, that at the Sepulcher of Leodegarius,
Miracles were wrought, he sent a Soldier thither to search out the truth of
the report, who spurning the place with his feet; says, My Wife does miracles
as my breech sings: which done, ever after as often as he spoke, he farted, and
stunk most abominably. Martinus in Chronico feria sexta id maxim sieri solitum
ait; and that thereby the Woman his Wife became so resolute a Christian, that
she was afterward a Martyr; and that King Pipin sending for the Woman, and
inquiring of the truth hereof, was fully satisfied, that it was according to
this relation. Vincentius, Book 23. Chapter 159. Et Epherdiensis, Chapter 59.
referunt.

ULadislaus first King of the Polonians taking to Wife Judith, daughter to
Uratislaus King of Bohemia, who having been long barren, advised by the Bishop
of Cracovia, sent Messengers to the Monastery of Saint Aegidius in the Province
of Narbo, where the body of that dead Saint lay, with magnificent gifts,
whereupon there was a time set apart for three days fast, which the Monks were
to observe, and spend in prayer to Almighty God, that for the merits and
intercession of his gracious servant Aegidius, he would grant an heir male to
the Princess. The third day of their fast, it was revealed by Vision to a
certain pious Monk, that Almighty God had granted what they had with so much
zeal and devotion desired; the Messengers therefore, sent away assured hereof,
when they returned, found the Princess great with child, who afterward was
maturely brought to bed of a gallant young Prince, to whom they gave in Baptism
the name of Boleslaus. Judith four Months after died, who gave, being a most
bountiful and pious Lady, all the Jewels, Moneys, and estate in her power to
bestow, to the relief of the poor; and the adorning of Temples whilst she was
living. Cromerus, lib. 5.

Vedastus the Attrebatensian Bishop was translated from the place, wherein
times past it was laid, a blind man, named Audomarus, desired of Almighty God
by prayer that he might see the bones of the Saint, and forthwith he received
his sight, and praying shortly after, if his sight did any way hinder the
health of his Soul, that his infirmity might return, he was again struck blind.
Merul. lib. 5. cap. 4.

MEthodius, Patriarch of Constantinople, was pursued with much hatred by his
enemies for his worshipping of Images, who corrupting a notorious common Whore
with a sum of Money which they gave her, caused her to accuse him that he had
ravished her, and that before the chief of the whole Senate: all which he bore
with admirable patience, till they ordered that the Holy man, before Manuel and
many of the chief of the Senate, should be admitted to no other purgation, but
having spoke some few words removing that part of his clothing which covered
his privities, he should show his members to them, which done, they appeared
withered and mortified, whereby it was obvious to all men that he was utterly
incapable of Venery; which to the Orthodox was great cause of rejoicing, and of
sorrow to Sycophants and calumniators: And when the Holy man was asked whether
sickness had been the cause that his members were so weakened, not without a
modest shame he answered, that in time past when he lived at Rome he was by the
Devil instigated to the lust of the flesh, by the often burning flames of
love, which daily growing and increasing in him and he fearing lest he should
lose his resolved continency and chaste life, he invocated the holy Apostles
Peter and Paul, that they would help him in this combat, and praying
incessantly to this purpose, In the night, says he, in my sleep I saw two men
standing by me, one whereof touched my privy parts with his hand, saying to me,
Be of good heart, thy fire of lust shall be suddenly assuaged, who seemed so to
burn my privy parts, that with the extreme pain thereof I awaked: Rising from
sleep, I found my privities enfeebled, and almost mortified, from which time I
was never troubled with fleshly lust. Cuspian.

AGatha, Virgin and Martyr, after many torments which she suffered by Tyrannus,
for that he could not move her from her steadfast faith, caused her breast to
be torn in pieces, and afterward cast her into prison woefully hurt and
wounded, being visited by the Apostle Peter, on purpose to cure her, she
conceiving him to be some Surgeon that came to her, refused his help, and said,
The Lord Jesus is my Physician, who by his only Word is able to cure all my
infirmities, and I have never in my life used any worldly help or Physic to my
body. Then the Apostle Peter declaring to her who he was, and that he was sent
by our blessed Savior to her, leaving her made whole, and cured of all her
hurts and wounds, vanished from her. Marulus, lib. 5. cap. 4.

Philip Diodorus about the year of our Lord, 1182, when there was a deadly War
betwixt the Rothomagensian King, and the Earls of St Aegidius, and no possible
humane means could put an end thereunto, a certain poor man named Durandus, of
an obscure place named Podium, a Carpenter by Trade, working in a Wood, the
Mother of God appeared to him, and gave him a small piece of parchment, upon
which was pictured the Virgin and her Son; and in the margent thereof was
written in Latin, Lamb of God grant us peace. He enjoining him, as he said,
that he should declare the same to the men in arms, and that he should command
them to put an end to their civil and unnatural War, and that in the Name of
Almighty God, credit being given to his speech, and a peace concluded, there
were many Images made in imitation of his, which those that carried in their
hats, securely and safely without hurt, fought in battle, and likewise were
upon their march or journey refreshed thereby, as much as if they had all
necessary provision, they supplying the want of all. Fulgosus, lib. 1. cap. 1.
continuator Sigesberti.

DAgobertus, son of Clotharius the second King of France, being very young,
pulled from Sadregifillum, an excellent and worthy Nobleman, who was designed
by his father to be prefect of Aquitane, his honorable ornament belonging to
his place, and grievously beat him, for that he conceived that he had not that
reverent observation from him which belonged to the son of a King, being
offended in the first place, that he set himself frequently over against him at
the Table when he feasted, and that forgetting his Majesty by wine, he took
from his hand the cup, which is not used but amongst equals, and freely drunk
in it. Whereupon the Nobleman went presently to the King, and showed to him his
deformed mouth, and lacerated back, with the fresh marks of all his blows:
whereat being enraged, he commanded, that his son should be taken and brought
to him; the young man fearing the anger of his father, flees, and from one
secret place to another, absconds himself from his fury: at last, the King
having but one only son, and thinking with himself, that he had done
sufficient Penance for his offense, by his long fear and flight, resolves to
forgive him, and be reconciled to him; those whom the King sent to Catullarus,
Governor of the Parisians, who were to fetch his son out of the Cave wherein
he absconded himself, when they came thither, were taken with such fear and
horror, that the hairs of their head standing upright, and all the parts of
their bodies trembling, they had no power to go into the Cave; his father
supposed, that they, to gratify his son, who was to reign after him, were
unwilling to perform his command, lest his son should be angry with them: and
therefore he presently pronounces his son's pardon, that they might go into
the Cave to fetch him to him. In this place, far in the ground, lay buried the
bodies of the Martyrs Dionysius Rusticus, and Eleutherius, which to that day
was not known to any man, who appearing to Dagobert in his sleep, advised him
to vow the building of a Church there, which he afterward performed, bestowing
upon it great endowments, and magnificently adorning it.

Basil the Great, supplicating him to pray to Almighty God for the forgiveness
of them; he accordingly imploring remission of her sins, all were blotted out
of the writing, except one more grievous then the rest; wherefore the woman was
sent to Ephem the Hermit; but by reason he was dead, she returned (having as
she conceived, labored in vain) to Basil, who understanding that he dyed that
day, after the woman's abundant pouring forth of tears, he putting the paper to
the breast of the dead man, who was laid upon the ground, finds, when
presently he took it away, that the remaining unblotted sin, when he there put
it, was now clean blotted out. Marulus, lib. 1. cap. 16.

Winton in England, in the year of our Lord, 975, Elferus, Prince of the
Marches, defended the married Priests against the Monks, which observed the vow
of Virginity; the Monks not able to defend their cause by Scripture, used the
assistance of Dunstane Archbishop of Canterbury, who not being able either by
Scripture to maintain, That Priests ought to vow Virginity; therefore all his
endeavors to confute them, they esteemed in vain; at length during this hot
contest, the Image of Christ hanging upon a wall, spoke words to this purpose;
They are mistaken, that take part with the married Priests; by which Miracle
most men were satisfied, that the chaste Monks were in the right; others
thought, that this Image was caused to speak by magical incantation, as they
said: whereupon the married Priests inviting Eltheredus the Bishop out of
Scotland, who whilst he and they were vigorously defending their cause against
the Monks, the room falling upon their heads, most of the Priests were slain,
and the rest hurt, but Dunstane standing upon a beam of the room, was preserved
from hurt, and the Monks were likewise safe and sound, whereby Dunstane
received victorious honor. But it was said by many, that this came to pass by
witchcraft. Mamelburiensis, lib. 2. Ranulphus, lib 6. cap. 11. Polydorus, lib.
6.

CLodoveus, King of France, converted to the Christian Faith, by the advice of
his Nobility, raised a War against the West Goths, not only because they had
incroached some of the Territories of France, but for that they were also
assertors of the Arrian Heresy; when therefore Clodoveus was strenuously
opposed by his enemies, and put into some danger by battle, he promised by vow,
that he would offer to St. Martin his horse whereon he rode, if he obtained the
victory; he was not unmindfull, when he had overcome his enemies, of his Vow,
but resolving to give an hundred pieces of gold in lieu of his horse toward
the adorning of St. Martin's Temple, his horse would not be moved out of the
place wherein he stood, till he gave two hundred, and then his horse moved as
freely as ever; whereupon the King merrily said, I see Saint Martin is ready to
help in distress, but strict in requiring the full value of what is vowed.
Johannes Magnus, lib. 16. cap. 2.

Luitprandus, King of the Longobards, was endeavoring to translate the
relics of St. Austin out of Sardinia, which was wasted by the Saracens, in
his journey at a certain Town in the Therdonensian Diocese, his Coach stopped
so upon a sudden, that by no art he could use, it would be moved: he made a
solemn vow, That if Austin would propitiously hear and cause his bones to be
carried to Ticinum, he would give that Town for the maintenance of Priests, and
men appointed for Divine worship; the Saint hearing his request, caused the
Coach to be drawn with much facility. Vincentius, lib. 23. cap. 148. Sigebertus
translationis illius meminit anno Dom. 721.

ADelbertus, Bishop of Bohemia, visited with a most grievous Feavour from his
childhood, was brought to the Temple of St. Mary the Virgin, and being
pronounced by his Parents, as dedicated by a vow to Religion if he should
recover his health, he immediately was freed from his disease. Bonfinius, l. 2.
Decad. 2.

GEnadius, Patriarch of Constantinople, having often rebuked a certain Priest
of the Church of St. Eleutherius, for that he by an evil life disgraced his
profession; and not being able by any means he could use to reform him, he at
last in the Temple complained to St. Eleutherius, of the wickedness of this
Clark, and says, Saint and Martyr, Eleutherius, either reform and amend thy
Clark, or cut him off, that he may no longer disgrace his profession. Cedrenus.

GRegorius Turonensis (de gloria confessorum, cap. 97.) scribit. When Hospitius
was buried, a certain man took some of the dust of his Sepulcher, and wrapping
it in a linen cloth, carried it with him, intending to bring it to the
Lirinensian Monastery; and taking ship, he sailed toward the said Monastery;
upon a sudden the Ship stood as immovable in the midst of the vaste Sea, as
a rock, at which the Jews, to whom the Ship belonged, wondering, and much
amazed, he declared to them, that he had with him the relics of Hospitius;
and now they might perceive, that those were the cause that the Ship would not
stir, unless they would steer their course to the Lyrinensian Monastery, where
he was to place the holy relics.

Boniface, Bishop of Moguntinum, slain by the Pagans, was carried to the
Fuldensian Monastery through Frisia, all the fields without any humane
agitation, resounded with an unwonted harmonious Echo. Scribit Werneius in
fasciculo temporum: et Mutius, lib. 7. de Germania.

Huns, their bodies were brought to the public Church; whereupon, when a
certain Priest had obtained the body of one of the Virgins, that he might
translate it to his Church, moved thereunto by zealous devotion; whilst they
were at Mattins, she resuming her body, and appearing as she had been alive, to
the great wonder of the whole College of Priests, who beheld it, worshipping
the great Altar, immediately departed; the chief of the Society coming
therefore to the Tomb, could not find the Virgin who was laid therein. At these
Altars, innumerable solemn vows were were made, and wonderful Tables, wherein
the people did write their voices, were fastened on the walls with folding
doors. As a certain German, who was addicted to the religion of these people,
when he was very sick, one of them came to him when he was at rest, and did let
him know, That if he would say the Lords Prayer 11000 times, he should not want
the help and protection of so many Virgins at the hour of death. Bonfinius,
lib. 5. Decad. 1.

IN the times of the Hunni, (a people that came out of Scythia to live in
Hungary) while that S. Servatius, the Bishop of Trajectum, did offer sacrifice,
the top of the house was presently opened, and a very high Pillar of fire
hanged out of Heaven even to the very Tomb, which not only the Citizens, but
the borderers also, and very many strangers did see. Wherefore they began to
worship this most potent man, and reckon him among the gods. They did never
intend to cover his Sepulcher, which was placed in the middle of the house,
with the roof. And although they did perform their Divine duties there in the
clear day, and did receive their Oracles, yet there was never any rain or hail,
snow or tempest wanting at these sacrifices. Bonfinius, libro and capite eodem.

DAgobertus the King of France, erected the Temple of St. Dionysius from the
foundation, taking away from all others, and spoiling them, whereby he might
enrich this alone: neither was any of his predecessors found, who gave so
magnificent and excessive yearly revenues to Temples out of their patrimony. He
covered the Temple of Dionysius only with silver, and he made the bodies of
the Saints to be placed there, covered with beaten gold, and having added many
rich gifts, insomuch, that that Temple was sometimes his defense against the
anger of his Father, when the officers, which would draw him thence at the
command of his Father, being astonished, stood before the Temple with their
feet so fastened, that they could not enter. But the dedication of that Temple
was wonderful: For a certain Leper that lay all that night in the same Temple,
did report to the high Priests which came together to the dedication, That he
saw Christ, and other Saints dedicating the Temple: And Christ commanded him,
that he should relate that which he had seen, to the High Priests which came
thither to the dedication; and lest happily the belief of this thing should be
desired, he would show that sign, that he should be cleansed of his Leprosy;
and the skin which was full of sores by the swellings of that disease, should
be wholly taken away from his face. Therefore they not only give credit to
him, but also the High Priests abstained from the dedication. But for the
memory of the thing, the skin was also taken from the face of the Leper, which
being hidden in a golden box was showed, and a day every year was celebrated
among the yearly Festivals. Fulgosus, lib. 1.

GEnovepha, a Virgin of Paris, did most reverently frequent the Village Catula,
where the holy Dionysius dyed, to whom she dedicated a Cathedral Church. She
humbly went to the College of the Priests, that they might build a Temple with
the collected money. But their poverty and want of Sand did allege an excuse.
On the contrary, she being carried by Divine inspiration, said, I beseech you,
go out to the bridge of the City, and whatsoever you hear, declare it to me.
They being gone out, while they stood attentively in the Marketplace, if they
might hear any thing, behold, two Swineherds coming toward them, talked
together. The one said, Whilst I did seek after the footsteps of a strayed
hogg, I found a very great furnace of Lime. I also (said the other) found it
likewise in a wood. The amazed Priests did relate to the Virgin those things
which they had heard. But she did shed tears for joy; which when it was
demonstrated to the Citizens, a magnificent Temple was erected with the
collected money, and dedicated to Dionysius. Truly, holy prodigies were not
wanting at building of the Cathedral Church. For when drink did fail the
Carpenters, she took a wine-vessel, which (when she had prayed to the Deity)
she hallowed with the sign of the Cross; by and by she gave it full to the
Laborers. The Divinity always renewing it with the like excessive abundance,
to quench their thirst, even until she had finished the work. Bonfinius, lib.
5. Decad. 1.

Venice (which they say were the Citizens of Patavium in Pontus) had builded
some Cottages, and had not as yet dedicated a Temple to any Deity, suddenly a
fire breaking out of the Master-Workmen's house in the night, the fire being
continued, consumed 24 houses; the wind and fuel scattered all abroad,
nourishing the flames. The multitude having turned themselves to prayers, did
bequeath a Temple to St. James. The fire at the very same instant departed, and
houses were erected by their prayers. Egnatius, lib. 6. cap. 5.

Balthazar Hubmeyerus, a Divine at Regenspurg, at his Conventions he so
enflamed the Magistrates against the Jews, that their Congregation being cut
off, they might build the Temple of the divine beautiful Virgin Mary in the
same Ark. Which when it was said to exhibit I know not what Miracles, the fame
thereof being stretched out far and wide through Germany, so great a concourse
of strangers suddenly began to be, that neither the Temple, nor the Monastery,
and scarcely the City it self, unless truly the large Palace of the King, could
suffice so great a company of vile, wicked persons. Thence the fury increased,
when as a certain Ratisbonian incidently remembered the beautiful Virgin Mary
so much, that being snatched away as it were in an ecstasy, did strive night and
day to come straightway to her with a restless course, leaving behind him
Parents, Wife, and Children, neither saluting nor acknowledging those which he
met in his Journey. Neither truly could he be compelled with threatenings or
bonds. The people being enraged, (for this madness had almost driven the common
people and Tradesmen) snatched with them the instruments of their Art which were
next to hand, did bring them to the Image instead of an offering, to be hung up
in the Temple. Thou might have seen women leading Children, old men leaning
on their staves, Children reaching a crust of bread or an apple, instead of a
gift; the sick drawing near with their sheets and coverings; dumb, deaf, and
blind with their eyes open; in the mean time, being unmindful of mear, drink,
or sleep. Having entered the Temple, all were not affected with one and the same
manner; but those who had attained to the highest point of Grace, according as
the Mass-Priests persuaded: as soon as they saw a beautiful Image, they sat
down without any word speaking, like men stricken with the Planet: being come
to themselves, they professed all together with fury, That they were healed of
their diseases. This persuasion made many, with a desire to excel in
superstition, to cast themselves, at the entrance of the Temple, on the ground.
When the Edict of the Senate did severely punish this insolence of immoderate
worship, whether it was done by the revenge of the Deity, or the wrath of the
Devil, whereby that seducing Dreamer (who for eight years and more, had made
the credulous Germans mad) might perish together with his miracles. There are
some which think it was done by the fraud of the Jews; others, by the deceit of
them which should have the greatest gain by this peregrination: This authority
was purchased to that place by magic art, which the worship of the Image, and
the minds of the people being once deluded by superstition, increased and
enlarged. Be it as it is, most men of Judgment, and true Catholics, judged,
that these were Magical and Diabolical signs, rather then Divine. Sebast.
Francus in Chronicis.

LAmpertus, a Knight of Lovain in Brabant, did bear a full of the Relics of
Saints hanging down from his neck even into his breast, and he believed that
this was a safe protection against all kinds of dangers. But in the Battle
against the Duke Godfrid, that enchantment fell from his neck into the field:
and presently after the Knight (before invincible) was killed, in the year,
1015. But a certain Soldier, having known the preservative against bewitching,
hid it in his house. But the thing was betrayed by the swelling of his
huckle-bone and thigh. Therefore it was delivered to Ethelon the brother of the
slain Knight. Sigebertus, in Chronico.

Metensian Bishop performing the Government of the Clergymen, in the stead of
Poppo of Treveris, (a City of Germany) who was gone into Palestina, made a nayl
very like the Altar of the Lord, and hid it in his bosom, which he did
restore, although swimming in blood, and shut up the earth, which was shaved
away with the blood, in Crystal. Catalogus Treverensis.

COnstantine the Emperor, did always adore the nails of Christ being
crucified, which were given him by Helena his Mother, he fastened one to the
Crest of his helmet, he made a bridle for his horse with the other, (which may
be seen at Mediolanum to this day) having confidence, that in the help of
these, he should eschew all dangers of his life. But what is more wicked, then
that thou should ascribe those things to the iron, which belong to the most
high God? Fulgosus, lib. 1. cap. 2. de cultu divino ex Ambrosio.

Gregory II. sent three holy Sponges, to Eudon the great Duke of Aquitan, which
were wont to be used at his table. He distributed them, being cut in pieces, to
his army, which he did conduct against the Saracens, and it happened, that none
of them which did partake of it, were wounded or slain. Eudoni epistola ad
Gregorium, in lib. Pont.

Roman Convent, which being a boy, was delivered by his Parents to an Abbot,
where he did offer sacrifice, and leaving his Religion, he married a Wife. But
being sick of the Quinsie, he was brought back into the Monastery, receiving
the habit, and repentance, and he was beaten cruelly with whips, by St. Andrew
and Gregory, for his faults committed. Hence leaping out of his bed, he put on
a garment made of Goats-hair, and another that was to cast over his shoulders,
and having entered the Temple of St. Andrew, he said to the standers by; Behold,
I being so purified by the stripes of the Saints I depart out of my body, as
formerly I issued out clean by baptism. And dyed, while they were muttering a
Soul-mass for the dead. Vincentius, lib. 25. cap. 57.

Colonis, (an I Will in the Argolick Gulf) born of a Jew his father, but being
converted, when he perceived the body of our Lord in the Paschall Feast, he
carried it whole (I know not for what use) in his mouth home with him. But he
being affrighted with the Divinity, did bury it in the Churchyard. The Priest
came suddenly upon him by chance, and discrying what was done, having opened
the pit, he found the form of a Child; which when he hasted to carry it to the
Church, it vanished into the thin Air. Trithemius in Hirsaugiensi Chronico.

Castrum, (which is called, The golden Mountain) when she perceived the body of
our Lord in her mouth, she shut it up whole in her chest at home. A little
after, when one of her Lovers by chance opened it, he found the sacrifice (as
they call it) of our Lord's body, changed into the shape of flesh and blood, in
the year of our Lord, 1181. Sigeberti continuator. By these delusions Satan
does strive to confirm the Popish fiction of Transubstantiation.

IN the year of Christ, 1345, when certain men consecrated a sacrifice, they
did steal the memories of all the Saints, with their own dish, which was
dedicated, out of the Temple; and because they found the dish not gold, (as
they believed) but brass gilded, they cast it into a filthy Pond at the Village
Bubalum, near the City of Cracovia. Presently the place shined with frequent
fires, and little firebrarnds some days and nights continually. When that
miracle was presented to the Bishop, not as yet discovering the cause thereof,
after he had proclaimed a three days fast, when he went thither with an annual
Pomp: and having found the Eucharist there, he brought it thither, from whence
it was carried. But in the very same place where it was found, Cazimirus II.
King, did build a magnificent Temple with exceeding rich walls, entitled, The
body of Christ, and in process of time environing a very large space of ground
with a wall, he built a new City, and called it Cazimiria, after his own name.
Cromerus, lib. 12.

JOnathas Judaeus of Bruxells (a famous City of Brabant) in the year of Christ,
M.CCC.LXIX. redeemed certain sacrifices (as they call them) dedicated to Holy
Katherin, and being slain in a Garden by the assault of his enemies, he left
them to his Wife to keep, and she to her son Abraham; who on Friday in the Holy
Congregation of the Jews, having chosen out his sacrifice, he pierced it, and
did tear it in pieces. But abundance of blood proceeding, the Mother of Abraham
being converted, divulged the miracle. Wencislaus the Duke of Brabant, having
made diligent search, he took care, that Abraham and his associates should be
burned alive before the Temple of holy Katherine, and religiously placed the
sacrifice in the Cathedral Temple of Saint Gudula. Ludovicus Guicciardinus, in
descriptione Germaniae inferioris.

Vigilius instituted, That it should not be performed but in a holy place, in
holy garments, and a low voice. It happened once, as Shepherds, having put
bread ridiculously upon a stone in the field, rehearsed the words of the Canon,
by which it was transubstantiated: and so suddenly seeing bloody humane flesh
before them, and stricken by the appointment of God, they presently dyed.
Hermannus Gygas.

Paulinus at Treveris, where the Theban Legions were killed by Ricticnarius
Maximianus, heretofore Lieutenant to the Emperor, a certain head being cast
forth by the Priest unwarily, did bleed excessively, and remains bloody even to
this day. Schaffnaburgensis, Anno 1072.

REgino does declare, that Clodoveus, King of France, because that
irreligiously he plucked the body of Dionysius out of his grave, and broke his
arm, and snatched him with violence; presently being astonished, fell mad, and
after two years lost his life and Kingdom. Idem Adon Vienensis aetate 6. and
Nauclerus generatione 23. Sigebertus circa annum Domini, 660.

HEctor Boethius does relate, That if any woman kicked the Tomb of a blessed
woman at Guanora in Scotland, she ever after remained barren. Cardanus de Rerum
varietate, lib. 8. cap. 44.

Genovepha to Lutetia, suddenly lost her eyes, and having begged pardon,
received her sight. Bonfinius, lib. 5. Decad. 1.

Wencislaus IV. the honorable King of the Bohemians, upbraiding the dead man's
life, a stony Statue put upon the Sepulcher gave him a buffet, and presently
being smitten blind, he suffered for his wickedness. Afterward the Statue was
laid in the privy Chapel, and another Brazen one was put in the place thereof.
Aeneas Sylvius, capite 28. Histor. Bohem.

Constantine, the overthrower of Artabasdus, seeing the Image of the
God-bearing-Virgin standing, having caught up a stone, he threw it at the
Image, and brake it, and when it fell, kicked it. And he saw her in his sleep
standing by him, and saying, Do thou know how audacious a fault thou have
committed against me? but it will fall on thy own head. On the morrow the
Saracens defending the walls, and the battle being joined, he miserable wretch
running to the wall, being struck on the head and face with a hurled stone, he
had a punishment according to the deserts of his wickedness. Paulus Diaconus,
lib. 21. Rerum Romans and Cedrenus.

COnstantine the Bishop of Cyprus in the 4 th action of Nicena the second, does
declare; That a certain heardsman, who had pulled out the right eye of the
Image of Mary with a prick; afterward going out into the field, when he struck
the cattle, his own eye dropped out. And there was another certain man in Cizium,
(a Town of Cyprus) because that he had driven a nail thorough the head of the
same Image painted upon a wall, had a mighty pain in the head, which he could
be in no wise eased of before that he had drawn out the nail. Also the same man
does affirm, That an Agarene endeavoring to pluck out the eye of the Image of
Mary, with a long Spear in the City Gabala of Syria, dug out his own eye,
and was tormented with a burning Fever. And in the 5 th action; yet other 3
miracles are published, which were executed by Images, to confirm the worship
of them, which Charles the Great in his book of the worship of Images, does
refer it to the force of superstition.

Hannonia, being lifted up from the holy fountain by William a Knight of
Holland, returning with the Dog to his vomit, he smote the Image of the Virgin
Mary in the Temple, privily with a punniard in the face, abundance of blood
gushed out, The Jew prepared himself for flight. The Virgin did appear to a
Smith in a Dream, does show him the author of the mischief, does exhort him to
pursue him, and offering a duel to convince him of his wickedness. He does
obey, and by single combat does drive the conquered Jew to the Cross. Johannes
Trithemius in Chronico Hirsaugiensi.

Henry and Philip, the Kings of England and France, certain Officers being
brought in from Richard son of Henry King of England, which that Age called
Coterelli, while they played at dice, a certain man having lost his money,
seeing the Virgin in the Porch of the Temple, holding her son in her right
hand, throwing a stone at the Image, he broke a part of her son's arm, from
whence blood plentifully flowing, it proved a remedy to many sick people, who
devoutly sought help thereby; the Officer being taken away by the Devil, dyed
most miserably the same day. Robertus Gaguinus, lib. 6.

Charles, the Frenchmen took a Town called Burburgum, and having broken into the
Temple, a French Soldier seeking to lay hold upon a silver Image of St. John,
it is reported, That the Statue turning to him, he fell mad, and killed himself
with his own teeth. Robertus Gaguinus.

Buda, a City of Panonia, two Gamesters meeting together, the one said he played
in the Name of God; and the other, in the name of the Devil: he which made God
by his vain words, a favourer of his wickedness, lost not only all his money,
but his clothes also; and going toward home about midnight, desperately
enraged by his loss, as he went through a Churchyard, thus possessed with
anger and fury, looking upon the Image of our Savior crucified upon a Cross,
he snatcheth up a stone, and strikes it into the face of the Crucifix, which
making a hole therein, stuck fast in it; whereupon great store of blood
miraculously issued thence: a Butcher who was troubled with the Gout, living
close to the Churchyard, being an old man, and in his bed, heard a low voice,
which bid him rise, and strike with his great knife whomsoever he should meet;
which words, when they had been thrice re-iterated, and that with threats of
much mischief to befall him, if he refused, he resolved to obey the voice.
Therefore when at first he was not able to rise out of his bed, by reason of
his infirmity, at length, slowly rising, he lays hand on his slaughter-knife,
and going to the Churchyard, meets the wretched mad Gamester coming toward
him, and thrusts his knife into him; which done, coming to the house of the
Judge, he desires to speak with him: The Judge at first believed it to be
merely an imposture of the Devil, though he declared to him his Dream, and the
slaughter he had committed; but when it was light, coming to the Churchyard,
whilst the people flocked about the dead body, Devils with terrible howling
snatching away the corpse, carried it into the air in a trice out of the sight
of the spectators, which with the hole in the Crucifix, out of which blood
issued, demonstrated the perfidiousness of the Gamester, and freed the Butcher
from danger. M. Frischius in Meteoris.

Schelkrop, of mean Parentage, one of the infamous rout, who naturally was
endued with a bold malignant wit, and by licentiousness and custom was come to
a great height of wickedness, wherein he not only delighted, but gloried, he
passed his time in Bawdy-houses and Taverns, and with great eagerness followed
Play; from whence all kind of vices engender, as fast as vermin from the
putrefaction of a dead carcass; and especially impiety toward God, is thereby
begot. In all which, Schelkrop was so notorious a Captain, that the time
wherein he lived could hardly parallel him. He upon a certain time, according
to his custom, tried his fortune at play, having choice of companions like
himself, they went to a public Gaming-house, a Tavern in the Suburbs of
Moguntinum, called Filtsbach, the sign of the flower, which was commonly called
Zuder Blumen; and when they had for some time played there at dice, it fell out,
that Schelkrop was so unfortunate, that he had lost almost all his money; which
when by continuing of play, he did not only not recover, but very much
augmented his loss, he began, as he was wont, not only to vapor with his
fellow Gamesters, and give them base and unhandsome language, but likewise most
impiously to blaspheme God and his Saints; some report, that when he was thus
with rage and impiety incensed, that he openly threatened, That whatsoever Image
of our Savior he first met withal, of it he would take revenge of his present
loss. But I will not confidently affirm it, but it appears plainly, that when
he went from his companions, he came to a certain Chapel seated betwixt the
Church of Saint Alban, and the Temple of the blessed Virgin, where Images were
kept, and suddenly fiercely hacked and hewed the Image of our blessed Savior
crucified upon the Cross, and that with one stroke he cut off the head thereof,
so that it fell from the body, and that with the edge and point of his sword he
slasht and thrust many other Images of Saints which were placed by the Cross,
etc. Hitherto Schelkrop was mad with fury and rage; and what follows, will
declare how miraculously divine revenge seized on him; for suddenly,
dreadfully, and miraculously blood flowed from the cuts, slashes, and thrusts,
that he had made in the Images, as if not Images made of wood, but living men
had suffered that injury; and Schelkope now as one attained to the full measure
of execrable impiety, stood still, not able to move a foot, till he was
deprehended in his raging crime by passengers, that found him in the place
where he had perpetrated that villainy, for which they seized upon him, and
brought him before the Magistrates, by whom he was most deservedly condemned to
die, and accordingly was burnt in the sight of all the people, not far from the
City, in the place which the people commonly call the Jews Sand, because they
were used there to interr their dead. And the Images, famous by their hurts and
the blood which issued from them, were translated by the hands of Priests, from
that little Church, to the Temple of the Holy Cross; where to this day that
dreadful blood is to be seen, and so religiously honored, and many mortals
variously afflicted, making vows to visit that place, have obtained of the most
great and good God such mercy, as to be cured of their infirmities, and
delivered from their afflictions. Theod^ricus Gresmundus, legum doctor.

Paul's latter Epistle to the Thessalonians, cap. 2. and seriously consider the
Text.

Constantine, at Coprominum in Beritum, the Image of Christ was contumeliously
abused by the Jews, whereupon blood and water openly appeared to issue out of
the side thereof, whereby many were cured of their infirmities: they putting it
into vials sent of it all the World over, by reason whereof an Holy Day was
instituted the fifth I Would of November, in remembrance of the Passion of the
Image of Christ. Sigebert in the year of our Lord, 765, says, The Fathers in
the Nicene Council were of opinion, that this happened in the time of
Athanasius, and that he particularly related and commended it to posterity. It
was translated from Syria (as it is reported) rather by Divine then humane
counsel. Sabellicus, lib. 9. Ennead. 8. et Cuspinianus.

Pelagius, stealing the Image of our Savior out of the Church, and thrusting
it through with a weapon, carried it privately home with him; and being about
to burn it, when he perceived it bloodied, he was so amazed thereat, that he
desists from his intent, and went and hid it; which the Christians seeking for
it, found it by the track of blood which fell from it as it was carried; for
which fact they stoned the Jew to death. Sigebertus in Chron.

OTho and Philip contending in War for the Empire, many committed themselves
and their goods to the Temple of Saint Govarus, not far from Trevers, because
the place, as they conceived, was excellently well fenced both by nature and
art. Whither Vernerus Bolanus coming to fight against it, the besieged fearing
lest the enemy should enter by a window, which they conceived the weakest part
of the Church placed there, the Image of our Savior upon a Cross which was
made of wood, whereby they thought they had sufficiently secured it from the
irruption of the enemy that way: a certain bow-man aiming at that place, shot
his arrow into the Image of Christ, and presently the blood flowed out of it,
as if it had been a living body. Vernerus terrified therewith, takes the cross,
and threw it into the Sea to war against the enemies of Christ, and the Image
and Arrow was conserved with the blood sprinkled on them, notwithstanding.
Fulgosus, lib. 1. cap. 6.

GRegory the Great in his Epistle to Theoctistus, says, That a certain
Longobard of the Region of Transpadua, found a golden Key of Peter's, which he
sent as a great Present to the King of the Longobards, who caused it to be
engraven on his sword; which as soon as he made use of, struck with Satanical
fury, he cut his own throat with it, and dyed the same hour; Whence had Peter
so precious a key? and to what purpose?

ALdegisius, whom Pandulphus Prince of Capua commanded to go to Cassinum, and
from thence to Planeta, and bring with him the Chalice of the Emperor, and
other more precious ornaments of the Church as a pledge, whilst he was about
to endeavor to perform the command of his Master, at the Altar, before which
he stood adorned, he fell upon his face, struck with the Palsy and
Falling Sickness, becoming thereby a miserable spectacle to the beholders;
from which sickness, though he after a sort recovered, yet his eyes and mouth
continued pitifully distorted; and moreover, the Prince did not only persist
in his enterprise of sacriledg, but designed greater against the brethren, but
after his death, a certain boy told to huntsmen, that he saw him tied with Iron
bonds, and drowned up to the throat in a miery stinking Lake, and that by two
ugly black spirits, he saw him one while cast into the deep, and another while
pulled out, the cause of such horrid punishment inquired by the boy of him; he
answered, It was, because he had taken a golden Chalice out of the Monastery of
St. Benedict, and had neglected to restore it before his death, desiring the
boy to acquaint his Wife herewith, and wish her to restore what goods were
taken from the Monastery, which notwithstanding the woman being covetous,
refused to perform. Chronicon, lib. 2. cap. 62.

Neapolitan Seigniory, looking out at a window to see what time of the night it
was, after he had said over the Nocturnal Psalms, saw a long rank of Blackmoors
going loaded with straw, and threatening fire, who asking them, Who they were,
they answered, That they were Devils, and they meant to bestow the combustible
matter, they carried upon men, and that now they went for Pandulph Prince of
Capua, who was a dying; in which very hour, as it afterward appeared, Pandulph
expired his life; and presently after, Vesuvius, a Mountain, vomited out such
flames, that store of scorching Sulphur rising thence, appeared like a torrent,
with great force and violence, discharging it self into the Sea. Chron.
Cassinense, lib. 2. cap. 84.

URspergensis and Platina narrant, That John Baptist appeared to a certain
rapacious and sacrilegious fellow, (who came to the Monument of Rothares, King
of the Longobards, in a Church built for the repose of his dead body, and took
away all the ornaments wherewith it was buried,) and blamed him for his
presumption to dare to touch his body; who although he had not walked in the
strict way of truth, yet he had committed himself to his patronage and
protection. By reason of this impiety, this sacrilegious person could never
after go into the Temple; for as often as he assayed to enter thereinto, he was
driven back by a ghost, which offered to cut his throat, if so be he proceeded;
and so was forced to retreat.

Charles the Eighth, King of France, waged against Anne Duchess of Britain,
whom afterward he married, a certain Soldier of Britain going out of the City
of Rhemes, to plunder, in the Temple of a certain Town, whereinto the Country
people had brought the greatest part of their goods, he breaks open a Chest,
thinking that it belonged to some secular person, and loading himself with as
much as he could well carry of the goods therein, returning home with them, he
looking amongst his plunder, saw amongst the rest certain small pieces of
linen cloth, like to handkerchiefs, and not conceiving that they were such as
Priests use for a napkin to carry the host, he bestowed them on his Landlady;
who perceiving them bloody, she first looked upon her hands; which when she
found hurt, but could not perceive any blood issue from thence, she searched
her bosom, and found all the skin of her breast, lining of her Wastcoar, and
lower petticoat imbroydered with blood; the woman carrying these clothes to the
River to wash, could not possibly take the blood out of them, though by washing
thereof, the water seemed bloody. Which is not unlike what happened to Pope
Leo, who to those that sought from him holy relics, he cutting part of a
napkin, which is called the Corporal, gave it them; but when he perceived a
certain man to despise it, Leo in his presence pricked the corporal, whereby he
made it plainly appear, that blood flowed from it. Fulgosus, lib. 1. cap. 6.

GRegorius Turonensis, cap. 81. de gloria confessorum, writes concerning
Marianus the Hermit, a Holy Day in remembrance of whom was wont yearly to be
kept, that the house of a certain man (who to perform domestic business, and
his necessary occupations, neglecting the observance thereof, and being rebuked
for it by a neighbor; answered, That it was better to perform his necessary
work, then show such devotion to such a Saint, whose salvation was doubted) was
set on fire and destroyed with revengefull flames, in such manner that his
neighbors houses joining close to his, received no hurt at all thereby.

Aurelianensian, about to labor in his vineyard in the holy Feast of Avitus
the Cartonensian Abbot, admonished by others to forbear work, as soon as he
betook himself to labor, his face was writhed toward his back; (to wit, by
the Devil, the murderer of mankind, turned the contrary way,) It was a
terrible sight therefore to a multitude of Spectators: but the man going into
the Temple of Avitus, and desiring forgiveness of his sin, obtained that
pardon, insomuch that his face was turned to its right place. Gregor. Turonens.
lib. de gloria Confess. cap. 99.

Paris having pawned his clothes to a Jew, being not able to redeem them,
promised to the Jew, if he would restore his apparel, to give him for the
same, the host which he should receive the next Easter; which the Jew
consenting to, he according to his promise bringing to him; the Jew takes the
host which he received, and casts it into a vessel full of boiling oil and
water, and with blasphemous words falls to scorn and reproach it; whereupon, as
it is reported, a most beautiful young man leapt out, and with wonderful
agility avoided the Jew, who sought to drown him with a staff that had an Iron
hook at the end thereof; his sons standing by, and frighted with the
strangeness of the sight, run to their Mother, and tell her the cruelty of
their father against the young man; immediately there is a great concourse of
people, who take the host from the Jew which the Bishop carried to the Church
of St. John in Gravia, the Wife and Children of the Jew were by this miracle
converted to the Christian faith, and he brought to prison, where with many
words he bragged of the virtue of the Talmud, and calls for it to be brought to
him to deride thereby the superstition of the times; which when he had
received, and began to hope that he was secure from suffering for his impiety,
he with his book were consumed by flames, which issued from a pile of wood made
for that purpose, as violently and swiftly, as an arrow out of a bow. Thomas
Patriarcha Barbariensis, lib. 3. Fortalicii fidei.

Arvernensian Church, a certain impious fellow swore untruly; whereupon his
tongue was suddenly tied; for that he could not speak, but lowed like a beast.
And grieving heartily with sighs for the perjury he had perpetrated, he humbly
casts himself down at the Sepulcher of the Bishop Dretemonius, imploring his
help, (not God's, as it is commanded) and finds his tongue loosed, and himself
able to speak as expeditely as formerly, publicly confessing his sin, for
which wittingly and willingly committed, this punishment fell upon him.
Gregorius Turonensis de confessoribus, cap. 29.

MEscho, Prince of the Polonians, by stratagem taking Cracovia from Boleslaus
Duke of Bohemia, the Princes making a Truce, met together at Cracovia, where
Boleslaus is taken at a Feast, and both his eyes put out, and his Nobles
cruelly slain; the Prisbuicensians being privy to the treachery, and partakers
of the wickedness, the same also endeavor treacherously to kill the brother
of Boleslaus; for Cochares drawing the young man into a Wood, upon pretense of
hunting, commanded him to be bound to the stock of a Tree, and shot at with
arrows. It is reported, that at that time St. John Baptist invocated by him,
received the arrows upon an hairy cover or skin, and so defended him, and that
he warned his Wife by Vision, to relieve her Husband in that great danger;
whereupon Overa, a servant to the Prince, with great haste, and good speed,
declared the Treason to the people, who speedily coming to the relief of the
Duke, released him, and killed the Traitors. In that place the Monastery of the
order of Saint Benedict was built, and a greater Altar placed where the Tree,
to which Janures was bound, stood. Aeneas Sylvius, in histor. Bohem.

COmnenus the Emperor being sick, and seeming ready to faint, was restored by
the Image of our Savior; for an holy imbroydered vail placed upon the Chalice,
which had the picture of our Savior wrought upon it, was spread upon the bed
wherein he lay, and his body wrapped in it; whereupon the vehemence of his
sickness was immediately remitted; and he arising, took meat, was perfectly
well, and freed from his disease: but when this recovery of his in this manner
seemed to the people as a thing not to be believed, that he might take away the
incredulity of them, he went on horseback into the Marketplace. Cuspinianus.

Ptolomey sought for the cross with great anxiety, because he could no where
find it, other Monuments of the Passion of our Lord, miraculously discovered
themselves to mortals; At Lutetia, Ludovicus, the son of Philip Augustus for
three years, (the King being absent upon his holy expedition) was visited with
such violent sickness, that every one expected the expiration of his life,
which was only known to be in him, by weak and almost insensible breathings.
Mauritius, the Bishop of Paris, brought with great reverence to Lutetia, a part
of the blessed crown of Thorns which was kept at the Church of Dionysius, and
the sacred nayl, obtained by prayers; which as soon as 'twas but moved toward
the sick Prince, his sickness was driven away, and his health perfectly
restored. Aemilius, lib. 6.

Bernard, was immediately healed, he could by benediction make bread continue
many years incorrupt, retaining its color to the sight, and sweetness for the
taste. In the Tolosanum Province, many sick, by tasting the bread which St.
Bernard had blessed, recovered their health. A certain Salernitanian Citizen,
with the water wherein St. Bernard the Abbot had washed his hands, was restored
to health. Author vitae.

Malmendrensian Monks, after they had in vain by prayers and tears sought the
free restitution of their Monastery from Caesar, who had subjectd it to the
Colonie of Antistitus, they sought for the bones of St. Remachus, and brought
them to Leodium, and laid them upon the King's Table, sitting then at meat,
which broken with the weight thereof, they by falling, broke the legs and feet
of a certain Nobleman, who by the intercession of Remachus, imploring the help
of Almighty God, was made whole, and that in such sort, that there remained not
so much as the least scarr or mark where his hurts had been; And when as more
Miracles were wrought by these relics, the King did not only restore what he
had taken from the Monastery, but bestowed gifts upon the Monks, Anno 171.
Schaffnaburgensis.

Biturgum and Turonum, Claudiomagus being Governor, there being a famous
Church, in a secret place whereof, when in his pilgrimage Saint Martin coming
thither, lodged upon straw, upon whose departure the Priests and Virgins in
devotion, for that they had a most reverent esteem of his piety, divided
amongst them the straw whereon he lay; part whereof, when they hanged about the
neck of one possessed with a Devil, he was suddenly dispossessed. Bonfinius, l.
5. Dec. 1.

CHronicon Martini manuscriptum, reports, That a certain Noble woman
ignorantly translating the bones or relics of Stephen from Jerusalem, to
Constantinople, thinking they had been the bones of her Mother, it happened,
That the Devil's howling in the air discovered the Angels harmoniously singing,
driving them away, and the daughter of the Emperor possessed with a Devil,
cried out, If Stephen come, I shall be presently made well.

A Certain Noble man, a Prefect or provost under Otho the second Emperor,
being possessed with a Devil, by a chain, which as it was believed, had bound
St. Peter put about his neck, was presently dispossessed in the year, 983. Ut
Chronicon Saxoniae habet. Vincentius, lib. 24. cap. 88. Othonis primi
temporibus accidisse narrat, Sigebertus vero secundi.

Nicetius the Lugdunensian Bishop, Augulphus the Deacon coming from Rome, and
bringing with him some of them which were given him by a Priest, gave of them
in a draught of cold water to several visited with Fevers, and they were
suddenly restored to health; Gregory of Turon affirms as a most certain truth,
that this was done in his time. It is reported, that the Albanensian Bishop,
sick of a Fever, taking bread and water out of a dish (out of which St.
Bernard was wont to eat meat), as soon as he tasted thereof, recovered his
health. Author vitae Bernardi. Gregorius Turonensis de gloria confessorum, cap.
85. de Sylvestri Calvillonensis Episcopi lectulo funibus ligatur, ligato mira
quaedam narrat. Many sick of Fevers being laid upon this bed of the Bishop,
have been refreshed, made whole, and lusty; he says he saw many troubled with
infirmities, who but by touching some small particles which had been cut from
the ropes of the bed, restored to their former health; he likewise says, he
saw his Mother with a particle of a rope which had been cut from the ropes of
that bed, to cure a woman sick of a Fever, by putting it about her neck.

IVo, in Chronico, and Paulus Diaconus, libro 6. cap. 2. de gestis
Longobardorum narrant, That in the time of Constantine, about the year of our
Lord, 682, during the three months of July, August, and September, a
pestilence had so depopulated Ticinum, and so many of the Inhabitants which
remained alive, fled out of the City, that grass and weeds sprung up in the
streets thereof; whereupon it was revealed to certain men, that the Plague
would not thence depart, till they had built up the Altar of the Martyr
Sebastian in the Church of Saint Peter; And that it came accordingly to pass,
for the relics of Sebastian being translated from Rome to Ticinum, and the
Altar built, the Pestilence ceased. And hence it is, that the superstition
which possessed the minds of the ruder sort of men, by conceiving Sebastian a
guardian and defender of men from the Plague, first took its rise.

COnstantine the Great having overcome Maxentius, there appeared as a symbol,
the sign of the Cross in the firmament; when he likewise thought to fall upon
Maximinus, a deadly enemy to the Christians, he was suddenly afflicted with a
disease called the Elephantiasie, all his Physicians despairing of his
recovery: at last the Greeks having a place in their Capitol, in which they
affirm, If the Emperor wash it, being filled with the blood of children, he
should recover his former health. Without all doubt, that kind of remedy was
familiar with the Kings of Egypt; (Scribit Plinius, lib. 26. cap. 1.) the
Children therefore are called together, and the hangman ready, expecting an
Edict to perpetrate that villainy; but the Emperor, being a most humane gallant
man, was so moved with tears of the tender Mothers, that he could by no means
find in his heart to deprive them of their children, but delivered them to
their Mothers, choosing rather to dye, then to ^elieve himself by the innocent
blood of children: The next night he saw by Vision Peter and Paul coming to
him, who admonished him to go to Sylvester the chief Bishop of Rome, and wash
himself in a pool there which they decyphered to him; he obeys this Vision; and
bestowing himself in fasting seven days, he with his son Crispus were washed
with baptism by holy Sylvester, having been anointed with oil; at which time an
extraordinary miraculous light illustrated the place, and a melodious sound was
heard; and Constantine himself being touched by a Divine hand, comes out of
the Laver safe and sound from his infirmity. Nicephorus, lib. 7. cap. 33. et
Cedrenus.

LOtharingus being a prisoner at Constantinople, was so robustious and strong,
that the Turks were afraid lest he should break his chain and fetters, and
therefore they made an Iron Collar or chain, and put it about his neck, with
chains of Iron fastened to it five fingers broad, and three fingers thick,
reaching to his fetters; in which condition the prisoner remembering St.
Nicolas, who had lived in his Country, invocates him to intercede to Almighty
God for him; whereupon sleeping that night after, the next morning when the
Sexton opens early in the morning the door of the Temple of St. Nicolas at
Varanguilles, he finds there this Captive sleeping, who awakened, acknowledged
himself miraculously brought thither in his sleep, it being two thousand miles
distant from Nanceum, where the day before he had invocated this Saint's
intercession. The miracle being divulged, the people run to see it; and after
Mass, having sung some praises to Almighty God, four Smiths are sent for to
free him from his chains; which when it appeared that they could by no humane
power be dissolved of their own accord, as it were, but by the command of
Almighty God, leapt in sunder. Vierus, lib. 2. cap. 29. de praestigiis
Daemonum; ex libello de Galliae Sanctuariis.

GRegorius Turonensis, lib. 5. cap. 6. writes, That Bituricus, Archdeacon of
Lions, by the cutting of Cataracts or skins which grew upon his eyes, lost his
sight; and being helpless by Physicians, made his address himself, by the
devotion of fasting and prayers for two or three months to the Church of
Martin, that he might receive his sight; and ardently making his prayers upon
the Feast Day of St. Martin, obtained his desire.

POpe Leo in the time of Charles the Great; when he had led the Procession
through the City of Rome to the Church of Sylvester, by his chief Officer, for
the celebrating the Paschal; and Pambulis a Priest, whose filthy life he had
often corrected, was stripped of his Pontificial Robes, and deprived of sight and
speech, and coming to the Monastery of Erasmus, and carried to the Image of
Albinus, in the Church of St. Peter, as it is reported, he there received again
his eyes and tongue. Sigebertus, Anno 799. et Bonfinius, lib. 9. Decad. 1.

GRegorius Turonensis, libro de gloria confessorum, cap. 96, tells a miraculous
story of one visited with the Palsy, who being drawn in a Coach to celebrate
the Feast of Alban, the Andigavensian Bishop, in his sleep at night he saw a
man coming to him, and saying, Rise the third hour, and go into the Temple, for
it will come to pass, that at that time Martin and Alban will be there; and if
thou likewise be there at that instant, thou shall recover thy health. Which
Miracle, according to the prediction had in his dream, was wrought in the sight
of many spectators. Turonensis affirmat.

Dunstan, Archbishop of Canterbury, was presently restored to health. At the
same Sepulcher a certain man possessed with a Devil, vomits him up with much
blood. Vincentius, lib. 24. cap. 95. At Grandavus in the year, 1010, before the
body of St. Bavones, which then by chance was brought thither, Mansuindis, a
Maid of Antwerp, was cured of the Palsy. Jacobus Meyer, in Chronico Flandrensi.

COsroes King of Persia hearing that Sergius the Martyr granted all things that
were desired of him, sought of him aid for the defense of his Kingdom, and
foecundity to his Wife, being barren, which obtaining of him, he sent to
Gregory a golden Cross, dish, cup, censer, and other gi^s in honor of Sergius
the blessed Martyr. Evagrius, l. 6. cap. 21.

COnstantine Bishop of Cyprus, tells in the fourth Nicene Act, of a certain
man, who by driving a nayl into a wall, struck it into the forehead of St.
Peter's picture, and found that he was presently troubled with an Headache;
whereupon, commanded to pull out the nayl, he obeying, was presently made whole.

FRenchmen being sent by Pippin to Floriacum, to carry the bones of Benedict to
the Cassianensian Monastery, as they were going into the Temple, by the virtue
of Benedict were struck blind; whereupon they returned back, conceiving that he
rebuked them, because he would not have France deprived of such holy relics.
Scribit Sigebertus Anno Dom. 753. Vincentius, lib. 13. cap. 155.

A Certain man named Garganus, a Citizen of Pontinum, who fed a great herd of
Cattle in the Mountain Prium, lying in Apuleia, which is now called Garganus,
or the Mount of St. Michael, in the time when the Goths infested Italy by war,
seeking a Bull which was strayed from the herd, at last finds him in a cave
which was in a hard rock naturally without man's labor; and angry at his
straying beast, he shoots at him, the arrow lighting upon the back of the Bull,
rebounded back upon Garganus, which he construed to have some divine
signification; wherefore he declared what happened, to Lawrence a Priest, who
prolaiming a Fast for three days, in the night when he was asleep, he had a
Vision or Dream, wherein Michael the Archangel appeared to him, affirming to
him, that it was his doing that the arrow retorted from the Bull, that he would
have that place known to be the oratory wherein he would have a Church for his
service; and when the Neapolitans had besieged the City of Sipontinum,
(Lawrence declaring the Oracle of the Archangel) the hour they had appointed
to break in, the Vision was believed, and the cave of the Archangel, which
seemed as if it had been made by handiwork, began religiously to be
worshipped; and the dedication of Gelasius the chief Bishop which he prepared,
was disapproved by the Archangel, for that a place divinely consecrated,
wanted no dedication. Therefore the cave being consecrated with a most royal
Temple, most men were wont to come thither once every year, there were tables
wherein were written the form of religion, and prayers hanged upon the walls
all about, showing their titles. And where the Altar that belonged to the
Statue of the Archangel was, in a place inaccessible by men, there the Statue
was placed, which beholding, the mind of man struck with a silent fear, by the
contemplation of so great and holy meditations, powers forth its prayers.
Other Altars also made by neither cost nor artifice of man, which seem natural,
increase devotion, Pont. l. 2. belli Neapol.

Bartholomaeus Grandonicus, when the waters rose above their ordinary custom,
and thereby threatened much hurt to the Venetians, that early in the morning
whilst the storm raged, three men of a venerable aspect came to him, whom he
carrying through the passage to the Haven, the storm ceasing, they all remained
in the City, one of them in the Church of St. George; another in the Temple of
St. Nicolas; the third, having declared the other two, to be George and
Nicolas, manifests himself to be Mark the Evangelist, and commanded that he
should relate it, because he should receive great benefit from the Prince of
the City for his labor in ferrying them over; and that he might have credit
from them he should acquaint with the same, he bestowed a Ring on him, to show
to them; whereupon the Venetians bestowing a yearly stipend on the Fisherman,
decreed supplications and praises. Fulgosus, lib. 3. cap. 6. et Egnatius eodem.

THe forty fifth year after the death of Stephen King of Hungary, he being
canonized, all the Princes of Hungary, with the King Ladislaus, met together;
and after celebrating certain ceremonies in remembrance of the dead, at their
coming to the Monument of the holy King, there issued from thence such fragrant
smells, that the whole Church was, as it were, filled with a certain heavenly
dew: finding his bones moistened, and anointed with a certain kind of Balsom,
laid in a Syndon, they began to look for a gold Ring, which was his old
Scepter, amongst the liquid balsom; which when they could by no means find in
the Marble Tomb, they endeavored to draw out the moisture, which falling upon,
and filling Viols and great Vessels therewith, they were nothing nearer their
desire of emptying the Sepulcher thereof; for as fast as they drew it out, it
was still by a Divine power supplied; which perceived, they by degrees powered
what they had drawn out upon the bones again; and it appeared, that after their
infusion thereof, there was neither more nor less in the Tomb; upon finding of
which treasure there, an Altar was renewed to the blessed Virgin; and after a
short time, the Wife of the illustrious Prince called Matildus, who for three
years space had labored of an intestine disease, invited by the fame hereof,
vows a pilgrimage to this Chapel in Hungary, whither as soon as she had made
her address, she was immediately freed from her torments. Bonfinius, lib. 1.
Decad. 2.

Udislaus King of Hungary, which showed the power of Almighty God for his sake
to be manifested, in that place he canonized him a Saint. In the same hour that
a child, who being an unformed lump of flesh, without hands or feet, and whose
bones and s^ews were not obvious to the sight of men, was brought to his
Sepulcher; as soon as the Parents began their prayers, he received hands, feet,
and shape, to their great comfort and rejoicing. Bonfinius, lib. 4. Decad. 3.

Sergiopolitans or Antiochians treating with Cosroes King of Persia, to spare
their City, offer him sacred treasures for the redemption thereof, offered him
a golden Cross, which Justinian the Emperor, and Theodora, had sent thither;
which Cosroes receiving, required more, and amongst others, seeking to take the
silver Urn, in which the relics of Sergius the Martyr were laid, presently an
Army all about the streets appeared, which chased away the Persians off the
City; so the City was miraculously delivered with the help of Soldiers.
Evagrius, lib. 4. cap. 28.

IN the tenth year of Leo Emperor of Isaurus, the Sarazens besieged the Town
of Nicea in Bithynia: the City long opposed by storm, and some part of her
Walls battered with Engines to the ground, by the appearance of Saints which
are there worshipped, the Saracens affrighted with the sight of the Father,
left what so hotly they had attempted, and basely fled. Cedrenus.

Thessalonians besieged by Michael King of the Bulgarians, upon a certain day
went to the Sepulcher, praying all night, and using an ointment which boiled up
out of the Sepulcher, uniting their strength together, they all fiercely
throwing open the Gates, sally out upon the Bulgarians; whereat the enemy was
so amazed, that fear took upon a sudden so deep impression in them, that they
all betook themselves to their heels, not so much as one of them standing, or
daring to defend themselves; the Leader of the Roman Army was a Martyr, who
cleared the way before him; which the Bulgarians who were taken prisoners
confirmed by oath, telling, that they saw a gallant young Knight on horseback,
who led the Roman Squadrons, from whom flashes of fire came, which lighting
upon their enemies, burnt and consumed them. Cedrenus.

Cartonensian Citizens hanged up the linen garment of the Virgin Mary, which
Charles the bald had brought from Constantinople, upon the wall, instead of a
flag or ensign, which struck blind Rollo the Dane with his Army, and compelled
them to depart, without doing injury to the City. Ranulphus, lib. 6. cap. 2.
Ganguinus, lib. 5.

Godfrey of Boleign with others had undertaken the Syriac Expedition, setting
upon the City Jerusalem by storm, Aimarus the Aniciensian Bishop was seen by
many to go before the Soldiers, and scaling the walls first, gave the sign to
others to follow him, although it was known for certain, that he departed many
months before from Antioch, as William the Bishop of Tire writes. Fulgosus,
lib. 1. cap. 6.

HEnry the second, Emperor, subjugating Boleslaus, who possessing Bohemia, and
all the Sclavonian Country, and likewise debilitating Poland, taking the sword
of Saint Adrianus the Martyr, which had been long kept in a place called
Waldberg, divine power working with it, he was most formidable to his enemies,
most prosperously prevailing over them, the Martyrs, St. George, St. Lawrence,
and St. Adrianus being seen to go before his Armies, and to break the ranks of
their enemies. Cuspinianus.

THe Romans carrying before them the holy Lance, with which the side of our
blessed Savior was pierced, instead of an Ensign fighting against Corbana
Prince of the Persians, at the Metropolis or chief City of Syria, called
Antioch, slew above an hundred thousand of their enemies; they missing when
they mustered, of four hundred thousand Soldiers which they had before the
fight, two hundred thousand; Baldricus Bishop of the Dolensians, a
contemporary, writes from the mouths of them that were present, That the
enemies when they joined battle, saw three in the shape of most royal
Noblemen, sitting upon white horses, and a great Troop of the like
countenance, and in like manner apparrelled, who led the forefront against the
enemies: these were not seen of all, but some of the Romans, and by them they
were believed to be the Martyrs, George, Demetrius, and Mercury; after whose
appearance, the Barbarians were so amazed, that void of counsel or courage, and
possessed with fear, they most basely ran away. Aemilius, lib. 4.

ACtius being General, when John King of Bohemia, father to Charles the fourth,
Roman Emperor, about the year of our Lord, 1330, invaded Italy, falling sick
of the Gowt, underwent great peril in his affairs, circumvented by the
unfaithful dealing of his cousen german, General Leodrisius, who leading the
Rhaetian and Helvetian cohorts, and with a strong hand gathering together all
banished men, came to Abdua. Actius, though troubled with the Gowt, raised
Soldiers in every place, and left his Garrisons well fortified to the care of
Governors, till such time as his expected recruits should come to him. And
committing the Vanguard of his Army to his Lieutenant Nervianus, the
Leodrisianians had prevailed against them, had not St. Ambrose, the
Mediolanensian guardian Saint, been seen by many of the City in form of an
Horseman, succouting them apparently in their distress; for there came at that
time to their relief, Hector Panicus, with a wing of Cataphractans, Albrogians
sent by Ludovicus Subaudius, father-in-law to Actius, which overcame the
Rhaetians, unseasonably exulting and resting themselves disorderly, putting
them to the sword, and took Leodrisius himself prisoner; there being slain at
that time above four hundred thousand men. And in the field where this Victory
was obtained, a Temple was built to St. Ambrose in memory thereof, where yearly
upon the twenty fourth of February, the Mediolanensian people coming together
in great pomp, with the Praetor and Counselors, celebrated his Feast with
sacred solemnities; Jovius in Actio. But Fulgosus, lib. 1. cap. 6. writes,
That the Auxiliaries which came to relieve Actius, as soon as they began
battle, clearly saw Ambrose with a whip to fall upon the Barbarians which
Martinus Scaliger led, being hired thereunto by Leodrisius; and in memory of
this Victory, Ambrose was pictured with a whip in his hand, ever after this.

IN the battle wherein Ramirus King of Spain fought against the Saracens before
Calugurium, James the Apostle was seen by all who were there, leading the
Christian Army, and putting the Saracens to flight.

NIcephorus, lib. 8. cap. 23. reports, That Chrysanthus and Musonius being
Bishops, who sat in the Nicene Council, and dying before they had subscribed
those Articles of Faith which were there agreed upon; the Fathers of the
Council therefore went to their Monuments, and holding a writing in their
hands, which contained in it the Articles, they spoke to them as if they had
been living men hearing them; Holy Fathers, you have fought a good fight with
us, you have finished your course and kept the faith, if therefore what we have
done ought to be allowed and confirmed, it is meet and needful, that you (who
are illustrated by the splendor of the Trinity, whose beatificall Vision frees
you from all obscurity and hindrance, which lets us from the clear and perfect
discerning of things,) with us subscribe this little book; who when they had
spoke these words, laid it down before the Tomb sealed, and going to their rest
that night, and returning in the morning, they found the book sealed with the
seals inviolated, and their subscriptions inserted with the rest, which they
perceived to be newly written, in these words; We Chrysanthus and Musonius,
with all the Fathers in the first holy Ecumenical and Nicene Council do agree,
and although translated from our bodies, yet with our own proper hands we have
subscribed the Articles in this book.

PLergilis, a Priest, prayed, That he might see what species laid hid under the
form of bread and wine, and whilst he continued his supplications for the
same, an Angel from Heaven appearing to him, speaks, saying, Arise quickly,
if thou desire to see Christ, he is present, clothed with that body which the
holy Mother of God bore, he therefore casting his eyes upon the Altar, sees
the child, the only begotten Son of the Father, whom with trembling arms he
takes and kisses, and presently restores again to the top of the Altar, and
falling prostrate upon his knees again, he implored Almighty God again, that he
would turn him again into his pristine species, and as soon as he had finished
his prayer, he found the body of Christ returned to his wonted form, as by
prayer he had desired. Rabbanus de Sacramento Eucharistiae, cap. 30. Paschasius
in libro, de corpore et sanguine Domini, cap. 41.

Rome extinct by the Plague, when he revived, said, That he saw a narrow
bridge, under which ran a River ugly and caliginous, which sent forth an
incredible stinking savor; but on the other side of the bridge upon the
bank-side of the River, he saw pleasant places, which with the variety of
flowers which grew therein, sent forth such fragrant odours as much delighted
the smelling faculty, and habitations all about which were of a certain divine
form and splendor; but amongst the rest, one was greater, and excelled in
glory, for that it was wholly built with golden bricks; but for whom it was
built, he could not understand: but he considered, that he observed, that the
just most securely passed that bridge; and that the unjust and reprobate fell
into the River: then he saw, as he said, a stranger, a Priest, who
inoffensively passed through those streights, having quietly and contentedly
suffered the going through the turnings therein, for that he had lived piously
in this world; but amongst those which he saw fall, whom the whirlpool of the
froathy snatching stream tossed about, he saw Peter chief Bishop of the
Ecclesiastical Family, who four years since coming that way, infolded with
Iron chains, and in vain striving to swim through the horrible hollow passage,
he therefore had a warrant, as a punishment to him, to punish those that
hereafter should be guilty, rather severely then indulgently. Marulus, lib. 6.
cap. 14.

Albericus, a certain Noble child when he attained the tenth year of his age,
afflicted with sickness, was brought even to deaths-door; at which time he lay
immovable without sense, as if he had been quite dead, seven days and nights.
In which interval brought by the blessed Apostle Peter, and two Angels, he
comes to the infernal gulf, at length he was brought to see the pleasant
things of Paradise, and lifted up into the aerie Heaven; he was sufficiently
instructed by Peter, of things contained in the Old Testament, of the
punishments due to sinners, and the glory of Saints: he saw certain secret
things which he was forbid to speak; and so for seventy days he being led
about the Provinces by him, he was restored to life. Chronicon Cassionense,
lib. 4. cap. 68.

VIncentius has a long Narration extant in his book 27. chap. 99. of Tundalus,
whose soul was led by an Angel as well to the infernal place of punishments, as
purgatory, where he saw many whom he knew, at his first entrance amongst the
blessed: he met with a multitude of men and women enduring the misery of rains
and winds, pining away with hunger and thirst, but enjoying light, molested
with no stink; who as the Angel told me, had not lived very honestly, nor had
been charitable to the poor, were after some years to enjoy rest. We came then
to the port, which once opened and gone through, there appears a flourishing
field full of eternal light, in which many souls of both sexes exulted,
destinated to those happinesses for the torments they had suffered in this
life, from which they were now delivered, though not yet deserving to be joined
to the society and fellowship of the Saints. There is a Fountain of life, of
which whosoever drinks, shall live for ever; going a little further, we saw
Concober and Donatus, who were tyrannical Kings in their lifetime. But Donatus
many years bound in chains, gave all that he had to the poor. Making a further
progress, we came to King Cormartus, under whom Tundalus in his lifetime
served, who spending his time in a silver Palace, was attended like a King by
the souls of the poor and pilgrims, upon whom he, being a King, had bestowed
his goods; which beholding, the house is obscured, and all the Inhabitants
consternated. The King going out weeping, seeing his Ministers with hands
lifted up toward Heaven, devoutly praying, and saying, As thou will and
know best, have mercy upon thy servant. And beholding, he saw the King in
fire up to the navel, and from the navel upward clothed with hair-cloath;
says the Angel, This punishment he suffers three hours every day, and for
twenty one hours he is at rest; for that he stained the Sacrament of holy
Matrimony, and therefore he is purged with fire up to his navel, and wears an
hair-cloth, because he commanded his fellow to be slain at St. Patricks, and
prevaricated his oath; excepting these two, all his sins were forgiven him.

Raphael to the Heavens above, and infernal places, saw a man sitting in a
chair of fire, into whose face most handsome curtezans threw fires which they
retracted with their posteriors; and those torments he continually endured,
because in his lifetime he was given over to lust and luxury. He saw a man
whose skin the Devils excoriated or pulled off, and throwing salt upon him,
cast him upon a grid-iron, who had been cruel to those who were subject to him:
Another riding upon a fierce horse, offered a she goat which he carried before
him, having a Monastical vesture behind, who had lived by rapine, and had
taken a Goat from a poor woman: at length the Monk would have put on feigned
repentance. He saw religious men of diverse orders, some of which had spent
their time in mirth and laughter; others who wallowed in gluttony and lust,
whom the Devil tormented with punishment answerable to the wickedness they had
perpetrated. Lastly, he saw Judas the Traitor, who, envied of all the Devils
and damned spirits, was held in the bottom of the gulf, where he was exposed
to the scorns and railings of them all. This man restored to life, beginning to
tell these things to his brethren, contrary to what was given him in charge,
immediately was struck upon his face with a staff by Saint Benedict. And (says
he) because thou have offended by speaking, thou shall be deprived of thy
speech for nine days. And having enjoined this penance, he departed. The nine
days being expired, he at last, as he was commanded, tells the whole story to
his Abbot; And the Abbot having received no order to conceal it, publishes it
to the people. Vincentius, libro 29. cap. 8, 9, 10.

GEnovepha, a Virgin of Paris, labored so much of an ecstasy, that she was for
three days breathless; only her cheeks were observed to have some redness in
them: who coming to her self, affirmed, That she had been led to Hell, went to
the fields of the blessed, and that she had manifestly seen the punishments of
the wicked. Bonfinius, lib. 5. Decad. 1.

ERasmus, Bishop and Martyr, after intolerable tortures suffered by him for the
testimony of Jesus Christ and his Gospel, the Apostles and Prophets were seen
to bring him a Crown; delighted with which Vision, he prayed Almighty God to
put an end to his life, which he obtained, most gently breathing out his soul.
Martinus, lib. 6. cap. 16.

URsinus, a Priest Nursia, as he was about to yield up his soul joyfully cried
out, giving thanks to them whom he only saw coming to him; they that stood by,
inquiring who they were, at whose coming he so greatly rejoiced, says he, Do
not you see the Apostles Peter and Paul here present, calling me away?
Presently whilst turning toward them whom he alone saw, and repeating, I
come, I come, behold I come, he departed, leaving his body void of a soul.
Gregorius, lib. 4. Dialogorum, cap. 11.

Ezekiel and Daniel the Prophets who appeared to him, saluted them; and whilst
he showed them re^erence, whom none else discerned, though many were present,
performing his duty, he departed. Idem.

MErulus, a Gregorian Monk at Rome, a man adorned with notable sanctity of
life, in his sleep dreamed, That he saw a crown made of most white flowers
which fell from Heaven, and was to be put upon his head; afterward visited
with sickness, with great alacrity finished his course. Then by the command of
Peter the Abbot, the fourteenth year after his death, his Sepulcher being
opened, a most incredible sweet smell ascended out of it; for which cause it
was thought, that the Vision he had was true. Idem. lib. 4. cap. 47.

Gregory tells us of a Maid of Christ named Galla, living at Rome; To whom the
Apostle Peter appeared, inviting her to go along with him, for that her sins
were forgiven. This Vision, when she her self had related to others, to the end
to go along with him, to whom the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven were given; she
put off her body with as much readiness and willingness, as a man undresseth
himself to take his rest. Idem. lib. 4. cap. 11.

DE Musa puella, idem Gregorius, cap. 17. tradit, That in a Vision by night
there appeared to her the Mother of God, with a comp^ny of Virgins, injoyning
her to abstain from laughter, jests, and allvanity; for that it would come to
pass, that after thirty days, he should exult and rejoice in the company of
her, and her Virgin. Whereupon being visited with sickness, and at last the
time approaching of which she was foretold, comforted with the same Vision
again, as if she had answered to one, calling upon her, she said, I come, Lady,
I come. And with those words she breathed out he^ soul.

Probus Rea^inus the Bishop, who by his languishing condition, knew that he was
shortly to depart this life; all that were wont to be with him, by chance being
gone from him, except one boy, saw Juvenal and Eleutherius the Martyrs, entering
the Room; at whose approach being terrified, and stupefied with the sudden
luster and shining, understanding where they were broke suddenly out of the
bed, with the noise whereof the family raised, run to the place where the
Bishop lay, but found nothing but his dead body, his soul being departed.
Marul. lib. 6. cap. 16.

Jerome when he had given up his soul, was surrounded with a sudden glorious
light, Angels appeared, and the voice of Christ was heard, which invited him to
his Heavenly Kingdom. The same hour Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalen, saw his soul
carried by Angels going toward Heaven; the same day his holy soul shining with
wonderful brightness, appeared to Augustine, Bishop of Hippo. At Turon two
Monks saw a shining Globe passing through the Skies, and thereupon immediately
heard a Quire of Angels most ravishingly singing, which whilst they admired,
they understood that the soul of Jerome the Priest who dyed then at Bethlehem,
was carried by Angels to rest in Paradise, etc. Idem.

Augustine was buried, a certain Monk who abode far off, being wrapped in spirit,
saw him singularly arrayed with a Miter, and Bishops weeds, sitting amongst the
clouds all in glorious white, such radiant beams proceeding from his eyes, as
illuminated the whole Church, incredible sweetness of odor delighting his
smelling faculty. Afterward he was seen by Bernard, whilst Sermons were read
in the nightime by his brethren in the Church, casting out of his mouth most
pure waters, which immeasurably flowed upon the Pavement of the Church. Idem.

AS the life, so the death of Francis Assiatus (from w^om the Order of Minors
begun) was noble and magnificent, who expiring, a certain brother saw his soul
in form of a star, to slew out of his body, and fly toward Heaven: The same
hour an Husbandman grievously sick with over-labouring, his soul being ^eady to
depart, languishing and speechless, on a sudden broke foth into speech,
saying, Expect me, father, expect me; and, being asked, he said, he saw St.
Francis with great light making toward Heaven. Which said, his soul went out of
his body, making good his words by his action continually, following him whom
he had said he saw. Marulus, lib. 6. cap. 16.

Adoneus at Rhotamagium, in the night going to see one with whom he was
enamored, fell off the bridge into the water, and was drowned. The Devils
contend with an Angel for his soul; it is agreed betwixt them, to refer it to
Richard Duke of Normandy, to end the difference. His order was, that his soul
restored to his body, should first be placed upon the bridge, and if he took the
way which leads to his beloved Mistress, he should be in the power of the
Devil; but if he should take toward his Church, his soul should be in the power
of the Angel: which done, the Monk returned to his Monastery, and so it is
believed he was freed from the jaws of the Devil. Ranulphus, lib. 6. cap. 7.
in Polychronico.

Agnus Dei, he leaped off the Beer, blaspheming God, refusing to kiss a wooden
cross which was offered him to kiss, falling upon the Virgin Mary with railing
words, deriding those that sung Psalms, for that he was orda^ned to the horrid
torments of Hell. The Monks beating their breasts with their fists, pour forth
prayers devoutly for him; the poor man receiving a better mind, began to laud
and praise the omnipotency of Christ, to renounce Satan, to adore the cross,
and to confess, That after he took the life of a Monk upon him, and vowed
chastity, he perpetrated fornication; and praising God, the text day he
comfortably departed. Vincentius, lib. 25. cap. 62.

France saw the soul of a most lewd and wicked man, who notwithstanding he put
on Monastical weeds in the agony of death was bound by the Devil in fiery
chains, and that he saw him dragged toward Hell: but at last by the
intervention of St. Benedict, was freed; for that whilst he was adorned with,
his habit he had done no hurt. Also Maius, a Cassinensian Monk, who being
precipitately cast down from an high Window in the night by the Devil, broke
his neck, he complained to a great favourer of his in the Monastery, (for that
was with many prayers sought by that convent) that in his sleep this evil was
imposed on him by the Devil, but that he was freed by the help of St. Benedict;
from hence almsgiving, and the number of Psalms said for the dead in that
Monastery increased. Cassianus, lib. 4. cap. 4.

German came to Turnodurum, he comes to the Sepulcher of a certain disciple
which had followed him out of Britain, and asked him, whether he would war
with him any further? who answered, That he had sufficiently warred, and that
he enjoyed heaped rewards for his fight; and further prayed, that he would
depart. Says Germanus, Rest in peace and happiness; so he laying down his
head, slept in the Lord. When he made his journey to Augustodunum, at the Tomb
of Cassianus the Bishop born in Scythia, having much company, in the hearing of
them all, he called to him in the Tomb, and enquired what and how he did? says
he, I enjoy sweet rest, and expect the coming of my Redeemer. To whom Germanus
answered, Rest happily therefore, and intercede more diligently for our health.
Bonfinius, lib. 4. Decad. 1.

PAschasius, a Deacon of the Apostolical Court, excelling by his piety toward
God and man, (as it is reported by Gregory,) but that he pertinatiously stood
for Lawrence, (whom he thought more worthy) against Symmachus, who was judged
by the voices of all men worthy of the place of chief Bishop, when after death
he was to pay punishment for his fault, he was found by Germanus Bishop of
Capua, performing the drudgery of a servant in the Angulanian Baths; which
Germanus when he understood the cause, went away, and for some days made
supplication for him, returning, knew that he was freed from that burden, and
that his prayers were heard, whom now he perceived was not to be found there.
Marul. lib. 5. cap. 11.

Centurellae, offered bread as a reward to one that had often freely waited
upon him, and found, that he did not want it; for he had been Lord of that
place, and after death he was there punished again, to expiate a certain
offense, by suffering punishment: yet he offered much to him, if by offering
consecrated bread he would pray for him; wherefore the Priest offered the holy
Host and praying for him, returned to the Baths; but not finding the man, he
understood that he was freed from his pain. Idem.

BEnedict the Tenth, chief Bishop, after his death appearing to John the
Portuensian Bishop, confesses, That he was kept, by Odilones his prayer, from
eternal death; And that he now appeared to him, that he would go to him, and
desire him, that he would pray for him now being in Purgatory, as he was
accustomed when he was living. This Message being delivered, the Abbot and he
prayed for him, and enjoined all the Monks who were with him, to do in like
manner. Not long after, Benedict gloriously shining, appeared to Edelbertus the
Monk, and told him, that he was translated from Purgatory to Beatitude.
Odilones and the Monks praying for him, he appeared again to Odilones, giving
him thanks, for that he had received so great mercy, chiefly by his prayers.
Idem. Ibidem.

RObertus Gaguinus tells, That John the Anchorite reported to Ansoaldus,
Bishop of Pictavum, That he was raised by a certain reverend old man from his
sleep, and commanded to pray for the soul of Dogabert King of France, the hour
of his death: which when he had done, he saw a company of Devils in the midst
of the Sea; who carried the soul of the King in a boat hawling him to torments,
he calling upon Martin, Maurice, and Dionysius, the Martyrs, to help him
against them, and that those three men came to him clothed in white garments,
professing they were the men he called on, who helped Dogabert, and freed the
soul of the suppliant King from torments without delay, and carried him with
them to heaven. Sigebertus in Chronico, about the year of our Lord, 645.
tells to a certain man, That the soul of Dagobert coming to Judgment, was
accused by many Saints for his spoiling of Churches, and that evil Angels
endeavoring to take him away, Dionysius the Parisiensian intervened and freed
him, only prescribing that, in satisfaction of the wrong he had done, he
should to the honor of God, and the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, whom he
had offended, build a Church.

MAurice the Rothamagensian Bishop, brought into the Temple after his death,
having received his soul again, said to them that stood about him, Mark well
the last words of your Pastor, I am naturally dead, but am revived, that I may
declare to you what I have seen, for I am to retain my soul no longer then I
speak to you, my conductors, whose apparel and countenance was most fair and
lovely to behold, and their speech most pleasant, promised me going toward the
Sunrising, the delectable and wished for enjoyment of Paradise; and having
finished the adoration of Saints at Jerusalem, we went toward Jordan, by the
Inhabitants whereof our company increasing, I was filled with exceeding joy;
and when I made haste to pass the River, my companions reported, that our Lord
had taught, that venial sins which I had not formerly washed away by
confession, would be purged by the aspect and fear of the Devil, which
thereupon I should conceive; forthwith there appeared an army of most ugly
spirits, flourishing and tossing most sharp Spears, and vomitting out of their
mouths flames of fire, so that the air seemed all over filled with Iron and
flames; at which sight I was miserably filled with horror. That therefore you
may consult and provide for your safeties, I have assumed this habit to speak
to you: and presently again he expired. Vincentius, lib. 25. cap. 4.

MAcarius of Alexandria upon a time walking in Scy^hiotican solitude, looking
upon the skull of a dead man lying upon the ground, began to obtest it by the
name of Jesus, and to interrogate it of what Country he was when he lived, and
in what place his soul, sometimes his Inhabitant, now abode? His dry mouth
denudated of flesh and nerves burst forth into speech, answering, he had been a
Gentile, and an Inhabitant of the next Village; and that now his soul was
thrust crowded as remotely deep into the Gulf of infernal perdition, as Heaven
is distant from the Earth; but the incredulous Jews were thrown lower then he,
and Heretics, who endeavored to pervert with falsehood the revealed truth of
Divinity, lower then they. Idem.

CYrillus Hierosolymitanus reports, Whilst in great heaviness he was at
prayer, desiring that he might know the condition of the soul of Ruffus his
dead Nephew; he first smell't a most heavy stink, intolerable, if he had not
stopped his nose; and presently after he saw Ruffus bound in burning chains,
vomiting flames out of his mouth mixed with smoke, his body all over by reason
of the hea^, he seemed to suffer within, sparkling fire; and being much
affrighted with this sad spectacle, he earnestly desired to know for what cause
a man, who for his integrity of life was beloved of all men, should be judged
worthy of such punishments? No fault was objected against him, (for ought he
could find) for which he was so tormented; but his playing at dice, which he
sundry times using, thought it a light sin, or none at all; and therefore
neglected to confess it to a Priest. Idem.

Valeria, before the Priest Severus came to him to absolve him of his sins,
finished his course presently; the same day the Lord looking upon the p^^^ers
and tears of Severus, the young man revived; and being asked what became of his
soul, whilst his body was deprived of it? he answered, That it was snatched by
certain men blacker then Moors, who breathed fire out of their mouths and
nostrils, who carried him through open and rough places; but as he was thus
led, being met by young men arrayed in white garments shining with a glorious
light, the Devils were forced to dismiss him, and restore him to his body; for
that they said, God had granted this to Severus, who had by prayer devoutly
desired it: Therefore having confessed his sins to the same Priest, and done
penance, he dyed the seventh day again, but more happily then before. Marulus,
ex Gregorio.

Rome was repaired, after the Goths had wasted it, one, rather wicked then
ignoble, being dead, revived. As his friends were bewailing his death, and
said, Send one to the Church of Lawrence the Martyr, to enquire what Tiburtius
the Priest does; for I saw him put upon a pile of wood fiercely burning: I also
saw another pile, which, with the point of the flame thereof, seemed to reach
Heaven, I heard a voice breaking out of the flame, which showed for whom this
punishment is prepared; which having declared, he was stricken, not with a
Planet, but death it self, and again returns from whence he came; and it
appeared, Tiburtius at that instant exhaled his wretched soul, whom every man
almost fore-judged, every one detesting his life; for though he was a Priest,
he had nothing belonging to his place besides the figure and name. Idem.

STephen, a Roman, illustrious in his age, going to Constantinople, fell sick
and dyed; and, because they who accompanied him; had a desire by reason of the
respect they owed him, to carry his body to his native Country, they enquired
for one to imbalm him, by taking out his bowels, and applying Spices and
ordinary means to keep the body from putrefying in the Journey: They could find
no imbalmer by all their inquisition they made after one, but the next day the
dead body was restored to life, and lived long after, though not so reformedly
as he ought. Wherefore many rebuked him, because what horrid sights he had
seen, did not terrify him from evill-doing. He was wont to tell that he was
then carried to Hell, and saw those formidable things which formerly he had
heard, and would not believe; and that while he stood as one guilty before the
Tribunal of the Judge, it was commanded that he should be dismissed, and their
mistake who had convented him, was reprehended; for that it was commanded, that
not he, but Stephen the Smith should be led thither: The same hour the Smith
departing this life, caused this to be believed a real Vision, and not reputed
an idle dream. Marulus, lib. 6. cap. 14.

WIlliam, a boy of fifteen years of age, had a Vision in the Night, wherein
there appeared to him a certain glorious man, who led him to a place of
torments, and seeing men excrutiated after various manners, at last was brought
to the Devil himself, who in his fiery Mansion amidst the flames, sat as a
Judge in his Tribunal: presently a certain ugly spirit leapt up, accusing the
boy; Says he, I have ever suggested evil things to this boy, but of those
sins which he committed lately, he made no mention at all to the Priest at his
confession; he that led the boy persuaded him to sign himself with the sign of
the Cross; which done, all his fear of damnation was taken away. Vincentius,
lib. 27. cap. 84.

Sabine Province there was a certain Nun, who strictly observed chastity, but
defiled her tongue with foolish procacity; and when she past her last day,
being buried in the Church, the Priest coming into the Church at midnight, saw
her distended before the Altar, cut through the middle, her higher part burnt
with fire, and her lower part left untouched: in the morning therefore telling
to his brethren what he saw, as he looked upon the place in which he saw her
burnt; he shows to them the marks which he found in the Marble of the
scorching fire. Gregorius Magnus, lib. 4. Dialog. cap. 50.

The End of the Second Book.
The Opinions and Arguments of the Sadduces, and Epicures; by which they would
prove, that the Angels and Devils do not appear unto Men; Confuted.
MAny there have been at all times, and in all Ages, which have impugned, and
stiffly denied the Apparitions of Devils, Angels, and Spirits: But some have
done it in one sort, and some in another. For there be some, who (to rid
themselves altogether from the question and disputation, that might be made
concerning particular and special matters, which are often alleged, in regard
of the Apparition of Specters) do bend themselves against them all in general;
That so by cutting off the root, and undermining the foundation of a Principle
well grounded, they may the more easily cause the overthrow and downfall of all
that which depends upon the same.

They deny therefore, that there are any Angels, or Devils at all: or any
Spirits, severed and abstracted from a corporal substance or body: to the end
that by consequence they may infer and conclude, that there are not likewise
any Specters, nor Apparitions of Spirits. Such were the Sadduces, as we may
read in the Acts of the Apostles; and the Epicures; and the greatest part of
the Peripateticks; and all sorts of Atheists whatsoever. Of which last, there
are at this day more huge numbers abounding within this our Realm of France,
then would be tolerated. These men would not stick to affirm (if they durst,
and were it not for fear of the Magistrate) that it is free for men to abandon
themselves to all kind of iniquity, impiety, and dissolute living: for so do
they murmr, and mumble, when they are alone and by themselves; that there is
not either God, or any Spirits at all, good, or evil: nor yet any Hell, where
the Souls of men should suffer any pains or punishment; but that they dye
together with the body* And that all whatsoever is said or alleged, touching
Hell Torments, is nothing but a vain and superstitious toy, and fable; only to
make babes and Children afraid: and to wrap and tie the greatest persons of the
World in certain bonds of a Religious superstition: for so are the words of
Lucretius, in this behalf. And I do believe, that they do often say in their
hearts, that which Pythagoras, the Samian, is alleged in Ovid, to have said to
the Inhabitants of Crotona in Italy, Why stand you thus in fear of Styx, and
such vain dreamings,
Of Manes, and of Spirits, which are naught else but leasings?


Certainly he that should take upon him, to instruct these Athiests, should but
^ose his time: because they will admit of no reasons, no not of those that are
merely natural. For seeing they do not believe him which has the command and
rule of Nature, how can they yield any credit or belief unto those reasons that
are drawn from nature it self?

Other persons there are, who, being more religious, and honester men then
those former; yet have no less denied the essence of Angels, Devils, and
Spirits: Howbeit they have been of this opinion: that by reason both of the
distance between them and us, and of the difficulty of appearing in a humane
body; they cannot possibly present themselves unto us.

Others also there have been, who have referred all that which is spoken of the
vision of Spirits, unto the natural and perpetual depravation of the humane
senses. Such were the Sceptikes, and the Aporreticks, who were the followers of
the Philosopher Pirrhon: as also the second and third Academy, who held, That
the senses, were they never so sound, could not imagine any thing, but falsely
and untruly.

Again, some others, with more appearance of reason then the Scepticks, have
affirmed; that abundance of Melancholy, and Choler adust, Frenzy, Fevers,
and the debility or corruption of the senses (be it naturally, or by accident)
in any body, may make them to imagine many things which are not. And they do
infer, that such as happen to be attainted with these maladies, do think that
they have seen Devils, and other such like Specters. They add moreover, that
the fear, superstition, and credulity of many is such, that they will most
commonly suffer themselves to be drawn into a belief and persuasion of that,
which is quite contrary to truth.

To make short; Others there be, wise enough and fine conceited: yet
nevertheless (being great mockers, and incredulous, because they themselves
did never happen to see any Vision, nor have ever heard or touched any
supernatural thing) they have been of this opinion; that nothing could appear
unto men, that exceeded or went beyond the course of nature. And of this
number, Lucian was one: who (being also as great an Infidel as any could be)
said: I believe no part of all these Apparitions: because I only amongst you
all did never see any of them. And if I had seen of them, assure your selves, I
would believe them, as you do. Notwithstanding for all this, he opposed himself
against all the famous and renowned Philosophers of his time, and held argument
against them, though (as himself confessed) they were the chiefest and most
excellent in all kind of knowledge and learning. And he was not ashamed to stand
only upon his own bare conceit and opinion: impudently maintaining, without
any reason at all, against them that were as wise, if not more wise then
himself, and more in number: that forsooth nothing at all, whatsoever was said
or alleged touching Specters, ought to be admitted or believed. But what
reasons I pray you does he bring, to confirm his saying? Truly none at all: but
that only of his own absolute and uncontrouled authority, he will draw to his
incredulity, all others, whom he sees to be assured and settled in their
opinion: Notwithstanding, that they are certainly resolved of the truth, by the
exterior senses, with which they have perceived and known that to be true,
which so constantly they do maintain and defend. But how can it possibly be,
that a man should think, without any show of reason, by incredulity and mockery
only, to confute and overthrow that, which has been ever of all men, and in
all ages, received and admitted? Certainly, this is the fashion and guise of
mockers, and scorners, that that which they cannot deny, nor yet have a will to
confess, they will find the means to put it off with a jest and laughter: and
so think secretly to insinuate themselves into the minds and conceits of their
hearers; especially, such as look not, nor have a regard to the truth and
substance of a thing, but only to the outward shadow, and grace of words and
glorious speeches. Such a scorner needs not any great knowledge: because it
is sufficient for him to be superficially skillful in any thing; so that he can
with a kind of grave and smiling grace, shift off the reasons and arguments of
those, whose knowledge, and learning, is so exceeding far beyond his, as during
his whole life, he will never attain unto the like. Thus did Machiavel carry
himself: who amongst the learned, and men of skill and judgment, knew well how
to make his profit of his scoffs, and pleasant grace in jesting; whereby he
would many times strike them out of countenance, in the sight of them that
heard him; whereas, if he had come to dispute with them, by lively reasons, and
solid Arguments, he would at the very first blow have been overthrown and
confounded. But in the end he discovered himself sufficiently, and was reputed
of all men, no other then a Scoffer, and an Atheist, as Paulus Jovius
testifies of him.

But we will cease to speak any further of him, of Lucian, and of those of
their humor, and will return to our matter, touching Specters: the which, that
we may the better explain (now that we have briefly declared the diversity of
opinions, of those that insist upon the contrary) we will answer unto each of
them in order, as they have been propounded. And first, as touching the
Sadduces, the Epicures, the Peripateticks, we will severally answer their
Arguments which they object against us: Next, we will remove those
difficulties, which are objected, and show how the Angels and Devils may take
upon them a body. Afterward, we will show and discover unto the Scepticks,
that the humane senses are not so faulty and uncertain, as they would make men
believe. And last of all, (to the intent we may leave nothing behind) we will
not forget to show, by what maladies and infirmities the senses may be hurt and
troubled: and the Imaginative power of man wounded and changed: so as all that
which is supposed to be seen, is merely false and untrue.

To come first of all to the Sadduces: It is most certain, that of all men they
were the most gross and carnal: and did not believe that any thing was
spiritual: but they did Imagine all to be corporal: because they said, that
the Humane Understanding does always work with the Phantasme, and with the
thing Imagined. And it appears, that in dreaming of any thing whatsoever, we
do always imagine it to be corporal; whereupon they conclude, that all things
are corporal; and therefore that even God also is a corporal Substance, which
is the greatest absurdity and Blasphemy that can be imagined in the world. For
it we should restrain God into a body, we must also make him subject to a body:
(so says Saint John Damascen) which, in a word, is to restrain and shorten the
power and omnipotency of God: the which being infinitely above all substances,
both corporal and incorporall, is not subject to their Category. The reason
that moved them to believe that God was corporal, was a place of Moses (for
they did not receive nor admit of any Scriptures, but the five Books of Moses;
as says Origin) wherein it is written. That God made Moses to stay in the Cave
of a Rock or Mountain: and putting his hand upon him, did show him his hinder
parts, not suffering him to see his face. And therefore in regard that Moses
attributes unto God a face, a hand, and other parts, they conclude that God
has a body. Of the same opinion also was Tertullian, (as witnesses Saint
Augustine, writing to Optatus) and the Bogomi^es, being certain Heretics of
Bulgary: who thought that God was as we are (so writes Enthymus): and that
from his two eyes, out of his brain did issue two beams; the one called the
Sun, and the other, the Holy Spirit: which is a most blasphemous and
intolerable error.

Now the occasion, why the Sadduces did so eagerly defend and maintain, that
God had a body; was, because they would deny all incorporall substances: to
which effect they thus argued. If God (say they) have created any substances,
he created them to his own Image and likeness: and therefore when he made man
he said, That he made him according to his own Image: showing thereby, that he
was of a corporal substance: because that Man, whom he formed to the pattern
of his own face, is corporal. And if God have made nothing but what is
corporal: It follows, that the Angels and Devils which are said to be
Spirits, are nothing but mere fables: and that there be not any Souls, or
spirits separated from a corporal substance: and by consequence, that the Soul
of man is mortal, as the body; and has no need to be reunited thereunto by
the general resurrection.

But it is easy to answer them; by denying plainly, that God is corporal, or
has any body. For albeit, the holy Scripture does attribute unto God, hands,
feet, face, eyes, and other parts of a body: yet this must be understood
spiritually; and by those corporal and bodily members, we must imagine the
spiritual virtues of God (according as says S. Gregory): as, by his eyes, we
must understand his foresight and his knowledge; to the which all things are
open, and from which nothing is hidden and concealed: By his hand, is meant,
his Almighty power and puissance: By his face, the plenitude and fulness of
his glory. By his hinder parts, his glory is shadowed, as under the vail of
some certain form and similitude. And whereas they say, that the Understanding
does work with the Imagination: and that we do Imagine God to be a corporal
substance: This has no reason, nor any appearance of truth at all; but is an
error, common to them, with the Epicures: to the which we will answer anon.
And as touching the Angels: I do greatly marvel how the Saduces can deny the
being of them; seeing that Moses in many places does make mention of them, and
of their Apparition. We may therefore very well say of them, that they use the
Books of Moses, as men use their Stirrops, in lengthening and shortning them,
at their pleasures. This is the reason, why Justine Martyr did not reckon them
in the number of the Jews (and that worthily) but reputed them as Heretics:
not allowing them any place in the Jewish Church, by reason of the fond and
absurd opinions which they held, not only of God, but also of the Angels,
Devils, and Souls of men, which they affirmed to be mortal. But as concerning
this latter point, we shall speak more hereafter. Let us now consider the
Arguments of the Epicures.

The first error of the Epicures is, that God has a body; as the Saduces did
believe likewise. And their first Argument was, That nature it self (forsooth)
did teach and admonish us, to believe, that both God and all Celestial
essences were corporal; for two reasons: The former was, because the Gods are
not figured in any other, then in a humane form. And the second, because
whether it be in sleeping, or in waking, when we dream or imagine of the Gods,
no other form does present it self unto our Imaginations, but a humane shape:
And therefore they conclude, that the Gods are in figure like unto men. But
unto this Argument, Cicero answers sufficiently; That such humane shape, and
form, is attributed unto the Gods by the invention of men: and that either it
proceeds from the wisdom of the Ancients; who thought thereby they should
the more easily draw the spirits and minds of the ignorant, to the knowledge of
spiritual, and supernatural things; and that they should the sooner bring and
reduce them into the way to live well and virtuously: Or else, that the same
had its beginning and first footing from a blind superstition: which does most
easily allure men to adore those gods which are portrayed and carved in a form
most pleasing and agreeable unto men; Or else, that it is but a fiction of
Poets and Painters; who have always been audacious to fain and devise any
thing, rather then that which should be according to truth and verity. And this
last point may well serve to answer that, which the Epicures say; that, be it
in sleeping, or in waking, the gods do not present themselves unto us, in any
other then a humane form: For this is certain, that by the portraiture and
pictures which we see of the gods, in those forms which are common and familiar
unto us; we do imagine (though falsely) that which may resemble unto us, the
same which we have seen to be painted. Insomuch, that Jupiter seems unto us,
to have a face and countenance terrible, with his hair black, and hanging
backward; as Phidias did engrave him. And Minerva had her eyes blew, or of an
azure color; as Homer describes her. Mercury was painted like a young man,
having his eyes always open, as one that was ever waking: with bright yellow
hair, and a yellow down upon his chin and cheeks, as if it did but newly begin
to frizzle or to curl. Venus had her eyes delicate and wanton, and her locks of
Gold yellow. Juno had gross and thick eyes, rising up toward her head, like
unto the eyes of an Ox. And so generally were the rest of the Gods painted by
the Gentiles, in diverse forms and fashions. Notwithstanding, all this proceeded
of nothing else, but from the error of our Imagination, which suffers it
self to be deceived and seduced, by the painting, which imprinted in it a kind
of false notion. I say, a notion: because the ignorant common sort of people,
is persuaded of the same, and suffers it to take place in their mind, or
Understanding: which is as easy also to be deceived, as is their Imagination.
But a man of Wisdom and Judgment, (who has his understanding more clear and
open) is not easily therewithal seduced: but notwithstanding all paintings and
fictions, his Intellect, or understanding power pierces through the
imagination (as the Sun pierces or shines through the Clouds): and spreading
it self, with her light, does easily believe in a spiritual manner, that God
and the Angels are Spiritual.

The second Argument of the Epicures, touching the humane body of God; was,
that God took upon him that form, which was, or could be imagined, to be the
most beautiful in the whole World. And they say, that the humane form, or
shape, is of all others, the most goodly and excellent: And therefore we ought
to think that God is carnal and corporal, as men are. Hereunto needs no
answer to be made: because the consequence of their Argument is not good: viz.
That God should retain unto himself the figure of a man, because the same is
the most excellent of all other creatures in the World. For the Divinity of
God, neither is, nor can be, in any corporal substance: but it is an
incorporeall and spiritual essence, which has nothing common with that
substance which is proper unto these Earthly Creatures.

The third and last Argument of these Philosophers, is a Gradation or heaping
up of Syllogisms: which kind of Argument, the Greeks call a Sorites: and they
frame it in this sort; It is held and confessed of all, that God, and all other
celestial powers, are exceedingly happy: But no person can be happy, without
virtue: And virtue cannot be present in any, without reason: and reason can be
in none, but in the figure and shape of man. Therefore it must be granted, that
the Gods, which have the use of reason, have the form of man also. But the
whole frame of this Argument may soon and easily be dissolved, by denying, that
reason can be in no other, then in a humane shape: For both God and the Angels,
who have a divine and spiritual understanding, have the use of reason,
notwithstanding, that they be not of a corporal substance. And reason in man,
comes not of the humane body: but from the Soul of man, which is Spiritual
and Divine, made unto the likeness of God, and capable of reason, of prudence,
and of Wisdom.

Now, whereas it might be objected to the Epicures; That in making their Gods
to have a humane body, they do therein make them subject to death and
dissipation. To avoid this absurdity, they do tumble into a greater; affirming,
that their body is as a body; and their blood, as blood; not having any thing,
but the lineaments and proportion of a man, and being exempted from all
crassitude and thickness: which in a word, is as much as to say, that their
gods were rather Idols of men, then very men; and rather framed by the pattern
of men, then as men in truth and substance: which is a thing the most
ridiculous that can be imagined.

But, will some say, to what purpose serves all this, touching our matter of
Specters? I have said before, that the Sadduces did maintain God to have a
body, to the end they might the better deny the appearing of Specters; which
are substances without a body. Also the Epicures made their Gods to have
bodies; that so they might hold them in the Heavens idle, and doing nothing:
and by consequence might deny their Apparition upon Earth. For as touching
Devils or Spirits, they believed there were not any: but did confound them all
in the number of their Gods. And, that they did but make a jest of Specters,
appears by the speech of Cassius in Plutarch: and in that that Celsus (half
an Epicure) writing against the Christians, did deny them flatly and
absolutely, (as is to be seen in Origin, who has answered him) and did reprove
the Christians, in that they would allow of any powers, or Spirits, contrary to
the gods: supposing (according to his own saying, and opinion) that there were
no Devils. Besides that, he made a mock and a jest of Angels, and of the
Resurrection of the body: and generally of all those Apparitions, which were
made, both in the Old and New Testament.

And now that we speak of contrary powers, it puts me in remembrance of a
speech of Plutarch, who reproves Chrysippus, for that in this universal body
of the World, so well ordained and framed, he should grant so great an
inconvenience, (to wit) that there should be a kind of Devils afflicting and
tormenting men, to the disturbance of the concord and harmony of the World:
Which being well ordained by the Author and maker thereof, ought not to be
thought to bear or sustain any thing which should be incommodious to it self;
and by lapse, and continuance of time, should work the confusion and
destruction of the same. But it seems, that Plutarch reprehended Chrysippus,
upon a desire and humor of contradiction, rather then moved upon any just
cause, or matter of truth. For the Devils do not work any damage or
inconvenience to the World, being bridled and restrained by the hand and power
of God. And if they do torment men, or tempt them, it is to exercise them, or
to manifest the glory and Justice of God; of the which they are sometimes made
the executioners. And as in each Commonwealth, well instituted there be
executioners ordained, for the punishment of Malefactors, and such as trouble
and disturb the public peace, and good of the Commonweal, and yet the
universal body of the Commonweal is not thereby offended, or endamaged: but to
the contrary, rather it receives much more profit and commodity. Even so God
has placed, and left here below in this World, Devils and wicked Spirits, to
be as tormenters and executioners to wicked men: that so his Justice might
shine the more glorious, to the comfort of the godly, and of his Elect, that
live in the love and fear of him.

But to come again unto the Epicures: It is most certain, that they were no
other, then the followers of nature: and that only so far as things did fall
under their outward senses. And if one should allege unto them, that any
Specters, Images, and Visions, had presented themselves; they would refer the
same, for the most part, to the concourse and perpetual flux of their Atoms:
or to some other like reasons; the which we hold it not amiss to discover and
decipher at large, as we have drawn them out of Cicero, or of Lucretius. All
Images (say they) which do externally present themselves unto our senses,
either they are visible, or invisible; If they be Invisible, either they are
created in the Air, or in our own minds and conceits. As touching those made
in the Air; it is not any strange thing, or abhorring from reason, that in the
same should be engendered certain voices; like as we see it is natural, that
cold comes from the Rivers; ebbing and flowing, from the Sea; and heat, from
the Sun. And it may be, that some voice, being spread abroad within the
Valleys, does not only rebound back again, to the place from whence it came;
but does dilate and scatter it self here and there, throughout the Air, as do
the sparks that mount up from the fire. So that for one voice there are many
engendered; which running through the empty Air, do enter within the Ears of
those, that knew nothing of the natural voice; and do put them into a
misconceit, and fond opinion, that they have heard either some of the Fayries,
or Satyrs, or Nymphs, playing and sporting amidst the Woods.

As concerning those that are bred in the mind; They say, that for the
innumerable course of Atoms; all whatsoever we do dream or think of, comes
incontinently into the spirit or mind, and sometimes passes by Visions and
Images into the bodily Eyes.

But if the Images be visible; either they are reverberated and beaten back,
from the Crystal and transparant Air, exceeding clear in her superficies? or
they come of the Spoils and scales of natural things. Touching the Air; That
it may of it self cast some kind of Image, having power to appear, they prove
it in this sort; All Air that is Chrystalline or transparent, has a kind of
refraction, as appears by the mirror (whereof Looking Glasses are made and
polished) and by the water, and by a thick and darkened Air. And this do the
Catopticks themselves teach in their principles; Now (by the comparison and
similitude of the mirror, and the water) all Air which has a refraction, does
of it self yield some certain form. And therefore it is not any thing strange
if in an Air a man may see certain forms and Images. And they do bring also
this comparison. Even as the Tapestry hangings in a Theater, or a large wide
Hall, do cast abroad round about, their natural color, where they find an
Air opposed against them; and the more that the beams of the Sun do beat or
shine upon them, the more bright and shining luster they carry with them; and
seem to have cast off and left their color, in the same place, which is
directly in opposition against them; So is it most certain, that the Air may
of it self cast abroad certain forms and figures; the which look by how much
the more they be made clear, by the light which does bring and tie them to our
object, so much the more comprehensible shall they be unto our sight.

In brief, concerning the spoils and scales cast from natural things, of which,
in their opinion, Images should be engendered. They do make this argument; The
Caterpillars (say they) do leave their spoils in the hedges or bushes, like
unto themselves; so do the Serpents among the thorns or stones; and the little
creatures, at the time of their birth, do leave behind them their
after-burthen; which is a little thin and slender skin, which they bring with
them, from their dammes belly. Why therefore may there not be left or cast from
the bodies of natural things, certain thin and subtle forms, or Images,
proceeding from them as well, as a little skin and the after-burthen does
remain of the superfluity of little Creatures? But all these Arguments may very
easily be dissolved.

And first, as touching the voices, which, they say, may simply be created of
the Air; I will not deny that. For it is most certain, that the voice, is a
certain beating and concussion of the Air, which falls under the sense of
hearing, (as is affirmed by the Grammarians.) And the matter of the voice (as
says Galen) is the breath, and respiration of the Lungs; but the form thereof
is the Air, without the which, neither can it be understood, nor can it be
called a voice. Besides I will not deny, but that the sounds are raised within
the empty Air, be it either by the winds, or by some other external cause.
But to say, that the voices, and the sounds are natural and adherent to the
Air, as the Tide to the Sea; and coldness to the Rivers; and heat to the Sun:
It would then follow, that without any external cause at all, both the voice,
and the senses should be treated in the Air, and should perpetually adhere
unto the Air, as the Tide does to the Sea; and cold to the waters; and heat
unto the Sun. But so it is, that the winds are not always in the Air: and the
sounds and voices are external things, coming into the Air, by the means of
some other subject; the which is nothing to neither in the Sea, nor in the
Rivers, nor in the Sun: because that in the Seas the Tide; and cold in the
waters; and heat in the Sun, are unseparably, and continually. And there is
great difference between Accidents that are Separable, and those that are
Inseparable. For the separable Accident as the Voices and the Sounds in the
Air, may be abstracted, and drawn from the substance of the Air, and yet the
Air shall neither perish, nor be the sooner altered thereby; But ebbing and
flowing cannot be taken from the Sea, but the nature thereof must needs be
changed; Nor can the heat be separated from the Sun, but that he must then lose
his light; Neither can the cold be severed from the Rivers, but that the
quality and nature of the water must be changed; which cannot possibly be;
because naturally water is cold. And these three Accidents, are inseparably
knit to those three substances, no less, then blackness is to the Raven, and
whiteness to the Swan. Moreover, it is a far greater foolery, to say, that of
voices articulated and knit together, the voices themselves should be bred and
engendered in the Air: For that is not only against the nature of the Air,
but against all order established in the World. Neither is it to any purpose,
to allege for an instance, the voice of an Echo: the which being carried in
the Air, does spread it self, and scatters (as a spark from the fire) here
and there, not only toward the party that made and dispersed the sound, but
to some other places likewise. For the voice of the Echo, is engendered of the
voice of the party, and not of the Air, and is dispersed (as themselves
confess) by the speech of the man, from whom it took its Original and first
beginning. Neither will I easily grant unto them, that the voice of the Echo
does disperse it self on all sides, without losing it self, or being
extinguished. For it is a thing very notorious, and sufficiently proved, that
if the Echo be dispersed into another place, then that from whence it first
received her voice, she is no more discerned or understood as the voice of a
man, but only as a confused and uncertain sound; which ranging through the
Valleys, cannot be discerned, but only for a resounding noise, and not
otherwise. Now as concerning those Images, or similitudes, which the Epicures
alledg to be created in the thought or conceit: saying, that the mind of man
does refer unto the eyes, whatsoever it dreameth, or thinks on; and that by
means of the abundance or concourse of the Atoms. I do make them the same
answer, which Cicero yielded them: that if the mind and the eyes do so
symbolize and agree together in operations, that whatsoever the mind shall
imagine and conceive, the eye may presently see; It must needs then follow,
that some things shall present themselves to our eyes and sight, which never
were in being, nor ever can be. For I may dream, or think of a Scylla, a
Chimera, a Hippocentaure, and such like conceited fictions, which never were,
nor can be. And I may fain unto my self, in my mind, strange Monsters, and
Anticks; such as Painters do many times make, which neither are things, nor can
possibly be. To be short, if this Argument of the Epicures were true; it must
needs be, that all things whatsoever the mind presents, should be of a
certainty: and they should fall so subject to our sight, as we might plainly
and sensibly see them: the which is the greatest folly, that can possibly be
imagined. Neither can they defend themselves with the continual concourse of
their Atoms: which (they say) do uncessantly bring certain Images into the
mind, and into the eyes of men. For, be it, that we should confess, that their
Atoms do slide into the mind of man: how can they conclude thereof, that they
descend into the sight; nay, how can they descend; but that even by their own
reasons, their ignorance and sottishness may be discovered. For, if their
Atoms do enter into the mind, it must needs be then by that means, that they
be Invisible; and that they do fly up and down very closely, and subtly (as
the very word does also import.) Now if they fly invisibly in the mind; how can
they of themselves so readily make any thing visible and apt to be seen?
Certainly, to make their Atoms visible and corporal, there must be of
necessity, beforehand, a great concurrence and huge heap of them drawn
together; which cannot be suddenly done, but will require a great time. Now in
the mean while that these Invisible Atoms shall be a gathering, and getting
together into the mind, they will be flitting and flying away some other where,
as soon as the mind (which never retains one thing very long) has put them
out of remembrance. So that by this means they have not any leisure to form
themselves visible to the eyes of the body; but they return back again, even as
they came at first, Invisible.

Now let us proceed, and pass on to those Images, which (say the Epicures) are
reverberated from the Air, being clear and transparant in her superficies. I
do agree with them, that the Catoptike, that is to say, the Speculative, (being
one of the kinds of the Art Optike) does hold, that the refraction, which is
made of forms (be it either in a mirror in the Air, or in the water) comes
either of the density and thickness of the mirror, polished and made bright,
the which keeps sight, that it does not disperse and scatter it self: whereas
otherwise, if the mirror were transparent, or had any pores, whereby one might
see through it, the sight would disperse and scatter it self abroad: Or else it
comes of the thickness of the Air next adjoining: or of the humid and moist
concretion of the Water, which stays and limiteth the beams of the eyesight.
And that is the reason, why one may as well see his visage in the water, as in a
mirror or looking-glass; and so also in the water of the Sea, when it is not
troubled nor tossed with the Winds, but rests calm and quiet; which Virgil
testifies in these Verses: Of late (upon the shore) I stood, my self beholding
In waters of the Sea, no stormy winds then stirring.


But what will they infer of this, which every man will confess to be true and
infallible? So it is, (say they) that the Air being clear in her Superficies
(like as does the mirror or looking Glass); so will it yield of it self, some
form or figure. Let this also be granted them: And what of that? Forsooth they
conclude, that therefore in the Air, a man may see figures and Images. But who
sees not, that this conclusion is ridiculous, and Sophistical: For it does
not answer to the terms of their proposition: but simply carries away the
Subject, without speaking of that, which is thereunto attributed, and which is
the knot of the whole question. But I would know of the Epicures, how they can
prove unto us, that by their Atoms the Air may naturally engender forms and
Images of themselves, which should be visible: and, which should be moving and
living, as the Specters are. I do assure my self, that they have not any
arguments so good, but they may as easily be dissolved and avoided, as was the
former. But they will say, perhaps; that we see often in the Air Comets, Fiery
Flames, and other Prodigies. True; this I will not deny; but these things
(which they say are seen in the Air) do not take their original neither of
their Atoms, nor of the Air; but are engendered of the vapors dried up from
the Earth, as it is well known by the writings of good Philosophers. And the
Air is susceptible and capable of them, by reason of some emptiness in it;
which does easily yield and give place, and receives that which is sent unto
it from below. Besides it is very evident, that such figures and Images as are
seen in the Air, have not any life in them, as have the true Specters; the
which also (the Epicures ought to show by good reasons) to be carried to and
fro, and to move themselves in the Air. For if they had attributed motion and
stirring unto Specters; and had proved, that naturally, without having any Soul
or life, they might notwithstanding be seen wandering, and running hither and
thither in our form, or in any other; and that they are not only to be seen in
all parts of the Air, but in all other places whatsoever; then this might have
stood them in great stead, to have impugned the Apparition of Specters,
supernaturally, or against nature.

Moreover, if they will affirm, that the transparent and thick Air, receiving
our figure by refraction, does move it self as we do; and does live and change
from place to place, as we do; then must they also prove unto us, that the same
should be a Specter; and not the Image of the object opposed thereunto, the
which vanishes away as soon as the same does absent it self from it.

And seeing we are now in the discourse of Images, formed in a thick Air: It
is to be understood, that their nature is to appear either by the refraction of
our own natural and proper form, or by reflection. As touching their appearance
by refraction, we have already spoken sufficiently: But as concerning those
which are by reflection; It is most certain, that their property is to appear by
another form then ours: namely, of some lightsome body, which grows into the
thick and gross Air, in the humid and moist concretion of the same; or into
the Glass of a mirror, making a reflection of that thing which is reverberated
and beaten back again into our sight. Thus by way of reflection may a man see
within a Looking-glass, those men which are walking and marching in the
streets. And sometimes a man shall think that men are walking near the walls of
his Chamber: which notwithstanding is nothing so; but that only there is a
reflection of those persons whom we see aloof, walking and going up and down. So
likewise by way of reflection, may a man see in the Heavens sometimes a second
Sun, the Image of the true Sun; and so likewise of the Rainbow. Howbeit that
this latter (as Aristotle would have it) is not any reflection but a relation of
the Aspect unto our eyesight. But under his correction, that is not so: For if
the Rainbow in the Heavens do not yield a reflection to our sight, it would not
be seen in the water, or in a looking Glass, as it is, and as daily experience
shows us. And this also may serve for a solution to that Argument of the
Epicures, who by Comparison of the clothes of Tapistry, that imprint their
colors in the wall opposed, would prove, that the Air may also cast any form
or Image of it self. For the colors of the Rainbow, and of Tapistry-hangings,
are for the most part lively colors, as Azure or Sky-colour, red, carnation,
and green; all which do naturally cast a great luster, which may easily yield
an impression upon any solid thing, and may reflect unto our eyes. And yet
nevertheless, I see not how this can be a good argument, to show that the Air
can engender forms or figures; which may refer themselves to the eyes, as
Specters, and not rather, as Colors.

Last of all, touching that which the Epicures affirm; how, of the bodies of
things do issue and remain certain Spoils: The same has not any foundation
upon natural reason, or upon any appearance of truth. For, is there any
likelihood, or probability, that if the creatures do leave behind them their
after-burthens, or other such spoils, bereaved from them, in the places where
they have been: That therefore the bodies (be they dead, or be they alive) do
leave an Image, or impression of themselves, in their absence, after they are
departed from those places? It is most certain, that the bodies of any
creatures, have not any thing in them, which either in their lifetime, or
after that their substance is perished, can be abstracted or separated from
them. For otherwise, of one body there should be two made; which were a strange
thing, and altogether abhorring from nature. And were not much different,
either from the Fables of the Poets, who of a dead body, made the abstraction
of a shadow, which they called the Image and Idol thereof, (as is affirmed,
both by Sergius, and Lucian and the Commentator upon Homer) or else from those
fabulous and idle dreams of the Rabbis, and Talmudists, which had their
Nephes, as says the Author of Zoar. But the truth is, that those Creatures
which do use to cast their spoils from them, do leave no other then a thin
slender skin, which being superfluous, is no more remaining or abiding with the
body: Howbeit, that it comes from the body; as appears both by the
after-burthens of all creatures (wherein the young ones being wrapped and
enfolded in the bellies of their dams, yet in coming from thence, do easily
and naturally cast them off) as also by the spoils of the Serpent, or Snake,
and by the skins of the Silkworms, and the Caterpillars; the which
superfluities, are drawn and cast off particularly from these beasts or
Creatures, as a mark to the one, to wit, the Silkworms, and Caterpillars, that
they do change from their former state, and to the other, namely the Serpents,
to show the poisons and ill herbs and seeds, which they have eaten all the
Winter, according as Virgil writes of them.

These Arguments being thus finished: Let us now come to that which the
Epicures affirm to be the cause why any should be touched and attained with
fear; when they see such Images and figures, which they affirm naturally to
flit and fly up and down. We (say they) are affected and altered, according to
the things which we see, and which are next unto us. As for example; we
perceive, I know not what, salt humor being near the Sea; and in touching of
Wormwood, and of Rue, we find a kind of bitterness: and when we are near a
Smith, we feel our teeth to gnash, and to be set on edge, at the noise of his
File, or Saw, wherewith he works. So likewise, when these Images and figures
do present themselves unto us, we cannot possibly abide nor suffer them; but we
find our selves altered and changed in our understanding: howbeit some more
then other some. For like as there be certain seeds within the eyes of Cocks,
which shining and shooting into the eyes of the Lions, do so strike and pierce
their eyelids, and do inflict upon them such pain and grief, that they are
constrained to fly from them, being not able to abide or endure the sight of
the Cock; So are there some men, who have their senses so apprehensive and
subtle, that they cannot hold from being afraid, when they see such vain
Images and figures before them.

But hereunto we must give them this answer; that the fear which men have by
the sight of Specters or Spirits, comes in regard that the things are
unaccustomed and admirable to the bodily senses; and not from any secret seeds,
which are contrary to our nature, and much less from any natural passion; such
as that is, wherewith men are touched, that abide near the Sea, or those that
see Rue or Wormwood, or do hear the noise of a Smiths file or saw. For if it
were of any natural passion that this fear proceeded; then would not the party
terrified, be so confounded and astonished even in the very powers of the Soul,
as it is commonly seen that men are, at the sight of Specters or Spirits: but
rather he should be only moved by a certain Antipathy or abomination (as
Pomponatius calls it) and would only abhor and fly from that which he so
fears. Besides, things that are supernatural, do much more touch the senses
of man, then those things do, which are natural. Neither are they to be
compared with such things, as having a natural cause (howbeit secret) do happen
to be seen daily and ordinarily. Now I say, that the cause of these things
(though natural) is secret: For Alexander Aphrodise^s, speaking of the noise
of the File, and how it sets the teeth on edge, with other things of like
nature, says, that Nature has reserved the reason thereof unto her own secret
knowledge, not being willing to impart the cause thereof unto men. The like may
be affirmed of the greatest part of those Antipathies, which being concealed
from men, yet cannot come of any secret seeds, that are contrary or enemies to
nature (as the Epicures dote) but are hidden in the secret Magazin or
Storehouse of Nature, which has not revealed or laid the same open unto any
person. Who can tell the reason why the Conciliatour, otherwise called Peter de
Albano, did abhor milk? Why Horace, and Jaques de Furly could not abide
Garlike? nor Cardan could away with Eggs. And why that Gentleman of Gascoigne
(of whom Julius Caesar Scaliger speaks) could not abide the sound of a Violl?
And of this latter in Cardan you may read the History. The Physician Scaliger
writes, how he himself knew a Gentleman, his neighbor, which had in him such
an Antipathy at the sound of a Violl, that as soon as ever he heard it (were he
in any company, even of the best sort, and that either at Table, or elsewhere)
he was constrained to forsake the place, and to go away to make water.

Now it happened, that certain Gentlemen having of a long time perceived and
known this strange nature and disposition in him, did one day invite this
Gentleman to dine with them; and having provided and suborned a certain
Minstrel of purpose, they caused him to be kept close till the appointed dinner
time, when being set at Table, they had so placed the Gent. in the midst of
them, as it was not possible for him to get forth. Now as they were in the
midst of their dinner, in came the Fiddler, and began to strike up his Violl
near unto the Gent. he that never heard the sound of that instrument, but was
presently taken with an extreme desire to piss, grew into an exceeding great
pain: for being not able to get from the Table, nor daring to lay open his
imperfection to the whole company; the poor man showed by the often change of
his countenance, in what pitiful case and pain he was. But in the end he was
constrained to yield to the present mischief, and to reveal his imperfection.
He that should undertake to search and find out the cause of this so admirable
an Antipathy, I assure my self he should be as long a time about it, as was
Aristotle in seeking out the cause of the Flowing and Ebbing of the Seas,
(whereof have written Gregory Nazianzen, Justine Martyr, Eusebius, and others)
and yet he could never learn the certain cause thereof.

But as touching the reason why the Lion does fly from the Cock: It comes not
from any seeds that lie hidden within the eyes of the Cock, and which from
thence, should strike into the eyes, and hurt the sight of the Lion: but it is
by a kind of Antipathy, whereof we have formerly spoken. By which also the
Elephant does fly from the Hog, and the Horse from the Stone Taraxippe; Or
else it is, for that the Cock and the Lion, partaking both of them of the
nature of the Sun (but the Cock more then the Lion;) it happens that the Lion
perceiving it, does presently fly from him; as the valiant Hector is said to
fly before Achilles, who was more brave and more warlike then he. Or else it is
because the Cock, being a celestial fowl, and the Lion a terrestrial
Creature, and of a g^osser matter (having the spirits more sensitive and brutal
then the other) does therefore by nature yield and give place, to that which is
more excellent. And this reason seems unto me in some sort allowable: the
rather, for that those Devils which are of a more material and terrestrial
nature, and be called Devils of the Sun, do fly the voice of the Cock, as well
as the Lion (as Psellus teaches us). And thus, in my opinion, you see
sufficiently how all the Arguments and foolish dreams and fancies of the
Epicures, may be soon answered, and easily dissolved.

The Arguments of those which deny that the Angels and Devils can take unto
them a body; Confuted.
THey which do deny that the Angels and Devils can take unto them a body, do
not aim at the mark to deny their essence, (as do the Sadduces:) but they do it
only to disprove and impugn their Apparition. For it is a good consequent; if
the Angels and Devils take not upon them any body, then can they not appear:
And if one should reply unto them and say; That in our spirit and understanding
the Angels and Devils may give some show and token of their presence. To this
they have their exception ready: That things spiritual and intelligible and
all sorts of Intelligences, do represent themselves by things that are
sensible. We will see therefore by what reasons they endeavor to prove, that
an Angel or a Devil cannot take a body unto them.

No Body (say they,) can be united to an incorporal substance, but only that
it may have an essence and a motion by the means of that substance. But the
Angels and Devils cannot have a body united in regard of any essence: for in
so doing we must conclude, that their bodies should be naturally united unto
them, which is altogether untrue; and therefore it remains that they cannot
be united unto a body, but only in regard of the motion: which is a reason of
no sufficiency for the approving of their opinion. For thereof would follow an
absurdity in regard of the Angels: to wit, That they might take all those
bodies that are moved by them, which is a very great and gross error. For the
Angel did move the tongue of Balaams Ass: and yet he entered not in his
tongue. And therefore it cannot be said that an Angel or a Devil, can take a
body unto them.

To this Argument I answer, That true it is, that an Angel and a Devil, cannot
(to speak properly) take unto them every body that is moved: For to take a body
signifies to adhere unto the body. Now the Angels and the Devils do take unto
them a body, not to unite it to their nature, and to incorporate it together
with their essence: as he that takes any kind of meat for sustenance: much
less to unite the same to their person: as the Son of God took upon him the
humane nature: But they do it only that they may visibly represent themselves
unto the fight of men. And in this sort the Angels and Devils are said to take
a body, such as is apt and fit for their Apparition, as appears by the
Authority of Denis Ariopagyte, "who writes, that by the corporal forms the
properties of "Angels are known and discerned.

Again they say, that if the Angels and Devils* do take a body, it is not for
any necessity that they have, but only to instruct and exhort us to live well,
as do the Angels; or to deceive and destroy us, as do the Devils. Now both to
the one and the other, the imaginary Vision, or the tentation is sufficient;
and therefore it seems, that it is not needful they should take unto them
any body.

I answer; that not only the imaginary Vision of Angels is necessary for our
instruction, but that also which is corporal and bodily, as we shall show
anon, when we entreat of the Apparition of Angels. And as concerning the
Devils, God does permit them both visibly and invisibly to tempt men, some to
their salvation, and some to their damnation.

Moreover they thus agree: That God appeared unto the Patriarchs (as is to be
seen in the Old Testament, and the good Angels likewise,) as Saint Augustine
proves in his book of the Trinity. Now we may not say, that God took upon him
any body, except only in the mystery of his Incarnation. And therefore it is
needless to affirm, that the Angels which appear unto men, may take upon them
a body.

I answer, (as does Saint Augustine) who says: That all the Apparitions which
were in the old Testament, were made by the Ministry of Angels, who formed
and shaped unto themselves certain shapes and figures imaginary and corporal,
by which they might reduce and draw unto God, the Soul and Spirit of him that
saw them: as it is possible, that by figures which are sensible, men may be
drawn and lifted up in spirit and contemplation unto God. And therefore we may
well say, that the Angels did take unto them a body, when they appeared in
such Apparitions. But now God is said to have appeared; because God was the
Bu^t and mark whereunto by Vision of those bodies, the Angels did endeavor and
seek to lift up unto God the Souls of men. And this is the cause that the
Scripture says, That in these Apparitions sometimes God appeared, and
sometimes the Angels.

Furthermore, they make this Objection. Like as it is agreeing naturally to the
Soul to be united to the body: so, not to be united unto a body, is proper and
natural unto the Angels and Devils. Now the Soul cannot be separated from the
body when it will: Therefore the Angels and Devils also cannot take unto them a
body when they will.

For answer whereof, I confess that every thing is born and engendered has not
any power over his being; for all the power of any thing flows from the
essence thereof, or presupposes an essence; And because the Soul by reason of
her being, is united unto the body, as the form thereof; it is not in her
puissance to deliver her self from the union of the body. And so in like manner
it is not in the power of any Angel or Devil to unite themselves to any body
as the form thereof; but they may well take a body whereof they may be the
moving cause, and (if a man may so speak) as the figure of the figure.

The affirm moreover, that between the body assumed, (if I may use this word)
and the party assuming, there ought to be some proportion and similitude; But
between the Angel or Devil, and a body, there is not any proportion; for both
the one and the other are of diverse kinds, and by consequent both of them are
incompatible together.

To this I answer, That if the proportion be taken according to the quantity,
greatness, and measure, there is no proportion between the Angels or Devils,
and a body; because their greatness is not of one and the same kind, nor of
one and the same consideration. Notwithstanding nothing can let but that there
may be a certain habitude of an Angel to a body: as of a thing that moves to
the motion, and of a thing figured to the figure, the which may be termed a
proportion.

Another Argument they make, which is this: No substance finite (whatsoever it
be) can have in any operations together: An Angel is a substance finite; and
therefore it cannot both minister unto us, and take to it self a body together.

But this is easily dissolved: for I say, that these two operations, To take a
body, and to serve in their Ministry, are ordained mutually to the Angels: and
therefore nothing hinders them, but that the Angels may use both of them at
once, and together.

Again they infer, that if Angels and Devils do take a body either it is a
Celestial Body; or some other, having the nature of some of the four Elements.
Now the Angels cannot take a Celestial Body, for that the Body of the Heaven
cannot divide it self, nor cannot make any abstraction from it self: much less
can the Devils have the power, seeing the Angels have it not. Besides, they
cannot take unto them a body of Fire, for then they should consume and burn the
body, near to which they do approach: much less can they take a body of the
Air, for that is not figurable; neither can they take any body that is a
moveable Element, and retains no form; nor yet by the same mean can they have
a Terrestrial body; for we see it written how the Angels do very soon and
suddenly vanish away out of sight, as it appeared by that Angel which came to
Tobias. And the Devils also when they show themselves in any Apparition, can
in a moment withdraw themselves from the sight of men. And therefore being
unable and unapt to take upon them any body, either Elementary or Celestial;
it must needs follow that they appear not at all.

To this I answer, That the Angels and Devils may take a body of any Element
whatsoever, and which themselves will; yea and of many Elements mixed together.
Nevertheless it is most likely to be true, and the common opinion is; that
they do soonest of all take unto them a body of the Air, by thickning the
same, and forming it of vapors, that mount and arise from the Earth, and in
turning and moving it at their pleasure, as the wind moves the Clouds, being
able to make the same to disappear and vanish away again whenever they will,
by reason that it is nothing but a vapor.

But yet this will not satisfy them, but they go further, saying; That every
assumption of a body, is limited and bounded with some union: But of an
Angel, and of a Body, there cannot be made any of those Three means of Unity,
of which Aristotle speaks; For they cannot be made one by Continuation, by
Inseperability, nor by Reason.

To this a man may answer as before. That there is not any union in the
assumption of a body by an Angel. For if there were a union, then in truth
that which Aristotle speaks, should be requisite between the Angel and the
body which it assumeth. But there is not between them any union, save only
that which is of a thing moving to the thing moved, as we have before affirmed.

Again, the good Angels (say they) in appearing unto us, either do take True
Figures visible and palpable, or such as are altogether false: if they have
such as be true, it should then follow, that if they appear in a humane body,
then they do assume a True humane body; But this is unpossible, unless we
should say, That an Angel may enter into the body of a man, which is a thing
not convenient nor agreeable unto the Angelical Nature. And if they have False
Figures, this would be much more unfitting and unbeseeming them: for that all
feigning and dissembling, or any kind of fiction is very unseemly in the Angels
of Truth. And therefore in what sort and fashion it be, the Angels cannot take
any Body upon them.

To this objection I answer, That the bodies which the Angels do take, have
True and unfeigned forms so far forth, as they may be seen and perceived by the
senses, be it in their color or their Figure, but not according to the nature
of their kind, For that cannot become sensible but by accident. That therefore
is no cause why a man should say, that there is any fiction and feigning in the
Angels: for they do not oppose and set before our eyes humane shapes and
forms, because thereby they would be thought and esteemed to be men; but to the
end that by their humane properties, we should know the virtues of the Angels.
And like as Metaphorous speeches are not therefore any whit the sooner to be
reputed false, in which by the similitude of things, other significations are
comprehended; So the figures and forms of Angels are not false, because they
are taken and assumed to the similitude and semblance of men.

More then so (they reply) that the Angels and Devils by the virtue of their
Nature, cannot work or create any effects within humane bodies, save only by
the means of their natural virtues. But their natural virtues cannot be in
things corporal to form any Figure of a humane body, but only by the usual
and determined mean of Generation, to wit, by the seed naturally ordained to
that effect* in which sort the Angels and Devils cannot take a body upon
them. And the same reason and consideration is there of other figures of
earthly bodies also which they take unto them.

But hereunto this answer may be made them, That albeit the natural virtues of
a body, do not suffice to produce a true shape of a humane body, but only by
the due and ordinary mean of Generation: Nevertheless so it is, that the
Angels and Devils are capable to cloth themselves, and to put on a certain
similitude of humane body, as touching the color and figure, and other such
exterior Accidents, and that especially at such a time, as when it may suffice
them by a local motion to move any such bodies; by means whereof both the
vapors are thickened, and again purified and made thin, as also the Clouds are
diversely painted and figured.

But they object again, that this is not sufficient: But (they say) that it
behooves the cause moving, to infuse some virtue into the body moved, but
cannot infuse any virtue, except it touch it. And if it be so that the Angels
have not any touching nor feeling with the body, it seems that then they
cannot move it. And therefore it must needs be, that they cannot take upon them
any body.

But it may be said, that the Angels by their Commandment only, may move the
body with a motion local, which they give unto it in touching of it, not with
a corporal kind of touching, but a spiritual.

Against this solution, they dispute further saying; It behooves the mover, and
the thing moved, to be connexed, and united together, as appears by
Aristotle. But in saying that an Angel does command any thing of his own will,
it is to be presupposed that then he is not together with the body, which is
said to be governed by him; and therefore he cannot move the body only by his
commandment.

Hereunto I answer; That the Commandment of the Angel does demand an
execution of his virtue and puissance: and therefore it must of necessity be,
that there be some spiritual touching of that body by which it is moved.

They insist yet further, and say; That the Angels cannot move bodies with any
local motion: and that therefore in vain should the bodies be obedient unto
them, seeing they should still remain immovable. And to prove this they bring
diverse Arguments.

Their first Argument is taken from the Authority of Aristotle, who says; That
the local motion is the principal, and most perfect of all other motions. Now
the Angels (if it be granted that they take a body) cannot use any lesser or
inferior motions; I follows therefore by a more forcible reason, that they
can much less use any local motion, which is the greatest, and the most
excellent of all others.

But the answer is easy, and we say; That the Angels moving themselves with a
local motion, by the phantasmaticall body which they took, may also cause the
other lesser motion, by using some corporal agents for the producing of those
effects which they purpose; like as the Smith uses fire to soften the Iron,
and to reduce it to that which they have an intention to make of it. And as
touching that saying of Aristotle; That the local motion is the chiefest of
all motions; the reason thereof is, because every corporal nature having life,
is apt to move it self locally by the means of the Soul, be it either
reasonable or sensitive, which gives life unto it:

Their second Argument is; That the local motion of natural bodies does
follow their forms: But the Angels are not causes of the forms of natural
bodies, and therefore they cannot be a mean to give them any local motion.

Nevertheless, answer may be made them, That in bodies there be other local
motions then those that do adhere unto the forms: as the flowing and ebbing of
the Sea, do not follow the substantial form of the water, but the influence of
the Moon; with much greater reason, therefore, may other local motions (then
such as adhere to to the forms) follow spiritual and incorporall substances.

Their third Argument is; That the corporal members do obey to the conception
of the Soul in a local motion, in as much as they have from her the beginning
of life: now the bodies which the Angels take unto them, have not from them
the beginning of life: for then it would behove that the bodies and the Angels
should be united together. And therefore it follows, that the bodies by them
assumed, cannot be obedient to any local motion.

I answer, That the Angels have their virtue less restrained or hindered then
the Souls, insomuch that being separated from all corporal massinesse, they
may nevertheless take an Ayry body, the which they can move locally at their
will and pleasure.

Besides all the former Arguments, they reply yet further, and say: That every
corporal motion does not obey to the command of the Angels, as touching the
forming and fashioning thereof: now the figure which the Angels take, is as a
kind of form. And therefore by the only Commandment of the Angels, cannot any
body take any form or figure whatsoever, be it either of man, or of any other
diverse kind comprised under one gender.

To this the answer is, That the figure which the Angels take, is in very
truth a form which is made by the abscision and dismembring (as a man may say)
of the thickning of the Air, or by the putrefaction of it, or by the
similitude and motion which may be taken of the same matter. But there is a
very great difference between the Form and Figure that is made so accidentally,
and that which is natural and according to the true substance of a thing, the
which cannot possibly be confounded with this accidental Figure.

This is not all which they object: for they say further touching the Devils:
That if they do invest themselves with a body, then they ought to be within the
body which they have taken. Now Saint Jerome interpreting that place of the
Psalmist; The Lord is in his holy Temple; and the Gloss do say, that the
Devils do command and rule over Images and Idols externally, and cannot be in
them internally: and the Idols are bodies as every man knows. And therefore
it cannot be said, that the Devils can take upon them any bodies.

I answer, That to be in or within a body of some substance, has a double and
twofold entendment of understanding. In the first sort it is understood under
the Terms of Divinity. And in this manner, nothing lets but that the Devil
may be in a body. In the second sort it is meant according To the essence, as
in giving a being to the thing, and in working man in it, which is proper unto
God only: howbeit that God does not make a part in the essence of any thing;
For God is a substance separated and abstracted solely and only in it self.
And for the further interpretation of Saint Jerome and the Gloss, which say,
That the Devil is not in Images: we may affirm, that they do privily and
closely reprehend the false opinion of the paynims and Idolaters, who made but
one thing of the Idol (were it of Wood, Brass, or Stone,) and of the unclean
spirit that remained within it; and by that means would have made a living
substance of that which in its own nature was senseless and without life, not
having either hands to touch withal, or feet to go on, or tongue to speak with;
except such only as the Devil did seem to give unto it, by his deceitful
illusions.

To make short, they object this Argument also: If the Angels and Devils do
take to them anybody, either they are united unto The whole body, or to some
Part thereof: If they be united only to a Part thereof, then can they not move
the other part, but only by the means of that part which they do move. But
this cannot possibly be; for otherwise the body assumed, should have such parts
as should have the Organs determined to the motion, which is proper to none but
living bodies. But if the Angels and Devils be United immediately to the
whole body, it behooves them then also to possess every part of that body which
they have taken to them; and so by that means they should be in many places,
which is proper and appertaining to God only: And therefore the Angels and
Devils cannot take any body unto them.

To this Argument answer may be made in this manner; That the Angel or Devil
so taking any body upon him, is wholly in the whole body which it assumeth, or
else in a part thereof, as the Soul is in the body. For albeit he be not the
form of the body which it assumeth, as is the Soul; yet so it is, that he is
the mover thereof. Now it behooves that the mover and the thing moved, should
be together; and it is nothing to the purpose to say, that an Angel or Devil,
filling a body whole and entire of substance, can be in diverse places: for the
whole body assumed by an Angel or Devil, is not but in one place only, albeit
the same be admitted to have many members and many parts.

Thus far have I done my best, both to set down and to refute all the reasons
and Arguments objected by those who deny that Angels and Devils can assume and
take unto them a body; to the intent that from hence forth their mouths might
be stopped, and that they may not esteem as fables the History of Specters, and
of the Apparitions of Spirits.

But before I come to conclude this discourse, I may not forget to tell you how
that many of the Rabbis and Jews which have taken upon them to interpret the
holy Scriptures, have held opinion, and been of the belief, that those Angels
which appeared to the Patriarks and Prophets, did not appear in any body, nor
did assume unto them any body to make themselves visible. And of this opinion
amongst others was Rabbi Moses, one of the most learned Rabbis of the Jews,
who said; That all that which is read and recorded in the Old Testament of the
Apparition of Angels, did come by an imaginary Vision; that is to say,
sometimes in sleeping, and sometimes in waking. But this position (as Saint
Thomas of Aquine calls it,) cannot prevail against the truth of the
Scriptures; for by the phrase and manner of speeches which are usual in the
books of the Old Testament, it is easy to know and discern a difference, that
which is signified and declared to have Appeared purely and simply to our eyes,
from that which is said to be done by the means of a Prophetical Vision. For
when it ought to be understood, that any Apparition was made by way of Vision,
there are some words put down and inserted, which do properly appertain to the
Vision, such as the Scriptures do intend; as in Ezechiel, the Spirit of the
Lord (says he) lifted me up between the Heaven and the Earth, and led me into
Jerusalem by the Visions of the Lord. I say therefore, that when it appears
that things are said to be done simply, we ought to understand them as done
simply and truly. Now we read in the Old Testament, that many Apparitions have
been made in body: And therefore we ought to grant, that the Angels do
sometimes assume and take unto them a body, in forming such a body as is
sensible and subject to the external and corporal Vision, as well as some kind
of shapes do form themselves in our imagination, which do produce an
imaginative Vision, when we are sleeping. But this shall suffice touching this
matter.

FINIS.
A Table of the first Part of this Book, being the Apparitions of Devils, and
Evil Spirits.
The several heads are to be found by the figures in the Margin.
MArcus Brutus his Vision. 1 Marcus Antonius his Vision. 2 Dion of Syracusa his
Vision. 3 Alexander King of Scots his Vision. 4 The Apparition of an old Woman
at Tortils in Parma. 5 Antonius Urceus Codrus, his Vision. 6 Jacobus Patricius
of Venice his Vision. 7 Cursius Ruffus, his Vision. 8 Edwinus his Vision. 9 The
Vision of Machabaeus, and Banquho Stuart. 10 Hotharus King of Swedes, his
discourse with Nymphs. 11 An Apparition to Julius Caesar. 12 Pelopidas General
of the Theban Army. 13 An evil spirit forced away by the sign of the Cross. 14
An Apparition to Matthaeus the Great. 15 An Apparition of the spirit of
Galeacius to two Merchants. 16 The Apparition of Ludovicus Alodisius. 17
Apparitions at a City called Come near France. 18 An Apparition before the
destruction of Antiochus. 19 An Apparition to a Factour of Sicily before the
bursting out of horrid flames from the top of Mount Aetna. 20 A vision to one
of the retinue of Damascus going into Persia. 21 The Vision of King Edward the
third. 22 An Apparition to Aurelianus the Emperor. 23 The appearing of the
Devil to St. Martin. 24 St. Germans detecting of evil spirits which appeared
in the habits of Men and Women. 25 Menippus invited by the Devil in shape of a
maid, to a rich house. 26 The Apparition of the Ghost of a Fencer to Jamblicus.
27 Julianus drove away Devils by the sign of the Cross. 28 A Mediolanensian
Boor afflicted by a Ghost. 29 An Apparition to Comandrus before his being
drowned in the Hellespont. 30 The appearing of a Succubus to Apelles a Monk of
Egypt. 31 Datius Bishop of Mediolana, delivers a house from the haunting of
Evil spirits. 32 A wonderful Spectrall related by Phlegon in his Book de
mirabilibus et longaevis. 33 A Monk deluded by the embraces of the Devil in
form of a beautiful Woman. 34 Vincentius his story of one who married a
phantasm. 35 Of a young Lady of the Country Marra who kept company with an
evil spirit. 36 A Woman who had accompanied the Devil in form of a man, being
at Sea causes a great storm. 37 Of a Priest who had for forty years lain with
an evil spirit. 38 Jacobus Ruffus in his fifth Book, his relation of a Woman
ravished by the Devil. 39 The Devil had commerce with a Merchants Wife seven
Miles from Wittenburg. 40 The Apparition of Benedictus the 8th, Pope. 41 The
Apparition of Theophylact who called himself Benedict the ninth. 42 The
appearing of an ugly Ghost to Saint Martin Bishop of Tours, where an unknown
Martyr was worshipped. 43 Scopas and his companie's sudden death by the falling
of a room upon them as they were feasting. 44 The raining of ashes. 45 An
Earthquake round about Palestine and Syria. 46 The representation wherewith
Theodoricus King of the Ostrogoths affrighted dies. 47 A strange report by the
Castrobians concerning Aristaeus the Poet. 48 The relation of one Leonard's
going into a Cave at the City Basil. 49 Of a Swan which by a Silver chain
fastened to her neck, haled a Bark along the River Rhene. 50 By Dianaes will, a
great darkness perplexed the Persians. 51 The Athenians assisted against the
Persians by one in the habit of a rustic fellow. 52 Lightning fell down from
Heaven upon the Persians at Minervaes Temple. 53 Aeacides assists the Greeks
fighting against Xerxes at Salamin. 54 A naked child placed before an army in
battle array. 55 Two unknown young men assisted the Locrensians against the
people of Sibaris, leading their army, upon milk-white Horses, and subduing
their Enemies. 56 Mercury, when a youth, leading some striplings, chased the
Eubaeans. 57 Castor and Pollux appeared champions for the Roman party. 58 Mars
was propitious to the Romans. 59 Bacchus's feasts solemnized at Empusa, or
O^acle, an evil Ghost sent by Hecate to them that are in distress. 60 In
Lybia; shapes of several living creatures. 61 The Orthomei their report of a
Goblin. 62 Parnassus a Hill in Boeotia. 63 Gellus his maid who dying young, her
Ghost walks at Lesbos. 64 Temissaeus his Ghost. 65 The Isle of Aega troubled
with Phantasms. 66 Spirits appeared at the death of Caligula. 67 Nero after
murdering his Mother, troubled with her Ghost. 68 Otho the Emperor troubled
with Galba his Ghost. 69 A Diabolical spirit appearing in the likeness of a
wild Boar. 70 Hobgoblins driven away from haunting of a place, by the Sacrament
and prayers. 71 The Devil appearing in the shape of an Angel to a Monk. 72 A
demoniall spirit driven away, by devout Prayers and holy water. 73 Prodigious
and wonderful sights of diverse kinds. 74 At New Castle in the coasts of
Finlandia, one in the night appears playing upon an Harp before the death of
any Soldier. 75 In Ilandia, an Island under the Artick Pole, a promontory like
the Hill Aetna. 76 Night-Ghosts representing an Army in a hostile manner. 77 In
Cracoviensis a spacious lake disturbed by Evil spirits. 78 A Priest troubled
with the Incubus or Mare. 79 Alexander his dead friend came to bed to him. 80
Gordian and his comrades saw fearful sights as they went to the City Arezzo.
81 A Devil seized upon one who had been a despiser of God, and disobedient to
his Parents, but was driven from him by calling upon God. 82 The Devils
appearing to Thomas Monachus in the shape of a Man. 83 The Devil appeared to a
wicked young fellow, who upbraided, defamed, and taunted his father. 84 A
spectrall in the form of a beautiful Woman. 85 The harmless spirits, called
Lares; the cruel, Larvae. 86 Mettal-mines frequented with both kinds of
spirits. 87 A tall Woman of a most dreadful countenance seen in the Air
before a Massacre at Antioch. 88 A Prisoner agreed with the Devil to be
delivered out of Prison and view Hell. 89 One in form of a child breaking out
of the ground, spoke as wisely as a Senator to a Ploughman. 90 The Devil in
the shape of a tall Woman appeared to Drusus made Consul, and warring by the
name of Augustus Caesar. 91 An Hobgoblin leaping and skipping before Dunstan an
English Abbot. 92 The overthrow of the Sicilians made known to shepherds by
the speaking of Spirits to one another in the night. 93 An Hermophrodite born
at Aetolia. 94 Pompeius Galienus the stoutest man of Caesar's army. 95 Castor
and Pollux appear in the shape of two young gallants. 96 The Devil transformed
into an Angel of light, appeared to Rathbodus commander of Frisia. 97
Valentinius the Arrian Bishop his dead Corpse dragged out of the Temple by evil
spirits. 98 A Monk adjures by virtue of the holy and undivided Trinity, spirits
appearing like troops of armed men, to tell what they were. 99 A Ghost appeared
to Cicero his Nurse. 100 The Prognostics of the death of the Emperor Annius
Tacitus. 101 Constantius the Emperor his strange visions. 102 Marcellus the
Bishop by earnest prayer repelled the Magic of the Devil. 103 An innumerable
company of spectralls amongst the Pilappii. 104 A noble Gentleman of Bavaria
grieved for the death of his Wife, she appeared to him. 105 Bruno Bishop of
Herbipolis, his Vision before his sudden death. 106 The Devil in shape of a
Monk walks in the Mountains of Bohemia. 107 A Fisherman taking a Sea Monster of
the shape of a beautiful woman, married her, and had a child by her, 108 A
Satanical phantasm by the Devil in form of an Hare in the sight of Luther, 109
Martin Luther his tale at a Supper, 110 The bodies of dead men entered by
Devils, 111 An innocent Fool brought an Infant safe out of the company of a
multitude of Devils. 112 A Bird melodiously singing adjured in the name of
Christ, confesses herself a spirit, 113 Two noble men long before dead,
appeared to Nicolaus Amsdorffius Bishop of Ciz, when he was a Priest at
Maidenburg, 114 In the year 1545. an evil spirit stragled about the City
Rotwill. 115 The Devil comes in shape of a man desiring a Priest to take his
confession, 116 The Devil appearing to a good old man upon his deathbed, was
driven away by a Text of Scripture, 117 A Doctor of Divinity of Lower-Germany
caught up by the Devil on horsback, then into the Air, whence he was cast
down; 118 In the lower Germany, a Monster of the bigness of a man formed like
a Dog, 119 The Devil in form of a servant waits upon a nobleman who lived by
plundering, 120 Luther's relation of certain Monks, their employing the Devil
in the Kitchen of their Monastery, 121 Crescentius the Popes Nuncio in the
Council of Trent, his Vision. 122 Spectralls after the death of a rich Epicure
at Haberstade, 123 In the year 1559. in Marhia appeared spirits in form of men
without heads, reaping corn, 124 A notable Vision near Spira in the year 1530,
on the 18th, 19th, and 20th, of July, 125 Magdalena Crucia Hispania, of the
chief City of all Corduba, Boetica, married her self to the Devil, whereby she
performed wonders, 127 The Devil appeared to a Clown to help him perform his
Lords unreasonable command, 128 The dead Husband of a Kins-woman to Phillip
Melancthon, appeared to her, 129 In the year 1555. a Spectrum appeared at
Brunsviga, in the Village of Gehern, 130 Stephen Hubener a rich Citizen of
Trawtenaw in Bohemia, his body after death entered into by the Devil, 131 The
Devil in likeness of a man, enticing many children, stole them away from
Hammel, 132 The Devil appearing, pretending himself the spirit of a deceased
man, 133 The Devil appearing in form of a dead man, and his appearing to a
maid, seeking commerce with her. 134 A maid possessed by the devil,
Prophesyeth, 135 A man troubled with the Worms, spoke Dutch, a language utterly
unknown to him, whereof being cured by a Physician, he was not able to speak a
word of that language, 136 Exorcisms for the dispossessing of the devil, 137
The devil speaks in a Maid possessed, 138 In the Wilderness of Tingut the
voices of devils are heard, 139 The devil speaks out of a Crow, 140 The devil
disputed with Hieronymus Cardanus, 141 The devil out of a Crow predicted
things to come, 142 A most certain argument to detect one possessed, 143 In the
time of Agyropolis Emperor of Rome a miserable doleful noise was heard at the
bottom of the Fountain Curena. 144 Calligraphus of Alexandria his Vision, 145
Hircanus Captain of the Jews had news by Oracle from the high Priest of his
Sons victory, 146 A strange prodigy, 147 Cornelius of Patavia, an Augur, 148
One and the self-same day, a day of Trophies and fame too, in places distant
2500. miles, 149 Sosipatra of Alexandria wrapped suddenly by a fury, 150 An
Egyptian Pilot as he was sailing to Rome, heard an unknown voice, which called
him by his name. 151 Monabazus King of the Adiabenians, heard a voice as he lay
in his Bed, 152 A prediction to Nicephorus Phaeus the Emperor, 153 A
Prodigious voice called aloud to Opicinius Cacia Novaria, 154 A confused
murmr mixed with laughing, heard in the Theater before Neroes death, 155 A
voice crying Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, in Eupilus Lake, 156 Hircanus Captain of the
Jews, his vision, 157 A voice to a vulgar man foretelling the approach of the
French against the Tribunitian soldiers, 158 A voice rebuking Lycurgus, 159 A
voice calling to Cassius, and others, conspiring against Caligula, 160
Pertharis, King Arithpertus his Son, warned by an unknown voice. 161 Chostilius
Maucius Consul, going into Spain, heard a voice sounding in his ear, stay
Maucius. 162 The Devil was heard to cry aloud through the Temple, I have made
this day quarrelsome, 163 Constans the Emperor, his death divulged by a voice
in the Air far from the place where he died, 164 Alchymists mocked by the
Devil, 165 The Devil seizes upon a soldier who defrauded the poor, 166 A
young man delivered from the Devil who haunted him in form of a Woman; by
fasting and prayer. 167 A melancholy maid fancying her self haunted with a
Ghost, cured by Physic, 168 A Monk of the Abbey K^etchtenstine, an upright
person, tortured with a Ghost, 169 One Brugus a woman, troubled with an evil
Genius. 170 Judith driven to Convulsion fits by the Devil, 171 Helena in a
village called Loes near Auden^ovia haunted with a Devil, 172 The Nuns of
Ventetus in the County of Horn cruelly handled by an evil spirit, 173 The
Virgins of the Monastery of Nazareth haunted with Devils, 174 A virgin of the
Nunnery of Saint Bridget being mad, was mounted up into the Air by the Devil
and strangled, 175 The Devil playing melodiously upon an Harp at the Nunnery
of Neognagus, 176 The Devil in shape of a Dog at a College in the
Coloniensian Province, 177 The Nuns of the Kentorpian Monastery infested by the
Devil, 178 John Fernelius his relation in his second book of Occult causes,
179 The Town of Schiltach in Germany set on fire by a Witch, 180 A maid
dispossessed of the Devil by the prayers of the Church, 181 A Fishermans
daughter at Urcad in Franckford, possessed with the Devil, 182 A Smiths daughter
near Joakims valley possessed with the Devil, 183 The dead corpse of a rich man
entered into by the Devil at Trawtenaw in Bohemia, 184 A Priests daughter
tormented by the Devil, 185 Bodinus his relation of Boys and Girls, possessed,
186 John Vierus his relation in his fifth Book, of a maid possessed with the
Devil, 187 The Lady Rosse from the eighth year of her age bound with an Evil
spirit, 188 The Brachman Philosopher of India, 189 Families in Africa who
bewitch by immoderate praise, 190 Wizards at Rhodus, 191 Ephesian characters,
192 Magical Women banished to Wildernesses, 193 The Northern Botnici Zappi and
Finnones Magitians, 194 Zoroastes King of the Bactrians thought to have found
out the Art of Magic, 195 Hecate sprung from Perses, her cruelty and immanity,
196 Pasetis Farthing, a Proverb, 197 Pythagoras his magical whispering, 198
Simon Samaritanus his wonderful arts, 199 In Galeotide a man who did wonders,
200 Apollonius Tyanaeus the Philosopher, 201 Sedetins a Jewish Physician, 202 A
Princess a notable Witch. 203 A woman strangled and devoured a boy, 204 John
Fernelius his strange relation, 205 Facius Cardanus had an aeriall devil to
his familiar, 206 James Jodoci had a ring wherein he thought the devil was tied
by exorcisms, 207 Margaret the daughter of John Vemerus of Eslingensis had her
belly swelled to an immense greatness by her Mothers means being a Witch, 208
The devil appearing in the shape of a man, calling himself Moses, deluded many
Jews, 209 Archus an Indian Wiseman, 210 Apollonius his prediction, 211
Iamblicus returning from sacrifices, 212 Govarus King of Norvegia skillfull in
the Art of divination, 213 A relation how Magicians teach Husbands to make
their wives hate Adultery, 214 Philometor his using Magical verses, 215 Crata
Regneri the wife of a Danish Champion, a Witch, 216 Clerus Sethus enticed a
virgin by a Persian Apple, 217 Cajanus by Magic could transform himself into
the shape of any beast, 218 Italian Women lethargized men's minds by some kinds
of meat, 219 In Prussia, Livonia, and Lituania a great number of Witches, 220 A
Witch foretold the issue of the battle 'twixt Uratislaus Prince of Luca, and
Grecomislaus Prince of Bohemia, 221 Apollonius Thioneus his strange cures, 222
Magical Enchantments, 223 Witches by the black art afflicted Duffus King of
the Scots, 224 Utolfus chief Ruler of the Helsingians, 225 The Lappones and
Finni their manner of revenge, 226 Johannes Galleacius by Magic disabled to
perform conjugal rights, 227 Pythagoras seen at Criton and Metapontus the same
hour, 228 Apollonius vanished out of the custody he was under, 229 Jamblicus,
praying, lift up from the ground, 230 Oddo Danicus a Pyrat, roved up and down
the Sea without a Ship, 231 Othnius by Magic brought Hadingus King of Denmark,
through a great part of the Sea, on horseback, 232 Thespetion his incantations,
233 The Image of Jupiter made by Magic to utter Oracles, 234 Appion, with the
herb Cynocephalea prevails against all manner of Witchcrafts, 236 The ghost of
Achilles presents it self to Apolonius Tyanaeus, 237 Jamblicus raises out of
Bathes two in the form of beautiful young men, 238 A phantasm wrought by the
Devil, 239 A notable Prodigy, 240 The Bulgari use Magical devices, 241 The
Hunni use enchantments, 242 Aquinus Prince of Norway uses enchantments, 243
The Wood- Finni or Tores, 244 The Magick-Vesture called Indusium, 245 An
enchanted Ensign, 246 Enchanted verses, 247 Empedocles the Magitian his verses
concerning himself, 248 The Magic Idolatry of the Persici, 249 Theti Magitians
allay tempest by sacrifices, 250 Inspired Persians walk upon burning coals, 251
A Virgin at Rome accused of incest, clears her innocence by prayers, 252
Armiplus an Egyptian Magitian, 253 A Northern people called Finni, sell winds
to Merchants, 254 Wicked blasphemous Priests, 255 Near Elton Pagum, a spirit
that vexed travelers, 256 Pelopsin an Olympic Charrioter his enchantment, 257
Pythagoras made tame a savage Bear, 258 Apollonius Tyancus his expelling of
Serpents, 259 The Abrathimins their Magitians called Brachmans, 260 Fishers of
Rotterdam deluded by Witchcraft, 261 Pasetus by famous for his skill in Magic,
262 Numa the Roman King, 263 William Earl of Holland made King, 264 The
Pythagorian sport by a Looking-glass, 265 A Chevalier swallows a sharp dart,
266 Philumena the Harlot of Apelles the Heretic, 267 Magitians come out of
Egypt to Byzantium, to show their art, 268 Wonderful tricks showed by some of
them for money, by others for ostentation, 269 Michael Sicidites, Magnus Manuel
Comnenus being Emperor, would allow no such Sights. 270 Gregory the seventh
his Miracles, 271 In the cave of an I Will belonging to the Ostrogothians strange
Enchantments, 272 Antonius Heliogabalus his Magical enchantments, 273 The
Emperor Atrian when he understood by Magic, that one whose name begun with
Theta, should succeed him in the Empire, commanded all to be slain whose names
begun with that letter, 274 Andronicus Comnenus Tyrannus consulteth a Magitian,
275 Euphrosina Wife of Alexius Angelus the Emperor, gave up her mind to
divinations, 276 Theotecnus of Athens, an Inchanter, and cruel persecutoe of
Christians, 277 Jason's Enterprise with fifty four more young gallants. 278
Johannes Teutonicus by Magical art causes Spectrum to appear. 279 An Arabian
after drinking Cocks-blood, conjured an East wind for three days, 280 A young
gallant of the Town of Gaza consulteth Magitians for the obtaining of a Ladies
love with whom he was enamoured, 281 Demetrius Spartanus deludes the people of
Rome by his Magic, for which he is worthily punished, 282 A Maid of sixteen
years of age possessed with a Devil, 283 Cardanus his Relation out of his
fifteenth book, of one possessed with a Devil, 284 Vierus his strange relation
of a Maid bewitched, 285 His wonderful relation of an Husbandman bewitched,
286 Fulgosus his miraculous report of a religious man, 287 Boccatius a noble
Lombard, 288 Johannes Baptist. Port. Neapolitan, his relation of a Witch, 289
Jarcka his gift to Apollonius Tyaneus, 290 Witches by giving men cheese, turned
them into beasts, 291 Witches transforming men into beasts, sell them to
Merchants, 292 Michael Verdunus and Peter Burgottus contract with the Devil,
293 An horrible Earthquake in Norway, in the year 1348. 294. A Bull charmed
with Magical incantations, 295 A Virgin of Bononia conversant with men two
years after her death, 296 A studious young man of Sfordia inamoured of a
Virgin, 297 Andreas an Italian, a notable Satanical jugler, 298 A dunghill Cock
divines, 299 John Faustus carried about with him an evil spirit in shape of a
dog, 300 The Devil comes to Frederick of Austria, being prisoner in a Castle
near Naburg, offering to set him free, but he drives the devil away by the sign
of the Cross, 301 John an Almain Priest at Haberstadium, a Magitian, 302 A
Magitian who cut off his servants head, uniting it to his body again, 303
Enchantresses who desired and endeavored to destroy the fruits of the earth,
304 A Magitian of a Neighbor Town of Ahena, 305 Martin Luther his tale of his
Mothers being vexed with an Inchantress, 306 Without the permission of God the
Devil can hurt no man, 307 Pope Alexander a Magitian, 308 Of a Virgin, who
instead of tears wept drops of blood, 309 A Magitian being hanged vanished
away, and a bundle of straw remained in his stead, 310 How to arm our selves
against the power of the devil, 311 Of the commixtion and commerce of the devil
with Witches, 312 A Witch uses means to seduce a chaste Virgin to lie with the
devil, 313 A young Virgin signing her self with the sign of the Cross, drives
away devils, 314 A woman prostitutes her self to the devil, 315 In the
Brixiensian Diocese, a young Wife bewitched to death, 316 A young Nobleman
deprived by Witchcraft of natural strength to beget children, 317 Devils appear
in form of young gallants, 318 A Priest who formerly thought there was no
Witches bewitched, 319 Barrenness in a family by Witchcraft, 320 A Midwife a
Witch, 321 A poor Labourer set upon by Gentlewomen Witches in the shape of
Cats, which he grievously hurt, 322 A woman to perpetrate her malice,
contracteth with the Devil, 323 A woman afflicted with a Leprosy by
witchcraft, 324 A Witch infects an hangman with Leprosy, 325 Enchantments hid
under the threshold of a door, 326 A woman by constant and fervent prayers to
Almighty God, delivered from Witchcraft, 327 Witches devote their Children to
the Devil, 328 Witches make it rain, hail, or cause a tempest at their
pleasure, by the power of the devil, 329 A Witch causes loathsome stinks, to
the terror of her apprehenders, 330 A Witch being to be hanged, spits upon the
face of the hangman, whereupon he fell down dead, 331 The History of Job
evidenceth the power of the devil, 332 They who get unjustly, labor for the
devil, 333 A Witch cures a woman afflicted with sickness, by praying to the
devil, 334 Witchcraft by Spells, and using of a sieve, 335 Two verses out of
the Psalms being pronounced, no Butter will be produced by art, 336
Ring-Magick, by putting a ring upon a bowl of water, 337 Rod-magick. 338 Amasis
King of Egypt so bound by Magic, that he could not perform Nuptial rights to
his Wife Laodice, 339 Witchcraft performed by tying of a knot many ways, 340 A
woman accuses a Witch for binding her Husband, that he could not perform
marriage rites, 341 It passes the power of the Devil to bind men from eating
or drinking, by intercepting the power of their stomach, 342 Insulanus Lord of
the Novallians, desirous to know the number of his days, 343 John Charterius
an Historiographer, and Guilhelm a Doctor of Sorbon, ^emned for Sorcery. 344 A
^naus Witchcraft detected by her husband. 345 A great Lady of Lugdunum, her
Witchcraft discovered by her stallion, 346 A Nobleman of Maldunum, who for
curiosities sake went amongst Witches, 347 A woman accused of Witchcraft by her
Husband, 348 A great company of Witches vanished away by a young maids calling
upon God, who was seduced to their society, 346 The devil obliges witches by
an oath to renounce God, 350 The devil seated upon a Throne, 351 The devil
lies as men use to do with Women, with a Witch. 352 Confessions of Witches.
353 Witches by their Husbands taken in the manner with the devil, 354 A
Noblewoman of Spain seduced by a witch, had to do with the devil at eighteen
years of age, 355 A whole family bewitched to madness, 356 A Woman by Magic
cures Fevers, 357 A Witch counterfeits holiness, 358 A Witch who had
bewitched a man, could not cure him again though she earnestly endeavored it,
359 A Witch cures the Horse of a Nobleman, and transfers the Horses disease to
a servant, 360 A Magitian promised to transfer the disease of the father to his
sucking Infant, 361 A witch commanded by a Judge to touch a woman whom she had
bewitched, falls down dead, 362 A Magitian bidding a man sick of a Fever, give
it his enemy, he answering he had not any, but transferring it to the Witch, he
died, and the sick man recovered, 363 A great number of Witches burned for
Witchcraft, 364 A disease which comes to a man by a natural cause, and not by
witchcraft, cannot be cured by Magic. 365 A house troubled with an evil
spirit, 366 A spirit in shape of a horse, kills twelve men, 367 The treasure
Arcolius near Lutetia discovered by Magic, 368 A Lawyer and his companions
seeking by Conjurations for treasure, are affrighted by spirits from their
enterprise, 369 Satan deludes many by binding fast their eyes, 370 A Witch who
enfeebled an Horse by witchcraft, 371 A way to free Cattle from sorcery by
using a sieve, 372 Witchcraft, 373 A Mason tormented by Witchcraft, 374 White
witches or those who cure and deliver from harm, 375 A Witch cures a sick woman
whom she had bewitched, 376 A Sorcerer of Flanders. 377 A Bishop bewitched, 378
Triscalanus a witch whom the King of France pardons, confesses the way by
which sorceries are conveyed, 379 Satan enters a man mortally wounded, 380 A
Butcher discovers many witches in a Wood in the night. 381 The confession of
three witches who were condemned to dye for witchcrafts which they had
committed, 382 The Sorcerers of Potezana their confession, 383 The confession
of a Witch at Biturgum, 384 The confession of a Witch who could not rest
unless she did some evil every day, 385 The Devils declare what is done in
diverse Nations at a convention, 386 There is no meeting of Witches and Devils
without dancing, 387 A witch anointing her self, lies void of sense for three
hours after, which returning to her body, relates things from diverse Countries.
388 A witch departs from her body for a whole night to the convention of
Devils and witches, and her spirit returns to her body in the morning, 389 The
Devil in form of a great Hee-goat adored by Witches, 390 The admirable
judgment of seven Magitians, 391 Baro of Razii who was condemned for using
Magic, his confession. 392 A most diabolical bloody Midwife, 393 Cazereis a
cursed Witch of Tholossa, 394 A Magician who upon a sudden oftentimes flew, 395
Articles against Aegidius Garnerius, whereof he was accused and Convicted, 396
Peter Burgottus, and Michael Verdunus, their confessing their sacrificing to
the Devil, 397 A Witch taking the form of a Wolf, wounded with an arrow, 398
Witches in the forms of Wolves and Cats, 399 The Lappi sell calms and storms,
400 A Jew who at any time when he pleased could transform himself. 401 Nothing
more clear by History, then that many have been transformed into beasts, 402 An
English Soldier at Cyprus turned into an Ass by a Witch, 403 A dialogue
betwixt a stage player and an Ass in Egypt, 404 Two witches turn men into
beasts, transform a Player into an Ass, 405 Atheistical men turned into
Asses, 406 Witches raise lightnings, storms, and tempests, 407 How a witch
caused a storm, 408 How some wicked Priests caused showers, 409 How witches
kill Cattle, 410 Children killed in the wombs of their Mothers by witches, 411
A cursed witch Christneth two Toads. 412 Witches with a powder kill Herbs, 413
A witch who by his voice could kill men. 414 The Devil teaches a Conjurer to
shoot darts at a crucifix, 415 An Hermophrodite a Witch attached, discovers the
conjuration, conventicles, and diabolical acts of Witches, 416 A Witch at
Laodunum who debilitated, and screwed men awry, and destroyed beasts and fruit,
417 A Conjurer in the sight of the people flying up toward Heaven, snatched
his Wife with him, laying hold on him, and a Maid also who stood by them, to
the great wonder of the amazed people, who beheld them wavering in the Air, 418
The Table to the Second Book, being of Oracles, Prophecies, etc.
The several heads are to be found by the figures in the Margin.
THe counsel which Telephus receives from the Oracle at Delphos for cure of his
wound, 1 Croesus King of the Lydians consults the Oracle at Delphos, for the
cure of his son being dumb. 2 The Minyae, the Plague raging upon man and beast,
consult the Oracle. 3 Atheniensis son of Craterus King of the Persians,
consulting the Oracle, was told, That he should kill his own father, 4 Oedipus
kills his father according to the prediction of the Oracle. 5 The strange death
of Eumelus King of the Bosphorean Cymerians, 6 Cyrus King of the Persians,
consults Orpheus his head at Lesbos, 7 Polycrates the Samian Tyrant consults
the Oracle at Delphos, 8 Great slaugter to happen revealed to Julius Caesar, by
evident and wonderful Prodigies. 9 Titus the Emperor his death foretold by the
Oracle. 10 Mauritianus the son of Justinianus the Emperor being slain by the
Goths, the Oracle was fulfilled, 11 Manuel Comnenus after he had reigned 38
years excepting 3 months, hoping to prolong his life, put himself into
Monastical habit. 12 Polycrates the Theban consults the Oracle at Delphos for
the finding of treasure, 13 Psameticus encouraged by the Oracle, gains the King
of Egypt, 14 Manuel Comnenus Emperor, names his son Alexius, in observance of
the Oracles doubtful speech. 15 Boetia being spoiled, those of that Country
who escaped, run to the Oracle, 16 The Teucri Cretensians seek themselves new
habitations, by the advice of the Oracle, 17 The Phrygians carried by Aeneas
their Captain into the Laurel field, were not willing to go any further, but
hearkened to the Oracle, 18 The prediction of the Oracle at Delphos to the
Lacedaemonians, 19 Codrus King of the Athenians, in observance of the Oracle,
voluntarily sacrificed himself for the safety of his people. 20 The Oracle
predicteth the overthrow of the Athenians by the Persians, 21 Valerius
Torquatus swallowed up by the ground, in which place an Altar is built
according to the advice of the Oracle, 22 In the Cimbrick War the goddess,
mother of great Idaea, declared victory to the Romans, 23 The Oracle at Delphos
declares victory to the Romans against the Vientians, 24 The Dorienses obeying
the command of the Oracle, got Elea, 25 The Oracle's advice to the
Lacedaemonians, how to overcome the Tegeans, 26 An Oracle given out in the time
of Tiberius Emperor of Rome, 27 The Devil speaks in the Idol of Zemus, 28 An
Oracle given to the Ancestors of Sardanapalus. 29 An Oracle given to the Poet
Hesiod. 30 Epaminondas his charge from the Oracle at Delphos. 31 The Oracle
given to Cambyses the Persian King. 32 Pythia predicteth the death of Philip
King of Macedon, 33 The doubtful Oracle given him at Delphos, 34 Aescylus the
Athenian tragic Poet, his death foretold by the Oracle. 35 Daphidas the
Sophister Ironically consults the Oracle at Delphos. 36 Dionysius senior,
Tyrant of Syracusa, acted a Tragedy to the Athenians in their Bachanalian
feasts. 37 Fatal necessity unavoidable, 38 Hannibal the famous Carthaginian
Captain, his death predicted by the Oracle. 39 Appius Claudius consults the
Oracle, 40 The Antianaean Oracles their advice to C. Caligula, 41 Parhonius
foretold by the Oracle to succeed in the Empire, 42 A Shepherd, laid down by
Orpheus his Tomb, falling asleep, chants forth Orpheus his verses in a sweet
tone, 43 The Scythian Islanders send the tenth of their treasures they get out
of the silver and gold Mines, yearly to Apollo at Delphos, 44 An aequivocal
Oracle given to the Messanensians, 45 The answer of the Oracle at Delphos to
the Phocenses, 46 The Lacedaemonians consult Pythia, 47 Cleomenes King of the
Spartans, consults the Oracle at Delphos, 48 Philomelus having taken the
Delphick Oracle compells Pythia to tell him somewhat of future events, 49 The
Oracle's answer to Croesus at Delphos, 50 Arcesilaus being driven from his
Kingdom, sent to Delphos, to consult the Oracle, 51 Nero the Emperor, warned
by Mathematicians, that the ruin of the Empire was portended by the Stars. 52
Xerxes the son of Darius finds an Urn, 53 Silvester the Pope reported to have
obtained the Popedom by evils works, 54 Whas encouragement the Aeginetians
received by the Oracle at Delphos to War, 55 The wisdom of the Persian Magies,
56 An huge beard grows upon the chin of the Priest of Minerva at Pedesensia,
upon a sudden, immediately before a diverse fortune seizes upon the people, 57
Beleses a Chaldean encourages Arabes General of the Medes, to invade the
Babylonians, 58 Thales the Milesian discovers the plenty one year, and scarcity
another, by the rising of the seven Stars, 59 Boeotius the son of a common
crier, his fortune told by a Chaldean, 60 The birthday of the Emperor
Augustus, observed, 61 Scribonius the Mathematitian, 62 Tiberius Caesar makes
use of Thrasillus, a cunning Chaldean, 63 Claudius the Emperor predicteth the
time of his own death, 64 An Astronomer foretold Nero his being Emperor, and
his killing his Mother at the time of his birth, 65 Ascletario a Mathematician,
foretells his own death. 66 Domitian the Emperor, superstitiously given to
Mathematical predictions, 67 Hadrian the Emperor, an excellent Astronomer, 68
Septimius Severus Pertinax a skillful Mathematician, 69 A Midwife of
Constantinople at the birth of Ablabius, foretells his being Praetor, 70 Two
Jews, Astrologers, promise Zira Prince of the Arabians Empire, and long life,
if he would demolish the Christian Temples and Images of Saints, 71 The advice
of John, an Astronomer and Magitian to Lucapenus the Roman Emperor, 72 Nicolas
son to Guido Earl of Patavia, predicted pernition to his Country, by Jambonus
Andreas, an Astrologian, 73 Guido Bonatus foretold the Earl of Mountferrat,
that he should receive a wound in his Hip, by a salley which he should make the
day before the Calends of May, 74 Antiochus Tibertus foretells Guidon, that he
should be killed by his intimate friend, upon suspicion of Infidelity, 75
Petrus Leonius, a dextrous Astronomer, discovered, by his Art, that sudden
death was portended to him by water, 76 Predictions by Bartholomeus Coclecles,
an excellent Physiognomist, 77 An Astrologer foretells Rodulphus the
Haspurgensian Earl his being Emperor, 78 The Mathematitians predicted Sfortia
his high Empire, 79 Braccius the Montenensian Duke, seeing the body of his
Enemy Sfortia drowned, praised him with exquisite Encomiums, 80 Henry a
Bohemian an Astronomer, his predictions, 81 Basil a Southsayer foretells the
death of Alexander Medices Duke of Florence, 82 John Liechtenberg his
prediction, 83 The tenth day of September fatal to Peter Alois, 84 Brazen
tables wherein was engraven a prediction, That the Grecians were to overcome
the Persians, 85 A wonderful thing in the second Carthaginian War, 86 Verses
found in a table of stone, when the walls of Chalcedon were made equal with the
ground, 87 A table of stone found in the bank of the River Scirtus, with
Hierogliphical Egyptian letters written on it, 88 Chaldeans foretell
Alexander's danger if he went to Babylon, 89 What Aretas King of the Persians
gathered by Southsayings, 90 Apollonius an Egyptian foretold the death of Caius
Caligula the Emperor, 91 Apollonius foretold Cilix his slaughter, 92 Larginus
Proclus foretells the death of Domitian the Emperor, 93 The death of Constance
discovered by a Soldier, observing the intrals of beasts and birds. 94
Alexander Severus Emperor, desiring to begin his speech to his Soldiers with
a lucky word, Fortune brought him one clean contrary. 95 A woman meeting the
two Maximines in the Marketplace, falls dead, 96 Dioclesian his being Emperor
is foretold by a Woman, 97 Marian a most wise Earl his predictions, 98 A
Soothsayers prediction to Agilulph Duke of the City Taurina, 99 Antonine his
prediction to his Scholars, 100 Remex a Rhodian, his prediction, 101 An old
Proverb in Carthage, 102 Spartan guests ravish the daughters of Scedasus. 103
The Speech of a Magitian of Egypt to Anthony, 104 The Roman Captains forbid to
go with weapons beyond Ctesiphon, by reason of an ancient Prophecy, 105 Sybill
her Prophecy of the destruction of Antichrist, 106 The god Ammon answers the
Tementes, 107 Sybill foretells the warlike glory of the Macedons, 108 A Child
having teeth speaks the same day in which he is born. 109 A Child within
twenty four hours of its birth spoke and made signs with its hands, 110 A
Syrian seeing a Ship running with full sails, foretold it should be sunk, 111
Phericides foretold an earthquake within three days, 112 The answer which the
Oracle at Delphos gave to Glaucus enquiring counsel concerning unjustly
deteyned money, 113 Alphonsus King of Arragon besieging Neopolis, had the
taking thereof foretold him by a man of a reverend aspect, 114 Women who
guessed at things to come, by whirl-pools and noise of Waters, 115 Abaris of
Seuthias a divine of the Hyberboreans, 116 Aedesius the son of Chrysanthus had
a body so nimble that it exceeded humane belief. 117 Agias divined unto
Lysander that he should conquer the name of the Athenians. 118 Philumena a
Soothsaying maid, 119 Saint Augustine reports of Algibertus, that he knew all
secrets, 120 Basilacius a man of an unaccustomed life a fortune tellers. 121
Merlin begotten by a spirit called Incubus, and a British Noblewoman, foretold
many things to come, 122 An unclean spirit having possessed Jacoba, speaks in
her, 123 A notable Impostor of Peter Brabantius who as often as he pleased spoke
from the bottom of his belly without moving his lips. 124 Amphiarus a
soothsayer, by the gaping of the earth swallowed up, with his Chariot and
Horses, 125 Actius Navius a shepherd boy, a soothsayer, 126 Posthumus the
Sooth-sayer, 127 Spurina foretells to Julius Caesar his danger of being killed.
128 A German Prophesyeth to Agrippa thou prisoner, his deliverance, and future
prosperity, 129 The Adelittans and Almogonens divine from the flying of Birds,
and meeting of Wild beasts, 130 Alexander the Emperor given to riot and
Magic, 131 Simeon Duke of the Bulgarians. 132 An Idol built by Mahomet,
whereunto a legion of Devils are engaged by Magic, to which Christians cannot
come without danger, 133 The manner how the Biarmians, Bothynians, Finlanders,
divine, 134 How Jannes the master of Theophilus the Emperor, foretold things
to come, 135 Apollonius the Emperor slain at Rome by Stephen according as
Apollonius spoke in an ecstasy at the instant of his death at Ephesus. 136
Stephen the Hagio-Christophorite, knew from the Devil by Sethus a Magitian,
that destruction hanged over the head of Andronicus Comnenus, 137 William King
of the Romans dying unfortunately and suddenly, was buried in a Tomb in Frisia,
which had stood long beautifyed, without any man buried, because it was
Prophesyed that a King of the Romans should be laid therein, 138 Two brothers
not knowing one another, kill each other as a soothsayer foretold them, 139
Sigthune King of Swethland as he sacrificed, understood that by fatal
necessity, he was to die by Gold, 140 Two Snakes found in the bed of Sempronius
Gracchus. 141 The Soothsayers answer to Marcellinus, 142 Agigulph a Soothsayer,
counsels Antharis King of the Longobards, to take Tolinda the Virgin to Wife,
143 Batabaces Priest of the great mother Idea, fore-shew's a great victory to
the people of Rome, 144 A Madman from Bellona, shows to L. Sylla, that he
should obtain the palm of conquest, 145 The builders of Ephesus consult the
Oracle for direction where to erect it, 146 The Locrians wooden Dog, 147
Melanthus a banished man from his country, received an Oracle, 148 The Oracle
Apollo Pythius directs Pausanias where to build Byzantium, 149 A Sow that had
Pigs, made a divination to the Trojans of building a City, 150 Tarquinius
Superbus his founding the Temple of Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva, 151 Alexander a
Priest of Minerva, Prophesies to Alexander that he shall be a Conqueror, 152
The interpretation of a divination by Calchas a Prophet, 153 Aristander the
diviner, his interpretation of a Crow's flying when Alexander the Great
assaulted Gaza. 154 A Magpy sits on the head of Coelius Pontius declaring the
Law, 155 At Alexander the great his expedition into Asia, a Cyprus Tree
sweateth, 156 The Siracusians besieged, perform solemn rights to Hercules. 157
Prodigies appear when Lucius Sylla went with an army to the Sociall war, 158
The Hilt of P. Scipio Africanus his Sword springs with blood, 159 A Ram with
one Horn sprung out of the middle of his forehead, brought to Pericles. 160 The
Chaldean Prophets foretell the translation of the Persian Empire to the
Macedonians. 161 The Buckler of Maximinus the father set on fire by the Sun,
and his spear struck by a Thunderbolt, 162 A Martin flying amongst a Navy of
Ships, lighted upon the very top of the Stern of the Ship wherein Dion was, 163
An Eagle snatcheth a spear from one of the guard of Dion wherewith sublimely
mounting, at length she let it fall into the deep, 164 The suburbs of Sardis
filled with Snakes, which the Horse of Croesus King of the Lydians going to
Grass, devours, 165 The Sacrifices offered by Dionysius the younger to the
gods, portend great prodigies, 166 Tarquinius Superbus his dream, 167 Strange
sights appear to Hippocrates the most valiant Duke of Athens, 168 Statues
sweat, with diverse other formidable prodigies, 169 The prodigious return of a
child almost born, to his Mothers belly again, 170 Archelaus Tetrarch of Judaea
and Idumea, his dream, 171 The Ensign of Barnabas, Lievtenant-Governour,
shattered with a Thunderbolt. 172 Zeno the Emperor flees to a little Castle
upon an Hill called Constantinople, 173 Frederick the second told by one who
had a familiar spirit, That he should die at the Florentine field, 174
Adelheida, a Lady of the noble blood of the Tuscans, of so high a wit, by
observing the Heavens and Stars, that she foresaw things to come, 175 A
fortune-teller's prediction to Machabaeus King of the Scots, 176 Antonius of
Leva animates Charles the fifth, Emperor, to war upon France, 177 A
Soothsayer's prediction to Amilcarus Duke of the Carthaginians, 178 The Velitri
consult an Oracle, 179 Hadrianus Cornetanus Cardinal, conceives hope of
obtaining the Papacy by the Oracle of a Fortune-telling woman, 180 Demophon's
advice to Alexander, given from his observations in Augury; 181 A certain
Syrian whose name was Eunus, who delighted in Magical enchantments, 182
Megistas Arcanas his Prophecy, 183 Domitian the Emperor commands Ascletario to
be burnt, and Larginus Proclus to be hanged, for that they foretold the day of
his death, 184 Perusinus the greatest Magitian of al Italy, 185
The Table of Dreams, Visions, Revelations, etc.
The several heads are to be sound by the figures in the Margin.
JUpiter sends a dream to Agamemnon, 1 Cyrus King of Persia his dream, 2
Socrates foresaw in his dreams, that his Scholar Plato would be an excellent
Orator and Philosopher, 3 Hippocrates his dream, 4 Alexander descended from
Hercules by Carinus, and from Aeacus on his Mothers side, by Neoptolemus; his
dream, 5 Sophocles his dream. 6 Aeneas Seneca his dream, the night after he
undertook the Tutorship of Seneca, 7 Fudemus a Cyprian his dream, 8 Aspatia the
daughter of Hermotimus, her dream. 9 The Mother of a certain Soldier, her
dream. 10 Aesculapius of Athens his prescription by Oracle to Plutarch an
Athenian, 11 Themistocles his Vision. 12 Lucullus going to Hellespont, his
Vision, 13 Marcorius, a Physician of Augustus Caesar, his dream. 14 Laodice the
Wife of Seleucus, her dream, 15 Publius Decius, Tribune of the Roman Soldiers,
his dream. 16 Gracchus, brother of Tyberius his dream, 17 Calphurnia, Wife of
Julius Caesar, her vision predicting his death, 18 Cornelius his foresight of
his death, 19 A beholder of Plays, his dream, 20 Great Sfortia his dream, 21
Malgepa, an Archer to Galeacius Sfortia, his dream. 22 Mark-Anthonie Taurell,
Duke of Guastella his dream, 23 Horace Perusine, servant of Alexander Medices
Duke of the Florentines, his dream, 24 Baptista and Cardanum his Vision, with a
voice speaking to him at the instant of his Mothers death, she dying far
distant from the place where he had this vision. 25 Ulysses his contrary
dreams, 26 ^indarus a Lyrick Poet his dream, 27 Phail King of the Phocians, his
dream, 28 Aristomenes King of the Messenians, his dream. 29 Alexander King of
Macedonia, understood by a dream, that the right hand of Cassandra would prove
mortal to him, 30 Alcibiades his dream, 31 King Croesus his Vision. 32
Polycrates daughter of a Tyrant of the Samians, her vision, 33 Verses presented
unto Hipparchus, son of Pisistratus in his sleep, 34 The like dream had Simon
of Athens, 35 Socrates his construction of a verse of Homer read unto him, 36
Aterius Rufus a Roman Knight, his vision, 37 Julius Caesar not long before he
was murdered, seemed to himself in his sleep sometimes to fly above the
clouds, sometimes to join his right hand to Jupiter, 38 Helius Cuma, one of
Caesar's friends, his most fearful dream the night before his murder, 39 Nero
affrighted with dreams and evident signs of things to come, 40 Galba the
Emperor his dream a little before his death, 41 Domitian his dreams
immediately before he was slain. 42 Anthony Carocalla Emperor, his vision a
little before he was murdered, 43 Himerea her vision, 44 Cicero his vision. 45
Quintus Catulus his vision, 46 Vespasian the Father, his Vision, 47 Julian his
Vision the night before his being declared Emperor, 48 Stipo the Philosopher
his vision, 49 Hippias the son of Pisisttratus his dream, 50 The Mother of
Dionysius of Syracusa, her vision when she conceived him, 51 Astyages Cyrus his
dreams, 52 Cyrus King of the Assyrians, his dream, 53 Antigonus his dream
concerning Mithridates, 54 Arcea, Mother of Augustus Caesar, her Vision. 55
Octavius his dream concerning his son Octavius. 56 Vespasian his confidence of
his sons succeeding him. 57 Adrian his vision before his being ordained
Emperor, 58 Alexander's visions whilst he assaulted the City of Tire, 59
Eumenes his wonderful vision, 60 The Priests of Proserpina their vision, 61
Hannibal Captain of the Carthaginians, his vision. 62 Amandatus, servant of
Mardonius, his vision, 63 Xerxes his dreams. 64 The Spartans, Collicratidas
being Captain, about to fight with the Athenians, the Soothsayers dissuade
them, 65 Pyrrhus King of the Epirots, his dream when he besieged Sparta. 66
Mithridates his vision, which foreshewed things to come. 67 Cneius Pompeius his
vision before the Pharsalian fight. 68 Hecuba when she was great with child of
Paris, her vision, 69 Cambyses King of the Persians, his vision. 70 Darius
moves out of Susa, against Alexander, encouraged by a dream, 71 Domitian his
dream, 72 Eziline, surnamed Monk, a bloody Tyrant, his terrible Vision, 73 The
Mother of Phalaris her vision, 74 Amilcar Captain of the Carthaginians, his
dream falsely expounded, 75 Jupiter appears to T. Latinus, a man of the common
people, 76 Changius first Emperor of the Tartars, his vision. 77 Juno appears
to Hannibal Captain of the Carthaginians. 78 Valens the Emperor his vision, 79
Hippias son of Pisistratus, his vision, 80 Sabbacus King of the Aethiopians,
his vision. 81 Sethon King of Egypt, Priest of Vulcan, his vision. 82
The Table of Mocks of the Devil, to strengthen the Idolatry of the Gentiles.
THe power of Vesta, 1 Aeneas places houshold-gods, brought from Troy at
Lavinium, 2 The Egyptians worship Isis for her Miracles, 3 In the Temple of
Aesculapius amongst the Epidaurians, those who pray to the god sleeping, learn
the reason of recovering health. 4 Aristides a Rhetorician of Smyrna, commanded
by Aesculapius, 5 An Ensign speaks with a low voice, 6 A whale of an
incredible bigness swimmeth to a bulwark in the Sea at Tire, 7 The god Pan
promises to aid the Athenians in the fight at Marathon, 8 Strange Visions at
Cyzicum, Minerva was seen in visions to many. 9 The Boetians their dream, when
enslaved by the Thracians, 10 The King of the Spartans after the Argians were
vanquished, sacrifices in Juno's Temple, 11 The Image of victory which stood
in Minerva's Temple, turns its back toward the door, 12 The Images of gods
appear not only in the night, but in the day, commanding every one to pray, 13
Before the demolishment of Troy, the fire in Minerva's Temple spares to burn
the sacrifices, 14 Caesar Augustus his vision. 15 Ladened Ships could not
arrive at Byzantium, 16 Olive Trees dedicated to Pallas, 17 Aesculapius
reported not to be born of the Nymph Coronis, but of an egg of a little Crow,
18 Jupiter's anger for Antonius Maximus his cruelty to his servant, 19 The
Argonautes tossed with a Tempest, call upon Orpheus, 20 Thophinius and Agamedes
build a Temple to Apollo. 21 C^oesus King of the Persians overcome by Cyrus,
invocates Solon, 22 The Athenians received by Oracle, that they should invoke
the North wind to help them. 23 A Vulcanian hillock near Agrigentum, 24 Romulus
vows to build a Temple to Jupiter, 25 Numa Pompilius his devotion to Jupiter.
26 Tullius Hostilius vows to sacrifice 12 Samians to Mars. 27 Counterfeiting of
piety, 28 A Miracle manifested about Claudius, 29 Adrian punished for his
unjust shedding of blood, 30 The Oracle from Pythia to the Athenians, infected
with the Plague. 31 Apollo answers the Grecians. 32 Hercules the son of
Alcmena, offers sacrifice to Jupiter. 33 Aurelian the Emperor consults the
Sibyllaean books, 34 The Persians spoil all the Temples of the Greeks. 35
Without Cratonis, a Temple dedicated to Juno. 36 A great barrenness coming to
Pelasgus, they devote the Spring to their gods, 37 A Miracle at the Rock of the
Posidoniacorians. 38 Diana being angry sends a Calydonian Boar to destroy the
grain in Oetolia, 39 A Miracle in Arcadia, 40 Glaucus the son of Sisiphns, 41
Hercules erects a magnificent Temple to Iolaus his Nephew. 42 Ciana kills her
Father for deflowring her. 43 The Temple of Isis. 44 The Thebans their severity
against those who violated their Religion. 45 Pentheus King of the Thebans, was
torn in pieces by the Priestsesses of Bacchus, for abusing his father, 46 The
Potilians extinct for abusing the consecrated things of Bacchus, 47 C.
Terentius Varro Overseen of the Temples, 48 Hannibal and Himilco two
Carthaginian Captains, command their Soldiers to cast down Monuments. 49 The
Image of Pallas falls from Heaven, 50 The Athenians neglect their god, 51 The
Captains of the Japignians take the Images out of the Temple, 52 The Aeginetae
invading the Epidaurians, carry away the Olive Tree Images of Damiae Auxesiae.
53 Artabarus a Persian, rushes into Neptune's Temple, and falls upon his
Image. 54 A Soldier of Scipio Africanus minor, attempteth to bereave the Image
of Apollo of its golden Vestment. 55 Agamemnon smote a Goat with a dart near
Diana her grove. 56 The Fish Pompilus in esteem with Neptune. 57 A certain man
steals a piece of money out of the Temple of Apollo at Delphos, 58 Sambicus
throws down brazen Statues, and sells them. 59 Consecrated things taken out of
the Temple to pay Soldiers, 60 Q. Fulvius Flaccus heavily punished for
carrying Marble tiles which were to mend the Temple of Juno, to the Temple of
warlike Fortune, 61 An horrible slaughter of the Persian coming with intent to
spoil the Temple at Delphos. 62 The Judgment which followed Thereon King of the
hither- Spain, upon his abolishing the Temple of Hercules, 63 The judgment
which followed the Scythians for their spoiling the Temple of Venus in Urania,
64 The revenge which Alexander received for suffering his Soldiers to throng
into the Temple of Ceres, 65 Pyrrhus his punishment for sacriledg, 66 The
punishment of Himilco Prince of Carthage, for his spoiling of Temples, 67 The
misery which befell Mithridates for his sacriledg, 68 The misery which befell
the Graecians for their spoiling the Temple of Neptune, 69 Sparta shaken with
frequent impulsions of the Earth, 70 Cytharoedes flies with his stole to the
Altar of Juno, 71 The Temple of warlike Neptune built by Trophimus and
Agamedes, 72 The Temple of Jupiter Lycaeus in Arcadia, 73 The Temple of
Eumenides dedicated by Orestes in Cenycaea, a City of Achaia. 74 The punishment
of Erisichthon for cuting down the grove of Ceres, 75 The heavy Judgment which
befell Cambyses King of Persia, and his Army, for burning the Oracle of Jupiter
Ammon, 76 The destruction of the Persians, who burned the Temple of Ceres. 77
The sad event of revenge, 78 A Grove dedicated to Aesculapius at Coos, 79 The
ceremonies which the Virgins dedicated to Diana used. 80 The ceremonies which
the Boetians used the feast day of Mercury. 81 A Well, consecrated to the
Vestal Virgins for the ceasing of the Pestilence. 82 Phalesius a private man
builds the Temple of Aesculapius, 83 The god of Heliopolis, 84 A man blind
from his birth receives his his sight by touching Adrian, 85 Ladices sends an
Image to Venus at Cyrena, for recovering her husband, who was disabled to
perform nuptial rights, 86 Laodomia daugter of Pyrrhus, 87 A Goat offers it
self a sacrifice to Jupiter, 88 The Temple of Ceres Micalessia, 89 The Temple
of Pluto and Juno, the den of Charon, 90 The Temple of Aesculapius at
Epidaurus, a City of Peloponnesus, 91 The Temple of Minerva Ilias, 92 The
Temple of Hercules in the Beast-Market at Rome, 93 The Temple of Pallas at
Methon, 94 Greece troubled with a drought, consults Pythia, 95 The Sepulcher of
Aristomenes at Messene, a City in Achaia in Greece, 96 Apollo Libistinus at
Pachinum, a Promontorie of Sicily, 97 The Chapel of Minerva before the Temple
of Delphos, 98 The Sabine War waged against the Romans for ravishing the
Virgins, 99 The Holy Sheep of the Sun, 100 The superstition of the Philippi
inhabiting the furthest part of Scandinavia, 101
A Table of Satan's wonderful impostures for establishing of the Idolatrous
invocations of Saints departed this life; contrary to the preaching of St.
Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
THe miraculous restoration of John Damascen his hand (unjustly cut off by
Theodosius the Emperor) at the Image of the blessed Virgin Mary, 1 A Jew
delivered from death, by calling upon the god of Sergius, 2 Many cured by the
carrying of the dead body of the Virgin Levinua through part of Flanders, 3
Many recover health at the Sepulcher of Pope Martin, 4 One cured at the grave
of St. Ladislaus King of Hungary, 5 The Bishop of Prague his finger cut off for
the Faith of Christ and thrown into a River, shines in a Fishes belly, 6
Genarius of Beneventum, his head cut off for professing the Faith of Christ, 7
Valens the Emperor an Arrian, 8 The bodies of eleven thousand virgins, 9 John,
a devout giver of Alms, 10 Conradus repents heartily of his sins, and does
penance, 11 The head of a dead man speaks, 12 How the Abbey of the King's right
hand, came to be so called, 13 The blessed Virgin Mary appears to St. Bruno, 14
Nicolaus sees the shape of the blessed Virgin and her Son in the air, on the
very day wherein her Conception is celebrated, 15 St. Stephen the Martyr
appears to Saroltha, the Wife of Grisa Duke of the Hungarians, 16 The Parents
of Nicolas Tolentinates vow a pilgrimage to Barium, 17 Haldricus the
Laodiensian Bishop cure^ before the Altar of St. Martin, 18 Sergius, a Prince
in wealth and authoririty, cured of a grievous sickness at the Temple of St.
Michael, 19 John Orphanotropus, brother to Michael Emperor of Paphlagonia,
cured at Mira of a grievous sickness, 20 Henry the second, Emperor, cured (by
interceding Saints) of the Stone, 21 Manuel, who disapproved of Images, upon
his resolution to restore Images according to the decrees of the Ancients, when
he was sick, was restored to health, 22 A Vision, 23 A Fast held in the Church
of the Virgin Mary three days, to divert the cruel intention of Julian,
prevails with God, 24 A Ring brought to King Edward the third from Jerusalem,
25 The Statue of S. Paul weeps, 26 The Mother of Leo of Iconomarum the fifth
King, her Vision, 27 Bardus durus his Vision, 28 A Vision discovered to Ambrose
the Mediolanensian Bishop, 29 Pulcheria, sister to Theodosia, her vision, 30 An
Apparition to Calomerus, 31 A strange Miracle obtained by fasting and prayer,
32 Pope Urban his Vision, 33 A Deacon his vision, 34 Elford King of England his
vision, 35 St. Andrew's cross seen in the air, 36 Dogar King of the Scots, his
vision, 37 An Apparition to Uladislaus and Grisa, 38 Theodosius his vision, 39
Massaclerus his vision, 40 The appearing of St. Andrew the Apostle to a Priest,
41 St. Theodore appears in ^efence of the Romans. 42 Sabinus a most pious
Patron of Soldiers, 43 The great Sfortia his vision, 44 The vision of a
Priest, 45 James the son of Zebedee appears to Charles the Great, 46 The
appering of St. Benedict to Count Sillogosus in a vision. 47 The Archangel
Michael appears in a vision to Childebert King of France, 48 Agnes Wife to
Leopold Marquess of Austria, desires her husband to design some place to build
a Monastery, 49 St. Ambrose appears threatening miseries to Caesar, 50
Colanianus King of the Hungarians, his vision, 51 A voice out of the Statue of
the blessed Virgin salutes St. Bernard, 52 Medericus Abbot of Edunium, cures a
Monk of libidinous cogitations, 53 Many cured by a candle, which extinguished,
was lighted by the touch of Genovepha, 54 Pope Leo quenches a fire by the sign
of the Cross, 55 The corporal of the Challice thrown into a fire, quenches it.
56 A voice out of the Tomb of S. Martin, 57 A part of the towel wherewith our
Lord wiped his Apostles feet before his last Supper, brought by Monks from
Jerusalem, 58 St. Peter restores a Cock dressed and carved, to life again, 59
The Bishop of Alexandria by the help of Almighty God converts a Philosopher, 60
At the Monastery of the holy Mother of God in Constantinople, two blind men
restored to sight before the Image of the blessed Virgin, 61 The picture of
Christ which Evagrius made, 62 Herbs taken from the Tomb of Nicetius, cure the
Fever, 63 A Revelation to Valerius the Cosoranensian Bishop, 64 Miracles
wrought at the Sepulcher of Leodegarius, 65 Uladislaus obtains issue by his
Wife, having been long barren, by fasting and prayers. 66 The body of Pedastus
translated from the place where formerly it lay, works a Miracle, 67 Methodius,
a great respecter of holy Images, most unjustly accused by his enemies, is
manifestly cleared to the joy of all pious men, 68 St. Peter cures Agatha,
virgin and Martyr, her breast torn in pieces for her steadfast confession of
the Faith, 70 The Mother of God appears to a Carpenter, 71 The discovery of
the bodies of the Martyrs Dionysius Rusticus and Eleutherius, 72 A woman
delivers her sins in writing to Basil the Great, 73 The Image of Christ
speaks, 74 The West Goths, assertors of the Arrian Heresy, 75 Luitprandus King
of the Longobards, translates the body of St. Austin out of Sardinia to
Ticinum, 76 Adelbertus cured of a Fever at the Temple of S. Mary the Virgin,
77 Genadius Bishop of Constantinople, rebukes a Priest for disgracing his
profession, 78 Some of the dust of Hospitius his Sepulcher carried to the
Lirinensian Monastery as an holy relic, 79 Boniface Bishop of Moguntium slain
by the Pagans, 80 Eleven hundred virgins martyred by the Huns, 81 A Leper sees
Christ dedicating a Temple, 83 Genovepha dedicateth a Cathedral Church to St.
Dionysius, 84 Houses erected by prayers, 85 The Temple of the divine beautiful
virgin at Regenspurg, 86 The Metensian Bishop, 88 Constantine adoreth the nayls
of Christ's Cross given him by his Mother, 89 Pope Gregory sends three Sponges
to Eudon, Duke of Aquitane, 90 A Monk leaving his Religion, marries a Wife, 91
One carries the Body of our Lord at a Paschal Feast whole with him in his
mouth, 92 The Sacrament put into a chest by a woman, turns into the shape of
flesh and blood, 93 The reason of the building the Temple, entitled, The Body
of Christ, 94 Abundance of blood flows from the blessed Sacrament of the
Eucharist, being torn in pieces by Jews, 95 Pope Vigilius institutes, That Mass
for the dead should be performed in an holy place, with holy garments, and a
low voice, 96 An head cast forth of the grave bleedeth, 97 Clodoveus King of
France, falls mad for his irreligious handling the body of St. Dionysius, 98 A
woman loses her sight for carrying away the shoes of holy Genovepha, 99 A
woman struck barren for kicking the Tomb of a Saint, 100 A ^o^^er comes to the
Tomb of Wenceslaus the fourth Honorable King of Bohemia, 101 The Judgment of
God upon one for throwing a stone at the Image of the blessed Virgin Mary, 102
The Judgment of God upon one who pulled out the eye of an Image, 103 A Jew
smites the Image of the blessed Virgin with a punniard, out of which blood
flows, 104 Blood flowing from the Image of the blessed Virgin, proves a remedy
to many sick people, 105 A Soldier seeking to lay hold on an Image, it turns
toward him, and he falls mad, 106 Two gamesters, one whereof played in the Name
of God; the other, in the name of the Devil. 107 Divine vengeance seizes on
Schelkrop, for slashing and thrusting through the Image of Christ and his
Saints. 108 The Miracles acknowledged, but thought by some to be done by the
power of the devil, 109 The Image of Christ abused by the Jews, bleedeth, 110
The Judgment of God upon a Jew for abusing the Image of Christ, 111 The Image
of Christ shot with an Arrow, bleedeth, 112 A golden key of St. Peter's. 113 A
sacrilegious person struck with a Palsy in the acting of his sacriledg, 114 An
Hermit his vision at the death of Pandulph Prince of Capua, 115 The Judgment
of God upon a sacrilegious person, 116 Church-cloathes plundered, when they
came to be used by profane hands, appear bloody. 117 A man's house by divine
vengeance set on fire for profaning an holy day. 118 A man's head turned
backwards in a fearful manner, for working upon an holy day. 119 A Jew's
cruelty to the Host, and the miraculous issue thereof. 120 The tongue of a
prejudiced man ^yed, 121 St. John Baptist relieves the brother of Boleslaus
invoking him. 122 Comnenus the Emperor being sick, is restored by the Image of
our Savior. 123 Ptolemey seeks for the Cross. 124 St. Bernard cures a man
mortally wounded, by giving him consecrated bread, 125 Miracles wrought by the
bones of Saint Remachus. 126 One dispossessed of a devil by part of the straw
whereon St. Martin lay. 127 A Noble-woman ignorantly translates the bones of
St. Stephen from Jerusalem to Constantinople. 128 A Nobleman belonging to Otho
the Emperor, dispossessed of a devil by a chain which had bound St. Peter. 129
Several cured of Fevers by the herbs strewed about the Tomb of Nicetius, 130
The Pestilence at Rome cease upon the building up of the Altar of St.
Sebastian in the Church of St. Peter. 131 Constantine the Great his vision
after his refusing to be cured by the blood of Children. 132 St. Nicolas
delivers Lotharingus at Constantinople, invocating him. 133 Bituricus,
Archdeacon of Leons, recocovers his sight by fasting and prayers at the Church
of Martin, upon his Feast Day. 134 Pambulis a Priest restored to sight at the
Image of Albinus in the Church of St. Peter. 135 One sick of the Palsy
restored to health by St. Martin, and St. Alban. 136 One sick of the Palsy,
restored to health at the Tomb of St. Dunstan. 137 Cosroe's invocating Sergius,
obtains the defense of his Country and foecundity of his barren Wife, 138 A
man falls sick of the headache, by driving a nail into St. Peter's picture,
139 Frenchmen about to translate the body of S. Benedict, are struck blind 140
St. Michael the Archangel appears to St. Lawrence. 141 Three Saints appear to
a Fisherman. 142 Stephen King of Hungary Canonized, 143 Udislaus King of
Hungary Canonized, 144 Cosroes seeking to take the silver Urn, wherein Sergius
the Martyr was laid, was driven away by an heavenly Host, 145 Saints defend the
Isaurians from the Sarazens, 146 A Martyr leads the Roman Army, 147 The
Cratonensians use a linen garment of the Virgin Mary for a flag. 148 Amiarus a
Saint, assists Godfrey of Bolleign in the Syriac Expedition, 149 St. George, S.
Lawrence, and S. Adrian, assist Henry the second, Emperor. 150 The Romans
carrying before them the Holy Lance instead of an Ensign, obtain a great
victory. 151 S. Ambrose the Mediolanensian Guardian Saint. 152 James the
Apostle assists the Christian Army. 153 The Fathers of the Nicene Council
consult Musonius and Crisanthus, 154 Christ appeared in the Sacrament to
Plergilis a Priest, in that body which the Virgin Mary bore. 155 The vision
which a Soldier of Rome, who extinct by the Plague, reviving, at large he
declares. 156 A noble child dead for seven days, reviveth. 157 Vincentius his
relation of Tundalus, 158 Vincentius his relation of one who being led by the
Angel Gabriel after death was restored to life. 159 Genovepha, a virgin of
Paris, in an ecstasy. 160 Erasmus Bishop and Martyr. 161 Ursinus sees S. Peter
and S. Paul at his death. 162 Ezekiel and Daniel app^^^ to a Religious man. 163
The vision of Merulus a religious Monk at Rome, 164 St. Peter the Apostle
appears to a Virgin of Christ called Galla, at Rome. 165 The Mother of God with
a company of Virgins, appears to a Maid. 166 Juvenal and Eleutherius the
Martyrs, appear to Probus Reatinus the Bishop. 167 The body of St. Jerome, when
he had given up his soul, was surrounded with a sudden glorious light. 168 A
Monk wrapped in spirit sees St. Augustine. 169 St. Francis Assiatus his soul
departs in form of a Star out of his body. 170 Devils contend with an Angel for
the soul of a Monk. 171 Mass celebrated before a dead Monk. 172 A soul dragged
toward Hell by the devil, is freed by S. Benedict. 173 Saints speak out of
their Tombs, 174 Paschasius a Deacon of the Apostolical Seat, 175 The spirit of
a dead man waits at the bathes. 176 Benedict the tenth chief Bishop appearing
after his death to John the Portuensian Bishop confesses, That he was kept
from eternal death by Odilones his prayer. 177 John the Anchorite his vision.
178 Maurice the Rothamagensian Bishop brought into the Temple after his death,
having received his soul, speaks to them about him. 179 Marcius of Alexandria
obtesting the skull of a dead man in the name of Jesus, causes it to speak.
180 Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus his vision as he was praying. 181 A young man
restored to life by the prayers and tears of Severus. 182 A man dead revives,
relates his vision, and (...) 183 Stephen a Roman going to Rome, falls sick and
dies, and revives again, and relates his vision during the time his soul was
separated from his body. 184 William, a boy of fifteen years of age, his
vision. 185 In the Sabine Province a Nun strictly observed chastity, but by
procacity defiles her tongue, as appears by a vision after her death, is
condignly punished, 186 The Sadduces and Epicures confuted, from page 343, to
page 358. The Arguments of those who deny, that Angels and Devils can take to
them a body, confuted; from page 359, to the end.
FINIS.

