ARGVMENTS Exhibited in PARLIAMENT BY SIR NICHOLAS BACON, Lord Keeper of the
great Seal of ENGLAND. Whereby it is proved, That the Persons of Noble men are
Attachable by Law, for Contempts by them committed in the right Honorable
Court of Chancery, for disobeying the Decrees of that Court.

Printed in the Year, 1641.

ARGVMENTS Exhibited in PARLIAMENT, By Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the
great Seal of England, etc.
THis Argument was occasioned about an Attachment, awarded out of the aforesaid
Court of Chancery to the Sheriff of Norfolk, to attach the body of the then
Lord Cromwell for his disobeying a Decree made in that Court, The said
Attachement being executed, and the body of the said Lord Cromwell by virtue
thereof detained by the said Sheriff, whereof the said Lord Cromwell being a
Peer, complained in Parliament.

I.
First (says he) That for Contempts committed by a Noble man against his
Prince, his person is attachable by Law. And if a Noble man disobey a Decree,
made in Chancery upon a cause examinable, there he commits a contempt against
his Prince, and therefore, by the common Law, his body, for his contempt, is
attachable, and the rather for that decrees given there are Coram nobis in
Cancellaria nostra.

II.
Secondly, if a Noble Man offend against the Queens Majesty's Prerogative in
one of the highest degrees, his body is attachable by Law: and if a Noble man
commit a contempt against a decree made in the high court of chancerie and
warranted to be made by her highness Prerogative, he commits a contempt
against that Prerogative and therefore his body for the same is attachable by
Law.

III.
Thirdly, it has always been accustomed that Noble men have been and still
are called into the Chancerie for matters examinable in the same Court; and the
same has been ordered there, and if custom has allowed thereof, then it
must necessarily allow the necessary dependence of the same, which is the
execution of these orders: and other means for the ecution of these orders in
Chancerie there is none but by Attachment, and as for that, that there is no
use or President of execution by Attachment of the persons of Noble men, he
answered that in former ages Noble men were of that prudence, that they never
disobeyed any of those orders in Chancerie, and therefore no cause of that use.

IIII.
Fourthly, to grant a Court power to hear and order, and not to execute the
same, is a plain absurdity: and again to leave all coppihoulders of Noble men
without remedy, if they be amoved by their Lords, and all other men without
remedy against Noble men, in matter of equity, seems much prejudicial to the
Commonwealth, considering how great the number of these may be; besides what
inconvenience is it to have a Noble man bring a case into the Chancery, and the
Court to have power to do justice for him, but not against him. This is not
Ius equabile, and all th,ese and other inconveniences, in his opinion will
succeed except Attachments in the causes of contempt before remembered be
allowed and executed.

V
Fifthly, and lastly, for as much as the Chancerie is warranted to hear, order,
and determine causes by virtue of the Queens Majesty's Prerogative; where
otherwise by law the subject has no help: and also to qualify the rigor of
the Law, therefore if all causes examinable in the Court of Chancerie for the
respects aforesaid, between a Noble man and another should be taken from the
hearing and ordering of the said Court. It must needs be Derogation of the
Queens said Prerogative, which he thinks ought not to be questioned or
debated without her Majesty's Privitie, and therefore prays her Highness may
be therewith acquainted.

FINIS.

