A NEW QUADRANT, OF More Natural, Easy, and Manifold Performance, than any
other heretofore Extant; Framed according to the Horizontall Projection of the
Sphere, with the Uses thereof.

By C. B. Maker of Mathematic Instruments in METAL.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1649.

TO My Singular good Friend Mr. WILLIAM BADILEY, Mariner, and a lover of the
Mathematics.
Worthy Sir,
HAving diligently inquired* the reason of the projection of the Sphere into
plain, as the ground of all Mathematic Instruments (the making whereof in
Metal is my Trade and Livelihood) and compared the several manners; I found
none so genuine, simple, easy, and manifoldly useful, as is the Horizontall;
which lively represents the Globe rectified to some certain elevation, and
naturally performs the uses thereof. And having likewise compared the
several Quadrants, and pocket Instruments hitherto made, and finding them all
pieced up with many unnatural and forced lines and divisions, presupposing an
exact diligence both in the Calculator, and in the workman; and yet the
performance difficult, troublesome, and tedious: I bethought my self whether
out of the Horizontall projection I might not by some small alteration frame a
Quadrant, that might remedy the defects of all the former Instruments, and that
with greater ease and certainty. And having by the help of God happily attained
my desired intent, my many respects represented you under whose Approbation and
Patronage I might send out into public view this my new Quadrant, with the many
Uses thereof; as being one to whom I stand obliged for your love and manifold
favors to me both at Sea in diverse Voiages, and at land; and who through your
skill in the Mathematical Sciences are able to judge and patronize the first
attempts of

Your affectionately devoted Servant, C. B.

THE Description of the Quadrant, and the parts thereof.
THe limb of the Quadrant divided into 90 Degr. represents the Horizon.

That side of the Quadrant where the Sights are, is the Meridian, or XII a
Clock line, unto which is joined the scale of Months with every fifth Day,
until they grow so little toward the Solsticeas, that they cannot be
distinguished. This scale* has five Rows, the midst whereof has the very
same divisions which are on the Meridian line: The two next on both sides are
for the parts of the Months, which in the two outermost Rows are noted by
their first Letters.

The other side of the Quadrant has on it the scale of Altitudes above the
Horizon.

The short Arching lines within the Quadrant beside the Meridian, are
Houre-lines, noted by their Figures, both for the forenoone, and afternoon; and
half Hour lines: each half hour containing 30 min. of an hour, or Degrees. 7.
30. Of these Horary lines, those which serve in the morning before the Sun is
full East, or in the evening past the West, (which is only in Summer half
year) are reversed. And all the Hour lines are noted with two Figures; whereof
the upper next the Center and scale of Altitudes, serve for the afternoon; and
the lower for the forenoon. The two Arches which cross the Hour lines, and
meet at the beginning of the Horizon and scale of Altitudes, are two Quarters
of the Ecliptic, and are divided into 90 Degr. a piece, in which are noted the
XII Signs by their proper Characters, namely on the upper next the Center are
and, the Summer or Northern Signs: and on the lower next the Horizon are and,
the Winter or Southern Signs, and contain 30 Degr. a piece. This is the
Circle of the Suns annual motion.

The long Arches, which beginning at the Scale of months in the Meridian
betwixt the two Quarters of the Ecliptic, cross all the Hour lines, are the
parallels of Declination, or the Semidiurnall Arches of the Sun; the
middlemost of which is the Equinoctial, the outermost above is the Tropic of,
and the outermost below is the Tropic of: although between the Equinoctial
and each Tropic Innumerable parallels are understood to be contained, yet
those which are in the Instrument drawn, at every second Degree of
Declination, may be sufficient to direct the eye in tracing out an imaginary
parallel from every point given in the Scale of months.

The Equinoctial and every tenth parallel are for distinction sake made
somewhat grosser than the rest, and all the Summer parallels at the East and
West line are continued reversedly back unto the Horizon.

Note that upon the right estimation of that imaginary parallel, the manifold
use of this Instrument does especially rely; because the true place of the
Sun all that day is in some part or point of the same Circle.

And note that in this Instrument, the direct Horary lines, and parallels
before their reversion, show the hour of the day like a direct South upright
Dial: And the Arches of them reversed serve like a direct North upright Dial.

Use I. To find the Declination of the Sun every day.

Seek the day proposed in the Scale of months very exactly, and mark upon what
point it falls in the middle Row of that Scale, or (which is all one) in the
Meridian, for there is the Declination of the Sun from the Equinoctial,
either North or South: which if it fall not directly upon a parallel, but in
the space between two, supposing each half of that space to contain 60
minutes, estimate with your eye proportionally what minute the point gives.

Example 1. What is the Suns Declinaclition upon November. 13? the day will
fall in the space after 20 Degrees, from the Equinoctial Southward, about 30
minutes: Wherefore the Suns Declination is 20. 30 South.

Example 2. What is the Suns Declination upon August 19? the day will fall in
the space after 8 Degrees, from the Equinoctial Northward, one Degree and
about 40 minutes: Wherefore the Suns Declination is 9. 40. North.

Note that the Declination thus found is to be kept in mind all the day.

Use II. To find the Semidinunall Arch, or parallel Circle in which the Sun
moves every day.

Seek out the true point of the Suns Declination upon the Meridian by Use I:
then from that point by the estimation of your eye, trace out an imaginary
parallel: which when it comes to the East and West line (as in all Northern
parallels it does) is to be reversed unto the Horizon or Limb at the same
proportionable distance as before. This operation requires exact diligence.

Use III. To find the time of the Sunes Rising and Setting every day.

Seek out the imaginary parallel, or Semidiurnal Arch of the Sun for that day
by Use II, and mark where it meets with the Horizon; for that is the very
point of the Suns rising and setting, and the Hour Lines on both sides of it,
(by proportioning the distance reasonably, according to 30 minutes for half an
hour) will show the time of the Suns rising and setting.

Thus at London, Novem. 13. the Sun will be found to rise at 9 min. before 8,
and to set at 9 min. after 4. Also August 19, the Sun will be found to rise
12 min. after 5. and to set 12 min. before 7.

Use IV. To find the Suns Amplitude, Ortive and Occasive: that is, how many
Degrees of the Horizon the Sun rises and sets from the true East and West
points every day.

The imaginary parallel of the Sun, together with the time of the Suns
rising, and setting, shows upon the Horizon the Degree of his Amplitude from
East and West, which in all the Northern parallels is on the North side, and
in the Southern on the South side.

Thus at London, Novem. 13. the Ampl. Ort. will be found 34 Degreees. Also Aug.
19. the Ampl. Ort. will be found 15. 10.

Use V. To find the Length of every day and night.

Double the hour of the sunnes-setting, and you shall have the Length of the
day: or double the hour of the sunnes-rising, and you shall have the Length of
the night.

Use 6. To know the reason and manner of the Increasing and Decreasing of the
Days and Nights throughout the whole year.

When the Sun is in the Equinoctial, it rises and sets at 6 a Clock: But
if the Sun be out of the Equinoctial, declining toward the North, the
Intersection of the parallel of the Sun with the Horizon is before 6 in the
morning, and after 6 in the evening; and the Diurnall Arch greater than 12
hours, and so much more great, the greater the Northern Declination is.
Again, if the Sun be declining toward the South, the Intersection of the
parallel of the Sun with the Horizon is after 6 in the morning, and before 6
in the evening; and the Diurnall Arch lesser than 12 hours, and by so much
lesser, the greater the Southern Declination is.

And in those places of the Ecliptic in which the Sun most speedily changes
his Declination, the Length also of the day is most altered; and where the
Ecliptic goes most parallel to the Equinoctial, changing the Declination
slowly, the length of the day is but little altered. As for Example; When the
Sun is near unto the Equinoctial on both sides, the days Increase and also
Decrease suddenly and apace; because in those places the Ecliptic inclines to
the Equinoctial in a manner like a straight Line, making sensible Declination.
Again, when the Sun is near his greatest Declination, as in the height of
Summer, and the depth of Winter, the days keep for a good time, as it were, at
one stay; because in these places the Ecliptic is in a manner parallel to the
Equinoctial, the Length of the day differs but little, the Declination
scarce altering; and because in those two times of the year, the Sun
stands as it were still at one Declination, they are called the Summer
Solstice, and Winter Solstice. Wherefore we may hereby plainly see, that the
common received opinion, that in every month the days do equally increase,
is erroneous. Also we may see, that in parallels equally distant from the
Equinoctial, the day on the one side is equal to the night on the other side.

Use VII. To take the height of the Sun above the Horizon.

Hold the edge of the Quadrant against the Sun, so that the Suns Ray or
Beam may at once pass through the hole of both the sights; then shall the
thread with the Plummet show the Suns Altitude.

Use VIII. To find the Hour of the day, or what a clock it is.

Having the imaginary parallel or Semidiurnall Arch of the Sun, already found
and conceived in your mind by Use II, take the Suns height above the
Horizon, then stretching the thread over the scale of Altitudes, set the Bead
to the Altitude found, move your thread until the Bead exactly falls upon
the imaginary parallel, for there is the hour fought; and that is the true
place of the Sun in the Quadrant at that time; to be estimated upon the Horary
lines, either direct, or reversed, according as the parallel is.

Use IX. To find the Suns Azumith or Horizontall distance from the four
Cardinal points.

The Bead being set to the hour of the day, as was showed in the Use next
before, the thread shall in the Limb cut the East or West Azumith; that is,
how many Degrees of the Horizon the vertical Circle in which the Sun is, is
distant from the East and West points: The complement of which number gives
the Azumith from the South Meridian, if the Bead fell in the right parallels:
But if the Bead fall upon the reversed parts, the Azumith is to be accounted
from the North Meridian.

Use X. To find the Meridian Altitude of the Sun every day.

Stretch the thread over the Meridian, and set the Bead to the true Declination
of the Sun therein; then apply the thread to the scale of Altitudes; and the
Bead shall give the Meridian Altitude sought.

Use XI. To find at what time the Sun comes to be full East or West every
day in Summer.

This is shown by observing at what hour the imaginary parallel meets with
the East and West line, at which it begins to reverse.

Use XII. To find how high the Sun is above the Horizon at any hour, every
day.

Set the Bead to the point in which the imaginary parallel of that day crosses
the hour given: then applying the thread to the scale of Altitudes, mark upon
what Degree the Bead falls; the same shall be the Altitude of the Sun
required.

Use XIII. To find how high the Sun is being in any Azumith assigned every
day: and also at what hour.

Set the Bead to the point in which the imaginary parallel of that day crosses
the Azumith assigned; There also shall be the hour sought: Then applying the
thread to the scale of Altitudes, mark upon what Degree the Bead falls; The
same shall be the Altitude of the Sun required.

These two last Uses serve for the Delineation of the ordinary Quadrants, as
that of Gemma Frisius, Munster, Clavius, Master Gunter, etc. and also of Rings,
Cylinders, and other Topicall Instruments; and for the finding out of the hour
by a man's shadow, or by the shadow of any Gnomon, set either perpendicular, or
else parallel to the Horizon.

Use XIV. To find the Suns Longitude, or place in the Ecliptic.

The imaginary parallel of the day being exactly traced will cut in the
Ecliptic the Sign and Degree wherein the Sun is: and note, that each
semicircle of the Ecliptic is doubly noted with Characters of the Signs; the
first and third Quarters go forward from the Equinoctial point unto the
Meridian, containing and: the second and fourth Quarters go back from the
Meridian unto the Equinoctial point, containing and.

But because near unto both Tropicks (namely from May 11, to July 10, in the
height of Summer, and from November 13, to Januarie 12 in the depth of Winter)
the Declination alters so slowly, that the true place of the Sun in the
Ecliptic cannot be distinguished with any certainty, work according to this
fourfold Rule following.

1. Before June 10, out of the number of days from May 0, subduct 11: the
remains shall be the Degrees of: thus for June 3, (because there is all May and
three days of June) say 34 -- 11=23, the place of the Sun.

2. After June 10, out of the Number of days from June 0, subduct 10: the
remains shall be Degrees of: thus for July 3, say 33 -- 10=23, the place of
the Sun.

3. Before December 13, out of the Number of days from November 0, subduct 13:
the reamines shall be Degrees of: thus for December 3, say 33 -- 13=20, the
place of the Sun.

4. After December 13, out of the Number of days from December o, subduct 13:
the remains shall be Degrees of: thus for January 3, say 34 -- 13=21, the
place of the Sun.

Use XV. To find the Suns Right Ascension every day.

Having by Use XIV. found the place of the Sun in the Ecliptic, mark
diligently upon what hour, and as near as you can estimate what minute it
falls, counting the hours in the first and third Quarters of the Ecliptic,
from the Equinoctial point; but in the second and fourth Quarters, from the
Meridian: and add thereto in the second Quarter six hours, in the third twelve
hours, and in the fourth eighteen hours: so shall you have the Suns Right
Ascension, not in Degrees, but in time, which is more proper for use.

Example, in 6. the Suns Right Ascension will be eight hours, one half,
and about three minutes; that is H: 8: 33. min. reckoning 30 for half an hour.

Use XVI. To find the Hour of the Night by the Stars.

For this, I have set a little Table of five known Stars dispersed round about
the Heavens, with their Declination and Right Ascension for Anno Dom. 1650.
Namely the left shoulder of Orion, noted O. The heart of the Lion, noted.
Arcturus noted A: the Vulture volant, noted V. The end of the wing of Pegasus,
noted P.

The Table.
Declinat. Rec. As. O 5 59 N H5 6,5 13 39 N 9 50 A 21 4 N 14 00 V 8 1- N 19 34
P 13 15 N 23 55, 5

THe Operation is thus; first by the height of the Star taken, and the
parallel of its Declination exactly traced, seek out the hour of the Star
from the Meridian, as before was taught for the hour of the Day by the Sun.
Secondly, out of the Right Ascension of the Star, subduct the Right Ascension
of the Sun; the remain^ shows how long time from the Noone before the same
star comes into the Meridian. Lastly, if the Star be not yet come to the
Meridian, out of the hour of the Stars coming into the Meridian, subduct
the hour of the Star: but if the Star be past the Meridian, add both the
hours together; so shall you have the true hour of the Night.

Note, that if the hours out of which you are to subduct be lesser than the
other, you must add unto them 24.

Use XVII. To find out the MeridianLine upon any Horizontall plain.

About the middle of your plain describe a Circle; and in the Center thereof
erect a straight Piece of Wire perpendicularly. When the Sun shines, note
the point of the Circle which the shadow of the Wire cutteth, which I therefore
call the shadow point; and instantly by Use IX. seek the Suns Azumith from
the South or North: keep it in mind. Then from the shadow point, if your
observation be in the foore-noon, reckon upon the circle an Arch equal to the
Azumith kept in mind, that way the Sun moves, if the Azumith be South: Or
the contrary way if it be North. But if your observation be in the
afternoon, reckon the North Azumith that way the Sun moves; Or the South
Azumith the contrary way.

Lastly, through the end of the Azumith and the center, protract a Diameter for
the Meridian line sought: which you may note with S. at the south end, and with
N. at the North end.

You may also note the point of the Circle Diametrally opposite to the shadow
point with sun;, because it is the Azumith place of the Sun, at the moment of
your observation.

Use XVIII. To find the Declination of any Wall or plain.

The safest way (because the Magneticall Needle is apt to be drawn awry) will
be by an Instrument made in this manner. Provide a rectangular board about ten
Inches long, and five broad: in the midst whereof, cross the breadth, strike a
Line perpendicular to the sides; and taking upon it a Center, describe a Circle
intersecting the same Line, in two opposite points, to be noted with the
Letters T. and A: divide each semicircle into two Quadrants, and every Quadrant
into 90 Degrees, beginning at the points T and A, both ways; the first Quad.
beginning on the left hand of T. the second Quadrant on the right hand: the
third Quadrant above it toward A: And lastly, the fourth Quadrant. And in the
Center erect a Wier at right Angles.

The use of this Instrument. Apply the long side of the board next T to the
Wall when the Sun shines upon it, holding it parallel to the Horizon, that
it may represent an Horizontall plain. Mark what Degree the shadow of the
Wire cutteth in the Circle; and instantly seek the Suns Azumith, either South
or North: Reckon it on the Circle from the shadow to the Meridian, as was
taught in the Use next before, noting that end with the Letter contrary to that
of the Azumith: as if the Azumith be South, note it N. and the opposite end S;
if the Azumith be North, note it S, and the opposite end N: whereby also you
have the East* and West sides: So shall the Arch S A. or N A. give the
Declination of the plain, and the point A, the coast or quarter into which it
is.

Example, June 2 in the forenoone, applying the instrument to a wall, I found
the shadow in 23 Degr. of Quadr. 2. and the height of the Sun was 26 Degrees,
whereby I found the Azumith to be North 84 Degr. which reckoned from the shadow
against the Sun, fell upon 61 Degr. in Quad. 1. for one end of the Meridian;
and the Opposite end* which is N. upon 61 Degr. in Quad. 3. And A was on the
East side of N. Wherefore the Declination of that Wall is 61 Degrees. from the
North Eastward.

Use XIX. To find the Declination of an upright wall by knowing the time of
the Suns coming to it, or leaving it. And contrariwise, the Declination of
an upright Wall being known to find at what time the Sun will come into it.

Because the Declination of a plain is an arch of the Equinoctial intercepted
between the Horizontall section of the plain: and the East or West points: Or
else (which is all one) between the Meridian, and A, the axis of that
Horizontall sexion. Watch till you see the Center of the Sunnejust even with
the edge of the Wall: then instantly take the Suns Azumith from East or West,
by Use IX. the same is the Declination of the wall.

Likewise if the Declination be given, reckon it upon the Limb of your
Quadrant from the East and West point; and the thread being applied to the end
of that Arch, shall in the Suns imaginary parallel for that day, cut the hour
and time desired.

Use XX. Certain advertisements necessary for the use of the Quadrant in the
night.

In which Questions as concern the night, or the time before Sunne-rising, and
after Sunnesetting, the instrument represents the lower Hemisphere, wherein
the Southern Pole is elevated. And therefore the parellels which are above the
Equinoctial toward the Center, shall be for the Southern or winter parellels:
and those beneath the Equinoctial, for the Northern or Summer parallels: and
the East shall be counted for West, and the West for East; altogether contrary
to that which was before, when the Instrument represented the upper Hemisphere.

Use XXI. To find how many Degrees the Sun is under the Horizon at any time
of the night.

Seek the Declination of the Sun for the day proposed by Use I. and at the
same Declination on the contrary side of the Equinoctial imagine a parallel
for the Sun that night; and mark what point of it is in the very hour and
minute proposed: Set the bead to that point; then applying the thread to the
scale of Altitudes, mark upon what Degree the bead falls: for the same shall
show how many Degrees the Sun is under the Horizon at that time.

Use XXII. To find out the length of the Crepusculum, or Twilight.

It is commonly held that Twilight is so long as the Sun is not more then 18
degrees, under the Horizon, the question therefore is, at what time the Sun
comes to be 18 Degrees under the Horizon any night.

Seek the Suns declination for the time proposed, and at the same
declination, on the contrary side of the Aequinoctiall, imagine a paralsel for
the Sun that night: then set the bead at 18 degrees in the scale of
Altitudes; and carry the thread about till the bead fall upon the imagined
parallel: for there shall be the hour or time sought.

And in this very manner you may find the time or hour of the night at any
other depression of the Sun under the Horizon.

FINIS.

