CARDINAL WOLSEY. OB. 1330. FROM THE ORIGINAL OF HOLBEIN. IN THE COLLECTION AT
CHRIST CHURCH, OXFORD.
portrait of Cardinal Wolsey

THE NEGOTIATIONS OF THOMAS WOOLSEY, The great Cardinal of England, Containing
his life and Death, viz.

1. The Original of his promotion. 2. The Continuance in his Magnificence. 3.
His Fall, Death, and Burial.
Composed by one of his own Servants, being his Gentleman-usher.

LONDON, Printed for William Sheeres. 1641.

THE PREFACE.
IT seems no wisdom to credit every light tale, blazed abroad in the
mouths of vulgars, for we daily hear how with their blasphemous Trumpe they
spread abroad innumerable Lies, without either shame or honesty, which prima
facie shows forth a visage of Truth, as though it were an absolute verity,
though indeed nothing less; And amongst the better sort, those bablings are of
no validity.

I have read the allegations of diverse worthy Authors against such false
rumors and opinions of the common people, who delight in nothing more, then to
hear strange things, and to see new alterations of Authority, rejoicing
sometimes in such Novelties, which afterward do produce Repentance. Thus may
all men of understanding conceive the madness of the rude multitude, and not
give too much credence to every sudden rumor, until the truth be perfectly
known by the report of some approved and credible persons, that commonly have
the best Intelligence.

I have heard, and also seen set forth in diverse printed Books, some untrue
imaginations, after the death of diverse persons (who in their lives were in
great estimation) invented rather to bring their honest names in question then
otherwise.

Now forasmuch as I intend to write here some special proceedings of Cardinal
Woolsey, the great Archbishop, his ascending unto honor and great promotion,
his continuance in it, and sudden falling from the same. A great part whereof
shall be of mine own knowledge, and some part from credible persons
informations.

This Cardinal was my Lord and Master, whom in his lifetime I served, and so
remained with him in his fall continually, during the time of all his troubles,
both in the South and North parts until he dyed. In all which time I
punctually observed all his demeanours, as also in his great Triumph and
glorious estate.

And since his departure I have heard diverse surmised and imagined Tales
concerning his proceedings, and dealings, which I my self have certainly
known to be most untrue, unto which I could have sufficiently answered
according to truth; But conceiving it to be much better to be silent, then to
reply against their untruths, whereby I might perhaps have rather kindled a
great flame of displeasure, then have quenched one spark of their untrue
reports; Therefore I did refer the truth thereof to the Almighty, who knows
the truth of all things.

Nevertheless, whatsoever any man has conceived of him in his life, or since
his death; Thus much I dare say without offense to any, that in my judgment I
never saw this Realm in better obedience, and quiet, then it was in the time
of his Authority, nor Justice better administered without partiality, as I could
justly prove, if I should not be taxed with too much affection.

I will therefore here desist to speak any further by the way of Apology, and
proceed. Now to speak of his Original, and ascending through Fortunes favor
to high dignity and abundance of wealth.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
WHo pleases to read this History advisedly may well perceive the
immutability of honor, the tottering state of earthly Dignity, the deceit of
flattering friends, and the instability of Princes favors.

This great Cardinal having experience of all this, witness his fleeting from
Honor, the loss of Friends, Riches and Dignities, being forgotten of his
Prince, whilst Fortune smiled, having saciety of all these; And she bending
her brow, deprived him of all Terrestiall Joys, who by twenty years study and
pains, had obtained so great wealth and dignity, and in less then one year
lost all.

And thus was his honor laid in the Dust.

THE TABLE.
CHAP. I. OF the Cardinal his Original, and who he was. CHAP. II. Of the
Cardinal his speedy dispatch to the Emperous Maximilian. CHAP. III. Of King
Henry his invading France in his own person with the Cardinals assistance.
CHAP. IV. The Kings promoting his Almoner being made Cardinal and Lord
Chancellor of England. CHAP. V. Of the Order and Offices of his House and
Chapel: CHAP. VI. Of his second Embassage to the Emperor Charles the fifth.
CHAP. VII. Of the manner of his going to Westminster Hall. CHAP. VIII. Of the
Cardinals magnificence in his house. CHAP. IX. Of the original Instrument of
the Cardinals fall, Mistress Anne Bullen. CHAP. X. Of Mistress Anne Bullen her
favor with the King. CHAP. XI. Of the variance between the French King and
the Duke of Burbon, etc. CHAP. XII. Of the Duke of Burbons stratagem and
victory wherein the French King was taken prisoner. CHAP. XIII. Of the French
Kings redemption out of captivity, and the Cardinals Embassage into France.
CHAP. XIV. Of the French Ambassadors entertainment and dispatch. CHAP. XV. Of
the Kings discovery of his love to Mistress Anne Bullen to the Cardinal with
his dislike, etc. CHAP. XVI. A new Court erected to determine the Kings case,
two Cardinals being Judges, and of the issue. CHAP. XVII. Of certain passages
conducing to the Cardinals fall. CHAP. XVIII. The Cardinal accused of high
treason in the Parliament house, and Master Cromwels defense for him. CHAP.
XIX. Of the Cardinals fall, and how he was arrested of high treason. CHAP. XX.
Of the Cardinals entertainment by the Earl of Shrewsbury, and of his death
and burial.
CHAP. I. Of the Cardinal his Original, and who he was.
TRuth it is Cardinal Woolsey was an honest poor man's son in the town of
Ipswich in the county of Suffolk, and there borne, who being but a child was
very apt to learn, wherefore by means of his parents and other his good
friends, he was maintained at the University of Oxford, where in a short time
he prospered so well, that in a small time (as he told me with his own
mouth) he was made Batchelour of Arts when he was but fifteen years of age,
and was most commonly called the Boy Batchelour. Thus prospering He was
Batchelour of Arts at 15. years of Age.
in learning, he was made fellow of Magdalene College in Oxford, after that he
was made Master of Magdalene School, at which time were the Lord Marquess
Dorset sons there at School, committing unto him as well their education as
their instructions and learning.

It pleased this Lord Marquess against Christmas to send as well for the
Schoolmaster as for the Scholars home to his house, for their recreation in
that pleasant and honorable Forest. They being a while there, the Lord
Marquess their Father perceiving them to be well improved in learning for the
time. He was so well contented, that he having a Benefice in his gift (being
at that present void) gave the School Master the same, in regard of his
diligence. After Christmas at his departure to the University, and he having
the presentation thereof repaired to the ordinary for his Institution. And
being then furnished with all his Instruments at the Ordinaries hands for his
preferment made have without any further delay to his Benefice to take
possession thereof. Now you shall understand that the Schoolmasters had not
been long there, but one Sir James Pawlet Knight dwelling in the Country
thereabouts, took an occasion of displeasure against him, but upon what ground
I know not; Insomuch that Sir James was so bold as to set the Schoolmaster by
the heels during his displeasure, which affront was afterward neither
forgotten, nor forgiven; For when the Schoolmaster mounted so high as to be
Lord Chancellor of England, he was not forgetful of his old displeasure most
cruelly ministered unto him by Sir James, but sent for him, and after a very
sharp reproof enjoined him not to depart out of London without license first
obtained, so that he continued in the middle Temple the space of five or six
years, who afterward lay in the Gatehouse next the Stayres, which he
re-edefied and sumptuously beautified the same all over on the outside, with
the Cardinals Arms, his hat, his Cognizance and Badges, with other devises in
so glorious a manner as he thought thereby to have appeased his old
displeasure.

This may be a good president for men in Authority, which work their own
wills without wit, to remember that greatness may decay. And those whom they
do punish more of humor then justice may afterward he advanced to great
honor (as this Cardinal was) and they abased as low as this Sir James was,
which seek revenge. Who would have thought that when Sir Iam's Pawlet punished
this poor Schoolmaster that ever he should have mounted to so great dignity
as to be Chancellor of England, considering his mean parentage and friends.
These be the wonderful works of Gods providence. And I would wish that all
men in authority would fear God in all ages in the time of their triumph and
greatness. considering that advancement and authority are not permanent, but
many times slide and vanish suddenly away, as Princes pleasures alters and
change, or as all living creatures must of necessity pay the debt due to
nature which no earthly creature can resist.

Shortly after it chanced the said Lord Marquess dyed, after whose decease the
Schoolmasters thinking himself but a weak beneficed man, and that he had
left his fellowship in the College, for (as I understand) if a fellow of that
house be once promoted to a Benefice, he shall by the rules of the same house
be dismissed of his fellowship; and now being also destitute of his singular
good Lord, as well as of his fellowship which was most of his relief; thought
long to be provided of some other help to defend him from all such storms as
he might meet with. In his travel thereabouts he grew acquainted with a very
great and ancient Knight, who had a great place in Callis under King Henry the
seventh. This Knight he served and behaved himself so discreetly that he
obtained the special favor of his said Master. In so much that for his wit
and gravitie he committed all the care and charge of his said office to his
said Chaplain. And as I understand his office was the Treasurership of Callis,
who in regard of his great age shortly after was discharged of his said office,
and so returned into England, intending to live a more private life. But
through his instant labor and good favor his Chaplain was preferred to be
the Kings Chaplain. And when he had once cast Anchor in the Port of promotion
how he then bestirred himself I shall now declare.

He having then just occasion to be daily in sight of the King in his Closet,
not spending the rest of the day in idleness would attend those men whom he
thought to bear most rule in the council, and were most in favor with the
King which at that time was Doctor Fox Bishop of Winchester and Lord Privy
Seal; And also Sir Thomas Lovell Knight, a very sage and wise Counselor
being Master of the Wards and Constable of the Tower.

These ancient and grave Councillors in process of time perceiving this
Chaplain to be a man of a very accute wit, thought him a meet Instrument to
be employed in greater affairs.

Not long after it happened that the King had an urgent occasion to send an
Ambassador to Maximillian the Emperor, who lay at that present in the Low
Countries at Flanders and not far from Callis.

Now the Bishop of Winchester and Sir Thomas Lovell whom the King most esteemed
as the chiefest of his Counsel, one day advising and debating with themselves
upon this Embassage; and by this time they saw they had a convenient occasion
to prefer the Kings Chaplain, whose excellent eloquence and learning they
highly commended unto the Kings highness, who giving ear unto them, and being
a Prince of an excellent judgment and modesty, he commanded them to bring his
Chaplain (whom they so commended) before his Grace, and being come, his
Majesty (to prove his ability) entered into discourse with him, concerning
matters of State, whereby the King had so well informed himself that he found
him to be a man of a sharp with and of such excellent parts, that he thought
him worthy to be put in trust with matters of greater consequence.

CHAP. II. Of the Cardinal his speedy dispatch in his first Embassage to the
Emperor Maximillian.
THe King being now resolved to employ him in this Embassage commanded him
thereupon to prepare himself for his journey; and for his dispatch wished him
to repair to his Grace and his Council, of whom he should receive his
Commission and instruction. By means whereof he had then a fit occasion to
repair from time to time into the Kings presence, who had thereby daily
experience of his singular wisdom and sound judgment. Thus having his
dispatch, he took his leave of the King at Richmond, about four of the clock
in the afternoon, where he lancheth forth in Graves-end Barge with a
prosperous wind and tide; and his happy speed was such, that he arrived at
Graves-end in little more then three hours: where he tarried no longer then
the Posthorses were provided, and he traveled so speedily, that he came to
Dover the next morning, where the Passengers were under sail to pass to
Callis; So that long before noone he arrived there, and having Posthorses
prepared, departed from thence without tarrying, making such hasty speed that
he was that night with the Emperor: who understanding of the arrival of the
King of Englands Ambassador, would in no wise delay time but sent for him
incontinently, for his affection to the King of England was such, that he was
glad of any opportunity to do him a courtesy.

The Ambassador declares the sum of his Embassy unto the Emperor, of whom
he craved speedy expedition, which was granted him, so that the next day he
was clearly dispatched, and all the Kings requests fully accomplished and
granted. At which time he made no further stay, but took Posthorses that
night and rode without intermission to Callis, being conducted thither by
diverse Nobles appointed by the Emperor; and at the opening of the gates of
Callis he came thither, where the Passengers were ready to return for
England: insomuch that he arrived at Dover between ten and eleaven of the
clock in the fore-noone.

And having Posthorses in a readiness, came to the Court at Richmond that
same night, where (taking his repose until morning) he presented himself unto
his Majesty at his first coming out of his Bedchamber to his Closet to
Mass, whom when he saw he checked for that he was not in his journey.

Sir quoth he, If it may please your Highness, I have already been with the
Emperor and dispatched your affairs I trust to your Graces contentation; and
thereupon presented the King with his Letters of Credence from the Emperor.
The King wondering at his speedy return (he being so well furnished with all
his proceedings) for the present dissembled his admiration and imagination in
that matter, and demanding of him whether he encountered with his Pursevant
which he sent unto him with Letters, imagining him to be scarce out of London,
which concerned very material passages which were omitted in their
Consultation, which the King earnestly desired should have been dispatched in
his Embassage.

Yes forsooth (quoth he) I met with him yesterday by the way, and though I had
no knowledge thereof, yet notwithstanding I have been so bold (upon mine own
discretion) perceiving the matter to be very necessary, in that behalf I
dispatched the same. And forasmuch as I have been so bold to exceed my
Commission, I most humbly crave your Royal remission and pardon.

The King inwardly rejoicing, replied, We do not only pardon you, but give
you our Princely thanks, both for your good exploit and happy expedition. And
dismissed him for that present, and bad him return to him again after dinner,
for a further relation of his Embassage, and so the King went to Mass.

It is not to be doubted but this Ambassador had all this while visited his
great Friends, the Bishop of Winchester, and Sir Thomas Lovell; to whom he had
declared the effect of his Embassage; and also his Majesty's commendations of
him did not a little rejoice the worthy Counselors, forasmuch as he was of
their preferment. And shortly after the King gave him for his diligent service
the Deanrie of Lincoln, which was in those days one of the greatest
promotions that he gave under the degree of a Bishop. And he grew more and more
in estimation and authority, and was afterward promoted to be Almaner.

Now not long after when Death (that favors no Estates, nor King nor Kezar)
had taken away the wise King Henry the Seventh out of this present life; It
was a wonder to see what practices and devices were then used about the young
Prince Henry the Eight; The great provision that was then made for the Funeral
of the one, and for the Coronation of the other, by the now-Queene Katharine,
and Mother after the Queens Highness that now is, whose virtuous life Jesus
long preserve.

After the solemnizations and costly tryumphes, our natural, young,
courageous, lusty Prince, and Sovereign Lord King Henry the Eight entering into
his flower and lusty youth, took upon him the Royal Scepter and Imperial
Diadem of this fertile Nation, the two and twentieth of April, Anno Dom 1509.
which at that time flourished with all abundance of riches, whereof the King
was most inestimably furnished, called then the golden world.

Now shortly after the Almaner seeing he had a plain pathway to promotion,
behaved himself so politickly, that he was made one of the Kings Privy
Council, and increased in favor daily: to whom he gave a house at Bridewell
near Fleete-street, where he kept his house for his family, and so he daily
attended upon the King being in special favor.

His sentences in the Star Chamber were ever so pithie and witty, that upon
all occasions they assigned him for the fluent eloquence of his tongue, to be
the Expositor to the King in all their proceedings. In whom the King received
so great content, that he called him still nearer to his person; and the rather
because he was most ready to advance the Kings own will and pleasure, having
no respect to the Case.

Now the King being young, and much given to his pleasure, his old Counselors
advised him to have recourse sometimes to the Council about his weighty
affairs; but the Almaner on the contrary, persuaded him to mind his pleasure,
and he would take his care and charge upon himself, (if his Majesty would
countenance him with his authority) which the King liked well. And thus none
was like to the Almaner in favor with the King.

CHAP. III. Of King Henry's invading France in his own person with the
Cardinals assistance.
THus the Almaner continuing in high favor, till at last many presents, gifts,
and rewards came in so plentifully, that I dare say he wanted nothing, for he
had all things in abundance that might either please his fancy or enrich his
Cofers, for the times so favorably smiled upon him, but to what end you shall
hereafter hear. Therefore let all men to whom fortune extends her favor and
grace, take heed they trust not her subtle and fair promises, for under
color thereof she carries an envious gall; for when portrait of Thomas Wolsey
she sees her servant in highest authority, she turns her favor and pleasant
countenance into frowns.

This Almoner clyming up Fortunes wheel, that no man was in estimation with
the King but only he for his witty qualities and wisdom.

He had an especial gift of Natural Eloquence and a fyled tongue to
pronounce the same, that he was able He was naturally eloquent.
therewith to persuade and allure all men to his purposes, in the time of his
continuance in fortunes favor.

In the fifth year of the reign of King Henry the Eight, it chanced that the
Realm of England and France was King Henry in the fifth year of his reign
invaded France.
at variance, but upon what ground or occasion, I know not, Insomuch that the
King was fully resolved in his own person to invade France with a puissant
Army; It was therefore thought very necessary, that his royal enterprises
should be speedily provided and furnished in every degree, in things apt and
convenient for the same; For expedition thereof the King thought no man's wit so
meet for policy and painful travel as the Almoner to whom he committed his
whole affiance, and trust therein; And he being nothing scrupulous in any thing
The King relieth upon the Almaners policy.
that the King would command, although it seemed very difficult, took upon him
the whole charge of the business, and proceeded so therein, that he brought
all things to good effect in direct order for all manner of victuals and
provision convenient for so noble a voyage and Army.

All things being thus prepared by him in order, the King not intending to
neglect or delay any time, but with noble and valiant courage to advance his
royal enterprise, passed the Seas between Dover and Callis, where he
prosperously arrived. And after he had there made his arrival, and landed all
his provision and munition, and He besieged the strong Town of Turwine.
sat in Consultation about his weighty affairs marched forth in good order of
battle, till he came to the strong Town of Turwine, to the which he laid
strong siege, and made a sharp assault, so that in short space it was yielded
unto him, unto which place the Emperor Maximillian resorted unto him with a
great Army like a mighty Prince, taking of the King wages.

Thus after the King had taken this strong Town, and taken possession thereof,
and set all things in good order for the defense and preservation thereof to
his Majesty's use, then he retired from thence, and marched toward Turney, He
besieges the Town? of Turney.
and there laid siege in like manner to which he gave so fierce assault, that
the Enemies were constrained to render the Town to his Majesty. At which time
the King gave unto the Almoner the Bishopric of the same Sea toward his
pains and diligence sustained in that journey. And when he had established all
things according to his princely mind and pleasure, and furnished the same
with men and Captains of War for the safeguard of the Town he prepared for
his return to England.

But now you shall understand by the way, that whilst the King was absent with
a great power in France the Scottish King invaded England against whom the The
Scots in the Kings absence invade England.
Queen sent a great Army, the Earl of Surrey being general, where he
overthrew the Scots at Blamston called Hoddenfield, where the King of Scots was
slain with diverse of his Nobility, and eighteen thousand men, and they took
all his munition for war.

By this time the King returned into England, and took with him diverse Noble
personages of France being prisoners; As the Duke of Longuido, Viscount
Clerimond, with diverse others that were taken in a skirmish.

And thus God gave him victory at home, and victory abroad, being in the fifth
year of his reign, Anno Dom. one thousand five hundred and thirteen.

portrait of Henry VIII

CHAP. IIII. The Kings promoting his Almoner, being made Cardinal, and Lord
Chancellor of England.
THe King being returned into England, the Sea of Lincoln became void by the
death of Doctor Smith late Bishop there, which Bishopric the King gave to the
Almoner Elect of Turney, who was not negligent to take possession thereof, but
made all speed for his Consecration, the solemnization thereof being ended, he
found a way to get into his hands all his predecessors goods, whereof I have
seen diverse parts that furnished his house.

It was not long after but Doctor Bambrige Archbishop of York dyed at Rohan in
France, being there the Kings Ambassador, unto which Sea the King presented
the last new Bishop of Lincoln, so that he had three Bishoprics in his hands
at one time, all in one year given him. Then prepared he again for his
translation from the Sea of Lincoln to that of York, as he did before to his
Installation.

After which Solemnization done, and being then Archbishop and Primus Angliae,
thought himself sufficient to compare with that of Canterbury, and did
thereupon advance his Crosses in the Courts, and every other place, as well in
the Precinct and Jurisdiction of Canterbury, as any other place; And forasmuch
as Canterbury claims a superiority over York, as well as over any other
Bishopric within England, and for that cause claims an acknowledgement, as
in ancient obedience of York to abate advancement of his Crosses, to the
Crosses of Canterbury.

Notwithstanding York not desisting to bear the same although Canterbury
gave York a cheek for the same, and told him it was presumption, by reason
whereof there ingendered some grudge between them; But shortly after he
obtained to be made Cardinal and Legatus de Literis unto whom the Pope sent
the Cardinals Cap, and certain Bulls for his authority in that behalf,
whereupon he was Installed at Westminster in great Triumph, which was executed
by all bishops with their Mitres, Cappes, and other ornaments; And after all
this he was made Chancellor of England, and Canterbury who was the Chancellor
was dismissed.

Now he being in the Chancelourship, and endowed with the promotions of
Archbishop and Cardinal de Litera, thought himself so fully furnished; that
he was now able to surmount Canterbury in all Jurisdictions; And in all
Ecclesiastical powers to Convocate Canterbury and all other Bishops, and
spiritual persons to assemble at his Convocations, where he would assign and
take upon him the conversion of all Ministers, and others within their
Jurisdictions, and visited all the spiritual houses in their Diocese, and all
manner of spiritual Ministers, as Commissioners, Scribes, Apparators, and all
other necessary Officers to furnish his Courts, and did convent by convention,
whom he pleased through this Realm and Dominion, and all other persons to the
glory of his Dignity. Then had he two great Crosses of silver, whereof one was
of his Archbishopricke, and the other of his Legasie, borne before him
wheresoever he rode or went by two of the tallest Priests that he could get in
this Realm.

And to the increase of his gain he had in his hand the Bishopric of Durham,
and S. Albons in Commendum; Also when Doctor Fox Bishop of Winchester dyed, he
did surrender Durham to the King, and took himself to Winchester. He had also,
as it were in Farm the Bishoprics of Bath, Worcester, and Hereford, for the
Incumbents of them were strangers. He had also attending upon him men of great
possessions, and the tallest Yeomen for his guard in the Realm.

CHAP. V. Of the Orders and Offices of his house and Chapel.
ANd first for his House you shall understand that he had in his Hall three
Boards kept with three several Officers (that is to say) a Steward, that was
always a Priest, a Treasurer, that was ever a Knight, and a Controller that
was an Esquire; Also a Confessor, a Doctor; Three Marshalls, three Vshers in
the Hall, besides two Almoners and Grooms.

Then had he in the hall-kitchin two Clerks, a Clarke Comptroller, and a
Surveyor over the Dresser; A Clarke in the Spycerie which kept continually a
Mess together in the Hall; Also he had in the Hall-kitchin two Cooks and
laborers, and children, twelve persons; Four men of the Scullery, two yeomen
of the Pastry, with two other Past-layers under the yeomen.

Then had he in his Kitchen a master Cook, who went daily in Velvet or Satin,
with a gold chain, besides two other Cooks, and six Laborers in the same
Room.

In the Larder one Yeoman and a Groom; In the Scullery one Yeoman and two
Grooms; In the Buttery two yeomen, and two grooms; In the Ewry so many; In
the Sellar, three Yeomen, three Pages; In the Chandery, two yeomen; In the
Wayfary two yeomen; In the Wardrop of Beds, the Master of the Wardrop, and
twenty persons besides; in the Laundery, a yeoman and a groom, and thirteen
Pages, two yeomen Purveyours, and a groom Purveyor; In the Bakehouse two
yeomen and grooms; In the Woodyard, one yeoman and a groom; In the Barn one
yeoman; Porters at the Gate, two Yeomen and two Grooms; A Yeoman in his Barge,
and a Master of his Horse; a Clarke of the Stables, and a Yeoman of the same; a
Farrier, and a yeoman of the Stirrup; a Maltlour and sixteen Grooms, every
one of them keeping four Geldings.

Now will I declare unto you the Officers of his Chapel The Officers of his
Chapel.
and singing men of the same. First he had there a Deane, a great Divine, and
a man of excellent learning, and a sub-Deane a Repeatout of the Quire, a
Gospeller, an Epistler of the singing Priests, a Master of the children; In the
Vestrey a yeoman, and two grooms, besides other Retainers that came thither at
principal Feasts.

And for the furniture of his Chapel, it passes my weak capacity to
declare the number of the costly Ornaments, and rich Jewels that were occupied
in the same; For I have seen in procession about the Hall, forty four rich
Copes of one settle worn, besides the rich Candlesticks, and other necessary
Ornaments to the furniture of the same.

Now you shall understand that he had two Crossebearers, Officersin his privy
Chamber.
and two Pillar-bearers in his great Chamber, and his privy Chamber, all these
persons; The chief Chamberlain, a Vice-chamberlaine, a gentleman Usher,
beside one of his privy Chamber; He had also twelve Wayters, and six
gentlemen Wayters; Also he had nine or ten Lords, who had each of them two or
three men to wait upon him, except the Earl of Darby who had five men.

Then he had gentlemen-Cup-bearers, and Carvers, and of the Sewers, both of the
great Chamber, and of the Privy chamber forty persons; Six yeomen Vshers,
eight grooms of his Chamber; Also he had of Alms, who were daily wayters of
his Board at Dinner; Twelve Doctors and Chaplains, besides them of his, which
I never rehearsed; a Clarke of his Closet, and two Secretaries, and two clerks
of his Signet; Four Councillors learned in the Law.

And for that he was Chancellor of England, it was necessary to have officers
of the Chancerie to attend him for the better furniture of the same.

First, he had a Ryding Clarke, a clerk of the Crown, a clarke of the Hamper,
a Chafer; Then had he a clarke of the Check, as well upon the Chaplains, as
upon the yeomen of the Chamber; He had also four Footmen garnished with rich
running Coats, whenever he had any journey. Then he had a Herald of Arms,
a Sergeant of arms; a Physician, an Apothecarie; Four Minstrells, a keeper of
his Tents, an Armourer; An Instructor of his Wards, an Instructor of his
Wardrop of Roabes, a Keeper of his Chamber continually; He had also in his
house a Surveyor of York, a Clerk of the Greene-cloth. All these were daily
attending downelying and uprising. And at meat he had Eight continual Boards
for the Chamberlaines and gentlemen Officers, having a Mease of young Lords,
and another of Gentlemen; Besides this, there was never a Gentleman or Officer,
or other worthy person, but he kept some two, some three persons to wait upon
them; And all other at the least had one which did amount to a great number of
persons.

Now having declared the order according to the Cheine Roll, use his house, and
what Officers he had daily attending to furnish the same, besides retainers and
other persons being suitors dined in the Hall. And when shall we see any more
such Subjects that shall keep such a Noble house; Therefore here is an end of
his household, the number of persons in the Cheyne were Eight hundred persons.

CHAP. VI. Of his second Embassage to the Emperor Charles the Fifth.
A After he was thus furnished in manner as I have before rehearsed unto you;
He was sent twice on Embassage to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, that now
reigns, and Father to King Philip now, our Lord and Sovereign; Forasmuch as
the old Emperor Maximillian was dead, and for diverse other urgent occasions
touching his Majesty; It was thought fit that about such weighty matters, and
to so noble a Prince the Cardinal was most meet to be sent on this Embassage,
and he being one ready to take the charge thereof upon him, was furnished in
every respect most like a great Prince, which was much to the honor of his
Majesty, and of this Realm; For first he proceeded forth like to a Cardinal
having all things correspondent, his Gentlemen being very many in number were
clothed in livery Coats of Crimson Velvet of the best, and chains of gold
about their necks; And his yeomen and all his mean officers were clad in fine
Scarlet guarded with black Velvet one hand breadth. Thus furnished, he was
twice sent in this manner to the Emperor in Flanders, then lying at Bridges,
whom he did most nobly entertain, discharging all his own charges, and his
men's. There was no house in the Town of Bridges, wherein any of my Lords
Gentlemen were lodged or had recourse, but that the owners of the houses were
commanded by the Emperors Officers upon the pain of their lives to take no
money for any thing that the Cardinals men did take of any kind of victuals;
No, although they were disposed to make costly Banquets, further commanding
their said hoasts that they should want nothing which they honestly required,
or desired to have.

Also the Emperors Officers every night went through the Town from house to
house, where any Englishmen had recourse or lodged, and served their Livery for
all night, which was done on this manner. First the Officers brought into the
house a Casteele of fine Manchet, then two silver pots of Wine, and a pound of
Sugar, white lights, and yellow lights, a Bowl of silver, and a Goblet to
drink in, and every night a staff Torch. This was their order of their Livery
every night; And then in the morning when the Officers came to fetch away their
stuff, they would account for the Gentlemen's costs the day before.

Thus the Emperor entertained the Cardinal, and his train during the time of
his Embassy. And that done, he returned into England with great Triumph, being
no less in estimation with the King then he was before, but rather much more,
for he increased daily in the Kings favor by reason of wits and readiness to
do the King pleasure in all things.

In the one and twentieth year of King Henry the Eighths rain, Anno Dom.
1529. This Emperor Charles the Fifth came into England, who was nobly
entertained.

CHAP. VII. Of the manner of his going to Westminster Hall.
NOw must I declare the manner of his going to Westminster Hall in the Term
time. First, when he came out of his privy Chamber, he most commonly heard
two Masses in his Chapel or Chamber. And I heard one of his Chaplains say
since (that was a man of credit, and excellent learning) that what business
soever the Cardinal had in the day time, that he never went to bed with any
part of his service unsaid; no not so much as one Collect, in which I think he
deceived many a man: then going into his Chamber again, he demanded of some
of his servants if they were in readiness, and had furnished his chamber of
Presence, and waiting Chamber: he being then advertised, came out of his Privy
Chamber about eight of the clock, ready apparelled, and in Red like a
Cardinal, his upper vesture was all of Scarlet, or else of fine Crimson
Taffata, or crimson Satin ingraned, his Pillion Scarlet, with a black Velvet
tippet of Sables about his neck, holding in his hand, an Orange the meat or
substance thereof being taken out and filled again with a part of Sponge, with
Vinegar and other Confections against pestilent Aires, the which he most
commonly held to his nose, when he came to the presses, or when he was pestered
with many suitors; And before him was borne the broad Seal of England, and the
Cardinals Hat, by some Lord, or some Gentleman of worship right solemnly; And
as soon as he was entered into his Chamber of Presence, where there were daily
attending on him as well Noblemen of this Realm, as other worthy Gentlemen of
his own Family, his two great Crosses were there attending upon him; Then cry
the Gentlemen Vshers that go before him bare-headed. On Masters before, and
make room for my Lord. Thus went he down into the Hall with a Sergeant of
Arms before him, bearing a great Mase of Silver, and two Gentlemen carrying
two great Plates of Silver; And when he came to the Hall door there his Mule
stood trapped all in crimson Velvet, with a Saddle of the same.

Then was attending him, when he was mounted his two Crosse-bearers, his two
Pillow-bearers, all upon great horses, all in fine Scarlet, then he marched on
with a train of Gentry, having four Footmen about him, bearing every one of
them a Pole-axe in his hand; And thus passed he forth till he came to
Westminster, and there alighted and went in this manner up to the Chancerie,
and stayed a while at a Bar, made for him beneath the Chancery, and there he
communed sometimes with the Judges, and sometimes with other persons, and then
went up to the Chancerie, and sat there till eleven of the clock, to hear
suits, and to determine causes; And from thence he would go into the
Star Chamber as occasion served him; he neither spared high nor low, but did
judge every one according to right.

Every Sunday he would resort to the Court being then at Greenwich, with his
former rehearsed train and Triumph, taking his Barge at his own stairs,
furnished with Yeomen standing upon the sails, and his Gentlemen within and
about, and landed at the three Cranes in the Vine-tree, and from thence he rode
upon his Mule with his Crosses, his Pillars, his Hat, and his broad Seal
carried before him on horseback along Thames Street until he came to
Billingsgate, and there he took his Barge, and so went to Greenwich, where
he was Nobly entertained of the Lords in the Kings house, being there with
staves in their hands, as the Treasurer, Comptroller, with many others, and
conveyed into the Kings Chamber, and so went home again in the like Triumph.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Cardinals magnificence in his houses.
He lived a long season Ruling all things in this Realm appertaining to the
King by his wisdom, and all other matters of foreign Regions with whom the
King had any occasion to meddle. All Ambassadors of foreign Potentates were
ever disposed by the Cardinals wisdom to whom they had continual access for
their dispatch.

His house was always resorted unto like a Kings house with Noblemen and
Gentlemen; And when it Great resort to his house as to the King.
pleased the Kings Majesty (as many times it did) he would for his recreation
resort unto the Cardinals house, against whose coming there wanted no
preparation or goodly furnitures, with victuals of the finest sort that could
be had for money or friendship.

Such pleasures were here devised for the Kings delight, His entertainment of
the King in a Masque.
as could be invented or imagined; Banquets set with Masquers and Mummers, in
such costly manner, that it was glorious to behold, there wanted no Damsells
meet to dance with the Masquers, or to garnish the place for the time with
variety of other pastimes. Then was there diverse kinds of Music, and many
choice men and women Singers appointed to sing, who had excellent voices. I
have seen the King come suddenly thither in a Masque, with a dozen Masquers
all in garments like Shepherds made of fine cloth of gold and silver wyre, and
six Torch-bearers, besides their drummers and others attending on them with
Vizards, and clothed all in Satin. And before his entering into the Hall, you
shall understand that he came by water to the watergate without any noise,
where were laid diverse Chambers and Gunnes charged with shot, and at his
landing they were discharged, which made such a rattling noise in the Air,
that it was like thunder; It made all the Noblemen, Gentlemen and Ladies to
muse what it should mean coming so suddenly, they sitting quietly at a
Banquet. In this sort you shall understand, that the Tables were set in the
Chamber of Presence covered, and my Lord Cardinal sitting under his cloth of
State, and there having all his service alone; And then was there set a Lady
and a Nobleman, a Gentleman and a Gentlewoman, throughout all the Tables in the
Chambers on the one side, which were made all joining, as it were, but one
Table. All which order was done by my Lord Sands, then Lord Chamberlain to the
King, and by Sir Henry Guilford, then Comptroller of the Kings house.

Then immediately after this great shot of Gunnes, the Cardinal desired the
Lord Chamberlain to see what it did mean, as though he knew nothing of the
matter; They then looked out of the window into the Thames, and returning
again told him, that they thought they were Noblemen and strangers arrived at
the Bridge, and coming as Ambassadors from some foreign Prince; With that
said the Cardinal, I desire you, because you can speak French, to take the
pains to go into the Hall, there to receive them into the Chamber, where they
shall see us, and all those Noble personages being merry at our Banquet,
desiring them to sit down with us, and take part of our Fare.

Then went they incontinently into the Hall, where The King and his Company
conducted into the chamber.
they were received with twenty Torches, and conveyed up into the Chamber with
such a number of Drums and Flutes, as I have seldom seen together at one time
and place.

Then at their arrival into the Chamber, they went two and two together
directly before the Cardinal where he sat, and saluted them very reverently;
To whom the Lord Chamberlain for them said; Sir, forasmuch as they are
strangers, and cannot speak English, they have desired me to declare unto
you, that they having understanding of this your triumphant Banquet, were
assembled such a number of fair Dames, they could do no less (under the
supportation of your Grace) then to view as well their incomparable beauties,
as to accompany them at Mumchance, and after that to dance with them, so to
beget their better acquaintance.

And furthermore they require of your Grace, license to accomplish this cause
of their coming.

When the Cardinal said he was willing, and very well content they should do
so.

Then went the Masquers and first saluted all the The Masquers salute the
Ladies.
Dames, and then returned to the most worthiest, and there opened the great Cup
of gold filled with crowns, and other pieces to cast at.

Thus perusing all the Gentlewomen, of some they won, and to some they lost.
And having viewed all the Ladies, they returned to the Cardinal with great
Reverence, pouring down all their gold, which was above two hundred crowns.
At all quoth the Cardinal, and casting the Dye he won it, whereat was made
The Cardinal casts at two hundred crowns.
great joy.

Then quoth the Cardinal to my Lord Chamberlain; I pray you go tell them,
that to me it seems that there should be a Nobleman amongst them, that better
deserves to sit in this place then I, to whom I should gladly surrender the
same, according to my duty if I knew him.

Then spoke my Lord Chamberlain to them in French, declaring my Lord
Cardinals words, and they rounding him again in the ear, the Lord
Chamberlain said unto my Lord Cardinal;

Sir (quoth he) they confess that among them is such a Noble personage, whom
if your Grace can point out from the rest, he is contented to disclose
himself, and to accept of your place most willingly.

With that the Cardinal taking good advise, went amongst them, and at the last
(quoth he) it seems to me, that the Gentleman with the black beard should
be he, and with that he rose out of his Chair, and offered the same to the
Gentleman with the black Beard, with the Cup in his hand; But the Cardinal
was mistaken, for the person to whom he then offered his Chair The Cardinal
mistaken,
was Sir Edward Nevill, a comely Knight, and of a goodly personage, who did
more resemble his Majesty's person then any other in that Masque.

The King seeing the Cardinal so deceived in his choice, could not forbear
laughing, but pulled down his Vizard, and Sir Edward Nevills also, with such a
pleasant countenance and cheer, that all the Noble Estates portrait of Anne
Boleyn desired his Highness to take his place; To whom the King made answer,
that he would first go and shift him; And thereupon went into the Cardinals
Bedchamber, where was a great fire prepared for him, and there he new
apparelled himself with rich and Princely garments; And in the Kings absence,
the dishes of the Banquet was clean taken away, and the Tables covered again
The Tables furnished again with a new Banquet.
with new and perfumed clothes every man sitting still until the Kings
Majesty with his Masquers came in among them, every man new apparelled.

Then the King took his seat under the cloth of Estate, commanding every
person to sit still as they did before; And then came in a new Banquet before
his Majesty of two hundred dishes, and so they passed the night in
Banqueting, and dancing until morning, which much rejoiced the Cardinal, to
see his Sovereign Lord so pleasant at his house.

CHAP. IX. Of the original Instrument of the Cardinals fall: Mistress Anne
Bullen.
NOw you shall understand that the young Lord of Northumberland attended upon
my Lord Cardinal, who when the Cardinal went to Court, would ever have
conference with Mistress Anne Bullen, who then was one of the Maids of Honor
to Queen Katharine, insomuch, that at last they were contracted together,
which when the King heard, he was much moved thereat (for he had a private
affection to her himself) which was not yet discovered to any, and then
advised the Cardinal to send for the Earl of Northumberland, his Father, and
take order to dissolve the Contract made between the said parties, which the
Lord Cardinal did after a sharp reprehension, in regard he was Contracted
without the King and his Fathers knowledge; He sent for his Father, who came
up to London very speedily, and came first to my Lord Cardinal, as all great
Personages did, that in such sort were sent for, of whom they were advertised
of the cause of their sending for; And when the Earl was come, he The Earl
come to the Cardinal.
was presently brought to the Cardinal into the Gallery. After whose meeting,
my Lord Cardinal and he were in secret communication a long space; after their
long discourse, and drinking a cup of Wine, the Earl departed, and at his
going away, he sat down at the Gallery end in the Hall upon a form, and
being set, called his Son unto him, and said;

Son (quoth he) even as thou art, and ever have been His sharp reproof of
his Son.
a proud, disdainful, and very unthrifty Master, so thou have now declared thy
self, wherefore what joy, what pleasure, what comfort, or what solace can I
conceive in thee? That thus without discretion have abused thy self, having
neither regard to me thy Natural Father, nor unto thy natural Sovereign
Lord, to whom all honest and loyal Subjects bear faithful obedience, nor yet
to the prosperity of thy own estate; But have so unadvisedly ensnared thy
self to her for whom thou have purchased the Kings high displeasure
intolerable for any Subject to sustain. And but that the King does consider
the lightness of thy head, and wilful qualities of thy person his displeasure
and indignation, were sufficient to cast me, and all my posterity into utter
ruin and destruction. But he being my singular good Lord, and favorable
Prince, and my Lord Cardinal my very good friend, has, and does clearly
excuse me in thy lewdness, and do rather lament thy folly, then malign thee,
and has advised an order to be taken for thee, to whom both I and you are more
bound, then we conceive of. I pray to God that this may be a sufficient
Admonition unto thee, to use thy self more wisely hereafter; For assure thy
self, that if thou do not amend thy prodigality. Thou will be the last
Earl of our house; For thy natural inclination, thou art Masterfull and
prodigal to consume all that thy Progenitors have with great travel gathered
and kept together with honor. But having the Kings Majesty my singular good
Lord, I trust (I assure thee) so to order my succession, that thou shall
consume thereof but a little.

For I do not intend (I tell thee) truly to make thee The Earl does intend to
dis-inhe^it him.
Heir, for (thanks be to God) I have more boys, that I trust will use
themselves much better, and prove more like to wise and honest men, of whom I
will choose the most likely to succeed me.

Now good Masters and Gentlemen (quoth he) unto He speaks to the servants.
us, it may be your chances hereafter, when I am dead, to see those things that
I have spoken to my Son prove as true as I now speak them, yet in the mean
time I desire you all to be his friends, and tell him his faults in what he
does amiss, wherein you shall show your selves friendly to him, and so I take
my leave of you; And son go your ways unto my Lord your Master, and serve him
diligently; And so parted and went down into the Hall, and so took his Barge.

Then after long and large debating the matter about He goes to the King.
the Lord Percies assurance to Mistress Anne Bullen, it was devised that the
Contract should be infringed, and dissolved; And that the Lord Piercy should
marry one of the Earl of Shrewsburies Daughters. And so indeed not long after
he did, whereby the former Contract was broken The Contract between Lord Percy
and Mistress Anne Bullen dissolved. She much displeased thereat.
and dissolved, wherewith Mistress Anne was greatly displeased, promising, that
if ever it lay in her power she would do the Cardinal some displeasure, which
indeed she afterward did. But yet he was not altogether to be blamed, for he
did nothing but what the King commanded; whereby the Lord Piercy was charged to
avoid her company. And so was she for a time discharged She is discharged the
Court.
the Court, and sent home to her Father, whereat she was much troubled and
perplexed. For all this time she knew nothing of the Kings intended purpose.
But we may see when Fortune does begin to frown, how she can compass a
matter of displeasure, through a far fetched Mark; Now therefore of the
grudge how it began, that in process of time wrought the Cardinals utter
destruction.

CHAP. X. Of Mistress Anne Bullen her favor with the King.
OH Lord, what a great God art thou, that workest thy wonders so secretly, that
they are not perceived, until they be brought to pass and finished.

Attend now good Reader to this story following, and note every circumstance,
and thou shall at the end perceive a wonderful work of God against such as
forget him and his benefits.

Therefore, I say, consider after this my Lord Percyes troublesome business
was over, and all things brought to an end; Then Mistress Anne Bullen was again
admitted Her admittance again to Court.
to the Court, where she flourished in great estimation and favor, having
always a prime grudge against my Lord Cardinal for breaking the Contract
between the Lord Peircy and her self supposing it had been his own devise
and no others. And she at last knowing the Kings pleasure, and the depth of his
secrets, then began to look very haughtily and stout, lacking no manner of
rich apparel, or Jewels that money could purchase.

It was therefore imagined by many through the Court, that she being in such
favor, might do much with the King, and obtain any suit of him for her
friends. All this while she being in this estimation in all places, there was
no doubt but good Queen Katherine, having this Gentlewoman daily attending
upon her, both heard by report, and saw with her eyes how all things tended
against her good Ladyship, although she seemed neither to Mistress Anne Bullen,
nor the King to carry any spark of discontent, or displeasure, but accepted
all things in Queen Katherine her patience.
good part, and with great wisdom, and much patience dissembled the same,
having Mistress Anne Bullen in more estimation for the Kings sake, then when she
was with her before, declaring her self indeed to be a very patient Grissell,
as by her long patience in all her troubles shall hereafter most plainly
appear.

For the King was now so enamoured of this young Gentlewoman, that he knew not
how sufficiently to advance her.

This being perceived by all the great Lords of the Court, who bore a secret
grudge against my Lord Cardinal, for that they could not rule in the Kingdom
as they would for him, because he was Dominus fac totum with the King, and
ruled as well the great Lords, as the mean subjects; whereat they took an
occasion to work him out of the Kings favor, and consequently themselves into
more estimation.

And after long and secret consultation with themselves how to bring this
matter to pass. They knew very A plot of the Nobility against the Cardinal.
well that it was somewhat difficult for them to do absolutely of themselves;
Wherefore they perceiving the great affection and love the King bare to Mistress
Anne Bullen, supposing in their judgments, that she would be a fit Instrument
to bring their earnest intentions to pass, therefore they often consulted with
her to that purpose, and she having both a very good wit, and also an inward
grudge and displeasure against my Lord Cardinal, was ever as ready to
accomplish their desires, as they were themselves, wherefore there was no more
to do but only to imagine an occasion to work their malice by some pretended
circumstances. Then did they daily invent diverse devises how to effect their
purpose, but the enterprise thereof was so dangerous, that though they would
feign have attempted the matter with the King, yet durst they not, for they
knew the great zeal the King did bear unto the Cardinal, and this they knew
very well, that if the matter they should propound against him was not grounded
upon a just and urgent cause, the Kings love was such toward him, and his wit
such withal, that he could with his policy vanquish all their enterprises,
and then after that, requite them in the like nature, to their utter ruin.

Therefore they were compelled to forbear their plots till they might have
some better ground to work upon. And now the Cardinal perceiving the great
zeal the King bore to this Gentlewoman, framed himself to please her, as well
as the King. To that end therefore he prepares great Banquets and Feasts to
entertain the King and her at his own house; She all The Cardinal endeavors
to get her favor.
this while dissembling the secret grudge in her breast; Now the Cardinal
began to grow into wonderful inventions not heard of before in England, and
the love between this glorious Lady and the King, grew to such perfection,
that diverse things were imagined, whereof I forbear here to speak, until I
come to the proper place.

CHAP. XI. Of the Variance between the French King, and the Duke of Burbon,
who fled to the City of Pavia, where the King besieged him.
THen began a certain grudge between the French King, and the Duke of Burbon
to break out; Insomuch that the Duke being now at variance with the house of
France, was compelled for safeguard of his life to fly, and forsake his
Country, fearing the Kings malice and indignation.

The Cardinal having intelligence hereof, contrived A plot of the Cardinal.
that the King our Sovereign Lord should obtain the Duke to be his General
in his wars against the French King, with whom our King had then an occasion
of war, and the rather, because the Duke of Burbon was fled to the Emperor
to invite him unto a like purpose, The Duke of Burbon fled to the Emperor.
where he moved the King in this matter. And after the King was advised
thereof, and conceived the Cardinals invention, he mused more and more of this
matter until it came into a Consultation amongst the Council, so that it was
concluded that an Ambassador should be sent to the Emperor about this matter;
And it was further King Henry joyneth his forces with the Emperor against the
French King. The Duke the King of Englands General.
concluded, that the King and the Emperor should join in those wars against
the French King, and that the Duke of Burbon should be the King of Englands
Champion, and General in the field, who had a number of good soldiers over
and besides the Emperors Army which was not small, and that the King should
pay the Duke monthly wages for himself and his retinue.

For which purpose John Russell, who was afterward Created Earl of Bedford
lay continually beyond the Seas in a secret place, both to receive money from
the King, and to pay the same monthly to the Duke, so that the Duke began the
wars with the French King in his own Territories and Dukedom which the King
had gotten into his own hands, being not perfectly known to the Dukes
enemies, that he had any aid from our Sovereign The French King in person
with an Army.
Lord, and thus he wrought the French King much displeasure, in as much that
the French King was constrained to prepare a present Army, and in his own
person to resist the Dukes power. And battle being joined, the King drove him
to take Pavia, a strong The Duke flies to Pavia, and is there besieged by the
French King.
Town in Italy with his host of men for his security, where the King
encamped himself wonderfully strong, intending to close the Duke within the
Town, lest he should issue out, and skirmish with him.

The French King in his Camp sent secretly into England a private person
(being a very witty man) to treat of The French. Ambassador treats of peace
with England.
a Peace between his Master, and our Sovereign Lord, his name was John Iokin,
who was kept as secretly as might be, no man having intelligence of his
arrival; For he was no French man borne, but an Italian, a man of no great
estimation in France, nor known to be much in his Masters favor, but taken
to be a Merchant; And for his subtle wit, was elected to treat of such an
Embassage as the French King had given him in Commission.

This Iokin was secretly conveyed to Richmond, and there stayed until such
time as the Cardinal resorted thither to him, where after Easter term was
ended, he kept his feast of Whitsontide very solemnly; In which season my Lord
Cardinal caused this Iokin diverse times to dine with him, who seemed to be
both witty, and of good behavior, he continued long in England after this,
till at the last (as it should seem) he had brought the Command sent to Sir
John Russell to detain the Kings pay.
matter, which he had in Commission to pass; Whereupon the King sent out
immediately a restraint unto Sir John Russell, that he should retain that
month pay still in his hands, until the Kings pleasure should be further
made known, which should have been paid to the Duke, being then encamped
within the Town of Pavia. For want of which money the Duke and his men were
much dismayed, when they saw no money come as it was wont to do, and being in
this dangerous case where victuals began to be scant, and very dear, they
imagined many ways what should be the reason that the Kings money came not,
some said this, and some said that, mistrusting nothing less then the true
cause thereof.

CHAP. XII. Of the Duke of Burbons Stratagem and Victory, wherein the French
King was taken prisoner.
NOw the Duke and his Soldiers were in great The Duke and his soldiers in
extreme want.
misery for want of Victuals and other necessaries, which they could by no
means get within the Town; Hereupon the Captains and Soldiers began to
grudge and murmr, being for want of Victuals all like to perish, and being in
this extremity came before the Duke, and said, Sir, we must of force and
necessity yield to our enemies; And better were it for us so to do, then to
starve like dogs. But when the Duke heard this, he replied with weeping
tears; Sirs, (quoth he) you have proved your selves valiant The Dukes loving
advise, A general consent.
men, and of noble hearts in this service; and for your necessity, whereof I
my self do participate, I do not a little lament; But I shall desire you, as
you are noble in heart and courage, so to take patience for two or three days,
and if succor come not then from the King of England, (as I doubt nothing
less) I will then consent to you all to put our selves and lives unto the
mercy of our Enemies; whereunto they all agreed, and tarried till two days
were past, expecting relief from the King; Then the Duke seeing no remedy,
called his noble Captains and Soldiers before him, and weeping, said; You
Noblemen and Captains, we must yield our selves unto our Enemies, or else
famish, and to yield the Town and our selves, I know well the cruelty of our
Enemies, as for my part I pass not for their cruelties, for I shall suffer
death (I know very well) most cruelly, if I come once into their hands; It is
not therefore for my self that I do lament, it is for your sakes, it is for
your lives, and for the safeguard of your persons, for so that you might escape
your enemies hands, I would willingly suffer death; good Companions, and noble
Soldiers, (I do require you all) considering the miserable calamities and
dangers we are in at this present to sell our lives most dearly, rather then
to be murdered like beasts; Therefore if you all consent with me, we will take
upon The Dukes subtle devise.
us this night to give our Enemies assault, and by that means we may either
escape, or else give them an overthrow, for it were better to dye in the field
like men, then to live prisoners miserably in captivity, to which they all
agreed.

Then (quoth the Duke) you all perceive the enemies Camp is strong, and there
is no way to enter upon them but one, and that entry is planted with great
Ordnance and strength of men, so that it is impossible to attain to our
enemies, that way to fight with them in their Camp; And also now of late you
perceive they have had but small doubt of us, in regard they have kept but
slender Watch.

Therefore mine advise is, there shall issue out of the Town, in the dead time
of the night from us a certain number of you, that be the most likely to
assault the Camp, and they shall give the assault secretly against the place
of the entry, which is most strong and invincible, which force and valiant
assault shall be to them of the Camp so doubtful, that they will turn the
strength of the entry, that lies over against your assault, to beat you from
your purpose. Then will I enter out at the Posterne gate, and come to the place
of their strength newly turned, and there ere they be aware will I enter and
fight with them in the Camp, and win their Ordnance, which they have newly
turned, and beat them with their own pieces, and then may you come and join
with me in the field; So this devise pleased them all wonderful well, and they
did then prepare themselves all that day for that devise, and kept themselves
secret and close without any noise or shot of pieces in the Town, which gave
the enemy the less fear of the assault, for at night they went all to their
Tents, and couched quietly, nothing mistrusting what after happened; So in the
dead of the night, when they all were at rest, the assailents issued out of the
Town, and there according to the Dukes appointment, they gave so cruel and
fierce an assault, that they in the Camp had much ado to withstand them. And
then (as the Duke before declared) they within were compelled to turn the shot
that They issue out in the night.
lay at the entry against the assault; Then issued out the Duke, and with him
about fifteen or sixteen hundred men or more, secretly in the night. The
enemy being ignorant The Duke issues out with 150. or 160. men. He flew the
enemies, and took the gunnes. He won the field.
of his coming until he entered the Field, and at his entry he took all the
Ordnance that lay there, and slew the Gunners, then charged the Pieces against
the enemies, and slew them wonderfully, and cut down their Tents and
Pavillions. and murdered many therein ere they were aware of his coming,
suspecting nothing less then his entry, so that he won the field ere the
King could arise; So the King was taken in his lodging, before he was
harnessed. And when the Duke had won the field, the French King taken, and his
men slain, his Tents robbed and spoiled, and the Kings coffers searched, The
Duke of Burbon found the league under the great Seal of England, newly made
between the King of England and the French King, whereby he perceived the
impediment of his money which should have come to him from the King, having
upon due search of this matter further intelligence, that all this business
was devised by the Cardinal of England. Whereupon the Duke He intended to sack
Rome, but was there slain.
conceived such indignation against the Cardinal, that he went immediately to
Rome, and there intended to sack the Town, and to have taken the Pope; But at
the first assault of the Town, the Duke was the first man that was there
slain, notwithstanding the Captains continued their assaults. And at last
many of the Town fled with the Pope to the Castle of Angel, where he
continued in great calamity.

I have written this History more at large, because it was thought of all this
mischief, wherefore you may see whatsoever a man does purpose, be he Prince or
Prelate, yet God dispatcheth all things at his pleasure and will; It being a
folly for any wise man to take upon him any weighty enterprise of his own will
without calling upon God for his grace and assistance in all his proceedings.

I have seen Princes, either when they would call a Parliament, or any other
great Assembly, that they would first call to God most reverently for his grace
therein. And now I see the contrary, as it seems they trust more to their
own minds and wills, then to Gods good grace, And even thereafter oftentimes
do their matters take effect; Wherefore not only in this History, but diverse
others, may be perceived most evident examples. Yet I see no man almost in
authority, or high estate regard the same, which is the greater pity, and the
more to be lamented. Now here I desist to speak any further of this matter;
and to proceed to others.

CHAP. XIII. Of the French Kings redemption out of captivity, and the Cardinals
Embassage into France.
Upon the taking of the French King, there were diverse Consultations and
various opinions amongst the Counsel: Some hold that our Sovereign Lord the
King could invade the Realm of France, he might easily conquer the same, for
as much as the King with the most part of the Noblemen of France were in
captivity. Easy to invade France.
Some said again, that the King our Master ought to have had the French King
prisoner, forasmuch as he was taken by our Kings Champion, and Captain
General the King Henry ought to have the French King captive.
Duke of Burbon and the Emperor. Insomuch that the King was advised thereby to
occasion of war against the Emperor, because he kept the King of France out
of our Kings possession, with diverse imaginations and devises as their
fantasies served, which were too long here to relate.

Thus were they in long consideration, whereof every Diverse Ambassadors from
Fuance to King Henry to take order for their Kings release.
man in the Court talked as his fancy served him, until at the last diverse
Ambassadors from the Realm of France came to the King our Lord, desiring him
to take order with the Emperor for the French Kings delivery, as his Highness
wisdom should think best, wherein my Lord Cardinal bore great rule. So that
after great deliberation and advise taken, it was thought good by the Cardinal
that the Emperor should deliver the French King out of his ward upon
sufficient pledges.

And afterward it was thought meet, that the Kings two sons (that is to say)
the Dolphin and the Duke of Orleans should be delivered in hostage for security
of the Emperor, and the King our Sovereign Lord, upon all such demands and
requests as should be demanded of the French King, as well by the Emperor as
by our Sovereign Lord.

The Cardinal lamenting the French Kings captivity, and the Popes great
adversity (who yet remained in the Castle) Angel, either as prisoner, or else
for defense against his enemies, endeavored and labored all that he The
Cardinal endeavors the peace of the Pope, and the French King.
could with the King and his Counsel to take some order for the quietness of
them both.

At the last as you heard before, diverse of the great States and Lords of the
Council with my Lady Anne lay in continual wait to spy a convenient occasion
to take the Cardinal in a snare.

Therefore they consulted with the Cardinal, and informed him that they
thought it a necessary time for him The Counsel advised the Cardinal to go of
the Embassage to France.
to take upon him the Kings Commission, to travel beyond the seas, and by his
wisdom to compass a present peace amongst these great Princes and Potentates,
encouraging him thereto, and alleging that it was more meet for his wisdom,
discretion, and authority to bring so weighty a matter to pass then any other
within this Realm, their intent was no other but to get him from the King that
they might adventure by the help of their chief Mistresses This was a plot.
to deprave him unto the King, and so in his absence bring him into his
disgrace, or at the least to be in less estimation.

Well the matter was so handled that the Cardinal was commanded to prepare
himself for the journey which The Cardinal does prepare for his Journey.
he took upon him, but whether willingly or not I cannot say. But this I
know, that he made so short abode after the perfect resolution thereof, that
he caused all things to be prepared speedily for his journey. And every one of
his servants were appointed that should attend him in the same.

When all things were concluded and provided for this noble Journey, he
advanced forwards in the name of God. My Lord had with him such of the Lords
and Bishops as were not of the Conspiracy.

Then marched he forward from his new house at Westminster through all London,
over London bridge, having a great many of Gentlemen in a rank before him in.
Velvet Coats, and the most part of them with chains of gold about their necks.
And all his yeomen followed him with noble men, and great men's servants all in
Oringe-tawny coats, and the Cardinals hat with T. and C. for Thomas Cardinal
embroydered upon them, as well upon his own servants coats, as all the rest of
the Gentlemen, and his sumpter Mules which were twenty and more in number: And
when all his carriages and carts and other his train were passed before, he
rode very sumptuously like a Cardinal with the rest of his train on his Mule
with his spare Mule, and his spare horse covered with crimson Velvet, and gilt
stirrops, following him. And before him he had his two great silver Crosses,
his two Pillars of silver, the Kings broad Seal of England, and his Cardinals
hat, and a Gentleman carrying his Balance, otherwise called his Cloak-bagge,
which was See his Magnificence.
made of fine scarlet all embroydered very richly with gold. Thus he passed
through London as I said before, and all the way in his said Journey he was
thus furnished, having his Harbengers in every place before which prepared
lodgings for him and his said train.

The first Journey he made was two miles beyond Debtford in Kent unto Sir
Richard Wiltshires house, the rest of his train were lodged in Debtford, and
in the country thereabouts.

The next day he marched to Rochester, where he lay in the Bishops Palace,
and the rest were lodged in the City

The third day he rode from thence to Feversham, and there lodged in the
Abbey, and his train in the Town, and some about in the country.

The fourth day he rode to Canterbury, where he was He came to Canterbury.
kindly entertained by the Bishop of the City, and there he continued four or
five days. In which season was the Iubilee, and a great Fair in the Town, by
reason it was the feast of Saint Thomas their Patron, upon which day there was
a solemn procession wherein my Lord Cardinal was in his Legantine Ornaments,
with his hat upon his head, who commanded the Monks and the Quire to sing the
Latin after this sort: Sancta Maria or a pro The Cardinal commands the
Monks to pray for the Pope.
Papa nostra Clemente, and in this manner perused the Latin through: My Lord
Cardinal kneeling at a stool before the Quire door prepared for him, with
Carpets and Cushions: All the Monks and the Quire stood in the body singing
the Letany. At which time I saw my Lord Cardinal weep tenderly, the which
James, I, and The Cardinal wept.
others conceived to be for grief, that the Pope was in such calamity and
danger of the Lance Knights.

The next day I was sent with Letters from my Lord to a Cardinal in Callice in
post, so that I was the same night in Callice. At my arrival I found standing
upon the He arrived at Callice.
Peer without the Lanthorne-gate all the Council of the Town, to whom I
delivered up my message, and my Letters before I entered the Town, where I lay
until my Lord came thither, who arrived two days after my coming thither
before eight of the clock in the morning, and was received of all the noble
Officers and Council of the Town, and the Major of the staple with
procession, the Clerks being in rich Copes having many rich Crosses.

In the Lanthorne-gate a stool with Cushions and Carpets was set for him where
he kneeled, and made his prayers: At which time they fenced him in with
Seizures of silver, and sprinkled water, that done they passed on before him in
procession, until he came unto Saint Mary's Church, where at the high Altar
turning him to the people he gave them his Benediction and pardon, and He gave
the people pardon.
then he repaired with a great number of Noblemen and Gentlemen to a place in
the Town, called the Chequer, where he kept his house so long as he abode in
the Town, going immediately into his naked Bed, because he was some what
troubled with sickness by reason of his passage by Sea.

That night he called unto him Mounsier de Bees, Captain of Bulloigne, with
diverse other Gallants and Gentlemen, who had dyned with him that day, and
having some further consultation with my Lord Cardinal, he and the rest of the
Gentlemen departed again to Bulloigne.

Thus my Lord was daily visited with one or other of the French Nobility.

When all his train and carriage was landed, and all things prepared for his
journey, his Grace called all his Noblemen and Gentlemen into the Privy
Chamber, where being assembled before him, he said; I have called The
Cardicalls all his followers into his privy Chamber.
you hither to declare unto you, that I would have you both consider the duty
you owe to me, and the good will I semblably bear to you for the same. Your
intendment of service is to further the Authority I have by Commission from the
King, which diligent observance of yours, I will hereafter recommend to his
Majesty, as also to show you the Nature of the Frenchmen, and withal to
instruct you with Reverence, you shall use me The Cardinals instructions to
his followers.
for the high honor of the Kings Majesty, and to inform you how you shall
entertain, and accompany the Frenchmen, when you meet at any time.

Concerning the first point you shall understand for diverse weighty affairs of
his graces and for mere advancement of his royal dignity, he has assigned
me in this Journey to be his Lieutenant, what reverence therefore belongs
to me for the same I will show you.

By virtue therefore of my Commission and Lieutenantship, I assume and take
upon me to be esteemed in all honor and degrees of service as unto his
highness is Their duty to him expressed.
meet and due, and that by me nothing be neglected that to his State is due
and appertinent, for my part you shall see that I will not omit one jot
thereof: Therefore one of your chief causes of your Assembly at this time is
to inform you that you be not ignorant of your duty in this; I wish you
therefore as you would have my favor, and also charge you all in the Kings
name, that you do not forget the same in time and place, but that every of you
do observe his duty to me according as you will at your return avoid the
Kings indignation, or deserve his Highness thanks; the which I will set forth
at our return, as each of you shall deserve.

Now to the second point the nature of the Frenchmen The nature of the
Frenchmen.
is such that at their first meeting they will be as familiar with you, as if
they had known you by long acquaintance, and will commune with you in their
French tongue as if they knew every word, therefore use them in a kind manner
and be as familiar with them as they are with you; if they speak to you in
their natural tongue speak to them in English, for if you understand not
them, no more shall they you. Then speaking merrily to one of the Gentlemen
being a Welshman, Rice, (quoth he) speak thou welsh to them and doubt not,
but thy speech will be more difficult to them then their French shall be to
thee. Moreover he said unto them all, let your entertainment and behavior
be according to all Gentlemen's in humility, that it may be reported after our
departure from thence, that you were Gentlemen of very good behavior and
humility; That all men may know, you understand your duties to your King. and
to your Master. Thus shall you not only obtain to your selves great
commendations and praises; But also greatly advance your Prince and Country.

Now being admonished of these things prepare your selves against tomorrow, for
then we purpose to set forward. Therefore we his servants being thus
instructed, and all things being in a readiness proceeded forwards the next
day being Mary Magdalens day, my Lord Cardinal The Cardinal and his train
go from Callis.
advanced out of Callis with such a number of black Coats as has been seldom
seen, with the Ambassador went all the Peers of Callis, and Groynes. All
other Gentlemen, besides those of his train were garnished with black Velvet
coats and Chains of gold. Thus passed he forward, with his troop before three
in a Rank, which compass extended three quarters of a mile in length, having
his Crosses, and all other his accustomed His troops 3. inranke extended three
quarters of a mile.
glorious furniture carried before him, as I have formerly related except the
Broad Seal, the which he left with Doctor Tailor, then Master of the Rolls
until his return.

Thus passing on his way, we had scarce gone a mile, but it began to reign so
vehemently, that I have not seen the like for the time, which endured until we
came The Cardinal of Lorraine meets my Lord.
to Bulloigne, and ere we came to Standingfield, the Cardinal of Lorraine a
goodly young Gentleman gave my Lord a meeting, and received him with much joy
and reverence, and so passed forth with my Lord in communication until we
came near the said Standingfield, which is a religious place standing between
the English, French, and Imperial Dominions, being a Newter, holding of
neither of them. Then there we waited for my Lord le Count Brian Captain of
Picardy, with a great Captain of Picardy.
number of Stradigatts or Arboncies standing in array in a great piece of
green Oats, all in harness upon light horses, passing on with my Lord in a
wing into Bulloigne, and so after into Picardy, for my Lord doubted that the
Emperor would lay some Ambushment to betray him, for which cause he commanded
them to attend The French king sent a Convoy.
my Lord for the safety of his own person, to conduct him from the danger of
his enemies.

Thus rode he accompanied until he came nigh to Bulloigne within an English
mile, where all the worshipful Citizens of Bulloigne came and met him, having
a learned man that made an Oration in Latin to him, unto the which my Lord
made answer, and that done, Monsieur de Bees Captain of Bulloigne with his
retinue met him on horseback with all his Assembly. Thus he marched into the
Town, lighting at the Abbey gate, from whence he was conveyed into the Abbey
with procession, and there they presented him with the Image of His
entertainment in Bulloigne.
our Lady, commonly called our Lady of Bulloigne, where was always great
offerings; That done, he gave his blessing to the people, with certain days
of pardon; Then went he into the Abbey to his lodging, but all his train were
lodged in the high base Town.

The next day after he had heard Mass, he rode to Muterell, Also at Muterell.
where he was in like manner saluted by the worshipful of the Town all in
livery alike, where also a learned Oration was made to him in Latin, which his
A Latin Oration.
Grace answered again in Latin. And as he entered in at the gate, there was
a Canopie of Silk imbroydered with like Letters, as his men had on their
coats. And when he was alighted, his Footmen had it as due to their Office.
There was also made Pageants for joy of his Pageants made for joy.
coming, who was called in the French tongue, whither ever he rode or came, Le
Cardinal de Patifagus, and in Latin Cardinalus Patifagus, who was accompanied
all that night with the Gentlemen of the Country thereabouts.

The next day he took his journey toward Abovile, where he was in like manner
entertained, and conveyed His entertainment at Abovile.
into the Town, and most honorably welcomed with diverse kinds of Pageants
both costly, and wittily contrived to every turning of the streets: as he rode
through the Town, having a Canopie borne over him, richer then at Muterill,
and so conveyed him to his lodging which was a fair house newly built with
Brick, at which house the French King Lowis was married to the Kings Sister,
which was married after to the Duke of Suffolk. In this Town of Abovile he
remained eight or nine days, where resorted unto him diverse of the French
Kings Counsel, every day continually feasting, and entertaining him, and the
other Lords.

At the time of his departing out of the Town, he rode to a Castle beyond the
water, called by some, Le Channel Percequeine, standing and adjoining to the
said water upon a great Hill and Rock, within the which there was a Coledge of
Priests; The situation whereof was much like to the Castle of Windsor in
England, and there he was received with a solemn procession, conveying him
first to the Church, and then to the Castle upon the Bridge over the water of
Some, where King Edward the Fourth met with the French King, as you may read
at large in the Chronicles of England.

My Lord was no sooner seated in his lodging, but I left my Lord and rode to
Amience to see the King.
I heard, that the French King would come that day to the City of Amience which
was not above six English miles from thence. And being desirous to see his
coming thither, I took with me two of my Lords Gentlemen and rode presently
thither: And being but strangers we took up our lodging at the sign of the
Angel, directly over against the west door of the Cathedral Church de nostre
Dame, where we stayed in expectation of the Kings coming: And about four of
the clock came Madame Regent the Kings Mother riding in a very rich Chariot,
and with her within was the Queen of First came Madam Regent.
Navarre, her Daughter, attended with a hundred or more of Ladies and
Gentlewomen following, every one riding upon a white Palfrey, also her guard
which was no small number. And within two days after the King Two days after
the King, attended by Swithers, Burgonians, French, and Scottish.
came in with a great Shot of Gunnes, and there was diverse Pageants made only
for joy of his coming, having about his person and before him a great number
of Noblemen and Gentlemen in three companies: The first, were of Swithers and
Burgonians with gunnes; The second, were Frenchmen with Bows; The third, were
le Carpe-fall Scottishmen, who were more comely persons then all the rest. The
French guard and Scottish had all one Livery, being apparalled with rich Coats
of white Cloth with a rich guard of silver Bullione of a handful broad: The
King came riding on a rich Jennet, and did alight at the said great Church and
was conveyed with procession to the Bishops Palace where he was lodged. The
next morning, I rode again to Picegueny to attend upon my Lord, and when I
came, my Lord was ready to go on horseback to ride toward Amience, and
passing on his way, he was saluted by diverse Noble personages making him
Orations in Latin, to whom my Lord made answer ex tempore.

Then was word brought him that the King was ready to meet him, wherefore he
had no other shift, but to light at an old Chapel that stood hard by the The
Cardinal put on rich raiments.
high way, and there he newly apparrelled himself in rich array; and so
mounted again upon an other Mule very richly trapped with a foot cloth of
crimson velvet purled with gold and fringed about the edges with a fringe of
gold very costly, his stirrops of silver guilt, the Bosses of the same, and the
checkes of his Mules bit were all guilt with fine gold, and by that time he
was mounted again in this gorgious manner; the King was come very near within
less then an English quarter of a mile his guard standing in array upon the
top of an high hill expecting my Lords coming; to whom my Lord made as much
have as conveniently he could until he came within a pair of Buts length,
and there he stayed. The King perceiving that, caused Monsieur van de Mount to
issue from him, and to ride to my Lord Cardinal to know the cause of his
tarrying, and so Monsieur van de Mount being mounted upon a very fair Jennet
took his race with his horse till he came even to my Lord, and then he
caused his horse to come aloft twice or thrice so near my Lords Mule, that he
was in doubt of his horse and so alighted, and in humble reverence did his
Message to my Lord, that done he repaired to the King. The French King and the
Cardinal meet.


And then the King advanced forwards, seeing my Lord do the like, and in the
mid way, they meet embracing each other with amiable countenances. Then came
into the place all Noblemen and Gentlemen on both parts who made a mighty
press.

Then the Kings Officers cried penant de la vant march march: So the King with
the Lord Cardinal on his right They March, the Cardinal on the Kings right
hand.
hand rode toward Amience; Every English Gentleman being accompained with an
other of France. The train of these two great Princes was two miles in length,
that is to say from the place of their meeting unto Amience where they were
nobly received with Gunnes and Pageants, until the King had brought my Lord to
his lodging, and then departed for that night. The King being lodged in the
Bishops Palace: And the next day after dinner, my Lord rode with a great
train of English Noblemen and Gentlemen unto the Court to the King, at which
time, the King kept his Bed, yet nevertheless, my Lord came into his
Bedchamber where on the one side of the Bed sat the Kings Mother, and on the
other side, the Cardinal of Lorraine accompanied with diverse other Gentlemen
of France, and after some communication, and drinking of wine with the Kings
Mother, my Lord departed and returned to his own lodging accompanied with
diverse other Lords and Gentlemen.

Thus continued my Lord at Amience and also the King The King and Cardinal at
Amience 14. days.
14. days feasting each other diverse times, and there one day at Mass, the
King and my Lord received the holy Sacrament, as also the Queen Regent and the
Queen of Navarre, after that it was determined, that the King and my Lord
should remove, and so they rode to a City called Campaine which was more then
20. miles from They removed from Amience to Campaines.
Amience, unto which Town I was sent to provide lodging for my Lord, and in my
travel, I having occasion to stay by the way at a little Village to shoe my
horse; There came to me a servant from the Castle, there perceiving me to be
an Englishman, and one of my Lord Legates servants (as they then called my
Lord) desired me to go into the Castle to the Lord his Master, whom he
thought would be very glad to see me, to whom I consented, because I desired
acquaintance with strangers, especially with men of authority and honorable
rank; so I went with him, who conducted me to the Castle, and at my first
entrance, I was among the Watchmen who kept the first ward being very tall men
and comely persons, who saluted me very kindly; and knowing the cause of my
coming, they advertised their Lord and Master: and forthwith the Lord of the
Castle came out unto me, whose name was Monsieur Crookesly a Nobleman borne;
and at his coming, he embraced Monsieur Crookesley his going to invite the
King and the Cardinal to his Castle.
me, saying, that I was heartily welcome, and thanked me; that was so gentle
as to visit him, and his Castle, saying that he was preparing to meet the
King, and my Lord Cardinal, and to invite them to his Castle: and when he had
showed me the strength of his Castle, and the Walls which were 14. foot broad,
and I had seeh all the houses, he brought me down into a fair inner Court
where his Jennet stood ready for him with 12. other of the fairest Jennets that
ever I saw, especcially his own, which was a Mare: which Jennet he told me,
he had 400. crowns offered for her; Upon these 12. Jennets were mounted 12.
goodly Gentlemen, called Pages of honor, they rode all bare-headed in Coats
of cloth of gold guarded with black velvet, and they had all of them boots of
read Spanish leather.

Then took he his leave of me, commanding his Steward, The Cardinals servant
nobly entertained.
and other of his Gentlemen to conduct me to his Lady to dinner; So they led me
up to the Gatehouse, where then their Lady and Mistress lay for the time that the
King and the Cardinal should tarry there. And after a short time the Lady
Crookesley came out of her Chamber into the dyning room, where I attended her
coming, who did receive me very Nobly, like her self, she having a train of
twelve Gentlemen that did attend on her. Forasmuch (quoth she) as you are an
English Gentleman, whose custom is to kiss all Ladies and Gentlewomen in your
Country without offense, yet it is not so in this Realm; Notwithstanding, I
will be so bold as The Lady salutes him her self.
to kiss you, and so shall you salute all my Maids. After this we went to
dinner, being as nobly served as ever I saw any in England, passing all dinner
time in pleasing discourses.

And shortly after dinner I took my leave, and was constrained that night to
lie short of Campanie, at a great walled Town called Moundrodrey, the Suburbs
whereof my Lord of Suffolk had lately burned; and early in the morning I came
to Campanie, being Saturday, and Market day, where at my first coming I took
up my Inn over against the Market place, and being set at dinner in a fair
Chamber that looked out into the street, I heard a great noise and clattering
of Bills; and looking out, I saw the Officers of the Town bringing a Prisoner
to execution, and with a Sword cut off his head. I demanded what was the
offense, they answered me, for killing of Red Dear in the Forest near
adjoining. And incontinently they held the poor man's head upon a Pole in the
Market place between the Stagges horns, and his four quarters set up in
four places of the Forest.

Having prepared my Cardinals lodgings in the great Castle of the Town, and
seen it furnished, my Lord had the one half assigned, and the King the other
half, and in like manner they divided the Gallery between them; The French
King the Lord Cardinal, and the Queen Regent lodged all in one Castle.
And in the midst thereof, there was made a strong Wall with a Window and a
Door, where the King and my Lord did often meet and talk, and diverse times
go one to the other through the same Door. Also there was lodged in the same
Castle Madam Regent the Kings Mother, and all the Ladies and Gentlewomen that
did attend on her.

Not long after came the Lord Chancellor of France, a very witty man, with all
the Kings grave Councillors, where they took great pains daily in
consultation. At which time I heard my Lord Cardinal fall out The Cardinal
fell out with the Chancellor of France.
with the Chancellor of France, laying to his charge, that he went about to
hinder the League which was before his coming concluded upon, by the King our
Sovereign Lord, and the French King their Master. Insomuch that my Lord
stomacked him stoutly, and told him it was not he that should infringe the
amiable friendship. And if the French King his Master being there present would
follow his the Chancellours counsel, he should not fail shortly after his
return to feel the smart, what it was to maintain War against the King of
England, and thereof he should be well assured; insomuch that his angry speech
and bold countenance made them all doubt how to quiet him to the counsel, who
The Cardinal departs in anger.
was then departed in a great fury.

Now here was sending, here was coming, here was entreating, and here was
great submission and intercession Great means used to bring him again to
consultation.
made unto him to reduce him to his former communication, who would in no ways
relent until Madame Regent came to him her self, who handled the matter so
well that she brought him to his former communication, and by that means, he
brought all things to pass, that before he could not compass, which was more
out of fear then affection the French King had to the matter in hand; for now
he had got the heads of all the Council under his girdle.

The next morning early after this conflict, the Cardinal arose about 4. of
the clock, and sat him down to write Letters into England unto the King,
commanding one of his Chaplains to prepare him ready; Insomuch that the
Chaplain stood ready in his Vestures until four of the clock in the
afternoon. All which season my Lord never rose to eat any meat, but
continually writ Letters with his own hand; And about four of the The
Cardinal writes Letters into England.
clock in the afternoon he made an end of writing, commanding one Christopher
Gunner the Kings Sergeant to He sends post into England.
prepare himself without delay to ride Post into England with his Letters whom
he dispatched away ere ever he drank. That done, he went to Mass and Mattins,
and other devotions with his Chaplain, as he was accustomed to do, and then
went to walk in a Garden the space of an hour and more, and then said Evening
song, and so went to dinner and supper, making no long stay, and so went to bed.

The next night following, my Lord caused a great supper to be made, or rather
a Banquet for Madam Regent The Cardinal feasts two Queens.
and the Queen of Navarre, and other Noble Personages, Lords and Ladies. At
which supper was Madam Lewis, one of the Daughters of Lewis the last King,
whose sister lately dyed, these two Sisters were of their Mother Inheritours of
the Duchy of Britain. And forasmuch as King Francis had married one of the
Sisters by which he had one Moytie of the said Duchy, he kept the said Madam
Lewis the other Sister without Marriage to the intent the whole Duchy might
descend to him or his successors after his death for lack of issue of her.

But now let us return to the Supper or Banquet, where all those noble
personages were highly feasted. And at the midst of the said Banquet the
French King In comes the French King, and the King of Navarre.
and the King of Navarre came suddenly in, who took their places in the lowest
part thereof; There was not only plenty of fine meats, but also much mirth
and solace as well in merry communication, as also the noise of my Lords
Music, who played there all that night so cunningly, that the two Kings took
great delight therein, insomuch that the French King desired my Lord to lend
them unto him for the next night. And after the Supper or Banquet ended, the
Lords fell to dancing amongst The French King much taken with my Lords Music.
whom one Madam Fountain had the praise. And thus passed they the most part of
the night ere they parted.

The next day the King took my Lords Music, and rode to a Noblemans house,
where was some living Image to whom he had vowed a nights pilgrimage. And to
perform his devotion when he came there (which was in the night) he danced and
caused others to do the same, and the next morning he returned to Campanie.

The King being at Campanie, gave order that a wild The French King hunted the
wild Boar.
Bore should be lodged for him in the Forest, whether my Lord Cardinal went
with him to see him hunt the wild Bore, where the Lady Regent with a number of
Ladies and Damsels were standing in Chariots looking upon the toil, amongst
these Ladies stood my Lord Cardinal, to regard the hunting in the Lady Regents
Chariot. And within the Toil was the King with diverse Ladies of France ready
furnished for the high and dangerous enterprise of hunting of this perilous
wild Swine.

The King being in his Doublet and Hose all of sheep color cloth richly
trimmed, in his slip a brace of very great Gray-hounds, who were armed as
their manner there is to defend them from the violence of the Beasts tuskes.
And the rest of the Kings Gentlemen that were appointed to hunt, were likewise
in their Doublets and Hose, holding each of them a very sharp Bores spear.
Then the King commanded the Keepers to uncouch the Boar; And that every person
within the Toil should go to a standing, among whom were diverse Gentlemen of
England.

The Boar presently issued out of his den, and being pursued by a hound came
into the plain, where he stayed a while gazing upon the people, and the hound
drawing near him, he espied a Bush upon a Bank; under the bush lay two
Frenchmen, who fled thither, thinking there to be safe; But the Bore smelling
them, and thrusting his head into the Bush, these two men came away from
thence, as men use to fly from the danger of death.

Then was the Boar by violence of the Hunters driven from thence, who 'ran
strait to one of my Lords Footmen being a very tall man, who had in his hand
an English Javelin, with which he defended himself a great while. But the Bore
continued foaming at him with his great Tuskes; at the last the Boar broke in
sunder his Javelin, so that he was glad to draw his sword, and therewith stood
upon his guard until the Hunters came and rescued him, and put the Boar once
again to flight to an other Gentleman of England, one Master Ratcliffe, who
was son and heir to the Lord Fitzwalter, now Earl of Sussex, who by his
Boares spear rescued himself. There were many other passages, but I forbear
prolixitie, and return to the matter in hand.

Many days were spent in consultation, and expectation of Christopher Gunners
return, who was formerly sent post into England with Letters, as I said
before; At last he returned with Letters, upon receipt whereof, my Preparation
to return into Bngland.
Lord prepared with all expedition to return to England.

That mourning that my Lord intended to remove being at Mass in his Closet, he
Consecrated the Chancellor of France, a Cardinal, and put his Hat on his
head, and his cap of Scarlet, and then took his journey, The Cardinal that
morning he came away made the Chancellor of France a Cardinal.
and returned into England with all the expedition he could, and came to
Said, and was there nobly entertained of my Lord Stanes, who was captain of
that place, and from thence went to Callis, where he stayed a while for
shipping of his goods. And in the mean time he established a work to be
there kept for all Nations. But how long, or in what sort it continued, I know
not; For I never heard of any great good it did, or of any Assembly of
Merchants or traffic of Merchandise that were brought thither for so great
and mighty a matter, as was intended for the good of the Town; This being
established, he took shipping for Dover, and from thence rode post to Court.

The King being then in his progress at Sir Henry Wyats house in Kent, of whom
I and other of his servants thought he should have been nobly entertained, as
well of the King himself as of the Nobles: But we were all deceived in our
expectations: Notwithstanding He arrives at the court.
he went immediately to the King after his return, with whom he had long
talk, and continued two or three days after in the Court, and then retired to
his house at Westminster where he remained till Michaelmas Term, which was
within a fort-night after, and there he exercised his place of Chancellorship,
as he had done before.

And immediately after the beginning of the Term he caused to be assembled in
the Star Chamber all the noble men, Judges and Justices of the peace of every
shire throughout England, and were at Westminster Hall then present. And there
he made a long Oration, declaring the cause of his Embassage into France, and
of his proceedings The Cardinal makes an oration in the Starchamber.
therein, saying that he had concluded such an Amity and peace, as never was
heard of in this Realm, between our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, the
Emperor and the French King; for a perpetual peace which shall be confirmed
in writing, under the seals of both Realms engraven in gold: Offering further
that our King should receive yearly by that name out of the A perpetual peace
made with France.
duchy of Normandy, all the charges and losses he had sustained in the wars.

And also for as much as there was a restraint made of the French Queens Dowry
(whom the Duke of Suffolk had married) for many years together during the
wars: It was concluded that she should not only receive the same according
to her just right, but also the Arrerages being unpaid during the said
restraint should be perfected shortly after. The resort of Ambassadors out of
France should be such a great number of Noblemen and Gentlemen to confirm the
same as has not bin seen heretofore repair hither out of one Realm.

This peace thus concluded, there shall be such an amity between them of each
Realm, and intercourse of Merchandise, that it shall be seen to all men to
be but one Monarchy. Gentlemen and others may travel from one country to an
other for their recreations and pleasure. And Merchants of either country may
traffike safely without fear of danger. So that this Realm shall ever after
flourish.

Therefore may all Englishmen well rejoice and set forth the truth of this
Embassy in the Country. Now my Masters I beseech you and require you in the
Kings behalf, that you show your selves as loving and obedient subjects in
whom the King may much rejoice, etc. And so he ended his Oration, and brake up
the Court for that time.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the French Ambassadors entertainment and dispatch.
NOw the great long looked for Ambassadors are arrived, being in number eight
persons of the Noblest and most worthy Gentlemen in all France, who were nobly
received from place to place, and so conveyed through London to the Bishops
Palace in Paul's Churchyard, where they were lodged, to whom diverse Noblemen
resorted and gave them noble presents (especially the Mayor of the City of
London) as Wines, Sugars, Beeves, Muttons, Capons, wild Foul, wax, and other
necessary things in abundance for the expenses of his house.

They resorted to the Court being then at Greenewich on Sunday, and were
received of the Kings Majesty of The Ambassadors establish our King in the
order of France.
whom they were entertained highly.

They had a Commission to establish our Kings Highness in the order of France,
to whom they brought for that intent a collar of fine gold, with a Michell
hanging thereat, and Robes to the said order appertaining, which were of blew
velvet, and richly embroydered, wherein I saw the King pass to the Closet, and
after in the same to Mass.

And to gratify the French King for his great honor, The King of England sent
Ambasse into France to establish the French King in the order of the Garter.
he sent incontinently noblemen here in England of the order of the Garter,
which Garter the Herald carried into France unto the French King, to establish
him in the order of the Garter, with a rich Collar and Garter, and Robes
according to the same: The French Ambassadors still remaining here, until the
return of the English.

All things being then determined and concluded concerning the perpetual
peace; upon solemn Ceremonies and Oaths contained in certain Instruments
concerning the same. It was concluded there should be a solemn Mass song in
the Cathedral Church of Paul's in London by the Cardinal, the King being
present at the same in his traverse to perform all things determined.

And for the preparation thereof, there was a Gallery from the West-doore of
Paul's Church through the body of the same up to the Quite, and so to the high
Altar into the Traverse. My Lord Cardinal prepared himself to sing the Mass,
associated with twenty four Miters of Bishops and Abbots, who attended him
with such Ceremonies, as to him were then due by reason of his Legative
Prerogative.

And after the last Agnus the King rose out of the Travers and kneeled upon a
Carpet and Cushions before the high Altar, and the like did the great Master of
France chief Ambassador, that here presented the Kings person The King of
England and France Ambassadors receive the Sacraments to confirm the
perpetual peace.
of France, between whom the Lord Cardinal divided the blessed Sacrament, as
a perfect oath and bond for security of the said Covenants, of the said
perpetual peace.

That done, the King went again into the Travers, this Mass being ended,
which was solemnly sung both by the Quite of the same Church, and all the
Kings Chapel.

Then my Lord took and read the Articles of peace openly before the King and
all other, both English and The Articles of peace read by the Cardinal.
French, and there in sight of all the people the King put his hand to the gold
Seal, and subscribed with his own hand, and delivered the same to the grand
Maste of France, as his deed, who semblably did the like; that The King
subscribeth and seals.
done they departed and rode home with the Cardinal, and dined with him,
passing all the day after in consultation of weighty affairs touching the
Articles and conclusion of the said peace.

Then the King departed to Greenwich by water, at The French Nobility conveyed
to Richmond.
whose departure it was concluded by the Kings devise, that all the Frenchmen
should remove to Richmond and hunt there: And from thence to Hampton Court, and
there to hunt likewise. And the Lord Cardinal there to make a Banquet or
Supper or both, and from thence they should ride to Windsor, and there hunt:
And after return to the King at Greenwich, and there to banquet with him
before their departure.

This determined they all repaired to their lodgings, then was there no more to
do, but to make preparation in all things for the entertainment of this great
Assembly at Hampton Court at the time appointed by my Lord Cardinal, who
called before him all his chief Officers, as Stewards, Treasurers, Clerks,
and Comptrollers of his Kitchen, to whom he declared his whole mind touching
the entertainment of the Frenchmen at Hampton court, to whom he also gave
command, neither to spare for any cost or expense, nor pains to make them such
a triumphant Banquet, as they might not only wonder at it here; but also make
a glorious report to the great honor of our King and this Realm.

Thus having made known his pleasure, to accomplish his commandment, they
sent out all the Carriers Purveyors and other persons to my Lords friends to
prepare: Also they sent to all expert Cooks, and cunning persons in the art of
cookery in London, or else where that might be gotten to beautify the noble
Feast.

Then the Purveyours provided, and my Lords friends sent in such provision that
it was a wonder to see it.

The Cooks they wrought both day and night in many curious devises, where was
no lack of gold, silver, or any other costly thing: the Yeomen and Grooms of
his Wardrobe were busied in hanging the Chambers with costly Hangings, and
furnishing the same with beds of silk and other furniture for the same in
every degree.

Then my Lord sent me being his Gentleman Usher, and two other of my fellows
to foresee all things touching The rooms richly hung.
our rooms to be richly garnished, wherein our pains was not small. But
daily we traveled up and down from Chamber to Chamber to see things fitted.

Then wrought Ioyners, Carpenters, Painters, and all other Artificers needful,
that there was nothing wanting to adorn this noble Feast: There was carriage
and re-carriage of plate, stuff, and other rich emploiments, so that there was
nothing lacking that could be devised or imagined for the purpose. There were
also provided two hundred and eighty beds with all manner of furniture to them,
too long here to be related. 200. and 80. beds prepared.


The day assigned to the Frenchmen being come, they were ready assembled
before the hour of their appointment, wherefore the Officers caused them to
ride to Hannorth, a Park of the Kings within three miles of Hampton Court,
there to spend the time in hunting till night, which they did, and then
returned, and every of them were conveyed to their several Chambers having in
them good fires and store of wine, where they remained till Supper was ready.
The ordering of the banqueting rooms.


The Chambers where they supped and banquetted, were adorned thus.

First the great waiting Chamber was hung with very rich cloth of Arras, and
so all the rest some better then others, and furnished with tall yeomen to
serve: There were set Tables round about the Chambers, Banquetwise covered:
Also a Cubbard garnished with white plate, having also in the same chamber
four great plates to give the more light, set with great lights, agreat fire
of wood and coals.

The next Chamber was the Chamber of presence, richly hanged also with cloth
of Arras, and a sumptuous cloth of State furnished with many goodly Gentlemen
to serve. The Tables were ordered in manner as the other were, save only the
high table was removed beneath the cloth of State, toward the midst of the
Chamber with six desks of plate, garnished all over with fine gold, saving one
pair of Candlesticks of silver and guilt, with lights in the same, the Cubberd
was barred about that no man could come very near it, for there were diverse
pieces of great store of plate to use, besides the plates that hung on the
Walls to give light, were silver and guilt with wax lights.

Now were all things in readiness, and supper fit, the principal Officers
caused the Trumpets to blow, to warn them to supper. Then the Officers
conducted The Frenchmen conducted to supper.
the Noblemen where they were to sup, and they being set the service came up,
in such abundance both costly and full of devises with such a pleasant noise
of music, that the Frenchmen (as it seemed) were wrapped up in a heavenly
Paradise. You must understand, that my Lord Cardinal was not there all this
while. But the French Monsieurs were very merry, with their rich fare and
curious cates and knackes. But before the second course, my Lord Cardinal came
in booted and spurred suddenly The Cardinal comes in ere the second course.
amongst them, at whose coming there was great joy every man rising from his
place, whom my Lord Cardinal caused to sit still and keep their places, and
being in his riding apparel, called for his chair and sat him down in the
midst of the high Table, and was there as merry and pleasant as ever I saw him
in my life.

Presently after came up the second course, which was above 100. several
devises, which were so goodly and costly, that I think, the Frenchmen never
saw the like.

But the rarest curiosity of all the rest, they all wondered at (which indeed
was worthy of wonder) were castles with Images in the same like Saint Paul's
Church for the Model of it, there were beasts, birds, fowls, personages most
excellently made, some fighting with swords, some with gunnes, other with
crosbowes, some dancing with Ladies, some on horseback with complete armor,
justling with long and sharp spears, with many more strange devises, which I
cannot describe: Amongst all, I noted, there was a chesboard made of spice
plate with men of the same, and of good proportion.

And because the Frenchmen are very expert at that sport. My Lord Cardinal
gave that same to a French Gentleman, commanding, that there should be made a
good case to convey the same into his Country.

Then called my Lord for a great boule of gold filled with Hipocras, and
putting of his cap said, I drink a The Cardinal drinks a health to both Kings.
health to the King my Sovereign Lord, and next unto the King your Master. And
when he had drunk a hearty draught, he desired the grand Master to pledge him
a cup, which cup was worth 500. Marks; And so all the Lords in order pledged
these great Princes.

Then went the cup merrily about, so that many of the Frenchmen were led to
their beds; then went my Lord into his privy Chamber making a short supper or
rather a short repast, and then returned again into the presence Chamber
amongst the Frenchmen, behaving himself in such a loving sort and so
familiarly toward them, that they could not sufficiently commend him.

And while they were in communication and pastime, all their livery were served
to theirs Chambers, every Chamber had a Basin and Ewer of silver, and a great
livery pot with plenty of wine and sufficient of every thing.

Thus furnished was every room about the house, when all was done, then were
they conducted to their lodgings.

In the morning after they had heard Mass, they stayed and dyned with my Lord,
and so departed toward Windsor: And as soon as they were gone, my Lord
returned to London, because it was the midst of the Term.

You must conceive, the King was privy to this magnificent feast, who then
intended far to exceed the same, which I refer to the French men's return.
Now the King had given command to his Officers to provide a far more
sumptuous Banquet for the Strangers, then they had at the Cardinals, which was
not neglected. After the return of these Strangers from Windsor which place
they much commended for the situation thereof, the King invited them to the
Court where they dyned, and after dynner, they danced, and had their pastime
till supper time.

Then was the Banquet Chamber in the little Yard at Greenewich furnished for
the entertainment of these His Majesty invites the Stangers to the Court.
Strangers, to which place they were conducted by the greatest personages then
being in the Court, where they did both sup and banquet, but to describe to you
the order hereof, the variety of costly dishes, and the curious devises my
weak ability and shallow capacity would much eclipse the magnificence
thereof. But thus much take notice of that although, that Banquet at Hampton
Court was marveilous sumptuous, yet this Banquet excelled the same as much, as
gold does silver in value. And for my part I never saw the like.

In the midst of the Banquet, there was turning at the Barriers of lusty gent:
in complete Armor very gorgious on foot and the like on horseback: And after
all this, there was such an excellent interlude made in Latin, that I never
saw nor heard the like, the Actours Apparel being so gorgious, and of such
strange devises, that it passes my poor capacity to relate them.

This being ended, there came a great company of Ladies and Gentlewomen, the
chiefest beauties in the Realm of England being as richly attired as cost
could make, or art devise to set forth their gestures proportions or beauties,
that they seemed to the Beholders, rather like celestial Angels then
terrestiall Creatures, and in my judgment worthy of admiration, with whom the
gent: of France danced and masked every man choosing his Lady as his fancy
served: That done and the Masquers departed; came in an other Masque of Ladies
and Gentlewomen so richly attired, as I cannot express; These Ladies Masquers
took each of them one of the French men to dance, and here note that these
Noble women spoke all of them good French, which delighted them much to hear
the Ladies speak to them in their own language.

Thus triumphantly did they spend the whole night from five of the clock at
the night, unto two or three of the clock in the morning, at which time the
Gallants drew all to their lodgings to take their rest.

As neither health, wealth, nor pleasure can always last, so ended this
triumphant Banquet, which being past, seemed in the morning to the Beholders,
as a phantastique dream.

Now after all this solemn banqueting, they prepared Their preparation for
France.
with Bag and Baggage to return. And thereupon repaired to the King, and in
order, every man took his leave of his Majesty, and the Nobles, by whom the
King sent his princely pleasure and commendations to the King their Master,
thanking them for their pains. And after great communication had with the They
take leave of the King.
great Master of that Embassage, he bad them adue.

Then they came to Westminster to my Lord Cardinal to do the like, of whom
he received the Kings reward, which I shall hereafter relate.

First, every man of honor and estimation had plate, The Kings reward.
some to the value of 2. or 300. pounds, and some of 400. pounds, besides the
great gifts before received of his Majesty; As gowns of velvet with rich
furs, great chains of gold, and some had goodly horses of great value, with
diverse other gifts of great value, which I cannot call to remembrance; but the
worst of them had And also of the Cardinal.
the sum of 20. crowns, and thus being nobly rewarded my Lord after humble
commendations to the French King bad them farewell, and so they departed.

The next day, they were conveyed to Dover to the Sea side, withal their
furniture being accompanied with many English young gallants, and what report of
their royal entertainment, they made in their own Country I never heard.

CHAP. 15. Of the Kings discovery of his love to Mistress Anne Bulloigne to the
Cardinal, with the Cardinals dislike, and also the opinions of all the learned
Bishops in England and foreign Universities.
AFter this began new matters which troubled the heads and imaginations of
all the Court, wherewith all their stomachs were full, but little digestion,
viz. the long concealed affection of the King to Mistress Anne Bulloigne now
brake out, which his Majesty disclosed to the Cardinal, whose often
persuasions on his knees took no effect.

My Lord thereupon being compelled to declare to his Majesty his opinion and
wisdom in the advancement of the Kings desires, thought it not safe for him
to wade too far alone, or to give rash judgment in so weighty a matter, but
desired leave of the King to ask Counsel of men of ancient and famous
learning both in the Divine and Civil Laws.

Now this being obtained, he by his Legatine Authority sent out his Commissions
for the Bishops of this Realm, who not long after assembled all at Westminster
before my Lord Cardinal. And not only these Prelates, but also the most
learned men of both Universities, and some from diverse Cathedral Colleges in
this Realm, who were thought sufficiently able to resolve this doubtful
question.

At this learned assembly was the Kings Case consulted of, debated, argued and
judged from day to day. The Kings Case discussed by an assembly of Bishops.
But in conclusion when these ancient Fathers of Law and Divinity parted, they
were all of one judgment, and that contrary to the expectation of most men.
And I heard some of the most famous and learned amongst them say, the Kings
Case was too obscure for any man, and the points therein were doubtful to have
any resolution therein, and so at that time with a general consent departed,
without any Resolution or judgment.

In this assembly of Bishops and diverse other learned men, it was thought very
expedient that the King should send out his Commissioners into all Universities
in Christendom, as well here in England, as Foreign Regions, there to have
this Case argued substantially, and to bring with them from thence every
definition of their opinions of the same, under the Seal of every University,
and thus for this time were their determinations.

And thereupon diverse Commissioners were presently appointed for this design:
So some were sent to Cambridge, some to Oxford, some to Lorraigne, others to
Paris, some to Orleance, others to Padua, all at Commisioners sent to all the
foreign Universities.
the proper costs and charges of the King, which in the whole amounted to a
great sum of money: and all went out of this Real me, besides the charge of
the Embassage to those famous and notable persons of all the Universities,
especially such as bare the rule, or had the custody of the University Seals,
were fed by the Commissioners with such great sums of money, that they did
easily condescend to their requests, and grant their desires.

By reason whereof all the Commissioners returned with their purpose, furnished
according to their Commissions under the Seal of every several University,
whereat there was no small joy conceived of the principal parties. Insomuch
that ever after the Commissioners were had in great estimation, and highly
advanced, and liberally rewarded far beyond their worthy deserts.
Notwithstanding they prospered, and the matter went still forward, having now
as they thought, a sure staff to lean upon.

These proceedings being declared unto my Lord The Cardinal sends again for
the bishop.
Cardinal, he sent again for the Bishops, to whom he declared the effect of
these Commissioners pains, and for assurance thereof, showed them the
instruments of each University under their several Seals, and the business
being thus handled, they went again to consultation how things should be
ordered.

At last it was concluded that it was very meet the King should send unto the
Pope his Holiness, the opinions of both Universities of England, and also
Foreign Universities, which were manifestly authorized by their common
Seals. And it was also thought fit the opinions of the worthy Prelates of
England should be sent to the Pope, comprised in an Instrument which was not
long time in finishing.

Nor was it long after that the Ambassadors were assigned for this design,
who took their journey accordingly, having certain instruments, that if the
Pope would not thereupon consent to give judgment definitively in the Kings
Case, then to require an other Ambassadors sent to the pope
Commission from his Holiness to be granted to his Legate, to establish a
Court here in England, for that purpose only, to be directed to my Lord
Cardinal Legate of England, and to Cardinal Campain Bishop of Bath, which the
King gave him at a certain time, when he was sent Embassdour hither from the
Pope his Holiness, to determine and rightly judge according to their
Consciences. To the which, The Pope does grant their suite.
after long suite made, and for the good will of the said Cardinal, the Pope
granted their Suite.

Then they returned into England, relating unto the King that his Graces
pleasure should be now brought to pass substantially, being never more likely,
considering the state of the Judges.

Long was the expectation on both sides for the coming The Pope sends his
Legate into England.
over of the Legate from Rome, who at last arrived in England with his
Commission, and being much troubled with the Gout, his journey was long and
tedious ere he could get to London, who should have been most solemnly
received at Black Heath; but he desired not to be so entertained with Pomp
and vainglory; and therefore he came very privately on his own Horse without
Temple-Barre called Bath-place, where he lay: The House being farnished of all
manner of Provision of my Lords. So after some deliberation and consultation in
the ordering of the Kings business now in hand by his Commission and Articles
of his Embassage, which being read, it was determined that the King and the
good Queen his lawful Wife, should be judged at Bride-wel and in Blackfriers,
and some place thereabouts the Court to be kept for the disputation and
determination of the causes and differences between the King and the Queen,
where they were to repair before these two Legates, who sat as Judges; before
whom the King and Queen were cited and summoned to appear; which was a
strange sight, and the newest devise that ever was heard or read of in any
Story or Chronicle: A King and a Queen to be compelled to appear in a Court as
common persons within their own Realm and Dominions, and to abide the
judgments and decrees of their Subjects, being a Prerogative belonging to the
royal Diadem.

portrait of Catherine d'Autriche

CHAP. 16. A new Court erected to determine the Kings case, two Cardinals being
Judges, having power to convent the King and Queen, the issue thereof.
IT is a wonderful thing to consider the strength of Princes Wills when they
are bent to have their pleasure fulfilled, wherein no reasonable persuasions will
serve the turn; how little do they regard the dangerous sequels that may
ensue as well to themselves as to their Subjects. And amongst all things there
is nothing that makes them more wilful then Carnal Love, and various affecting
of voluptuous desires, wherein nothing could be of greater experience then to
see what inventions were furnished, what Laws were enacted, what costly
Edifices of noble and ancient Monasteries were there over-throwne, what
diversities of opinions then arose, what extortions were then committed, how
many learned and good men were then put to Death, and what alterations of good
ancient Laws, Customs, and Charitable foundations were turned from the
relief of the poor, to the utter destruction and desolation, almost to the
subversion of this noble Realm.

It is a thousand pitties to understand the things that since have happened to
this Land, the proof whereof has taught all us Englishmen lamentable
experience. If men's eyes be not blind they may see, and if their ears be not
stopped they may hear; and if pity be not exiled, their hearts may relent
and lament at the sequel of this inordinate Love, although it lasted but a
while. O Lord God withold thine indignation from us.

You shall understand as I said before, that there was a Court erected at
Blackfriars London, where these two Cardinals sat as Judges: Now will I
describe unto you the order of the Court.

First, there were many tables and benches set in manner of a Consistory, one
seat being higher than another for the Judges aloft, above them three degrees
high was a Cloth of Estate hanged, and a Chair Royal under the same, wherein
sat the King, and some distance off sat the Queen, and at the Judges feet
sat the Scribes and Officers for the execution of the Process; the chief
Scribe was Doctor Stevens after Bishop of Winchester, and the Apparatour who
was called Doctor of the Court, who was one Cook of Westminster. Then before
the King, and the Judges sat the Archbishop of Canterbury Doctor Warham, and
all other Bishops, there stood at both ends within, Counselors Learned in the
Spiritual Laws, as well on the Kings side, as the Queens side. Doctor
Sampson, Kings Council.
afterward Bishop of Chichester, and Doctor Hall after Bishop of Worcester,
with diverse others, and Proctors in the same Law, were Doctor Peter, who was
afterward chief Secretary, and Doctor Tregunmill with diverse others. Queens
Counsel.


Now on the other side, there were Counsel for the Queen, Doctor Fisher
Bishop of Rochester, and Dr. Standish, Bishop of St. Asaph in Wales, two brave
Noble Divines, especially the Bishop of Rochester a very Godly man, whose death
many Noble men and The Bishop of Rochester lost his head for the Queens sake.
many worthy Divines much lamented, who lost his head about this cause ere it
was ended upon Tower hill, as also another ancient Doctor called Doctor Ridley,
a little man but a great Divine. The Court being thus ordered as is before
expressed, the Judges commanded the crier to proclaim silence, whilst the
commission was both read to the Court and to the people there assembled: that
done, and silence being again proclaimed, the Scribes commanded the Crier to
call King Henry of The King and Queen called by the Crier.
England, whereunto the King answered and said, here; Then called he again the
Queen of England, by the name of Katherine Queen of England, come into the
Court, etc. Who made no answer thereunto, but rose immediately out of her
Chair where she sat: and because she could not come to the King directly, by
reason of the distance, therefore she came round about the Court to the King,
and kneeled down at his feet saying these words in broken English as
follows: viz.

Sir, quoth she, I beseech you do me Justice and The Queen on her knees
pleads for her self.
right, and take some pity upon me for I am a poor woman and a stranger,
borne out of your Dominions, having here no indifferent Counsel, and less
assurance of friendship: alas Sir how have I offended you, what offense have I
given you, intending to abridge me of life in this sort, I take God to witness,
I have been to you a true and loyal wife, ever conformable to your will and
Pleasure, never did I contrary or gainsay your mind, but always submitted my
self in all things, wherein you had any delight or dalliance, whether it were
little or much, without grudging or any sign of discontent: I have loved for
your sake all men whom you have loved, whether I had cause or not, were they
friends or foes, I have been your wife this twenty years, by whom you had
many Children: And when I first came to your Bed, I take God to witness, I was
a Virgin, whether it were true or no, I put it to your Conscience, if there be
any cause that you can allege, either of dishonesty, or of any other matter,
lawful to put me from you, I am willing to depart with shame and rebuke, but
if there be none, then I pray you let me have Justice at your hands.

The King your Father was a man of such an excellent She commends K Henry the
7.
wit in his time, that he was accounted a second Solomon, and the King of
Spain my father Ferdinand, was taken for one of the wisest Kings that reigned
in Spain these many years. So they were both wise men and noble Princes; and
it is no question but they had wise Counselors of either Realm, as be now at
this day, who thought at the marriage of you and me, to hear what new devises
are now invented against me, to cause me to stand to the order of this Court.
And I conceive you do me much wrong, may you condemn me for not answering,
having no Council but such as you have assigned me: You must consider that
they cannot be indifferent on my part, being your own Subjects, and such as
you have made choice of out off your own Council whereunto they are privy,
and dare not disclose your pleasure.

Therefore I most humbly beseech you to spare me until I know how my friends
in Spain will advise me: But if you will not, then let your pleasure be done.

And with that she rose, making a low Courtesy to the King, and departed from
thence: all the people thinking she would have returned again to her former
Seat; but she went presently out of the Court leaning upon the arm of one of
her Servants, who was her general receiver, one Mr. Griffith.

The King seeing that we was ready to go out of the Court, commanded the
Crier to call her again by these words, Katherine Queen of England, come into
the Court. Lo, quoth M. Griffith, you are called again: Go on, quoth she, it
is no matter, It is no indifferent She goes out of the Court.
Court for me, therefore I will not tarry; go on your way; and so they
departed without any further answer at that time, or any appearance in any
other Court after that.

The King seeing she was departed thus, and considering her words, said to the
Audience these few words in effect.

Forasmuch, quoth he as the Queen is gone, I will The Kings commendations of
his Qu. in her absence
in her absence declare unto you all: she has been to me a true obedient
wife, and as comfortable as I could wish or desire, she has all the virtues
and good qualities that belong to a woman of her Dignity, or in any of meaner
estate, her conditions will well declare the same.

Then quoth my Lord Cardinal, I humbly beseech your Highness to declare unto
this Audience whether I have been the first and chief moover of this matter
unto your Highness, or no, for I am much suspected of all men.

My Lord Cardinal quoth the King, you have rather The King declares himself to
the whole Court.
advised me to the contrary then been any mover of the same. The special cause
that moved me in this matter, is a certain scruple that pricked my conscience,
upon certain words spoken by the Bishop of Bayon the French Ambassador, who
came hither to consult of a Marriage between the Princess our daughter the
Lady Mary and the Duke of Orleans, second Son to the King of France, and
upon resolution, and determination, he desired respite to advertise the King
his Master thereof, whether our daughter Mary should be legitimate in respect
of my marriage with this woman being sometimes my Brothers wife, which words
(I pondering) begot such a scruple in my conscience that I was much troubled at
it, whereby I thought my self in danger of Gods heavy displeasure, and
indignation, and the rather because he sent us no issue Male, for all the issue
Male that I have had by my wife dyed All the Kings Issue Male by the Queen dyed.
incontinently after they came into the world, which caused me to fear Gods
displeasure in the particular. Thus my conscience being tossed in that waves of
troublesome doubts, and partly in despair to have any other issue, then I had
already by this Lady my now wife: It behooved me to consider the estate of
this Realm and the danger it stands in for lack of a Prince to succeed me, I
thought it therefore good, in release of this mighty burden on my Conscience,
as also for the quiet estate of this Realm, to attempt a trial in The chief
point in the Kings case:
the Law herein: Whether I might lawfully take another wife without stain of
carnal concupiscence, by which God may send more issue, in case this my first
copulation was not good: I not having any displeasure in the person, or age of
the Queen, with whom I could be well contented to continue, (if our Marriage
may stand with the Law of God) as with any woman alive, The King affirms he
has no dislike of the Queen,
in which point consists all the doubt that we go about, now to know by the
Learned wisdom of you our Prelates and Pastors, of this Realm and Dominion
now here assembled for that purpose, to whose Consciences and learning I have
committed the care and Judgment, according to which I will (God willing) be
well contented to submit my self, and obey the same: And when my Conscience
was so troubled, I moved it to you my Lord of Lincoln in confession, then
being my Ghostly Father: And forasmuch, as you were then in some doubt, you
moved me to ask Counsel of the rest of the Bishops, whereupon I moved it to
you my Lord Cardinal to have your license, forasmuch as you are Metropolitan,
to put this matter in question, and so I did to all you my Lords, to which you
all granted under your Seals, which is here to The King produces the License
sealed by the Card. and the rest of the Bishops.
show, that is truth quoth the Bishop of Canterbury, and I doubt not but my
Brothers will acknowledge the same. No Sir, not so, under correction, quoth the
Bishop of Rochester, for you have not my hand and Seal, no quoth the King, is
not this your hand and Seal, and showed it to him in the Instrument with
Seals? no forsooth quoth the Bishop, how say you to that, quoth the King, to
the Bishop of Canterbury? Sir, It is his hand and Seal, quoth the Bishop of
Canterbury. No my Lord quoth the Bishop of Rochester, indeed you were in hand
with me to have both my hand and Seal, as other of the Lords had done, but I
answered The Bishop of Rochester does deny that he ever sealed or subscribed.
that I would never consent to any such act, for it was much against my
Conscience. And therefore my hand and Seal shall never be set to such an
instrument (God willing) with many other words to that purpose: You say truth
quoth the Bishop of Cantorbury, such words you used, but you were fully
resolved at the last that I should subscribe your name, and put to your seal,
and you would allow of the same, all which quoth the Bishop of Rochester, under
correction my Lord is untrue: Well quoth the King, we will not stand in
argument with you, you are but one: And so the King arose up, and the Court was
adjourned until The Court adiourn'd
the next day, at which time the Cardinals sat again, and the Counsel on
both sides were there present to answer.

The Kings Counsel allege the matrimony not good, The Kings counsel alledg
the Matrimony not good nor lawful.
nor lawful at the beginning: Because of the Carnal copulation that Prince
Arthur had with the Queen: This matter was very narrowly scanned on that side,
and to prove the Carnal Copulation they had many Reasons and fimilitudes of
truth, and being answered negatively again on the other side, it seemed that
al their former allegations, were doubtful to be tried, and that no man knew.
Yes quoth the Bishop of Rochester, I know the truth, how can you know the truth
quoth the Cardinal, more The Queens Counsel speak
than any other person: Yes forsooth my Lord quoth he, I know that God is the
Truth it self, and never says but Bishop of Rochester.
truth, and he says thus. Quos Deus conjunxit, homo non separet. And for as
much as this marriage was joined and made by God to a good intent, therefore I
said I knew the truth and that man cannot break upon any wilful action that
which God has made and constituted: So much do all faithfullmen know, quoth
my Lord Cardinal, as well as you, therefore this reason is not sufficient in
this case, for the Kings Counsel do allege many presumptions to prove that
it was not lawful at the beginning Ergo it was not ordained by God, for God
does nothing without a good end, Therefore it is not to be doubted, but if the
presumptions be true which they allege to be most true, then the Conjunction
neither was nor could be of God. Therefore I say unto you my Lord of
Rochester, you know not the truth unless you can avoid their presumptions
upon just reasons.

Then quoth Doctor Ridley, it is a great shame and dishonor Doctor Ridley.
to this honorable presence, that any such presumtions should be alleged in
this open Court, what quoth my Lord Cardinal Domine Doctor Reverende. No my
Lord there belongs no reverence to this matter, for an unreverent matter may
be unreverently answered: And so left off, rnd then they proceeded to other
matters. Thus passed this Court from Session to Session, and day to day, till
The King sent for the Cardinal.
a certain day the King sent for the Cardinal to Bridewell, who went into the
privy Chamber to him where he was, about an hour, and then departed from the
King, and went to Westminster in his Barge, the Bishop of Carlisle being with
him said, it is a hot day today, yea quoth the Cardinal, if you had been as
well chafed The Cardinal returns and goes home to bed.
as I have been within this hour, you would say you were very hot: my Lord no
sooner came home but he went to bed, where he had not lain above two hours,
but my Lord of Wiltshire Mistress Anne Bullens Father, came to speak with him
from the King: my Lord commanded he should be brought to his beds side, who told
him it was the Kings mind he should forthwith go with the Cardinal to the
Queen, being then at Bridewell in her chamber, and to persuade her through
their wisdoms to put the whole matter into the Kings own hands, by her
consent, which should be much better for her honor, then stand to the trial
at Law, and thereby be condemned, which would tend much to her dishonor and
discredit.

To perform the Kings pleasure, my Lord said he was ready, and so prepared to
go, but quoth he further to my Lord of Wiltshire, you and others of the Lords
of the Counsel, have put fancies into the head of the King, whereby you
trouble all the Realm, but at the length you will get but small thanks both of
God and the world, with many other earnest words and reasons, which did cause
my Lord of Wiltshire to be silent kneeling by my Lords beds-side, and in
conclusion departed.

And then my Lord rose and took his barge and went to Bathhouse to Card.
Campaines, and so went together to Bridewell to the Queens lodgings, she being
then in her Chamber of Presence, they told the Gentleman Usher that they came
to speak with the Queens grace, who told the Queen the Cardinals were come to
speak The two Cardinals went on a message from the King to the Queen.
with her, then she rose up having a scane of red silk about her neck (being
at work with her maids) and came to the Cardinals, where they stayed
attending her coming, at whose approach quoth she. Alack my Lords, I am sorry
that you have atended on me so long what is your pleasures with me: If it
please your grace, quoth the Cardinal, to go to your privy Chamber, we will
show you the cause of our coming.

My Lord said she, if you have any thing to say to me, speak it openly before
all these folk, for I fear nothing that you can say to me or against me, but
that I am willing all the world should both see and hear it, and therefore
speak your minds openly.

Then began my Lord to speak to her in Latin: nay good my Lord speak to me in
English, quoth she, although I do The Cardinal declares the cause of their
going.
understand some Latin, Forsooth quoth my Lord, good Madam, if it please your
Grace, we come both to know your mind what you are disposed to do in this
matter, and to declare to you secretly our Counsels and opinions, which we do
for very zeal and obedience to your Grace.

My Lords quoth she, I thank you for your good Queens answer
wills, but to make answer to your requests I cannot so suddenly, for I was set
amongst my maids at work, little thinking of any such matter, wherein is
requisite some deliberation, and a better head then mine to make answer, for I
need Counsel in this case which concerns me so near, and friends here I have
none, they are in Spain in my own Country: Also my Lords, I am a poor woman
of too weak Capacity to answer such noble persons of wisdom as you are, in
so weighty a matter. And therefore I pray you be good to me a woman destitute
of friendship here in a foreign Region, and your Counsel I also shall be
glad to hear, and therewith she took my Lord by the hand and led him into
her Privy Chamber, with the other Cardinal, where they stayed a while, and I
heard her voice loud, but what she said I know not.

This done, they went to the King, and made a Relation unto him of the passages
between the Queen and them, and so they departed.

This strange case proceeded and went forwards from Court day to Court day,
until it came to that, that every man expected to hear Judgment given, at
which time all their proceedings were openly read in Lattin, That done, the
Kings Counsel at the Bar moved for Judgment, quoth Cardinal Cardinal
Campains refused to give Judgment.
Campaines, I will not give judgment until I have related the whole
proceedings to the Pope, whose Counsel and Commandment I will in this Case
observe: The matter is too high for us to give hasty judgment, considering the
persons and the doubtful occasions alleged, and also whose Commissioners we
are by whose authority we sit.

It is good reason therefore that we make our chief He makes a speech.
Lord of Counsel in the same before we proceed to judgment definitive: I
came not to please for any Favor, Reward, or fear of any person alive, be he
King or otherwise, I have no such respect to the person, that I should offend
my Conscience. And the party Defendant will make no answer here; but rather
does appeal from us; I am an old man both weak and sickly, and look every
day for Death; what shall it avayle me to put my Soul in danger of Gods
displeasure to my utter damnation, for the favor of any Prince in this World.
My being here is only to see Justice administered according to my Conscience.

The Defendant supposes that we be not indifferent Judges, considering the
Kings high dignity and authority within his Realm. And we being both his
Subjects, she thinks we will not do her justice: and therefore to avoid all
these Ambiguities, I adjourn the Court for the Time according to the Court of
Rome, from whence our jurisdiction is derived: For if we should go further
then our Commission does warrant us, it were but a folly and blame worthy;
because then we shall be breakers of the Orders from whom we have (as I said)
our authority derived; and so the Court was dissolved and no more done.

Thereupon by the Kings Commandment stepped up the Duke of Suffolk, and with a
haughty countenance The Duke of Suffolk confronts the Cardinals.
uttered these words:

It was never thus in England until we had Cardinals amongst us. Which Words
were set forth with such vehemence, that all men marvailed what he intended,
the Duke further expressing some opprobrious Words.

My Lord Cardinal perceiving his vehemence, soberly said: Sir, of all men in
this Realm you have least cause to disprayse Cardinals, for if I poor
Cardinal The Cardinals mild answer.
had not been, you should not at this present have had a head on your
shoulders, wherewith to make such a brag in dispute of us, who wish you no
harm; neither have given you such cause to be offended with us. I would have
you think my Lord, I and my Brother wish the King as much happiness, and the
Realm as much honor, Wealth, and peace, as you, or any other Subject of what
degree soever he be within this Realm, and would as gladly accomplish his
lawful desires.

And now my Lord, I pray you show me what you His reason why he proceeds not
to Judgment.
would do in such a Case as this, if you were one of the Kings Commissioners
in a foreign Region about some weighty matter, the consultation whereof was
very doubtful to be decided; would you not advertise the Kings Majesty ere you
went through with the same: I doubt not but you would; and therefore abate your
malice and spite, and consider we are Commissioners for a Time, and cannot by
virtue of a Commission proceed to judgment without the knowledge and consent
of the head of the authority and license obtained from him, who is the Pope.

Therefore do we neither more nor less then our Commission allows us: and if
any man will be offended with us, he is an unwise man: Therefore pacify your
self my Lord, and speak like a man of Honor and Wisdom, (or hold your
peace) speak not reproachfully of your friends, you best know what friendship
I have shown you: I never did reveal to any person till The Duke deharted
discontented.
now, either to mine own praise, or your dishonor. Whereupon the Duke went
his way, and said no more, being much discontented.

This matter continued thus a long Season, and the The King offended. The
Cardinals commission his excuse.
King was in displeasure against my Lord Cardinal, because his Suit had no
better success to his purpose.

Notwithstanding the Cardinal excused himself by his Commission which gave him
no authority to proceed to judgment without the knowledge of the Pope, who
reserved the same to himself. At last they were advertised by a Post that they
should take deliberation in the matter until his Council were opened, which
should not be til Bartholmew-tide next.

The king thinking it would be too long ere it would be determined, sent an
Ambassador to the Pope to persuade him to show so much favor to his Majesty, as
that it might be sooner determined.

On this Embassage went Doctor Stephen Gardener, Dr. Gardener sent Ambassador
to the pope
then called by the name of Doctor Steven, Secretary to the King, afeer wards
Bishop of Winchester. This Ambassador stayed there till the latter end of
Summer, of whose return you shall hereafter hear.

CHAP. 17. Of certain passages conducing to the Cardinals fall.
NOW the King commanded the Queen to be removed from the Court, and sent to
another; place and presently after the King rod on Progress, and had in his
Company Mistress Anne Bolloigne; in which time Cardinal Campadnes made suite to
be discharged, and sent home to Rome: and in the interim returned Mr.
Secretary, and it was concluded that my Lord should come to the King to Grafton
in Northamptonshire; as also The Cardinal sent for to the Court.
Cardiall Campaines being a stranger, should be conducted thither by my Lord
Cardinal. And so the next Sunday there were diverse opinions that the King
would not speak with my Lord; whereupon there were many great Wagers laid.

These two Prelates being come to the Court, and lighting, expected to be
received of the great Officers as the manner was, but they found the contrary:
Nevertheless because the Cardinal Campaine was a stranger, the Officers met
him with staves in their hands in the outward Court, and so conveyed him to his
lodging prepared for him; and after my Lord had brought him to his lodging he
departed, thinking to have gone to his Chamber as he was wont to do. But it
was told him he had no lodging or Chamber appointed He found but small content.
for him in the Court; which news did much astonish him.

Sir Henry Norris who was then Groom of the stool, came unto him, and desired
him to take his Chamber for a while until an other was provided for him, for I
assure you, quoth he, here is but little room in this House for the King, and
therefore I humbly beseech your Grace accept of mine for a Season. My Lord
thanking him for his courtesy, went to his Chamber, where he shifted his
riding apparel.

In the mean time came diverse Noblemen of his friends to welcome him to the
Court, by whom my Lord was advertised of all things touching the Kings favor
or displeasure; and being thus informed of the Cause thereof, he was more able
to excuse himself.

So my Lord made him ready, and went to the Chamber of Presence with the other
Cardinal, where the Lords of the Council stood all of a Row in order in the
Chamber, and all the Lords saluted them both: And there were present many
Gentlemen which came on purpose to observe the Great supposition of the K.
displeasure.
meeting and countenance of the King to my Lord Cardinal: Then immediately
after, the King came into the Chamber of Presence standing under the Cloth of
State.

Then my Lord Cardinal took Cardinal Campaine by the hand, and kneeled down
before the King, but what he said unto him, I know not, but his Countenance
was amiable, and his Majesty stooped down, and with both his hands took him
up, and then took him by the hand, and went to the Window with him, and there
talked with him a good while.

Then to have beheld the Countenance of the Lords and Noblemen that had laid
Wagers, it would have made you smile, especially those that had laid their
money that the King would not speak with him.

Thus were they deceived, for the King was in earnest discourse with him,
insomuch that I could hear the King say, how can this be, is not this your
hand, and pulled a Letter out of his own bosom and showed the same to my
Lord. And as I perceived, my Lord so answered the same, that the King had no
more to say; but said to my Lord, go to your Dinner, and take my Lord
Cardinal to keep you company, and after Dinner I will speak further with
you, and so they departed. And the King that day dined with Mistress Anne
Bulloign in her Chamber.

Then was there set up in the Presence Chamber a Table for my Lord, and other
Lords of the Council, where they dined together; and sitting at Dinner telling
of diverse matters, The King should do well, quoth my Lord Cardinal, to send
his Bishops and Chaplains home to their Cures and Benefices. Yea marry, quoth
my Lord of Norfolk, and so it were meet for you to do also. I would be very
well contented therewith, quoth my Lord, if it were the Kings pleasure to
license me with his Graces leave to go to my Cure at Winchester: Nay quoth my
Lord of Norfolk, to your Benefice at York; where your greatest Honor and
Charge is. Even as it shall please the King, quoth my Lord Cardinal; and so
they fell upon other Discourses. For indeed the Nobility were loath he should
be so near the King, as to continue at Winchester. Immediately after Dinner
they fell to Council till the Waiters had also dined.

I heard it reported by those that waited on the King at dinner, that Mistres
Anne Bulloigne was offended as much as she durst, that the King did so
graciously Mistress Anne Bulloigne offended for the Cardinals intertaynment.
entertain my Lord Cardinal. Saying, Sir, Is it not a marvailous thing to see
into what great debt and danger he has brought you, with all your Subjects?
How so, quoth the King? Forsooth, quoth she, there is not a man in all your
whole Realm of England, worth a hundred pounds, but he has indebted you to
him, (meaning of Loan, which the King had of She complains of him.
his Subjects. Well, well, quoth the King, for that matter there was no blame
in him, for I know that matter better then you, or any else.

Nay, quoth she, besides that, what exploits has he wrought in several
parts and places of this Realm, to your great slander and disgrace? There is
never a Nobleman, but if he had done half so much as he has done, were well
worthy to loose his head. Yea, if my Lord of Norfolk, my Lord of Suffolk, my
Father, or any other man had done much less then he has done, they should
have lost their heads ere this.

Then I perceive (quoth the King) you are none of my Lord Cardinals friends.
Why Sir, quoth she, I have no cause, nor any that love you? No more has your
Grace, if you did well consider his indirect and unlawful doings.

By that time the Waiters had dyned and took up the Table and so for that time
ended their Communication.

You may perceive by this how the old malice was not forgotten: but begins to
kindle and be set on fire, which was stirred by his ancient enemies, whom I
have formerly named in this treatise.

The King for that time departed from Mistress Anne Bulloigne, and came to the
Chamber of Presence, and called for my Lord, and in the great window had a long
discourse with hin, but of what I know not, afterward the King took him by
the hand and led him into the privy Chamber, and sat in Consultation with him
all alone without any other of the Lords, till it was dark night, which
blanked all his enemies very soer, who had no other way but by Mistress Anne
Bulloigne, in whom was all their trust and affiance, for the accomplishment of
their enterprises, for without her they feared all their purposes would be
frustrate.

Now at night was warning given me, that there was no room for my Lord to
lodge in the Court, so that I was forced to provide my Lord a lodging in the
Country about Easton at one Mr. Empstons house, where my Lord came to supper
by torch-light, being late before my Lord parted from the King, who willed him
to resort to him in the morning, for that he would talk further with him about
the same matter, and in the morning my Lord came again, at whose coming the
Kings Majesty was ready to ride, willing my Lord to consult with the Lords in
his absence, and said he would not talk with him, commanding my Lord to depart
with Cardinal Campaine who had The King would not talk with the Cardinal.
already taken his leave of the King.

This sudden departure of the Kings, was the especial labor of Mistress Anne
Bulloigne who rode with him purposely to draw him away, because he should not
return till the departure of the Cardinals. The King rode that morning to
view a piece of ground, to make a Park of, which was afterward and is at
this time, called Harewell Park, where Mistress Anne had provided him a place
to dine in, fearing his return before my Lord Cardinals departure,

So my Lord rode away after dinner with Cardinal Campaine, who took his
jorney toward Rome, with the Kings reward, but what it was I am not certain.

After their departure, it was told the King, that Cardinal Campaine was
departed and had great Treasure with him of my Lord Cardinals of England to
be conveyed in great sums to Rome, whither they surmised he would secretly
repair out of this Realm. Insomuch that they caused a Post to ride after the
Cardinal to search him, who overtooke him at Callis, and stayed him until
search was made, but there was found They search the Cardinal at Callis.
no more then was received of the King for a reward.

Now after Cardinal Campaine was gone, Michaellmas term drew on, against
which time my Lord Cardinal repaired to his house at Westminster, and when the
Term began, he went into the Hall in such manner as he was acustomed to do,
and sat in the Chancery, being then Lord Chancellor of England, after which
day he never sat more, the next day he stayed at home for the coming of my
Lord of Norfolk and Suffolk, who came not that day, but the next: And did
declare unto my Lord that it was the Kings pleasure he should surrender up the
great Seal of England The King sends for the great Seal.
into their hands, and that he should depart unto Ashur, which is a house near
unto Hampton Court belonging unto the Bishopric of Winchester.

The Cardinal demanded of them to see their Commission that gave them such
authority, who answered again, they were sufficient Commissioners, and had
Authority to do no less from the Kings own mouth, notwithstanding, he would
in no wise agree to their demand in that behalf, without further knowledge of
their Authority, telling them that the great Seal He refuses to deliver up
the broad Seal
was delivered to him by the Kings own person to enjoy the Ministration
thereof, together with the Chancellorship during the term of his life, whereof
for surety he had the Kings Letters, Patents to show, which matter was much
debated between him and the Dukes with many great words which he took
patiently, insomuch that the Dukes were feign to depart without their purpose
at that time, and returned to Windsor to the King, and the next day they
returned to my Lord with the Kings Letters, whereupon in obedience to the Kings
command, my Lord delivered to them the broad Seal, which they brought to
Windsor to the King.

Then my Lord called his Officers before him and took account of all things
they had in their charge, and in his The Card. sets his house in order.
Gallery were set diverse Tables upon which were laid diverse and great store of
rich stuffes, as whole pieces of silk of all colors, Velvets, Sattins,
Muskes, Taffaties, Grogarams, Scarlets, and diverse rich Commodities. Also there
were 1000. pieces of fine Hollands, and the hangings of the Gallery with cloth
of Gold, and cloth of Silver, and rich cloth of Bodkin of diverse colors,
which were hanged in expectation of the Kings coming.

Also of one side of the Gallery were hanged the rich suits of Copes of his
own providing, which were made for Colleges at Oxford and Ipswich, they were
the richest that ever I saw in all my life; Then had he two chambers adjoining
to the Gallery, the one most commonly called the guilt Chamber, the other the
Council Chamber, wherein were set two broad and long Tables, whereupon was set
such abundance of Plate of all sorts, as was almost incredible to be believed,
a great part being al of clean gold, and upon every table and cupboard where
the Plate was set were books importing every kind of plate and every piece
with the contents and the weight thereof.

Thus were all things furnished and prepared giving the charge of the said
stuff, with other things remaining in every office, to be delivered to the
King, as he gave charge, all things being ordered as is before rehearsed, my
Lord prepared to depart and resolved to go by water, but before his going: Sir
William Gascoigne being his Treasurer came unto him and said, Sir quoth he, I
am sorry for your Grace, for I hear you are straight to go to the Tower; Is
this the best comfort quoth my Lord, you can give to your master in adversity?
It has always been your inclination to be light of credit, and much lighter
in reporting of lies, I would you should know Sir William and all those
reporters too, that it is untrue, for I never deserved to come there: Although
it has pleased the King to take my house ready furnished for his pleasure, at
this time I would all the world should know, I have nothing but it is of right
for him, and of him I received all that I have: It is therefore convenient and
reason to tender the same to him again.

Then my Lord with his train of Gentlemen and yeomen which was no small
company, took his barge at his privy stairs, and went by water to Putney, at
which time upon the water were abundance of boats filled with people,
expecting to have seen my Lord Cardinal go to the Tower, which they longed
to see. Oh wondering and newfangled world, is it not a time to consider the
mutability of this uncertain world! for the common people ever desire things
for novelties sake, which after turn to their small profit or advantage. For
if you mark the sequel, they had small cause to rejoice at his fall, I cannot
see but all men in favor are envyed by the common people, though they do
minister Justice truly.

Thus continued my Lord at Ashur, 3. or 4. weeks without either Beds, sheets,
Table-cloaths or dishes to eat their meat in, or wherewith to buy any. But
there was good store of all kind of victuals, and of beer and wine plenty,
but afterward my Lord borrowed some Plate and dishes of the Bishop of Carlisle.

Thus continued my Lord in this strange estate till after Alhollantide, and
being one day at dinner; Mr. Crumwell told him that he ought in Conscience to
consider the true and good service, that he and other of his servants had done
him, who never forsook him in weal nor woe, then quoth my Lord alas Tom: you
know I have nothing to give you nor them; which makes me both ashamed and sorry
that I have nothing to requite your faithful services, whereupon Master
Cromwell told my Lord that he had abundance of Chaplains that were preferred
by his Grace to Benefices of some 1000. pound, and others 500 pound, some more
and some less, and we your poor servants who take more pains in one days
service, then all your idle Chaplains have done in a year, and therefore if
they will not impart liberally to you in your great indigence, it is pity they
should live, and all the world will have them in iudignation for their great
ingratitude to their Master.

Afterward my Lord commanded me to call all his Gentlemen and Yeomen up into
the great Chamber, commanding all the Gentlemen to stand on the right hand, and
the Yeomen on the left side, at last my Lord came out in his Rochet, upon a
Violet gown like a Bishop, who went with his Chaplins to the upper end of the
Chamber where was a great window, beholding his goodly number of servants, who
could not speak to them until the tears ran down his checks, which being
perceived of his servants, caused fountains of tears to gush out of their
sorrowful eyes in such sort as would cause my heart to relent. He speaks to
them all.


At last my Lord spoke to them to this effect and purpose saying, most
faithful Gentlemen and true-hearted Yeomen, I much lament that in my
prosperity I did not so much for you as I might have done, and was in my power
to do, I consider that if in my prosperity I should have preferred you to the
King, then should I have incurred the Kings Servants displeasure, who would not
spare to report behind my back that there could no office in the Court escape
the Cardinal and his servants, and by that means I should have run into open
slander of all the world, but now it is come to pass: that it has pleased the
King to take all that I have into his hands, so that I have now nothing to give
you, for I have nothing left me but the bare clothes on my back, with many
other words in their phrase, and so he giving them all hearty thanks, went
away, and afterward many of his servants departed from him, some to their
wives, some to their friends, Master Cromwell to London, it being then the
beginning of the Parliament.

CHAP. 18. The Cardinal is accused of high Treason in the Parliament House,
against which accusation Mr. Cromwell (late servant to him) being a Burgess in
the Parliament made defense.
THe aforesaid Master Cromwell after his departure from my Lord, devised with
himself to be one of the Burgesses of the Parliament: And being at London he
chanced to meet one Sir Thomas Russell Knight, a special friend of his, whose
son was one of the Burgesses of the Parliament, of whom by means he obtained
his room, and so put his feet into the Parliament house, and 3. days after
his depature from my Lord, he came again to Ashur, and I being there with my
Lord, he said unto me with a pleasant Countenance: I have adventured my feet
where I will be better regarded, ere the Parliament be dissolved: And after
he had some talk with my Lord, he made haste to London, because he would not
be absent from the Parliament, to the intent he might acquaint my Lord what
was there objected against him, thereby He informed his Lord what was objected
against him.
the better to make his defense, insomuch that there was nothing at any time
objected against my Lord, but he was ready to make answer thereunto, by
means whereof he being earnest in his Masters behalf was reputed the most
faithful servant to his Master of all other, and was generally of all men
highly commended.

Then was there brought a Bill of Articles into the Parliament house to have my
Lord condemned of high Articles against the Cardinal disannulled by Mr.
Cromwell.
Treason, against which Bill Master Cromwell did inveigh so discreetly and with
such witty persuasions, that the same would take no effect; Then were his
enemies constrained to indite him of a Praemunire, and al was to entitle the
King to all his goods and possessions, which he had obtained and purchased for
the maintenance of They charge him with a Praemunire.
his Colleges of Oxford and Ipswich, which were both most sumptuous buildings.
To the Judges that were sent to take my Lords answer here in he thus Judges
sent to examine the Cardinal. His answer.
answered.

My Lords Judges quoth he; the King knows, whether I have offended or no in
using my Preogative for the which I am indicted, I have the Kings license in my
Coffer to show under his hand and broad Seal, for the executing and using
thereof in most large manner, the which now are in the hands of mine enemies,
but because I will not here stand to contend with his Majesty in his own case,
I will here presently before The Cardinal does submit to the King.
you confess the Indictment, and put my self wholly to the mercy and grace of
the King, trusting that he has a conscience and reason to consider the truth,
and my humble submission and obedience wherein I might well stand to my trial
with Justice. Thus much may you say to his Highness, that I wholly submit my
self under his obedience in all things to his Princely will and pleasure whom
I never disobeyed or repugned, but was always contented and glad to please him
before God, whom I ought most chiefly to have believed and obeyed, which I now
repent: I most heartily desire you to have me commended to him, for whom I
shall during my life pray to God to send him much prosperity, honor and
victory over his enemies. And so they left him.

After which Mr. Shelley the Judge was sent to speak with my Lord, who
understanding he was come issued out of his privy Chamber and came to him to
know his business, who after due salutation did declare unto him that the
Kings pleasure was to demand my Lords house called Yorke-place near
Westminster belonging to the Bishopric of York, And that you do pass the
The King demands York house.
same according to the Laws of this Realm, his Highness has sent for all
his Judges and learned Counsel to know their opinions for your assurance
thereof, who be fully resolved that your grace must make a Recognizance and
before a Judge acknowledge and confess the right thereof to belong to the King
and his Successors, and so his Highness shall be assured thereof.

Wherefore it has pleased the King to send me hither to take of you the
Recognizance, having in your Grace such affiance that you will not refuse to
do so, therefore I do desire to know your Graces pleasure therein.

Master Shelley quoth my Lord, I know the King of The Cardinals answer.
his own nature is of a Royal spirit, not requiring more then reason shall
lead him to by the Law. And therefore I counsel you and all other Judges and
learned men of his Counsel to put no more into his head then Law, that may
stand with Conscience for when you tell him, that although this be Law, yet
it is not Conscience, for Law without conscience is not fit to be ministered by
a King nor his Counsel, nor by any of his Ministers, for every Counsel to a
King ought to have respect to Conscience, before the rigor of the Law: Laus
est facere quod decet, non quod licet. The King ought for his Royal dignity
and prerogative to mitigate the rigor of the Law, and therefore in his
Princely place he has constituted a Chancellor, to order for him the same,
and therefore the Court of Chauncery has been commonly called the Court of
Conscience, for that it has jurisdiction to command the Law in every case, to
desist from the rigor of the execution: And now I say to you Master Shelley,
have I a power, or may I with Conscience give that away which is now mine for
me and my Successors? if this be Law and Conscience, I pray you show me your
opinion.

Forsooth quoth he, there is no great conscience in it, but having regard to
the Kings great power, it may the better stand with Conscience, who is
sufficient to rcompence the Church of York with the double value.

That I know well quoth my Lord, but there is no such condition, but only a
bare and simple departure of others rights, if every Bishop should do so, then
might every Prelate give away the Patrimony of the Church, and so in process of
timeleave nothing for their Successors to maintain their dignities, which would
be but little to the Kings honor.

Well quoth my Lord, let me see your Commission which was showed to him, then
quoth my Lord, tell his Highness that I am his most faithful Subject and
obedient beadesman, whose command I will in no wife disobey, but will in all
things fulfill his pleasure, as you the Fathers of the Law say I may. Therefore
I charge your Conscience to discharge me, and show his Highness from me that I
must desire his Majesty to remember, there is both heaven and hell, and
thereupon the Clarke took and wrote the Recognizance and after some secret
talk they departed.

Thus continued my Lord at Ashur, receiving daily messages from the Court, some
good, and some bad, but more ill then good, for his enemies perceiving the good
affection the King bare always to him, devised a means to disquiet his
patience, thinking thereby to give him occasion to fret and chafe, that death
should rather ensue then otherwise, which they most desired, for they feared
him more after his fall, then they did in his prosperity. Fearing he should
by reason of the Kings favor rise again, and be again in favor, and great
at the Court, they his enemies might be in danger of their lives, for their
cruelty wrongfully ministered unto him, and by their malicious surmises
invented and brought to pass against him, And did continually find new
matters against him to make him vex and frett, but he was a wise man, and did
arm himself with much patience.

At Christmas he fell very sore sick most likely He fell sick.
to dye, the King hearing thereof was very sorry, The King sends his Physician.
and sent Doctor Butts his Physician unto him, who found him very dangerously
sick in Bed, and returned to the King. The King demanded saying, have you
seen yonder man? yes Sir quoth he, how do you like him quoth the King? Sir
quoth he, if you will have him dead, I will warrant you he will be dead within
these four days, if he receive no comfort from you shortly

Marry God forbid, quoth the King, that he should dye, for I would not loose
him for twenty Thousand pounds. I pray you go to him, and do your care to
him.

Then must your Grace, quoth Doctor Buts, send him some comfortable message; So
I will, quoth the King by you; therefore make speed to him again, and you
shall deliver him this Ring from me for a Token. In the which Ring was the
Kings Image engraven with a The King sends his ring in token of favor.
Ruby as like the King, as might be devised; This Ring he knows well, for
he gave me the same; and tell him that I am not offended with him in my heart
for any thing. And that shall be known shortly; therefore bid him pluck up his
heart, and be of good comfort: And I charge you come not from him till you have
brought him out of the danger of Death, if it be possible.

Then spoke the King to Mistress Anne Bulloign, good And mistress Anne Bulloign
her Tablet.
Sweet heart as you love me, send the Cardinal a Token at my Request, and in
so doing you shall deserve our Thanks: She being disposed not to offend the
King, would not disobey his loving Request; but took incontinently her Tablet
of gold that hung at her side, and delivered it to Doctor Buts, with very
gentle and loving Words; and so he departed to Ashur with speed; and after him
the King sent Doctor Cromer, Doctor Clement, and Doctor Wotton to consult and
advise with Doctor Buts for my Lords recovery.

Now after Doctor Buts had been with him, and delivered him the Tokens from
the King and Mistress Anne Bulloigne, with the most comfortable Words he could
devise on the Kings and Mistress Annes behalf, He advanced himself in his
Bed, and received the Tokens very joyfully, giving him many thanks for his
pains and good comfort, He told him further, that the Kings pleasure was,
that he should minister unto him for his Health. And for the better and more
assured ways, he has also sent Doctor Cromer, Doctor Clement, and Doctor
Wotton, all to join for your recovery. Therefore my Lord, quoth Doctor Buts,
it were well they were called to visit you, and to consult with them for your
disease.

At which motion my Lord was contented, and sent for them to hear their
judgments; but he trusted more to Doctor Cromer, then all the rest, because
he was the very means to bring him from Paris to England, and gave him partly
his exhibition in Paris. To be short, in four days they set him again In
four days they cured him.
upon his feet, and he had gotten him a good stomach to meat. All this
done, and my Lord in a right good way of amendment, they took their leaves and
departed, to whom my Lord offered his Reward; but they refused, saying, the
King has given a special Commandment that they should take nothing of him,
for at their return he would reward them of his own cost.

After this, my Lord continued at Ashur till Candle-masse, before and against
which Feast, the King caused to be sent to my Lord three or four loads of
stuff; and most thereof, except Beds and Kitchinstuffe, The Kingsent three or
four loads of household stuff.
was loaded in Standars, wherein was both plate and rich Hangings, and Chapel
stuff, which was done without the knowledge of the Lords of the Council; for
all which, he rendered the King most humble and hearty thanks: And afterward
made suite unto the King to be removed from Ashur to Richmond, which request
was granted.

The House of Richmond a little before was repaired by my L. to his great cost,
for the K. had made an exchang with him for Hampton Court. Had the Lords of the
Counsel known of these favors from the King to the Cardinal, they would
have persuaded the King to the contrary, for they feared least his now abode
near the King, might move the King at some season to resort unto him, and to
call him home again, considering the great and daily affection the King bare
unto him. Therefore they moved the King that my Lord might go down to the
North, to his benefice there, where he might be a good stay (as they
alleged) to the Country, to which the King condiscended thinking no less
but that all had been true according to their relation, being with such color
of deep consideration, that the King was straitway persuaded to their
conclusion, whereupon my Lord of Norfolk by Master Cromwell who daily did
resort to my Lord, that he should say to him that he must go home to his
Benefice, well then Thomas quoth my Lord, we will go then to Winchester: I
will then quoth Master Cromwell tell my Lord of Norfolk what you say, and so
he did at his next meeting of him: what should he do there quoth the Duke?
let him go to the rich Bishopric of York; where his greatest honor and
charge lies, and so show to him: The Lords who were not his friends perceiving
that my Lord was disposed to plant himself so nigh the King, thought then to
withdraw his appetite from Winchester, moved the King to give my Lord a pension
of four thousand marks out of Winchester, and all the rest to be distributed
amongst the Nobility and his servants: And so likewise to divide the Revenues
of Saint Albons, whereof some had 200. pound, and al his Revenues of his Lands
belonging to his College at Oxford and Ipswich the King took into his own
hands; whereof Master Cromwell had the receipt and government before by my Lords
assignment, wherefore it was thought very necessary that he should have the same
still, who executed all things so well and exactly, that he was had in great
estimation for his behavior therein.

Now it came to pass that those to whom the King had given any annuities or
fees for term of life, or by patent could not be good but only for and during
my Lords life, for as much as the King had no longer estate therein, but what
he had by my Lords attainder in the Praemunire: And to make their estate good
and sufficient, there was no other way but to obtain my Lords confirmation of
their patents: And to bring this about there was no other means but by Master
Cromwell who was thought the fittest Instrument for this purpose, and for his
pains therein he was worthily rewarded: and his demeanor, his honesty and
wisdom was such, that the King took great notice of him, as you shall
hereafter hear.

Still the Lords thought long till my Lord was removed further off the Kings
way, wherefore among others of the Lords, my Lord of Norfolk said, Master
Cromwell, me thinks the Cardinal thy Master makes no have to go Northwards,
tell him, if he go not away, I will tear him with my teeth: Therefore I would
advise him to prepare away with speed, or else I will set him forwards. These
words reported Mr. Cromwell to my Lord at his next repair, which was then at
Richmond, having obtained license of the King to remove from Ashur to Richmond,
and in the evening my Lord being accustomed to walk in the Garden, and I being
with him standing in an Alley, I espied certain Images of Beasts counterfeited
in Timber, which I went nearer to take the better view of them, among whom I
there saw stand a dunne Cow, whereat I most mused of all those beasts: My Lord
then suddenly came upon me unawares, and speaking to me said, what have you
spied there whereat you look so earnestly?

Forsooth, quoth I, if it please your Grace I here behold these Images which I
suppose were ordained to be set up in the kings Palace, but amongst them all I
have most considered this Cow which seems to me the Artificers Masterpiece.
Yea marry quoth my Lord, A Prophecy.
upon this Cow hangs a certain Prophecy which perhaps you never heard of, I
will show you, there is a saying,

When the Cow does ride the Bull, When the cow rides the bull, Then Priest
beware thy scull.

Then Priest beware thy Scull.
Which saying, neither my Lord that declared it nor I that heard it understood
the effect, although the compass thereof was working, and then like to be
brought to pass: this Cow the King gave by reason of the Earldom of
Richmond which was Inheritance: This Prophecy was afterward expounded in this
manner, The dunne Cow, because it is the Kings beast, betokens the King, and
the Bull betokens Mistress Anne The Prophesies expounded,
Bulloigne, who after was Queen, her Father gave the black Bulls head in his
Cognizance, and was his Beast, so that when the King had married Queen Anne,
it was thought of all men to be fulfilled, for what a number of Priests
Religious and secular lost their heads for offending of those Laws made, to
bring this matter to pass, is not unknown to all the world, therefore it may
well be judged that this prophecy is fulfilled. And fulfilled by the
Cardinals fall.


You have heard what words the Duke of Norfolk spoke to Master Cromwell
touching my Lords going into the North, then said my Lord, Tom: It is time to
be going, therefore I pray you go to the King, and tell him I would go to my
Benefice at York, but for lack of moneys desiring his Grace to help him to
some, and you may say that the last money I had from his Grace was too little to
pay my debts, and to compel me to pay the rest of my debts were too much
extremity, seeing all my goods are taken from me: Also show my Lord of
Norfolk and the rest of the Counsel, that I would depart if I had money. Sir
quoth Master Cromwell, I shall do my best, and so after other communication
departed and came to London, then in the beginning of Lent, my Lord removed his
lodging into the Charterhous at Richmond where he lay in a lodging that Dr.
Collet made for himself, and every afternoon for the time of his residence
there would he sit in contemplation with some one of the most ancient Fathers
there, who converted him to dispose the vain glory of this world, and there
they gave unto him shirts of hair to wear next his body, which he were
diverse times after. Shirt: of hair.


The Lords assigned that my Lord should have 1000. Marks pension out of
Winchester for his going down A thousand mark pension to the Cardinal.
into the North, which when the King heard of, he commanded that it should be
forthwith paid unto Mr. Cromwell. And the King commanded Master Cromwell to
repair to him again when he had received the said Sum, which he accordingly
did: To whom his Majesty said, show your Lord that I have sent him ten The
King sent him 10000. p.
thousand pounds of my benevolence, and tell him he shall not lack, bid him
be of good comfort. Master Cromwell, on my Lords behalf thanked the King for
his royal liberality toward my Lord, and with that departed to Richmond, to
whom he delivered the money and the joyful tidings, wherein my Lord did not a
little rejoice, forthwith there was a preparation made for his going, he had
with him in his train one hundred and sixty persons, having The Cardinal
goes to his Bishopric of York.
with him twelve Carts to carry his goods which he sent from his College at
Oxford besides other Carts of his daily carriage of his necessaries for his
buildings, he kept his solemn feast of Easter at Peterborow, and upon
Palme-Sunday, he bare his palm and went on procession with the Monks, and upon
Thursday he made his Mandy, having 59, poor people At Peterborowe he did wash
59. poor men's feet.
whose feet he washed and kissed, and after he had dried them, he gave every
one of them twelve pence and three else of good Canvas to make them shirts, and
each of them a pair of new shoes and a caske of Redherring, on Easter Day he
rose to the Resurrection, and that day he went in procession in his Cardinals
vestments, and having his hat on his head, and sung the high mass there
himself solemnly, after his mass he gave his Benediction to all the hearers
with clean remission. From Peterborow he took his journey into the North,
but made some stay by the way, and many passages happened in his journey too
tedious here to relate. At the last he came to Stoby where he continued til
after Michaelmas exercising many deeds of charity, most commonly every sunday
if the weather served would he go to some poor Parishchurch thereabouts, and
there would say the divine service and either said or heard mass, and then
caused one of his Chaplins to preach the word of God to the people, and
afterward he would dine in some honest house in the Town, Charity to the
poor.
where should be distributed to the poor, alms as well of meat and drink, as
money to supply the want of meat and drink, if the number of poor did exceed:
thus with other good deeds practicing himself during the time of his abode
there between party and party, being at variance: About Michaelmas after
heremoved from thence to Caywod Castle within 7. miles of the City of York,
where he had much honor and love from all men high and low, where he kept a
plentiful house for all comers, also he builded and repaired the Castle
which was much decayed, having at the least three hundred persons daily in
work to whom he paid Wages lying there: Where all the Doctors and Prebends of
the Church of York did repair to my Lord according to their duties, as unto
the chief Head, Patron, and Father of their Spiritual dignities, who did most
joyfully welcome him into those parts, Saying, it was no small comfort unto
them, to see their Head among them, who had been so long absent from them,
being like unto Fatherless and comfortless Children for want of his Presence;
and that they trusted shortly to see him amongst them in his own Church. To
whom he made answer, That it was the most especial cause of his coming, to
be amongst them as a Father, and a natural brother.

Sir, quoth they, you must understand the Ordinances and Rules of our Church,
whereof, although you be the Head and sole Governor, yet you are not so well
acquainted as we be therein: Therefore, if it please your Grace, we shall
(under favor) open unto you some part of our ancient Laws and Customs of our
Church, that our head Prelate and Pastor as you now are, might Order in the
Cathedral at York.
not come above our Quire door, until by due Order he be installed. Nor if
you should happen to dye before your installation, you should not be buried
above in the Quire, but below in the nether part of the body of the Church.
Therefore we humbly desire and beseech you, in the name of all our Brethren,
that you would vouchsafe to do therein, as our ancient Fathers your
Predecessors have done, and that you will not break the laudable Customs of
our Church; To the which we are obliged by Oath at our first admittance to
observe that, and diverse others, which in our Chapter does remain upon Record.

These Records (quoth my Lord) would I feign see, and then shall you know
further of mine advise and mind in this business.

A day was signed to bring their Records to my Lord, at which time they
resorted to my Lord with their Register and Books of Records, wherein were
fairly Written their Institutions and Rules, which every Minister of their
Church was most principally and chiefly bound to observe and infallibly keep
and maintain.

When my Lord had read the Records, he did intend to be at the Cathedral
Church of York the next Monday after Alholland-tide, against which Time due
preparation was made for the same; but not in so sumptuous a wise as were his
predecessors before him: Nor yet in such sort as the fame and common report was
afterward made of him, to his great slander. And to the false Reporters no
small dishonesty to become a divulger of such notorious lies I am sure they
did: For I my self was sent by my Lord to Preparation for the Cardinals
instalment at York.
York, to see that all things there should be ordered and provided for that
Solemnity, in a very decent form to the honor of that ancient and worthy
Monastery of York

It came to pass that upon Alholland-day, one of the head and principal
Officers of the said Cathedral Church which should have had most doing at my
Lords Installation, was with my Lord at Caywood, and sitting at Dinner, they
fell into Communication of this matter, and the Order and Ceremony thereof: He
saying that my Lord Cardinal should go a foot from a Chapel which stands
without the Gates of the City called Saint James his Chapel, unto the Minster
upon cloth, which should be distributed to the poor after his said passage
to the Church. Which my Lord hearing, replied and said, although perhaps our
Predecessors have gone upon cloth, yet we intend to go on foot without any
such Pomp or glory in the vampes of our hosen. And therefore gave order to his
Servants to go as humbly thither as might be without any sumptuous apparel;
for I intend on Sunday to come to you to be installed, and to make but one
Dinner for you at the close, and the next day to dine with the Major, and so
return again hither.

The day being not unknown to all the Country, the Gentlemen, Abbots, and
Priors, such provision Store of good provision sent in by the Country.
sent in, that it was almost incredible for store and variety.

The Common people held my Lord in great estimation for his purity and
liberality, and also for his familiar gesture and good behavior amongst them.
By means whereof he gained much love of all the people in the North parts of
England.

CHAP. 19. Of the Cardinals fall, and how he was arrested of high Treason.
WHat chanced before his last troubles at Caywood as a sign or token from God,
of that which should follow, I will now, God willing, declare. My L. enemies
being then at Court about the King, in good estimation, and honorable
dignities; seeing now my Lord in great favor, and fearing the King would now
call him home again, they therefore did plot amongst themselves to dispatch
him by means of some sinister Treason, or to bring him into the Kings great
indignation by some other means.

This was their daily study and consultation, having for their especial help
and furtherance as many vigilant attendants upon him, as the Poets feign Argus
had eyes.

The King with these their continual complaints, was moved to much
indignation, and thought it good that the Cardinal should come up, and to
stand to his Trial in his own person; which his enemies did not like of.
Notwithstanding, he was sent for, and after this sort.

First, they devised that Sir Walter Welsh Knight, one of the Kings privy
Chamber should be sent down with a Commission into the North, and the Earl
of Northumberland, who was sometimes brought up in the House of my Lord, being
joined in Commission with him, should arrest my Lord of high Treason. This
being resolved upon, Sir Walter Welsh prepared for his journey, with his
Commission and certain instruments annexed to the same and took horse at the
Court Gate upon Alholland-day, toward my Lord of Northumberland.

Now will I declare what I promised before of a certain sign or token of my
Lords trouble ensuing.

Upon All-hallow-day my Lord sitting at dinner, having at his Boards end diverse
of his Chaplains to bear him Company for want of other Guests; you The
Cardnals cross in the fall, brake Dr. Bonners head.
shall now understand that my Lords great Cross which stood by fell, and in
the fall broke Doctor Bonners head, inasmuch that some blood ran down. My Lord
perceiving the fall thereof, demanded of those that stood by him what was the
matter that they stood so amazed, I showed him of the fall of his great cross
upon Dr. Bonners head: Quoth my Lord, has it drawn any blood? yea quoth I,
with that he cast his head aside and soberly said (Malum Omen) and thereupon
suddenly said grace, and rose from table and went to his Bedchamber, but what
he did there I cannot tell. Now mark how my Lord expounded the meaning thereof
(in his fancy) to meat Pontefract after his fall. First that the great Cross
that he bare as Archbishop of York betokened himself, and Doctor Austin the
Physician who overthrew the Cross, was he that accused my Lord, whereby his
enemies caught an occasion to overthrowe him, it fell on Doctor Bonners head,
who was then master of my Lords faculties, and spiritual jurisdiction, who was
then dampnified by the fall thereof, and moreover the drawing of blood
betokeueth death, which did suddenly after follow.

Now the appointed time drew near for Installation and sitting at dinner; the
friday before the monday that he should have been installed at York: The Earl
of Northumberland and M. Welsh with a great company of Gent of the Earls house,
and of the Country whom they had gathered in the Kings name, to accompany them,
(yet not knowing to what end) came to the hall of Caywood (the Officers being
at dinner) and my The Earl of Northumberland and Mr. Welsh come to Caywood-hal.
Lord not fully dined, nor knowing any thing of the Earls being come.

The first thing that the Earl did, after he had set the hall in order, he
commanded the Porter to deliver the keys of the gates to him, which he would
in no wise do, although he was threatened and commanded in the Kings name to
make deliverance thereof to one of the Earls servants, which he still refused,
saying to the Earl, that the keys were delivered to him by his Lord and
master, both by oath and other command.

Now some of the Gent. that stood by the Earl hearing the porter speak so
stoutly said, he is a good fellow and a faithful servant to his master, and
speaks like an honest man, therefore give him your charge, and let him keep the
keys still: then said my L. thou shall well and truly keep the keys to the use
of our Sovereign Lord the King, and you shall let none pass in nor out of the
Gates, but such as from time to time you shall be commanded by us, being the
Kings Commissioners during our stay here, and with that oath he received the
keys of the Earl, and Master Welches hands, but of all these doings knew my
Lord nothing, for they had stopped the stayers that none should go to my L.
chamber, and they that came down could not go up again. At the length one
escaped up and showed my Lord that the Earl of Northumberland was in the hall,
whereat my Lord wondered, and at the first believed him not, till he heard it
confirmed by another: Then quoth my Lord, I am sorry we have dined, for I
fear our Officers have not provided fish enough for the entertainment of him,
with some honorable cheer fitting his estate and Dignity; And with that my
Lord arose from the Table and commanded to let the cloth lie that the Earl
might see how far forth they were at The Cardinal and the Earl meet.
their dinners, and as he was going down stayres, he encountered with my Lord
of Northumberland, to whom my Lord said you are heartily welcome my Lord, and
so they embraced each other: Then quoth my Lord Cardinal, if you had loved me,
you would have sent me word before of your coming, that I might have
entertained you according to your honor. Notwithstanding you shall have such
cheer as I can make you for the present, with a right good will, trusting you
will accept thereof in good part, hoping hereafter to see you oftener when I
shall be more able to entertain you: this said, my Lord took him by the hand,
and led him to his Chamber, whom followed all, the Earls servants, and they
being there all alone, saving I which kept the door as my Office required
being Gentleman-usher, The Earl does arrest the Cardinal.
these two Lords standing at a window, the Earl trembling said: I arrest you
of high Treason, with which words, my Lord was well nigh astonished, standing
still a good space without speaking one word.

But at the last, quoth my Lord, what authority have you to arrest me, quoth
the Earl, I have a Commission so to do: show it me, quoth my Lord, that I may
see the contents thereof: nay Sir that you may not quoth the Earl. Then quoth
my Lord, hold you contented, for I will not obey your arrest, for there has
been between your Ancestors and my Predecessors great contentions and debate,
and therefore unless I see your authority I will not obey you. Master Welsh
arrests Doctor Austin of high Treason.


Even as they were debating the matter in the Chamber, so likewise was Master
Welsh busy in arresting Dr. Austine at the door, saying, go in thou Traitor,
or I shall make thee: with that I opened the Portall door, and did thrust in
Doctor Austine before him with violence. The matter on both sides astonished me
very much, marveyling what all this should mean, until at the last, Master
Welsh being entered my Lord Chamber, began to pluck of his hood being of the
same cloth his cloak was, which hood he wore to the intent he should not be
known, who kneeled down to my Lord; to whom my Lord said come hither Gentleman;
and let me speak with you, commanding him to stand up, and said thus. My Lord
of Northumberland has arrested me, but by what authority I know not, if you
be privy thereunto joined with him therein, I pray you show me. Indeed my Lord
if it please your Grace, quoth Master Welsh, I pray have me excused; there is
annexed to our Commission certain instructions, as you may not see nor be
privy too: why quoth my Lord, be your Instructions such as I may not see nor
be privy thereunto, yet paradventure if I be privy unto them, I may help you
the better to perform them, for it is not unknown to you, that I have been of
Counsel in as weity matters as these are, and I doubt not, but I shall do
well enough, for my part, prove my self a true man against the expectations of
my cruel enemies, I see the matter whereupon it grows, well there is no more
to do I trow, you art of the Privy Chamber, your name is Mr. Welsh, I am
contented to yield to you, but not to the Earl, without I see his Commission,
and also you are a sufficient Commissioner in this behalf, being one of the
privy Chamber: Therefore put your Commission in execution, spare me not, I
will obey you and the King, for I fear not the cruelty of mine enemies, no
more then I do the truth of my Allegiance, wherein I take God to witness, I
never offended his Majesty in word or deed, and therein I dare stand face to
face with any, having a difference without partiality.

Then came my Lord of Northumberland and commanded me to avoid the Chamber:
And being loath to depart from my Master, I stood still and would not remove,
to whom he spoke again and said, there is no remedy you must depart, with
that I looked upon my Master, as who would have said shall I go, and
perceiving by his countenance that it was not for me to stay, I departed and
went into an other chamber, where were many Gentlemen and others to hear
news, to whom I made a report of what I heard and saw, which was great
heaviness to them all. The Earl takes the keys from my L.


Then the Earl called into his Chamber diverse of his own servants, and after
he and Master Welsh had taken the keys from my Lord, he committed the keeping
of my Lord unto five Gentlemen, and then they went about the house, and put all
things in order, intending to depart the next day, and to certify the King and
the rest of the Lords, what they had done.

Then went they busy about to Convey Doctor Austine away to London with as
much speed and privacy as they could possible, sending with him diverse persons
to conduct him, who was bound to his horse like a Traitor.

And this being done, when it was near night, the Commissioners sending two
Grooms of my Lords to attend him in his Chamber (where he lay all night) the
rest of the Earls men watched in the Chamber, and all the house was watched,
and the gates safe kept, that no man could pass or repasse until next morning.

About eight of the clock next morning, the Earl sent for me into his
Chamber, and commanded me to go to my Lord; and as I was going, I met with
Master Welsh, who called me unto him, and showed me how the Kings Majesty bare
unto me his principal favor for my love and diligent Service that I had
performed to my Lord: wherefore, quoth he, the Kings pleasure is, that you
shall be about him as chief, in whom his Highness puts great confidence and
trust; and thereupon gave me in Writing the Articles: Which when I had read, I
said I was content to obey his Majesty's pleasure, and would be sworn to the
performance thereof; whereupon he gave me my Oath.

That done, I resorted to my Lord, whom I found sitting in a Chair, the Table
being ready spread for him. But so soon as he perceived me come in, he fell
into such a woeful lamentation, that would have forced a flinty-heart to mourn.

I then comforted him as well as I could, but he would not; for quoth he, I am
much grieved that I have nothing to reward you, and the rest of my true and
faithful Servants, for all the good Service that they and you have done me,
for which I do much lament.

Upon Sunday following, the Earl and Master Welsh appointed to set forward,
for my Lords Horse and ours were brought ready into the inner Court, where we
mounted, and coming toward the Gate ready to ride out, the Porter had no
sooner opened the same, but we saw without ready attending a great number of
Gentlemen and their Servants, such as the Earl had appointed for that Service
to attend and Conduct my Lord to Pomfrait that night.

But to tell you the Truth, there were also many of the people of the Country
assembled at the Gate, lamenting his departure, in number above three Thousand,
who after the opening of the Gate that they had a sight of him, cried out with
a loud voice, God save your Grace, God save your Grace; the foul Evil take
them that have taken you from us; we pray God that vengeance may light upon
them. And thus they ran after him through the Town of Caywood, for he was
there very well beloved both of rich and poor.

CHAP. 20. Of the Cardinals entertainment at the Earl of Shrewsburies, and of
his death and burial at Leicester.
AFter our departure from Cawood, we came to Doncaster, the third day we came
to Sheffield-parke, where my Lord of Shrewsbury lived within the lodge, and the
Earl and his Lady, and a great company of Gentlewomen and Servants stood
without the Gate to attend my Lords coming; at whose alightning the Earl
received him with much honor, and embraced him, saying these words; My Lord
you are most heartily welcome to my poor lodge, and I am glad to see you.

Here my Lord stayed a fortnight, and was most nobly entertained; he spent most
of his time and applied his mind to prayers continually in great devotion. It
came to pass as he sat one day at dinner, I being there, perceived his
color diverse times to change; I asked him if he was not well; who answered me
with a loud voice: I am suddenly taken with a Thing at my stomach as cold as a
Whet-stone, and am not well: Therefore take up the Table, and make a short
dinner, and return to me again suddenly. I made but a little stay, but came
to him again, where I found him still sitting very ill at ease: He desired me
to go to the Apothecarie and ask him if he had any thing would break Wind
upwards: He told me he had: Then I went and showed the same to my Lord, who
did command me to give him some thereof, and so I did, and it made him break
wind exceedingly: Lo quoth he, you may see it was but wind, for now I thank
God I am well eased, and so he arose from the Table and went to prayers, as he
used every day after dinner.

In the afternoon my Lord of Shrewsbury sent for me to him, to whom he said,
forasmuch as I have always perceived you to be a man in whom your Lord puts
great affiance, and I my self knowing you to be a man very honest, with many
words of commendations and praise more then becomes me to rehearse, he said,
your Lord and Master has often desired me to write unto the King that he might
answer his accusations before his enemies: And this day I have received
Letters from his Majesty by Sir William Kingston whereby I perceive that the
King has him in good opinion, and upon my request has sent for him by the
said Sr. William Kingston.

Therefore now I would have you play your part wisely with him in such sort as
he may take it quietly and in good part, for he is always full of sorrow and
much heaviness at my being with him, that I fear he would take it ill if I
bring him tidings thereof: And therein does he not well, for I assure you that
the King is his very good Lord, and has given me most hearty thanks for his
entertainment: And therefore go your way to him and persuade him I may find
him in quiet at my coming, for I will not tarry long after you.

Sir quoth I, and if it please your Lordship I shall endeavor to the best of my
Power, to accomplish your Lordships command: But Sir, I doubt when I name this
Sir William Kingston, that he will mistrust some il, because he is Constable of
the Tower, and Captain of the guard, having in his company 24. of the Guard to
accompany him: That is nothing quoth the Earl, what if he be Constable of the
Tower and Captain of the Guard? he is the fittest man for his wisdom and
discretion to be sent about such a business, and for the Guard it is only to
defend him from those that might intend him any ill. Besides that, the Guard
are for the most part such of his old servants as the King has took into his
service to attend him most justly. Well Sir quoth I, I shall do what I can,
and so departed and went to my Lord and found him in the Gallery with his
Staff and his Beads in his hands, and seeing me come, he asked me what
news, forsooth quoth I, the best news that ever you heard, if you can take it
well I pray God it be true ^ then quoth he; my Lord of Shrewsbury said, I
your most assured friend, has so provided by his letters to the King, that his
Majesty has sent for you by Master Kingston, and 24. of the Guard to conduct
you to his Highness, Master Kingston quoth he, and clapped his hand on his
Thigh and The Cardinals causlesse fears.
gave a great sigh.

May it please your Grace (quoth I) I would you would take all things well, it
would be much better for you, content your self for Gods sake, and think that
God and your good friends have wrought for you, according to your own desires:
And (as I conceive) you have much more cause to rejoice then lament or mistrust
the matter, for I assure you that your friends are Enemies.
more afraid of you then you need be of them: And his Majesty to show his
love to you, has sent Master Kingston to honor you, with as much honor as is
your Graces due, and to convey you in such easy journeys as is fitting for
you, and you shall command him to do, and that you shall have your request. And
I humbly entreat you to imprint this my persuasion in your Highness discretion
and to be of good cheer, wherewith you shall comfort your self, and give your
frinds and poor servants great comfort and content.

Well quoth he, I perceive more then you can imagine, or do know, presently
after came my Lord to acquaint him with that I had so lately related, my L.
Cardinal thanked the Earl for his great love, and called for Master Kingston
who came to him presently, and kneeling down before him saluted him in the
kings The Cardinal salutes Mr. Kingston
behalf, whom my Lord bareheaded offered to take up, but he would not, then
quoth my Lord, Master Kingston I pray you stand up and leave your kneeling to
me, for I am a wretch repleat with misery, not esteeming my self, but as a
mere abject utterly cast away, but without desert God he knows, therefore
good Master Kingston stand up.

Then Master Kingston said, the Kings Majesty has him commended unto you. I
thank his Highness quoth my Lord, I hope he is in good health. Yea quoth
Master Kingston, and he has him commended unto you, and commanded me to bid
you be of good cheer, Mr. Kingston tells him he is in the Kings favor.
for he bears you as much good will as ever he did.

And whereas Report has been made unto him, that you should commit against his
Majesty certain heynos crimes which he thinks to be, but yet he for
ministration of Justice in such Cases requisite, could do no less then send
for you that you might have your trial, mistrusting nothing your truth and
wisdom, but that you shall be able to acquit your self of all complaints and
accusations extended against you: And you may take your journey to him at your
pleasure, commanding me to attend you.

Master Kingston quoth my Lord, I thank you for your good news: And Sir
hereof assure your self, if I were as able and lusty as ever I was to ride, I
would go with you post: But alas I am a diseased man having a sluxe (at which
time it was apparent that he had poisoned himself) it has made me very weak,
but the Comfortable news you bring is of purpose (I doubt) to bring me into a
fools Paradise, for I know what is provided for me. Notwithstanding, I thank
you for your good will, and pains taken about me, and I shall with speed make
ready to ride with you.

After this I was commanded to make all things ready for our departure the
morrow after.

When my Lord went to bed, he fell very sick of the Laske, which caused him to
go to stool from time to The Cardinal near death
time all that night, insomuch that from that time till morning, he had 50.
stools: And the matter that he voided was very black, which the Physicians
called Adustine, whose opinions were that he had not above 4. or 5. days to
live.

Notwithstanding, he would have ridden with Mr. Kingston the next day, had not
the Earl of Shrewsbury advised him to the contrary, but the next day he took
his journey with Master Kingston, and them of the Guard, who espying him could
not abstain from weeping, considering he was their old Master, and now in such
a miserable case, whom my Lord took by the hand, and would as he rode by the
way sometimes talk with one, and sometimes with an other, till he came to a
house of my Lords standing in the way called Hardwick hall, where he lay all
that night very ill at case. The next day he came to Nottingham, and the next
day to Leicester abbey, and the next day he waxed very sick that he had almost
fallen from his horse, so that it was night ere he got to Leicester abbey,
where at his coming in at the Gates, the Abbot with all their Covent met him
with many lighted Torches, whom they honorably received and welcomed with
geat reverence.

To whom my Lord said, Father Abbot, I am come to lay my bones amongst you,
riding still on his mule till he came to the stairs of his Chamber where he
alighted: Master Kingston holding him by the arm led him up the stairs, who
told me afterward that he never felt so heavy a burden in all his life, and
as soon as he was in his Chamber he went straight to bed, this was upon
Satterday, and so he continued.

On Monday in the morning as I stood by is bedside about eight of the clock in
the morning, the windows being close shut, and having wax lights burning upon
the Cupboard, I thought I perceived him drawing on toward death. He
perceiving my shadow upon the bedside asked who was there. Sir quoth I, it is I,
how do you quoth he, well? I Sir quoth I, if I might see your Grace well, what
is it a clock quoth he? I answered it was about eight of the Clock, quoth he
that cannot be, rehearsing eight of the clock so many times. Nay quoth he that
cannot be, for at eight of the clock you shall see your masters time draw near
that I must depart this world: with that quoth Doctor Palms a worthy Gentleman
standing by, bid me ask him if he would be shriven to make him ready for
God, what ever chanced to fall out, which I did: but he was very angry with me,
and asked what I had to do to ask him such a question? till at the last
Master Doctor took my part and talked with him in Lattin and pacified him.

After dinner M. Kingston sent for me and said, Sir, The King has sent unto
me Letters by Mr. Vincent our old companion who has bin in trouble in the
Tower for money that my Lord should have at his departure: A great part of which
money cannot be found, wherefore the King at Master Vincents request for the
declaration of the truth has sent him hither with his Graces Letters, that I
should examine my Lord and have your Counsel therein, that he may take it well
and in good part. And this is the cause of my sending for you, therefore I
desire your Counsel therein for acquitall of this poor Gentleman Master Vincent.

Sir quoth I, according to my duty you shall, and by my advise you shall resort
unto him in your own person to visit him, and in communication break the
matter unto him: And if he will not tell you the truth therein, then may you
certify the King thereof; But in any case name not nor speak of my fellow
Vincent: Also I would not have you to detract the time, for he is very sick,
and I fear that he will not live past a day or two, and accordingly Master
Kingston went to my Lord and demanded the money, saying that my Lord of
Northumberland found a book at Caywood-house that you had but lately borrowed
10000. pounds, and there is not so much as one penny to be found who has made
the King privy to the same, wherefore the King has written to me, to know
what is become thereof, for it were pity that it should be holden from you
both. Therefore I require you in the Kings name to tell me the truth, that I
may make a just report thereof unto his Majesty of your answer?

With that quoth my Lord, oh good Lord, how much does it grieve me that the
King should think any such thing in me, that I should deceive him of one
penny, seeing I have nothing nor never had (God be my Judge) that I ever
esteemed so much mine own as his Majesty's, having but the bare use of it
during my life, and after my death to leave it wholly to him; wherein his
Majesty has prevented me. But for this money that you demand of me, I assure
you it is none of my own, for I borrowed it of diverse of my friends to bury
me, and to bestow amongst my servants, who have taken great pains about me,
notwithstanding if it be your pleasure to know, I must be content, yet I
beseech his Majesty to see it satisfied for the discharge of my Conscience to
them that I owed it to, who be they quoth Master Kingston? That shall I tell you
quoth my Lord, I borrowd two hundred pounds of John Allen of London, another
200. p. of Sir Richard Gresham, and 200. pound of the Master of the Savoy, and
also 200. pound of Doctor Highden Dean of my College at Oxford, 200 pound of
the Treasurer of the Church, and 200. pound of Master Ellis my Chaplain: And an
other 200. pound of a Priest, I hope the King will restore Diverse soms of money
borrowed by the Cardnal a little before he dyed.
it again, forasmuch as it is none of mine.

Sir quoth Master Kingston, there is no doubt in the King whom you need not
distrust, but Sir I pray you where is the money quoth he, I will not conceal
it I warrant you, but I will declare it unto you before I dye by the grace of
God, have a little patience with me I pray you, for the money is safe enough in
an honest man's hands, who will not keep one penny thereof from the King.

So Master Kingston departed for that time, my Lord being very weak, and about
four of the clock in the next morning, as I conceived, I asked him how he did,
well quoth he if I had any meat, The Cardinal desires meat.
I pray you give me some.

Sir quoth I, there is none ready, then he said (you are much too blame) for
you should have always meat for me in readiness, whenever that my stomach
serves me, I pray you get some ready for me, for I mean to make my self
strong to day to the intent I may go to confession and make me ready for God,
quoth I, I will call up the Cooks to prepare some meat, And also I will call
Master Palmer that he may discourse with you till your meat be ready, with a
good will quoth my Lord, and so I called Master Palmer who rose and came to my
Lord.

Then I went and acquainted Master Kingston that my Lord was very sick and not
like to live. In good faith quoth Master Kingston, you are much too blame to
make him believe he is sicker then he is. Well Sir quoth I, you cannot say but
I gave you warning as I am bound to do, upon which words he arose and came
unto him, but before he came my Lord Cardinal had eaten a spoonful or two of
Callis made of Chickin, and after that he was in his confession the space of an
hour: And then Master Kingston came to him and bad him good morrow, and asked
him how he did, Sir quoth he, I watch but Gods pleasure to render up my poor
soul to him. I pray you have me heartily commended unto his Royal Majesty,
and beseech him on my behalf to call to his Princely remembrance all matters
that have bin between us from the beginning and the progress: And especially
between good Queen Katherin and him, and then shall his Graces Conscience
know whether I have offended him or not.

He is a Prince of a most Royal carriage and has a Princely heart, and
rather then he will miss or want any part of his will, he will endanger the
one half of his Kingdom.

I do assure you I have often kneeled before him sometimes three hours
together to persuade him from his will and appetite, but could not prevail:
And Master Kingston, had I but served God as diligently as I have served the
King, he would not have given me over in my gray hairs. But this is the just
reward that I must receive for my diligent pains and studdy, not regarding my
service to God, but only to my Prince, Therefore let me advise you, if you be
one of the Privy Counsel, as by your wisdom you are fit, take heed what
you put in the Kings head, for you can never put it out again.

And I desire you further to request his Grace in The Cardinals advise.
Gods name, that he have a vigilant eye to suppress the hellish Luthrans, that
they increas not through his great negligence, in such a sort as he be
compelled to take up Arms to subdue them, as the King of Bohemia was; whose
Commons being infected with Wickliffs heresies, the King was enforced to take
that course.

Let him consider the Story of King Richard the Second, the second son of his
Progenitor, who lived in the time of Wickliffs Seditions and heresies: Did not
the Commons I pray you in his time rise against the Nobility and chief
governors of this Realm, and at the last some of them were put to death
without Justice or mercy, and under pretense of having all things common, did
they not fall to spoiling and robbing, and at last took the Kings person, and
carried him about the City making him obedient to their proclamations?

Did not also the Traiterous Heretics Sir John Old-Castle, Lord Cobham pitch
a field with Heretics against King Henry the fourth, where the King was in
person and fought against them, to whom God gave the victory?

Alas, if these be not plain presidents and sufficient persuasions to admonish
a Prince: Then God will take away from us our prudent Rulers, and leave us to
the hands of our enemies. And then will ensue mischief upon mischief,
Inconveniences, Barrenness and scarcity for want of good Orders in the
Commonwealth, from which God of his tender mercy defend us.

Master Kingston farewell, I wish all things may have good success, my time
draws on, I may not tarry with you, I pray you remember my words.

Now began the time to draw near, for he drew his speech at length, and his
tongue began to fail him, his eyes perfectly set in his head, his sight failed
him. Then we began to put him in mind of Christ's passion, and caused the
Yeoman of the Guard to stand by privately to see him dye, and bear witness of
his words and his departure, who heard all his communications.

And then presently the clock struck eight, at which time he gave up the
Ghost, and thus departed he this life, one of us looking upon an other, The
Cardinal gave up the Ghost.
supposing he prophesied of his departure.

We sent for the Abbot of the house to anoint him, who speedily came as he
was ending his life, who said certain prayers before that the life was out of
his body:

Here is the end and fall of pride, for I assure you he was in his time the
proudest man alive, having more regard to the honor of his Person then to his
spiritual function, wherein he should have expressed more meekness and
humility: For Pride and Ambition are both linked together; and Ambition is like
Choler, which is an humor that makes men active, earnest, and full of alacrity
and stirring, if it be not stopped or hindered in its course: But if it be
stopped, and cannot have its way, it becomes dust, and thereby malign and
venomous. So Ambitions and proud men, if they find the way open for their
rising and advancement, and still get forwards; they are rather busy then
dangerous: But if they be checked in their desires, they become secretly
discontent, and look upon men and matters with an evil eye, and are best
pleased when things go backewards: but I forbear to speak any further herein.

The Cardinal being departed, Master Kingston sent post to London one of the
Guard, then was Master Kingston and the Abbot in consultation about the
Funeral, which was solemnized the day after, for Master Kingston would not
stay the return of the Post.

They thought good that the Major of Leicester and his Brethren should see him
personally dead, to prevent false reports that he was alive And in the
Interim, whilst the Major was sent for, his Bones were laid in the Coffin, and
his shirt of hair and his over shirt of fine holland were taken off and were
put into the Coffin together, with all such ornaments wherewith he was
invested, when he was made Arehbishop, as Miter, Cross, Ring and Pall, with
all other things due to his orders.

Thus he lay all that day with his Coffin opon and bare faced: that all that
desired might see him. And about 3. of the Clock he was buried of the Abbot
with great solemnity. And being in the Church, his corpse were set in the
Ladies Chapel The Cardinal is buried in St Mary's Chapel in Leicester.
with many Tapers or poor men about him holding Torches in their hands, who
watched the Corpse all that night, whilst the Canons sung diverse dirges and
other divine Orisons.

And at 4. of the Clock the next morning, the Cardinals servants and Master
Kingston came to the Church to the execution of many Ceremonies in such manner
as is usual to Bishops burialls: And so he went to Mass, where the Abbot did
offer and diverse others: And then went to bury the Corpse in the middle of the
said Chapel, by this time it was fire of the Clock, being St. An^^^^s day.

Then we prepared for our journey to the Court, where we attended his
Majesty, the next day I was sent for to the King, conducted by Master Norris,
where the King was in his night gown of Rochet velvet furred with sables,
before whom I kneeled the space of an hour, during which time his Majesty
examined me of diverse particulars concerning my Lord Cardinal wishing rather
then twenty thousand pounds that he had lived.

He asked me concerning the fifteen hundred pounds which Master Kingston moved
to my Lord. Quoth I, I think I can perfectly tell your Grace where it is and
who has it, can you quoth the K. I pray you tell me, and you shall not be
unrewarded.

Sir quoth I, after the departure of Master Vincent from my Lord at Ser^oby,
who had the custody thereof leaving it with my L. in diverse baggs he delivered
it to a certain Priest safely to be kept to his use, is this true quoth the
King? yea quoth I, without doubt, the Priest will not deny it before me, for
I was at the deliverie thereof, who has gotten diverse other rich Ornaments,
which are not Registered in the book of my Lords inventorie or other writings,
whereby any man is able to charghim there with but my self.

Then said the King, let me alone for keeping this secret between me and you.
Howbeit three may keep Counsel if two be away: And if I knew my Cap were
privy to my Counsel, I would cast it into the fire and burn it: And for your
honesty and Truth, you shall be our servant in our Chamber, as you were with
your Master.

Therefore go you your ways to Sir John Gage our Vice-Chamberlain, to whom
we have spoken already, to admit you our servant in our Chamber, and then go
to the Lord of Norfolk and he shall pay you your whole years wages which is
ten pounds, is not it so quoth the King? Yea forsooth and if it please your
Grace quoth I. And withal said the King, you shall receive a reward the Duke
of Norfolk.

So I received ten pounds of the Duke for my wages, and twenty pounds for my
reward, and his Majesty gave me a Cart and six horses the best that I could
chose out of my Lords horses to carry my goods and five marks for my charge
homewards.

FINIS.

