ENGLISH PVRITANISME. CONTAINING The maine Opinions of the rigidest sort of
those that are called Puritans in the Realm of ENGLAND.

Written by WILLIAM AMES D. of Divinity.

ACTS 24. 14. But this I confess unto thee, that after the way (which they
call Heresy) so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things which
are written in the Law and the Prophets.

ACTS 28. 22. But we will hear of thee what thou think: for as concerning
this Sect, we know that every where it is spoken against.

Printed in the year. 1641.

To the Indifferent Reader.
IT cannot be unknown unto them that know any thing, that those Chistians in
this Realm which are called by the odious and vile name of Puritans, are
accused by the Prelates to the Kings Majesty and the State, to maintain many
absurd, erroneous, Schismatic, and Heretical opinions, concerning Religion,
Church Government, and the Civil Magistracy. Which has moved me to collect
(as near as I could, the chiefest of them, and to send them naked to the view
of all men, that they may see what is the worst that the worst of them hold. It
is not my part to prove and justify them, Those that accuse and condemn them,
must in all reason and equity prove their accusation, or else bear the name of
unchristian slanderers. I am not ignorant that they lay other opinions (yea,
some clean contradictory to these) to the charge of these men, the falsehood
whereof we shall (it is to be doubted have more and more occasion to detect. In
the mean time all Enemies of Divine Truth shall find, That to obscure the
same with Calumniation and untruthes, is but to hide a Fire with dry Straw or
Towe upon it. But thou may herein observe, what a terrible Popedom and
Primacy these riged Presbyterians desire. And with what painted Bug-beares and
Scar-Crowes the Prelates go about to fright the States of the Kingdom with
all. Who will no doubt one day see how their wisdoms are abused.

Farewell.
ENGLISH PVRITANISME.
CHAP. I. Concerning Religion, or the worship of God in general.
IMPRIMIS, They hold and maintain, that the Word of God contained in the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles, is of absolute perfection, given by
CHRIST the head of the Church, to be unto the same, the sole Canon and rule of
all matters of Religion, and the worship and service of God whatsoever. And
that whatsoever done in the same service and worship, cannot be justified by
the said Word, is unlawful. And therefore that it is a sin, to force any
Christian to do any act of Religion, or Divine Service, that cannot evidently
be warranted by the same.

2 They hold, that all Ecclesiastical actions invented and devised by man, are
utterly to be excluded out of the exercises of Religion? Especially such
actions as are famous and notorious Mysteries of an Idolatrous Religion, and in
doing whereof, the true Religion is conformed (whether in whole or in part) to
Idolatry and Superstition.

3 They hold, that all outward means instituted and set apart to express and
set forth the inward worship of God, are parts of Divine worship and that not
only all moral actions, but all typical Rites and Figures, ordained to
shadow forth in the solemn worship and service of God, any Spiritual or
religious Act or habit in the mind of man, are special parts of the same, and
therefore that every such Act ought evidently to be prescribed by the Word of
God, or else ought not to be done? it being a sin to perform any other
worship to God, whether External or Internal, Moral or Ceremonial, in whole
or in part, then that which God himself requires in his Word.

4 They hold it to be gross Superstition for any mortal man to institute and
ordain as parts of Divine worship, any mystical Rite and Ceremony of Religion
whatsoever, and to mingle the same with the Divine Rites and Mysteries of Gods
Ordinance. But they hold it to be high presumption to institute and bring into
Divine worship such Rites and Ceremonies of Religion, as are acknowledged to be
no part of Divine worship at all, but only of civil worship and honor: For
they that shall require to have prformed unto themselves a ceremonial
obedience, service and worship, consisting in Rites of Religion to be done at
that very instant that God is solemnly served and worshipped? and even in the
same worship make both themselves and God so an Idol. So that they judge it a
far more fearful sin to add unto, and to use in the worship and service
of God, or any part thereof, such mystical Rites and Ceremonies as they
esteem to be no parts or parcels of Gods worship at all: then such as in a
vain and ignorant Superstition, they imagine and conceive to be parts thereof.

5 They hold, that every Act or action appropriated and set apart to Divine
Service and Worship, whether Moral or Ceremonial, real or typical? ought to
bring special honor unto God, and therefore that every such Act ought to be
apparently commanded in the Word of God, either expressly, or by necessary
consepuent.

6 They hold, that all actions whether Moral or Ceremonial appropriated to
Religious or Spiritual persons, Functions, or Actions, either are or ought to
be Religious and Spiritual. And therefore either are or ought to be instituted
immediately by God, who alone is the Author and Institutor of all Religious and
Spiritual actions, and things: whether Internal or External, Moral or
Ceremonial.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Church.
1 THey hold and maintain, that every Company, Congregation, or Assembly of
true believers, joining together according to the order of the Gospel, in the
true Worship of God, is a true visible Church of Christ; and that the same
Title is improperly attributed to any other Congregations, Synods, Societies,
Combinations, or Assemblies whatsoever.

2 They hold, that all such Churches or Congregations, communicating after that
manner together in Divine worship, are in all Ecclesiastical matters equal,
and of the same power and authority, and that by the Word and Will of God they
ought to have the same Spiritual Privileges, Prerogatives, Officers,
Administrations, Orders, and Forms of Divine worship.

3 They hold, that Christ Jesus has not objected any Church or Congregation of
his, to any other Superior Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, then unto that which
is within it self. So that if a whole Church or Congregation shall err, in
any matter of Faith or Religion, no other Churches or Spiritual
Church Officers have (by any warrant from the Word of God) power to censure,
punish, or control the same: but are only to counsel or advise the same,
and so to leave their Souls to the immediate judgment of Christ, and their
bodies to the sword and power of the Civil Magistrate, who alone upon earth
has power to punish a whole Church or Congregation.

4 They hold, that every established Church or Congregation ought to have her
own Spiritual Officers and Ministers, resident with her, and these such as
are joined by Christ in the new Testament, and no other.

5 They hold, that every established Church ought (as a special prerogative
wherewith she is endowed by Christ) to have power and liberty to elect and
choose their own Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Officers, and that is a greater
wrong to have any such forced upon them against their wills, then if they should
force upon men wives, or upon women's husbands, against their will and liking.

6 They hold, that the Ecclesiastical Officers and Ministers of one Church,
ought not to bear any Ecclesiastical Office in another, neither as they are
Officers in one Congregation, can they officially administer in another, but
ought to be tied unto that Congregation of which they are members, and by which
they are elected into Office.

And they are not (without just cause, and such as may be approved by the
Congregation, to forsake their Callings, wherein if the Congregation shall be
perverse, and will not hearken to reason, They are then to crave the assistance
and help of the Civil Magistrate, who alone has power, and who ought by his
civil sword and authority, procure to all members of the Church, whether
Governors or others, freedom from all manifest injuries and wrongs.

7 They hold, that the Congregation having once made choice of their Spiritual
Officers, unto whom they commit the Regiment of their souls, they ought not
(without just cause, and that which is apparently warrantable by the Word of
God) to discharge, deprive, or depose them. But ought to live in all Canonical
obedience and subjection unto them agreeable to the Word of God.

8 They hold, that the Laws, Orders, and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the
visible Churches of Christ, if they be lawful and warrantable by the Word of
God, are no wyaes repugnant to any civil State whatsoever, whether
Monarchical, Aristocraticall, or Democraticall, but to tend to the further
establishing and advancing of the right and prerogatives of all and every of
them. And they renounce and abhor from their souls all such Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction or Policy, that is any ways repugnant to any civil State
whatsoever, whether Monarchical, Aristocraticall, or Democraticall, but do
tend to the further establishing and advancing of the right and prerogatives of
all and every of them. And they renounce and abhor from their souls all such
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Policy, that is any way repugnant and
derogatory to any of them specially to the Monarchical State, which they
acknowledge to be the best kind of Civil Government for this Kingdom.

9 They hold and believe, that the equality in Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and
Authority, of Churches and Church-Ministers, is no more derogatory, and
repugnant to the State and glory of a Monarch, then the parity of equality, of
Schoolemasters, of several Schools, Captains of several Camps, Shepherds
of several flocks of sheep, or Masters of several Families.

Yea, they hold the clean contrary, that inequality, of Churches and
Church Officers in Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Authority, was that
principally that advanced Antichrist unto his throne, and brought the Kings and
Princes of the earth, unto such vassalage under him, and that the Civil
Authority and glory of Secular Princes and States has ever decayed, and
withered, the more that the Ecclesiastical Officers of the Church have bin
advanced and lifted up in Authority, beyond the limits and confines that
Christ in his Word has prescribed unto them.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Ministers of the Church.
1 THey hold, that the Pastors, Teachers, and ruling Elders of particular
Congregations, are, or ought to be highest Spiritual Officers in the Church,
over whom (by any Divine Ordinance) there is no Superior Pastor, but only
Jesus Christ; And that they are led by the Spirit of Antichrist, that arrogate,
or take upon themselves to be Pastors of Pastors.

2 They hold, that there are not by Divine Institution in the Word, any
ordinary National, Provincial, or Diocesan, Pastors or Ministers under which
the Pastors of particular Congregations are to be subject, as inferior
Officers. And that if there were any such, that then the Word of God would have
set them down distinctly, and more precisely then any of the rest: For the
higher place that one occupies in the Church, of the more necessity he is unto
the Church: the more carefully would Christ (the Head of the Church) have been
in pointing him out, and distinguishing him from other.

Hence, in the Old Testament, the high Priest, his Title, Office, Function, and
special Administration and Jurisdiction is more particularly and precisely set
down then the Office of any of the inferior Priests and Levites.

Also in the New Testament, the Office of a Pastor is more distinctly, and more
precisely set down, then of a Doctor, or any other inferior Church Officer; So
that a man may as well call into question the whole New Testament, as doubt
whether there ought to be a Pastor in every Congreation, or doubt of his proper
Office and Function. and if by Gods Ordinance there should be an Ordinary
Ecclesiastical Officer above the Pastors of particular Congregations, then
Christ out of all question would with that special care and cost has set it
forth: by Titles, Prerogatives, peculiar Offices, Functions and Gifts. That the
Churches and people of God, should have reason rather to doubt of any Office or
Jurisdiction, then of the peculiar Office or Jurisdiction of the Primates,
Metrapolitanes, Archbishops and Prelates of the world.

4 They hold, that if there were a Supreme National Ecclesiastical Minister
or Pastor, that should be the Prince of many thousand Pastors: that then also
Christ (as he did in the Jewish Church) would have appointed a solemn
National or Provincial Leiturgie or worship, unto which at some times of the
year, the whole body of the People should ascend, and that unto the
Metropolitan City as unto a Jerusalem, and that he would (as he did in the
Jewish Church) more precisly and particularly have set down the manner of
solemnization thereof, then of his Prochical worship. For as much therefore as
they cannot read in the New Testament of any higher or more solemn worship,
then of that which is to be performed in a particular Congregation they cannot
be persuaded that God has appointed any higher Ministers of his service and
worship under the New Testament, then the elect Ministers of particular
Congregations.

4 They hold, that the High Priest of the Jews, was typical and in a figure
the supreme head of the whole Catholic Church, which though it were visible
only in the Province and Nation of Jury, Yet those of other Nations and
Countries (as appear, by the History of Acts, Even though they were
Ethiopians) were under this high Priest. And acknowledged homage unto him. So
that he was not a Provincial Metropolitan, but in very deed, an Occumenicall
and universal Bishop of the whole world. And therefore they hold, (this being
the best ground in the word, for Metropolitan and Provincial Pastors or
Bishops,) that the Pope of Rome, who alone makes claim unto, and is in
possession of the like universal Supremacy: has more warrant in the word of
God, to the same, then any Metropolitan, or Diocesan (not dependant upon him)
has or can have. So that they hold, that by the word of God, either there must
be no Metropolitans and Diocesans, or else there must be a Pope.

5. They hold, that no Ecclesiastical Minister ought to exercise or accept of
any Civil public jurisdiction and authority, but ought to be wholly employed
in spiritual Offices and duties to that Congregation over which he is set.
And that those Civil Magistrates weaken their own Supremacy that shall suffer
any Ecclesiastical Pastor to exercise any civil jurisdiction within their
Realms, Dominions, or Seignories.

6 They hold, that the highest and Supreme office and authority of the Pastor,
is to preach the Gospel solemnly and publicly to the Congregation, by
interpreting the written word of God, and applying the same by exhortation and
reproof unto them.

They hold that this was the greatest work that Christ and his Apostles did,
and that whosoever is thought worthy and fit to exercise this authority, cannot
be thought unfit and unworthy to exercise any other Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical authority whatsoever.

7. They hold, that the Pastor or Minister of the word, is not to teach any
Doctrine as to the Church, grounded upon his own Judgment, or Opinion, or
upon the judgment or opinion of any or all the men in the world. But only that
truth, that he is able to demonstrate and prove evidently, and apparently, by
the word of God soundly interpreted, and that the people are not bound to
believe any Doctrine of Religion or Divinity whatsoever, upon any ground
whatsoever, except it be apparently justified by the word, or by necessary
consequent deduced from the same.

8. They hold, that in interpreting the Scriptures, and opening the sense of
them, he ought to follow those rules only that are followed in finding out the
meaning of other writing, to wit, by waying the propriety of the tongue wherein
they are written, by waying the Circumstance of the place, by comparing one
place with another, and by considering what is properly spoken, and what
tropically or figuratively.

And they hold it unlawful for the Pastor to obtrude upon his people a sense
of any part of the divine word, for which he has no other ground but the bare
testimonies of men, and that it is better for the people to be content to be
ignorant of the meaning of such difficult places, then to hang their Faith in
any matter in this case upon the bare Testimony of man.

9. They hold, that the people of God ought not to acknowledge any such for
their Pastors as are not able by preaching, to interpret and apply the word of
God unto them in manner and form aforesaid. And therefore that no ignorant and
sole reading Priests are to be reputed the ministers of Jesus Christ, who
sends none into his ministry and service, but such as he adorneth in some
measure with Spiritual gifts. And they cannot be persuaded that the faculty of
reading in ones mother tongue the Scriptures, etc. which any ordinary Turk or
Infidel has, can be called in any congruity of Speech a ministerial gift of
Christ,

10. They hold, that in the assembly of the Church, the Pastor only is to be
the mouth of the congregation to God in prayer, and that the people are only
to testify their assent by the word Amen. And that it is a Babilonian
confusion, for the Pastor to say one piece of a prayer, and the people with
mingled voices to say another except in singing, which by the very ordinance
and instinct of nature, is more delightful, and effectual, the more voices
there are joined and mingled together in harmony and consent.

11. They hold, that the Church has no authority to impose upon her Pastors,
or any other of her Officers, any other ministerial duties, Offices,
Functions, Actions, or Ceremonies, either in Divine worship or out of the same
then what Christ himself in the Scriptures has imposed upon them, or what they
might lawfully impose upon Christ himself, if he were in person upon the
Earth, and did exercise a ministerial office in some Church.

12. They hold, that it is as great an injury to force a congregation or Church
to maintain as their Pastor, with tithes and such like donations, that person
that either is not able to instruct them, or that refuses in his own person
ordinarily to do it, as to force a man to maintain one for his wife, that
either is not a woman, or that refuses in her own person to do the duties
of a wife unto him?

13. They hold, that by Gods Ordinance there should be also in every Church a
Doctor, whose special office should be to instruct by opening the sense of the
Scripture to the Congregation (and that particularly) in the maine grounds and
principles of Religion.

CHAP. IIII. Concerning the Elders.
1 FOr as much as through the malice of Satan, there are and will be in the
best Churches many disorders and Scandals committed, that redound to the
reproach of the Gospel and are a stumbling block to many, both without and
within the Church, and since they judge it repugnant to the word of God, that any
Minister should be a Sole Ruler, and as it were a Pope so much as in one
Parish, (much more that he should be one over a whole Diocese, Province or
Nation) they hold that by Gods Ordinance the Congregation should make choice of
other officers, as Assistants unto the Ministers in the spiritual regiment of
the congregation, who are by office jointly with the ministers of the word to
be as Monitors and Overseers of the manners and conversation of all the
Congregation, and one of another; that so every one may be more weary of their
ways, and that the Pastors and Doctors may better attend to prayer and
Doctrine, and by their means may be made better acqainted with the estate of
the people, when others eyes besides their own shall wake and watch over them.

2 They hold, that such only are to be chosen to this Office, as are the
gravest, honestest, discreetest, best grounded in Religion, and the Ancientest
Professors thereof in the Congregation, such as the whole Congregation do
approve of and respect, for their wisdom, holiness, and honesty, and such
also (if it be possible) as are of civil note and respect in the world, and
able (without any burden to the Church) to maintain them selves, either by
their lands, or any other honest civil trade of life, neither do they think
it so much disgrace to the policy of the Church, that tradesmen and artificers,
(endowed with such qualities as are above specified) should be admitted to be*
Overseers of the Church, as it is that persons both ignorant of Religion and
all good letters, and in all respects for person, quality, and state, as base
and vile, as the basest in the Congregation, should be admitted to be Pastors
and Teachers of a Congregation. And if it be apparent that God (who always
blessed his own Ordinances) does often even in the eyes of Kings and Nobles,
make honorable the Ministers and Pastors of his Churches upon which he has
bestowed Spiritual gifts and graces though for birth, education, presence,
outward, state and maintenance, they be most base and contemptible, so he will
as well in the eyes of holy men, make this Office, which is many degrees
inferior to the other, precious and honorable, even for the Divine calling
and Ordinance sake.

CHAP. V. Concerning the censures of the Church.
1 THey hold, that the spiritual keys of the Church are by Christ, committed
to the aforesaid spiritual Officers and Governors, and unto none other: which
keys they hold that they are not to be put to this use, to lock up the
crowns, swotds, or scepters of Princes and civil States, or the civil
rights, prerogatives, and immunities of civil subjects in the things of this
life, or to use them as picklocks to open withal, men's treasuries and coffers,
or as keys of prisons, to shut up the bodies of men; for they think that such
a power and authority Ecclesiastical is fit only for the Antechrist of Rome,
and the consecrated governors of his Synagogues, who having no Word of God
which is the sword of the Spirit, to defend his and their usurped jurisdiction
over the Christian world, does unlawfully usurp the lawful civil sword and
power of the Monarchs and Princes of the earth, thereby forcing men to subject
themselves to his spiritual vassaladge and service, and abusing thereby the
spiritull keys and jurisdiction of the Church.

2 They hold, that by virtue of these keys, they are not to make any curious
Inquisitions into the secret or hidden vices or crimes of men, extorting from
them a confession of those faults that are concealed from themselves and
others; or to proceed to molest any man upon secret suggestions, private
suspicion, or uncertain fame, or for such crimes as are in question whether
they be crimes or no; But they are to proceed, only against evident and
apparent crimes, such as are either granted to be such of all civil honest
men: or of all true Christians, or at least such, as they are able, by evidence
of the word of God, to convince to be sins, to the conscience of the
offender; As also such as have been either publicly committed, or having been
committed in secret, are by some good means brought to light, and which the
delinquent denying, they are able by honest and sufficient testimony to prove
against him.

3 They hold, that when he that has committed a scandalous crime comes before
them, and is convinced of the same, they ought not (after the manner of our
Ecclesiastical Courts) scorn, deride, and taunt, and revile him, with odious
and contumelious speeches, eye him with big and stern looks, procure Proctors
to to make personal invectives against him, make him dance attendance from
Court day to Court day, and from term to term, frowning at him in presence,
and laughting at him behind his back: but they are (though he be never so
obstinate and perverse) to use him brotherly, not giving the least personal
reproaches, or threats) but laying open unto him the nature of his sin by the
light of Gods Word, are only by denouncing the judgments of God against him,
to terrify him, and so to move him to repentance.

4 They hold, that if the party offending be their civil superior, that then
they are to use ever throughut the whole carriage of their censure, all civil
complements, offices and reverence due unto him, that they are not to presume
to convent him before the, but are themselves to go in all civil and humble
manner unto him, to stand bare before him, to bow unto him, to give him all
civil titles belonging unto him; And if he be a King and supreme ruler,
they are to kneel down before him, and in the humblest manner to censure his
faults; so that he may see apparently that they are not carried with the least
spice of malice against his Person, but only with zeal of the health and
salvation of his soul.

5 They hold, that the Ecclesiastical Officers laying to the charge of any
man, any error, heresy, or false opinion whatsoever do stand bound
themselves, first to prove that he holds such an error or heresy; and
secondly to prove directly unto him that it is an error by the word of God,
and that it deserves such a censure before they do proceed against him.

6 They hold, that the governors of the Church ought with all patience and
quietness, hear what every offender can possibly say for himself, either for
qualification, defense, apology, or justification of any supposed crime or
error whatsoever; and they ought not to proceed to censure the grossest
offense that is, until the offender have said as much for himself in his
defense as he possible is able. And they hold it an evident character of a
corrupt ecclesiastical government, where the parties convented may not have
full liberty to speak for themselves, considering that the more liberty is
granted to speak in a bad cause, (especially before those that are in authority
and of judgment) the more the iniquity of it will appear, and the more the
Justice of their sentence will shine.

7 They hold, that the oath ex Officio, whereby Popish and English
Ecclesiastical Governors, either upon some secret informations, or
suggestions, or private supitions go about to bind men's consciences, to
accuse themselves and their friends, of such crimes or imputations as cannot by
any direct course of Law be proved against them, and whereby they are drawn to
be instruments of many heavy crosses upon themselves and their friends, and
that often for those actions that they are persuaded in their consciences are
good and holy. I say, that they hold, that such an Oath (on the urgers part) is
most damnable and Tyrannous, against the very law of Nature, devised by
Antichrist, through the inspiration of the Devil; That by means thereof the
Professors and Practisers of the true Religion, might either in their weakness
by perjury damn their own souls, or be drawn to reveal to the enemies of
Christianity, those secret Religious Acts and Deeds, that being in the
persuasion of their consciences) for the advancement of the Gospel, will be a
means of heavy sentences of condemnation against themselves and their dearest
friends.

8 They hold, that Ecclesiastical Officers have no power to proceed in censure
against any crime of any person, after that he shall freely acknowledge the
same, and profess his hearty penitency for it; And that they may not, for any
crime whatsoever lay any bodily or pecuniary mulct upon them, or impose upon
them any ceremonial mark or note of shame, such as is the white sheet, or any
such like; or take fees for any cause whatsoever, but are to accept of as a
sufficient satisfaction, a private submission, and acknowledgement if the crime
be private, and a public, if the crime be public and notorious.

9 They hold, that if a member of the Church be obstinate, and show no signs
and tokens of repentance of that Crime, that if they by evidence of Scripture
have coevinced it to be a crime, that then by their Ecclesiastical authority,
they are to denounce him to be as yet no member of the Kingdom of Heaven, nor
of that Congregation, and so are to leave him to God and the King. And this is
all the Ecclesiastical Authority and jurisdiction that any Spiritual Officers
of the Church are to use against any man, for greatest crime that can be
committed.

10 They hold, that the Officers of the Church are not to proceed unto
excommunication against against any man, without the consent of the whole
Congregation it self, first called for in public Assembly.

11 They hold, that the Minister or any other particular Officer offending, is
as subject to the censures, as any other of the Congregation.

12 They hold, that if any member of the Congregation having committed a
srandalous sin, shall of self forsake the worship of GOD, and the Spiritual
Communion with the Church; that the Church shall then send for the said person,
and if he refuse to come, they shall (after much seeking and long patience)
openly declare that he has no part nor portion in the holy things of God among
them; that then the Ecclesiastical Officers hove no authority or jurisdiction
over him, but only the Civil Magistrate, and those unto whom he owes civil
subjection, as Parents Masters, Landlords, etc.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the Civil Magistrate.
1 THey hold, that the civil Magistrate, as he is a civil Magistrate has and
ought to have supreme power over all the Churches within his dominions, in all
causes whatsoever. And yet they hold, that as he is a Christian, he is a member
of some one particular Congregation, and ought to be as subject to the
spiritual regiment thereof prescribed by Christ in his word, as the meanest
subject in the kingdom, and they hold that this subjection is no more
derogatory to his supremacy, then the subjection of his body in his body in
sickness to Physicians, can be said to be said to be derogatory thereunto.

2 They hold, that these civil Magistrates are the greatest enemies to their
own supremacy, that in whole or in part, communicate the vertute and power
thereof, to any ecclesiastical officers. And that there cannot be imagined by
the wit of man, a more direct means to check-mate the same, then to make them
Lords and Princes upon earth, to invist them with civil jurisdiction and
authority, and to conform the State and limits of their jurisdiction, to the
state of Kings and bounds of Kingdoms.

3 They hold, that there should be no ecclesiastical officer in the Church so
high, but that he ought to be subject unto, and punishable by the meanest
civil officer in a kingdom, city or town, not only for common crimes, but
even for the abuse of the ecclesiastical offices, yea, they hold, that they
ought to be more punishable then any other subject whatsoever, if they shall
offend against either civil or Ecclesiastical Laws.

4 They hold, that the Pope is that Antichrist, and therefore that Antichrist
because being but an Ecclesiastical officer he does in the hight of the pride
of his heart make claim unto, and usurp the Supremacy of the Kings and civil
Rulers of the Earth. And they hold, that all defenders of the Popish Faith, all
indeverours of reconcilement with that Church, all plotters for toleration of
the Popish Religion, all countenancers and maintainers of Seminary Priests, and
professed Catholics, and all denyers that the Pope is that Antichrist, are
secret enemies to the Kings Supremacy.

5 They hold, that all Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Officials, etc. have their
Offices and Functions only by will and pleasure of the king and civil States
of this Realm; and they hold, that whosoever holds that the King may not
without sin remove these Officers out of the Church, and dispose of their
Temporalities and maintenance according to his own pleasure, or that these
Offices are jure divine, and not only or merely jure human^: That all such
deny a principle part of the Kings Supremacy.

6 They hold, that not one of these opinions can be proved to be contrary to
the word of God; and that if they might have leave, that they are able to
answer all that has been written against any one of them.

FINIS.

