THE DOCTRINE AND DISCIPLINE Of the KIRK of SCOTLAND, As it was formerly set
forth by public authority, And at this present commanded there to be
practiced in the said KIRK, Anno 1641. TOGETHER, With some Acts of general
Assemblies clearing and confirming the same: AS ALSO An Act of Parliament by
the King and three Estates of Scotland, for rectifying of the said Discipline.
THE FIRST AND SECOND BOOK.

According to all that I show thee, after the pattern of the Tabernacle, --
even so shall ye make it, EXODUS 25.9. Printed by Rob. Young his Majesty's
Printer for Scotland, and are to be sold by John Sweeting, at the sign of the
Angel in Popes-head-Allie, 1641.

THE PREFACE.
AFter these dark and dreadful days of barbarous blindness, and
superstition, wherein, by the deceit of dumb dogs, bloody wars for many
years had covered the face of this land, it pleased the bountifulness of God,
in that riches of his love, as not regarding the time of former ignorance, with
a mavelous mercy to visit this Realm, by sending, not one Jonah to such a
Ninivie, or one Phillip to such a Samaria, but first few, since many, and all
faithful, holy, wise, frack to preach the Gospel in Scotland, as in another
Antiochia. At the terror of these Trumpets, like smoke before the wind, were
quickly driven away, not only the darkness of Idolatry, and damnable
dissension among the members of this kingdom, wherein consisted the strength of
that bloody beast, by whose tyrannous cruelty, and deceivable ways, Princes
and People, were shamefully abused, and often compelled with the claws of
violence to shed the blood of the Saints; yea, to keep the book of the
unchangeable Testament of Jesus Christ, under the cover of a strange tongue, as
a clasped boeke that it should not be read: but also, many of that
Antichristian sect, who in the time of persecution had used the curious Arts of
that kingdom of lies, and service of Baal, were turned to the truth of God, and
preached the word of his grace, so that in a short time that Romish Jericho
fell, the people that sat in darkness saw a great light, and where the power
of Satan had prevailed, the Throne of Christ was set up, the word increased,
and the Lord added to the Kirk from day to day, such as were to be saved; so
magnifying the strength of his own arm against his enemies, in that
prosperous time, that neither proud Anakims, nor crafty Gibeonites, were able
to stand before the Spirit that spoke in these men of God, when they were but
few: and though they walked in the flesh, yet did they not war after the
flesh, but by the spiritual arms of bold Preaching, reverent ministration of
the Sacraments, and sincere ruling of the flock of Christ with discretion, and
without partiality, and always praying, and often fasting, they banished
Atheism, Barbaritie, and Papistrie, quenched the fire of contentions,
prevented dangers, planted the Kirkes, teached and persuaded great and small,
poor and rich, and persons of all estates, to profess the Evangel. And
howsoever they were daily crossed with deceit, and opposition, so led they
diversity in the hand of amity, that all things concerning the great work of
that glorious reformation, to the praise of God, and the comfort of the godly,
were wisely and firmly appointed. In those happy days the servants of the
Lord, in love were like Jonathan and David; in courage like Gideons 300. in
unity like the Saints that first received the Gospel; in care and diligence
like the builders of the wall of Jerusalem, and so marching like the Lords
Armies. Then were they neither despised nor abhorred but received as the Angels
of God; and yet in the Lords troops, neither for work, nor war, were there to
be found any pompous Prelate, Abbot, Prior, Bishop, or Archbishop, that loves
to shine in dignity, and rejoice in rent, with the contempt of their brethren,
and neglect of the Lords service. O Scotland! what was then thy felicity? Then
did thou sing and shout with the voice of joy: God will arise, and his
enemies shall be scattered; they also that hate him shall stye before him. Thou
have brought a Vine out of Egypt. Thou have cast out the heathen, and planted
it. Thou made room for it, and did cause it to take root, and it filled
the land, etc.

The superstitious ignorant, the perverse Papist the crafty Parasite, and the
self-loving Politian, the Christian colored Belly-god, and the loose-liver,
the time-server, and all the sorts of that filthy sect, that hates to be
reformed, often conspired against the building of that glorious Temple, but all
in vain; for by the power of God they were disappointed. Yet in these last
days some dangerous Dalilah has betrayed Sampson; and told wherein his
strength lay, with no less hurt to this Kirk, then was performed by the false
brethren, who were craftily sent in, and crept in privily amongst the
faithful, to spy out their liberty which they had in Christ Jesus, that they
might bring them into bondage. It is clearly known to many in this Kingdom,
and in foreign parts, what a wall for defense, and a band for peace, and
progress of the Gospel, was that heavenly discipline, whereby brotherly
amity, and sacred harmony of Prince, Pastors and Professors, were so
continued and increased that all, as one man, did stand together for the
Doctrine, Sacraments, and Kirk government, against the adversaries, either
lurking or professed. It was the hedge of the Lords vineyard, and the hammer
whereby the horns both of adversaries, and disobeyers, were beaten and broken.
And of this happy mean it might be truly said, that in the strength of it,
more then by our own virtue, were we strong and prevailed: And to sharpen our
love it is thus written by a stranger, but a friend. Albeit it be necessary,
that they who have their City in heaven, repose altogether thereupon, yet
nothing should let us to behold, as it were, heaven upon earth, that is, the
power of God in his own, etc. By most evident reasons I judge the Kirk of
Scotland to be of this sort; In the which, the many mighty, and long
continuing assaults of Satan, the like whereof, as I think, no Nation
sustained, could neither defile the purity of doctrine, nor bow the rule of
right discipline. This is a great gift of God, that he has brought together to
Scotland, both the purity of Religion, and Discipline, whereby, as in a bond,
the doctrine is safely kept. I pray and beseech you so to keep these two
together, as that ye may be assured, that if the one fall, the other can no
ways long stand.

It cannot be denied, but by the space of fifty years and above, Scotland
ran well, the Doctrine was in such sort preached, and Discipline appointed,
and practiced; yea, both professed, established, and constantly defended; not
only by those faithful men that went before, but by them who followed, and
yet live, in such concord of Kirk and policy, that the like thereof is
scarcely to be found in Story, or seen with eyes in any Nation, since the
revelation of the Mystery of the Gospel to the first Apostles. But now of
late, with pity of speak it, no uncircumcised Philistim, or Assyrian, but
some of the Disciples, desirous to sit at the right hand, and pretending to
restore again the Kingdom to Israel, the Kirk to her old rents, and
privileges, at first did mince and sparingly speak, but afterward practice
and loudly preach; that, except after the manner of other Nations, the Kirk of
Scotland admitted again Prelates, the Princes of that wicked Hierarchy, with
some untrusty traditions, and change of things indifferent, as they term them,
but in effect the disgracing of Pastors, ejecting of Elders, destroying of
Assemblies, and Fashioning, Doctrine, Discipline, Sacraments, Confessions of
Faith, Forms of prayer, and all in a new shape; it cannot be saved, nor
vindicate from poverty and contempt, but by the means of this malady
obtruded for a remedy. Not only these evils, howsoever at the beginning
seeming small, has so grown, that like nettles in a foul ground, they not
only bud and bloome; but abundantly bring forth divisions; dissensions, and
unkindly contentions among brethren, to the great joy of the enemies, and
grief and offense of them that fear God. This strange fire has entered into
the City of God, and horribly burns on: and yet is it so, that such as may,
will not, and such as are willing, cannot, and they that should be first, are
least zealous and forward to offer their pains, either to clear and defend
the truth, to pacisie their brethren, or to plead the cause of Discipline
against the calumnies and cavillations of such as by promoting of novelties,
seeks promotion; but uncharitable speeches, and pestiferous pens of
dissension, fretting as a canker, increases unto more ungedlinesse; dangerous
dissolution, the daughter of division, and the undoubted forerunner of
desolation daily proclaims the defacing, if not the fall of this reformed Kirk.

As if no care should be taken that the Spouse of Jesus Christ; who so long
like a chaste Virgin has shined in purity before her Lord in this land, should
now be stained with Corahs ambition, Balaams wages, and Esau's profaneness,
Altar against Altar, and Brother against Brother. In this case, so pitiful,
and good cause so universally neglected, if not deserted; it should be our
hearts desire, and prayer to God to be found faithful, when with grief we may
justly say of the old friends, and new adversaries of Discipline. It is time
for the Lord to work, for they have destroyed thy Laws: And of her constant
friends boldly avow, Therefore love they thy commandments above gold, yea
above most fine gold. Could this pragmaticall course of dangerous desertion
from a truth so long professed, whereof none, or few can be ignorant, work in
our hearts, now almost lukewarm, a laborious love, and holy zeal for that
truth whereof we are persuaded, we might then be fully assured, That as it was
said in the book of the wars of the Lord, what he did in the red sea, and in
the brooks of Arnon, the banners of his power being displayed for Israel, as
well at their entry into Canaan against the Nations, as at their coming out
of Egypt against Pharaoh: so through the wonderful working of his equivalent
power, and unchangeable love, it should be remembered in the Records of the
reformed Kirkes of Scotland, that what he did first in substance, that he did
last in ceremony, making the end of his own work against Apostates from
Discipline, professed by themselves, and in that respect renters of brotherly
unity, and dividers of brethren, answerable to the happy beginnings thereof
against cruel persecutors, and wicked Heretics. Is the Lord changed, because
he changes the manner of his working? God forbid. For although he declare not
in out times who belong to him by miraculous fire sent from heaven, as in the
days of Eliah, the earth opens not her mouth, as in the days of Corah; he
raines not showers of Brimstone upon the Sodomites of this age he turns not
such as look back into pillars of salt to season others, neither is his
favor manifested toward his own secret ones, in earthly and visible
blessings, so wonderfully as of old; yet the God of Israel is our God, and the
God of the old Testament is the God of the New, and better Testament, having
still a secret and equivalent providence most wisely disposed, and framed for
the weal of his Kirk according to the diversity of the ages succeeding one
after another. So that no wise heart perceiving the course thereof could wish
another then the present, howsoever the folly of Infidelity blindes men to
affect the miracles, case, and outward speritie of former generations, and if
these fail, to cast themselves headlong in desperation, defection, or
Atheism. Yea, because he works not as before, in their haste, they conclude,
that he works not at all. It were our wisdom, who live in the last times,
rather to determine with our selves, that as in great and extraordinary
plagues, small and common diseases are swallowed up; so will the Lord, leaving
all other warnings, have all ears to be lift up in fear, to the hearing of
the loud Trumpet of the Gospel, summoning all flesh before the judgment seat
of Christ, that they may most of all tremble at that last sentence, which
debarres men for ever from the face of God, and in the mean time, will have
the life of his own children hid with Christ, that in a holy conformity with
him, they may by many afflictions enter into his Kingdom. As the present
prosperity of the common sort does make their fear the greater; so the
crosses of the Kirk should make them with the greater courage to lift up their
heads, and while the day of their redemption draws near, to walk with the
greater fidelity in their vocations, building the house of God with the one
hand, and fighting with the other, against enemies of all sorts, especially
these Sanballats, and Tobiahs, who labor to make other Kirkes abroad, and a
great number of the Pastors and People at home, to think that a great part of
the walls of Christ's Kirk, builded within this Nation, since our deliverie
from the Romish captivity, are so weak, that if a Fox shall go up upon them,
he should break them down. And now forsooth the new work rising in place of
the old to be more firm, and of the old foundation, when the mystery of
iniquity, after long working in secret was seen manifested, there was a new
face brought upon the Kirk. The pure fountains of holy Scripture troubled
with the puddle of trifling traditions, ceremonies brought in, and
will worship, and damnable Idolatry set up, Apostolical Discipline abolished,
and Popish policy exalted. Yet such is the wilfulness of men, knowing the
weakness of error, and force of the truth, that multitudes in the succeeding
times have not blushed to bring in these novelties under the name of anoient
verities; yea, without shame, or fear, to affirm that this last was the
primitive and natural face of their mother. It may be seen in these days,
that after a large time, this second mystery working under cover, yet always
perceived by some in this Land, is now at last brought to light, according to
the warnings of the wise watchmen of this Kirk, and has changed the comely
countenance of Christ's Spouse, further then the lovers of the truth would have
thought, into the Antichristian complexion of that whore of Babel, and without
Gods preventing mercy, and our speedy repentance, the loss of a great
substance for a foul conformity; and yet, howsoever all men cry, that the
ancient way was the best, and as they love honesty, they will be the sons of
constancy, and firmly retain the ancient Discipline of the reformed Kirk of
Scotland. They have renounced nothing, they have abjured nothing; yea, if any
whisper of a fall from the first love, they are quickly marked, as wilful
pleading for shadows, and making of schisms: and so such as would strive to
stand, must suffer for their fault, who has wrought the change. As that old
Painter, intending to represent the body of Hercules, expressed nothing of the
lineaments of his face, stature, or members, contenting himself with the
resemblance of the Lions skin, which he was wont to carry, as the badge of
his strength, and Trophie of his honor: So some of his Prentices, for the
beautiful face of this Kirk, and heavenly proportion of her drivine
Discipline, do set before the eyes of men of this time, who never saw the fair
face, nor felt the strength of ancient order, that roaring Lions skin of
Episcopacie, the greatest monster that this Kirk had conflicted with, in the
most part of her meetings, and whose skin within these few years was commonly
repute amongst the rest of the spoils taken from her enemies. As it was the
courage of wise Cato against the bragges of arrogant Greeks, perverting all
verity and antiquity of History, and usurping the honor of the invention of
all things, to write a book de Originibus, for vindicating the truth from
usurping presumption: And as in later times many have happily labored in
discovering the Roman inventions, and bringing to light the beginnings and
progress of error and idolatry, creeping in and corrupting that Kirk; It
were likewise to be wished, for the weal of this Kirk, and her cause of
controversies, that the Acts of the general Assemblies, so often visited and
prepared for public use, were now according to the intention and care of the
Kirk, together with the books of Discipline, which should be lights for
direction, and laws for dicision of controversies arising thereabout,
faithfully perused and printed.

For the present necessity, ye have here the first and second books of
Discipline, with certain Acts of the Kirk for clearing your doubts, and
confirming the truth against such, as delight in vatles of obscurity, and
circuits of circumvention. As there was never any miracle wrought for confuting
of Atheists because every work of God is a miracle against them; so there needs
no argument, to stop the mouths of adversaries for Discipline, who would seem
to stand to their own oath and ancient profession, because every line almost of
these books, will be an argument against them. If truth shall obtrude her
self to the knowledge of men, not suffering them to be so forgetful and
ignorant, as perhaps they would seem, God forbid that any should think that
his resolution to be rich and stately, should so suppress his light, and stay
his mind from thinking that true, which we would wish were false, that were
the sin of a witty malignant: Haec est summa delicti nolle agnoscere quod
ignorare non potes: It were much better, that as many as through ignorance of
the established order in the Kirk have been misled, would now repent their
negligence and dangerous course, when they shall see a good daughter of an
evil mother. This truth brought to light to be the fruit of our division, As
persecution in former times has brought forth purity, and heresy the truth of
doctrine; so has this fit of distraction among brethren brought this draught
of Discipline to the view of the world; to so many as have stood, by the grace
of God, to the defense of their profession, a strong confirmation; and to such
as are tossed with doubtings, a clear resolution. Let it be no derogation to
the truth here expressed, nor to the labors of these faithful Fathers, who
penned and put in Register the same, but a great imputation and guiltiness
lying upon the succeeding age, who deprived themselves of such a benefit, and
the Kirk of such a defense. Though the book of Gods covenant lay long hid in
the Temple, yet Josiah rejoiced when it came to light. Very Jezabel could not
be stayed from magnifying of Baal by all the dashes he suffered from heaven
and earth: And should not Christians be ashamed to be less affectionate to
Verity, then she to Idolatry, and namely a truth concerning Christ's Kingly
Office, and the Ministers of his Kingdom; without the truth whereof we can
neither have comfort of his Prophecy nor Priesthood. It is the Lord his great
mercy, that in the reformation of this Kirk he has been preached, and
professed, King, Priest, and Prophet. And it shall be the glory of this Land
thankefully to acknowledge that incomprehensible benefit, and always carefully
to keep whole without rent, and to carry a reverent estimation to the great
work of the glorious reformation of this Kirk. For this effect ye must arm
your selves against the Lords of tongues, who have said, with our tongues will
we prevail. Of that generation some will dash you by the name odious of
Puritan, and yet one of that Lordly sort is forced to confess, that Scots
Professors are unto him Puritanes from the form of external government, but
not from Religion, which both is and may be one and the same, where the
external form of government is different and contrary; who albeit they be
miserably taken with that their own form, yet in the rest of the doctrine
they are sufficiently Orthodox. Others, like wicked creditors destroying the
obligation whereby they are bound for debtfull obedience, summarily deny, that
ever this Kirk had any approved discipline, except that which is printed and
placed in the Psalm books. A third sort, making such Pastors, who at the
beginning were called Super-intendents, to be figures, patterns, forerunners,
or lievtenants of Bishops, such as now are, would move the world to believe
that they follow the first Discipline. A fourth kind, wandering in the
wilderness of unbounded indifferency, takes upon them to determine all doubts
of discipline, by honor, ease, or gain. And some, of Gallio's disposition it
may be, hidly esteeming all Religion a matter of speech, spare not to
proclaim, that striving about such trifles is needless. For your
encouragement against such, and others of the like disposition, it has pleased
the Lord to set on work our pens; and in his own time, if presumption be
obstinate, he will inspire them with greater love of his truth, to whom he
has given knowledge in measure above them who has put to their hand; and
increase their knowledge, in whose hearts he has wrought some love, howsoever
their knowledge be far inferior to many of theirs who stand for the truth.

It is to be remembered, that the true friends of discipline are the Ministers
of the blessed Evangel of Jesus Christ, agreeing in doctrine, and
administration of the Sacraments, and the people of this Realm that profess
Christ, as he is now offered in his Evangel, and do communicate with the holy
Sacraments (as in the reformed Kirk of this Realm they are publicly
administered) according to the confession of Faith; and that such as were
clothed with the Kirkrents, or greedily gaped after the same, as Abbots,
Priors, Prioresses, Bishops, Commendatairs, and other sacrilegious usurpers of
Kirk-livings, as they had place in policy, and credit in Court, or Council,
either professedly or craftily, have resisted the course of the Gospel, and the
discipline thereof, as may be seen in these conflicts, whereby the Kirk has
ever striven for deliverance from their usurpation; till now the zeal of
benefices having devoured the zeal of discipline, old opposites are thought to
be her most loving familiars, and her old friends her greatest enemies. A
strange Case, and yet very casual for the Kirk by seeking worldly preferment,
to lose spiritual servants, as one said, Never a Minister got a great
Benefice, but he spilt it, or it spilt him.

Item, that under the name of discipline is to be understood not only the
particulars expressed in these two books, but also the Acts, Constitutions,
and practices agreed upon, and recorded in the Registers of the General and
Provincial Assemblies, Presbyteries, and Kirk Sessions.

Thirdly, to consider the different conditions of the Kirk in her infancy, in
her growing, and in her ripe age, and accordingly to accommodate the discipline
to practice, as the condition of the time permitted or required, and wisely to
distinguish betwixt the Kirks purpose and intention in every particular, and
their possibility to perform and practice, as circumstances concurred, or were
contrary: As for example, they intended resident Ministers, one or more, as
Kirks were of largeness, with Elders and Deacons. Item, Doctors of Divinity
for Schools, Assemblies general, provincial, weekly meetings for the
interpretation of the Scripture, which afterward at Edinburgh the 7. day of
July, 1579. were judged to be a Presbytery: And they abhorred Anarchie,
Oligarchie, and Hierarchy: but with great pains and frequent meetings was
abuses condemned, and order established; so that for lack of ordinary Ministers
planted, and in that respect lack of lawful Assemblies, they were forced
occasionally to use Super-intendents, and Visiters of Countries, who afterward
in the general Assembly holden at Edinburgh the 4. of August 1590. when
Presbyters were well and orderly constitute, were declared neither to be
necessary, nor expedient.

Fourthly, the first and second book of Discipline, penned by the Mininisters
of the reformed Kirk, and the first book at the charge and commandment of
the great Council of Scotland, subscribed by the greatest part thereof, and
afterward by many more, as may be seen in the Acts of the Kirk: the second
book standing insert in public Register of the Kirk, ordained to be
subscribed by diverse Acts of the Assembly, and confirmed by practice, are both
for one end: To wit, to direct reformation in Doctrine, Sacraments, and
exercise of Discipline, and to resist Idolatry and corruptions. The first has
more particular purposes: The second sets down more fully, and particularly the
jurisdiction of the Kirk as it agrees, or is distinguished from the Civil
Policy, the Office-bearers of the Kirk with their duty, the Assemblies of the
Kirk, and distinctions thereof; the Patrimony of the Kirk, and distribution
thereof; the Office of a Christian Magistrate in the Kirk; certain heads of
reformation, with the utility of the said books, etc. Item, either of the said
books confirm the other, and neither of them abolish, or innovate the other.

ACTS OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY FOR CLEARING AND CONFIRMING THE SAID BOOKS OF
DISCIPLINE, AND AGAINST THE ADVERSARIES THEREOF.
For the First Book.
BEcause the lives of Ministers ought to be such, Edinburgh Iul. 30. 1562.
as thereby others may be provoked to godliness, It becomes them first to be
tried, after the trial of the Superintendents, if any man have whereof to
accuse them in life, doctrine, or execution of their office. After the
Ministers, must the Elders of every Kirk be tried, etc. In that whole ordinance
anent trial, and in the Constitution following anent the subjection of all
sorts of Ministers to the Discipline of the Kirk, there is no mention of
Bishops, or any sorts of Prelates, as not acknowledged to have any place in the
Ministry of the Reformed Kirk.

Mr. Alexander Gordone, called Bishop of Galloway, Ibidem.
making petition for the Superintendencie of Galloway, was refused, because he
had not observed the order of calling Superintendents, and in the mean time
was required to subscribe the book of Discipline. Where it is evident that by
his Episcopacy he might exercise no Ministerial duty, and although he was
presented by the Lords, yet they would not admit him to be Super-intendent,
except he subscribed the book of Discipline. And let this be remembered for
the subscription of others, of whom there may be seen a great number at the
end of the said book.

It is concluded by the whole Ministers assembled, Ibidem.
That all Ministers shall be subject to their Super-intendents, in all lawful
Admonitions, as is prescribed as well in the book of Discipline, as in the
election of Super-intendents. Here observe two things, First, that
Super-intendents might not do what pleased them: Secondly, that obedience to
be performed to them was enjoined by the Kirk, and set down in the book of
Discipline, and in the election of Super-intendents.

A Minister lawfully admitted, Ibidem.
shall not be removed, but according to the order of the book of Discipline;
so that the said book is both the warrant of orderly admission, and orderly
removing. According to the fourth head of the book of Discipline concerning
the lawful election of Ministers, Edinburgh December. 25. 1562.
the Assembly ordaines, That Inhibition shall be made to all and sundry
persons, now serving in the Ministry, who have not entered into their charges
by the order in this same head appointed. And this Act to have strength as well
against them that are called Bishops, as others pretending any Ministry within
the Kirk.

It was thought needful, Edinburgh December. 25. 1563.
for further confirmation of the book of Discipline, that the Earl Marshal,
Lord Ruthwen, Lord Secretar, the Commendator of Kilwinning, the Bishop of
Orknay, Clerk of Register, Justice Clerk Mr. Henry Balnaves, David Forrester,
and Mr. George Buchanan, or any three, or four of them, should over-see the
said book, and diligently consider the contents thereof, noting their
judgment in writ, and report the same to the next Assembly general of the
Kirk: or, if any Parliament chance to be in the mean time, that they report
their judgments to the Lords of the Articles, that shall happen to be chosen
before the said Parliament. By these it is evident, that our Kirk acknowledged
the first book to be the book of Discipline, and no ways to be abolished,
but for the use of the Kirk to be further confirmed.

For the second Book of Discipline.
A Nent the causes of the Kirk, Edinburgh Junii 25. 1564.
and jurisdiction thereof, the Assembly appointed, the lord of Dunn, Mr. John
Winram, Mr. John Spottiswod, Mr. John Willock, Super-intendents; Mr. John Row,
George Hay, Robert Pont, Christopher Gudman, Thomas Drumond, John Knox, John
Craig, John Rutherford, George Buckhanan, Robert Hammiltoun, Clement Little,
the lairds of Lundie, Elephiustoun, Karnall, Kers, and Thomas Scot of
Abbottishall, to conveen the morn after the preaching, and to reason and
confer anent the said causes and jurisdiction.

Ordaines an humble supplication to be made to the Lords of secret Council,
anent the commission of jurisdiction, Edinburgh December. 25. 1566.
supponed granted to the Bishop of S. Andrews, to the effect, that their
honors may stay the same, in respect that these causes, for the most part,
judged by his usurped authority pertain to the Kirk, and howbeit for hope of
good things the Kirk did over-see the Queens Majesty's Commission given to such
men, who for the most part were our brethren, yet can the Assembly no ways be
content that the Bishop of Saint Andrews, a conjured enemy to Christ, use that
jurisdiction; as also in respect of that colored commission, he might usurp
again, his old usurped authority, and the same might be the mean to oppress
the whole Kirk by his corrupt Judgment.

The whole Assembly thought meet that certain brethren be appointed to
concur at all times with such persons of Parliament, Edinburgh December. 25.
1567.
of secret Council, as my Lord Regents Grace has nominate for such affairs
as pertain to the Kirk and jurisdiction thereof, and also for decision of
questions that may occur in the mean time, viz. Mrs. John Knox, and John
Craig Ministers of Edinburgh: The Super-intendents of Angus, and Lothiane,
David Borthuike, Thomas Mackcalzan, David Lindsay Minister at Leith, George Hay
at Ruthven, and John Row at S. Iohnstonn.

Letters directed from the Assembly by their Commissioners, Edinburgh Junii 25.
1567.
to the Earls, Lords, and Barons, viz. the Earls, Huntly, Argyle, Cassels,
Rothes, Marshal, Munteith, and Glencarne; to the Lords, Boyd, Drumond, Sanchar,
Here Is, Yester, Cathcart, Mr. of Grahame, Fleming, Levingston, Forbes, Salton,
Glames, O gilvis, Mr. of Sinclare, Gray, Oliphant, Methven, Innermeth, M. of
Somervell; Barons, Lochinvar, Garlies, Shireff of Air, Glenurquher, Sir Ia.
Hamiltoun, Bonington; Commendatares, Arbroth Kilwinning, Dunfermling, Saint
Colms, Newbottel, Halyrood house, showing them that the Assembly had of long
time traveled both in public and private, with all estates, continually
craving of their honors in special, that the course of the Evangell of
salvation, now once of the liberal mercy of God restored to this Realm, might
continue to all their comforts, and their posterities. And that for the
furthering and maintaining thereof a perfect policy and full liberty might be
granted to this reformed Kirk within Scotland, etc.

An Article presented to my Lord Regent, Edinburgh Iul. 1. 1568.
That his Grace would cause such as are appointed of the Council, convene with
them that are appointed of the Assembly, to confer anent the jurisdiction of
the Kirk and to decide therein, that time and place may be condiscended upon to
that effect, and that it be done before the Parliament.

My Lord Regents Grace ordaines the persons nominate in the act of Parliament
to convene the time of the next chekker, Edinburgh Iul. 1. 1569.
and desine and limitate the jurisdiction of the Kirk, according to the word of
God, and act of Parliament made there anent Extract. act. secretarii consilii,
Alexander Hay.

Articles pertaining to the jurisdiction of the Kirk to be proponed to the
Regents Grace and secret Council, Edinburgh Martu 5. 1570.
and sought to be appointed by them. 1. That the Kirk have the judgment of
true and false Religion, of doctrine, heresies, and such like, annexed to the
preaching of the word, and ministrations of the Sacraments. 2. Election,
examination, and admission of them, that are admitted to the Ministry, or
other functions of the Kirk, charge of souls, and Ecclesiastical benefices,
the suspension, and deprivation of them therefrom for lawful causes. 3. All
things concerning the Discipline of the Kirk which stand in correction of
manners, admonitions, excommunications, and receiving to repentance. 4. The
judgment of Ecclesiastical matters betwixt persons that are in the Kirk, and
especially among them that are constitute in the Ministry, as well concerning
beneficiarie causes, as others. 5. Jurisdiction to proceed by admonitions, to
the process of excommunication, if need be, against them that rob the
patrimony of the Kirk, pertaining to the Ministry, or otherwise intromet
therewith unjustly, whereby the Ministry is in danger to decay by occasion of
the poverty of the Ministers. 6. And because the conjunction of Marriages
pertaines to the Ministry, the causes of adherence and divorcements ought also
to pertain to them, as naturally annexed thereto.

Brethren appointed to make an overture of the policy, Edinburgh Apr. 24.
1576. Sess. 6.
and jurisdiction of the Kirk, etc. For the West country, the Bishop of
Glasgow, Mrs. Androw Melvil, Androw Hay, James Graig, David Cuninghame; For
Lowthian, Mrs. Robert Pont, James Lowson, David Lindsay, Clement Littil, and
Alexander Simme. For Fyfe, the Super-intendent thereof, with the principal
masters of the University. For Angus and Merns, the Lord of Dunne, William
Chrystesone, John Row, William Rind, John Dunkesone: for Aberdene, Mrs. John
Craig, Alexander Arbuthnot, George Hay, and their persons to conveen, ilk
country and rank in the places following, viz. The West in Glascow: Lothian, in
Edinburgh, Fyfe, in Saint Andrews: Angus, in Montrois: the first Tuesday of
June next to come, to confer and advise upon the said matter, and to have
general meeting or conventions, two, or one at least, of ilk country, in
Stirling, the last of July thereafter, to communicate and cognosce upon their
whole travels and labors taken herein, and to confer hereupon, and report
what they have found, and conceived in the said matter, to the next Assembly.

The brethren depute to the conceiving and forming of the heads of the policy
of the Kirk, Edinbudgh October. 1. 1577.
being called to give account of their diligence, presented the same as they
had made partition thereof at the Assembly in Stirling. The heads penned by
Master John Row, and James Lowson, were read, and nothing said against, except
that one of the said Mr. John, his Articles was referred to further
disputation. All men being required, that had any good reason or Argument to
propone in the contrary to allege the same; or if they would not publicly
reason on the said head, to resort to the said Commissioners, where travel
should be taken to satisfy them; leaving to them liberty also, before the
heads be recollected and ordered in one body, to make argument, as they think
good against the same.

The Lord of Dun thought the head given to him obscure. The Assembly desired
him to confer with the remanent Commissioners the morn at 7. hours, that he
may be resolved of the meaning thereof.

The Remanent heads being prolix, were thought good to be contracted in short
propositions to be presented to public reading.

Sess. 2.
The head committed to Mr. Androw Hay, being read in face of the Assembly,
nothing was proponed against the same, except the Article anent the suspension
of Ministers, referred to further reasoning. David Forgusone his part being
read, the 18. Article was referred, and nothing spoken against the rest. The
points committed to Mrs. Androw Hay, Robert Pont, David Lindesay, nothing
alleged in the contrary. The heads committed to Mr. John Craig read, some
things were desired to be contracted, and others referred to further reasoning.

Sess. 3.
The whole labors of the brethren taken upon the matter, and argument of the
policy being wholly read in public audience of the Assembly, it was thought
expedient that their whole travailes and work in this matter being now
dispersed, should be revised and perused by some brethren, and digested and
disposed in good and convenient order, to be thereafter presented to the
Assembly. And for that effect the Assembly appointed the brethren Mrs. James
Lowsone, Androw Melvill, John Craig, George Hay, to conveene together to
appoint the hours and place thereto, and to remain thereat while the matter
be brought to an end. And in the mean time, if it please any to reason with
them in the matter, to have access thereto.

Sess. 6.
Commissioners directed from this Assembly to the Regents Grace for informing
his Grace anent the travels of the Kirk in the matter and argument of the
policy, returned, and reported, his Grace liked well of their travels, and
labors they took in that matter, requiring expedition, and hasty outred
thereof.

Sess. 9.
The brethren appointed to collect the heads of the policy presented of
before, reported the same gathered and collected in order, and digested in one
body, and all men were required, that had good reason, or argument to propone,
to offer them thereto. Three heads were called in doubt, One de Diaconatu,
another dejure Patronatus, the third de Divortiis, wherein they were not
resolved, nor satisfied. As to the rest, nothing was thought in the contrary,
nor opponed thereto.

These three heads standing in controversy, and disputed in utramque partem,
yet further disputation was reserved to the morn to any man that liked to take
the part of reasoning upon him against the said heads. Because the matter of
the policy of the Kirk collected by the brethren, is not yet in such perfect
form, as is requisite, and sundry things are largely entreated, which would
be more summarily handled, others required further dilatation, for
recollecting thereof, and putting the same in good order, and form, and for
avoiding of superfluity, and obscurity, the substantialls being kept. The
Assembly presently has willed their beloved brethren, Mrs. R. Pont, and James
Lowson, to take travel and labor in the premises. And to the effect, that
the work may be the better complete, and in readiness against the next
general Assembly, which is ordained to begin at Edinburgh the 25. of October
next to come, the Assembly has ordained their brethren the Lord of Dun, Mrs.
Alexander Arbuthnot, Androw Melvill, John Craig, Andrew Hay, George Hay, John
Row, David Lindesay, John Dunkesone, to assemble and convene together the 19.
of October next in Edinburgh, to revise and consider the travels of the said
brethren, that the same may be the more advisedly proponed publicly, as is
said. In the mean time such as please to reason in the matter, to have access
to the said brethren. And likewise ordained the visitours of Countries, to make
intimation to the Barons, that the said work is in hands, and to be treated in
the next general convention, desiring their presence and concurrence thereto.

Because the matter of the policy, and jurisdiction of the Kirk, Edinburgh
October. 25. 1577.
committed to the recollecting, forming, and disposing of certain brethren,
being now presented by them, was thought expedient to be propounded and
entreated the morn after the reading of the general heads thereof, The whole
brethren were required to advise with themselves, if they found any other head
necessary to be disputed then those, and to signify the same to the Assembly
the morn. My Lord Regents grace desired the Assembly to proceed forward
earnestly in the policy, wherein they were laboring, and to put the same to
an end.

The rest of this day being consumed in examination of the travells taken upon
the policy, as is noted thereupon to the next Session, the Assembly ordaines
it to be proceeded further in.

Sess. 6.
This Session being wholly employed in reasoning upon the heads of the
Jurisdiction of the Kirk, the same argument was ordained to be followed out the
morn, so far as time may serve thereunto.

The heads of the policy and jurisdiction of the Kirk being wholly read,
Edinburgh October. 25. 1577.
and thought good that the same should be presented to my Lord Regents grace,
as agreed upon by reasoning among the brethren, saving the head de Diaconatu,
which is ordained to be given in with a note, that the same is agreed upon by
the most part of the Assembly, without prejudice of further reasoning, to the
effect that the said heads may be put in Mundo, disposed and set in good order,
according to the mind of the Assembly, The Assembly has willed Mrs. James
Lowson, Robert Pont, David Lindsay, and the Clerk of the Assembly to labor
with diligence therein, and the same being put in Mundo by them according to
the original to be seen, and revised, by John Dunkeson David Forguson, the
Lord of Dun, Mr. James Carmichael, and John Brand, and being seen by them
according to the said original, to be presented by the said Mrs. James Lowson,
Robert Pont, and David Lindsay, together with a supplication penned and
delivered to them by the Assembly unto my Lord Regents grace, and in case
conference and reasoning be sought by his grace upon the said heads presented
to his grace, the Assembly has ordained the Lord of Dun, Mr. Patrick Adamson,
John Craig, John Row, Alexander Arbuthnot, Androw Melvill, James Lowson, Robert
Pont, David Lindsay, Androw Hay, George Hay, and John Dunkeson to concur and
await upon the said conference, as they shall be advertised by his Grace.

For as much as the general Assembly has thought meet, Edinburgh April. 24.
1578.
that the travels taken by them upon the policy, shall be presented to the
Kings Majesty, and his highness Council, it was found meet that before the
copies thereof were delivered, they should be yet reviewed and over-seen by
Mrs. Robert Pont, James Lowson, and David Lindsay, and being written over,
according to the original, one copy should be presented by them to his
highness, with a supplication penned by them to that effect, and another copy
to the Counsel. The time to be at the discretion of the said brethren, so it
be before the general fast. And in case conference and reasoning be craved
upon the said heads, the Assembly has nominated Mr. John Craig, Alexander
Arbuthnot, the Lord of Dun, William Christeson, John Row, David Forguson,
Robert Pont, James Lowson, David Lindsay, John Dunkeson, Androw Melvill, Androw
Hay, James Craig, to concur and convene at such times appointed by the King
and Counsel as advertisement shall be made to them by the said three brethren.
And that the said Commissioners at the said conference, reason also in the head
of the ceremonies, and how far Ministers may meddle with civil affairs, and
if they may vote in Counsel or Parliament.

It was required, Edinburgh 24 April, 1578.
that if any brother had any reasonable doubt, or argument to propone anent the
head de Diaconatu, that he should be ready the morn to offer his reasons,
where he shall be heard and resolved.

According to the ordinance made yesterday, all persons that have any
reasonable doubt, or argument to propone against the head of the policy, were
required to propone the same, and none offered any argument to the contrary.

The general Assembly of the Kirk finding universal corruption of the whole
estates of the body of this Realm, Ibidem.
the great coldness and slacknesse in Religion in the greatest part of the
professors of the same, with the daily increase of all kind of fearful sins
and enormities, as incest, adulteries, murders, and namely recently committed
in Edinburgh, and Sterling, cursed sacrilege, ungodly sedition and division
within the bowels of the Realm, with all manner of disordered and ungodly
living, which justly has provoked our God, although long-suffering and
patient, to stretch out his arm in his anger, to correct and visit the
iniquity of the land, and namely by the present penury, famine, and hunger,
joined with the civil and intestine seditions, whereunto doubtless greater
judgments must succeed, if these his corrections work no reformation nor
amendment in men's hearts. Seeing also the bloody conclusions of the cruel
Councels of that Roman beast, tending to extermine, and raze from the face of
all Europ, the true light of the blessed word of salvation: for these causes,
and that God of his mercy would bless the Kings highness, and his regiment,
and make him to have a happy and prosperous government, as also to put in his
Highness heart, and in the hearts of his noble Estates of Parliament, not only
to make and establish good politic laws for the weal and good government of
the Realm, but also to set and establish such a policy, and discipline in the
Kirk, as is craved in the word of God, and is contained, and penned already to
be presented to his Highness, and Council, that in the one, and the other, God
may have his due praise, and the age to come an example of upright and godly
dealing. Therefore the Assembly has ordained the Act preceding hereanent, to
be precisely kept in all points.

Forasmuch as in the last Assembly commission was given to certain brethren to
present to the Kings Highness and Council, Sterling Junii 10. 1578.
the heads of the policy of the Kirk, with a supplication to his Grace: The
Assembly desired the report of the brethrens proceedings, who expounded, and
show, that according to their commission, they exhibit to the Kings Majesty a
copy of the heads of the policy, with the supplication unto his Grace, who gave
a very comfortable and good answer, That not only would he concur with the
Kirk in all things that might advance the true Religion, presently professed
within this Realm, but also would be a protector for the Kirk, and thereafter
his Grace presented to the Council the said supplication, who nominate persons
to confer in the matter, and by his Majesty's procurement obtained of the
Council, that they might choose so many Ministers to confer, as was at
length agreed upon, which conference is ready to be showen.

In respect that at the desire of the Assembly, Edinburgh October. 29. 1578.
a certain of the Nobility were convened, viz. my Lord Chancellor, the Earl
of Montros, my Lord Seatoun, my Lord Lyndsay, it was exponed and showen to the
Moderator of this Assembly, what care, and study the Assembly had taken to
entertain and keep the purity of the sincere word of God, unmixed with the
invention of their own heads, which their special care was to reserve to the
posterity hereafter. And seeing that the true religion is not able to continue,
nor endure long, without a good discipline and policy, in that part have they
also employed their wit and study, and drawn forth out of the pure fountains
of Gods word, such a Discipline as is meet to remain in the Kirk, which they
presented to the Kings Majesty, with their supplication, at whose direction
certain Commissioners were appointed to reason with such as were deputed by
the Kirk, where the whole matter being disputed, was resolved and agreed,
except a few heads, and thereafter again presented to the Lords of the
Articles, that the said Discipline might have place, and be established by the
acts and laws of the Realm, wherein no the less their travells have not
succeeded, praying therefore the Nobility present, as well openly to make
profession to the Assembly, if they will allow, and maintain the Religion
presently established within this Realm, as also the policy and discipline
already spoken of, and to labor at the King and Councels hands, for an answer
to the heads following, to wit, That his Grace and Council will establish such
heads of the policy, as were already resolved and agreed upon by the said
Commissioners, and cause such others as were not finally agreed on to be
reasoned, and put to an end, and that his Grace and Council will restore to
the Kirk the act of Parliament concerning the Thirds: And that none vote in the
Parliament in name of the Kirk, except such as shall have commission from the
Kirk to that effect. And that presentations to benefices be directed to the
Commissioners of Countries, where the benefices lie. And to the end that the
matter may be the better and sooner exped, that their Lordships would appoint
such time convenient there to, as they may best spare, that such of the
brethren as shall be named thereto, may wait upon their Honors. Hereunto the
said Noblemen answered, that a part of them had made a public profession of
this Religion before, always now they declare and profess the Religion
presently professed within this Realm, and that they shall maintain the same
to their power. As to the rest, they think good the King and his Council be
suited, and they shall insist with the King for answer thereto. The time to
that effect they shall notify to the Assembly the morn.

The because in the last conference holden at Sterling by his Graces command
concerning the policy of the Kirk, Edinburgh Iulii 7. 1579.
certain Articles there anent remain yet unresolved, and referred to further
conference, Therefore the Assembly craves of his Majesty that persons unspotted
of such corruptions as are desired to be reformed, may be nominate by his
Majesty to proceed in the further conference upon the said policy, and time and
place to be appointed to that effect.

The question being proponed by the Synods of Lowthiane to the general
Assembly anent a general order to be taken for erecting of Presbyteries in
places where public exercise is used, Ibidem.
unto the time the policy of the Kirk be established by law; It is answered,
that the exercise may be judged to be a Presbytery.

An Article propounded by the Commissioners of the Kirk to his Majesty and
Council, Dundie, Iulii 12. 1580.
that the book of policy may be established by an act of privy Council,
while a Parliament be had, at which it may be confirmed.

Forasmuch as travells have been taken in the forming of the policy of the
Kirk, Glasgow, Aprilis 24. 1581.
and diverse suits made to the Magistrate for approbation thereof, which albeit
has not yet taken the happy effect which good men would crave, yet that the
posterity should judge well of the present age, and of the meaning of the Kirk,
the Assembly has concluded, that the book of policy agreed to in diverse
Assemblies before, should be registrate amongst the Acts of the Assemblies,
and remain therein ad perpetuam rei memoriam: And the Copies thereof to be
taken by every Presbytery, Of the which book the Tenor follows, etc.

For as much as it is certain, Edinburgh Aug. 4. 1590. P. Galloway Moderator.
that the word of God cannot be kept in the own sincerity, without the holy
Discipline be had in observance, It is therefore by common consent of the whole
Brethren, and Commissioners present, concluded, that whosoever has borne
office in the ministry of the Kirk within this Realm, or that presently
bears, or shall hereafter bear office herein, shall be charged by every
particular Presbytery where their residence is, to subscrive the heads of
Discipline of the Kirk of this Realm, at length set down and allowed by act
of the whole Assembly, in the book of policy, which is registrat in the
Assembly-bookes, and namely the heads controverted by enemies of the Discipline
of the reformed Kirk of this Realm, betwixt and the next Synodall Assemblies
of the Provinces, under the pain of excommunication to be executed against the
non-subscrivers, and the Presbyteries which shall be found remiss or
negligent herein, to receive public rebuke of the whole Assembly. And to the
effect the said Discipline may be known, as it ought to be, to the whole
brethren, It is ordained that the Moderator of each Presbytery shall receive
from the Clerk of the Assembly, a copy of the said book under his
subscription, upon the expenses of the Presbytery, betwixt and the first day of
September next to come, under the pain to be openly accused in face of the
whole Assembly.

The Assembly ordaines, Edinburgh Iulii 2. 1991.
that the Discipline contained in the acts of the general Assembly be kept as
well in Angus and Mernis, as in all other parts.

ACTS CONCERNING THE Adversaries of Discipline.
It is to be marked, that such as adhered to Papistry, were enemies beth to
reformation and Discipline, and such as embraced the true Religion, whether
Kirkmen or other Professors, and yet possessed the Kirk rents, were not only
unhearty friends, but, under color and in policy, as great hinderers as
lovers of the benefices and livings belorging to the service of God.

ALexander Gordon, Edinburgh Iulii 30. 1562.
being Bishop of Galloway, is no other wise acknowledged by the Assembly in
respect of spiritual function, then as a private man void of Jurisdiction: and
therefore he and the rest of that sort, are not simply set down by their
title of Bishop, but by a note as it were of degradation, [so called] to wit,
by custom, but by no right.

The said Mr. Alexander Gordon without respect to his place, Edinburgh December.
25. 1562.
or Bishopric, is enrolled after the Super-intendents, and is thus designed,
Mr. Alexander Gordon, intitulate Bishop of Galloway, and is there leited for
the Super-intendencie of Dunfrice, Liddisdaill, and Galloway, and gets
commission to present Ministers, Exhorters, and Readers, for planting of
Kirkes, and to do such other things as has been heretofore accustomed.

Mr. Alexaxder Gordon, named Bishop of Galloway, was removed, S. Ichnston,
Iunii 25. 1563.
out of the Assembly, and accused by the Lord of Gairles; his excuses were not
found altogether relevant, and therefore the Assembly appointed order to be
taken anent the matter complained upon. Ibidem.


The Assembly ordained commissions to be given to the Bishops of Galloway,
Orknay and Catnes, for the space of a year after the date hereof, to plant
Kirks, etc. within their own bounds, and that the Bishop of Galloway haunt, as
well the Shirefdome of Wigtoun, as the Stewardie of Kirkubright, reckoned
within his bounds.

It was then ordained, Ibidem.
that when any benefice shall chance to vake, or is now vacant, that a
qualified person be presented to the Super-intendent of that Province where the
benefice vakes, and that he being sufficient be admitted Minister to that Kirk
which is destitute of a Pastor, that ignorant Idiots be not placed in such
rooms by them that are yet called Bishops, and are not.

Mr. Robert Pont complained upon the Bishop of Dunblane, Ibidem.
that the said Bishop lately said, and caused say Mass in Dunblane, contrary
to the tenor of the Act made thereanent, etc.

Remember to make supplication to the Queens Majesty and her Council, for
remitting the thirds, Ibidem.
or any part thereof to the Bishops, that are elected by the Kirk, to be
Commissioners to plant Kirkes within their bounds.

A sentence of unquhile James Bishop of Rosse, Ibidem.
Commissioner to unquhile James Archbishop of Saint Andrews, pronounced
against James Hammiltoun of Kincavel, was declared wicked, ungodly, and
wrangusly led.

Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other Persons beneficed, Edinburgh December. 25 1566.
being of the Kirk, who receive teinds and awaite not on the flock committed to
their cure, anther present themselves to the General Assembly, are ordained to
be summoned by the Super-intendents to compaire at the next general Assembly,
to give their assistance and counsel in such things as appertain to Christian
Religion and preaching of the true word, and further to know the Ordinance of
the Kirk to be made thereanent.

Adam, called Bishop of Orknay, and Commissioner, Edinburgh December. 25. 1567.
was accused that he, being Bishop and Commissioner occupied the room of a
Magistrate in the Session, his sheep wandering without a Pastor, and retains
in his company Sir Francis Bothwel, a rank Papist, to whom he has given
benefices, and placed him as Minister in those Kirkes; as also that he
solemnized the marriage of the Queen, and Earl of Bothwell etc. and for the
said causes was deprived.

Alexander called Bishop of Galloway, Ibidens.
Commissioner, accused that he has not visited, these three years bygone, or
thereby, his Kirkes within his charge; that he has given himself over
altogether to hant the Court, and clean left the office of visiting, and
planting the Kirkes, and has now procured to be one of the Session, and privy
Council, which cannot agree with the office of a Pastor or Bishop; and also
has resigned Inchschaffray in favors of a young child, and set diverse lands in
few: Compeiring, granted publicly that he had offended in all things were
laid to his charge. And for certain considerations the Assembly continued him
still, until the next Assembly, upon certain conditions of his diligence in
his Charge.

No man ought to enjoy or possess the patrimony of the Kirk, Edinburgh Iulti
1. 1568.
without doing of their dutiful service. And because it is known that there
are many of that number, to whom God has given such gifts, wherethrough they
might profit greatly in the Kirk of God, it was thought necessary, that
admonitions be made by the whole Assembly, to such as brook benefices, that
they apply themselves according to the gifts given to them by God, and as the
Kirk shall judge them able, to enter in the Ministry, and continue therein.
And because all the said Persons are not present to hear the voice of the
Assembly, It is ordained, that Super-intendents and Commissioners, that shall
be appointed for planting, and visiting of Kirkes, give the same admonitions
particularly to the said Persons within their bounds, requiring them in name of
the Assembly to beat the next general Assembly, etc.

An Article presented to my Lord Regents Grace, Ibidem.
bearing, that it is thought very unreasonable that the Papists, enemies to
Gods Kirk, and this Commonwealth, and others, that labor not in the
Ministry, shall possess freely, without imposition, the two part of the
benefices, and the Kirk, which labors, shall not possess the third.

The Bishop of Orknay restored again, Ibidem.
and Mr. John Row appointed Commissioner of Galloway.

Ordaines Alexander Gordane sometimes Commissioner of Galloway to repair to
the next general Assembly of the Kirk, Edinburgh Julii 5. 1569.
to answer to such things as shall be laid to his charge, etc. and in the
mean time inhibites him to use any function within the Kirk of God, conform to
the Act made against him the 8. of July 1568. in the general Assembly.

Adam B. Ibidem.
of Orknay was accused for not fulfilling of the injunctions appointed to him
by the Assemblies in them. of July, 1568.

Adam of Orknay being called to the office of a Bishopric, Sterling Febr. 25.
1569.
and promoted to the profits thereof, and suffered by the Kirk, receives charge
to preach the Evangell, to be also Commissioner of the Country of Orknay,
which he received, and exercised for a certain space, while now of late he
made a Simoniacall change with the Abbacie of Hali-rudhous, although
yetbrooking the name, and styled Bishop of the same; contrary to all laws both
of God and Man, made against Simony. Secondly, he dimitted his cure in the
hands of an unqualified person, without the consent of the Kirk, leaving the
flock destitute without a shepherd, whereby not only ignorance is increased,
but also most abundantly all vice and horrible crimes there are committed, as
the number of 600. persons, convict of incest, adultery and fornication, bears
witness. Thirdly, he has given himself daily to the execution of the function
of a temporal Judge, as to be a Lord of Session, which requires the whole
man, and so rightly in naither can he exercise both: And styles himself with
Roman titles, as Reverent Father in God, which pertaines to no Minister of
Christ Jesus, nor is given to any of them in Scripture. Fourthly, in great
hurt, and defraud of the Kirk, he has bought all the thirds of the Abbacie of
Halirudhous, at least, he has made Simoniacall change thereof with the rents
of Orknay. Fifthly, he has left the Kirks, partly unplanted, and partly
planted, but destitute of provision. Sixthly, some of the Kirkes are sheepfolds,
and some of them ruinous. Seventhly, he has traduced both publicly and
privately the Ministers of Edinburgh, absented himself from preaching in that
Kirk, and from receiving the Sacraments.

Excommunication directed against Patrik called Bishop of Murray, to be
executed by Mr. Robert Pent Commissioner their, Edinburgh Julii 5. 1570.
with the assistance of the Ministers of Edinburgh.

Robert Bishop of Catnes to assist John Gray of Fordel in visiting the Kirkes
there. Edinburgh Mart. 5. 1570.


John Bishop of Saint Andrews accused, Edinburgh Aug. 6. 1573.
first that he had given a benefice to Mr. George Lauder suspect of Papistrie.
2. That he oversaw adultery in Brauntiland. 3. He suffered M. Magnus Hulcio lie
uncontrouled under old adultery. 4. That he visited by others, and not by
himself. 5. That in his default the exercise of Saint Andrews was likely to
decay. 6. That such as had offended in Lowthian, he receives in Saint Andrews,
and admits some to function in the Kirk that are not able, and untried, chiefly
such as come out of Lowthiane, and Mers.

The whole Assembly hears that he has received the name of Bishop, Ibidem.
Mr. James Paton B. of Dunkell.
but has not used the office of a Bishop; within his bounds he has not
proceeded against Papists, he is suspect of Simony betwixt the Earl of Argile
and him, anent the prosites of the Bishopric; he is suspect of perjury in
receiving the same Bishopric, because he gives acquittances, and the Earl
receives the silver of the Bishopric.

Alexander Gordon Bishop of Galloway accused, Ibidem.
1. that he intrused himself in the office of the Ministry, within the burgh
of Edinburgh: 2. He persuaded and enticed the people to rebel against our
Sovereign Lord: 3. He refused to pray for our Sovereign Lord, approving
another Authority: 4. Being forbidden by the general Assembly to have any
intromission with the Parishoners of Halyrud-hous, he compelled them to receive
the Sacrament, then abused by him within Edinburgh, causing his pretended
Baillies, and the men of war, to compel the said poor people: 5. Being
sworn by his solemn oath, for due obedience to our Sovereign Lord, and his
Graces Regent, and authority, brake his said oath, by sitting in pretended
Parliament for dispossessing of our said Sovereign Lord of his royal crown,
and authority: 6. Openly in Pulpi the gave thanks for the flaughter of Matthew
Earl of Lennox, of good memory, saying that it was God most just judgment, and
exhorted the people to do the same: 7. That he was a perverter of the people,
not only before the reformation, but also diverse times since. It was
concluded, that he should make public repentance in Sackcloth three several
Sundaies; First, in the Kirk of Edinburgh; Secondly, in Halyrud-hous; Thirdly,
in the Queens College, under the pain of Excommunication.

Alexander Hay, Ibidem.
Clerk to the secret Council, presented certain heads proponed by my Lord
Regent to the present Assembly, whereof one follows: My Lord Regents Grace
minds, that with all convenient diligence qualified persons shall be promoted
to the Bishoprics now vacant, the delay whereof has not been in his own
Grace his default, but by reason some entresse was made to these livings, in
favors of certain Noblemen before his acceptance of the Regiment; yet his
Grace is persuaded, that qualified persons shall speedily be presented, and in
case of failzie, will not fail without the others knowledge and consent to
present.

The Assembly has concluded, Edinburgh Mar. 6. 1573.
that the Jurisdiction of Bishops in their Ecclesiastical function shall not
exceed the Jurisdiction of Super-intendents, which heretofore they have had,
and presently have; and that they shall willingly be subject to the Discipline
appointed by the general Assembly, as members thereof, as the Super-intendents
have been heretofore in all sorts; and that no Bishops give collation of any
benefice within the bounds of Superintendents, without their consent, and
testimonial subscrived with their hands: And that Bishops in their own
Dioceses, visit by themselves, where no Super-intendents are, and give no
collation of benefices, without consent of three well qualified Ministers, etc.

The Bishop of Dunkell ordained to confess his fault publicly in the Kirk of
Dunkell, Ibidem.
for not executing the sentence of the Kirk against the Earl of Athol.

George, Bishop of Murray, Ibidem.
ordained to be summoned to make his Purgation of the fornication alleged
committed by him with the Lady Ardrosse.

Bishops, Super-intendents, or Commissioners of Countries, Edinburgh August. 7.
1574.
that be found negligent in their office, or do not their debtfull charge,
either in their visitation, teaching, or life, the Assembly has decreed and
ordained, that they shall be punished and corrected according to the quality of
their faults, either by admonition, public repentance, suspension or
deprivation simpliciter, at the sight of the said Assembly.

Bishop of Dunkell, Bishop of Brechin, Bishop of Murray, Edinburgh Mar. 7. 1574.
Bishop of Glasgow, removed, and particularly complained on.

The Bishops of Galloway, Dunkell, Brechin, Dumblaine, Yles, Edinburgh Augusti
6. 1575.
being present, John Durie one of the Ministers of Edinburgh protested, that
the trial of Bishops prejudge not the opinions and reasons which he, and
other brethren of his mind, had to oppone against the said office, and name of
Bishop.

Anent the question propounded by certain brethren, Ibidem.
whether if the Bishops, as they are now in Scotland, have their function of
the word of God, or not; or the Chapiters appointed for creating of them in
this reformed Kirk: for better resolution hereof, the general Assembly of the
Kirk appoints Mr. John Craig, Minister at Aberdene, Mr. James Lowson, Minister
at Edinburgh, and Mr. Androw Melvil, principal of the college of Glasgow on
the one part: Mr. George Hay, Commissioner of Caitnes, Mr. John Row, Minister
of Pearth, and Mr. David Lindsay Minister at Leith on the other part, to
conveen, reason, and confer upon the said question, and to report their
judgments and opinions thereupon to the Assembly before the dissolving
thereof, if they be resolved betwixt and the same.

They think it not expedient presently to answer directly to the first
question, Ibidem.
but if any Bishop shall be chosen who has no such qualities as the word of
God requires, let him be tried by the general Assembly de novo, and so
deposed.

The points wherein they agree concerning the Office of a Bishop or
Super-intendent.
FIrst, the name of Bishop is common to all them that has any particular
flock, over the which he has a peculiar charge as well to preach the word, as
to Minister the Sacraments, and to execute the Ecclesiastical Discipline, with
consent of his Elders. And this is his chief function by the word of God.

Out of this number may be chosen some to have power to visit such reasonable
bounds, besides his own flock, as the general Assembly shall appoint; and in
these bounds to appoint Ministers, with consent of the Ministers of that
Province, and the consent of the flock to whom they be appointed: Also to
appoint Elders and Deacons in every particular Congregation, where there is
none, with consent of the people thereof, and to suspend Ministers for
reasonable causes with consent of the Ministers foresaid.

Bishops being present, Edinburgh April is 5. 1576. Ibidem.
their diligence is tried, and they are accused for want of particular flocks,
dilapidation, and other faults.

Anent the advice and opinion of the brethren given concerning the question
moved anent Bishops, the whole Assembly, for the greatest part, after
reasoning, and long disputation upon every Article of the said brethrens
opinion, and advice, resolutely affirmed, and approved the same, and every
Article thereof, as is also above set down. And, to the effect that the said
Articles condescended upon by the said Assembly, may be the better followed
out, and ready execution may ensue thereupon, as appertains, ordaines the
Bishops which has not as yet received the charge of a particular Congregation,
to condescend the morn, what particular flocks they will accept to take the
cure of.

For the more commodious visitation of Countries, Ibidem.
there is appointed for every Shire four or five Bishops, Super-intendents,
and Ministers, and Articles of visitation set down.

Anent the demand of Mr. Androw Hay Parson of Ranthrow, Ibidem:
if every Vifiter within his own bounds has like power, and jurisdiction to
plant Ministers, suspend, and depose for reasonable cause: The Assembly
resolved affirmative, that they have alike power and jurisdiction therein, as
is contained in the particular Articies concerning the jurisdiction of the
Visiters.

For as much as there is great corruption in the estate of Bishops, as they are
presently made in this Realm, Edivburgh Aprilis 24. 1578.
whereunto the Kirk would provide some stay in time coming, so far as they
may, to the effect that further corruption may be bridled: therefore the
Assembly has concluded, that no more Bishops shall be elected, or made
hereafter before the next general Assembly of the Kirk, discharging all
Ministers and Chapiters to proceed any ways in the election of the said
Bishops in the mean time, under the pain of perpetual deprivation from their
offices.

The Act above written extended to all times to come, Sterling Iulti 11. 1578.
and all Bishops already elected required to submit themselves to the general
Assembly, concerning the reformation of the corruption of that estate, which
submission the Bishop of Dunblane willingly offered to the Assembly.

Sess. 4.
For as much as the office of a Bishop, as it is now used, Dundie, Iulii 12.
1580. Bishops as they are, judged unlawful and discharged.
and commonly taken within this Realm, has no sure warrant, authority, nor
good ground out of the Scriptures, but is brought in by the folly and
corruption of men's inventions, to the great overthrow of the Kirk of God, The
whole Assembly of the Kirk in one voice, after liberty given to all men to
reason in the matter, none opponing himself in defending the said pretended
Office, Finds and declares the same pretended Office used and termed, as is
abovesaid, unlawful in the self, as having neither fundament, ground, nor
warrant within the word of God; and ordaines, That all such persons as bruike,
or shall bruike, hereafter the said Office shall be charged simply to dimit,
quite, and leave off the same, as an Office where into they are not called of
God: And such like to desist, and cease from all preaching, ministration of the
Sacraments, or using any way the Office of Pastors, while they receive de novo
admission from the general Assembly, under the pain of Excommunication to be
used against them. Wherein if they be found disobedient or contradict this act
in any point, the sentence of Excommunication after due admonitions to be
executed against them. Synodall Assem. blies appointed.
And for better execution of the said Act, It is statute, that a Synodall
Assembly shall be holden in every Province, where any usurping Bishops are, and
begin the 18. of August next to come, whereto they shall be called, and
summoned by the Visitors of the said Countries, to compeire before their
Synodall Assemblies, and namely, the Bishop of Saint Andrews, to compeir in
Saint Andrews, The Bishop of Aberdene in Aberdene, The Bishop of Glascow in
Glascow, The Bishop of Murray in Elgyne, to give obedience to the said Act;
which if they refuse to do, That the said Synodall Assemblies shall appoint
certain brethren of their Ministry, to give them public Admonitions out of
the Pulpit, and warnethem in case they disobey, To compeir before the next
general Assembly to be holden at Edinburgh, the 20. of October next to come,
to hear the sentence of Excommunication pronounced against them for their
disobedience. And to this Act the Bishop of Dunblane agreed, submitting
himself to be ruled thereby.

The twelfth Parliament holden at Edinburgh, the fifth of June, the year of
God 1592. years, by the right excellent, right high and mighty Prince JAMES
the sixth, by the Grace of God, King of Scotts: with advice of his Three
Estates.
Ratification of the liberty of the true Kirk: Of gener all and Synodall
Assemblies: Of Presbyteries; Of Discipline. All laws of Idolatry are abrogate:
Of Presentation to Benefices.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of this present Parliament, following the
laudable, and good example of their Predecessors, has ratified, and approved,
and by the Tenor of this present Act, ratifies and approves all liberties,
privileges, immunities, and freedoms whatsoever, given and granted by his
Highness, his Regents in his name, or any of his Predecessors, to the true
and holy Kirk presently established within this Realm, and declared in the
first Act of his Highness Parliament the twenty day of October, the year of
God 1579. years. And all, and whatsoever Acts of Parliament, and Statutes made
of before by his Highness, and his Regents, anent the liberty and freedom of
the said Kirk; and specially the first Act of Parliament, holden at Edinburgh,
the twenty four day of October, the year of God 1581. years, with the whole
particular Acts there mentioned: Which shall be as sufficient as if the same
were here expressed: and all other Acts of Parliament made since, in favor of
the true Kirk, and such like, ratifies and approves the general Assemblies
appointed by the said Kirk, and declares that it shall be lawful to the Kirk
and Ministers every year, at the least, and oftener pro re nata, as occasion
and necessity shall require, to hold and keep general Assemblies: Providing
that the Kings Majesty, or his Commissioners with them, to be appointed by his
Highness, be present at ilk General Assembly, before the dissolving thereof,
nominate and appoint time and place, when and where the next general Assembly
shall be holden: and in case neither his Majesty, nor his said Commissioners
be present for the time in that Town, where the said general Assembly is
holden: Then and in that case it shall be leasum to the said general Assembly
by themselves to nominate and appoint time and place, where the next general
Assembly of the Kirk shall be kept, and holden, as they have been in use to
do in times by past. And also ratifies and approves the Provincial and
Synodall Assemblies to be holden by the said Kirk and Ministers twice ilk
year, as they have been, and presently are in use to do within every
Province of this Realm: And ratifies and approves the Presbyteries, and
particular Sessions appointed by the said Kirk, with the whole Discipline and
Jurisdiction of the same Kirk agreed upon by his Majcsty in conference had by
his Highness with certain of the Ministers, conveened to that effect. Of the
which Articles the Tenor follows: Matters to be entreated in Provincial
Assemblies: Their Assemblies are constitute for weighty matters, necessary to
be entreated by mutual consent, and assistance of brothren within the
Province, as need requires. This Assembly has power to handle, order, and
redress all things omitted or done amiss in the particular Assemblies. It
has power to depose the office bearers of that Province, for good and just
causes deserving deprivation. And generally their Assemblies have the whole
power of the particular Elderships, whereof they are collected. Matters to be
entreated in the Presbyteries: The power of the Presbyteries is to use diligent
labors in the bounds committed to their charge, that the Kirkes be kept in
good order: To enquire diligently of naughty and ungodly persons, and to
travel to bring them in the way again by Admonition, or threatening of Gods
judgments, or by correction. It appertains to the Eldership to take heed that
the word of God be purely preached within their bounds, the Sacraments rightly
ministered, the Discipline entertained, and Ecclesiastical goods uncorruptly
distributed. It belongs to this kind of Assemblies, to cause the ordinances
made by the Assemblies Provincial, National and general to be kept and put
in execution, to make Constitutions which concern (...) in the Kirk for decent
order in the particular Kirk where they govern: Providing that they alter no
rules made by the Provincial, or general Assemblies; And that they make the
Provincial Assemblies foresaid, privy to the rules that they shall make: and
to abolish Constitutions tending to the hurt of the same. It has power to
excommunicate the obstinate, for mall process being led, and due intervall of
times observed. Anent particular Kirkes, if they be lawfully ruled by
sufficient Ministers and Session, they have power and Jurisdiction in their
own Congregation in matters Ecclesiastical; And decrees and declares the
Assemblies, Presbyteries, and Sessions, Jurisdiction and Discipline foresaid,
to be in all times coming, most just, good and godly in the self,
Notwithstanding of whatsoever Statutes, Acts, Canons, Civil or Municipall
laws made to the contrary: To the which, and every one of them their presents
shall make express derogation. And because there are diverse Acts of Parliament
made in favor of the Papisticall Kirk, tending to the prejudice of the liberty
of the true Kirk of God presently professed within this Realm, Jurisdiction
and Discipline thereof; which stand yet in the books of the Acts of Parliament
not abrogated nor annulled, Therefore his Highness and Estates foresaid, has
abrogated, cassed, and annulled, and by the Tenor hereof, abrogates, casses,
and annulles, all Acts of Parliament made by any of his Highness
Predecessors, for maintenance of superstition and idolatry withal, and
whatsoever Acts, Laws and Statutes made at any time before the day and date
hereof, against the liberty of the true Kirk, Jurisdiction and Discipline
thereof, as the same is used and exercised within this Realm.

And in special, that part of the Act of Parliament, holden at Sterling, the
fourth day of November, the year of God 1443. years, commanding obedience to
be given to Eugenius the Pope for the time: The Act made by King James the
third, in his Parliament holden at Edinburgh, the 24. of February, the year of
God 1480. years. And all other Acts whereby the Popes authority is
established. The Act of King James the third in his Parliament holden at
Edinburgh the 20. of November, the year of God 1469. years, anent the
Saturday, and other vigils to be holy days from Evensong to Evensong.

Item, that part of the Act made by the Queen Regent, in the Parliament holden
at Edinburgh the first day of February, the year of God 1551. years, giving
special license for holding of Pasche and Zuill. Item, the Kings Majesty and
Estates foresaid, declares, that the 129. Act of the Parliament holden at
Edinburgh, the two and twentieth of May, the year of God 1584. years, shall
no ways be prejudicial, nor derogate any thing from the privilege that God
has given to the spiritual Office-bearers in the Kirk, concerning heads of
Religion, matters of Heresy, excommunication, collation, or deprivation of
Ministers, or any such like essential censures, specially grounded and having
warrant of the word of God. Item, our Sovereign Lord, and Estates of
Parliament foresaid, abrogates, casses, and annihilates the Acts of the same
Parliament holden at Edinburgh the said year 1584. years, granting commission
to Bishops, and other Judges, constitute in Ecclesiastical causes, to receive
his Highness presentation to Benefices, to give collation thereupon, and to
put order to all causes Ecclesiastical, which his Majesty, and Estates
aforesaid declares to be expired in the self, and to be null in time
coming, of none avail, force or effect. And therefore ordaines all
Presentations to Benefices to be direct to the particular Presbyteries in all
time coming, with full power to give collation thereupon, and to put order to
all matters and causes Ecclesiastical within their bounds, according to the
Discipline of the Kirk; providing the foresaid Presbyteries be bound and
astricted, to receive and admit whatsoever qualified Minister, presented by his
Majesty, or laicke Patrons.

THE FIRST BOOK OF DISCIPLINE.
To the great Council of Scotland now admitted to the Regiment, by the
providence of God, and by the Common consent of the Estates thereof, Your
Honors humble Servitours and Ministers of Christ Jesus within the same, wish
grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, with the
perpetual increase of the holy Spirit.

FRom your Honors weereceived a charge dased at Edinburgh the 29. of April, in
the year of our Lord 1560. requiring and commanding us in the name of the
eternal God, as we will answer in his presence, to commit to writing, and in
abooke deliver to your wisdoms our judgments touching the reformation of
Religion which heretofore in this Realm (as in others) has been utterly
corrupted: upon the receipt whereof (so many of us as were in this Town) did
conveene, and in unity of mind do offer unto your wisdoms these subsequents
for common order and uniformity to be observed in this Realm concerning
doctrine, administration of Sacraments, election of Ministers, provision for
their sustentation, Ecclesiastical discipline, and policy of the Church; Most
humbly requiring your Honors, that as you look for participation with Christ
Jesus, that neither ye admit any thing which Gods plain word shall not
approve, neither yet that ye shall reject such ordinances as equity, justice,
and Gods word do specify. For, as we will not bind your wisdoms to our
judgments further then we are able to prove by Gods plain Scriptures: so
must we most humbly crave of you, even as ye will answer in Gods presence
(before whom both ye and we must appear to render accounts of all our facts)
that ye repudiate nothing for pleasure and affection of men, which ye be not
able to improve by Gods written and revealed word.

The first head of Doctrine.
Seeing that Christ Jesus is he whom God the Father has commanded only to be
heard and followed of his sheep, we judge it necessary that his Gospel be
truly and openly preached in every Church and Assembly of this Realm, and
that all doctrine repugnant to the same, be utterly repressed, as damnable to
man's salvation.

The explication of the first head.
LEst that upon this generality ungodly men take occasion to cavil, this we
add for explication: By preaching of the Gospel we understand not only the
Scriptures of the new Testament, but also of the old, to wit, the Law,
Prophets, and Histories, in which Christ Jesus is no less contained in figure,
then we have him now expressed in verity And therefore with the Apostle we
affirm, that all Scripture inspired of God is profitable to in struct, to
reprove, and to exhort. In which books of old and new Testaments, we affirm
that all thing necessary for the instruction of the Church, and to make the man
of God perfect, is contained and sufficiently expressed.

By the contrary doctrine we understand whatsoever men by laws, counsels, or
constitutions, have imposed upon the conseiences of men, without the expressed
commandment of Gods word, such as be the vows of chastity, for swearing of
marriage, binding of men and women to several and disguised apparells, to the
superstitious observation of fasting days, difference of meat for conscience
sake, prayer for the dead, and keeping of holy days of certain Saints
commanded by man, such as be all those that the Papists have invented, as the
feasts (as they term them) of the Apostles, Martyrs, Virgins, of Christmasse,
Circumcision, Epiphanie, Purification, and other fond feasts of our Lady:
which things because in Gods Scriptures they neither have commandment nor
assurance, we judge them utterly to be abolished from this Realm: affirming
farther that the obstinate maintainers and teachers of such abominations ought
not to escape the punishment of the civil Magistrate.

The second head of Sacraments.
TO Christ Jesus his holy Gospel truly preached, of necessity it is, that his
holy Sacraments be annexed, and truly ministered, as seals and visible
confirmations of the spiritual promises contained in the word; and they be
two, to wit, Baptism, and the holy Supper of the Lord Jesus, which are then
rightly ministered, when by a lawful Minister the people, before the
administration of the same, are plainly instructed, and put in mind of Gods
free grace and mercy, offered unto the penitent in Christ Jesus: when Gods
promises are rehearsed, the end and use of Sacraments preached and declared,
and that in such a tongue as the people do understand: when farther to them is
nothing added, from them nothing diminished, and in their practice nothing
changed besides the Institution of the Lord Jesus, and practice of his holy
Apostles.

And albeit the order of Geneva which now is used in some of our Churches, is
sufficient to instruct the diligent Reader how that both these Sacraments may
be rightly ministered, yet for an uniformity to be kept, we have thought good
to add this as superaboundant.

In Baptism we acknowledge nothing to be used except the element of water
only (that the word and declaration of the promises ought to preceed we have
said before) wherefore whosoever presumes in Baptism to use oil, salt, wax,
spittle conjuration and crossing accuses the perfect institution of Christ
lesus, of imperfection. For it was void of all such inventions devised by men,
and such as would presume to alter Christ's perfect Ordinance you ought severely
to punish.

The Table of the Lord is then most rightly ministered when it approaches most
near to Christ's own action. But plain it is, that at Supper Christ Jesus
sat with his Disciples; and therefore do we judge that sitting at a Table is
most convenient to that holy action, that bread and wine ought to be there,
that thanks ought to be given, distribution of the same made, and
commandment given that the bread should be taken and eaten, and that all
should likewise drink of the cup of wine, with declaration what both the one
and the other is: we suppose no godly man will doubt: For as touching the
damnable error of the Papists, who dare defraud the Common people of the one
part of that holy Sacrament, to wit, of the cup of the Lords blood, we suppose
their error to be so manifest, that it needs no confutation: neither yet
intend we to confute any thing in this our simple Confession, but to offer
public disputation to all that list oppugn any thing affirmed by us.

That the Minister break the bread and distribute the same to those that be
next unto him, commanding the rest, every one with reverence and sobriety to
break with other, we think it nearest to Christ's action, and to the perfect
practice, as we read in Saint Paul; during the which action we think it
necessary, that some comfortable places of the Scripture be read, which may
bring in mind the death of Christ Jesus, and the benefit of the same. For
seeing that in that action we ought chiefly to remember the Lords death, we
judge the Scriptures making mention of the same, most apt to stir up our dull
minds then, and at all times. Let the discretion of the Ministers appoint the
places to be read as they think good. What times we think most convenient
for the administration of the one and of the other of these Sacraments, shall
be declared in the policy of the Church.

The third head touching the abolishing of Idolatry.
AS we require Christ Jesus to be truly preached, and his holy Sacraments
rightly ministered, so cannot cease to require Idolatry, with all monuments and
places of the same. as Abbeyes, Monkeries, Frieries, Nonries, Chappeis,
Chanteries, Cathedral Churches, Chanonries, Colleges, others then presently
are Parish Churches or Schools, to be utterly suppressed in all bounds and
places of this Realm (except only Palaces, Mansions, and dwelling places
adjacent thereto, with Orchards and Yards of the same) as also that Idolatry
may be removed from the presence of all persons, of what estate or condition
that ever they bewithin this Realm.

For let your Honors assuredly be persuaded, that where idolatry is
maintained, or permitted, where it may be suppressed, that there shall Gods
wrath reign, not only upon the blind and obstinate idolater, but also the
negligent sufferers, especially if God have armed their hands with power to
suppress such abomination.

By Idolatry we understand, the Mass, invocation of Saints, adoration of
Images, and the keeping and retaining of the same. And finally all honoring of
God, not contained in his holy word.

The fourth head concerning Ministers, and their lawful Election.
IN a Church reformed, or tending to reformation, none ought to presume either
to preach, either yet to Minister the Sacraments, till that orderly they be
called to the same. Ordinary Vocation consists in Election, Examination, and
Admission. And because that Election of Ministers in this cursed Papistrie has
altogether been abused, we think expedient to entreat it more largely. It
appertains to the people, and to every several Congregation to elect their
Minister: And in case that they be found negligent therein the space of forty
days, The best reformed Church to wit, the Church of the Super-intendent with
his Council, may present unto them a man whom they judgeapt, to feed the flock
of Christ Jesus, who must be examinated as well in life and manners, as in
doctrine and knowledge. And that this may be done with more exact diligence,
the persons that are to be examinated, must be commanded to appear before
men of soundest judgment remaining in some principal Town next adjacent unto
them, as they that be in Fyfe, Angus, Mearnes or Straitharne, to present
themselves in Saint Andrews, These that be in Lowthian, Merse or Tevidaill to
Edinburgh, and likewise those that be in other Countries must resort to the
best reformed City and Town, that is, to the Town of the Super-intendent,
where, first in the Schools, or, failing thereof, in open assembly, and before
the Congregation, they must give declaration of their gifts, utterance and
knowledge, by interpreting some place of Scripture to be appointed by the
Ministry; which being ended, the person that is presented, or that offers
himself to the administration of the Church, must be examined by the
Ministers and Elders of the Church, and that openly, and before all that list
to hear, in all the chief points that now be in controversy betwixt us and
the Papists, Anabaptists, Arrians, or other such enemies to the Christian
Religion. In which, if he be found sound, able to persuade by wholesome
doctrine, and to convince the gaine-sayer, then must he be directed to the
Church and Congregation where he should serve, that there in open andience of
his Flock in diverse public Sermons, he may give confession of his faith in
the article of Justification, in the Office of Christ Jesus, of the number,
effect, and use of the Sacraments, and finally of the whole Religion which
heretofore has been corrupted by the Papists. If his doctrine be found
wholesome and able to instruct the simple, and if the Church justly can
reprehend nothing in his life, doctrine, nor utterance, then we judge the
Church, which before was destitute, unreasonable, if they tefuse him whom the
Church did offer, and they should be compelled by the censure of the Council
and Church, to receive the person appointed, and approved by the judgment of
the godly and learned: unless that the same Church, have presented a man
better, or as well qualified to the examination, before that this foresaid
trial was taken of the person presented by the council of the whole Church:
As for example, The council of the Church, presents to any Church a man to be
their Minister, not knowing that they are otherwise provided: in the mean
time, the Church is provided of another, sufficient in their judgment for that
charge, whom they prefent to the learned Ministers, and next reformed Church to
be examined. In this case the presentation of the people, to whom he should
be appointed Pastor, must be preferred to the presentation of the council,
or greater Church, unless the person presented by the inferior Church be
judged unable of the Regiment by the Learned. For altogether this is to be
avoided, that any man be violently intruded or thrust in upon any
Congregation. But this liberty with all care must be reserved to every
several Church, to have their Votes and Suffrages in election of their
Ministers. But violent intrusion we call not, when the council of the Church
in the fear of God, and for the salvation of the people, offers unto them a
sfficient man to instruct them, whom they shall not be forced to admit before
just examination, as before is said.

What may unable any person, that he may not be admitted to the Ministry of
the Church.
IT is to be observed, that no person, noted with public infamy, or being
unable to edify the Church by wholesome doctrine, or being known of corrupt
judgment, be either promoted to the regiment of the Church, or yet retained in
Ecclesiastical administration.

Explication.
BY public infamy we understand, not the common sins and offenses which any
has committed in time of blindness, by fragility, (if of the same by a better
and more sober conversation he has declared himself verily penitent) but
such capital crimes as the Civil sword ought and may punish with death by the
word of God. For besides that the Apostle requires the life of Ministers to
be so irreprehensible, that they have a good testimony from those that be
without, we judge it a thing unseemly and dangerous, that he shall have
public authority to preach to others life everlasting, from whom the Civil
Magistrate may take the life temporal for a crime publicly committed. And if
any object, that the Prince has pardoned his offense, and that he has
publicly repented, and so not only his life is in assurance, but also that he
may be received to the Ministry of the Church; We answer, that repentance
does not take away the temporal punishment of the Law, neither does the pardon
of the Prince remove his infamy before man.

That the life and conversation of the person presented, or to be elected may
be the more clearly known, public edicts should be directed to all parts of
this Realm, or at the least to those parts where the person had been most
conversant: as where he was nourished in letters, or where he continued since
the years of infancy and childhood were passed. Straight commandment would
be given that if any capital crimes were committed by him, that they should
be notified; as if he had committed wilful murder, adultery, if he were a
common fornicator, a thief, a drunkard, a fighter, brawler, or contentious
person. These Edicts ought to be notified in the chief Cities, with the like
charge and commandment, with declaration that such as concealed his sins
known did deceive and betray (so far as in them lay) the Church which is the
Spouse of Christ Jesus, and did communicate with the sins of that wicked man.

Admission.
THe Admission of Ministers to their offices must consist in consent of the
people, and Church whereto they shall be appointed, and approbation of the
learned Ministers appointed for their examination.

We judge it expedient that the Admission of Ministers be in open audience,
that some special Minister make a Sermon touching the duty and office of
Ministers, touching their manners, conversation and life: as also touching the
obedience which the Church owes to their Ministers. Commandment should be
given as well to the Minister as to the people, both being present: to wit,
That he with all careful diligence attend upon the flock of Christ Jesus over
the which he is appointed Preacher: That he will walk in the presence of God
so sincerely, that the graces of the Holy spirit may be multiplied into him,
and in the presence of men so soberly and uprightly, that his life may confirm
in the eyes of men, that which by tongue and word he persuaded unto others.
The people would be exhorted to reverence and honor their Ministers, chosen as
the servants and Ambassadors of the Lord Jesus, obeying the commandments which
they pronounce from Gods mouth and book, even as they would obey God himfelfe.
For whosoever hears Christ's Ministers, hears himself; and whosoever
rejects and despises their ministry and exhortation, rejects and
despises Christ Jesus. Other ceremony then the public approbation of the
people, and declaration of the chief Minister, that the person there presented
is appointed to serve the Church, we cannot approve; for labeit the Apostles
used imposition of hands, yet seeing the miracle is ceased, the using of the
ceremony we judge not necessary.

The Minister elected, or presented, examined, and as said is, publicly
admitted, may neither leave the flock at his pleasure to which he had
promised his fidelity and labors, neither yet may the flock reject nor change
him at their appetite, unless they be able to convict him of such crimes as
deserve deposition, whereof we shall after speak. We mean not but that the
whole Church, or the most part thereof, for just considerations, may transfer
a minister from one Church to another: neither yet mean we, that men who now
serve as it were of benevolence, may not be appointed and elected to serve in
other places; but once being solemnly elected, and admitted, we cannot
approve that they should change at their own pleasure.

We are not ignorant that the rarity of godly and learned men, shall seem to
some a just reason why that so strait and sharp examination should not be
taken universally, for so it shall appear, that the most part of the Kirks
shall have no Minister at all. But let these men understand, that the lack of
able men shall not excuse us before God, if by our consent unable men be
placed over the flock of Christ Jesus. As also that amongst the Gentiles godly
and learned men were also rare, as they be now amongst us, when the Apostle
gave the same rule to try and examine Ministers, which we now follow. And
last, let them understand that it is alike to have no Minister at all, and to
have an Idol in the place of a true Minister: Yea and in some case it is
worse, for those that be utterly destitute of Ministers, will be diligent to
search for them; but those that have a vain shadow, do commonly without
further care content themselves with the same, and so remain they continually
deceived, thinking that they have a Minister, when in very deed they have none.
For we cannot judge him a dispensator of Gods mysteries, that in no wise can
break the bread of life to the fainting and hungry souls. Neither judge we
that the Sacraments can be rightly ministered by him in whose mouth God has
put no Sermon of exhortation. The chiefest remedy left to your Honors, and to
us, in all this raritie of true Ministers, is fervent prayer unto God, that it
will please his mercy to thrust out faithful workmen in this his harvest. And
next, that your Ho. with consent of the Church, are bound by your authority to
compel such men as have gifts and graces able to edify the Church of God,
that they bestow them where greatest necessity shall be known. For no man may
be permitted to live idle, or as themselves list; but must be appointed to
travel where your wisdoms and the Church shall think expedient: We cannot
prescribe unto your Honors certain rules how that ye shall distribute the
Ministers and learned men, whom God has already sent unto you. But hereof we
are assured, that it greatly hinders the progress of Christ's Gospel within
this poor Realm, that some altogether abstract their labors from the Church,
and others remain altogether in one place, the most part of them being idle.
And therefore of your Honors we require in Gods name, that by your authority,
which ye have of God, ye compel all men to whom God has given any Talent to
persuade by wholesome doctrine, to bestow the same, if they be called by the
Church, to the advancement of Christ's glory, and the comfort of his troubled
flock. And that ye with the consent of the Church, assign unto your chiefest
workmen, not only Towns to remain in, but also Provinces; that by their
faithful labors, Churches may be erected, and order established where none
is now. And if on this manner ye shall use your power and authority, chiefly
seeking Gods glory, and the comfort of your brethren, we doubt not but God
shall bless you and your enterprises.

For Readers.
TO the Churches where no Ministers can be had presently, must be appointed
the most apt men that distinctly can read the common prayers and the
Scriptures, to exercise both themselves and the Church, till they grow to
greater perfection; and in process of time, be that is but a Reader, may
attain to a farther degree, and by consent of the Church, and discreet
Ministers, may be permitted to minister the Sacraments, but not before that
he be able some what to persuade by wholesome doctrine, beside his reading,
and be admitted to the Ministry, as before is said. Some we know that of
long time have professed Christ Jesus, whose honest conversation deserves
praise of all godly men, and whose knowledge also might greatly help the
simple, and yet they only content themselves with reading; these must be
animated, and by gentle admonition encouraged by some exhortation to comfort
their brethren, and so they may be admitted to administration of the
Sacraments; but such Readers as neither have had exercise, not continuance in
Christ's true religion, must abstain from ministration of the Sacraments, till
they give declaration and witnessing of their honesty and further knowledge,
that none be admitted to preach, but they that are qualified therefore, but
rather be retained Readers, and such as are Preachers already, not found
qualified therefore, by the Super-intendent, be placed to be Readers.

The fifth head concerning the provision for the Misters, and for the
distribution of the rents and possessions justly appertaining to the Church.
Seeing that of our Master Christ Jesus, and his Apostle Paul we have, that the
workman is worthy of his reward, and that the mouth of the laboring exe ought
not to be musseled, of necessity it is, that honest provision be made for
the Ministers, which we require to be such, that they have neither occasion
of solicitude, neither yet of insolency and wantonness. And this provision
must be made not only for their own sustentation, during their lives; but
also for their Wives and Children after them. For we judge it a thing most
contrarious to reason, godliness and equity, that the Widow and the Children of
him who in his life did faithfully serve in the Kirk of God, and for that cause
did not carefully make provision for his family, should after his death be
left comfortless of all provision: which provision for the Wives of the
Ministers after their decease is to be remitted to the discretion of the Kirk.
Difficile it is to appoint a several stipend to every Minister, by reason that
the charge and necessity of all, will not be alike. For some will be
continuers in one place, some will be compelled to travel, and often to change
their dwelling place (if they shall have charge of diverse Kirkes;) among these
some will be burdened with Wife and Children, and one with more then others,
and some perhaps will be single men. If equal stipends should be appointed
to these that in charge should be so unequal, either should the one suffer
penury, or else should the other have superfluity and too much. We judge
therefore that every Minister have sufficient whereupon to keep an house, and
be sustained honestly in all things necessary as well for keeping of his house
and clothes, flesh, fish, books, fuel, and other things necessary, of the
rents and treasury of the Kirk, at the discretion of the Congregation conform
to the quality of the person and necessity of the time: Wherein it is thought
good that every Minister shall have at least forty bolls meal, twenty six
bolls malt, to find his house bread and drink, and more so much as the
diseretion of the Church finds necessary; besides money for buying of other
provision to his house and other necessaries: the modification whereof is
referred to the judgment of the Kirk, to be made every year at the choosing
of the Elders and Deacons of the Kirk. Providing always that there be
advanced to every Minister sufficient provision for a quarter of a year
beforehand of all things. But to him that travels from place to place, whom
we call Superintendent, who remains as it were a month or less in one place
for establishing of the Kirk, and for the same purpose changing to another,
must consideration be had. And therefore to such we think six chalders
beer, nine chalders meal, three chalders oats, six hundredth merkes money, to
be eiked and paired at the discretion of the Prince and Council of the
Reasme, to be paid to him in manner foresaid. The Children of the Ministers
must have the liberties of the Cities next adjacent, where their Fathers
labored, freely granted. They must have the privileges in Schools, and
bursisses in Colleges; That is, that they shall be sustained at learning, if
they be found apt thereto: And failing thereof, that they be put to some
handy-craft; or exercised in some virtuous industry, whereby they may be
profitable members of the Commonwealth, and the same we require of their
Daughters: To wit, that they be virtuously brought up, and honestly doted when
they come to maturity of years at the discretion of the Kirk. And this in Gods
presence we witness we require not so much for our selves, or for any that
appertain to us, as that we do it for the increase of virtue and learning,
and for the profit of the posterity to come. It is not to be supposed that
any man will dedicate himself and his Children so to God and to his Kirk, that
they look for no worldly commodity, but this cankered nature which we bear
is provoked to follow virtue when it sees profit and honor thereto annexed;
and contrarily, then is virtue in many despised, when virtuous and godly men
are without honor: and sorry would we be that poverty should discourage men
from study, and following of the way of virtue, by which they might edify the
Kirk and flock of Christ Jesus. Nothing have we spoken of the stipend of
Readers, because if they can do nothing but read, they neither can be called
nor judged true Ministers, and yet regard must be had to their labors; but so
that they may be suprred forward to virtue, and not by any stipend appointed
for their reading to be retained in that estate. To a Reader therefore that is
newly entered, forty merkes, or more or less, as Parishioners and Readers can
agree, is sufficient: Provided that he teach the Children of the Parish, which
he must do, beside the reading of the common prayers, and books of the old
and new Testament. If from reading he begin to exhort, and explain the
Scriptures, then ought his stipend to be augmented, till finally he come to
the honor of a Minister. But if he be found unable after two years, then
must he be removed from that office, and discharged of all stipend, that
another may be proved as long. For this always is to be avoided, that none
who is judged unable to come at any time to some reasonable knowledge whereby
he may edify the Kirk, shall be perpetually sustained upon the charge of the
Kirk. Farther it must be avoided, that no child, nor person within age, that
is, within twenty one years of age, be admitted to the office of a Reader.
But Readers ought to be endued with gravity and discretion, lest by their
lightness the prayers or Scriptures read be of less price or estimation. It
is to be noted that the Reader be put in the Kirk at the admission of the
Super-intendent. The other sort of Readers, who have long continued in
godliness, and have some gift of exhortation, who are of hope to attain to the
degree of a Minister, and teach the Children; we think an hundred merkes, or
more or less, at the discretion of the Kirk, may be appointed; so that
difference be made, as is said, betwixt them and the Ministers, that openly
preaches the word and ministers the Sacraments.

Rests yet two sorts of people to be provided for, upon that which is called
the Patrimony of the Kirk, to wit, the poor, and teachers of the youth-head.
Every several Kirk must provide for the poor within it self: For fearful
and horrible it is, that the poor, whom not only God the Father in his Law,
but Christ Jesus in his Evangell, and the holy Spirit speaking by Saint Paul
has so earnestly commended to our care, are universally so contemned and
despised. We are not Patrones for stubborn and idle beggars, who running from
place to place make a craft of their begging, whom the civil Magistrate ought
to punish: But for the Widow and Fatherless, the aged, impotent or lamed, who
neither can, nor may travel for their sustentation; we say that God commands
his people to be careful, and therefore for such, as also for persons of
honesty fallen into decay and poverty, ought such provision to be made, that
of our abundance their indigence might be relieved. How this most
conveniently, and most easily may be done in every City, and other parts of
this Realm, God will show you wisdom, and the means, so that your minds
be godly inclined thereto. All must not be suffered to beg that gladly
would so do, neither yet must beggars remain where they would; but the stout
and strong beggars must be compelled to work; and every person that may not
work, must be compelled to repair to the place where he or she was borne,
unless of long continuance they have remained in one place, and there
reasonable provision must be made for sustentation, as the Kirk shall appoint.
The order nor sums in our judgments can not particularly be appointed unto
such times as the poor of every City, Town and Parish be compelled to
repair to the places where they were borne, or of their residence, where their
names and number must be taken and put in roll, and then may the wisdom of
the Kirk appoint stipends accordingly.

The Head of the Super-intendents.
BEcause we have appointed a larger stipend to them that shall be
Super-intendents then to the rest of the Ministers, we have thought good to
signify to your Honors such reasons as moved us to make difference betwixt
Preachers at this time, as also how many Super-intendents we think necessary,
with their bounds, office, election and causes that may deserve deposition from
that charge.

We consider, that if the Ministers whom God has endowed with his singular
graces amongst us should be appointed to several places there to make their
continual residence, that then the greatest part of the Realm should be
destitute of all doctrine: which should not only be the occasion of great
murmur, but also be dangerous to the salvation of many. And therefore we have
thought it a thing most expedient at this time, that from the whole number of
godly and learned men, now presently in this Realm, be selected ten or twelve
(for in so many Provinces we have divided the whole) to whom charge and
commandment should be given, to plant and erect Kirkes, to set, order, and
appoint Ministers, as the former order prescribes, to the Countries that shall
be appointed to their care where none are now. And by their means, your love
and common care over all Inhabitants of this Realm, to whom you are equally
debtors, shall evidently appear; as also the simple and ignorant, who
perchance have never heard Jesus Christ truly preached, shall come to some
knowledge: By the which many that are dead in superstition and ignorance, shall
attain to some feeling of godliness, by the which they may be provoked to
search and seek farther knowledge of God, and his true Religion and
worshipping: whereby the contrary, if they shall be neglected, then shall they
not only grudge, but also seek the means whereby they may continue in their
blindness, or return to their accustomed Idolatry; and therefore nothing we
desire more earnestly then that Christ Jesus be universally once preached
throughout this Realm, which shall not suddenly be, unless that by you men
be appointed, and compelled faithfully to travel in such Provinces as to them
shall be assigned.

The names of the places of residence and several Diocesses of the
Super-intendents.
INprimis, The Super-intendent of Orknay, whose Diocese shall comprehend the
Isles, Orknay, Zetland, and Cathnes, and Stranaver: his residence to be in
Kirkwall.

The Super-intendent of Rosse, whose Diocese shall comprehend Rosse,
Sutherland, Murray, with the north Isles of the Sky, and Jews with the
adjacents: his residence to be in the Channonric of Rosse.

The Super-intendent of Argyle, whose Diocese shall comprehend Argyle,
Kyntire, Lorne, the south Isles, Arran and Buite with their adjacents, with
Lochwhaber: his residence to be in Argyle.

The Super-intendent of Aberdene, whose Diocese is betwixt Dee and Spay
containing the Shirefdom of Aberdene and Bamfe: whose resid ence shall be in
old Aberdene.

The Super-intendent of Brechen, whose Diocese shall be the whole Shirefdomes
of the Mernes, Angus, and the brae of Mar to Dee: his residence to be in
Brechen.

The Super-intendent of Fyfe and Fotheringhame to Stirling, and the whole
Shirefdome of Perth: his residence to be in Saint Andrews.

The Super-intendent of Edinburgh, whose Diocese shall comprehend the whole
Shirefdome of Lowthian and Stirling, and the South Side of the water of Forth:
his residence to be in Edinburgh.

The Super-intendent of Iedburgh, whose Diocese shall comprehend the whole
Tivitdail, Tweddail, Liddisdail, and thereto is added by consent of the whole
Kirk, the Merse, Lawderdaill and Weddaill, with the forest of Etrick: his
residence to be in Iedburgh.

The Super-intendent of Glasgow, whose Diocese shall comprehend Clidsdaill,
Renfrew, Menteth, Lennox, Kyle and Cuninghame: his residence to be in Glasgow.

The Super-intendent of Dumfriesse, whose Diocese shall comprehend Galloway,
Carrik, Nithisdal, Annandaile with the rest of the dailes in the West: his
residence to be in Dumfriesse.

Those men must not be suffered to live as your idle Bishops have done
heretofore: neither must they remain where gladly they would, but they must
be Preachers themselves, and such as may not make long residence in any place
till their Kirkes be planted and provided of Ministers, or at the least of
Readers. Charge must be given to them that they remain in no place above
twenty days in their visitation, till they have passed through their whole
bounds. They must thrice every week preach at the least; and when they return
to their principal Town and Residence, they must be likewise exercised in
preaching and edification of the Kirk: and yet they must not be suffered to
continue there so long, that they may seem to neglect their other Kirkes: But
after they have remained in their chief Town three or four Months at most,
they shall be compelled (unless by sickness they be retained) to re-enter
in visitation. In which they shall not only preach, but also examine the life,
diligence and behavior of the Ministers, as also the order of the Kirkes, the
manners of the people. They must further consider how the poor be provided,
how the youth be instructed: They must admonish where admonition needs, and
dress such things as by good counsel they be able to appease. And finally
they must note such crimes as be heinous, that by the censure of the Kirk the
same may be corrected. If the Super-intendent be found negligent in any of the
chief points of his office, and specially if he be noted negligent in
preaching of the word, and visitation of the Kirkes; or if he be convict of
such crimes, which in common Ministers are damned, he must be deposed, without
respect of his person, or office.

The Election of Super-intendents.
IN this present necessity, the nomination, examination, and admission of the
Super-intendent cannot be so straight, as we require, and as afterward it must
be. For this present, therefore we think it expedient, that either your
Honors by your selves nominate so many as may serve the fore-written
Provinces: or that ye give commission to such men as ye suppose the fear of
God to bein, to do the same. And the same men being called in your presence
shall be by you, and such as your Hon, pleases call unto you for consultation
in that case, appointed to their Provinces. We think it expedient, and
necessary, that as well the Gentlemen, as Burgess of every diocy be made
privy at the same to the election of the Super-intendent; as well to bring the
Kirk in some practice of her liberty, as that the Pastor may be the better
favored of the flock whom themselves have chosen. If your Honors cannot find
for this present so many able as necessity requires, then in our judgments,
more profitable it is those Provinces vaike till God provide better for them,
then that men unable to edific and govern the Kirk, so suddenly be placed in
that charge; for experience has teached us what pestilence has been
engendered in the Kirk by men unable to discharge their offices. When therefore
after three years any Super-intendent shall depart, or chance to be deposed,
the chief Town within the Province, to wit, the Ministers, Elders and
Deacons, with the Magistrate and Council of the same Town, shall nominate,
and by public Edicts proclaim, as well to the Super-intendent, as to two or
three Provinces next adjacent, two or three of the most learned and godly
Ministers within the whole Reasme, that from amongst them, one with public
consent may be elected and appointed to the office then vacant: And this the
chief Town shall be bound to do within the space of twenty days; which
being expired, and no man presented, then shall three of the next adjacent
Provinces with consent of their Super-intendents, Ministers and Elders, enter
in the right and privilege of the Town, and shall present every one of them,
one or two, if they list, to the chief Town to be examined, as the order
requires. As also it shall be lawful for all the Kirkes of the Diocese to
nominate within the same time such persons as they think worthy to stand in
Election, who all must be put in an Edict.

After nomination to be made, public Edicts must be sent forth, warning all
men that have any exception against the persons nominate, or against any of
them, to be present in the chief Town at the day affixed, and place, to
object what they can against the election of any of them. Thirty days we
think sufficient to be assigned thereto. Thirty days we mean after the
nomination be made; which day of the election being come, the whole Ministers
of the Province, with three or four Super-intendents next adjacent, or that
shall be thereto nominated, shall examine, not only the learning, but also
the manners, prudence and hability to govern the Kirk, of all these that be
nominated: that he who shall be found most worthy may be burdened with the
charge. If the Ministers of the whole Provinces should bring with them the
votes of them that were committed to their care, the election should be the
more free. But always the votes of them that convene, should be required. The
examinations must be publicly made. They that stand in election must publicly
preach, and men must be charged in the name of God, to vote according to
conscience, and not after affection.

If any thing be objected against him that stands in election, the
Super-intendents and Ministers must consider whether the objection be made of
conscience or malice, and they must answer accordingly. Other ceremonies then
sharp examination, approlation of the Ministers, and Super-intendents, with the
public consent of the Elders and people, we cannot allow.

The Super-intendent being elected, and appointed to his charge, must be
subject to the censure and correction of Ministers and Elders, not of his
chief Town only, but also of the whole Province, over the which he is
appointed Overseer.

If his offense be known, and the Ministers and Elders of the Town and
Province be negligent in correcting of him, then the next one or two
Super-intendents with their Ministers and Elders, may convent him, and the
Ministers and Elders of his chief Town (provided that it be within his own
Province or chief Town) may accuse or correct as well the Superintendent in
these things that are worthy of correction, as the Ministers and Elders of
their negligence and ungodly tolerance of his offense.

Whatsoever crime deserves deposition or correction of any other Minister,
deserves the same in the super-intendent, without exception of persons.

After that the Kirk is established, and three years be passed, we require
that no man be called to the office of a Super-intendent, who has not at the
least two years given declaration of his faithful labors in the ministry of
the same Kirk.

No Super-intendent may be transferred at the pleasure or request of any one
Province, no not without the consent of the whole council of the Kirk, and
that for grave causes and considerations.

Of one thing in the end we must admonish your Honors, to wit, that in the
appointing of the Super-intendents for this present, ye dis-appoint not your
chief Towns, and where learning is exercised, of such Ministers as more may
profit by residence in one place, then by continual travel from place to
place. For if ye so do, the youth in these places shall lack the profound
interpretation of Scripture: and so shall it be long before your garden send
forth many plants; where by the contrary, if one or two Towns be continually
exercised as they may, the Commonwealth shall shortly feast of their fruit, to
the comfort of the godly.

For the Schools.
SEeing that the office and duty of the godly Magistrate, is not only to
purge the Church of God from all superstition, and to set it at liberty from
tyranny and bondage, but also to provident the utmost of his power, how it may
abide in some purity in the posterity following, we can but freely communicate
our judgments with your Honors in this behalf.

The necessity of Schools.
SEeing that God has determined that his Kirk here in earth shall be taught
not by Angels, but by men; and seeing that men are borne ignorant of God, and
of all godliness, and seeing also he ceases to illuminate men miraculously,
suddenly changing them as he did the Apostles, and others in the primitive
Kirk: Of necessity it is that your Honors be most careful for the virtuous
education, and godly up-bringing of the youth of this Realm: if either ye now
thirst unfainedly the advancement of Christ's glory, or yet desire the
continuance of his benefits to the generation following. For as the youth must
succeed to us, so we ought to be careful that they have knowledge and
erudition to profit and comfort that which ought to be most dear to us, to
wit, the Kirk and spouse of our Lord Jesus. Of necessity therefore we judge it,
that every several Kirk have one Schoolmaster appointed, such a one at least
as is able to teach Grammar, and the Latin tongue; if the Town be of any
reputation. If it be up-a-land, where the people convene to the doctrine but
once in the week, then must either the Reader, or the Minister there
appointed, take care over the children and youth of the parish, to instruct
them in the first rudiments, and especially in the Catechism as we have it now
translated in the book of the common order, called the order of Geneva. And
further we think it expedient, that in every notable Town, and specially in
the Town of the Super-intendent, there be erected a College, in which the
arts at least Logic and Rhetoric, together with the tongues, be read by
sufficient Masters, for whom honest stipends must be appointed. As also
provision for those that be poor, and not able by themselves, nor by their
friends to be sustained at letters, and in special these that come from
Landward. The fruit and commodity hereof shall suddenly appear. For first, the
youth-head and tender children shall be nourished, and brought up in virtue in
presence of their friends, by whose good attendance many inconveniences may be
avoided, in which the youth commonly fall, either by over much liberty, which
they have in strange and unknown places, while they cannot rule themselves: or
else for lack of good attendance, and such necessity as their tender age
requires. Secondly, the exercise of Children in every Kirk, shall be great
instruction to the aged. Last, the great Schools, called the Universities,
shall be replenished with these that shall be apt to learning. For this most be
carefully provided, hat no Father of what estate or condition that ever he be,
use his Children at his own fanta^e, especially in their youthhead, but all
must be compelled to bring up their Children in learning and virtue.

The rich and potent may not be permitted to suffer their Children to spend
their youth in vain idleness, as heretofore they have done: But they must be
exhorted, and by the censure of the Kirk compelled to dedicate their Sons by
good exercises to the profit of the Kirk, and Commonwealth; and that they
must do of their own expenses, because they are able. The Children of the
poor must be supported and sustained of the charge of the Kirk, trial being
taken whether the Spirit of docility be in them found, or not: If they be found
apt to learning and letters, then may they not (we mean, neither the Sons of
the rich, nor yet of the poor) be permitted to reject learning, but must be
charged to continue their study, so that the Commonwealth may have some
comfort by them. And for this purpose must discreet, grave, and learned men be
appointed to visit Schools for the trial of their exercise, profit and
continuance: To wit, the Minister and Elders, and the rest of learned men in
every Town shall in every quarter make examination how the youth have profited.

And certain times must be appointed to reading and learning of the
Catechism, and certain to the Gramma and to the Latin tongues, and a
certain to the Arts of Philosophy, and the tongues; and certain to that study
in the which they intend chiefly to travel for the profit of the
Commonwealth. Which time being expired, we mean in every course, the Children
should either proceed to the farther knowledge, or else they must be set to
some handy-craft, or to some other profitable exercise; providing always that
first they have further knowledge of Christian Religion: To wit, the knowledge
of Gods Law and Commandments, the use and office of the same: the chief
Articles of the beleese, the right form to pray unto God; the number, use, and
effect of the Sacraments: the true knowledge of Christ Jesus, of his Office and
Natures, and such others, without the knowledge whereof neither any man
deserves to be called a Christian, neither ought any to be admitted to the
participation of the Lords Table: and therefore their principles ought and must
be learned in the youth-head.

The Times appointed to every course.
TWo years we think more then sufficient to learn to read perfectly, to
answer to the Catechism, and to have some entres in the first Rudiments of
Grammar; to the full accomplishment whereof (we mean of the Grammar) we think
other three years or four at most sufficient to the Arts, to wit, Logic and
Rhetoric, and to the Greek tongue four years, and the rest till the age of
24 years, to be spent in that study, wherein the Learner would profit the
Church, or Commonwealth, be it in the Laws, Physic, or Divinity, which time
of 24. years being spent in the Schools, the Learner must be removed to serve
the Church or Commonwealth, unless he be found a necessary Reader in this
same College or University. If God shall move your hearts to establish and
execute this order, and put these things in practice, your whole Realm, we
doubt not, within few years will serve it self of true Preachers, and of
other Officers necessary for the Commonwealth.

Of the Erection of Universities.
THe Grammar School being erected, and of the tongues (as we have said) next
we think it necessary there be 3. Universities in this whole Realm,
established in 3. Towns accustomed. The first in S. Andrews, the second in
Glasgow, and the third in Aberdein. And in the first University and principal,
viz. S. Andrews, that there be 3. Colleges, and in the first College, which
is the entry of the University, therebe four classes or seages, the first to
the new Supposts shall be only Dialecticae next only Mathematicae, the third
of Physic only, the fourth of Medicine. And in the second College, two
classes or seages, the first of Moral Philosophy, the second of the Laws. And
in the third College two classes or seages, the first of the tongues, to wit,
Greek and Hebrew, the second of Divinity.

Of Readers, and of the degrees and time of study.
ITem, in the first College and first Class, shall be a Reader of Dialectica,
who shall accomplish his course thereof in a year. In Mathematica, which is the
second Class, shall be a Reader which shall complete his course of
Arithmetica, Geometry, Cosmography, and Astrology in one year. In the third
class shall be a Reader of natural Philosophy, who shall complete his course
in one year. And who after their three years by trial and examination, shall
be found sufficiently instructed in the foresaid sciences, shall be Laureat,
and Graduat in Philosophy. In the fourth class, shall be a Reader of Medicine,
who shall complete his course in 5. years, after the study of the which time,
being by examination found sufficient, they shall be graduat in Medicine.

Item, in the second College, in the first class, one Reader only in the
Ethics, Oeconomicks, and Politics, who shall complete his course in the space
of one year. In the second class shall be two Readers in the Muncipall and
Roman Laws, who shall complete his course in 4. years, after which time being
by examination found sufficient, they shall be graduate in the Laws.

Item, in the third college, in the first class, one reader of the Hebrew,
and another of the Greek tongue, who shall complete the Grammar thereof in 3.
months, and the remanent of the year, the Reader of the Hebrew shall
interpret one book of Moses, the Prophets, or the Psalms, so that this course
and class shall continue one year. The Reader of the Greek shall interpret
some book of Plato, together with some place of the new Testament. In the
second class shall be two Readers in Divinity, the one in the new Testament,
the other in the old, who shall complete their course in five years: after
which time, who shall be found by examination sufficient, they shall be
graduate in divinity.

Item, we think expedient that none be admitted to the first College, and to
he Supposts of the University, unless he have from the Master of the School,
and Minister of the Town where he was instructed in the tongues, and testimony
of his learning, docility, age and parentage: and likewise trial be taken by
certain Examinators, depute by the Rector and Principals of the same. And if
he be found sufficiently instructed in the Dialectica, he shall incontinent the
same year be promoted to the class of Mathematica.

Item, that none be admitted to the class of Medicine, but he that shall have
his testimonial of his time well spent in Dialectica, Mathemasica, and
Physic, and of his docility in the last.

Item, that none be admitted unto the class of the Laws, but he that shall
have sufficient testimonials of his time well spent in Dialectica, Mathematica,
Physica, Ethics, Oeconomicks, and Politics, and of his docility in the last.

Item, that none be admitted unto the class and seage of Divinity, but he that
shall have sufficient testimonials of his time well spent in Dialectica,
Mathematica, Physica, Ethica, Oeconomica, and Politica, and the Hebrew tongue,
and of his docility in the moral Philosophy, and the Hebrew tongue. But
neither shall such as apply them to hear the Laws, be compelled to hear
Medicine; neither such as apply them to hear Divinity, be compelled to hear
either Medicine, or yet the Laws.

Item, in the 2. University, which is Glasgow, shall be two Colleges only: in
the first shall be a class of Dialectica, another of Mathematica, the third of
Physica, ordered in all sorts as S. Andrews.

Item, in the second, four classes, the first of Moral philosophy, Ethics,
Oeconomicks, and Physic. The second of the Muncipall and Roman Laws. The
third, of the Hebrew tongue. The fourth of Divinity, which shall be ordered in
all sorts to that we have written in the order of the University of S. Andrews.

The third University of Aberdein shall be conform to this University of
Glasgow in all sorts.

Item, we think needful that there be chosen of the body of the University to
every College, a principal man of learning, discretion and diligence, who
shall receive the whole rents of the College; and distribute the same
according to the erection of the College, and shall daily hearken the diet
counts, adjoining to him weekly one of the Readers or Regents, above whom he
shall take attendance upon their diligence, as well in their reading as
exercising of the youth in the matter taught upon the policy and uphold of the
place, and for punishment of crimes shall hold a weekly convention with the
whole members of the College. He shall be countable yearly to the
Super-intendent, Rector, and the Principals convened, about the first of
November. His election shall be in this sort: There shall be three of the most
sufficient men of the University (not Principals already nominate by the
members of the College) sworn to follow their consciences whose Principal is
departed, and publicly proponed through the whole University; after the which
time 8. days, by the Super-intendent himself, or his special Procurator,
with the Rector, and the rest of the Principals, as a Chapter, convenit, shall
confirm one of the three they think most sufficient, being before sworn to
do the same with a single eye without respect to sead or favor.

Item, in every College we think needful at least, a Steward, a Cook, a
Gardener, and Porter, who shall be subject to Discipline of the Principal, as
the rest.

Item, That every University have a beddall subject to serve at all times
throughout the whole University, as the Rector and Principal shall command.

Item, that every University have a Rector chosen from year to year as shall
follow. The Principals, being convened with the whole Regents chapterly shall
be sworn, that every man in his room shall nominate such a one as his
conscience shall testify to be most sufficient, to bear such charge and
dignity: and three of them that shall be oftest nominated shall be put in edict
publicly 15. days before Michaelmas; and then shall on Michaelmas even
convene the whole Principals, Regents, and Supposts, that are graduat, or at
the least studied their time in Ethics, Oeconomicks, and Politics, and na
others younger, and every one first protest in Gods presence to follow the
sincere ditment of their conscience shall nominate of the three, and he that
has most votes shall be confirmed by the Super-intendent and Principals, and
his duty with an exhortation proponed unto him, and this to be the 28. day of
September, and thereafter trial to be taken hinc inde of his just and godly
government, and of the rests lawful submission and obedience: he shall be
propined by the University at his entry with a new garment, bearing insignia
Magistratus, and he holden monthly to visit every College, and with his
presence decore and examine the lections and exercise thereof. His Assessors
shall be a Lawyer and a Theologe, with whose advice he shall decide all
questions civil betwixt the members of the University. If any without the
University pursue a member thereof, or he be persued by a member of the same,
he shall assist the Provost and Baillies in these cases, or other Judges
competent, to see justice be ministered: In like wise if any of the University
be criminally persued, he shall assist the Judges competent, and see that
justice be ministered.

Item, We think expedient that in every College in every University, there be
24. bursars, divided equally in all the Classes and seages as is above
expremit, that is, in S. Andrews 72. bursars, in Glasgow 48. bursars, in
Aberdeine 48. to be sustained only in meat upon the charges of College, and
to be admitted at the examination of the ministry and chaptour of the
Principals in the University, as well in the docility of the Persons offered,
as of the ability of their Parents to sustain them themselves, and not to
burden the Commonwealth with them.

Of the Stipends and Expenses necessary.
ITem, we think expedient, that the Universities be doted with temporal
lands, with rents and revennues of the Bishoprics temporalitie, and of the
Kirkes collegiate so far as their ordinary charges shall require; and
therefore that it would please your Hon: by advice of your Hon. Coun. and vote
of Parliam. to do the same. And to the effect the same may be shortly exped. we
have recolled the sums we think necessary for the same.

Imprimis, for the ordinary stipend of the Dialectician Reader, the
Mathematician, Physician and moral Philosopher, we think sufficient an
hundred pounds for every one of them.

Item, for the stipend of every Reader in Medicine, and Laws, a hundredth
thirty three pounds 6. s. 8. d.

Item, to every Reader in Hebrew, Greek, and Divinity, 200. p.

Item, to every Principal of a College 200. pounds.

Item, to every Steward 16. pounds.

Item, to every Gardener, to every Cook and Porter, to ilk one of them ten
merkes.

Item, to the buird of every bursar without the class of Theol. 20. pounds.

Item, in the class of Theology, which will be only twelve persons in S.
Androes, 24. p.

Sum of yearly and ordinary expenses in the Universitie of S. Androes, 3979.
p.

Sum of yearly and ordinary expenses of Glasgow. 2922. p.

Abberdine as much.

Sum of the ordinary charges of the whole.

Item, the Beddalls stipend shall be of every intrant and suppost of the
University 2. shillings: of every one Graduate in Philosophy 3. shillings: of
every one Graduate in Medicine or laws, 4. shillings, in Theology 5.
shillings: all Bursars being excepted.

Item, we have thought good for building and upholding of the places, a
general collect be made, and that every Earls son, at his entry to the
University, shall give 40. s. and likewise at every Graduation 40. shil. Item,
each Lords son likewise at such time, 30. shil. each freeholding Barons son
20. shil. every fewar and substantious Gentleman's son, 1 mark. Item, every
substantious husband and Burges son, at each time 10. shil. Item, every one of
the rest, not excepting the bursars, 5. shil. at each time. And that this be
gathered in a common box, put in keeping to the principal of the Theologians,
every principal having a key thereof, to be counted each year once with the
rest of principalls to be laid in the same, about the 15. day of Nov. in
presence of the Superintendent, Rector and whole Principals, and with their
whole consent, or at least the most part of them, referred, and employed only
upon the building and upholding of the places, and repairing of the same, ever
as necessity shall require. And therefore the Rector with his assistants,
shall be holden to visit the places each year once, incontinent after he be
promoted upon the last of October, or thereby.

Of the privileges of the University.
SEeing we desire that Innocence should defend us rather then privilege, we
think that each person of the Universitie should answer before the Provost and
Bailiffes of each Town, where the Universities are, of all crimes whereof they
are accused, only that the Rector be assessor to them in the said actions. In
civil matters, if the question be betwixt members of the Universitie, on each
side making their residence and exercise therein, for the time in that case the
party called shall not be holden to answer, but only before the Rector and
his assessors heretofore exprimed. In all other cases of civil pursuit, the
general rule of the law to be observed, actor sequatur forum rei, etc.

Item, that the Rector and all inferior members of the Universitie be exempted
from all taxations, imposts, charges of war, or any other charge that may
onerate, or abstract him or them, from the care of his office, such as Tutorie,
Curatorie, or any such like that are established, or hereafter shall be
established in our Commonweal; to the effect that (without trouble) they may
wait on the upbringing of the youth in learning, and bestow their time only in
that most necessary exercise.

All other things touching the books to be read in ilk class, and all such
like particular affairs we refer to the discretion of the Masters,
Principals and Regents, with their well advised counsel; not doubting but if
God shall grant quietness, and give your Wisdoms grace to set forward
letters in the sort prescribed, ye shall leave wisdom and learning to your
posterity, a treasure more to be esteemed then any earthly treasure; ye are
able to amasse for them, which without wise some are more able to be their ruin
and confusion, then help and comfort. And as this is most true, so we leave it
with the rest of the commodities to be weighed by your honors wisdom, and
set forwards by your authority to the most high advancement of this
Commonwealth committed to your charge.

The sixth head of the Rents and Patrimony of the Church.
Their two sorts of men, that is to say, Ministers and the poor, together with
the Schools, when order shall be taken thereanent, must be sustained upon the
charges of the Kirk; and therefore provision must be made how, and by whom
such sums must be lifted. But before we enter in this head, we must crave of
your Honors, in the name of the eternal God, and of his Son Christ Jesus,
that ye have respect to your poor brethren, the Laborers and Manurers of the
ground; who by their cruel beasts the Papists have before been oppressed, that
their life to them has been dolorous and bitter. If ye will have God author
and approver of this reformation, ye must not follow their footsteps, but ye
must have compassion of your brethren, appointing them to pay reasonable
teinds, that they may find some benefit of Christ Jesus now preached unto them.

With the grief of our hearts we hear, that some Gentlemen are now as cruel
over their Tenants, as ever were the Papists, requiring of them whatsoever they
before paid to the Kirk; so that the Papisticall tyranny shall only be changed
into the tyranny of the Lord and Lord. We dare not flatter your Honors,
neither yet is it profitable for you that we so do. If we permit cruelty to
be used, neither shall ye, who by your authority ought to gainstand such
oppression, nor yet they that use the same escape Gods heavy and fearful
judgments. The Gentlemen, Barons, Earls, Lords and others, must be content to
live upon their just rents, and suffer the Kirk to be restored to her liberty;
that in her restitution, the poor, who heretofore by the cruel Papists have
been spoiled and oppressed, may now receive some comfort and relaxation, that
their teinds and other exactions be clean discharged, and no more taken in
times coming. The uppermost claith corps-present; clerk-maile, the Pasche
offering, teind-aile and all handlings upaland, can neither be required, nor
received of good conscience: Neither do we judge it to proceed of justice, that
any man should possess the teinds of another, but we think it a most
reasonable thing that every man have the use of his own teinds, provided that
he answer to the Deacons and Treasurers of the Kirk, of that which justice
shall be appointed to him. We require the Deacons and Treasures, rather to
receive the rents, then the Ministers themselves; because that of the tiends
must not only the Minister be sustained, but also the poor and schools. And
therefore we think it expedient that common Treasurers; to wit, the Deacons be
appointed from year to year, to receive the whole rents appertaining to the
Kirk, and that commandment be given that none be permitted either to receive,
or yet to intromet with any thing apperteining to the sustination of the
persons foresaid, but such as by common consent of the Kirk are thereto
appointed.

If any think this prejudicial to the tackes and assedations of them that now
possess the tiends. Let them understand, that their unjust possession is no
possession before God; for they of whom they received their title, and
presupposed right or warrant, were thieves and murderers, and had no power so
to alienate the patrimony, and common good of the Kirk. And yet we are not so
extreme, but that we wish just recompense to be made to such as have debursed
sums of money to the unjust professors, so that it has not been done of late
days in prejudice of the Kirk. But such as are found and known to be done of
plain collusion, in no ways ought to be maintained by you. And for that
purpose we think it most expedient that whosoever have assedation of tiends
and Kirks, be openly warned to produce their assedation and assurance, that
cognition being taken, the just takesmen may have the just and reasonable
recompense for the years that are to run, the profit of the years past
being considered and deduced, and the unjust and surmised may be served
accordingly; so that the Kirk in the end may receive her liberty and freedom,
and that only for the relief of the poor. Your Honors may easily
understand that we speak not now for our selves, but in favor of the
Laborers defrauded and oppressed by the Priests, and by their confederate
pensioners; for while that the Priests Pensioner his idle belly is delicately
fed, the poor, to whom the portion of that appertains, was pined with hunger;
and moreover the true labourer was compelled to pay that which he ought not.
For the labourer is neither debtor to the dumb dog, called the Bishop, neither
yet to his hired pensioner; but is debtor only to the Kirk. And the Kirk is
bound to sustain and nourish of her charges, the persons before mentioned, to
wit, the Ministers of the word, the poor, and the teachers of the youth. But
now to return to the former head. The sums able to sustain the forenamed
persons, and to furnish all things appertaing to the preservation of good order
and policy within the Kirk, must be lifted off the tenths, to wit, the tenth
sheafe, hay, hemp, lint, fishes, tenth calfe, tenth lamb, tenth wool, tenth
folle, tenth cheese. And because that we know that the tenth reasonably taken,
as is before expressed, will not suffice to discharge the former necessity, we
think that all things doted in hospitality, and annual rents both in burgh
and land, pertaining to the Priests, Chantorie Colleges, Chappellanties, and
the Freeries of all orders, to the sisters of the Seenes, and such others, be
retained still in the use of the Kirk or Kirks within the Towns and parishes
where they were doted. Furthermore, to the upholding of the Universities, and
sustentaaion of the Superintendents, the whole revennue of the temporalitie of
the Bishops, Deanes, and Archdeanes lands, and of all rents of lands pertaining
to the Cathedral Kirks whatsoever. And further Merchants and rich craftsmen in
free Burghs, having nothing to do with the manuring of the ground, must take
some provision of their Cities, Towns, and dwelling places for to support the
need of the Kirk.

To the Ministers, and failing thereof, the Readers, must be restored their
Manses and Gleibs; for else they cannot serve the flock at all times, as their
duty is; If any Gleib exceed six Acres of ground, the rest to remain in the
hands of the possessours, till order be taken therein.

The receivers and collectors of these rents and duties, must be Deacons or
Treasurers appointed from year to year in every Kirk, and by the common
consent, and free election of the Kirk. The Deacons must distribute no part of
that which is collected, but by command of the Ministers and Elders. And that
they may command nothing to be delivered, but as the Kirk has before
determined; to wit, the Deacons shall of the first part pay the sums, either
quarterly, or from half year to half year, to the Ministers, which the Kirk
has appointed. The same they shall do to the Schoolemasters, Readers, and
Hospital, if any be, receiving always an acquittance for their discharge. If
any extraordinary sums be to be delivered, then must the Ministers, Elders,
and Deacons; consult whether the deliverance of such sums, does stand with
the common ^^ilirie of the Kirk, or not. And if they do universally condescend
and agree upon the affirmative or negative, then because they are in credit and
office for the year, they may do as best seems; but if there be any
controversy amongst themselves, the whole Kirk must be made privy, and after
that the matter be proponed, and the reasons; the judgment of the Kirk with
the Ministers consent shall prevail. The Deacons shall be compelled and bound
to make accounts to the Minister and Elders of that which they received, as often
as the policy shall appoint: and the Elders when they are changed (which must
be every year) must clear their counts before such Auditers as the Kirk shall
appoint: and both the Deacons and Elders being changed shall deliver to them
that shall be new elected all sums of money corns and other profits resting
in their hands: The tickets whereof must be delivered to the Super-intendants
in their visitation, and by them to the great council of the Kirk; that as
well the abundance as the indigence, of every Kirk may be evidently known, that
a reasonable equality may be had throughout this whole Realm. If this order
be perfectly kept, corruption cannot suddenly enter. For the free and yearly
election of Deacons and Elders shall suffer none to usurp a perpetual
domination over the Kirk: the knowledge of the rentall shall suffer them to
receive no more, then whereof they shall be bound to make accounts: the
deliverance of money to the new officers shall not suffer private men use in
their private business, that which appertains to the public affairs of the
Kirk.

The seventh head of Ecclesiastical Discipline.
AS that no Commonwealth can flourish, or long endure, without good Laws and
sharp execution of the same; so neither can the Kirk of God be brought to
purity, neither yet be retained in the same without the order of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, which stands in reproving and correcting of the
faults, which the civil sword either does neglect, or not punish: blasphemy,
adultery, murder, perjurie, and other crimes capital, worthy of death, ought
not properly to fall under censure of the Kirk; because all such open
transgressors of Gods laws, ought to be taken away by the civil sword. But
drunkenness, excess, be it in apparel, or be it in eating and drinking,
fornication, oppressing of the poor by exactions, deceiving of them in buying
and selling by wrang met and measure, wanton words and licentious living
tending to slander, do openly appertain to the Kirk of God to punish them, as
Gods word commands. But because this accursed Papistrie has brought in such
confusion into the world, that neither was virtue rightly praised, neither yet
vice severely punished, the Kirk of God is compelled to draw the sword, which
of God she has received, against such open and manifest contemners, cursing
and excommunicating all such, as well those whom the civil sword ought to
punish, as the other, from all participation with her in prayers and
Sacraments, till open repentance appear manifestly in them. As the order and
proceeding to excommunication ought to be slow and grave, so being once
pronounced against any person of what estate or condition that ever they be, it
must be kept with all severitie. For laws made and not kept, engender contempt
of virtue; and brings in confusion and liberty to sin. And therefore this
order we think expedient to be observed before, and after excommunication.
First, if the offense be secret or known to few men, and rather stands in
suspicion then in manifest probation, the offender ought to be privately
admonished, to abstain from all appearance of evil, which if he promise to
do, and declare himself sober, honest, and one that fears God, and fears to
offend his brethren, then may the secret admonition suffice for his correction.
But if he either contemn the admonition, or after promise made do show
himself no more circumspect then he was before, then must the Minister
admonish him, to whom if he be found inobedient they must proceed according to
the rule of Christ, as after shall be declared. If the crime be public, and
such as is heinous, as fornication, drunkenness, fighting, common swearing, or
execration, then ought the offender to be called in presence of the Minister,
Elders and Deacons, where his sin and trespass ought to be declared and
aggreged; so that his conscience may seele how far he has offended God, and
what slander he has raised in the Kirk. If signs of unfeigned repentance
appear in him, and if he require to be admitted to public repentance, the
Minister may appoint unto him a day, when the whole Kirk convenes together,
that in presence of all he may testify his repentance, which before he
professed. Which if he accept, and with reverence confess his sin, doing the
same, and earnestly desiring the Congregation to pray to God with him for
mercy, and to accept him in their society notwithstanding the former offense;
Then the Kirk may and ought to receive him as a penitent. For the Kirk ought to
be no more severe, then God declares himself to be, who witnesses that in
whatsoever hour a sinner unfainedly repents, and turns from his wicked way,
that he will not remember one of his iniquities. And therefore ought the Kirk
diligently to advert, that it excommunicate not those whom God absolves. If the
offender called before the Ministry be found stubborn, hard-hearted, or in
whom no sign of repentance appears, then must he be dimitted with an
exhortation to consider the dangerous estate in which he stands, assuring him,
that if they find in him no other tokens of amendment of life, that they will
be compelled to seek a further remedy. If he within a certain space show his
repentance to the Ministry, they may present him to the Kirk, as before is
said: If he continue not in his repentance, then must the Kirk be advertised,
that such crimes are committed amongst them, which by the Ministry have been
reprehended, and the persons provoked to repent; whereof because no signs
appear unto them, they could not but signify unto the Kirk the crimes, but
not the person; requiring them earnestly to call to God to move and touch the
heart of the offender, so that suddenly and earnestly he may repent. If the
person malign, the next day of public Assembly, the crime and the person
must be both notified unto the Kirk, and their judgments must be required, if
that such crimes ought to be suffered unpunished amongst them; request also
should be made to the most discreet and nearest friend of the offender to
travel with him to bring him to knowledge of himself, and of his dangerous
estate, with a commandment given to all men to call to God for the conversion
of the unpenitent. If a solemn and special prayer were drawn for that
purpose, the thing should be more gravely done. The third Sunday the Minister
ought to require, if the unpenitent have declared any signs of repentance to
one of the Ministry; and if he have, then may the Minister appoint him to be
examined by the whole Ministry, either then instantly, or another day affixed
to the Consistory: and if repentance appear, as well for his crime, as for
his long contempt, then he may be presented to the Kirk; and make his
confession to be accepted as before is said: But if no man fignifie his
repentance, then ought he to be excommunicated, and by the mouth of the
Minister, and consent of the Ministry, and commandment of the Kirk must such
a contemner be pronounced excommunicate from God, and from all society of the
Kirk. After which sentence may no person (his wife and family only excepted)
have any kind of conversation with him, be it in eating and drinking, buying
and felling; yea, in saluting or talking with him, except that it be at
commandment or license of the Ministry for his conversion, that he, by such
means confounded, seeing himself abhorred of the godly and faithful, may
have occasion to repent and so be saved. The sentence of excommunication must
be published universally throughout the Realm, lest that any man should
pretend ignorance. His children begotten and borne after that sentence, and
before his repentance may not be admitted to Baptism, till either they be of
age to require the same, or else that the mother, or some of his special
friends, members of the Kirk, offer and present the child, abhorring and
damning the iniquity, and obstinate contempt of the impenitent.

If any man should think it severe that the child should be punished for the
iniquity of the father: let him understand that the Sacraments appertain to
the faithful and their seed; but such as stubbornly contemn all
godlyadmonition, and obstinately remain in their iniquity, cannot be
accounted amongst the faithful.

The order for public Offenders.
We have spoken nothing of them that commit horrible crimes, as murderers,
manslayers, adulterers; for such, as we have said, the civil sword ought to
punish to dead: But in case they be permitted to live, then must the Kirk, as
is before said, draw the sword which of God she has received, holding them as
accursed even in their very fact. The offender being first called, and order of
the Kirk used against him in the same manner, as the persons for their
obstinate impenitency are publicly excommunicate. So that the obstinate
impenitent after the sentence of excommunication, and the murderer or
adulterer stand in one case, as concerning the judgment of the Kirk. That is
neither of both may be received in the fellowship of the Kirk to prayers or
Sacraments (but to hearing the word they may) til first they offer themselves
to the Ministry, humbly requiring the Ministers and Elders to pray to God for
them, and also to be intercessors to the Kirk that they may be admitted to
public repentance, and to the fruition of the benefits of Christ Jesus,
distributed to the members of his body. If this request be humbly made, then
may not the Ministers refuse to signify the same unto the Kirk, the next day
of public preaching, the Minister giving exhortation to the Kirk, to pray to
God to perform the work which he appears to have begun, working in the heart
of the offender, unfeigned repentance of his grievous crime and offense, and
feeling of his great mercy by the operation of the holy Spirit. Thereafter one
day ought publicly to be assigned unto him to give open profession of his
offense and contempt, and so to make public satisfaction to the Kirk of God:
which day the offender must appear in presence of the whole Kirk, with his own
mouth damning his own impiety, publicly confessing the same: desiring God of
his mercy and grace, and his Congregation, that it would please them to receive
him in their society, as before is said. The Minist must examine him diligently
whether he finds a hatred or displeasure of his sin, as well of his
contempt, as of his crime: which if he confess, he must travel with him, to
see what hope he has of Gods mercies; and if he find him reasonably instructed
in the knowledge of Christ Jesus, in the virtue of his death, then may the
Minister comfort him with Gods infallible promises, and demand of the Kirk if
they be content to receive that creature of God whom Satan before had drawn in
his nets, in the society of their body, seeing that he declared himself
pentient. Which if the Kirk grant, as they cannot justly deny the same, then
ought the Minister in public prayer commend him to God, confess the sin of
that offender before the whole Kirk, desiring mercy and grace for Christ Jesus
sake. Which prayer being ended, the Minister ought to exhort the Kirk to
receive that penitent brother in their favors, as they require God to receive
themselves when they offend. And in sign of their consent, the Elders, and
chief men of the Kirk, shall take the penitent by the hand, and one or two in
the name of the rest shall kiss and embrace him with reverence and gravity, as
a member of Christ Jesus. Which being done, the Minister shall exhort the
received that he take diligent heed in times coming that Satan trap him not
in such crimes, admonishing him that he will not cease to tempt and try by all
means possible to bring him from that obedience which he has given to God,
and to the ordinance of Jesus Christ. The exhortation being ended, the Minister
ought to give publik thanks unto God for the conversion of their brother, and
for all benefits which we receive of Christ Jesus, praying for the increase and
continuance of the same. If the penitent after he has offered himself unto
the Ministry, or to the Kirk, be found ignorant of the principal points of
our Religion, and chiefly in the Articles of Justification, and of the office
of Christ Jesus, then ought he to be exactly instructed before he be received:
For a mocking of God it is to receive them to repentance, who know not wherein
stands their remedy, when they repent their sin.

Persons subject to Discipline.
TO Discipline must all the estates within this Realm be subject, as well the
Rulers, as they that are ruled: yea the Preachers themselves, as well as the
poor within the Kirk: And because the eye and mouth of the Kirk ought to be
most single, and irreprehensible, the life and conversation of the Minister
ought to be diligently tried, whereof we shall speak after that we have spoken
of the Election of Elders and Deacons, who must assist the Minister in all
public affairs of the Kirk.

The eight head touching the election of Elders and Deacons.
MEN of best knowledge in Gods word, and cleanest life, men faithful and of
most honest conversation that can be found in the Kirk, must be nominate to be
in election, and their names must be publicly read to the whole Kirk by the
Minister, giving them advertisement, that from amongst them must be chosen
Elders and Deacons. If any of these nominate be noted with public infamy, he
ought to be repelled. For it is not seemly that the servant of corruption shall
have authority to judge in the Kirk of God.

If any man know other of better qualities within the Kirk, then these that be
nominate, let them be put in election, that the Kirk may have the choice.

If the Kirk be of smaller number then that Seniors and Deacons can be chosen
from amongst them, then may they well be joined to the next adjacent Kirks. For
the plurality of Kirks without Ministers and order, shall rather hurt then
edify.

The election of Elders and Deacons ought to be used every year once, which we
judge to be most convenient at the first day of August lest of long continuance
of such officers, men presume upon the liberty of the Kirk. It hurts not that
one be received in office more years then one, so that he be appointed yearly by
common and free election; provided always that the Deacons and Thesaurers be
not compelled to receive the office again for the space of three years.

How the votes and suffrages may be best received, so that every man may give
his vote freely, every several Kirk may take such order as best seems them.

The Elders being elected, must be admonished of their office, which is to
assist the Ministers in all public affairs of the Kirk, to wit, in
determining and judging causes, in giving admonition to the licentious liver,
in having respect to the manners and conversation of all men within their
charge. For by the gravity of the Seniors, the light and unbridled life of the
licentious, must be corrected, and bridled. Yea the Seniors ought to take heed
to the like manners, diligence and study of their Ministers. If he be worthy of
admonition, they must admonish him; of correction, they must correct him: and
if he be worthy of deposition, they, with consent of the Kirk, and
Super-intendent, may depose him, so that his crime deserve so. If a Minister be
light of conversation, by his Elders and Deacons he ought to be admonished. If
he be negligent in study, or one that vaikes not upon his charge, or flock, or
one that propones not faithful doctrine, he deserves sharper admonition and
correction. To the which if he be found stubborn and inobedient, then may the
Seniors of the Kirk complain to the Ministry of the two next adjacent Kirks,
where men of greater gravitie are. To whose admonition if he be found
inobedient, he ought to be discharged of his Ministry, till his repentance
appear, and a place be vakand for him. If any Minister be deprehended in any
notable crime, as whordom, adultery, manslaughter, perjury, teaching of
heresy, or any other deserving death, or that may be a note of perpetual
infamy, he ought to be deposed for ever. By herefie we mean pernicious
doctrine plainly taught, and openly defended, against the foundations and
principles of our faith: and such a crime we judge to deserve perpetual
deposition from the Ministry. For most dangerous we know it to be to commit the
flock to a man infected with the pestilence of heresy. Some crimes deserve
deposition for a time, and while the person give declaration of greater
gravitie and honesty. And if a Minister be deprehended drinking, brawling, or
fighting, an open slanderer, or infamer of his neighbors, factious, and a
sower of discord, he must be commanded to cease from his Ministry, till he
declare some sign of repentance, upon the which the Kirk shall abide him the
space of 20. days, or further, as the Kirk shall think expedient, before they
proceed to a new election. Every inferior Kirk shall by one of their Seniors,
and one of their Deacons, once in the year, notify unto the Ministers of the
Super-intendents Kirk, the life, manners, study and diligence of their
Ministers, to the end the discretion of some may correct the levity of others.
Not only must the life and manners of Ministers come under censure and judgment
of the Kirk, but also of their wives, children and family, judgment must be
taken, that he neither live riotously, neither yet avaritiously; yea respect
must be had how they spend the stipend appointed to their living. If a
reasonable stipend be appointed, and they live avaritiously, they must be
admonished to live as they receive: for as excess and superfluity is not
tolerable in a Minister, so is avarice and the careful solicitude of money,
utterly to be damned in Christ's servants, and especially in them that are fed
upon the charge of the Kirk. We judge it unseemly and untolerable that
Ministers shall be buirded in common Alehouses, or in Tavernes, neither yet
must a Minister be permitted to frequent and commonly haunt the Court, unless
it be for a time when he is either sent by the Kirk, either yet called for by
the authority, for his counsel and judgment in civil affairs, neither yet
must he be one of the Council, be he judged never so apt for the purpose. But
either must he cease from the ministry (which at his own pleasure he may not
do) or else from bearing charge in civil affairs, unless it be to assist
the Parliament, if they be called.

The office of Deacons, as before is said, is to receive the rents, and gather
the alms of the Kirk, to keep and distribute the same as by the Ministers and
Kirk shall be appointed; they may also assist in judgment with the Minister
and Elders, and may be admitted to read in assembly, if they be required, and
be able thereto.

The Elders and Deacons with their wives and household, should be under the same
censure that is prescribed for the Ministers. For they must be careful over
their office, and seeing they are judges over others manners, their own
conversation ought to be irreprehensible. They must be sober, lovers and
maintainers of concord and peace: and finally, they ought to be examples of
godliness to others. And if the contrary thereof appear, they must be
admonished thereof by the Ministers, or some of their brethren of the
Ministry, if the fault be secret: and if the fault be open and known, they
must be rebuked before the Ministry, and the same order kept against the
Senior and Deacon, that before is described against the Minister. We think it
not necessary, that any public stipend shall be appointed, either to the
Elders, or yet to the Deacons, because their travel continues but for a year,
and also because that they are not so occupied with the affairs of the Kirk,
but that reasonably they may attend upon their domestical business.

The ninth head concerning the policy of the Kirk.
Policy we call an exercise of the Kirk in such things as may bring the rude
and ignorant to knowledge, or else inflame the learned to greater fervencie, or
to retain the Kirk in good order: And thereof there be two sorts, the one
utterly necessary, as that the word be truly preached, the sacraments rightly
ministered, common prayers publicly made, that the children and rude persons be
instructed in the chief points of religion, and that offenses be corrected and
punished: These things be so necessary, that without the same there is no face
of a visible Kirk. The other is profitable, but not merely necessary. That
Psalms should be sung, that certain places of the Scripture be read when there
is no sermon, that this day or that, few or many in the week, the Kirk should
assemble: Of these and such others, we cannot see how a certain order can be
established; For in some kirkes the Psalms may conveniently be sung, in others
perchance they cannot. Some kirkes convene every day, some twice, some thrice
in the week, some perchance but once. In this and such like must every
particular kirk by their consent appoint their own policy. In great Towns we
think expedient that every day there be either Sermon, or common prayers, with
some exercise of reading of Scriptures. What day the public Sermon is, we can
neither require nor greatly approve that the common prayers be publicly used,
lest that we shall either foster the people in superstition, who come to the
prayers, as they come to the Mass; or else give them occasion, that they think
them no prayers, but which be made before and after Sermons.

In every notable town, we require that one day beside the Sunday be appointed
to the Sermon and prayers, which, during the time of Sermon, must be kept free
from all exercise of labor, as well of the Master as of the Servant. In
smaller towns, as we have said, the common consent of the kirk must put
order, but the Sunday must straightly be kept both before and after noone in all
towns. Before noone must the word be preached, and Sacraments minstred, as
also marriage solemnized, if occasion offer: after noone must the young children
be publicly examined in their Catechism in the audience of the people,
whereof the Minister must take great diligence, as well to cause the people
understand the questions proponed as answers, and that doctrine that may be
collected thereof.

The order, and how much is appointed for every Sunday is already distinguished
in the book of our common order, which Catechism is the most perfect that ever
yet was used in the kirk; and after noone may Baptism be ministered, when
occasion is offered of great travel before noone. It is also to be observed,
that prayers be after noone upon Sunday, where there is neither preaching nor
catechism. It appertains to the policy of the kirk to appoint the times when
the Sacraments shall be ministered. Baptism may be ministered whenever the
word is preached: But we think it more expedient that it be ministered upon
Sunday, or upon the day of prayers only after the Sermon; Partly to remove this
gross error, by the which many are deceived, thinking that children be damned
if they die without Baptism; and partly to make the people have greater
reverence to the administration of the Sacraments then they have: for we see
the people begin already to wax weary by reason of the frequent repetition of
those promises.

Four times in the year we think sufficient to the administration of the
Lords Table, which we desire to be distincted, that the superstition of times
may be avoided so far as may be. For your Honors are not ignorant how
superstitiously the people run to that action at Pasche, even as if the time
gave virtue to the Sacrament; and how the rest of the whole year, they are
careless and negligent, as if it appertained not unto them, but at that time
only. We think therefore most expedient, that the first Sunday of March be
appointed for one time, the first Sunday of June for another, the first Sunday
of September for the third, the first Sunday of December for the fourth. We do
not deny but any several kirk for reasonable causes may change the time, and
may minister oftener, but we study to repress superstition. All Ministers must
be admonished to be more careful to instruct the ignorant, then ready to serve
their appetite, and to use more sharp examination, then indulgence, in
admitting to their great Mysteries such as be ignorant of the use and virtue of
the same. And therefore we think that the administration of the Table ought
never to be without examination passing before, and specially of them whose
knowledge is suspect. We think that none are to be admitted to this Mystery,
who can not formally say the Lords prayer, the Articles of the Belief, and
declare the sum of the Law. Further, we think it a thing most expedient and
necessary, that every Kirk have the Bible in English, and that the people be
commanded to convene and hear the plain reading and interpretation of the
Scripture, as the Kirk shall appoint. By frequent reading, this gross
ignorance, which in this cursed Papistry has overflowed all, may partly be
removed. We think it most expedient that the Scripture be read in order: that
is, that some one book of the old or new Testament be begun and orderly read to
the end: And the same we judge of preaching where the Minister for the most
part remains in one place. For this skipping and divagation from place to
place of Scripture be it in reading, or be it in preaching we judge not so
profitable to edify the Kirk, as the continual following of one text. Every
Master of household must be commanded either to instruct, or cause to be
instructed, his children, servants, and family, in the principalls of the
Christian Religion, without the knowledge whereof, ought none to be admitted to
the Table of the Lord Jesus. For such as be so dull, and so ignorant, that they
can neither try themselves, nor yet know the dignity and mystery of that
action, cannot eat and drink of that Table worthily. And therefore of necessity
we judge, that every year at the least, public examination be had by the
Ministers and Elders of the knowledge of every person, within the Kirk; to wit,
that every Master and Mistress of household come themselves, and their family,
so many as be come to maturity before the Minister and the Elders, and give
confession of their faith. If they understand not, nor cannot rehearse the
commandments of Gods law, know not how to pray, neither wherein their
righteousness stands, or consists, they ought not to be admitted to the Lords
Table. And if they stubbornly contemn, and suffer their children and servants
to continue in wilful ignorance, the discipline of the Kirk must proceed
against them to excommunication: and then must that matter be referred to the
Civil Magistrate. For seeing that the just lives by his own faith, and Christ
Jesus justifies by knowledge of himself, insufferable we judge it that men be
permitted to live and continue in ignorance, as members of the Kirk.

Moreover, men, women, Children, would be exhorted to exercise themselves in
Psalms, that when the Kirk does convent and sing, they may be the more able
together, with common hearts and voices to praise God. In private houses we
think expedient, that the most grave and discreet person use the common prayers
at morn and at night, for the comfort and instruction of others. For seeing
that we behold and see the hand of God now presently striking us with diverse
plagues, we think it a contempt of his judgments, or provocation of his anger
more to be kindled against us, if we be not moved to repentance of our former
unthankfulness, and to earnest invocation of his name, whose only power may,
and great mercy will, if we unfainedly convert unto him, remove from us their
terrible plagues, which now for our iniquities hang over our heads. Convert us
o Lord, and we shall be converted.

For Prophesying, or Interpreting of the Scriptures.
TO the end that the Kirk of God may have a trial of men's knowledge,
judgments, graces and utterances, as also such that have somewhat profited in
Gods word, may from time to time grow in more full perfection to serve the
Kirk, as necessity shall require, it is more expedient that in every town,
where Schools and repair of learned men are, there be in one certain day
every week appointed to that exercise, which S. Paul calls prophesying; The
order whereof is expressed by him in their words, Let two or three Prophets
speak, and let the rest judge: But if any thing be revealed to him that sits
by, let the former keep silence: ye may one by one all prophecy that all may
learn, and all may receive consolation. And the spirit, that is, the
judgments of the Prophets, are subject to the Prophets. By which words of the
Apostle it is evident, that in the Kirk of Corinth, when they did assemble for
that purpose, some place of Scripture was read, upon the which one first gave
his judgment to the instruction and consolation of the auditors: after whom
did another, either confirm what the former had said, or added what he had
omitted, or did gently correct, or explain more properly, where the whole
verity was not revealed to the former. And in case things were hid from the
one, and from the other, liberty was given for a third to speak his judgment
to the edification of the Kirk. Above which number of three (as appears) they
passed not, for avoiding of confusion. This exercise is a thing most necessary
for the Kirk of God this day in Scotland. For thereby, as said is, shall the
Kirk have judgment, and knowledge of the graces, gifts, and utterances of
every man within their body. The simple, and such as have somewhat profited,
shall be encouraged daily to study and to proceed in knowledge, the Kirk shall
be edified. For this exercise must be patert to such as list to hear and
learn, and every man shall have liberty to utter and declare his mind and
knowledge to the comfort and consolation of the Kirk. But lest of this
profitable exercise there arise debate and strife, curious, peregrine, and
unprofitable questions are to be avoided. All interpretation disagreeing from
the principles of our faith, repugning to charity, or that stands in plain
contradiction with any other manifest place of Scripture, is to be rejected.
The Interpreter in this exercise may not take to himself the liberty of a
public Preacher (yea, although he be a Minister appointed) but he must bind
himself to his text, that he enter not in digression, or in explaining common
places: he may use no invective in that exercise, unless it be of sobriety in
confuting heresies: in exhortations or admonitions he must be short, that the
time may be spent in opening the mind of the Holy Ghost in that place:
following the sequel and dependence of the text, and observing such notes as
may instruct and edify the auditor for avoiding of contention: neither may the
Interpreter nor any in the Assembly move any question in open audience,
whereto himself is not able to give resolution, without reasoning with
another, but every man ought to speak his own judgment to the edification of
the Kirk.

If any be noted with curiosity of bringing in of strange doctrine, he must be
admonished by the Moderator, Ministers and Elders, immediately after the
interpretation is ended.

The whole Ministers, a number of them that are of the Assembly, ought to
convene together, where examination should be had, how the persons that did
interpret did handle and convey the matter (they themselves being removed;) to
every man must be given his censure. After the which, the person being called,
the faults (if any notable be found) are noted, and the person gently
admonished.

In that Assembly are all questions and doubts, if any arise, resolved without
contention; the Ministers of the Parish Kirks in Landwart adjacent to every
chief Town, and the Readers, if they have any gift of interpretation, within
six miles, must concur and assist these that prophecy within the towns, to
the end that they themselves may either learn, or others may learn by them.
And moreover men in whom is supposed to be any gift which might edify the
Church, if they were well employed, must be charged by the Minister and Elders,
to join themselves with the session, and company of Interpreters, to the end
that the Kirk may judge whether they be able to serve to Gods glory, and to the
profit of the Kirk in the vocation of Ministers or not: And if any be found
disobedient, and not willing to communicate the gifts and special graces of
God with their brethren, after sufficient admonition, Discipline must proceed
against them, provided that the civil Magistrate concur with the judgment
and election of the Kirk. For no man may be permitted as best pleases him, to
live within the Kirk of God, but every man must be constrained by fraternall
admonition and correction, to bestow his labors, when of the Kirk he is
required, to the edification of others. What day in the week is most convenient
for that exercise, what books of Scripture shall be most profitable to read, we
refer to the judgment of every particular Kirk, we mean, to the wisdom of
the Ministers and Elders.

Of Marriage.
BEcause that Marriage, the blessed ordinance of God, in this cursed Papistrie,
has partly been contemned, and partly has been so infirmed, that the parties
conjoined could never be assured in conscience, if the Bishops and Prelates
list to dissolve the same, we have thought good to show our judgments how such
confusion in times coming may be avoided.

And first public inhibition must be made, that no person under the power or
obedience of others, such as sons and daughters, and those that be under
curators, neither men nor women, contract marriage privately, and without
knowledge of their parents, tutors or curators, under whose power they are for
the time: Which if they do, the censure and discipline of the Kirk to proceed
against them. If the son or daughter, or other, have their heart touched with
the desire of marriage, they are bound to give honor to their parents, that
they open unto them their affection, as king their counsel and assistance, how
that motion, which they judge to be of God, may be performed. If the father,
friend or master, gainestand their request, and have no other cause then the
common sort of men have; to wit, lack of goods, and because they are not so
high borne, as they require, yet must not the parties whose hearts are touched,
make any covenant till further declaration be made unto the Kirk of God, and
therefore after that they have opened their minds to their parents, or such
others as have charge over them, they must declare it to the Minister also, or
to the civil Magistrate, requiring them to travel with their parents for
their consent, which to do they are bound. And if they, to wit, the Minister
or Magistrate find no cause, that is just, why the marriage required may not be
fulfilled, then after sufficient admonition to the father, friend, master, or
superior, that none of them resist the work of God, the Minister or Magistrate
may enter in the place of parents, and be consenting to their just requests,
may admit them to marriage; For the work of God ought not to be hindered by the
corrupt affections of worldly men. The work of God we call, when two hearts,
without filthiness before committed, are so joined, and both require and are
content to live together in that holy band of Matrimony. If any commit
fornication with that woman he requires in Marriage, they do both lose this
foresaid benefit as well of the Kirk, as of the Magistrate; For neither of both
ought to be intercessors or advocats for filthy fornicators. But the father or
nearest friend, whose daughter being a virgin is defloured, has power by the
law of God to compel the man that did that injury to marry his daughter: and
if the father will not accept him by reason of his offense, then may he require
the dowry of his daughter, which if the offender be not able to pay, then ought
the civil Magistrate to punish his body by some other punishment. And because
whoredom, fornication, adultery, are sins most common in this Realm, we
require of your Honors in the name of the eternal God, that severe
punishment, according as God has commanded, be executed against such wicked
contemners. For we doubt not, but such enormities and crimes openly committed,
provoke the wrath of God, as the Apostle speaks, not only upon the
offenders, but upon such places, where without punishment they are committed.
But to return to our former purpose, Marriage ought not to be contracted
amongst persons, that have no election for lack of understanding. And therefore
we affirm that bairns and infants cannot lawfully be married in their minor
age, to wit, the man within 14. years, and the woman 12. years at least. Which
if it have been, and they have kept themselves always separate, we cannot
judge them to adhere, as men and wives, by reason of that promise which in Gods
presence was no promise at all: but if in years of judgment they have
embraced the one the other, then by reason of that last consent, they have
ratified that which others have permitted for them in their youth-head.

In a reformed Kirk Marriage ought not to be secretly used but in open face,
and public audience of the Kirk, and for avoiding of dangers, expedient it is,
that the band be publicly proclaimed 3. Sundays, unless the persons be so
known, that no suspicion of danger may arise: and then may the time be
shortened at the discretion of the ministry. But no ways can we admit marriage
to be used secretly, how honorable soever the persons be. The Sunday before
noon we think most expedient for marriage, and it be used no dayelse, without
the consent of the whole ministry. Marriage once lawfully contracted, may not
be dissolved at man's pleasure, as our master Christ Jesus does witness, unless
adultery be committed; which being sufficiently proved in presence of the
civil Magistrate, the innocent (if they so require) ought to be pronounced
free, and the offender ought to suffer death, as God has commanded. If the
civil sword foolishly spare the life of the offender, yet may not the Kirk be
negligent in their office, which is to excommunicate the wicked, and to repute
them as dead members, and to pronounce the innocent party to be at freedom, be
they never so honorable before the world. If the life be spared, as it ought
not to be to the offenders, and if fruits of repentance of long time appear in
them, and if they earnestly desire to be reconciled with the Kirk, we judge
they may be received to the participation of the Sacraments, and other benefits
of the Kirk. For we would not that the Kirk should hold them excommunicate,
whom God absolved, that is the penitent. If any demand whether that the
offender after reconciliation with the Kirk, may not marry again, We answer,
that if they cannot live continently, and if the necessity be such, as that
they fear further offense of God, we cannot forbid them to use the remedy
ordained of God. If the party offended, may be reconciled to the offender, then
we judge that on no ways it shall be lawful to the offender to marry any
other, except the party that before has been offended; and the solemnization
of the latter marriage must be in the open face of the Kirk, like as the
former, but without proclamation of bands.

This we do offer as the best counsel that God gives unto us in so doubt some
a case, but the most perfect reformation were, if your Honors would give to
God his honor and glory, that ye would prefer his express commandment to
your own corrupt judgments, especially in punishing of these crimes, which he
commands to be punished with death. For so should ye declare your selves
Gods true obedient officiars, and your commonwealth should be rid of
innumerable troubles.

We mean not that sins committed in our former blindness (which be almost
buried in oblivion) shall be called again to examination and judgment. But we
require that the law may be now, and hereafter so established and execute, that
this ungodly impunity of finne have no place within this Realm. For in the
fear of God we signify unto your Honors, that whosoever persuades you that
ye may pardon where God commands death, deceives your souls, and provokes
you to offend Gods Majesty.

Of Burial.
Burial in all ages has been holden in estimation to signify that the same
body which was committed to the earth should not utterly perish, but should
rise again, and the same we would have kept within this Realm. Provided that
superstition, idolatry, and whatsoever has proceeded of a false opinion, and
for advantage sake, may be avoided, and singing of Mass, placebo and dirige,
and all other prayers over, or for the dead, which are not only superstitious
and vain, but also are idolatry, and do repugne to the plain Scriptures of
God. For plain it is, that every one that dies, departs either in the faith
of Christ Jesus, or departs in incredulity. Plain it is, that they that
depart in the true faith of Christ Jesus rest from their labors, and from
death do go to life everlasting, as by our Master and his Apostles we are
taught. But whosoever departs in unbelief, or in incredulity, shall never
see life, but the wrath of God abides upon him. And so we say, that prayers for
the dead are not only superstitious and vain, but do expressly repugne to the
manifest Scriptures and verity thereof. For avoiding of all inconveniences we
judge it best, that neither singing, nor reading be at burial? For albeit
things sung and read may admonish some of the living to prepare themselves for
death, yet shall some superstitious think that singing and reading of the
living may profit the dead. And therefore we think it most expedient, that the
dead be conveyed to the place of burial with some honest company of the Kirk,
without either singing or reading; yea, without all kind of ceremony heretofore
used, other then that the dead be committed to the grave, with such gravity and
sobriety, as those that be present may seem to fear the judgments of God,
and to hate sin which is the cause of death.

We are not ignorant, that some require a Sermon at the burial, or else some
place of Scripture to be read, to put the living in mind that they are
mortal, and that likewise they must die. But let these men understand, that
the Sermons which be daily made serve for that use; which if men despise, the
funeral Sermons shall rather nourish superstition and a false opinion, as
before is said, then that they shall bring such persons to a godly
consideration of their own estate. Attour either shall the Ministers for the
most part be occupied in funeral Sermons, or else they shall have respect of
persons, preaching at the burials of the rich and honorable, but keeping
silence when the poor and despised departs; and this with safe conscience
cannot the Minister do. For seeing that before God there is no respect of
persons, and that their Ministry appertains to all alike, whatsoever they
do to the rich in respect of their Ministry, the same they are bound to do
to the poorest under their charge. In respect of diverse inconveniences we think
it neither seemly that the Kirk appointed to preaching and ministration of the
Sacraments shall be made a place of burial, but that some other secret and
convenient place, lying in the most free air, be appointed for that use, which
place ought to be walled and fenced about, and kept for that use only.

For repairation of the Kirks.
LEst that the word of God, and ministration of the Sacraments by unseemlinesse
of the place come in contempt, of necessity it is that the Kirk and place where
the people ought publicly to convene be with expedition repaired with doors,
windows, thack, and with such preparation within, as appertains as well to
the Majesty of God, as unto the ease and commodity of the people. And because
we know the slothfulness of men in this behalf, and in all other, which may
not redound to their private commodity, strait charge and commandment must be
given, that within ane certain day the reparation must be begun, and within
another day to be affixed by your Honors, that it may be finished. Penalties
and sums of money must be enjoined, and without pardon taken from the
contemners.

The reparation would be according to the ability and number of Kirks. Every
Kirk must have doors, close windows of glass, thackable to withold rain, a
bell to convocate the people together, a pulpit, a basen for baptizing, and
table for ministration of the Lords Supper. In greater Kirks, and where the
Congregation is great in number, must reparation be made within the Kirk, for
the quiet and commodious receiving of the people. The expenses are to be lifted
partly of the people, and partly of the teinds, at the consideration of the
Ministry.

For punishment of those that profane the Sacraments and contemn the word of
God, and dare presume to minister them not being thereto lawfully called.
AS Satan has never ceased from the beginning, to draw mankind in one of two
extremities, to wit, that men should eitheir be so ravished with gazing upon
the visible creatures, that forgetting the cause wherefore they are ordained,
they attributed unto them a virtue and power, which God has not granted unto
them: or else that men should so contemn and despise Gods blessed Ordinance,
and holy institutions, as if that neither in the right use of them there were
any profit, neither yet in their profanations there were any danger. As this
way, we say Satan has blinded the most part of mankind from the beginning: so
doubt we not, but that he will strive to continue in his malice even to the
end. Our eyes have seen, and presently do see the experience of the one, and
of the other. What was the opinion of the most part of men, of the Sacrament of
Christ's body and blood, during the darkness of superstition, is not unknown.
How it was gazed upon, kneeled unto, born in procession, and finally worshipped
and honored as Christ Jesus himself. And so long at Satan might then retain
men in that damnable idolatry, he was quiet, as one that possessed his
kingdom of darkness peaceably. But since that it has pleased the mercies of
God to reveal unto the unthankful world the light of his Word, the right use
and administration of his Sacraments, he assayes man upon the contrary part.
For where not long ago men stood in such admiration of that idol the Mass,
that none durst have presumed to have said the Mass, but the shaven sort, the
beasts marked men; some dare now be so bold as without all vocation to
minister, as they suppose, the true Sacraments in open Assemblies: and some
idiots (yet more wickedly and impudently) dare counterfeit in their house, that
which the true Ministers do in the open Congregations. They presume we say, to
do it in houses, without reverence, without Word Preached, and without
Minister. This contempt proceeds, no doubt, from the malice and craft of that
Serpent, who first deceived man, of purpose to deface the glory of Christ's
Evangell, and to bring his blessed Sacraments in a perpetual contempt: And
further, your Honors may clearly see, how stubbornly and proudly the most part
despises the Evangell of Christ Jesus offered unto you, whom unless that
sharply and stoutly ye resist, we mean as well the manifest despiser, as the
prophaner of the Sacraments, ye shall find them pernicious enemies ere it be
long. And therefore in the Name of the Eternal God, and of his Son Christ
Jesus, we require of your Honors, that without delay, strait Laws be made
against the one, and the other.

We dare not prescribe unto you, what penalties shall be required of such: But
this we fear not to affirm, that the one and the other deserve death. For if
he who does falsify the seal, subscription, or coin of a King, is judged
worthy of death, what shall we think of him who plainly does falsify the
Seals of Christ Jesus, Prince of the Kings of the earth? If Darius pronounced
that a balk should be taken from the house of that man, and he himself hanged
upon it, that durst attempt to hinder the re-edifying of the material Temple,
what shall we say of those, that contemptuously blaspheme God, and manifestly
hinder the Temple of God, which is the souls and bodies of the elect to be
purged by the true Preaching of Christ Jesus, from the superstition and
damnable Idolatry, in which they have been long plunged, and holden captive? If
ye, as God forbid, declare your selves careless over the true Religion, God
will not suffer your negligence unpunished: and therefore more earnestly we
require that strait Laws may be made against the stubborn contemners of
Christ Jesus, and against such as dare presume to minister his Sacraments, not
orderly called to that Office, least while that there be none found to
gainstand impiety, the wrath of God be kindled against the whole.

The Papisticall Priests have neither power, nor authority to minister the
Sacraments of Christ Jesus, because that in their mouth is not the Sermon of
exhortation: and therefore to them must strait Inhibition be made,
notwithstanding any usurpation they have had in the time of blindness. It is
neither the clipping of their crowns, the greasing of their fingers, not the
blowing of the dumb dogs, called the Bishops, neither the laying on of their
hands, that makes Ministers of Christ Jesus. But the Spirit of God inwardly
first moving the hearts to seek Christ's glory, and the profit of his Kirk, and
thereafter the nomination of the people, the examination of the learned, and
public admission (as before is said) make men lawful Ministers of the Word,
and Sacraments. We speak of an ordinary vocation; and not of that which is
extraordinary, when God by himself, and by his only power, raises up to the
Ministry such as best pleases his wisdom.

The Conclusion.
THUS have we in these few heads offered unto your Honors our judgments,
according as we were commanded, touching the reformation of things, which
heretofore have altogether been abused in this cursed Papistrie. We doubt not
but some of our petitions shall appear strange unto you at the first fight.
But if your wisdoms deeply consider, that we must answer not only unto man,
but also before the throne of the eternal God, and of his Son Christ Jesus,
for the counsel which we give in this so grave a matter, your Honors shall
easily consider, that more assured it is to us to fall in the displeasure of
all men in the earth, then to offend the Majesty of God, whose justice cannot
suffer flatterers, and deceitful counselors unpunished. That we require the
Kirk to be set at such liberty, that she neither be compelled to feed
Idle-bellies, neither yet to sustain the tyranny which heretofore has been
by violence maintained: we know we shall offend many, but if we should keep
filence hereof, we are most assured to offend the just and Righteous God, who
by the mouth of his Apostle has pronounced this sentence, He that labors
not, let him not eat. If we in this behalf, or in any other, require or ask
any other thing then by Gods express Commandment, by equity and good
conscience ye are bound to grant, let it be noted, and after repudiate. But if
we require nothing which God requires not also, let your Honors take heed how
we gainestand the charge of him, whose hand and punishment ye cannot escape.
If blind affections rather lead you to have respect to the sustentation of
these your carnal friends, who tyranously have impyred above the flock of
Christ Jesus, then that the zeal of Christ Jesus his glory provoke and move
you to set his oppressed Kirk at freedom and liberty, we fear your sharp
and sudden punishments, and that the glory and honor of this enterprise be
reserved unto others. And yet shall this our judgment abide to the generations
following, for a monument and witness how lovingly God called you, and this
nation to Repentance: what counselors God sent unto you, and how you have
used the same. If obediently ye hear God now calling, we doubt not but he
shall hear you in your greatest necessity. But if, following your own
corrupt judgments, ye contemn his voice and vocation, we are assured that
your former iniquity, and present ingratitude, shall together crave great
punishment from God, who cannot long delay to execute his most just judgments,
when after many offenses, and long blindness, grace and mercy offered is
contemptuously refused.

God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, by the power of his holy Spirit, so
illuminate your hearts, that ye may clearly see what is pleasing and acceptable
in his presence, and so bow the same to his obedience, that ye may prefer his
revealed will to your own affections. And so strengthen you by the Spirit of
Fortitude, that boldly ye may punish vice, and maintain virtue within this
Realm, to the praise and glory of his holy Name, to the comfort and assurance
of your own consciences, and to the consolation, and the good example of the
posterity following, Amen.

By your Honors most humble servitors.
From Edinburgh the 20. of May. 1560.
Act of Secret Counsel, 17 Januarii anno 1560.
WE which have subscribed their presents, having advised with the Articles
herein specified, as is above mentioned from the beginning of this book,
thinks the same good and conform to Gods Word in all points; conform to the
notes and additions hereto eiked: and promises to set the same forward to the
uttermost of our powers. Providing that the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other
Prelates and benificed men, which else have adjoined them to us, bruik the
revenues of their benefices during their life times, they sustaining and
upholding the Ministry and Ministers, as herein is specified, for the Preaching
of the Word, and ministering of the Sacraments.

sic subscribitur. James Hamiltoun. Archbald, Argyle. James Stewart. Rothes.
Boid. William Lord Hay. Alexander Cambell. M. Alexander Gordoun. Glencarne.
Vchiltrie. Sanquhare. S. Jhones. William of Culrosse. Drumlangrig. Bargannie
younger. Lochinvar. Cunninghamhead. James Haliburtoun. Ihone Lochart of Bar.
Jone Schaw of Halie. Scot of Haning. James Maxwell. George Fentoun of that ilk.
Andro Ker of Fadounside. Andro Hamiltoun of Lethane. Deane of Murray.


The second Book of Discipline.
Heads and Conclusions of the Policy of the Kirk.
CHAP. I. Of the Kirk and policy thereof in general, and wherein it is
different from the civil policy.
THE Kirk of God sometimes is largely taken, for all them that profess the
Evangell of Jesus Christ, and so it is a company and fellowship not only of
the godly, but also of hypocrites, professing always outwardly the true
Religion.

Other times it is taken for the Godly and Elect only, and sometimes for them
that exercise spiritual function in the congregation of them that profess the
truth.

The Kirk in this last sense, has a certain power granted by God, according to
which it uses a proper jurisdiction and government, exercised to the comfort of
the whole Kirk.

This power Ecclesiastical is an authority granted by God the Father, through
the Mediator Jesus Christ, unto his Kirk gathered, and having the ground in
the Word of God to be put in execution by them, unto whom the spiritual
government of the Kirk by lawful calling is committed.

The Policy of the Kirk flowing from this power, is an order or form of
spiritual government, which is exercised by the members appointed thereto by
the Word of God: and therefore is given immediately to the office-bearers, by
whom it is exercised to the weal of the whole body.

This power is diversely used: for sometime it is severally exercised, chiefly
by the teachers; sometime conjunctly by mutual consent of them that bear the
office and charge, after the form of judgment. The former is only called
potestas ordinis, and the other potestas jurisdictionis.

These two kinds of power have both one authority, one ground, one final
cause, but are different in the manner, and form of execution, as is evident
by the speaking of our Master in the 16 and 18 of Matthew.

This power and policy Ecclesiastical is different and distinct in the own
nature from that power and policy which is called Civil power, and
appertains to the Civil government of the Common wealth; albeit they be both
of God, and tend to one end, if they be rightly used, viz. to advance the glory
of God, and to have godly and good subjects.

For this power Ecclesiastical flows immediately from God, and the mediator
Jesus Christ, and is spiritual, not having a temporal head in the earth, but
only Christ, the only spiritual King and governor of his Kirk.

It is a title falsely usurped by Antichrist, to call himself head of the Kirk,
and ought not to be attributed to Angel, nor man, of what estate that ever he
be, saving to Christ the only head and Monarch in the Kirk.

Therefore this power and policy of the Kirk should lean upon the word
immediately, as the only ground thereof, and should be taken from the pure
fountains of the scriptures, the Kirk hearing the voice of Christ the only
spiritual King, and being ruled by his laws.

It is proper to Kings, Princes and Magistrates to be called Lords, and
dominators over their subjects whom they govern civilly, but it is proper to
Christ only to be called Lord and Master in the Spiritual government of the
Kirk; and all others that bear office therein ought not to usurp dominion
therein, nor be called Lords, but only Ministers, Disciples, and servants. For
it is Christ's proper office to command and rule his Kirk universally, and every
particular Kirk through his spirit and word, by the ministry of men.

Notwithstanding, as the Ministers and others of the Ecclesiastical estate are
subject to the Magistrate civil, so ought the person of the Magistrate be
subject to the Kirk spiritually, and in Ecclesiastical government. And the
exercise of both these jurisdictions cannot stand in one person ordinary.

The Civil power is called the power of the Sword, and the other the power of
the Keys.

The civil power should command the spiritual to exercise, and to do their
office according to the word of God; The spiritual rulers should require the
Christian magistrate to minister justice, and punish vice, and to maintain the
liberty and quietness of the Kirk within their bounds

The Magistrate commands external things for external peace and quietness
amongst the subjects: the Minister handles external things only for
conscience cause.

The Magistrate handles external things only, and actions done before men,
but the spiritual ruler judges both inward affections, and external actions
in respect of conscience, by the word of God.

The Civil Magistrate craves and gets obedience by the sword, and other
external means, but the Ministry by the spiritual sword, and spiritual
means.

The Magistrate neither ought to preach, minister the sacraments, nor execute
the censures of the Kirk, nor yet prescribe any rule how it should be done, but
command the Ministers to observe the rule commanded in the word, and punish the
transgressors by Civil means. The Ministers exerce not the Civil
jurisdiction, but teach the Magistrate how it should be exercised according to
the word.

The Magistrate ought to assist, maintain and fortify the jurisdiction of the
Kirk. The Ministers should assist their Princes in all things agreeable to the
word, providing they neglect not their own charge by involving themselves in
civil affairs.

Finally, as Ministers are subject to the judgment and punishment of the
Magistrate in external things, if they offend: so ought the Magistrates to
submit themselves to the discipline of the Kirk, if they transgress in matters
of Conscience and Religion.

CHAP. II. Of the Policy of the Kirk, and persons and office-bearers, to whom
the administration is committed.
AS in the civil policy the whole Commonweal consists in them that are
governors, or Magistrates, and them that are governed, or subjects: So in the
policy of the Kirk some are appointed to be rulers, and the rest of the members
thereof to be ruled, and obey according to the word of God, and inspiration of
his spirit, always under one head and chief governor, Jesus Christ.

Again, the whole policy of the Kirk consists in three things, in Doctrine,
Discipline, and Distribution. With Doctrine is annexed the administration of
Sacraments: and according to the parts of this division, arises a sort of
threefold officers in the Kirk, to wit, of Ministers Preachers, Elders
Governors, and Deacons distributers. And all these may be called by a general
word, Ministers of the Kirk. For albeit the Kirk of God be ruled and governed
by Jesus Christ, who is the only King, high Priest, and head thereof, yet he
uses the ministry of men, as the most necessary mids for this purpose.

For so he has from time to time, before the Law, under the Law, and in the
time of the Evangell for our great comfort raised us men endued with the gifts
of the spirit, for the spiritual government of his Kirk, exercising by them
his own power, through his spirit and word to the building of the same.

And to take away all occasion of tyranny, he will that they should rule with
mutual consent of brether, and equality of power, every one according to their
functions.

In the new Testament, and time of the Evangell, he has used the Ministry of
the Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors in administration of
the word: The Eldership for good order, and administration of the Discipline:
The Deaconship to have the cure of the Ecclesiastical goods.

Some of their Ecclesiastical function are ordinary, and some extraordinary or
temporary. There be three extraordinary functions; The office of the Apostle,
the Evangelist and of the Prophet, which are not perpetual, and now have
ceased in the Kirk of God, except when it pleased God extraordinarily for a
time to stir some of them up again.

There are four ordinary functions or offices in the Kirk of God, the office
of the pastor, Minister or Bishop, the Doctor, Presbyter or Elder, and the
Deacon.

Their offices are ordinary, and ought to continue perpetually in the Kirk, as
necessary for the government and policy thereof, and no more offices ought to
be received or suffered in the Kirk of God, established according to his word.

Therefore all the ambitious titles invented in the kingdom of Antichrist, and
in his usurped Hierarchy, which are not of one of these sour sorts, together
with the offices depending thereupon, in one word ought to be rejected.

CHAP. III. How the persons that bear Ecclesiastical function, are to be
admitted to their office.
VOcation or calling is common to all that should bear office within the Kirk,
which is a lawful way, by the which qualified persons are promoted to any
spiritual office within the Kirk of God.

Without this lawful calling it was never leasome to any person to meddle with
any function Ecclesiastical.

There are two sorts of Calling, one extraordinary by God immediately, as was
of the Prophets and Apostles, which in Kirks established, and well already
reformed has no place.

The other calling is ordinary, which besides the calling of God, and inward
testimony of a good conscience, is the lawful approbation, and outward
judgment of men, according to Gods word, and order established in his Kirk.

None ought to presume to enter in any office Ecclesiastical without this good
testimony before God, who only knows the hearts of men.

This ordinary and outward calling has two parts, election and ordination.
Election is the choosing out of a person, or persons, most able, to the office
that vakes, by the judgment of the Eldership, and consent of the Congregation,
to which shall be the person, or persons appointed.

The qualities in general requisite in all them, who should bear charge in
the Kirk, consist in soundness of Religion, and godliness of life, according
as they are sufficiently set forth in the Word.

In the order of Election it is to be eschewed, that any person be intruded in
any offices of the Kirk, contrary to the will of the congregation to which they
are appointed, or without the volce of the Eldership.

None ought to be intruded, or placed in the placea already planted, or in any
room that vakes not, for any worldly respect: and that which is called the
benefice ought to be nothing else, but the stipend of the Ministers that are
lawfully called.

Ordination is the separation and sanctifying of the person appointed to God
and his Kirk, after he be well tried and found qualified.

The Ceremonies of Ordination are fasting, earnest Prayer, and imposition of
hands of the Eldership.

All their, as they must be raised up by God, and by him made able for the work
whereto they are called; so ought they know their message to be limited within
Gods word, without the bounds of the which they ought not to pass.

All their should take these titles and names only (lest they be exalted and
puffed up in themselves) which the Scriptures gives unto them, as these which
import labor, travel and work, and are names of offices and service, and not
of idleness, dignity, worldly honor or pre-eminence, which by Christ our
Master is expressly reproved and forbidden.

All these office-bearers should have their own particular flocks amongst whom
they exercise their charge.

All should make refidence with them, and take the inspection and overfight of
them, every one in his vocation.

And generally their two things ought they all to respect: the glory of God, and
edifying of his kirk, in discharging their duties in their calling.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Office-bearers in particular, and first of the Pastors or
Ministers.
PAstors, Bishops, or Ministers, are they who are appointed to particular
Congregations, which they rule by the word of God and over the which they
watch. In respect whereof sometime they are called Pastors, because they feed
their Congregation; sometime Episcopi, or Bishops, because they watch above
their flock; sometimes Ministers, by reason of their service and office, and
sometimes also Presbyters or Seniors, for the gravity in manners which they
ought to have in taking care of the spiritual government, which ought to be
most dear unto them.

They that are called unto the Ministry, or that offer themselves thereunto,
ought not to be elected without any certain flock be assigned unto them.

No man ought to ingyre himself, or usurp his office without lawful calling.

They who are once called by God, and duly elected by man, after that they
have once accepted the charge of Ministry, may not leave their functions.

The desertours should be admonished, and in case of obstinacy, finally,
Excommunicate.

No Pastor may leave his flock without License of the Provincial or National
Assembly, which if he do, after admonitions not obeyed, let the censures of
the Kirk strike upon him.

Unto the Pastors apperteins teaching of the Word of God, in season and out of
season, publikly and privately, always traveling to edify, and discharge his
conscience, as Gods word prescribes to him.

Unto the Pastors only apperteins the administration of the Sacraments, in
like manner as the administration of the Word: For both are appointed by God,
as means to teach us, the one by the care, and the other by the eyes, and
other senses, that by both, knowledge may be transferred to the mind.

It appertains by the same reason to the Pastor to pray for the people, and
namely, for the flock committed to his charge, and to bless them in the name
of the Lord, who will not suffer the blessings of his faithful servants to be
frustrate.

He ought also to watch above the manners of his flock, that the better he may
apply the Doctrine to them in reprehending the dissolute persons, and exhorting
the godly to continue in the fear of the Lord.

It appertains to the Minister after lawful proceeding by the Eldership, to
pronounce the sentence of binding and loosing upon any person, according unto
the power of the keys granted unto the Kirk.

It belongs to him likewise, after lawful proceeding in the matter by the
Eldership, to solemnizate marriage betwixt them, that are to be joined therein,
and to pronounce the blessing of the Lord upon them that enter in at that holy
Band in the fear of God.

And generally all public denunciations that are to be made in the Kirk before
the Congregation concerning the Ecclesiastical affairs belonging to the
Office of a Minister: For he is as messenger and Herald betwixt God and the
people in all these affairs.

CHAP. V. of Doctors, and their Office, and of the Schools.
ONE of the two ordinary and perpetual functions that travel in the Word, is
the Office of the Doctor, who may be also called Prophet, Bishop, Elder,
Catechiser, that is, teacher of the Catechism, and rudiments of Religion.

His office is to open up the mind of the Spirit of God in the Scriptures
simply, without such applications as the Ministers use, to the end that the
faithful may be instructed, and sound Doctrine taught, and that the purity of
the Gospel be not corrupted through ignorance, or evil opinions.

He is different from the Pastor, not only in name, but in diversity of gifts.
For to the Doctor is given the word of knowledge, to open up by simple teaching
the mysteries of faith; to the Pastor the gift of wisdom, to apply the same by
exhortation to the manners of the flock, as occasion craveth.

Under the name and office of a Doctor we comprehend also the order in
Schools, Colleges, and Universities, which has been from time to time
carefully maintained, as well among the Jews and Christians, as also among the
profane Nations.

The Doctor being an Elder, as is said, should assist the Pastor in the
government of the Kirk, and concur with the Elders his brethren in all
assemblies; by reason the interpretation of the Word, which is only judge in
Ecclesiastical matters, is committed to his charge.

But to preach unto the people, to Minister the Sacraments, and to celebrate
marriages, pertain not to the Doctor, unless he be otherwise called
ordinarily: howbeit the Pastor may teach in the Schools, as he who has the
gift of knowledge, oftentimes meet for that end, as the examples of Polycarpus,
and others testify, etc.

CHAP. VI. Of Elders, and their Office.
THE word Elder in the Scripture, sometime is the name of Age, sometime of
Office. When it is the name of any Office, sometime it is taken largely,
comprehending as well the Pastors and Doctors, as them who are called Seniors
or Elders.

In this our division, we call these Elders, whom the Apostles call Presidents
or Governors. Their office as it is ordinary, so is it perpetual and always
necessary in the Kirk of God. The Eldership is a spiritual function, as is the
Ministry.

Elders once lawfully called to the office, and having gifts from God meet to
exercise the same, may not leave it again. Albeit such a number of Elders may
be chosen in certain Congregations, that one part of them may relieve another
for a reasonable space, as was among the Levites under the Law in serving of
the Temple.

The number of the Elders in every Congregation cannot well be limited, but
should be according to the bounds and necessity of the people.

It is not necessary that all Elders be also teachers of the Word, albeit the
chief ought to be such and swa are worthy of doublehonour.

What manner of persons they ought to be, we refer it to the express word,
and namely the Canons written by the Apostle Paul.

Their office is as well severally, as conjunctly, to watch diligently upon the
flock committed to their charge, both publicly, and privately, that no
corruption of Religion, or manners, enter therein.

As the Pastors and Doctors should be diligent in teaching and sowing the seed
of the Word, so the Elders should be careful in seeking the fruit of the same
in the people.

It appertains to them to assist the Pastor in examination of them that come to
the Lords Table: item, in visiting the sick.

They should cause the acts of the assemblies, as well particular as general
to be put in execution carefully.

They should be diligent in admonishing all men of their duty according to the
rule of the Evangell.

Things that they cannot correct by private admonitions they should bring to
the Eldership.

Their principal office is to hold Assemblies with the Pasiors and Doctors who
are also of their number, for establishing of good order and execution of
Discipline, unto the which Assemblies all persons are subject that remain
within their bounds.

CHAP. VII. Of the Elderships, Assemblies, and Discipline.
ELderships and Assemblies are commonly constitute of Pastors, Doctors, and
such as we commonly call Elders, that labor not in the word and Doctrine: of
whom, and of whose several power has been spoken.

Assemblies are of four sorts. For either are they of particular Kirks and
Congregations ane or more, or of a Province, or of a whole Nation, or of all and
diverse Nations professing one Jesus Christ.

All the Ecclesiastical Assemblies have power to convene lawfully together for
treating of things concerning the Kirk, and pertaining to their charge.

They have power to appoint times, and places to that effect, and at one
meeting to appoint the diet, time and place for another.

In all Assemblies an Moderatour should be chosen by common consent of the
whole brethren convened, who should propone matters, gather the votes, and
cause good order to be kept in assemblies.

Diligence should be taken, chiefly by the Moderator, that only
Ecclesiastical things be handled in the assemblies, and that there be no
meddling with any thing pertaining to the civil jurisdiction.

Every Assembly has power to send forth from them of their own number, ane or
more visitours to see how all things be ruled in the bounds of their
jurisdiction.

Visitation of more Kirks is no ordinary Office Ecclesiastic in the person of
one man, neither may the name of a Bishop be attribute to the visitor only,
neither is it necessary to abide always in one man's person, but it is the part
of the Eldership to send out qualified persons to visit prore nata.

The final end of assemblies is first to keep the Religion and Doctrine in
purity without error and corruption. Next, to keep comeliness and good order in
the Kirk.

For this orders cause, they may make certain rules and constitutions
appertaining to the good behaviors of all the members of the kirk in their
vocation.

They have power also to abrogate and abolish all Statutes and Ordinances
concerning Ecclesisticall matters, that are found noisome and unprofitable, and
agree not with the time, or are abused by the people.

They have power to execute Ecclesiastical Discipline and punishment upon all
transgressors, and proud contemners of the good order and policy of the Kirk,
and so the whole Discipline is in their hands.

The first kind and sort of assemblies, although they be within particular
Congregation, yet they exerce the power, authority and Jurisdiction of the Kirk
with mutual consent, and therefore bear sometime the name of the Kirk.

When we speak of the Elders of the particular Congregations, we mean not that
every particular Parish-kirk can or may have their own particular Elderships,
specially in Landward; but we think three, four, more or fewer particular
kirks may have one Eldership common to them all, to judge their Ecclesiastical
causes.

Yet this is meet, That some of the Elders be chosen out of every particular
Congregation, to concur with the rest of their brethren in the common Assembly,
and to take up the delations of offenses within their own kirks, and bring them
to the Assembly. This we gather of the practice of the Primitive kirk, where
Elders, or Colleges of Seniors were constitute in Cities, and famous places.

The power of their particular Elderships is to use diligent labors in the
bounds committed to their charge, that the kirks be kept in good order, to
inquire diligently in naughty and unruly persons, and travel to bring them in
the way again, either by admonition or threatening of Gods judgments, or by
correction.

It pertaines to the Eldership to take heed that the word of God be purely
preached within their bounds, the Sacraments rightly ministered, the Discipline
rightly maintained, and the Ecclefiasticall goods uncorruptly distributed.

It belongs to this kind of Assembly, to cause the ordinances made by the
Assemblies provincial, national, and general, to be kept and put in
execution.

To make constitutions which concern (...) in the kirk, for the decent order
of these particular kirks where they govern: Providing, they alter no rules
made by general or provincial Assemblies, and that they make the provincial
Assemblies foreseen of these rules that they shall make, and abolish them that
tend to the hurt of the same.

It has power to excommunicate the obstinate.

The power of election of them who bear Ecclesiastical charges pertaines to
this kind of Assembly within their own bounds, being well erected, and
constitute of many Pastors and Elders of sufficient ability.

By the like reason their deposition also pertaines to this kind of Assembly:
as of them that teach erroneous and corrupt Doctrine, that be of slanderous
life, and after admonition desist not; that be given to schism or rebellion
against the kirk, manifest blasphemy, fimony, corruption of bribes, falsehood,
perjury, whoredom, theft, drunkenness, fighting worthy of punishment by the
Law, usury, dancing, infamy, and all others, that deserve separation from the
kirk.

These also who are altogether found unsufficient to execute their charge
should be deposed, whereof other kirks would be advertised that they receive
not the persons deposed.

Yet they ought not to be deposed, who through age, fickenesse, or other
accidents become unmeet to do their office, in which case their honor should
remain to them, their kirk should maintain them; and others ought to be
provided to do their office.

Provincial assembles we call lawful conventions of Pastors, Doctors, and
other Elders of a Province, gathered for the common affairs of the kirk
thereof, which also may be called the conference of the kirk and brethren.

Their assembles are institute for weighty matters to be entreated by mutual
consent and assistance of the brethren within that Province, as need requires.

This assembly has power to handle, order, and redress all things committed
or done amiss in the particular assemblies.

It has power to depose the office-bearers of that province for good and just
causes deserving deprivation.

And generally their assemblies have the whole power of the particular
Elderships whereof they are collected.

The National assembly, which is general to us, is a lawful convention of
the whole kirks of the Realm or Nation where it is used and gathered, for the
common affairs of the kirk, and may be called the general Eldership of the
whole kirks in the Realm. None are subject to repair to this assembly to vote,
but Ecclefiasticall persons to such a number, as shall be thought good by the
same Assembly, not excluding other persons that will repair to the said
Assembly to propone, hear, and reason.

This Assembly is institute, that all things either committed, or done amiss
in the Provincial Assemblies may be redressed and handled, and things
generally serving for the weal of the whole body of the kirk within the Realm
may be forescen, entreated and set forth to Gods glory.

It should take care, that kirks be planted in places where they are not
planted.

It should prescribe the rule how the other two kinds of Assemblies should
proceed in all things.

This Assembly should take heed, that the spiritual jurisdiction, and civil,
be not confounded to the hurt of the kirk; That the Patrimony of the kirk be
not consumed, nor abused; and generally concerning all weighty affairs that
concern the weal and good order of the whole Kirks of the Realm, it ought to
interpone authority thereto.

There is besides these, another more general kind of Assembly, which is of
all Nations, and all estates of persons within the kirk, representing the
universal kirk of Christ, which may be called properly the General Assembly,
or General Council of the kirk of God.

These Assemblies were appointed and called together specially, when any great
schism or controversy in Doctrine did arise in the kirk, and were convocate
atcommand of godly Emperors being for the time, for avoiding of schism within
the Universal kirk of God, which because they pertain not to the particular
estate of any Realm we cease further to speak of them.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Deacons and their Office, the last Ordinary function in the
Kirk.
THE word (...) sometimes is largely taken, comprehending all them that bear
office in the Ministry, and spiritual function in the kirk.

But now, as we speak, it is taken only for them, unto whom the collection and
distribution of the alms of the faithful and Ecclesiastical goods does
belong.

The office of the Deacons so taken, is an ordinary and perpetual
Ecclesiastical function in the kirk of Christ.

Of what properties and duties he ought to be that is called to this function,
we remit it to the manifest Scriptures.

The Deacon ought to be called and elected, as the rest of the Spiritual
Officers, of the which election was spoken before.

Their Office and power is to receive, and to distribute the whole
Ecclefiasticall goods unto them, to whom they are appointed.

This they ought to do according to the judgment, and appointment of the
Presbyteries or Elderships (of the which the Deacons are not) that the
patrimony of the kirk and poor, be not converted to private men's uses, nor
wrongfully distribute.

CHAP. IX. Of the Patrimony of the Kirk, and distribution thereof.
BY the Partrimony of the Kirk, we mean whatsoever thing has been at any time
before, or shall be in times coming given, or by consent or universal custom
of Countries professing the Christian Religion applied to the public use and
utility of the kirk.

So that under the Patrimony we comprehend all things given or to be given to
the Kirk and service of God, as lands, biggings, possessions, annuel rents, and
all such like, wherewith the Kirk is doted, either by donations, foundations,
mortifications, or any other lawful titles of Kings, Princes, or any persons
inferior to them, together with the continual oblations of the faithful.

We comprehend also all such things as by Laws or Custom, or use of Countries
have been applied to the use and utility of the Kirk; of the which sort are
Teinds, Manses, Gleibs, and such like, which by common and municipall Laws and
universal Custom are possessed by the Kirk.

To take any of this Patrimony by unlawful means, and convert it to the
particular and profane use of any person, we hold it a detestatable sacrilege
before God.

The goods Ecclesiastical ought to be collected, and distributed by the
Deacons, as the word of God appoints, that they who bear office in the Kirk be
provided for without care or solicitude.

In the Apostolical Kirk, the Deacons were appointed to collect and distribute
what sum soever was collected of the faithful, to distribute unto the
necessity of the Saints, so that none lacked amongst the faithful.

These collections were not only of that which was collected in manner of
alms, as some suppose, but of other goods moveable, and unmovable, of lands
and possessions, the price whereof was brought to the feet of the Apostles.

This office continued in the Deacons hands, who intrometted with the whole
goods of the Kirk, ay and while the estate thereof was corrupted by Antichrist,
as the ancient Canons bear witness.

The same Canons make mention of a fouresold distribution of the Patrimony of
the kirk, whereof one part was applied to the Pastor or Bishop for his
sustentation and hospitality; another to the Elders and Deacons, and all the
Glergy; the third to the poor, sick persons and strangers; the fourth to the
upholding other affairs of the kirk, specially extraordinary.

We add hereunto the Schools and Schoolemasters also, which ought and may be
well sustained of the same goods, and are comprehended under the Clergy. To
whom we join all Clerks of Assemblies, as well particular as general,
Syndicks or Procutors of the kirk affairs, takers up of Psalms, and such like
other ordinary Officers of the Kirk, so far as they are necessary.

CHAP. X. Of the Office of a Christian Magistrate in the Kirk.
ALthough all the members of the Kirk be holden every one in their vocation,
and according thereto to advance the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, so far as lies
in their power, yet chiefly Christian Princes, and other Magistrates, are
holden to do the same.

For they are called in the Scripture nourishers of the Kirk, for so much as by
them it is, or at least ought to be maintained, fostered, upholden and defended
against all that would procure the hurt thereof.

So it pertains to the office of a Christian Magistrate, to assist and fortify
the godly proceedings of the Kirk in all behalfes; and namely to see that the
public estate and Ministry thereof be maintained and sustained, as it
appertains, according to Gods Word.

To see that the Kirk be not invaded, nor hurt by false Teachers, and
Hirelings, nor the rooms thereof be occupied by dumb dogs, or idle bellies.

To assist and maintain the Discipline of the Kirk, and punish them civilly,
that will not obey the censure of the same, without confounding always the one
jurisdiction with the other.

To see that sufficient provision be made for the Ministry, the Schools, and
the poor: and if they have not sufficient to awaite upon their charges, to
supply their indigence even with their own rents, if need require.

To hold hand as well to the saving of their persons from injury and open
violence, as to their rents and possessions, that they be not defrauded,
robbed, nor spoiled thereof.

Not to suffer the Patrimony of the Kirk to be applied to profane and
unlawful uses, or be devoured by idle bellies, and such as have no lawful
function in the Kirk, to the hurt of the Ministry, Schools, poor and other
godly uses, whereupon the same ought to be bestowed.

To make laws and constitutions agreeable to Gods word, for advancement of the
Kirk, and policy thereof, without usurping any thing that pertains not to the
civil sword, but belongs to the offices that are merely Ecclesiastical, as is
the ministry of the Word and Sacraments, using Ecclesiastical Discipline,
and the spiritual execution thereof, or any part of the power of the
spiritual keys, which our Master gave to the Apostles, and their true
successors.

And although Kings and Princes that be Godly, sometimes by their own
authority, when the Kirk is corrupted, and all things out of order, place
Ministers, and restore the true service of the Lord, after the example of some
godly Kings of Juda, and diverse godly Empeours, and Kings also in the light of
the new Testament. Yet where the ministry of the Kirk is once lawfully
constitute, and they that are placed, do their office faithfully, all godly
Princes and Magistrates ought to hear and obey their voice, and reverence the
Majesty of the Son of God speaking in them.

CHAP. XI. Of the present abuses remaining in the Kirk, which we desire to
bereformed.
AS it is the duty of the godly Magistrate to maintain the present liberty,
which God has granted by the Preaching of his Word, and the true
administration of the Sacraments within this Realm: So is it to provide, that
all abuses which yet remain in the Kirk, be removed, and utterly taken away.

Therefore, first the admission of men to papisticall titles of benefices, such
as serve not, nor have no function in the Reformed Kirk of Christ, as Abbotes,
Commendators, Priors, Prioresses, and other titles of Abbeys, whose places are
now for the most part by the just judgment of God demolished, and purged of
idolatry, is plain abuse, and is not to receive the Kingdom of Christ amongst
us, but rather to refuse it.

Such like that they that of old were called the Chapiters and Convents of
Abbeys, Cathedral kirks, and like places, serve for nothing now, but to set
fewes and tacks, if any thing be left of the kirk lands and teinds, in hurt and
prejudice thereof, as daily experience teaches, and therefore ought to be
utterly abrogate and abolished.

Of the like nature are the Deanes, Archdeacons, Chantours, Subchantours,
Thesaurers, Chancellors and others having the like titles flowing from the Pope
and Canon law only, who have no place in the reformed kirk.

The kirks also which are united together, and joined by annexation to their
benefices, ought to be separated and divided, and given to qualified Ministers,
as Gods Word craves.

Neither ought such abusers of the kirks Patrimony to have vote in Parliament,
nor sit in Council under the name of the kirk and kirkmen, to the hurt and
prejudice of the liberty thereof, and laws of the Realm made in favor of the
Reformed kirk.

Much less is it lawful, that any person amongst these men should have five,
sixteen, twenty or more kirks, all craving the charge of souls, and bruike the
patrimony thereof, either by admission of the Prince, or of the kirk, in this
light of the Evangell. For it is but a mockage to crave reformation, where such
like have place.

And in so far, as in the order taken at Leith, in the year of our Lord
1571, it appears that such may be admitted, being found qualified; either that
pretended order is against all good order, or else it must be understood not of
them that be qualified in worldly affairs, or to serve in Court, but such as
are qualified to teach Gods Word, having their lawful admission of the kirk.

As to Bishops, if the name (...) be properly taken, they are all one with the
Ministers, as before was declared. For it is not a name of superiority and
lordship, but of office and watching.

Yet because in the corruption of the kirk, this name (as others) have been
abused, and yet is likely to be, we cannot allow the fashion of these new
chosen Bishops, neither of the Chapiters that are Electors of them to such
offices, as they are chosen unto.

True Bishops should addict themselves to a particular flock, which sundry of
them refuse, neither should they usurp Lordship over their brethren, and over
the inheritance of Christ, as these men do.

Pastors, in so far as they are Pastors, have not the office of Visitation of
more kirks joined to the pastorship, without it be given to them.

It is a corruption, that Bishops should have further bounds to vifit, nor they
may lawfully.

No man ought to have the office of Vifitation, but he that is lawfully chosen
thereunto.

The Elderships being well established, have power to send out visitours one or
more, with commission to vifit the bounds within their Eldership, and likewise
after count taken of them, either continue them, or remove them from time to
time, to the which Elderships they shall be always subject.

Criminal jurisdiction in the person of a pastor, is a corruption.

It agrees not with the word of God, that Bishops should be Pastors of
Pastors, Pastors of many flocks, and yet without a certain flock, and without
ordinary teaching.

It agrees not with the Scriptures, that they should be exemed from the
correction of their brethren, and Discipline of the particular Eldership of the
Kirk, where they shall serve, neither that they usurp the Office of Visitation
of other Kirks, nor any other function beside other Ministers, but so far as
shall be committed to them by the kirk.

Wherefore, we desire the Bishops that now are, either to agree to that order
that Gods word requires in them, as the general kirk will prescribe unto them,
not passing their bounds, either in Ecclefiasticall or Civil affairs, or else
to be deposed from all function in the kirk.

We deny not in the mean time, but Ministers may and should affist their
Princes when they are required, in all things agreeable to the Word, whether it
be in Council, or Parliament, or otherwise; Providing always, they neither
neglect their own charges, nor through flattery of Princes hurt the public
estate of the Kirk.

But generally, we say, no person under whatsoever title of the Kirk, and
specially the abused titles in Papistry, of Prelates, Convents, and Chapters,
ought to attempt any act in the Kirks name, either in Council, or Parliament,
or out of Council, having no Commission of the Reformed Kirk within this
Realm.

And by Act of Parliament it is provided, that the Papisticall Kirk and
Jurisdiction should have no place within the same, and no Bishop nor other
Prelate in times coming should use any jurisdiction flowing from his authority.

And again, that no other Ecclefiasticall Jurisdiction should be acknowledged
within this Realm, but that which is, and shall be in the Reformed Kirk, and
flowing therfrom.

So we esteem holding of Chapiters in Papisticall manner, either in Cathedral
kirks, Abbeyes, Colleges, or other conventuall places, usurping the name and
authority of the kirk, to hurt the patrimony thereof, or use any other Act to
the prejudice of the same, fince the year of our Lord 1560 years, to be abuse
and corruption, contrary to the liberty of the true kirk, and laws of the
Realm; and therefore ought to be annulled, reduced, and in times coming
utterly discharged.

The dependances also of the Papisticall jurisdiction are to be abolished; of
the which sort is mingled jurisdiction of the Commissars, in so far as they
meddle with Ecclesiastical matters, and have no Commission of the kirk
thereto, but were elected in time of our Sovereigns mother, when things were
out of order. It is an absurd thing, that sundry of them having no function of
the kirk, should be Judges to Ministers, and depose them from their rooms.
Therefore they either would be discharged to meddle with Ecclesiastical
matters, or it would be limited to them in what matters they might be Judges,
and not hurt the liberty of the kirk.

They also that before were of the Ecclesiastique estate in the Popes kirk, or
that are admitted of new to the Papisticall titles, and now are tolerate by
the laws of the Realm to possess the two-part of their Ecclesiastical
rents, ought not have any further liberty, but to intromet with the portion
assigned and granted to them for their life-times; and not under the abused
titles which they had to dispon the kirk-rents, set tackes and fewes thereof at
their pleafure, to the great hurt of the kirk, and poor laborers that dwell
upon the kirk-lands, contrary to all good conscience and order.

CHAP. XII. Certain special heads of Reformation, which we crave.
WHatsoever has been spoken of the offices of the kirk, the several power of
the office-bearers, their conjunct power also, and last of the patrimrny of the
kirk, we understand it to be the right Reformation which God craves at our
hands, that the kirk be ordered according thereto, as with that order which is
most agreeable to the Word.

But because something would be touched in particular, concerning the estate of
the Country, and that which we principally seek to be reformed in the same, we
have collected them in these heads following.

Seeing the whole Country is divided in Provinces, and their Provinces again
are divided in Parishes, as well in land-ward, as in Towns; in every Parish
and reasonable Congregation there would be placed one or more Pastors to feed
the flock, and no Pastor or Minister always to be burdened with the particular
charge of more kirks or flocks then one alanerly.

And because it will be thought hard to find out Pastors or Ministers to all
the paroch kirks of the Realm, as well in Landward, as in Towns, we think by
the advice of such as commission may be given to by the kirk and Prince,
Parishes in landward or small Villages, may be joined two or three or more, in
some places together, and the principal and mest commodious kirks to stand,
and be repaired sufficiently, and qualified Ministers placed thereat; and the
other kirks, which are not found necessary, may be suffered to decay, their
kirk-yards always being kept for burial places, and in some places where need
requires, a Parish, where the Congregation is over great for one kirk, may be
divided in two or more.

Doctors would be appointed in Universities, Colleges, and in other places
needful, and sufficiently provided for, to open up the meaning of the
Scriptures, and to have the charge of Schools, and teach the rudiments of
Religion.

As for Elders, there would be some to be censurers of the manners of the
people, one or more in every Congregation, but not an Assembly of Elders in
every particular kirk, but only in Towns, and famous places, where resort of
men of judgment and ability to that effect may be had, where the Elders of the
particular kirks about may convene together, and have a common Eldership, and
assembly-place among them, to treat of all things that concerns the
Congregations of which they have the oversight.

And as there ought to be men appointed to unite and divide the Parishes, as
necessity and commodity requires: So would there be appointed by the general
kirk, with assent of the Prince, such men as fear God, and know the estate of
the Countries, that were able to nominate and design the places, where the
particular Elderships should convene, taking confideration of the Diocese, as
they were divided of old, and of the estate of the Countries, and Provinces of
the Realm.

Likewise concerning Provincial and Synodall Assemblies confideration were
easy to be taken: How many and in what places they were to be holden, and how
often they should convene, ought to be referred to the liberty of the general
kirk, and order to be appointed therein.

The National Assemblies of this Country, called commonly the General
Assemblies, ought always to be retained in their own liberty, and have their
own place.

With power to the kirk to appoint times and places convenient for the same,
and all men, as well Magistrates, as inferiors to be subject to the judgment
of the same in Ecclesiastical causes, without any reclamation or appellation
to any Judge, Civil or Ecclesiastical within the Realm.

The liberty of the election of persons called to the Ecclesiastical function,
and observed without interruption, so long as the kirk was not corrupted by
Antichrist, we desire to be restored and retained within this Realm.

So that none be intrused upon any Congregation, either by the Prince, or any
inferior person, without lawful election, and the assent of the people over
whom the person is placed, as the practice of the Apostolical and Primitive
Kirk, and good order craves.

And because this order, which Gods word craves, cannot stand with patronages
and presentation to benefices used in the Popes kirk, we desire all them, that
truly fear God, earnestly to consider, that for as much as the names of
patronages and benefices, together with the effect thereof, have flowed from
the Pope, and corruption of the Canon law only, in so far as thereby any
person was intrused or placed over Kirkes having Curam animarum.

And for as much as that manner of proceeding has no ground in the word of
God, but is contrary to the same, and to the said liberty of Election, they
ought not now to have place in this light of Reformation. And therefore,
whosoever will embrace Gods word, and desire the kingdom of his Son Christ
Jesus to be advanced, they will also embrace, and receive that policy and
order which the word of God, and upright estate of his Kirk craves, otherwise
it is in vain that they have professed the same.

Notwithstanding as concerning other patronages of benefices that have not
curam animarum, as they speak: such as are chaplenries, prebendaries founded
upon temporal lands, annuels, and such like, may be reserved unto the ancient
Patrones, to dispone hereupon, when they vaike, to scholars and bursers, as
they are required by act of Parliament.

As for the Kirk rents in general we desire that order be admitted and
maintained amongst us, that may stand with the sincerity of Gods word, and
practice of the purity of the Kirk of Christ:

To wit, that, as was before spoken, the whole rent and patrimony of the Kirk,
excepting the small patronages before mentioned, may be divided in four
portions: one thereof to be assigned to the Pastor for his entertainment, and
hospitality; an other to the Elders, Deacons and other officers of the Kirk,
such as clerks of Assemblies, takers up of the Psalms, Beadels and keepers of
the Kirk, so far as is necessary: Joining with them also the Doctors, and
Schools, to help the ancient foundations where need requires: the third
portion to be bestowed upon the poor members of the faithful, and hospitalls:
the fourth for reparation of the Kirks, and other extraordinary charges as are
profitable for the Kirk, and also for the commonwealth, if need require.

We desire therefore the Ecclesiastical goods to be uplifted and distributed
faithfully to whom they appertain, and that by the ministry of the Deacons,
to whose office properly the collection and distribution thereof belongs, that
the poor may be answeted of their portion thereof, and they of the Ministry
live without care and solicitude: as also the rest of the treasury of the Kirk
may be reserved, and bestowed to their right uses.

If these Deacons be elected with such qualities as Gods word craves to be in
them, there is no fear, that they shall abuse themselves in their office, as
the profane Collector did of before.

Yet because this vocation appears to many to be dangerous, let them be
oblished, as they were of old, to a yearly count to the Pastors and Eldership;
and if the Kirk and Prince think expedient, let cautioners be oblished for
their fidelity, that the Kirk rents on na ways be dilapidat.

And to the effect this order may take place, it is to be provided that all
other intrometters with the Kirk rent, Collectors general or special, whether
it be by appointment of the Prince, or otherways, may be denuded of further
intromission therewith, and suffer the Kirk rents in time coming to be wholly
intrometted with by the ministry of the Deacons, and distribute to the use
before mentioned.

And also, to the effect that the Ecclesiastical rents may suffice to these
uses for the which they are to be appointed, We think it necessary to be
desired, that all alienations, setting of fewes, or tacks of the rents of the
Kirk, as well lands as tiends, in hurt and diminution of the old rentalls, be
reduced and annulled, and the patrimony of the of Kirk restored to the former
old liberty.

And likewise, that in times coming the tiends be set to nane, but to the
laborers of the ground, or else not set at all, as was agreed upon, and
subscribed by the Nobility of before.

CHAP. 13. The utilitie that shall flow from this reformation to all Estates.
SEeing the end of this spiritual government and policy whereof we speak, is,
that God may be glorified, the kingdom of Jesus Christ advanced, and all who
are of his mystical body may live peaceable in conscience; Therefore we dare
boldly affirm, that all these who have true respect to these ends, will even
for conscience cause gladly agree and conform themselves to this order, and
advance the same, so far as lies in them, that their conscience being set at
rest, they may be replenished with spiritual gladness in giving full obedience
to that which Gods word, and the testimony of their own conscience does crave,
and refusing all corruption contrary to the same.

Next we shall become an example and pattern of good and godly order to other
nations, countries, and Kirks professing the same Religion with us, that as
they have glorified God in our continuing in the sincerity of the word hither
to, without any errors, praise be to his name: so they may have the like
occasion in our conversation, when as we conform our selves to that
discipline, policy, and good order, which the same word, and purity of
reformation craveth at our hands: Otherwise that fearful sentence may be
justly said to us, The servant knowing the will of his Master, and not doing
it, etc.

Moreover, if we have any piety or respect to the poor members of Jesus
Christ, who so greatly increase and multiply amongst us, we will not suffer
them to be longer defrauded of that part of the patrimony of the Kirk, which
justly belongs unto them; and by this order, if it be duly put to execution,
the burden of them shall be taken off us to our great comfort, the streets
shall be cleansed of the cryings and murmurings of them as we shall no more be
any scandal to other Nations, as we have hitherto been, for not taking order
with the poor amongst us, and causing the word which we profess to be evil
spoken of, giving occasion of slander to the enemies, and offending the
consciences of the simple and godly.

Besides this, it shall be a great ease and commodity to the whole common
people, in relieving them of the building and upholding their Kirks, in bigging
of brigges, and other like public works: to the laborers of the ground in
payment of their tiends, and shortly in all these things, whereinto they have
been hitherto rigorously handled by them that were falsely called Kirk-men,
their tacks-men, factours, chalmerlanes and extortioners.

Finally, to the Kings Majesty, and commonwealth of the country this profit
shall redound, That the other affairs of the Kirk being sufficiently provided,
according to the distribution, of the which has been spoken; the superplus
being collected in the treasury of the Kirk may be profitably employed, and
liberally bestowed upon the extraordinary support of the affairs of the Prince
and Commonwealth, and specially of that part which is appointed for reparation
of Kirks.

So to conclude, all being willing to apply themselves to this order, the
people suffering themselves to be ruled according thereto: the Princes and
Magistrates not being exemed, and these that are placed in the Ecclesiastical
estate rightly ruling and governing, God shall be glorified, the Kirk edified,
and the bounds thereof enlarged, Christ Jesus and his Kingdom set up, Satan
and his Kingdom subverted, and God shall dwell in the midst of us, to our
comfort, through Jesus Christ, who together with the Father and the Holy Ghost,
abides blessed in all eternity, Amen.

FINIS.

