ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Concerning MATTERS Ecclesiastical:
EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen of every Parish within
the DIOCESE of HEREFORD.

In the first EPISCOPAL VISITATION OF THE Right Reverend Father in God,
HERBERT, By Divine Providence, LORD BISHOP of HEREFORD.

LONDON, Printed for G. Bedell, and T. Collins. M. DC. LXII.

The Tenor of the Oath to be Administered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen of
every Parish.
YOu shall Swear to enquire with your best diligence, and to make a true Answer
unto every Article in this Book now given you in Charge; and to Present every
Person that now is, or of late was, Inhabiting within your Parish, that has
done any Offense, or omitted any Duty therein mentioned. And this you shall do,
as in the sight of God, uprightly and truly, without Favor or Malice, Hope of
Reward, or Fear of Displeasure. So help you God.

ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY WITHIN THE DIOCESE of HEREFORD.
TITUL. I. Concerning Churches and Chapples, with the Ornaments and Furniture
thereunto belonging.
I. IS your Parish Church or Chapel kept in good and sufficient repair? Are
the Roofs thereof well covered with Lead, Tile, or Slate; the Windows well
Glazed, the Floors well Paved, the Seats well Fastened, and conveniently Placed;
and all things so decently ordered, as becomes the house of God?

II. HAS the Steeple or Tower of your Church or Chapel, or any part thereof,
been pulled down, or any of the Lead, or Bells formerly belonging thereunto,
been imbezelled, sold or made away? In whose hands or custody does the same, or
any part thereof remain? Declare what you know, or have heard therein?

III. IS there a Font of Stone, with a good Cover thereunto, standing in a
convenient place toward the lower part of your Church, for the Administration
of Baptism? And is there in your Chancel, a decent Communion Table, for the
Administration of the Lords Supper; with a Carpet of Silk, Stuff, or fine
Woollen Cloth; and another Covering of white and pure Linen, to spread
thereupon? And have you a fair Communion-Cup, or Chalice, with a Cover of
silver, and one or more Flagons of silver, or pewter, thereunto belonging?

IV. HAVE you in your said Church or Chapel, a convenient Seat, or Pew, for
your Minister to read Divine Service in? A Pulyit, with a comely Cloth or
Cushion for the same? A Bible, of the last Translation, in a large Volumn, and
the Book of Common Prayer; both well and substantially bound? Have you likewise
the Book of Homilies set forth by Authority? A Book of Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical? And a printed Table of the Degrees wherein Marriage is
prohibited?

V. HAVE you acomely large Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of
his Public Ministration in the Church; provided, and to be dilly washed at the
charge of the Parish?

VI. HAVE you a Register-Book of Parchment, wherein to Register the Names and
Surnames of all such persons as are Married, Christened, or Buried within your
Parish? together with the Names and Surnames of both the Parents of the
Children so Christened, expressing the Day, Month, and Year of all such
Christnings, Marriages, and Burials? And is the Transcript thereof Yearly,
within one Month next after the 25. of March, brought into the Bishops Registry?

VII. HAVE you likewise another Book of Paper, wherein to Record the Names and
Licenses of all such Strangers as are admitted at any time to Preach in your
Church or Chapel? As also a Third Book, wherein to write down the
Churchwardens Accounts: together with a strong Chest, with Locks and Keys,
wherein to keep the aforesaid Books, and all other the aforementioned Furniture
in safe Custody? And lastly, Have you a Bier, with a black Hears-Cloth, for the
Burial of the Dead?

TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Gleabs, and Tithes, belonging
to the Church.
I. IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced with Walls, Rails, or Pales; and
decently kept from the annoyance of Swine, Horses, and other Cattle? Has any
person encroached upon the same? or made any door into it, out of his own
Ground or Habitation, without allowance from the Ordinary? Have any Trees there
growing been cut down? how long since? by whom? and to whose use and benefit?

II. IS the House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, (with all the Outhouses
thereunto belonging) kept in good and sufficient repair? Or, have any of the
said Houses, or Outhouses, been defaced, or pulled down, without License from
the Ordinary? And by whom? Has any Person encroached upon any Garden, Yard, or
Close, belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage-house? Or cut up any Trees
growing thereon? Or changed, or removed the Ancient Marks and Bounds of the
same?

III. HAVE you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-lands, Gardens,
Orchards, Tenements, or Cottages, belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? As
also a Note of such Pensions, Rate-tithes, and Portions of Tithes, or other
yearly Profits (either within, or without your Parish) as belong thereunto:
Have any of the same been withheld from your Minister; and by whom, as you
know, or have heard?

IV. HAVE any of the Ancient Glebe-lands belonging to your Parsonage or
Nicarage, been taken away or exchanged for other, without the free consent of
the Incumbenf, and License from the Ordinary? Have any Enclosures been made in
your Parish, to the detriment of the Church, by the decay of Tillage, and
converting Arable Land into Pasture? by whom has the same been made? and how
many years since? and how much is your Parsonage or Vicarage damnified thereby
in the yearly value thereof, as you know, believe, or have heard?

TIT. III. Concerning MINISTERS.
I. IS your Minister a Priest or Deacon, Episcopally Ordained, according to the
Laws of the Church of England?

II. IS he defamed or suspected to have obtained either his Benefice or Orders,
by any Simonaical Compact.

III. HAS he been legally Instituted and Inducted into his Benefice? And did
he within two Months after his Induction, publicly in the Church, upon some
Sunday or Holy Day, in the time of Divine Service, read the 39. Articies of the
Church of England; established by Authority, and there publicly Declare his
Assent thereunto?

IV. HAS he any other Ecclesiastical Benefice, Prebend, or Dignity? Is he
constantly resident upon his Benefice amongst you? How many weeks in any one
Year has he been absent from it, without urgent Necessity?

V. HAS your Minister a Curate to assist him? Is the said Curate in holy
Orders, an able and discreet Person, and conformable to the Laws and Orders of
the Church of England? Is he allowed by the Bishop to serve in your Church or
Chapel? And does he serve in any other Church beside? And what yearly Stipend
does your Minister allow him?

VI. DOES your Parson, Vicar or Curate, in reading the daily Morning and
Evening Service, Administration of the holy Sacraments, Celebration of
Marriage, Churching of Women after Childbirth, Visitation of the Sick, Burial
of the Dead, and pronouncing Gods Commination against impenitent Sinners, use
the Form and Words prescribed in the Book of Common-Praper, without any
Addition, Omission, or Alteration of the same? And does he use all such Rites
and Ceremonies in all parts of Divine Service, as are appointed in the said
Book?

VI. DOES your Minister, at the Reading or Celebrating any Divine Office in
your Church or Chapel, wear the Surplice, together with such other
Scholastical Habit as is suitable to his Degree?

VIII. DOES he observe the Holy Days and Fastingdayes, as also the
Ember-weeks, and the yearly Perambulation in Rogation-week, as in the
Common Prayer Book, or by the Ecclesiastical Canons is appointed; giving notice
to the Parishioners of every of the same in the Church, in the time of Divine
Service upon the Sunday next before?

IX. HAS your Minister been Licensed to Preach by the Bishop, or either of the
two Universities? If so; Does he then constantly (unless in case of sickness,
necessary absence, or other reasonable impediment) himself Preach in your
Church or Chapel, one Sermon every Sunday? Or if he be not a Licensed
Preacher, or being so Licensed, be hindered by sickness, or otherwise, as
aforesaid; Does he procure a Sermon to be so preached by some other Minister, a
Licensed Preacher? or one of the Homilies, set forth by Authority, to be there
read by a Priest or Deacon lawfully Ordained?

X. DOES your Minister diligently instruct the Youth of your Parish, in the
Church-Catechism? And does he prepare and present them, being so instructed, to
be Confirmed by the Bishop? And does he endeavor to reclaim all Popish
Recusants, and other Sectaries (if any such be inhabiting within your Parish)
to the true Religion established in the Church of England, and to their bounden
Duty, in obeying the Laws, and submitting to the Government thereof?

XI. DOES he neglect to visit the Sick, or delay the Baptism of any Infant that
is in danger of death? Is there any Chillde past Infancy, or other person of
more Years, through your Ministers default, yet remaining unbaptized in your
Parish? Does he Baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers, or admit either
of the Parents to be Godfather or Godmother to their own Children?

XII. DOES he in his Sermons Preach sound Doctrine, tending to the Edification
of the People, in the Knowledge and Faith of Jesus Christ, and Obedience to
Gods Holy Commandments? Or has he at any time (as you know, or have heard)
Preached any False, Heretical, Seditious, or Schismatical Doctrine, thereby to
seduce the People into Parties and Factions, to the disturbance of the Public
Peace and Unity either of Church or State?

XIII. HAS he presumed to Marry any persons in private Houses? Or such, as
being* under Age, have not the consent of their Parents, or without the Banes
first published on three Sundays or Holy Days in the Church? Or at any other
hours than between Eight and Twelve in the Morning; unless he had a License or
Dispensation so to do?

XIV. DOES any person Preach in your Parish as a Lecturer? Has he allowance
from the Bishop for so doing? Does he before his Lecture, read Divine Service
according to the Book of Common Prayer? And is he in all respects conformable
to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England?

XV. HAS your Minister taken upon him to appoint any Public or Private Fasts,
Prophecyings or Exercises, not appointed by Authority? Or does he, or any
other, either Minister or Lay-person, hold any Conventicles or Meetings in
private Houses within your Parish for people of several Families to resort
unto, under the pretense of Preaching, Praying, Thanksgiving, or Humiliation,
contrary to the Laws and Canons in that case provided?

XVI. IS your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, a man of a sober,
unblameable, and exemplary life? Does he familiarly converse with ungodly,
vicious, and excommunicate persons? Is he a Frequenter of Taverns, or
Alehouses? a common Gamester? a profane or obscene Iester? a Swearer, Railer,
Scoffer, or Quarreller? Does he set Neighbors at variance one with another? Or
encourage them to Suits and Contention? Is he noted to be an intemperate
Drinker? Or vehemently suspected of Incontinency with any Person, either within
your Parish, or without? Does he wear his hair of an immoderate or uncomely
length? Is his Apparel grave and decent, both for Fashion and Color, as the
Canons of the Church require? Or is his Carriage and Conversation in any kind
whatsoover, Disorderly or Scandalous, and unbeseeming a Minister of Jesus
Christ?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
I. Is there in your Parish, any person, a known or reputed Heretic or
Schismatic? Any Papist, Familist, Anabaptist, Quaker, or other Sectary, that
refuse to come unto the Public Assemblies, Prayers or Services of the Church,
or that make Profession of any other Religion than what is established in the
Church of England? And if there be any such, what are their Names?

II. IS there any person in your Parish, that lies under a common Fame, or
vehement suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any common
Drunkards within your Parish, or common Swearers, or Blasphemers of Gods Name,
or any that are Noted to be Railers, unclean or filchy Talkers, or Sowers of
Sedition, Faction, and Discord amongst their Neighbors?

III. DO any of your Parish upon the Sundays or Holy Days, follow their
bodily and ordinary Labor? Or permit their Servants so to do? Are any Shops
kept open, or Wares sold? Or do any Vintners, Inne-keepers, or other
Victuallers and Sellers of Beer or Ale, suffer any persons to Tiple or Game in
their Houses upon those days?

IV. DOES every Person inhabiting or sojourning within your Parish, duly resort
unto your Church or Chapel, upon every Sunday and Holy Day appointed for
Divine Service? Do they then and there abide quietly with Reverence, Order and
Decency, during all the whole time of Common Prayer, Preaching, or other
Service of God there used? And are there any among you that come only to the
Preaching, and not to the Common Prayers of the Church?

V. DOES every Person reverently uncover his Head, and so continue all the time
of Divine Service, and Sermon in the Church? Do they all reverently kneel at
the Prayers, and stand up when the Creed and Gospel are read, making due
Reverence when the Name of our Lord Jesus is mentioned?

VI. ARE there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant-children to
be baptized publicly in the Church, unless in case of urgent Danger; in which
case, the Child may be baptized at Home by a lawful Minister, after the Form
and Rites appointed in the Liturgy? Or do they send them to be bap^ized in any
other Parishes, or after other Form than is appointed? Or do they keep them
unbaptiz^d any longer time than the Church allows? And are there any Infants,
or more aged persons in your Parish, as yet unbaptized?

VII. DOES every Householder in your Parish cause their Children and Servants to
learn their Catechism, and to give an Account thereof unto your Minister, as he
shall require it of them openly in the Church upon Sundays and Holy Days, as
in the Book of Common Prayer is appointed: that when they are well instructed
in the same, they may be confirmed by the Bishop?

VIII. IS there any person in your Parish, who being Sixteen Years of Age, and
well instructed in Religion, does not receive the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, at least three times in the year, of which Easter is always to be one?
Does any in your Parish refuse to receive the same kneeling: or from the hands
of your own Minister, repairing for it to other Parishes and Ministers abroad?
Or are there any strangers not of your Parish, that forsake their own Churches,
and usually repair to yours for it?

IX. HAVE you any among you that be denounced and declared Excommunicate for
any Crime committed? How long have they been so Excommunicated? And do any of
your Parish keep Society with them before they be reconciled to the Church, and
absolved?

X. ARE there any living in your Parish, who have been unlawfully Married,
contrary to the Laws of God? Or any that being lawfully Divorced, have Married
again? Or any that being lawfully Married, and not Separated or Divorced by
course of Law, do not Cohabit together?

XI. ARE there any Married women in your Parish, who after their Delivery from
the Peril of Childbirth, refuse to make their Public Thanksgiving to God in
the Church? And when they come so to do, Do they come decently Apparrelled, and
make their Off^rings according to Custom?

XII. ARE there any belonging to your Parish, who refuse to pay their Duty for
Easter-Offerings to your Minister? Or any that refuse to contribute, and pay
the Rate Assessed upon them, for the Repair of your Church or Chapel, and for
the providing of such Books, Furniture and Ornaments, as be requisite for the
performance of all Divine Offices there?

XIII. DO any refuse to bury their Dead according to the Rites of the Church of
England? And are there any Wills or Testaments of persons dead in your Parish,
that be yet unproved? Or any Goods Administered, without a due Grant from the
Ordinary? Did any dying in your Parish, or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to your
Church or Chapel, or to the use of the Poor, or to any other pious and
charitable purposes? What were those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed?

XIV. DO you know, or have you heard, of any Patron, or other person in your
Parish, having the Presentation or Gift of any Ecclesiastical Benefice, who
has made gain thereof, by presenting a Clerk or Minister to it upon any
Bargain, either for Money or Pension, or Lease, reserve of Tithes, or Glebe, or
any part thereof, or upon other Simonaical Compact whatsoever?

XV. IS there any Strife and Contention among any of your Parish, for their
Pews or Seats in your Church? Have any new Pews been erected in your Chancel,
or in the Body of your Church or Chapel, without leave from the Ordinary?

TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks and Sextons.
I. HAVE you belonging to your Church or Chappelry, a Parish-Clerk aged Twenty
one Years at the least? Is he of honest Life and Conversation, and sufficient
or able to perform his Duty in Reading, Writing, and Singing? Is he chosen by
your Minister, and does he duly attend him in all Divine Services at the
Church? Are his Wages duly paid unto him? Or who withholds the same from him?

II. DOES he or your Sexton (if there be any such appointed in your Parish)
diligently look to the Doors of your Church, that they be locked and opened at
due time? And does he keep your Church or Chapel clean from Dust, Cobwebs, and
other Annoyance? Does he Toll or Ring the Bells at the due accustomed hours
before the beginning of Divine Service, Morning and Evening, that the people
may be warned to come unto the Church? And when any person is passing out of
this Life, does he upon notice given him thereof, Toll a Bell, as has been
accustomed, that the Neighbors may thereby be warned to recommend the dying
person to the Grace and Favor of God?

TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, Schoolmasters, Physicians,
Chyrurgyons, and Midwives.
I. IS there any Hospital, Almes-house, or Free School founded in your Parish?
Who was the Founder, or is now the Patron thereof? And what is the Yearly
Revenue, or Stipend, belonging to the Governors, or Masters of the same? Is the
same Ordered and Governed in every Respect as it ought to be? And are the
Revenues thereof rightly employed, according to the intention of the Founder,
and of such Grants and Ordinances as have been made concerning the same?

II. DOES any man keep a public or private School in your Parish, who is not
allowed thereunto by the Bishop or his Chancellor? Does your Schoolmaster
teach his Scholars the Catechism of Religion set forth by Authority? Does he
cause them upon Sundays and Holy Days, orderly to repair to your Church or
Chapel; and see that they behave themselves there quietly and reverently,
during the time of Divine Service and Sermon?

III. DOES any man in your Parish practice Physic, or Chyrurgery; or any Woman
take upon her to exercise the Office of Midwife, without Approbation and
License from the Ordinary?

TIT. VII. Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen.
I. ARE the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of your Minister and Parishioners; or one of them by your Minister, and
the other by the Parishioners?

II. HAVE the former and last Churchwardens given up their due Accounts to the
Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens the Moneys remaining
in their hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or
Chapel?

III. DO you the Churchwardens and Sidemen take diligent Care, and see who of
your Parishioners be absent from the Divine Service and Sermon in your Church
or Chapel, upon Sundays and Holy Days? And if you find any to have absented
themselves without a sufficient Cause, do you by Warrant from some of the
Justices of Peace, levy of them by way of Distress upon their Goods, the Sum of
Twelve Pence for every such day of their absence, according to the Act of
Parliament in that Case provided: And do you distribute the several Sums so
levied, among the Poor of your Parish, according to the Law?

IV. DO you Note them that come late to Church after Divine Service is begun,
or depart before it be ended? Do you suffer none to stand idle, or talk
together in the Church Porch, or to walk in the Church, or Churchyard, during
the time of Prayers, Preaching, or other Sacred Offices?

V. DO you suffer no Misbehaviour or Disorder to be done by Men, Women, or
Servants, or Children in your Church or Chapel? Are you careful that none of
them sit, lean, or lay their Hats upon the Communion Table? Do you permit no
Minstrels, no Morris-Dancers, no Dogs, Hawks, or Hounds, to be brought, or
come into your Church, to the disturbance of the Congregation?

VI. DO you against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chapel,
provide a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and of good Wine, according
to the Number of Communicants?

VII. DO you cause all Strangers that Preach in your Church or Chapel, to
Subscribe their Names the same day in a Book provided for that purpose,
together with the Name of the Bishop that Licensed them to Preach in this
Diocese? And do you permit no other to Preach?

VIII. HAVE you (the Churchwardens and Sidemen) now Sworn to give in a true
Answer unto all these Articles of Inquiry in all their several Titles, taken
sufficient time to draw up your Presentiments, and therein consulted with your
Minister for his faithful Assistance?

FOR know you assuredly, That as the true discharging of your Office, is the
chief means whereby Public Disorders, Sins and Offenses in your Parish may be
Reformed and Punished: So if you wilfully refuse to Present such Crimes and
Faults as either you know to have been committed, or otherwise have heard of by
Public Fame; That in such Cases, the Bishop and his Officers are to proceed
against you in their Ecclesiastical Courts, as in Cases of wilful Omission and
Perjury.

HERBERT. HEREFORD.

THE Ministers of every Parish are desired to give in the Names of such of the
younger Sort, in their several Parishes, as they judge fit to receive
Confirmation from the Bishop, and to Present them to be Confirmed; especially
such as having competently learned their Catechism, have not yet received the
Holy Communion.

Also the Clergy within the County of HEREFORD, are desired to bring with them
in Writing, a Note of all such Coats of Arms as are in the Church-windows, and
of all such Monuments, Gravestones and Inscriptions, whether of ancient or
later Times, as are yet remaining in their several respective Churches or
Chapels, or the Chancels thereof.

FINIS.

