blazon or coat of arms

THE LIBERTIES USAGES, AND CUSTOMS OF THE CITY OF LONDON; CONfirmed by
especial Acts of Parliament, with the time of their Confirmation.

ALSO, Diverse ample, and most beneficial Charters, granted by King Henry the
6. King Edward the 4. and King Henry the 7th. not confirmed by Parliament as
the other Charters were, And where to find every particular Grant and
Confirmation at large.

Collected by Sir Henry Colthrop, Knight, sometime Recorder of London, for his
private use.

And now published for the good and benefit of this Honorable City.

LONDON: Printed by B. Alsop for Nicholas Vavasour, and are to be sold at his
shop in the Inner Temple, MDCXLII.

THE LIBERTIES, Usages, and Customs, of the City of LONDON.
All the Liberties, Usages, and Custom hereafter following, are confined by an
especial Act of Parliament at Westminster, Anno Septimo Regni Regis R. 2. albo
libro, 43. a.
Abrokers.
THat the Abrokers of any Merchandise in this City, shall not be, except the
same be chosen by Merchants of the mystery; in which the same Ab-brokers, shall
have there exercise of their office, and the same Abrokers also to be sworn
before the Lord Major of the City of London, libro albo, 38. a. 12. H. 3.

Abrokecators, or Brokers.
Abrokecators or Brokers. Brokers are to be chosen by Merchants of their own
mysteries, and they shall take their Oath before the Major of London, lib, albo
fol, 570. b. 3. E. 3. per Charter and Parliament.

Acquittances of Murder.
The Citizens are acquitted as well for any murder committed within the City,
as within the Portsoken. viz they shall not be amerced as they have bin in old
time if the murderer did escape, fol. 35. albo lib. 11. H. 3. so that the
statutes of English shere, Anno 14. E. 3. Cap 4.

Acquittances.
That the Citizens of London shall be for ever acquitted of pavage, portage,
and murrage, through all the Kings Dominions, lib. alb. fol. 36. b, c. Anno 12.
H. 3.

Aldermen and their election.
Upon the Feast day of S. Gregory, yearly shall every Alderman be removed from
their place, and new in their place shall be chosen, lib, alb. fol. 42. a. b.
50, E. 3. note that this is changed since by Act of Parliament.

Aldermens goods.
That Aldermens goods shall be taxed in Aids, tallages, or other contributions
amongst other men's goods, lib. alb. f. 36, b.

Allowance of Liberties.
It shall suffice that one Writ in one Kings time shall serve in the Kings
Exchequer, and in all other places for the allowance of the Liberties, lib.
alb. f, 4. b, 1. E, 1. Learn for what cause at every change the City is put to
so great charges, as to procure a new Confirmation. I think it be only for the
profit of Chancery men.

Amerciaments.
The Sheriff shall not be amerced for any offense above 20. l. lib. alb. f.
34. Anno 11. H. 3.

That the Sheriffs of London shall not be charged or amerced for escape of any
Fellon, but as other Sheriffs have used on this side Trent, lib, alb. f. 39.
b. 1. E. 1.

None shall be otherwise amerced, but according to Law used in the time of H.
1. lib. alb. f. 35. 11. H. 3.

Aids and Contributions.
That the Citizens of London in all Aids, Grants, and Contributions to the
Kings use, shall be taxed and contribute with the Commonalty of England, as men
of the Counties, and not as men of Cities and Burrowes, and that they shall be
free from all other tallages, and thereof clearly acquitted, lib, al. f. 40. 1.
E. 1.

Bakers and Millers.
THere is a Statute in French granted by the King for the punishment of Bakers
and millers, and tried by weight, whether the millers do deceive the Owners of
the corn, and that ob. to be yielded for every quarter of corn that is ground,
lib. al. f. 42, b, c, 1. E. 1.

Battle.
A Citizen shall not be enforced to wage Battle, nor shall in the pleas of
Crown be tried by any other Order, but only according to the ancient Custom of
the City lib. al fol. 35, Anno 11, H. 3.

Bean-pleader.
None shall be amerced for mispleading, the which the Book calls misk^nning,
li. al. f. 35, 11, H. 3.

Bridgemasters.
The Bridgmasters shall be chosen by the Commons, there must be but two, and
they must be approved sufficient men of the City, being no Aldermen, lib, al.
fol. 38. 12, Hen. 3.

Buttlerage.
And of the Wines of the Citizens, no prizes or takings shall be had or made
by any of the Kings Ministers of their heirs, or of any other against their
will, that is to wit, of one run before the mast, and of any other tun behind
the mast, nor in any other manner, but they shall be thereof acquitted for ever,
br. alb. fol. 40. lib. 1. E. 3.

Ceritorary or writ of Privilege.
Note, that the King charge his Treasurer, and the Barons of the Exchequer,
and other his Ministers of the same Court, that from hence forth the Kings Writ
shall not be granted to remove the body of any imprisoned in the Goal of
Newgate, or elsewhere within the liberties, of the City of London, for debts
or damages in any action adjudged to any Citizen to answer to the King, or
other in the said Court of Exchequer; for the Kings debt, or for the debt of
any of the Ministers of the said Exchequer, except the said Barons do first
find the said Action to be feigned or untrue, lib. alb. fol. 44. Anno 1. R. 2.

Chamberlain, Town Clerk, and common Sergeant.
That these three Offices are eligible and removable by the Commons, and at the
will of the Commons, lib. albo fol. 38. b. 12. Hen. 3.

Coloring of strangers goods.
That Citizen which colors strangers goods, shall lose his Freedom, lib
alb. fol. 37. b. c. 12. Hen. 3.

Confirmation.
All the aforesaid Liberties are confirmed by Act of Parliament, and by
Charter, lib. alb. fol. 36. Anno. 5. E. 3.

Corporation of London.
In the 11. year of King Hen. 3. he granted unto the Citizens of London, the
Counties of London and Middlesex in Fee Farm. Note, that the Grant was made
unto the Citizens only, and not to the Major and Citizens and Commonalty of
London, as the usage is at this day, but this makes no doubt, because the
Charter is confirmed by Parliament the 21. of November in the 5. year of the
King, N. 2. lib. alb. 34. a. b. and fol. 45. a.

Custom paid.
If any sell his ware before the Custom paid, it shall be forfeited lib. alb.
fol. 36. b. 50. Hen. 3.

Customs expounded, and new Laws made.
That it shall be lawful for the Major, and Aldermen with the assent of the
Commons to expound obscure Customs, and when need requires to make new laws,
the which shall be consonant to reason, lib. alb. fol. 39. 15. E. 2.

Debts.
All manner of Debts lent in London shall be sued for in London, lib. alb. fol.
35. b. 11. Hen. 3.

Elections.
That the Major of London, and the Sheriffs shall be chosen and elected in
such sort, as they were appointed by the ancient Charter, and in no otherwise.

Escheator.
That no Escheator or other Minister of the King, shall exercise their Offices
within the City, but that the Major for the time being, shall be Escheator and
he shall yield unto the King his Oath, that he shall duly exercise and make a
true account for the same Office, lib. alb. fol. 4. a. 1. E. 1.

Expostion.
If any difficulty or ambiguity do arise upon any Article, within any of the
Kings Charters granted unto this City, so that the same Article may be taken to
diverse meanings: the King grants that he by the advisement of his Counsel,
may make thereof such interpretation as shall be best with equity and reason,
lib. alb. 44. ab. 10. R. 2.

Fellons goods.
That the Citizens shall have Infangtheff, and Outfangtheff, and the goods of
all Fellons that shall be adjudged before them within their liberties there,
lib. alb. fol. 39. b. 1. E, 2.

Fee Farm.
Where the Counties of London and Middlesex were let to Farm for 300. l. and
yet notwithstanding the office of the Exchequer by incrochment, compelled them
to pay 400. l. Now it is granted by Parliament, that the City shall pay no more
but 300. l. according to their former Charters, lib. albo fol. 39. b. 1. E. 1.

Fee Farm apportioned.
If the King do grant to any other, any thing that belongs to the Fee Farm,
then shall the Fee Farm for so much yearly be apportioned and abated at the
Exchequer, fol, 34. lib. albo 11. Hen. 3.

Fee Farm of London and Middlesex.
The Fee Farm of London and Middlesex, that is to say, for 300. l. by the year,
is granted to the Citizens of London, by 11. Hen. 3. and confirmed by
Parliament in the 7. R. 2. lib. albo fol. 34. a. b. and fol. 45. a lib. 4.

Farm bought, and Farm sold.
The Statute of Anno 9. E, 3. cap. 1. Rastall Tile Merchants, No. 2. is for
as much as concerns London expounded and repealed and the liberties of Magna
Charta, as touching London are revived, and the intent of the Lawmakers
expounded was not to touch London, nor yet infringe the Liberties of the great
Charter, lib. alb. 41. a. b. the aforesaid statute Anno 9. E. 3. has bin very
often objected against the City of London in Parliaments, by such as are
ignorant of our Charters and Statutes, vide alib, lib: alb. flo. 43. a. b. a
notable Grant by Parliament for the same matter.

Foren bought, and Foren sold.
No stranger shall Foren buy, and Foren sell within this City any Statute, to
the contrary notwithstanding, lib. alb. fol. 57. b. and per Parliament.

Foren bought, and Foren sold.
Both by Charter and Parliament it is granted, that from henceforth no Merchant
being a stranger to the liberties of this City, shall buy or sell any
Merchandise within the liberties of this City, to any like stranger Merchant,
upon the pain of Forfeitures of such Merchandises so bought or sold, lib. alb.
f. 43. a, b. 1. R. 2.

Forest of Middlesex dissaforested.
King Henry 3. Anno 11. Regni sui, did by his Charter dissaforest the Warren of
Stanes, and the Forest of Middlesex, the which was a singular benefit both to
the Country, and also for the City. Note also in the same place, a man may
gather some notable points touching the Forest Law, lib. alb. fol. 35. b, c.

Forfeiture or seizure of the liberties of the City.
That the liberty of the City shall not be seized in the Kings hands, for any
personal trespass, or judgment personal of any minister of the City, or for
any such cause, any Warden called Custos shall be by the King Deputed to rule
the City; but every minister shall answer for his own fault, and shall
according to the quantity and quality of the same fault, receive condign
punishment, lib. albo fol. 40. b 1. E. 3.

Form of Justice.
That the Citisens of London in the Eyres before the Justices of the tower
shall be measured, guided, and go^erned by the laws and customs; by the which,
they were guided in the Eires, holden there in the times of King John and King
Henry the 3. lib. alb. f. 40. b. 1. E. 3.

Fore-Stallers.
Fore-stallers and Fore-stalments made by the merchants, for or concerning
merchandise or victuals, either by land, or by water, shall be punished by
forfeiture, or imprisonment, lib. albo 36. b 50. H. 3.

Freemen and making Freemen.
No stranger born shall be made free of this City but in the Court of Hustings,
lib. albo fol. 37. b 12. H. 3. How free Denizens and Englishmen that never were
Apprenties shall be made free, and how every one ought to put in for himself
sufficient sureties, to be true to the conservation of the city, but this Order
is not used at this day; therefore I omit to speak any more of it in this place,
and yet is this Form of making Freemen by redemption, appointed by Parliament,
lib. al. fol. 37, b, 12 Henry 3.

Hunting.
The Citizens of London may have their sugations, viz. their Hunting in all
such places, as they had the same in the time of King Henry 1. lib. alb. fol.
35, b, 11. Henry 3.

Hustings.
That as well Forreiners as others, being either plaintiffs or defendants, may
make their Attorneys in the Hustings in London, lib. al, f, 36, b. 60, Henry 3.

The Hustings shall be holden but once in a week, lib. al, 35, 11. Henry 3.

Inquisitions.
All Inquisitions to be taken before the Kings Ministers by men of this City,
shall be taken at S. Martins Le-grand, and not elsewhere, except the
Inquisitions of the Eires of the Tower and Jail-delivery of Newgate, lib. al
41, a. 1. E. 3.

All Inquisitions of the Customable payments, Customs, Impositions, and
Purprestutes, within the City shall be inquired of the Citisens, and not by
others; see the words of Record more at large, lib. al. 45, b, c. 7. R. 2. See
the Statute of 28. E. 3. Cap. 10.

Jurisdiction of Pleas.
No Citizen shall be impleaded out of the walls of the City of London; but for
pleas of the Land, being without the city, always excepted the Moniers, and
the Kings Ministers, lib, al. f. 35. a, 11. H. 3.

Inquisitions of the Goal of Newgate.
That the Major of London for the time being shall in every Commission for the
Goal delivery of Newgate be named one of the Justices, lib. al. f. 39, b. 1.
E, 1.

Justices in London.
The King is restrained by his Charter, confirmed by Parliament, to assign any
Justices in London* except the Justices of Eire at the Tower of London, and
Justices of Goal delivery of Newgate, and for errors at S. Martins to be
corrected: except any things do chance within the same city, that do touch the
King or his Heirs, lib. al 37, a. 12. Henry 3.

Kiddles, viz. wares.
It is granted that all the wears of the Thames, and Medway shall be put down.
And he that sets up any hereafter, shall forfeit x. l. libro al folio 35, a.

That the Citizens shall remove and take away all Keddels stops and wears in
the waters of Thames, and Medway: And that they shall have all such punishments
in that behalf to the King, li. al. fol. 39, b. 1. E. 1.

Liberties and free Customs.
Free Liberties and free Customs used in the time of King Henry 1. are by
Charter, and after by Parliament ratified and granted to the city, lib. al.
folio 35 b, c. 11. Hen. the third, and 37. Henry 3.

Liberties and Pranchises.
The King grants, and does allow that the Citisens of London, their heirs and
successors, shall have their Liberties, and free Customs, and may use and
enjoy the same, as they have done in ancient time. And also that they may
record the same before the Kings Justices, and Ministers, as they have bin wont
to do any Statutes or Judgments to the contrary notwithstanding, lib. al. 40,
a. b, 1. E. 1.

Liberties confirmed.
All manner of Liberties granted by King Henry 3. are confirmed by E. 1. Anno
12. lib. albo fol. 31. a.

Liberties confirmed.
First, whereas in the great Charter of the Liberties of England, amongst other
things it was ordained, that the City of London should have all their ancient
Liberties and customs, and that the same Citizens at the time of the making of
the same Charter, and in the time of Saint Edmond the King and Confessor, and
William the Conqueror, and of other the Progenirors of King E. 3. had and used
diverse liberties and customs, as well by Charters as without Charters of
ancient custom. Of which liberties in diverse Eyres, and in other Courts of the
Kings of the Realm, the same Citizens have bin impeached and sundry of them
fore-judged, King E. 1. by Charter, confirmat Anno Regni sui primo, has
granted that the Citisens shall have their liberties according to the Form of
the great Charter, and that all impediments and usurpations to them, in that
behalf made, shall be revoked and disanulled, lib. albo fol. 39, a, b. Aano
primo E. 1.

Major to be presented.
The Lord Major being chosen must be presented unto the Court of Exchequer, and
after to the King himself, lib. albo f. 36. a, 37 Henry 3.

Major.
That the Major of London during his majoralty shall have no more Offices
belonging to the City, but only the Office of the majoralty, nor hold any plea
vicouncell within the chamber of the city, nor any other, but such as by the
ancient custom of the city he as Major ought to hold plea of, Fleetwood
Recorder does expound these words, Vicounty pleas, to be such pleas as the
Sheriffs by the common laws of this Realm, may hold pleas of in his hundred,
the which be actions of debt under 40. l. and of such like causes, lib. alb.
fol. 37. b, 12. H. 3.

Marishall.
The marshall shall not within the city, nor the portsoken by force, nor
otherwise, take up any man's house, lib. alb. f. 35, a. 11, Henry 3.

Markets.
No market from henceforth shall be granted by the King, to be kept within 7.
miles of this City, lib. alb. f. 41, a. 1. E. 3.

Marshalsee and Clerk of the Household.
The Steward of the Marshalsee, and the Clerk of the Market of the Kings House,
shall nor sit nor execute their Office within the liberties of this City, nor
shall draw into plea any Citizen out of the city, for any cause arising, or
growing within the liberties of the same city, lib. albo folio 40, a. 1. E. 1.

Merchants strangers free Hosts.
It is commanded by Charter, and Parliament, that all Merchants strangers
coming into England, shall make sale of their merchandises within 40 days
after their arrival; and that they shall abide and be at the table of free
Hosts, of this city of London, and of all other Cities and Towns of England,
without keeping houses of societies by themselves, lib. albo fol. 39, b, c. 1.
E. 1.

Mortmain.
That the City and their heirs, and successors, may devise their lands as well
in Mortmain, as otherwise, as of ancient time they were accustomed, lib. albo
folio 30, b. 1. E. 1.

Non-user.
Although before this time, any of the ancient liberties have not bin put in
ure; yet from hence forth it shall be lawful to put them in execution, lib.
albo fol. 39, a. 15. E. 3.

Officers of the City.
All lands or tenements without the Freedom of the city, whereof any Citizen is,
or shall be owner, now or hereafter, which are, or shall be Ministers of the
city, shall be obliged to the conversation or saving harmless, the same city
against the King and his Heirs, for matters concerning their offices in like
manner, as their tenements within the same city were wont to be, lib, al, folio
40, b, c. 1. E. 1.

Note by this Article, that all the Ministers of this city, ought to be Freemen.

Oasts.
No stranger shall be an Oast, or keep Oasterie for strangers, lib. al. fol.
57, a, b per Charter, 38. E. 3. and per Parliament.

Oasts and free Oasts.
That all that keep common Oastery in the city, or the Suburds, although they
be not free, yet shall they be at all manner of charges for the maintenance of
the city, as ample, as any other that be free Oasts, lib. al. folio 38, a. b.
12. Henry 3.

Oath.
The Major of London shall not be compelled to take any other Oath at the
Exchequer, then has bin used in the time of King Edward the third, any Law,
Statute, or Ordinance notwithstanding, lib. al. folio 44. b, c. 7. R. 2.

Parliament.
All the aforesaid Articles, Charters, Grants, and Ordinances, are to this
place confirmed by Act of Parliament, in manner and form as they be before
expressed, Anno 7. R. 2.

Pleas in Fairs and Markets.
Because the Citizens of London in all good and great Fairs of England were
wont to have Wardens of themselves to hold pleas, concerning such Citizens as
shall have conference to the said Fairs: It is granted by Charter, that the
same Citizens shall have their Wardens of their Citizens, for the holding of
such pleas as of ancient times they have had, excepting pleas of the Land, and
of the Crown, lib. al. 40. 1. E. 1.

Precepts to the Citizens.
By Parliament that is allowed to the Citizens of London, not to be subject to
the precepts or commandments of the Constable of Eng and, Steward, Marshall,
Admiral, Clerk of the Market, or of any other Officer or Minister of the King,
but only to the Kings commandments or precepts, which shall be made in the
Kings name still, and under the Kings Seals, and Liberty, is allowed by Act of
Parliament, soit use Come ad estre devant tempes, lib. albo f. 43, b. 1. R. 2.

Presenting of the Sheriffs.
Such Sheriffs as the Citizens shall make choice of, shall be presented to the
King Justices. And the said Sheriff shall answer to the King, or to his
Justices, or his Exchequer, of such things as to his Sheriffedome do appertain,
lib. al. fol. 34. a, b. 11 Henry 3.

Process and serving of Process.
That no Sommons, Attachment, or Execution, by any of the Kings Ministers, by
writ or without writ, within the Liberty of the city aforesaid, shall be made
but by the only Ministers of the city, lib. albo. 40, b. 1. E. 1.

Protections.
The King grants that all the Protections of him and his Heirs, given to and
for the service of the KING, either to go forth, or to abide in any places of
the Kings service from henceforth, shall take no place in any plea of debt for
any victuals taken or bought for the voyage or service; whereof any mention is
made in any such protection, nor any such protection shall be allowed for any
pleas of trespasses, or contracts, made or done after the date of such
protection, in such case as the plaintiff is, or shall be a Freeman of this
city, lib. albo f. 44. Anno primo R. 2.

Purveyors.
That no Purveyor-taker, Officers, or other Ministers, shall make, or take any
prise or takings in the City of London, or without, of the goods of any Citizen
of the same city, against their wills; except immediately their indelayed
payment be made, or else that respect of payment be therefore taken with the
good will of the party, lib allbo 40 b. 1. E. 3.

Purveyors or Officers of the King.
It is prohibited that no Officer or Purveyor of the King shall merchandise by
himself, or by other within the said city or without, of any thing touching, or
concerning his office, lib. albo fol. 40, b. 1. E. 3. Remember how the
Purveyours of poultry do keep shops in London, and nothing is said against them.

Restitution.
There is a free restitution granted, as well by Charter as by Parliament unto
the Citizens of London, of all and singular their Liberties and Franchises, as
ever any of their predecessors enjoyed the same, any Non-user, or Abuser, or
Statute-judgment, or Charter to the contrary notwithstanding. And that the same
Citizens may enjoy the same without impeachment of the King his Justices or
Ministers whatsoever, lib. albo 40. 7. R. 2.

Right.
That equal might be done both for lands, and Leases, that be within the City,
viz. infraurbem, according to the ancient custom of the city, lib. albo 35, 1
Henry 3.

Right owner.
Every Rightful owner of Lands, Leases, Gages, pledges, and debts, shall enjoy
the same lawfully, lib. albo 35, a. 11. H. 3.

Sanctuaries.
That the Citisens shall not be otherwise charged, then they have bin
accustomed, touching the scapes of such as have taken Sanctuary in the Church,
or Churchyards, lib. alb. f. 39. b.

St. Paul's.
There is 8. l. parcel of the Fee-Farme abated to the City, for the liberty of
St. Paul's in London, lib. albo f. 36. a 37, H. 3.

Scot and Lot.
That Freemen within the City, as such as dwell without the City, and occupy
Merchandise within the city, shall be subject to Scot and Lot with the Commons
of the same city, for and touching, etc, lib. alb. fol. 38, a. 11. Henry the
third.

Seals of the King.
There does appear 11. Hen. 3. that in a Charter made for the putting down of
Kiddles or ware s. that the King did set his hand to the Charter, and also his
Seal, the which I did never hear nor read of in any book before this time, the
words are these. Quod ut firmum and stabile perseveret imperpuum putis pagine
inscriptio. Commun. etc. lib. albo fol. 35, a 11. H. 3.

Seal of the City.
The common Seal of this City shall remain in the custody of two Aldermen, and
two Commoners, and the same Seal shall not be denied neither to the poor nor to
the rich Commoner, when need shall require; provided, that such request shall
be upon reasonable causes, and that nothing shall be taken for the setting of
the same Seal thereto, lib. alb. f. 38, a. 12. H. 3.

Sergeants at the Chamber.
That no Sergeant of the chamber of Guild Hall, shall have any fee of the
Commonalty of the city, nor shall make any execution but only by the Commons of
the city for that purpose to be chosen, lib. alb. fol. b. 12. H. 7.

Sergeants at the Mase.
For the augmentation of the name and honor of t^^ city, it is granted that
our Sergeants shall and may bear, and carry maces of gold, of silver, or
gilded of silver, with the Kings Arms upon the same, within the city and
Middlesex, and all other places belonging to the same city; and also when they
be sent to the King his mother or children, lib. alb. fol. 42. a. 28. E. 3.

Sheriffs.
The Sheriffs of London shall not be distreined to make an Oath at the
Exchequer, but only upon the yielding up their account, lib. alb. fol. 40, a.
1. E. 1.

That none of the Sheriffs shall have but 7. Clerks, and two Sergeants, by
reason of his Office.

Sheriffs and their Elections.
It is granted to the Citizens of London to make Elections of their Sheriffs,
and after to remove them at their pleasures, Anno 11. Hen. 3. lib. al. fol. 34.
a. b.

Sherffe.
That the Sheriff of London shall be amerced in the Kings Court, according to
the quantity of their offense, like as all other Sheriffs of England have bin,
lib. alb. fol. 31. a, lib. 1. 12. Edw. 3.

Sheriff.
That the Sheriff for the time being shall commit the collection of tolls and
customs belonging to the Fee Farm, and all public offices to them belonging,
and by them to be exercised unto sufficient persons, for whom they will answer,
and that such Officers as they shall appoint shall be removed upon their
misbehavior, lib. alb. fol. 30. Anno 12. Hen. 3.

Sheriffs.
That the Sheriffs of this city for the time being shall have toward the Farm
of the same city, the full forfeiture of victuals, and other things. And also
of Merchandises after the tenor of the Charters to the Citizens granted and
made. And that from henceforth the Sheriffs shall not be hindered or molested
for the same against the tenor of the same Charters, lib. alb. fol. 40. b. 1.
E. 1.

Southwarke.
The town of Southwarck is granted for a Fee Farm unto the city, to the
intent, to conserve the peace of the same town, and to suppress Fellons in
that place. And this is by Act of Parliament and Charter, lib. alb. 41. a. 1.
E. 3.

Subsidies, Tallages, or Aids.
That those that be assessed according to the Custom of the city by men of
their wards appointed to be Sessors by the Major and Aldermen, or by others to
pay any tallage or Aid to the King, shall not be set higher, but by the Major
and Commons, lib. alb. fol. 37. b. 12. Hen. 3.

Successors in London.
The habend of the Fee Farm of London and Middlesex, is to the Citisens and
their heirs. And yet it is taken, that these words heirs, do signify their
successors, lib. alb. fol. 34, a, b: 11. Hen. 3.

Sureties for the Sheriffs.
The whole Citizens of London must answer to the King, and satisfy both the
Fee Fatm, and also all the amerciaments, if the Sheriffs do make default, lib.
al. f. 34. a, b. 11. Henry 3.

Suites against Citizens.
None of the liberty of this city shall be impleaded or occasioned at the King
Exchequer, nor elsewhere by Bill, xcept it be for matter, which belongs to the
King or his Heirs. fol. 41. Anno 1. E. 3.

At this day all our Citisens do implead one another out of the city, the which
is directly against our liberties, being coufirmed by Parliament.

Taxes and Tallages.
That taxes and tallages for the necessity of the City by common consent or
Common-counsell, may be assessed and levied as well upon Rents, as other things,
and as well upon mysteries, as by any other means, lib. alb. folio 38. b. 12. H.
3.

Toll.
The Citizens of London are discharged of Toll and Lastage, and of all other
customs as well by Land, as by Seas, within the Kings Dominions, lib. alb.
fol. 35. a, 37. Hen. 3.

Tower of London.
That the Costable of the Tower for the time being shall not either by land or
water take or make any prisages of any victuals, or other things whatsoever, of
the people of the same city; nor of any others coming or going toward or from
the said city, nor by any manner of means, shall arrest or cause to be arrested
any ships, vessels, or boats bringing to the said city any victuals or any
other such goods, lib. alb. fol. 40. a. 1. E. 1.

The Constable of the Tower of London shall not take any thing for the
suffering of wares in the Thames or Medway, lib, albo fol. 35. 11. H. 3.

The Constable of the Tower of London, in the default of the Barons of the
Exchequer, being absent from Westminster, and also of the King at such time as
the Major ought to be polluted, must take the Oaths of the Major and of the
Sheriffs without the Tower Gates, lib. albo fol. 36, b. Anno 12. H. 3.

Wars.
That the Citizens from henceforth shall not be compelled to go or send to the
wars out of the city, lib. alb. f. 40, a. 1. E. 1.

Weights and Measures.
That the weights and balances amongst Merchants, by the which any profit does
grow, and the correction of the same does belong to the commonalty of this
city. And that they shall be in the custody of approved and sufficient men,
expert in the same office, being chosen by the Commons.

Witherman.
If any toll or other custom be taken from any Citizen of the Kings Dominions
the Sheriffs of London shall at London take pledge or Witherman, lib. alb. f.
35, b. 11. Henry the third.

Wines sold by retaile.
That no Merchant that is not free of this City shall sell any Wines by retail
within the same city, lib. alb. fol. 38. a, 12. Henry the third.

Wines and Victuals.
By Charter and by Parliament, is granted that the Lord Major and Aldermen for
the time being, shall have the Rule and Government of the Vintners, viz. of all
manner of wines which shall be sold within the same city, and of all manner or
Victuals, as well sellers of fish, as of all other, dwelling within the same
city, and to the same bringing any Victuals there to be sold, lib. alb fol. 44,
b. 7. R. 2.

Note, how that the Vintners of this city did exhibit a Bill to the Counsel at
Greenwich, Termino pasche. An. 18, Eliz. Regni, affirming, that they were not
under the Government of the Major and Aldermen; the which I learn to be drawn
by one Land, an Attorney of the Guild Hall.

Hereafter do ensue diverse ample and most beneficial Charters, granted by King
Hen. 6. E. 4. and King Hen. 7. but these Charters are not confirmed by
Parliament, as the other Charters were. Note, that the Charter of Hen. 6 and E.
4. are all one, with little alteration.
Beer-brewers.
THe correction of the Beer-brewers, and of the measurages likewise is granted
to the City, lib. albo f. 50 b, e. 23. Hen 6. Note, at this time there was
Beer-brewers in England.

Certioraries for Recognisances.
It is granted, that when a Certiorary is sent for any Indictment of Felony,
trespass, extortion or any other offense, or for any Recognisance for the
peace broken, that we shall not send the Record it self, but only the tenors of
the same, and that shall suffice, lib. albo, 49. b. 23. Henry 6.

Commission of the Peace,
The Commission of the Peace is at large set down, with all the Articles that
are to be inquired, lib. albo. 47. 23. H. 6.

Confirmation.
King Henry 7, Anno 20. did grant unto the City of Lond^^ most large and ample
ratification of all and singular their Liberties, Franchises, and Customs, and
all such like things expressed in any of their Charters whatsoever they were,
lib. albo 58. a.

Confirmation.
King H 5. by Act of Parliament, and a special Charter, dated the 7, ber. Anno
7. has also confirmed the Liberties aforesaid, lib albo folio 47, a.

Confirmation all and singular.
All and singular the aforesaid Liberties are most amply confirmed by a great
Charter, made by King H, 4. in the first year of his Reign; but they are not by
him confirmed by Parliament, but by Charter. And this is the Charter that the
Commons of this City do use to call the great Charter of London, lib. alb. fol.
46, a, b. 1. primo H. 4.

Elections of Officers.
That the Cirisens shall have the choice of all under-Sheriffes, Clerks,
Bayliffes of Sheriffs, for whom they will answer for as well in the County of
Middlesex, as within the City of London: In which grant, there is a saving or
proviso for the Sheriffs of London, for the right, etc. lib. alb. 49, b, c,
23. H. 6.

Exemption for the Aldermen.
It is granted, that the Aldermen of this City shall not be put in Assizes,
Juries, Attaints, Recognitions, or Inquisitions, although the King himself be
party; nor they shall be without the Liberties of the City, Collectors, or
Assessors of tenths and fifteens, lib. alb. f. 54, a, b.

Fines and amerciaments.
All Fines, Amerciaments, Issues forfeited, Redemptions, Forfeitures, Penalties
of all Offenses inquirable by the Commissions of the peace, are granted to the
Citizens of London lib. alb. f. 49, a, 23. H. 6. And in the same place the
premises are also granted, if they be forfeited before the Justices in the
pleas of the crown, or before any other Justices, or Minister whatsoever, ibid.

Foren bought, and Foren sold.
That the forfeiture of Foren bought, and Foren sold, shall belong to the Major
and Commons of this City, without any account to be therefore yielded, lib. alb.
fol. 59, b, c. this Article is most largely and beneficially set forth in the
Book.

Gates and Posterns.
All the Gates and Posterns of this City, and the custody of the same are
granted unto the city, lib. alb. f. 46. fol. 8. 1. H. 4.

Ganger.
The office of the Ganger-ship is granted to the city of London, with all the
Fees, profits, and enrolements to the same belonging, lib. alb. f. 60. b. 20.
H. 7.

Justices of Peace.
That the Major for the time being may nominate to the Chancellor of England,
the names of two Aldermen, the one to be a Justice of Peace in Surrey, and the
other in Middlesex, lib, al. fol. 60, b. 20. H. 7.

Justices of the Peace.
That the Major and the Recorder, and all the Aldermen that have bin Majors
shall be Justices of peace in London, And that the Major and the Recorder shall
be two of the quorum, lib. al. 47, b, c. Henry 6.

Mortmain.
The King grants license to the Commonalty to purchase lands and tenements,
to the value of 200. marks by the year, the statute of Martmain, or any other
thing to the contrary notwithstanding, lib. albo fol. 56, a, b, c. 18. E. 4.

Non-user and abuser.
Non-user and abuser of the liberties are by the King pardoned, lib. alb. 50.
Anno 25. H. 6.

Notunda.
All the aforesaid matters expressed in the aforesaid Charter, 23. H 6. lib.
alb. 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, and 52, are by like Charter granted again by 2. E. 4.
lib. albo fol. 52, 53, 54, 55.

Packer.
The Offices and gift of the same, viz. of the Packer and Survey or, ships of
all measures, weights, and of merchandises, and of the Garblers office, and
Wine-drawers, and the collection of all manner of victuals, and all such like
Offices do belong to the Lord Major and his disposing, lib. alb. folio 50, a.
b. 23. H. 6.

Recordator.
That the Recorder shall or may ore-tenus, that is to say, by open speech,
record and certify the customs, being traversed. And his Certificate shall be
as strong in the Law as the verdict of 22 men, lib. albo fol. 49, a. 23. H. 6.

Recognizances.
The forfeiture of Recognizances for the breach of peace or good abearing, is
also granted to the City, lib. alb. f. 49. 23. H. 6.

Seizure of the Liberties.
I find that King R. 2. Anno 16. Regni sui, did by verture of a statute, 28. E.
3. cap. 10, the which statute in King R. days, was by a bye-word, Flagellum
Commit London, that is, the whip and scourge of the City of London, the statute
shall be hereafter set down at large.

I say by this statute the King very easily found a quarrel against the City,
and did by Commission ceize the liberties of the said City. The fault was for
that the Major and Aldermen of the City did not correct nor punish, and this
was all. But after in Anno 16. and 20. the same King restored the liberties
again to the said City, lib, albo f. 45, a, b, c.

Search.
The general search of survey government, correction and permission of all
people, within this City as well, Denizens and strangers in their sellings
cuttings, workings, measurings, weighings, and in all and singular their other
doings, done not only by custom, but also by Charter, belong to the Major of
London for the time being, lib. al fol. 58, a, b, c, d. 20. H. 7.

This matter especially is most excellently well set down in the said Book. And
King H. 7. has granted for him his Heirs and Successors that neither the Kings
of this Realm, nor any other person shall interrupt the Major of London in the
due execution and exercising of the premises: if this Charter were well looked
unto, then enquire of what force all and singular these Charters are of, to
whom the King has granted to be Searcher, not only over their own companies,
but also over others. As the Girdlers do attempt to search the Habberdashers,
and Clothworkers, the Black-smiths do attempt to search the Iron-mongers, and
such like others.

Southwarke.
A large Charter is granted for the liberties of Southwark, and for correction
of offenses there, and a view of Franck-pledge with Arrests, and to bring the
Offenders to Newgate. And to have as ample Liberties in Southwark, as the King
had, lib. albo fol. 41, b, c, d, e, 23 H. 6.

Toll.
The Offices of the gathering of the Toll, and of the custom in Cheap,
Billings-gate, and Smithfield, is granted to the city, lib. alb. 46, b. 1. H. 4.

Treasure trove.
Treasure-trove, wait and Fellons, goods, and for stallers of victuals, and
Regrators, both in London and upon the Thames, are granted to the City, lib.
alb. f. 49. a, 23. H. 6.

Tronage.
Tronage, that is to say, the weighing of Lead, wax, pepper, allom, madder,
and of such like merchandise, are granted to the City, lib. albo f. 46, b.

Waste-grounds.
All the waste ground, or common grounds pur-prestures, and approvements, and
the Rents reserved of the same are granted to the City, as well in the Land, as
in the Thames, lib. alb. fol. 49, 23. H. 6.

Wools, Leaden Hall.
The tronage or weighing of wools shall be at Leaden Hall, which was wont to be
at Westminster, lib. alb. fol. 55. 3. E. 4.

FINIS.

