John iij King of POLAND Great Duke of Lithuania, Russia, Prussia Samogitia, etc
Page 163



The History of POLAND, IN Several LETTERS to Persons of Quality.

Giving an Account of the Ancient and Present State of that Kingdom,
Historical, Geographical, Physical, Political, and Ecclesiastical;
VIZ.

Its Origin and Extent, with a Description of its Towns and Provinces, the
Succession and remarkable Actions of all its Kings, and of the Great Dukes of
Lithuania: The Election Power and Coronit^^^ o^^ the King: The Senate, or House
of Lords: The (...) and Form of Government: The Privileges of the G^^^^ry their
Religion, Learning, Language, Customs, Ha^^^s, Manners, Riches, Trade, and
Military* Affairs; together with the State of Physic and Natural Knowledge
(...) also an Account of the Teutonick Order, and of the Duke of Curland, his
Family and Territories. With Sculptures, and a new Map after the best
Geographers.

With several Letters relating to Physic.

VOL. I.

By BERN. CONNOR, M. D. Fellow of the Royal Society, and Member of the College
of Physicians; who in his Travels in that Country collected these Memoirs from
the best Authors, and his own Observations.

Published by the Care and Assistance of Mr. SAVAGE.

London, Printed by J. D. for Dan. Brown without Temple Bar, and A. Roper in
Fleetstreet. M DC XCVIII.

THE PREFACE.
HAving neither a Genius, nor a Talent for History, much less for Politics,
and having passed but a very small time at the late King of Poland's Court, I
can neither promise the Critics, nor Politicians, that Politeness of Style,
nor those exact Rules and Circumstances of History they generally expect, and
are accustomed to meet with in Rela^^ions of this nature. For the Memoirs I
collected, and the Remarks I made in that Nation, as well as in other Foreign
Countries, were first intended for my own Curiosity; until being come some few
Years ago from my Travels into England, and finding there had not been yet
published in our Tongue any Account of this vast neighboring Kingdom, I was
often discoursed, chiefly during this last Election, about the Constitution of
that Country, and was desired to communicate to the Public what I knew of it.
This gave me occasion to revise my Memoirs, and to consider that if they were
put into good order, they might perhaps be of some use, because the Form of
Government in Poland is in some respect like that of ours. But the first Year I
came over, I spent some Months at Oxford to publish a small Latin Treatise of
Physical Matters, and to communicate to the Ingenious Gentlemen there what
small Insight I was thought to have in Anatomy, and in the Materia Medica. The
Summer following I made some Chemical and Anatomical Demonstrations at
Cambridg. These two last Winters I have been much taken up here in Town in
trying a great many Chemical and Anatomical Experiments, and in publishing my
Treatise de Medicina Mystica; and besides, being busied in my other Occupations
in the Practice of Physic, to which I have entirely applied my self of late,
as being more suitable to my Temper and Profession than Historical ones, I
neither could take any Delight, nor have any Leisure to write over, or to put
into due method the Memoirs I brought from Poland: so that the Public is
indebted to my ingenious Friend Mr. Savage; for without his help this Account
of Poland could not doubtless have thus appeared these several Years.

I hope Ingenuous and Candid Persons will excuse the Faults and Defects they
will undoubtedly meet with in this Historical Relation; since what I designed
only to do at my own leisure in some Years, I have dispatched with too much
Precipitation in few Months, to satisfy the Curiosity of People during the late
Election in Poland, who longed to see some Account of that Kingdom published.
Wherefore I neither deserve nor desire any other Reputation by it, than that
being the first that has given any History of that Country in our Language, I
give occasion to others that may travel after me in Poland, to give a more
satisfactory Account thereof.

I admire our English Gentry, who travel into Germany, have never the Curiosity
to go either from Berlin through Prussia or Posnania to Warsaw, or from Vienna
through Silesia to Cracow. They may with ease perform this Journey in three
Months time, and not think their time lost; for tho there are not so many
Rarities to be seen, nor that Convenience of traveling ^^s in most other
Countries, yet they may observe the most remarkable Places in Poland, the
peculiar form of Government, the Splendour of the Court, and the extraordinary
Grandeur of the Nobility, who are not so barbarous nor so unpolished, as they
are generally represented. For these sixty or seventy Years past, the Poles
have taken a Humor to travel, and have of late refined themselves extremely,
having had French Queens and French Factions reigning amongst them during the
four last Reigns successively; which has produced this good Effect, contrary to
the private Designs of France, that not only the rough Temper of the Poles is
made more polite, and their Behavior more civil, but likewise their Judgment
improved, and they themselves rendered more capable of knowing their own
Interest, and more wary than formerly of a Despotic Power, which their Kings of
late, assisted by the French, have labored to introduce: for the Poles are now
sensible that the French King, who is absolute at home, and well known to be
ambitious enough to enlarge his Conquests abroad, has just reason to think that
it would have been casier for him to manage his Interest against the Empire
with a King of Poland, who was likewise absolute, than it is now with one who
entirely depends on the uncertain Resolutions of a free Parliament: Because,
let a King of Poland be ever so Despotic, his Kingdom being poor, he will
always want Money either to satisfy his Pleasure, or to gratify his Ambition,
and will scarcely ever be proof against fifty thousand Louis-d'Or's.

The Poles are not only watchful against the encroaching Factions of France,
but likewise they begin to consider the unhappy Condition of their inslaved
Neighbors, the Muscovites, Swedes, Danes, Germans and Turks, who groan under
the heavy Yoke of the unlimited Power of their Sovereigns. These visible
Examples make them so very jealous of their Kings, and so extreme fond of their
Liberty, that they will not only always keep their Crown elective, but likewise
oblige their new King to enlarge their Privileges, which are at this time more
ample than ever they have been before. And it is not to be imagined that the
King of Poland will become Despotic as the King of Denmark did; because in
Denmark the King, Clergy and common People being kept under by the exorbitant
Power of the Nobility, joined together, and soon brought the Nobility to
declare the King Absolute, choosing rather to be under one Master than under
several petty Tyrants. But in Poland, both Gentry and Clergy, who are very
numerous and powerful, have a joint Interest to limit the King's Power, and to
keep the Common People in subjection, who are stupidly pleased with, or rather
insensible of their Slavery. And the Notion of Liberty is so inbred with the
Polish Gentry, that if they should suspect that their King did aim at making
any Breach upon their Laws, they not only think themselves no longer obliged to
pay him Allegiance, but likewise exclude his Children: For they maintain, That
^^ex est Rex, their Law is their King; and that they elect a Prince only to
head their Army, against the Invasion of Foreigners, and to govern the
turbulent Spirit of the Gr^^^^^^ who think they are all equal among themselves,
and their King but the first among his Eq^^ls. So th^^ the ^^urest way for a
King of Poland to ma^^ the Crown Hereditary, is never to (...) but to ^^ave
entirely to the free will of the Di^^ to ^^ouse whom they please. Which (...)
by the bad Success Prime (...) had in the ^^te Election, caused by the ill
Con^^^^ of King ^^obieski his Father, who prompted by his (...) and French
Counsel, (...) ^^ears before his Death, to persuade the Die^^ i^^ thuse a
Successor; which drew such (...) and Jealousy upon his Children, that very few
appeared for them in the last Election, th^^ he ^^lig'd the Chief Officers to
whom he (...) ^^onsiderable Employment, to take an Oath to (...) his Childrens
Interest after his (...) But the Poles, who think themselves to longer ^^ound
by their Oaths, than they find them conformable to their Laws and Interest,
(...) t^^ abandon those Princes to choose the Elector of Saxony; and to give a
new Precedent for two things they never practiced before, to exclude their own
King's Sons, and to elect a German Prince. For the distance and situ^^i^^n of
the Elector of Saxony's Hereditary Dominions, and the Jealousies the other
German Princes would have conceived, had he usurped more Power than the Laws
allowed, took away from the Poles all suspicion that this Prince would ever
attempt to invade their Privileges, as they apprehended the Prince of Conti,
and perhaps John III's Children would have done.

When I came first into this Nation, my chief Design was to converse with
Physicians, and other Naturalists, to improve my Knowledge in the Practice of
Physic, and in Natural History: But finding little here to satisfy my
Curiosity in these Matters, that I might not lose my Labor in traveling in so
remote a Country, I resolved to look into their Chronicles, to inform my self
of the Origin of the Monarchy; of the Succession, and Remarkable Actions of all
its Kings; of its Geography, and its Products; and to enquire into the Ancient
and Present State of that vast Kingdom. Which I have done with as much Care and
Accuracy as I could well compass in so short a time.

People perhaps will admire how I could pretend to give an Account of so large
and Ancient a Kingdom, not having been in it a full Twelvemonth. I own this
were no small presumption in me, had I undertaken to give a complete History
thereof; but as I only relate briefly either what I have gathered from the best
Polish Authors, learned from the most Intelligent Natives, or observed my self,
I hope the Public will have no ill Thoughts of me for this Attempt.

The first Writers of the Polish History, like most other Historians, were
credulous and superstitious, and have filled their Writings with a great many
Romantio and almost fabulous Stories, which I have omitted, tho I have inserted
some, as the golden Tooth, the devouring Dragon, Popiel's being eaten by Rats,
and some others; not with a design to make the Public believe them, or that I
believed 'em my self, but only to show how the Ignorance of some, and the
unfair Relations of others, have imposed upon the World in all Ages.

I knew something of the Constitution of Poland before I went thither, having
formerly conversed with several Gentlemen of that Country at Paris, in Italy,
and Germany; which inclined me in some measure to travel with some of them from
thence into that Kingdom. Besides, I came out of Poland with the Electoress of
Bavaria, the King's Daughter, in Company with several Natives thereof, who
attended her Highness from Warsaw to Brussels. In this long Journey I had
likewise opportunity to inform my self further of the present State of that
Country. So that I have not only collected this imperfect Account, which I have
ventured to give of it, during the little time I resided at the King's Court,
but likewise before I came thither, and since I left it.

I did not at first design this Historical Account should swell to so great a
Bulk, nor that chiefly the Geographical Part should be so tediously long, but
thought to reduce the whole to the narrow compass of one Volume; until Mr. S --
considering the Inconveniency of too small an Epitome, enlarged the Geography
of the Kingdom of Poland, and of the Great Duchy of Lithuania, to make the
Relation of them both more exact, and more satisfactory to such as are desirous
to compare the Towns and Provinces with the Map.

THE CONTENTS OF THE First Volume.
Letter I. TO the Right Honorable William Lord Dartmouth. Of the Origin of the
Kingdom of Poland, with the Succession and remarkable Actions of its first
Dukes from the Year 550 to 830.
Let. II: To the Right Honorable Laurence Earl of Rochester, Ambassador from
his Majesty Charles II. into Poland. Containing the second and third Classes of
the Kings of that Country, or the Succession and Remarkable Actions of the
Families of Piastus and Jagello, from the Year 830, to the Year 1574.
Let. III. To his Grace William Duke of Devonshire, Lord Steward of his
Majesty's Household. Of the Succession and remarkable Actions of the four
Classes of the Kings of Poland, consisting of mixed Families, from the Year
1574, to 1674.
Let. IV. To the Right Honorable William Earl of Yarmouth. Concerning the
Family and remarkable Actions of John III. King of Poland. As also his
Daughter's Marriage to the present Elector of Bavaria, etc.
Let. V. To the Right Honorable Charles Lord Townsend. Of the Extent and
Products of Poland, together with a Description of the chief Towns and
Provinces of that Kingdom.
Let. VI. To George Stepney, Esquire; His Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary to the
Princes of the Empire. Of the Extent and Products of the Great Duchy of
Lithuania, with an Account of its chief Towns and Provinces.

The CONTENTS of the Second Volume, being the present State of Poland. In
several Letters.
Letter I. To his Grace Thomas Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. Of the Form of
the Government in Poland, and of the King's Power and Revenues.
Let. II. To his Grace the Duke of Norfolk. Of the Senate of Poland, or House
of peers, consisting of Bishops, Palatins, Castellans, and the ten great
Officers of the Crown; as likewise of the Starosta's and other Persons of Note.
Let. III. To the Right Honorable James Vernon, Esquire; Principal Secretary of
State. Of the Diet or Parliament of Poland, and other Courts of Judicature.
Let. IV. To the Earl of Marlborough. Of the Election and Coronation of a King
of Poland, with the Interregnum.
Let. V. To the Lord Marquess of -- Of the Power of the Gentry, and Slavery of
the People in Poland; where the Genius, Character, and manner of living of the
Poles are related.
Let. VI. To his Grace the Duke of Ormond. Of the state of the Army, Forts, and
Military Affairs in Poland.
Let. VII. To his Excellency Monsieur de Cleverskerk Ambassador from Holland.
An Account of the Trade and Riches of Poland, as likewise of the City of
Dantzic.
Let. VIII. To the Earl of Burlington. Of the Origin of the Teutonic Order, and
the Succession of its great Masters in Prussia, and in Livonia; with its
present State in the Empire.
Let. IX. To Sir Thomas Millington, President of the College of Physicians. Of
the state of Learning, of Natural Knowledge, and particularly of the Practice of
Physic in Poland; with an account of some natural things, chiefly of a Disease
in the Hair peculiar to the Poles, called Plica Polonica.
Let. X. From Baron Blomberg, his Highness the Duke of Curland's Minister, to
Dr. Connor. Giving an Account of the Duke of Curland's Family, Strength and
Revenues, as likewise the Extent and Products of his Territories.
Let. XI. To the Honorable Mr. Bridges, eldest Son to my Lord Chandois, and
Fellow of the Royal Society. Giving an Anatomical Account of the Natural Cause
why People must necessarily die of old Age alone, attended with no other
Disease.
Let. XII. To -- Explaining the Nature of curable and incurable Wounds,
demonstrating by Practical Observations, and Anatomical Experiments, the small
number of Wounds which are of themselves absolutely mortal, and showing the
true use and common abuse of Styptic Waters and Pouders in the Practice of
Surgery.

A Catalogue of such Authors as have been consulted in both Volumes of this
Book; whereof some have been quoted, and others omitted on account of Consent
in Opinion.
POmponius Mela de Sarmatia Commentariolus Hartmanni Schedii de Sarmatia Aeneas
Sylvius de Polonia, Lithuania, and Prussia, five Borussia. Martini Cromeri
Polonia. Alexandri Guagnini Rerum Polonicarum. Sigismundi Liberi Baronis in
Herberstein Descriptio Lithuaniae. Jacobi Pritusii de Provinciis Polonicis.
Chronicon Poloniae Vincentii Kadlub^^i. Matthew. de Michovia Chronica Polonorum.
Polonici Regni tredecem Mutationes. Johannes Duglossus Annals Polonorum.
Salomonis Neugebaveri Historia Polonica. Johannes Herburtus a Fulstin
Compendium Historiae Polonicae. Flosculi Legum Polonicarum. Stanislai Orichovii
Annals. Mariciani Mattbiae Ladovli Constitut. Polon. Compendium. Pastorii
Florus Polonicus. Johannis Boteri Poloniae Descriptio. Historia Reformationis
Polonicae. Authore Stanistao Lubiensko Equite Polono. Stanislai Krzistanowicksi
Status Poloniae. Simonis Star^^vols^^ii Poloniae. Relation Historique de
Pologne. Par Mons. Hauteville. Hartk^^^bii Respublica Polonorum. Adam Bremensis
Seculi IX. Scriptor, Historia Ecclesiastics. Alhini Chronicon. Hornii Arca
Noae. Historia de Vita and Obitu Sigismundi Augusti. Heidenstein de Rebus
Polonicis ab exoessii Sigismundi Augusti. D^^^^soanorum Clades a Johanne
Lasicio Polon^^. ^^ob^^slaus Balbinus Historis Bohemiae. (...) Historia
Bohemiae. (...) Chronica Pomeranie. Alberti Cranzii Polonicarum Rerum. (...)
Annal^^s Polon. (...) I. Regis Poloniae cum Fragmentls (...). Vladislai
Boloni^^ and Sueciae Principis Vita. Casamir Roy de Pologne. Guerre Civili di
Poliniae, di Alberto Vi^^ina. Description d' Vkraine, par Beauplan. Cuerres des
Turcs avec la Pologne. Histoire des Cosaques and leurs Guerres contre la
Pologne. La Politic des Polonois. (...) diere Histoire des Dietes. Philippi
Honorii de Interregno. Grammatica seu Institutio Polonice Linguae. Effata Regum
Poloniae. (...) Polonica.
Books printed for Daniel Brown and Abel Roper.
1. FOur Treatises of Physic and Surgery. 1. A Physico-Medical Essay
concerning Alkaly and Acid. 2. Farther Considerations on the said Essay. 3. A
new Light of Surgery. 4. The new Light of Surgery vindicated from many
unjust Aspersions. By J. Colebatch, a Member of the College of Physicians.

2. -- His Treatise of the Gout.

3. -- His Doctrine of Acids in the Cure of Diseases farther asserted; in which
is contained some things relating to the History of Blood, etc.

4. Nature and Qualification of Religion, in reference to Civil Society.
Written by Sam. Puffendorf, Counselor of State to the late King of Sweden.
Translated from the Original.

The Present and Ancient State of Muscovy, in which is inserted all things
material to be known in relation to that vast Country; with several Sculptures,
and a new Map.

A New Map of POLAND Exactly delineated after the best Modern Geographer.


THE ^^ntient and Present STATE OF ^^OLAND.
PART I. The Ancient State.
LETTER I.
(...) the Right Honorable WILLIAM Lord Dartmouth.
(...) the Origin of the Kingdom of Poland; with the Succession and Remarkable
Actions of its first Dukes, from the Year 550, to 830.

MY LORD,
HAving had the good Fortune, some Years since, to meet your Lordship at
Venice, in my Travels from France, ^^hrough Italy and Germany into Poland, I
^^ound, that not contented with a superficial ^^nd transitory Account of
Places, your Genius led you naturally to enquire not only into the Government,
Laws, and Characters of the several Nations you passed through, but likewise to
examine nicely into their Maxims of State, and their different Interests; and
this, that by discovering the Excellency of some of their Constitutions, and
Defects in others, you might, like a wise and thinking Patriot, admire the
Perfections of our own Government, Goodness of our Laws, and Wisdom of our
Senate, whereof you your self are so worthy a Member.

My Lord, You may remember, that after your Resolution to take Medicines, as
well as my small Skill in prescribing them, had had the good Effect of curing
your Lordship at Venice of that acute Disease which made me almost despair of
your Recovery, I left you at Padua with the Earl of Kildare to gather strength;
and went through Tyrol, Bavaria and Austria down the Danube, to Vienna; where
having staid for some time to see the Emperor's Court, I set forward, with
some Noblemen of Poland, through Moravia and Silesia to Cracow, the Capital
City of that Kingdom; from whence, in eight days, we arrived, with a numerous
Attendance, at the King's Court, which always resides at Warsaw; where I was
kindly received by the late King John Sobieski, who did me the Honor to
entrust me with the Care of his decaying Health: and sometime afterward his
Majesty sent me with her Electoral Highness the Princess Tcresa, his only
Daughter, then married to the Elector of Bavaria, to take care likewise of her
Health in her long Winter Journey from Warsaw to Brussels; which gave me
opportunity to come sooner out of that Kingdom, than I at first apprehended I
could.

Tho, my Lord, my chief business both in Poland and other Countries has been
always ^^o improve my self in what related pecu^^iarly to the Practice of
Physic, and to Natural Knowledge; yet for my own Satisfaction and Curiosity, I
was desirous to be in^^ormed further, both from the Natives themselves, and
their Historians, of the true State and Origin of this vast Kingdom. I found
that Poland has met with the same Fate with most other Countries, that is, to
be little known from its Minority: For when this Monarchy was first founded by
Lechus, there were no Learned Men to hand down to Posterity by their Writings
the true State thereof from ^^ts Infancy; but what small Account there is
extant of it, was written some Ages after: Wherefore, not having besides been a
twelvemonth in that Kingdom, I cannot presume to give that satisfaction which
perhaps your Lordship might otherwise expect from the discourse I lately had
with you; yet I can securely assert, that the following Relation of the Origin
of that Country is drawn out of its most authentic Historians.

Origin of Poland.
POLAND, by the Romans called Pomp. Mela lib. I. de situ Orbis, cap. 3. and
lib. III. ^^ap. 4.
Sar^^natia Europaea, came to be a distinct Nation, and to be governed by
Elective Princes, much about the Middle of the Sixth Century, sometime after
that the Goths and Vandals had ravaged the South parts of Europe, and abandoned
their own bleak Northern Habitations to establish themselves in warmer Regions,
Italy, France, Spain and Africa, which gave occasion to the Albinus tit. 6.
page 70, etc.
Sclavonians, as Sabellicus, Thuanus, and other Authors have it, to quit the
Cimmerian Bosphorus or Straits of Caffa, Great Sarmatia, and Great Russia, or
Moscovy, to inhabit those desolate Countries. Afterward, this People, dividing
themselves into two considerable Bodies, one passed the Danube, and settled in
Dalmatia, Istria, Bosnia, Carynthia, Bulgaria, as far as Greece, and in some
part of Adam. ^^remens^^s seculi 9. scriptor, in lib. I. Hist. Ecclesiast. cap.
10, etc.
Germany; while the other, under the Conduct of three Brothers, Lechus, Cechus
and Russus, turned toward the North to possess themselves of those Provinces
which the Goths and Vandals had forsaken.

These Brothers Guagnini Rerum Polon. p. 50.
are said to have built Bremen in Germany, so naming it from a Sclavonian Word,
signifying a Burden, because they had there, as one may say, laid down their
Burden, and were in great measure freed from their former Miseries. These
Princes likewise divided their Followers into three Parties, whereof one
commanded by Cechus, settled in that Kingdom which lies between Poland and
Germany, now called Bohemia; the other, headed by Lechus, fixed in the lower
part of Great Sarmatia, a Flat and Champain Country; whence the Natives have
since called it Polska, from the Sclavonian word Pole, which Whence so called,
and what by the Inhabitants.
either signifies Plainness, or Hunting; and the Germans, Poland, or
Even-Ground. Lib. I. cap. 2. page 21.
Hartknoch is of Opinion that Poland was an ancient Name of Sarmatia in the
time of Ptolomey, before the Poles inhabited this Champain Country, which it
might have taken from the Bulani or Bolani, that are said to have settled near
the Vistula, and to have come from Sarmatia. The third Brother Hornii
Arca-Noae, and Pet. Lucari in Annal. ^^agus^^is.
Russus established himself in that Province of Poland, which is now called
from his Name Russia.

Not only the Testimony of Authentic Writers, but also our own Reason will
convince us, that all these Nations have originally been the same; which may
appear by their Languages, being but as so many Dialects of one Mother Tongue,
the Sclavonian; which is now spoke in more Countries than any Language of
Europe.

Founded by Lechus.
Here Lechus had no great need of Force to establish himself; he met with but
little resistance, all this Country having been left desolate for some time
before by the Vandals: Only Guagnini Rerum Polon. p. 51.
Regulus, a German Prince, is said to have oppos d him at first, and to have
challenged him, but was soon vanquished by him in a Duel; whereby he became
Master of Pomerania, which was then Regulus his Country.

In these days there were no Cities in Poland, no Money was yet known, nor any
Laws writ, such as they had being only pronounced What Laws.
by their Princes Mouths, and handed down by Tradition to the People. Herburt.
de Fulstin. Senate. Polon. in Chronico p. 2.
Princes were then rather Fathers of Families, than Lords and Masters; and
their Revenue consisted only in a moderate Imposition on their Subjects Labor.

Lechus, my Lord, settled in that great Province which joins the State of
Brandenburg, since called Posnania, where he built the first The first City.
City, naming it Id. ibid.
Gnesna, from the Sclavonian word Gniazdo, which in that Language signifies a
Nest; and this because, that where it was building, a Tree was cut down which
had an Eagle's Nest on the Top of it: which Lechus taking for a good Omen, not
only called his City Gnesna, and made it the Metropolis of his Kingdom; but
also ordered, that the Arms of Poland should for ever after be a Spread-Eagle,
which has so continued even down to this day. He likewise built Second City.
another City in a Wood, eight Miles from the former, which he named Posnania
(by the present Inhabitants called Posnan) signifying in the Polish Tongue
Knowledge, because he there met and knew his Brother Cechus, Prince of Bohemia,
after above twenty years absence. This City gave occasion for naming the
Province Posnania.

In Memory of Lechus to this day, the Poles style their Country in their Poems
Lechia: and Mr. Mountague North, who lived for sometime at Constantinople, has
lately told me, that the Turks call a Polander, in their Language, Lech, making
the Poles likewise derive their Name from their Founder.

Tho, my Lord, this Lechus brought that People under a kind of Monarchical
Government, yet neither he, nor any of his Successors could ever so far prevail
upon them as to make the Succession Hereditary; they having continued Elective
for above Eleven hundred years; always reserving a full Power and Authority to
themselves, of choosing whom they pleased for their King. Nevertheless, it is
to be observed, that they have still hitherto elected one of the Royal Family,
where the deceased King had any Issue left, except in this present Election,
which is like to go otherwise. I find by their Chronicles, that not so much as
a Daughter has been excluded when there has been no Son: However, they always
thought fit to acquaint 'em at the time of their Election, that they were not
to attribute Policy of Poland.
their Accession to the Throne to any Right contracted from their Parents, but
were altogether obliged to the Senate and Gentry for putting that Scepter into
their hands. Hereby they intimated how much their Kings were indebted to 'em,
and what Necessity they lay under to behave themselves well toward a People
that were pleased to raise 'em to a Supreme Dignity, which they had no better
Claim to than the meanest Gentleman in the Kingdom. They acquainted them
likewise, that they thought themselves no longer obliged to pay them Obedience,
than that they kept to their Oaths: And moreover, they always reserved to
themselves a Right of deposing them whenever they violated their Laws.

This Maxim has hitherto proved very beneficial to the Poles for enlarging
their Country, and maintaining their Privileges; and might well have extended
their Dominions beyond those of any State in Europe, had their other
Constitutions been as well grounded, or as exactly observed: For tho the Poles
have been constantly molested by their Neighbors, the Suedes, Moscovites,
Tartars, Turks, Hungarians, and Germans, and their Kingdom been several times
reduced to Extremities, burnt and plundered by frequent Incursions, put into
Convulsions and Desolations, and thousands of their People been carried away
into Policy of its Kings.
Captivity; yet by the prudent Conduct and Courage of their Kings, through a
desire of gaining the Affection of their Subjects by serving their Country
zealously, to the end their Fame and Merits might raise their Children to the
Throne after their deaths, the Poles have not only always opposed, but likewise
repulsed the exorbitant Force of their Enemies: They have also by degrees
enlarged their Country by vast Conquests, and rendered it several times the
most formidable of any Kingdom in Europe: They have likewise never submitted to
any Foreign Power, no not even to the Romans by force: They have also hitherto
inviolably maintained their Liberties, Properties and peculiar manner of
Government, against all the Attempts, both of their Enemies abroad, or the
Cabals formed either by themselves or their Kings at home: and I believe I may
say to their great Commendation, that they are the only Nation in the World who
have kept the longest Succession of Kings without subjecting themselves either
to a Despotic or Hereditary Monarchy; their Princes being now, as most are
thought to have been at first, wholly elected by the People.

Tho, My Lord, I have said the Poles have never excluded their Kings Children,
yet must it be understood that their Crown has not always been in the same
Family, by reason that from time to time the Royal Line has failed; and
therefore they have consequently been obliged to elect Princes out of other
Families; but still I may very well affirm, that there has never been any
Stranger chosen, except in the present Election, where the preceding King had
any Issue surviving.

Number of Princes.
The Princes and Princesses of this Kingdom have in all been fifty, two whereof
were Women, as Venda, and Hedwigis, both having had the Government for some
time; and the other forty eight were Men. Hartknoch Respub. Polon. p. 22.
At first these Princes were only styled Duces, Dukes or Generals of Poland; as
if their Office in those times had been no other than to head Armies: for it is
to be observed that to Boleslaus Chrobry they were not so much as crowned. This
Title continued from the Year 550, to the Year 1005. when the Emperor Otho
III. created Boleslaus I. the Sixteenth Duke of Poland, The First King.
King, being the second Christian Prince that had governed that Country, all
before him and Miecislaus I. his Father having been Pagans; as were likewise
the Poles themselves till the tenth Century, when this Miecislaus the fifteenth
Duke of Poland turned Christian in the Year 964, in Pope John the XIIIth's
time; by which means his Son Boleslaus came to have the Title of King.

All the Princes of Poland may be divided Four Classes of Kings.
into four Classes, whereof the first and last are of different Families; the
second and third of but one, in which the Crown passes from the Father to the
Daughter. The first Class reigned from the Year 550, to the Year 830; The
second from 830, to 1382; The third from 1382, to 1574; and the last from
thence down to our Time.

I shall now proceed to give your Lordship some short Account of the Succession
and most Remarkable Actions of the first Class of the Dukes of Poland, from the
Year 550, to the Year 830.

Lechus. 550.
LECHUS Kadlubkon in Praefat. p. 8.
Son of Annon, first Duke of Poland, as I said before, founded this Nation:
Gnesna and Posnan built.
He built the first City there, naming it Gnesna, now the Primate's See; as
likewise the City of Posnan, Capital of Posnania. It Is uncertain how many
governed before his Race came to be extinct, and there is great Contest among
the Polish Historians about his Successor: but some affirm that he ordered by
his last Will (like Alexander the Great) that they should elect the most worthy
Person among them.

Visimirus.
VISIMIRUS his Guagnini Rerum Polon. p. 52.
Nephew was thereupon chosen, who is reported to have extended his Dominions
even to the very Borders of Denmark, and to have built a very great Ship which
was an exceeding Terror to the Danes. He is also said to have given that Nation
a great Overthrow by Sea, and to have pursued his Victory into the very Bowels
of that Kingdom, where he subdued many Provinces, and His Conquesis.
built several Cities, whereof one was Wismar, which retains his Name to this
day. In one Battle this Visimirus is said to have taken the Danish King
Prisoner, and to have carried him into Poland; whence afterward being
released, and conspiring together with the Swedes and Holsatians, he made an
Incursion into Poland with a numerous Army, but was soon met and vanquished
again by Wisimir, who thereupon pushed on his Victory so far as to reduce the
greatest part of Denmark, which he then united to Poland. In opposition to this
Story Monsicur Pauli, Minister here from Denmark, has assured me that the Poles
never made any Conquest in that Country, which may give some Exception to the
truth of this King's Reign: tho it may very well be supposed that several Kings
reigned during the space of 150 Years, there being so much time between the
beginning of Lechus his Reign and the Election of Cracus. However, to gratify
the Curiosity of the Public, I hope I have not done amiss to insert it, since
I withal quote my Author. After many glorious Actions, having greatly augmented
his Dominions, this Wisimir died His Death.
without Issue.

Vapovius says that Lechus his Posterity reigned all that space of time between
him and Cracus, being 150 Years: yet having consulted all their Historians, I
can find no manner of Account given of their Reig^^* nor of the Government of
Poland in all that space of time.

Lechus his Issue being extinct, it is certain the Twelve Woievods.
People elected twelve Woievods (in the Polish Language Captains of War) to
govern 'em, who divided that Country into twelve parts: for the Poles sticking
close to their Liberty, would then by no means put the Government into one
Man's hands. But soon after these Deposed.
Palatins disagreeing among themselves, the People chose one

Cracus. 700.
CRACUS for their Head, a very Rich and Popular Person, reported to have been
of the Race of the Gracchi at Rome, who were banished into this Country by King
Ancus. Who this Cracus was all Historians do not agree: The Polish Writers say
he was one of the twelve Woievods; but the Vide Bohusl. Balbinum, lib. 1. Hist.
Bohem. cap. 10. p. 82, etc.
Bohemians affirm he was a Prince of their Country. He gained extremely upon
the good Will of his Subjects, for he soon appeased the impending Storms of a
Civil War, built a City on the River Vistula, Cracow (...).
calling it after his own Name Cracow, and transferred his Residence from Gnesna
thither; which is the reason that this City has ever since been the Metr^^polis
of Poland, in which all the Kings by the Constitution are to be crowned, tho
they are to live at Warsaw.

Guagnini Rerum Polon. p. 55.
There goes a frivolous Story of a monstrous Dragon that raged in those days
near this City, who with his poisonous Breath killed all that came near him,
and likewise sometimes sallied abroad to the Destruction of thousands; to
prevent which they were wont to throw him every day three Oxen, which at length
almost causing a Famine, Duke Cracus made use of a Stratagem to destroy him,
which was this: He ordered an Ox's Hide to be stuffed full of Sulphur, Nitre,
Pitch, and the like, and to be cast to the Monster, who taking it for no other
than his daily Offering, greedily devoured it, but quickly found himself
enflamed with so great a Drought, that he soon after burst with drinking in the
River Vistula.

His Death.
After this Duke's Death he was ^^uried, by his own Orders, on a little Hill in
sight of the Town, and this to put the Citizens in mind of their Founder. He
left three Children, His Issue.
Cracus, Lechus, and Venda, whereof

Lechus II.
LECHUS II. to obtain the Principality murdered his elder Brother Cracus in a
Wood; His Banishment and Death.
which being soon detected, he was banished the Country, and died in Exile.

Vend^^ 750.
VENDA a Virgin (which shows the Affection the Poles have always had for the
Royal Family) succeeded him. She was a very beautiful Princess, and amongst
several others was courted by one Micralius lib. 2. Chron. Pomeran. number. 22. p.
161.
Ritiger a German Prince, who not proving much in her Favor, came with an Army
to force her to marry him, but was bravely opposed and vanquished by her, as
the Polish Historians will have it; tho the German affirm the contrary, and say
she drowned her self upon his pursuing her close, Her Death.
which the others pretend was occasioned by her hearing Ritiger was a handsome
Man, and had killed himself in a rage.

With this Princess Cracus his Family being Twelve Woievods.
extinct, the Poles chose a second time twelve Woievods, who falling out as
before among themselves, and the Hungarians and Moravians Deposed.
invading their Country, they thought fit to elect one Premislus a Goldsmith
for their Duke, afterward called

Lescus I. 750.
LESCUS I. The reason of whose being chosen was a Stratagem he had contrived,
that saved the Poles when they were in Distress. How he came to be elected by
The manner of which was as follows: They being in the Field against the
Hungarians and Moravians, and finding themselves much inferior in number to
their Enemies, this Goldsmith contrived a way to make 'em seem more numerous,
and at the same time to gain 'em a complete Victory; to effect which he got a
certain number of Helmets made of the Bark A Stratagem.
of Trees, which he daubed over with Quicksilver and Gall, and by Night hung
'em in order of an Army on small Boughs at the side of a Wood, which the Enemy
next Morning perceiving, by Reflection of the Sun upon 'em, believing it to be
the Polish Army, marched directly toward 'em, when the Poles who were behind
the Trees removing the Helmets, the Enemy thought they had retreated for fear;
whereupon hotly pursuing 'em into the very heart of the Wood, the Poles, who
lay in Ambush, surrounded and cut 'em all to pieces.

He governed the Poles in Peace and Quietness for a good while, none during his
Reign daring to molest that Country. How long he His Reign and Death uncertain.
reigned, and where, and of what Distemper he died, is uncertain.

Election by Horse-race.
This Duke leaving no Issue, a Horse-race was instituted, wherein the Victor
was to succeed in the Government. Hereupon a Stone Pillar was raised before
Cracow, on which were ^^aid the Crown, Scepter, Globe and other Regalia, and at
the same time a Herald proclaimed the Throne to him that got first from the
River Pardnic to the Goal. Upon which several Candidates appearing, one Lescus
thinking himself wiser than the rest, laid Iron Spikes in the Road where the
Race was to be run, by which the others Horses being A Stratagem defeated.
^^am'd, he came first to the Pillar: but this Fraud being soon detected,
instead of being chosen, he was torn to pieces on the spot, and

Lescus II. 776.
LESCUS II. a poor Country Fellow, whom the Poles looked upon to be destined
for their Prince, was elected in the Year 776, who while the others Horses were
hampered by the way, running the Race on foot for want of a Horse, tho rather
to show his Swiftness than out of any thoughts of the Crown, got next the
Impostor to the Goal.

A Commendable Example.
This Duke in Commemoration of his former Condition would once a Year solemnly
^^ay by his Robes, and put on his Country Clothes, which he preserved whilst he
lived for that purpose, and which induced all the Courtiers to be as meanly
clothed at the same time. They write that he was killed in the His Death.
Wars against Charles the Great.

Lescus III. 804.
LESCUS III. his Son succeeded him, being chosen in the Year 804. He soon
forced the His Death uncertain.
aforesaid Emperor to a Peace, but when he died I find no mention made. He is
said to have had above twenty natural Sons.

Popiel I. 810.
POPIEL his Son succeeded him in the Year 810. This Prince had none of the good
Qualities either of his Father or Grandfather, his greatest His Vices.
care being to make much of himself without any regard to the Public. He
thought Cracow too much exposed to the Incursions of the Hungarians and
Russians, and therefore, for security of his Person, withdrew into the Heart of
the Country, first to Gnesna, and afterward to Cruswitz, where he soon after
His Death.
died suddenly. Herburt. de Fulstin. p. 11.
His common Execration was wont to be that he might be devoured by Rats, which
tho it happened not to him, yet his Son Popiel perished by that Fate.

Popiel II. 815.
POPIEL II. Son to the former, was elected next in the Year 815, and reigned to
830, who being a loose and profligate Prince, was more universally hated than
his Father; which his Wife perceiving, as likewise that his Father's Brothers
were more beloved, contrived a way to poison them, thereby the better to secure
the Succession to her Children. Hereupon, A cursed Stratagem.
by her Stratagem, Popiel feigns a dangerous Sickness, and invites his Uncles
to visit him; which they speedily obeying, he caused 'em to come to his
Bedside, where taking 'em by the Hands, as if just going to leave e World, he
recommends to 'em a Cup to ink, which they, little suspecting any Poison,
urteously accepted, and drank off; when king leave of their Nephew, a little
while ter they fell into excessive Pains, and soon ed. Upon which this
barbarous Duke, by e instigation of his Wife, gave out that it as a Judgment
from the Gods upon 'em for ^^e treacherous Designs they had formed a^^inst him
and his Children; and therefore ^^dered their Bodies to lie unburied for a
con^^erable time, the better to take away all spicion of his Crime. Hereupon no
body ^^er so much as suspected either Popiel or ^^s Wife of their Deaths, till
at length Dine Justice discovered, and punished the Offeners after an
extraordinary manner: For all ^^e Chronicles, Histories, and general Tradions
of Poland agree, that out of these dead odies came a vast number of huge Rats,
Judgment upon Popiel by Rats.
^^hich guided by an unknown Intelligence, ^^llowed Popiel, his Wife and
Children where^^ver they went; neither Rivers, nor strong ^^alls, close Rooms,
nor their very Guards as they say) were able to prevent these Ani^^als from
crawling about 'em, and continually eeding on their Bodies both night and day:
They first devoured the Sons, afterward the Wife, and lastly Popiel himself,
tho he retired or safety to an Island in the River Vistula. It Is said the
Watermen were afraid that hey should gnaw through their Boat, and sink ^^m
before they reached the Island; for they ^^lways pursued through Fire, or
whatever else was opposed to 'em with a great deal of Noise ^^nd Fierceness.

This doubtless your Lordship will think f^^bulous; yet since all their
Historians una^^mously agree in it, I thought my self oblig to relate it as
they do. It Is certain the Po^^ would never elect any of Popiel's Nephews, ^^
any other of his Relations, for the Aversio^^ they had conceived to his Name
after this ^^ normous Crime; so that he was the last of h^^ Family that
reigned, and likewise the last ^^ the first Class of the Dukes of Poland.

After the Death of Popiel, the Poles elect one Piastus, a Wheelright, nothing
related ^^ there to him, or any of his Predecessors. H Family reigned
successively, without interru^^tion, for about 800 Years, of which it woul^^ be
too tedious to trouble your Lordship wit a Relation, and therefore I will
conclude wit giving you only this imperfect Account ^^ the first Princes of
Poland, and with subscribing my self,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most obedient Humble Servant, B. ^^

LETTER II.
To the Right Honorable LAURENCE Earl of Rochester, Ambassador from his
Majesty Charles II. into Poland.
Containing the second and third Classes of the Kings of that Country, or the
Succession and remarkable Actions of the Families of Piastus and Jagello, from
the Year 830, to the Year 1574.

My LORD;
THE great Character I found your Lordship had left behind you in Poland, to
the Honor of the English Nation, makes me as well admire your prudent Conduct,
and circumspect Behavior at that Court, as the happy Choice so great a Prince
made of you, to represent his Royal Person there: for tho this Western part of
Europe will hardly allow the Poles the same proportion of Sense and Judgment
with most other Nations, yet Politicians readily own that there is more Art and
Policy required in an Ambassador to manage his Master's Credit and Advantage
with the turbulent Spirit of the Senate of Poland, than with any other Court
whatever governed by well regulated Methods, and refined Maxims.

This, my Lord, the vigilant Court of France and wise Republic of Venice have
long experienced, and therefore of late, have sent into that Kingdom none but
their most accomplished Statesmen.

The Esteem the Court of Poland professed for your Lordship's Memory was fresh
enough in my time to convince me, that you were thoroughly acquainted with the
Genius and Constitution of that Nation; Two things Public Ministers ought
chiefly to be versed in, and which are the Rules they generally go by in their
Ministry, to compass more effectually their Designs. It would therefore, my
Lord, appear vain in me to presume to tell you any thing New as to the present
State of that Kingdom, since, by conversing with your Lordship, I have learned
some Particulars of that Country I knew nothing of before. The Subject I
thought most agreeable for your Entertainment, was a short Account of the
Renowned Families of Piastus and Jagello, who reigned about eight hundred
Years, and whose remarkable Actions were doubtless out of the Memory of those
Grandees you conversed with, being only recorded in voluminous Annals, which,
probably, Public and more Important Affairs might not allow your Lordship
leisure to peruse.

The Kingdom of Poland beginning to make some considerable Figure in the World
about the Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 38.
ninth Century, and having embraced the Christian Religion in the tenth,
foreign Nations, particularly its Neighbors, began to look more nicely into
it, and to embody its History with their own; so that from thence forward I can
promise your Lordship a more certain Account of this Country than hitherto I
have given from the sixth Century to that time.

After the Death of the inhuman Popiel, the last of the first Class of the
Princes of Poland, his Cousin Germans, whose Father he had poisoned, aspiring
to the Crown, were unanimously rejected by the Poles, either because they were
thought unqualified or undeserving, or by reason of Popiel's Crimes, which had
entailed a kind of Odium both on them, and all his Posterity. Whereupon a
General Assembly or Diet was called at Cruswitz, a small Town in Lower Poland;
but not being able to agree, their Session was dissolved. A little while after
another was convened in the same place, which being resolved to pitch upon some
body to prevent farther Disorders, elected one

Piastus. 830.
PIASTUS a Wheelright, Son to Cossisco a Citizen of Cruswitz, in gratitude for
having supplied their want of Provisions after the following manner.

Guagnini Rerum Polon. p. 64. Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 1. p. 13. and
Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 68, etc.
Cause of his Election.
Piastus having provided a small Collation for the naming of a Child, born
about the time of that Convention, happened to be visited by two Pilgrims, Paul
and John, whom they report to have been afterward Martyrs at Rome. These
Mendicants being repulsed at the Hall of Election, were notwithstanding kindly
received by him, whereupon to return his Civility, they named his Child
Ziemovitus, and departed. Afterward, by the great Concourse of Electors,
Provisions growing scarce at Cruswitz, and many applying themselves to Piastus
for Relief, he furnished them all gratis, (but that not without being thought a
Miracle, for 'twas believed the Blessing of those good Men remained upon him)
and extended his Bounty much beyond his supposed Ability, which made 'em look
upon him as a Man sent from the Gods to govern 'em, and therefore unanimously
chose him for their Prince.

This good Man, having thus obtained the His Virtues.
Principality, did not yet change his Life with his Condition; but his Power
being increased, continued his Bounty comparatively. In his Reign there arose
many intestine Disorders, all which he soon quieted rather by his Clemency than
Severity. So being beloved by good Men, and respected by bad; and having
removed his Court from Cruswitz, which he abominated for having been the Scene
of His Death.
Popiel's wicked Life, to Gnesna, he died in the 120th Year of his Age.

His Family reigned above 600 Years in Poland, nay, a Branch of 'em were
Hartknock. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 74.
Princes of Silesia a long while after, to the Year 1675, when George William,
the last of that House, dying without Issue, the Dukedoms of Lignitz and Brieg
in Silesia fell to the Emperor. In memory of this Piastus, when any Native ever
after obtained the Crown of Poland, they called him a Piasto. He was succeeded
by his Son

Ziemovitus. 861.
ZIEMOVITUS by his Wife Repicha, a ^^rave and warlike Prince. This Duke had
considerable Advantages by having the Administration of the Government long
before his Father's Death, who for some time was super^^nnuated. He obtained
great Conquests over the Hungarians, Moravians, and Germans, and His Wars.
was the Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 1. p. 15.
first that brought the Polish Army to a Discipline, by instituting Generals,
Colonels, Captains, and other Subaltern Officers among them. He regained what
the Popiels ^^ost, and besides, considerably enlarged his Dominions by new
Conquests.

His Character.
He was a Person of a boundless Resolution, seemed destined for War Florus
Polon. cap. 12. p. 22.
(being able to undergo the greatest Fatigues) and consequently was exceedingly
admired and beloved by his Subjects. He died at Gnesna, was buried His Death.
there, and was succeeded by his Son

Lescus IV. 892.
LESCUS IV. who being elected young, was under the Care of Governors for some
time. He was of a quiet and peaceable Disposition, His Character.
inclined rather to Peace than War, and contented to preserve what his Father
had left him, without ever aiming to enlarge his Dominions. He died in the Year
913, and was His Death.
succeeded by his Son

Ziemovistus. 913. His Character.
ZIEMOVISTUS, who reigned 51 Years. This Prince was much of the same Temper
with his Father, there having been no Wars in his time. He had but one Son
^^ecislaus I. who being born blind, was miracu^^ously restored to his sight
about the Age of seven Years, when he was about to have his Head shaven
according to the Pagan Custom; which gave occasion to the Magi of that Kingdom,
to prognosticate that he should be the Light of Poland, which, not long after
his Election, His Death.
came to pass. Ziemovistus died, and was buried at Gnesna, and his Son

Miecislaus I. 964.
MIECISLAUS I. came to the Crown next. He had seven Wives at a time, yet could
have no Children by them, which opened a way How the Poles became Christians.
for the Christian Faith to enter Poland; for there being then several
Christians wandering up and down that Country to convert those Pagans, they came
to this Duke, and told him he could never have any Issue till he had turned
Christian; which Miecislaus harkening to, immediately put away all his Wives,
and His Christian Wife.
married Dambrawca Daughter to Boleslaus Duke of Bohemia, on condition to turn
Christian and be baptized. Whereupon Pope John XIII. sent Cardinal Aegidius
with a great number of Priests into Poland, to preach the Gospel there, which
before had been altogether unknown in that Country.

This Duke erected the Arch-bishopricks of Gnesna and Cracow, with several
Bishoprics. In the mean while Miecislaus had a Son called Bolesl^^us, which
mightily augmented his Zeal to oblige his Subjects to be converted: Cromerus*
lib. 3. p. 43. Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 70. Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 2.
p. 19.
for he caused a Law to be made, that while any part of the Gospel was reading
at Mass, every Man should half draw his Scimiter, to testify their forwardness
to defend that Faith.

His Wars.
This Duke had Wars with Vlodimirus* Duke of Russia, to whom he lost Premislia
and other Towns. He sent Lambert Archbishop of Cracow to Rome, to obtain leave
of Pope Benedict VII. for the Princes of Poland to be styled Kings, but was
refused, this Pontiff not being yet disposed to grant that Favor. He buried
Dambrawca, and afterward married Judith Daughter of Jesse Prince of Hungary,
and was succeeded by his Son

Boleslaus Chrobry. 999.
BOLESLAUS CHROBRY, a virtuous Prince, who was elected in the Year 999. and
Dubravius lib. 6. Hist. Bohem. p. 49. and Albert. Cranzius lib. 2. cap. 36.
Kadlubkon. lib. 2. Chron. Epist. xi. p. 130.
after some Years reign by Consent of the Pope, was dignified with the Title of
King by Created first King 1005.
the Emperor Otho III. who also remitted the Pretensions his Predecessors had
to Poland as being Emperors of the Romans, and this in consideration of a kind
Entertainment made him by Boleslaus in his Pilgrimage, on account of his
Health, to the Tomb of St. Adalbert Bishop of Prague, who was martyred by some
Pagans to whom he offered to preach the Christian Faith. Of these Barbarians
Boleslaus bought his Body, and caused it to be buried at Gnesna, whither great
numbers from all parts came to pay their Devotion at his Shrine.

The Emperor Otho also at the same time married his Niece Rixa to Boleslaus his
young Son Miecislaus, who succeeded his Father in the Kingdom. To confirm his
being crowned King by Otho the Emperor, it would not be amiss to recite part of
an old Epitaph written upon him; Ob famam bonam tibi contulit Otto Coronam,
Propter Luctamen sit tibi salus. Amen.


Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 2. p. 22.
This King was surnamed Chrobry (signifying in Polish Acute) from the Quickness
and Excellency of his Parts. Boleslaus made Bohemia, Moravia and Prussia
tributary to Poland. His Wars.
He also declared War against the Saxons, who made Incursions into Pomerania,
which was then governed by Lescus III's Family. He Twelve Senators Assistants.
likewise instituted twelve Senators to assist him in the Government. This
King's Death was so sincerely regretted, that for a Year's time there was no
Mirth nor Splendour in Poland. Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 71.
This Prince was of an undaunted His Character.
Spirit, tho withal modest, courteous and endearing. Both Boleslaus and his
Father lie buried in the middle of the Cathedral Church His Death.
of Posnan, whose Tombs I have there seen. His Son

Miecislaus II. 1025.
MIECISLAUS II. being about 35 Years old was elected next, being crowned by
Hypolitus Archbishop of Gnesna. He degenerated in all respects from his
Father, and lost most of those Conquests which he had added His Wars.
to the Crown. To him the Bohemians and ^^avians refused to pay Tribute; yet he
^^ued Pomerania, which belonged of right he Polish Crown. He was a Person very
^^y and stupid, and chose rather to be His Character.
^^ed by his Queen and Companions than Council, which made him soon slighted
and ^^is'd both by his Friends and Enemies: Yet reigned almost nine Years, and
lived forty (...) It Is said he died mad, and left but His Death.
Son,

Casimir I. 10^^4.
CASIMIR I. who being elected young, his ^^ther Rixa officiated the Regency
during Queen Regent.
Minority. This King was not chosen with^^ much difficulty, for many of the
Electors, ^^ing he might follow his Father's steps, vi^^ously opposed him at
first: Also the Poles ^^re dissatisfied with his Mother's Admi^^ration for
several Reasons, among which (...) was, her robbing the Treasury, and
after^^rds flying with her Son to her Brother ^^sar in Saxony.

This young Prince being sent afterward his Mother to study at Paris, became a
Bedictin Monk at the Abbey of ^^luncy in France. the mean time the Poles, having
no body to ^^eside in their Government, had great Dis^^sions among them; and
therefore earnest^^ entreated the Pope to dispense with Casi^^r's Vow, that he
might return to his Throne, ^^hich they at length obtained upon Hartknoch. lib.
1. cap. 2. p. 71.
Agreeent, that for each Head, except those of the obility and Clergy, they
would contribute early a farthing to maintain a Lamp perpetually burning in St.
Peter's Church at R^^ and moreover, for ever after cause their H^^ to be shaved
about their Ears like Mo^^ (which is practiced to this day) as like^^ stand in
a white Surplice while Mass was ^^ciating Casimir recalled.
on all Holidays: upon these Condit^^ they had their King again; but when he ^^
crowned I could never learn.

He entered into an Alliance with Jaro^^ His Marriage.
Duke of Russia, Son to Vlodomirus, and (...) ry'd his Sister Mary afterward,
called Do^^neva, whose Mother was the Princess (...) Sister to Basil and
Constantine, Emperoun Constantinople.

He conquered the Province of Maso^^ His Wars.
where now lies Warsaw, and defeated ^^ Army of Maslaus, then Duke of that
Co^^try; who retiring among the neighbour^^ Barbarians, not long after returned
(...) greater Force, and ravaged Masovia ^^ along to the Vistula, but was soon
met (...) overthrown a second time by Casimir; wh^^ flying to his Friends, as
he thought, that (...) assisted him, they took, flayed, and fastened (...) to an
exceeding high Cross, saying, Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. ^^. p. 34.
That was but just that he should be exalted whose A^^ tion was so boundless.
Afterward Casimir bei^^ mindful of the Benefits he formerly receiv^^ in the
Abbey of Cluny, sent thither great Pr^^sents and Offerings.

At length this good King having settled h^^ His Death and Issue.
Kingdom in its former Tranquillity, died, and left three Sons, Boleslaus,
Vladislaus, and Mi^^cistaus, and one Daughter Suentochna. He was ^^y'd at
Posnan in the Year 1058.

Boleslaus II. 1059.
BOLESLAUS II. his Son, surnamed the d, succeeded him, who reigned 23 Years. n
the beginning of his Reign he had Wars His Wars.
^^h the Hungarians, Bohemians, Russians and ^^ssians, all caused by the
protecting of three ^^les. He vigorously maintained the Cause Bela Prince of
Hungary, who was then mar^^d to his Aunt, and banished by King An^^. Whereupon
he dethroned Andrew, and ^^wn'd Bela King of Hungary, notwithstand^^ the
considerable Succors sent to Andrew ^^ of Germany and Bohemia. Afterward,
re^^ning into Poland, he married Viseslava, His Marriage.
ughter and Heiress of the Duke of Russia, by om he had that Dukedom for a
Portion.

Hartknoch. lib. (...) cap. 2. p. 73.
Toward the latter end of his Reign he came very dissolute and lewd; oppressed
the ^^ple with extraordinary and insupportable xes; took away publicly
Gentlemen's dies to satisfy his Lust; could not endure ^^ that took notice of
his Irregularities; ^^ish'd such as complained of his Tyrannical His Vices.
^^vernment, and at length killed Stanislaus ^^zepanovius Bishop of Cracow, for
refusing ^^ the Sacrament of the Altar; the manner which was thus: Boleslaus
continuing in enormous Crimes and Extravagancies, this od Man earnestly
entreated him to amend Life; but perceiving his Obstinacy, one y he refused him
the Communion: Which s Prince being highly offended at, watched an opportunity
to revenge; and a little while after, as the Bishop was officiating at Mass, he
gave him such a blow with his Sabre, that he made his Brains fly against the
Wall; and afterward his Guards entering, cut the good Bishop to pieces.
Hereupon he was soon pursued with Vatican Thunder, and consequently rendered
odious to his Subjects: Wherefore fearing some Conspiracy might be His Flight
out of the Kingdom.
raised against him, he left his Kingdom, and retired with his Son Miecislaus,
which he had by his Queen Viseslava, to Ladislaus King of Hungary, where it is
reported, that out of His Death.
mere Madness he afterward killed himself.

This Bishop Stanislaus was Canonized by Pope Gregory VII. and has all along
from thence Patron of Poland.
been received for the Patron of Poland. The Pope also excommunicated the whole
Country, and Boleslaus his Successors were for a Title of K* ceases.
considerable time Hartknoch. lib. I. cap. 2. p. 40.
deprived of the Title of Kings. Next came

Uladislaus I. 1082.
ULADISLAUS HERMANNUS, Brother to Boleslaus, to be elected; who being afraid of
the Pope, or else fearing his Brother's return, would only accept of the Title
of Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 4. p. 45.
Prince. He recalled his Nephew Miecislaus, who died in six Years after. He
built many Churches and Monasteries, all which he richly endowed.

This Prince also brought over the rebellious His Wars.
Pomeranians and Prussians, and defeated likewise the Army of Vratislaus Prince
of Bohemia, whom the Emperor Henry IV. had dignified with the Character of
King, giving him moreover a Right over Poland, tho he had no Title to dispose
of it, his Predecessor Otho III. when he crowned Boleslaus I. King of Poland,
having renounced both for himself and his Successors all Claim to that Kingdom.
Nay, I heard the Poles themselves say that this was rather a piece of Civility
in Otho, than any Obligation upon them, their Country having never been
conquered by any Foreigner, not even by the Romans themselves.

His Marriage.
He married Judith, Daughter of Vratislaus King of Bohemia, by whom he had
Boleslaus III. surnamed Krivoustus, or the Wry-mouthed; and afterward by a
Daughter of the Emperor Henry IV. he had three Daughters. He died His Death.
in the fiftieth Year of his Age, was buried at Ploscow, and succeeded by his
Son

Boleslaus III. 1103.
BOLESLAUS III. surnamed Krivoustus, or the Wry-mouthed.

He was the most warlike and successful Prince that Poland ever had, and at
length subdued his Bastard Brother Sbigneius that rebelled His Wars.
against him, whom at last he was forced to cause to be Herburt. de Fulstin.
lib. 4. p. 60.
murdered. But of all others, his Contest with the Emperor Henry V. is most
famous, which is as follows.

This Emperor having declared War against Colomannus King of Hungary, and
engaged the Bohemians on his side, Boleslaus joined Colomannus, and to make a
strong Diversion entered Bohemia, and destroyed the greatest part of that
Country; whereupon, to be revenged on Boleslaus, the Emperor surpised the
Provinces of Silesia and Marchia, which were then in the hands of the Poles,
and had been absolute Master of them had not Boleslaus speedily marched with an
Army to oppose him; who finding his Enemies much superior in number, at first
thought it better to compose the matter amicably, and therefore sent an
Ambassador to treat of Peace; to which the Emperor, thinking he had the
Advantage, would by no means condescend, except upon very dishonorable Terms
for the Poles. Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 4. p. 55.
And hereupon leading Scarbicus the Ambassador to see his Treasure, he told
him, that that (pointing to his Gold) would bring the Poles to what Terms he
pleased: at which Scarbicus being highly affronted, took off a Gold Ring from
his Finger, and throwing it into the Treasury, said, Whatever be your Imperial
Majesty's Opinion, I do not question but the Polish Iron (meaning their Swords)
will prove as good Metal as the German Gold. Which said, he immediately took
his leave, and returning to his Master, acquainted him with his Negotiation;
which the haughty Pole highly resenting, resolved to hazard a Battle, which he
did, and by the Bravery of his Army obtained a signal Victory in the Dogs-field
near Breslaw chief City of Silesia: whereupon the Emperor immediately struck up
a Peace with him, gave him His Marriage.
his Sister Adleida in Marriage, and his Daughter Christina to his young Son
Vladislaus. This Prince forced the Pomeranians to the Christian Faith, which
they had often rejected before. The Poles all this while were in possession of
Silesia, but afterward the Kings of Bohemia conquered it, and therefore it
consequently now is under the Emperor.

Hartknoch. lib. ^^. cap. 2. p. 74.
It is reported of this Prince, that he had fought forty seven Battles with
success, except His Valor and Success.
one only* with the Red Russians, which was merely lost through the Cowardice
of a Woievod of Cracovia, to whom the King after the Fight sent a Hare-Skin and
Spinningwheel for Recompense. Nevertheless, this one Defeat stuck so close to
him that he soon after died, leaving four Sons, among whom His Death and Issue.
he divided his Kingdom. This King performed a great many more memorable
Actions, which, my Lord, because they might be too tedious to insert here, I
have omitted.

Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 4. p. 72.
His Character.
He was of an undaunted Spirit, a great despiser of Danger, and no less an
observer of Truth and Right; very liberal and generous upon the smallest
Occasions, and moreover endued with singular Clemency and Modesty. He was
further very ambitious of Glory, but at the same time no Enemy to Peace, tho he
is said to have been trained up to War from his very Cradle. To

Uladislaus 11. 1140.
ULADISLAUS, surnamed the Driveler, his eldest Son, he left the Supreme Power,
which was confirmed, and he elected in the Year 1140, but reigned only six
Years: and to the other three he gave only some separate Provinces, which
afterward was the occasion of great Disorders in Poland; for the elder Brother
Vladislaus pretending to dispossess Persecutes his Brothers.
the other three, turned his Brother Boleslaus out of the Palatinates of
Ploskow and Masovia, and his Brother Henry out of the Province of Sendomir, who
both retired to their third Brother that governed Posnania.

Florus Polon. lib. 2. cap. 7. p. 73.
Vladislaus had always with him a Nobleman, call d Peter Dunin, whom taking out
one day to hunt, they happened to be so late abroad, that they were obliged to
lie all Night in a Wood; where, for Diversion, the King began to joke with his
Companion after this manner. Dunin (quoth he) I. believe your Wife lies more at
ease to Night with the Abbot Scrinnen, than we do: To which Dunin, forgetting
himself, tartly replied, And it may be your Majesty's does the same with
Dobessus: Who, it seems, was a handsome Fellow about Court that his Queen
Christina loved. This Answer so nettled the King, that he afterward employed
the same Dobessus to be revenged A severe Revenge.
on Dunin, which he effected by pulling out his Tongue and Eyes.

Hereupon the People perceiving how cruelly Vladislaus persecuted his own
Brothers, and at the same time how ill he treated his Subjects, began to be
daily more and more disaffected to him; whereby his Brothers Party greatly
increasing, he was beaten by them as he was going to besiege Posnan. Wherefore
discovering new Factions hourly appearing against him, and fearing some ill
Fate from a universal Hatred, he timely withdrew into Germany to the Emperor
Conrade III. Cousin His Flight out of the Kingdom.
German to his Queen Christina, who several times endeavored to restore him,
but all in vain; for his Brother Boleslaus Crispus having got possession of the
Crown, Vladislaus was forced to compound for Silesia only, which afterward
fell to the Principality of Bohemia, and has ever since been out of the
possession of the Poles. This Prince lies buried at Attenburg, His Death.
a City of Germany in Alsace. Vladislaus with his Son having abdicated the
Crown of Poland, his second Brother,

Boleslaus IV. 1146.
BOLESLAUS CRISPUS, or the Frizled, was elected in the Year 1146, and reigned
to the Year 1175; yet the Emperor Conrade did what he could to restore
Vladislaus. To effect which, he first sent Ambassadors into Poland, but to no
purpose: Then he resolved to make War with the Poles, but deferred it till his
Expedition against Asia was over; to facilitate which he had obtained leave to
pass through Boleslaus his Dominions to the Euxine Sea: But at his return being
constantly solicited by Vladislaus and his Queen, he marched with a powerful
Army against Poland; yet His Wars.
what with Delays, Stratagems, and Ambuscades, he was so fatigued by the Poles
that he could do nothing, till at last he was called home to appease some
Intestine Broils in his own Dominions, which having effected, he soon after
died. His Successor Frederic Barberossa also espoused Vladislaus his Cause, but
not being able to do any thing in his Favor by Ambassadors, he marched with a
numerous Army against the Poles, which they likewise harassed and wearied out,
till they had obliged that Emperor to strike up a Peace with 'em, he being in
War at the same time against Milan; by which it was agreed, that Boleslaus
should remit Silesia to Vladislaus, whose Posterity afterward divided it into
several Dutchies, till at last it came to the Empire. This great Province, my
Lord, as I observed in my Journey through it, is one of the most fertile and
plentiful Countries in all Germany.

Boleslaus began another War against the Prussians for refusing to pay him
Tribute, and forced them to this Compliance, that they should submit in case he
left 'em to their Religion; but otherwise they boldly declared, that they would
rather die than become Christians again. Whereupon Boleslaus was forced to
grant them Liberty of Conscience; yet they soon revolted, and by a Florus
Polon. lib. 2. cap. 8. p. 78.
Stratagem entirely routed the Polish Army, and His Death.
killed his Brother Henry. This King died not long after, and was buried at
Cracow.

Miecislaus III. 1174.
MIECISLAUS, surnamed the Old, Brother to Boleslaus, succeeded him, being
elected in the Year 1174, and reigned only to 1178. He was called the Old from
his great Sagacity and Prudence in his Youth. His Covetousness A bad Policy.
induced him to hoard up great Sums of Money by oppressing the Gentry and
People with unreasonable Taxes, and selling all Employments, tho against the
Constitutions of the Kingdom. This extreme Avarice brought him to be generally
hated by the Clergy, Nobility and People: whereupon Ib. p. 80. and Herburt. de
Fulstin. lib. 5. c. 9. p. 88.
Gedeon Bishop of Cracow endeavored several times to incline him to pity his
Subjects, and despise Money, since he had no need of it; but he would by no
means hearken to his Advice, wherefore this Bishop concerted together with the
Gentry to dethrone him, and remit Dethroned.
the Crown to Casimir his Brother, who more deserved it, which they effectually
did after some little Bloodshed.

Here we may observe, that Covertousness is the greatest Vice that any Prince
can be guilty of, especially a King of Poland, whose Subjects, as your Lordship
doubtless has observed, are generally liberal even to Extravagance.

At first Casimir refused the Crown offered him, alleging it was his Brother's
Right, and that such an Alteration might occasion Civil Wars, which he by no
means had any mind to be the Author of. But when they unanimously declared they
would have no other King, and could never more obey Miecislaus,

Casimir II. 1178.
CASIMIR II. consenting to accept of the Government, was elected in the Year
1178, and reigned to 1195. He was surnamed the Just, being altogether unlike
his Brother, as appears by the following Particular. Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2.
p. 75. Florus Polon. lib. 2. cap. 9. p. 82.
Being at play with a Gentleman of his, named Conarius, whilst he was Prince of
Sendomir, and having won all his Adversary's Money, the Gentleman in a Passion
struck him over the Face, and fled; but next day being brought before him, was
adjudged by every body to have deserved Death for his Insolence. Not A
commendable Example.
at all (replied the good Prince) for being affected with his Loss, and not
having it in his Power to revenge himself on Fortune, it is no wonder if he
fell foul of her Favorite: and moreover, rather blamed himself for
condescending to play with him, and likewise thanked him for putting him in
mind by that Blow, how unworthy it was for a Prince to bestow his time so ill:
And lastly, as a further. Argument of his dissenting from his Brother's
Principles, he returned the Courtier all his Money again.

Miecislaus endeavors to be restored.
Miecislaus being excluded, retired with his Princess and Children to Ratisbon
to the Emperor Frederic his Kinsman, who yet could do him no good, he being
engaged at that time in War both in Italy and Asia; therefore his next Recourse
was to his Brother's Clemency. This so far wrought upon Casimir, that he made a
Speech to the Senate to recall him, but was extremely blamed by them for
offering to prefer a private Kindness to the Public Safety. All this while
Miecislaus was little sensible of his Brother's good Nature, tho he afterward
underhand endeavored again to get him restored.

Casimir begun his Reign by easing his Subjects of the Taxes his Brother had
imposed upon 'em, and restraining the Power of exorbitant Magistrates. While he
was absent in Russia, on account of composing some Differences, by instigation
of Miecislaus, some of the Nobles conspired against him, and endeavored to
re-instate Miecislaus; which the better to bring about and satisfy the People,
they pretended that Casimir was poisoned in Russia. Hereupon Miecislaus readily
arrives in Poland, and was received every where but in the Castle of Cracow,
which Bishop Fulco held out against him. Of all this Casimir being soon
informed, by Assistance of the Russians, overcame his Brother, and gave both
him and his Army their Lives; which Goodness of his at length so wrought upon
Miecislaus, that he never after aimed at the Crown. Submits.


After Casimir was well settled, being not unmindful of the rebellious
Prussians, nor of the Death of his Brother Henry, he marched with so great fury
against them, that he had regard neither for Man, Woman nor Child, but put
great numbers of all sorts to the Sword, and burnt and plundered their Country
to that degree, that at last they quietly submitted to the absolute Dominion of
Poland.

Dantzic made a City.
This King made a City of Florus Polon. lib. 2. cap. 10. p. 85.
Dantzic in Prussia, which before was only a poor Fisher-Town on the Baltic
Sea. He lies buried at Cracow, having left two Sons Lescus and Conrade, His
Death and Issue.
and one Daughter Adleida. He lived to the Age of six and fifty Years. After
his Death the Poles elected his Son

Lescus V. 1195.
LESCUS V. surnamed the White, in the Year 1195, who being very young had for
Guardians, his Mother Helena, with the Under Guardians.
Bishop and Palatin of Cracovia. In the mean time his Uncle Miecislaus being
yet alive His Wars.
came with a powerful Army of Poles and Silesians to dethrone him, and gained a
bloody Battle over the Palatin of Cracovia, who commanded Lescus his Army.
Hereupon he immediately dispatched Ambassadors to Helena, to represent to her
his unquestionable Right to the Crown, his Strength; the Disorder among Lescus
his Tutors, who being too young, was not able of himself to govern; the great
Advantages he had obtained in the late Battle; and lastly, his great Party in
the Kingdom. He moreover desires Helena to make him Guardian over her Son, and
promises to adopt him for his own, to leave him the Succession after his Death,
and that he will do nothing but what shall be according to the Constiutions of
the Kingdom. All these Dethroned.
Proffers having been thoroughly weighed by Miecislaus III. restored, 1199.
the Queen and Council: At last Miecislaus was recalled a second time in the
Year 1199. after having taken a solemn Oath to perform all his Promises. But
being once reinthron'd he soon forgot his Oath, and fell to consiscating
several of his Subjects Estage, and giving 'em to others, saying, Herburt. de
Fulstin. lib. 6. p. 99.
That a King was no longer obliged to keep his Oath, than when it was neither
safe nor beneficial for him to break it. Hereupon Dethroned.
the Palatin of Cracovia seizes on the Lescus V. restored.
City of Cracow, and receives Lescus a second time, whilst Miecislaus, being
then absent, by all the Intrigues imaginable endeavored to be restored:
Whereupon he flattered the People, persuading them that Lescus his Party had
cast false Aspersions upon him; and that if he did any thing contrary to his
Oath, he was merely betrayed to it by the malicious Persuasions of his
pretended Friends. By these and such like fair words he Iulls asleep the
credulous People, and gains their Affections the third time: Whereupon he sends
to the Queen to inform her that Nicholas Palatin of Cracovia had been the
Author of the late Disturbances, and therefore wills her to remove him from
Court, and receive himself again; which she, pitying his unfortunate Case, even
in prejudice of her own Son, was inclined to do, and would therefore admit of
no Justification from the Palatin. Whereupon this Person being a Man of great
Authority in the Kingdom, goes and joins Miecislaus; many follow his Example,
and in short, the Queen was quickly forced to recall Miecislaus a third time
Miecislaus reinthron'd, 1202.
in the Year 1202. When being reinthron'd, he requited Queen Helena for her
Services by seizing upon the Territory of Voslicia, and three other Places in
Sendomir, which of right belonged to her: and being about to do the same to
several others, he was prevented by a sudden Death in the seventy third Year of
His Death.
his Age, leaving two Sons, Otho and Vladislaus Lasconogus.

After Miecislaus his Death, the greater part voted for Lescus V. that was
still alive; but Nicholas Palatin of Cracovia, and the Bishop of Cracow his
Brother, would by no means consent to it Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 75, 76.
Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 6. p. 102, 103.
unless Lescus would banish out of the Kingdom Gouoric Palatin of Sendomir, of
whom they were both very jealous. Lescus answered, He would not buy a Kingdom
(which by right was his own) by doing an Injury to his Friend. Hereupon by the
Bishop and Palatin's Interest he was put by, and

Uladislaus Lasconogus. 1203.
ULADISLAUS LASCONOGUS, that is, Thin-foot, elected in the Year 1203. But this
good Prince, considering Lescus his Right, after Surrenders his Crown.
three Years Reign, voluntarily surrendered to him, when

Lescus V. Reestablished. 1206.
LESCUS was received the third time, in the Year 1206, and reigned to the Year
1226. Under his Reign the Poles heard first of the Tartars, a barbarous Nation
that came from the Caspian Sea and Mount Imaus in Asia, who made Irruptions
into Taurica Chersonesus, and the Frontiers of Podolia and Russia, and have
ever since been most inveterate Enemies to Poland. Lescus had a Brother called
Conrade, to whom he gave the Provinces of Masovia and Cujavia, and made one
Suentopelus Governor of Pomerania, whereof one was Author of Lescus's Death,
and the other of most blood Wars in Poland: For this Suentopelus thinking to
make himself absolute in Pomerania, employed People to Guagnini p. 92.
murder Lescus, which they not long after effected accordingly, Murdered in a
Bath.
when this good Prince was in a Bath: Whereupon, after his Death, Suentopelus
declared himself Duke of Pomerania and Conrade, and Florus Polon. lib. 2. cap.
2. p. 94. and Herburt. de Fulstin. p. 111.
called into Poland the Knights of the Teutonic Teutonic Knights called into
Poland.
Order, (who were then banished out of Syria by the Sarazens, and settled in
Germany) to help him against the Prussians, who were wont to make frequent
Incursions into his Country, to whom for Recompense he gave the Territory of
Culm, and some other small Places, on condition they should act vigorously
against the Prussians; but after they had conquered those People, they were to
resign Culm, etc. and have the half of their Conquests to themselves. These
Auxiliary Troops proved afterward very pernicious to Poland, having been the
Cause of many bloody Wars in that Country. This Agreement between the Knights
of the Cross (as they were likewise called) and Conrade, was approved and
confirmed by Pope Gregory IX. in the Year 1228. In a short time these Knights
effected what they undertook. This Lescus lies buried in the Cathedral at
Cracow, and left behind him a young Son,

Bloeslaus V. 1228.
BOLESLAUS V. surnamed the Chaste, whose Guardians he ordered to be his Brother
Conrade, and Henry Duke of Breslaw his Cousin. This young Prince,
notwithstanding the many Intrigues and Cabals Conrade formed against him, who
designed to make himself King, was elected in the Year 1228, and reigned to the
Year 1278. He married Cunigunda, Daughter His Marriage.
to Bela King of Hungary; but after they were bedded, he had not the courage to
consummate the Marriage, and therefore by mutual Consent both made a Vow of
Chastity.

In^^ad of Tartars.
Ib. p. 96. and Herburt. de Fulstin. p. 116.
'Twas in this Prince's Reign the Tartars made their first Irruptions into
Poland, whereof there were three at several times. In the first they ravaged
all the Country about Lublin and Russia, and carried away an incredible Number
of Prisoners with great Riches. In the second they returned with more fury, and
not being contented with the Plunder of Poland, spread likewise all over
Silesia, where near Lignitz they entirely defeated the Confederate Army of the
Christians; wherein Henry Duke of Breslaw, Boleslaus Son to the His Troubles.
Duke of Moravia, Pompo Great Master of the Teutonick Order, and several other
Persons of Note were killed. Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 76. Herburt. de
Fulstin. lib. 7. p. 119.
The Number of dead Bodies was so incredible, that they filled nine great Sacks
with the Christians Ears, cutting off each Head but one, after the same manner
as Hanibal at the Battle of Cannae filled several Bushels with the Rings cut
off from the Fingers of the Roman Knights only, that were there killed.
Boleslaus had not the courage to march in Person against the Tartars when they
came a second time to invade him, but retired with Retires into Hungary.
his Court into Hungary, and thereby left his Subjects to the Mercy of their
Enemies. Which base Action the Poles being extremely offended at, intended to
have elected a new King; whereupon Boleslaus, Son to Henry Duke of Breslaw that
was killed in the Battle afterward, was named; but Conrade vigorously opposing
him, and pretending to have more Right, the Gentry, to prevent Civil Wars,
recalled their former King Bolestaus from Returns.
Hungary, and in the mean time Conrade died. Not long after the Tartars,
together with the Lithuanians, which were hitherto Pagans, made Incursions a
third time into Poland, when they pillaged the Country up as far as Cracow;
which City, meeting with no body in it to resist'em, they both plundered and
burnt. Afterward they went to Vratislaw, which they found His Troubles and
Wars.
ready fired to their hands; for the Townsmen having had timely notice of the
coming of the Barbarians, had got all their Treasure together and fled, whilst
the Soldiers, distrusting the Strength of the Place, and searing it might
become a Prey to the Enemy, set fire to it, and retired into the Castle; which
having greatly incensed the Tartars, they laid Siege to the Castle with all
imaginable Vigor, and would soon have taken it, had they not been frighted
from before it by a Prodigy. During this, Boleslaus marched in Person against
the Lithuanians, whom he overthrew, and killed their Duke Mindacus. The
Prussians likewise being yet Pagans, sided with the Lithuanians, when the
Teutonick Order, which was then settled in Prussia, called to their Assistance
Florus Polon. lib. 2. cap. 13. p. 103.
Ottocarus King of Bohemia, who quickly reduced the Prussians; and the better
Koningsberg built.
to keep them in Awe, built a Fort called Koningsberg or Royal Hill.

Boleslaus was a pious and good Prince, and lies buried at Cracow in a
Monastery founded His Death.
by himself. He built other Religious Houses, and reigned near 50 Years; and
having made a Vow of Chastity, left no Children: Wherefore his Uncle's Son, by
the Father,

Lescus VI. 1279.
LESCUS VI. surnamed the Black, succeeded him, being elected in the Year 1279,
and reigned only to the Year 1289. In the beginning of his Reign the Russians,
summoned by the Lithuanians and Tartars, made Incursions into His Wars.
Poland under Command of Leo their Duke; but were defeated, first by Varsias
the King's General, and afterward were beat by the King himself out of a
Village where they had entrenched themselves, which from that City of Leopol,
whence so called.
General's Name has been since called Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 8. p. 136.
Leopol, and is now a sine City. Upon this Defeat the Enemy were forced to
retire with great Loss. Not long after they returned again, but more to their
prejudice than in the former Irruption: for then, tho their Army consisted of a
Prodigious Number of Men, and an innumerable Company of Mastiff Dogs trained up
to War; yet were they a second time routed by Lescus, insomuch that a certain
People called Jazyges, who then inhabited a part of Lithuania, and came only to
plunder in Poland, were so totally destroyed, that there remains nothing left
of 'em except the Name. But at Length the Tartars making another Irruption, had
better success; for they not only vanquished Lescus, but also carried away,
besides Men, married Women and Children, above twenty thousand Maids into
Captivity.

An Insurrection.
After this Defeat, an Insurrection was raised against Lescus by Paul Bishop of
Cracow; for that under the Reign of Boleslaus the Chaste, Lescus had kept him
about a Month in Prison. Hereupon, Conrade Duke of Masovia was invited to
accept the Crown; who, coming into Poland for that purpose, was met at Sendomir
by General Varsias, Paul the Bishop, and a great Number of the Nobility. Upon
this, Lescus perceiving himself forsaken, fled into He retires into Hungary.
Hungary to King Vladislaus; but the City of Cracow still bearing a respect to
him, continued Loyal, and prepared to sustain a Siege: Whereupon having been
summoned to surrender, their Answer was, That they could not be trea^^berous to
their lawful Sovereign Lescus, but would defend his Right to the last drop of
their Blood. Hereat the Nobles being grievously nettled, resolved to sit down
with their Army before that City; but, upon their Approaches, finding it empty,
the Inhabitants being retired into the Castle, they set sire to it, thinking by
those means to bring the Enemy sooner to a Compliance. This done, Lescus having
obtained a considerable Army of King Vladislaus, was marching directly toward
Cracow, to relieve his besieged Friends; when meeting with Conrade, who came to
oppose him, near the River Raba, he entirely routed Returns with success.
him, and forced him back again into his own Country. This happened about the
Year 1285.

His Death.
This Prince died, and was buried in the Monastery of the Trinity at Cracow.

Lescus the VI. leaving no Children, his Kingdom consequently fell into great
Distractions; for Vladislaus Locticus his Brother seized on the Palatinate of
Siradia, and Boleslaus Duke of Ploskow, Brother to Conrade Duke of Masovia, on
the Palatinates of Cracovia and Sendomir; but this latter was soon dispossessed
by

Henry 1. 1290.
HENRY Duke of Breslaw, surnamed the Honest, of the Family of Piastus, in the
Year 1290; who was likewise not long after turned out by Locticus, but soon
restored, and reigned in quality of King for the space of five Years, tho I do
not read he was crowned. He appointed Premislus Duke of Great Poland, for his
Successor, being of the Family of Piastus likewise. This Premislus also had the
Province of Pomerania left him by Miescingus Prince of that Country.

Premislus. 1296.
PREMISLUS, in the thirty eighth Year of his Age, was crowned King at Gnesna by
James Swinka Archbishop of that City, in the Title of King restored.
Year 1296, which was an Honor that had not been Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p.
40.
done to any Prince of Poland before for above two hundred Years, since
Boleslaus the Bold killed Stanislaus at the Altar; but Premislus did not long
enjoy this Title, for seven Months after his Coronation, he is said to have
been Murdered.
Florus Polon. lib. 2: cap. 15. p. 113. Guagnini Tom. 1. p. 97.
murdered by some Brandenburg Emissaries, that Marquess being afraid of this
King who was Master of Pomerania which joined to his Country. He was buried
among his Predecessors at Posnan. After the Murder of King Premislus,

Uladislaus III. 1296.
ULADISLAUS LOCTICUS, (so called from the word Hartknoch. p. 77.
Lokiec, an Ell, having his Name from his low Stature) Brother of Lescus the
Black, was chosen in the Year 1296, and reigned only four Years. He went upon
an Expedition against the Silesians that were His Wars.
inclined to assist the Bohemians against him, who then pretended a Right to
the Kingdom of Poland. These Locticus subdued, and having considerably ravaged
their Country, returned home, where he afterward gave himself up to a lewd and
debauched Life, insomuch that His Vices.
he neglected the care of all Public Business, and minded nothing but his own
private Pleasures. These his intolerable Vices brought upon him the Ill Will of
his Subjects, insomuch that after three years Reign they pronounced him
unworthy of the Scepter, and resolved to elect another. Hereupon Locticus being
dethroned, Dethroned.
they invite

Winceslaus K. of Bohemia. 1300.
WINCESLAUS King of Bohemia to accept their Crown, who was married to Rixa,
Daughter of King Premislus, and crowned King of Poland in the Year 1300, but
reigned only to 1305. After he came to reign he persecuted Locticus, who hid
himself for some time, but was forced at last to quit the Kingdom. When
Winceslaus thus saw himself secure at home by the flight of Locticus, and after
having put Bohemian Garrisons into the several Cities of Poland, which seemed
very False Policy.
uneasy to that Nation, he thought it high time to go and settle Affairs in
Bohemia.

During this, Vladislaus Locticus having a considerable Party in the Kingdom,
which daily increased on account of discontent against Winceslaus; and having
got together several Troops out of Hungary, he marched directly His Wars.
toward Poland, hearing that the Bohemian Government was somewhat burdensome to
that Nation. At first Locticus had considerable Advantage over the Bohemians,
but by the Death of Winceslaus, which followed soon after, he had all the
Success he could desire; for the Bohemians, who had possession of the Garrisons,
finding themselves in a strange Country, and moreover hated and ill thought on
by the People, were afraid of an Insurrection against 'em, and therefore made
no great difficulty of surrendering to Locticus all those Cities and Towns they
had possession of, as Cracow, Sendomir, etc. In the mean time young Winceslaus
coming with an Army to dispute his Father's Kingdom with Locticus, was Florus
Polon. lib. 2. cap. 17. p. 118.
murdered in the Expedition, it is thought, by Orders of the Emperor Albert;
and since his time the Bohemians have ever been governed by foreign Princes.
Winceslaus King His Death.
of Poland and Bohemia died, and was buried at Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 9. p.
147.
Prague in the Year 1305.

Uladislaus IV. restored. 1305.
After the Death both of Winceslaus the Father and Son, Vladislaus Locticus was
restored, almost by common Consent, in the Year 1305, and reigned to the Year
1333. And this they did, either because they thought he had had time to repent
and mend his former Life, or by reason they were afraid of Civil Wars if they
should elect any other. Ib. p. 148. and Florus Polon. lib. 2. cap. 18. p. 119.
Notwithstanding Meets with Difficulties.
the Palatinates of Posnania and Kalisch having a fresh Memory of his past
dissolute Life, would never acknowledge him their King. Also the Governor of
Pomerania, which then belonged to Poland, being bribed by the Marquess of
Brandenburg, delivered up to him all the Cities of that Province, as likewise
the City of Dantzic, except the Castle which the Governor thereof, one
Bogussa, being truly loyal to his King, would by no means surrender.

Teutonic Knights established in Prussia.
In these days the Knights of the Teutonic Order were fully settled in Prussia,
being both very Strong and very Rich. They were established there by Agreement
with Conrade, Brother to King Vladislaus Lasconogus, for assisting him against
the Prussians when he was oppressed by them. They there built, some years
before, the City of Ib. p. 120.
Marienburg, appointed for City of Marienburg, when built.
Residence of their Great Masters. Here Locticus was obliged to crave their Aid
against the Rebels of Pomerania and Dantzic, which they readily granted, on
condition that half the Garrison of the Castle of Dantzic should be of their
Troops, by which means they soon became Masters of the whole; for they
afterward not only turned the Poles out of the Teutonic Order troublesome to
the Poles.
Castle, but both Brandenburghers and Pomeranians out of the City of Dantzic it
self; and likewise under pretense of assisting the King of Poland, conquered
all Pomerania for themselves; when being Masters thereof, they offered to buy
the Title of Locticus for Money, which he refused. Then they offered the same
Sum to the Marquess of Brandenburg to renounce his Right to that Province;
which he, tho he had no Title to sell, yet was wise enough to accept their
Prosser.

The Poles were very sensible of all these Affronts and Injustices offered 'em
by the Teutonic Order; but before they proceeded to Revenge, they thought it
advisable to Florus Polon. lib. 2. cap. 18. p. 123.
acquaint the Pope therewith, who lived then at Avignon, who, after four years
Delays and Debates, ordered the Knights to give due fatisfaction to the Poles:
but they having had four years respit to fortify themselves, and to make strong
Alliances with some Neighboring Princes; and besides, having a very
considerable Army on foot, answered his Holiness, That they had often done
great Services for Poland; that that Kingdom owed them Sums of Money; and that
they presumed that not only the Lands they were in possession of in Prussia and
Pomerania, were lawfully theirs; but that also they thought the Poles obliged
to give 'em either more Land or more Money to recompense the several Kindnesses
they had done And therefore excommunicated by the Pope.
them. Hereupon the Pope excommunicates this Order; and the Poles, under
command of their King, marched directly against 'em.

Here Locticus made an eloquent Speech to Locticus his Speech to his Army.
his Army, representing the many Affronts and Injustices they had received from
a little Sect of People, to which his Predecessors the Kings of Poland had out
of mere Goodness given their Protection when banished from their own Country by
the Sarazens. Then he enlarged upon the Covetousness and Ambition of this
Order, and concluded by encouraging his Men to fight bravely, and not suffer
those to become their Masters, who were at first their Vassals. Hereupon the
Poles, animated by this Speech of their King, tho much inferior in Number to
their Enemies, yet fought so siercely and bravely, that they entirely routed
the Teutonic Overthrows the Teuronic Order.
Order, and killed about twenty thousand of their Men, tho they themselves have
had the presumption to affirm that they did not lose above five or six hundred.

Florus Polon. lib. 2. cap. 18. p. 131.
Among the wounded, there was one Florianus Szari, Knight of that Order, who
having his Belly opened with a Scymiter, and his Guts dropping out, which he
held up with his hands; the King passing by, pitied him: Whereupon the Knight
said to him, Sir, A Man in his Village suffers more than I do when he has bad
Neighbors. The King admiring at this dying man's Thought, immediately caused
his Surgeons to take care of him; and when he was well, gave him Land that had
no bad Neighbors about it.

Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 9. p. 153. Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 77, 78.
This Vladislaus, it seems, not being thoroughly satisfied with Premislus his
Right, to transmit the Title of King to his Posterity without leave of the
Pope, sent an Ambassador to his Holiness to request a liberty for himself Is
crowned, together with his Queen, by Order of the Pope.
and his Queen Hedwigis to be crowned, which was forthwith granted, and the
Ceremony performed in the Cathedral of Cracow by the Archbishop of Gnesna, and
other Bishops, in the Year 1320. The King long after died, and was buried at
Cracow, in the Year 1333.

Casimir III. 1333.
CASIMIR the Great succeeded his Father Locticus, being elected in the Year
1333, and Makes Peace with the Teutonic Knights.
reigned to the Year 1370. He made a Peace with the Teutonic Order, that was
not at all advantageous or honorable to the Polish Nation, the Knights being
thereby still to remain in possession of Prussia, Dantzic and Pomerania,
notwithstanding the Threatenings of the Pope, and his Bulls of Excommunication.
This Casimir had no Children: He is the last Male of the Family of Piastus:
Wherefore that the Crown might not go altogether out of his Family, before his
Death he Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 10. p. 166.
prevailed with the Poles to elect Charles King of Hungary his own Sister's
Son; but he dying before Casimir, his Son Lewis was chosen. The Poles had
several His Conquests.
times conquered Russia, but it was never enjoyed peaceably till Casimir's
time; who having had better success than any of his Predecessors, annexed it as
a Province to the Crown of Poland. The Province of Masovia was likewise
conquered by him, and annexed to the Crown. Florus Polon. lib. 2. cap. 19. p.
135.
The Poles had never hitherto any written Laws, and but very few made His other
good Deeds.
till Casimir began to make Institutions, name Judges, create Magistrates,
build Forts, and to establish a better Economy in the Kingdom than any Prince
before him. The Laws and Constitutions of the Teutonic Knights seemed very
rational and political to him, having had a sensible Experience of the good
Government of this Order for a considerable time: Wherefore he introduced their
Laws into Poland, which have continued ever since, and are called the Magdeburg
Laws.

His Character.
This Casimir was a very lewd Prince, but withal exceeding Liberal and Just: He
kept a Jewish Concubine, at whose request he granted great Privileges to that
People: He gained so well the good Opinion and Affection of his Subjects, that
he was styled the Father of the Poor; and a great many Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap.
2. p. 78. Starovolseius Descript. Polon. p. 122.
Germans, who were oppressed by their own Princes, in his time came into
Poland, and have ever since inhabited the Foot of the Carpathian Mountains. The
Daughter of Boguslaus, Duke of Pomerania, was then married to the Emperor
Charles IV. Casimir celebrated the Nuptials with great Splendour and
Magnisicence at Cracow, where assisted Lewis King of Hungary, Sigismund King of
Denmark, and Petrua King of Cyprus, with the Emperor, and many Princes of
Germany, Poland, and other Countries.

Valachia at that time was a kind of Republic of it self, having before had
Governors, which they called Hospodars; the last of which being dead, and his
Children aspiring to the same Dignity, Casimir sent an Army to support His Wars.
'em, but by an Ambush of the Valachians, placed in a Wood, was entirely
defeated. Casimir died soon after this of a Fall from his His Death.
Horse, and was buried at Cracow. This King reigned thirty seven Years, and
lived sixty. Bizardiere Histoire des Dietes, p. 1. Guagnini Tom. 1. p. 102.
He was surnamed the Great (being the only Person that had had that Title among
the Polish Princes) not because he had gained a great many Victories, but by
reason of the many beautiful Structures and Fortresses he had built, as
likewise of the many beneficial Laws and Constituions which he had made.

Casimir, being the last King of the Family of Piastus, had caused his own
Nephew by his Sister,

Lewis King of Hungary, 1370.
LEWIS, King of Hungary, to be elected for his Successor during his Lifetime,
who was crowned accordingly in Poland in the Year 1370, and reigned 12 Years.
The Poles were not extraordinarily well satisfied with him, being a Foreign
Prince, and therefore Obliged to take an Oath.
obliged him before they would crown him, to take an Radevicus lib. 1. cap. 3.
p. 13.
Oath, not only to maintain their former Privileges, but also to enlarge 'em;
for hitherto the Successors of Piastus had almost had an absolute Power in
Poland, a great deal more than their present Kings have.

Returns into Hungary.
After some time Lewis was forced to return into Hungary to settle some Affairs
there, when he left the Administration of the Government, during his Absence,
to his Mother Elizabeth. His going away occasioned great Troubles, for the
Russians rebelled, and the Lithuanians made Incursions into the very Heart of
Poland. The Poles also were divided among themselves; they could not endure to
see their Towns in the hands of Hungarian Garrisons; and besides, they were so
much displeased with their King's leaving 'em to the Government of his Mother,
whom they neither loved nor esteemed, that they sent to acquaint him, that they
thought it Honor enough for himself to govern Poland. All these Troubles and
Distrusts soon obliged the King to return into Poland with a strong Army of
Hungarians, where he first marched His Wars.
against the Rebel Russians, and subdued them; next against the Lithuanians,
and obliged them to a Peace: soon after which he died, and was His Death,
buried at Belgrade in Hungary, in the 56th Year of his Age, having reigned 12
Years. He And Issue.
left two Daughters, but no Sons, one of which married to Sigismund the
Emperor's Son, and the other, named Hedwigis, he left to succeed him in the
Kingdom of Poland.

Chwalkowski singularia Polonica p. 20. Florus Polon. lib. 2. cap. 20. p. 145,
146. Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 11. p. 189, etc.
This Prince was very curious to know what Opinion People had of him, and was
also exact in reforming the Faults they laid to his A commendable Example.
Charge. For this purpose he was wont to disguise himself, and enquire among
the People how they liked their King, and what they thought amiss in him; and
according to their Answers he redressed the Grievances suggested to him.

My Lord, I have hitherto given you a succinct Account of the Family of
Piastus; next I shall proceed to present your Lordship likewise with that of
Jagello, being still a Continuation of Piastus his Family in the Line of a
Daughter.

Of the Family of Jagello.
When Lewis King of Poland and Hungary died, his Daughter Hedwigis being with
her Mother the Queen Dowager in Hungary, the Poles, tho there were several
Princes of the Race of Piastus left in Poland and Silesia, yet either because
they did not think them deserving, or else by reason that they believed 'em
engaged in their Enemies Interests, sent a solemn Embassy for the young Princess

Queen Hedwigis 1382.
HEDWIGIS, who soon came into Poland, with Cardinal Demetrius, the Bishop of
Strigonia, and several others of the chief Nobility of Hungary. At her arrival
the Poles received her with great Joy, Splendour and Magnificence; and the
Archbishop of Gnesna, Bozenta, crowned her after the usual Ceremonies at
Cracow, on the Feast of St. Hedwigis (always religiously observed in Poland) in
the Year 1382, and she reigned alone four Years. This young Princess, being not
yet married, Has several Suitors.
had several noble Suitors, among which Ziemovitus Duke of Masovia was the
first, whom she refused; the next was William of Austria, who came in Person to
court her: Him she liked, but the Senate of Poland would by no means consent to
a Marriage with him, having always had a Maxim (which they never hitherto
broke) that they would by no means admit any of that Family to their Crown, and
this, fearing so powerful a Neighbor might one time or other find means to
make himself Absolute in their Country. But at last Jagello great Duke of
Lithuania had better Fortune, for he soon obtained her by the great Is married
to Jagello, who becomes a Christian.
and advantageous Proffers he made the Poles. He first promised to embrace the
Christian Religion with all his Country, who were before Fagans: Next to unite
Lithuania to Poland, during his time, under the same form of Government; and
lastly, that in case his Male Race failed, it should for ever after be annexed
to that Kingdom. Hereupon Jagello was baptized, and takes upon him the Name of

Jagello, or Uladislaus V. 1386.
ULADISLAUS V. and after having consummated the Marriage with Hedwigis, was
consecrated by the Archbishop Bozenta in the Year 1386. and reigned 48 Years.
Not long after his Coronation he went with Priests into Lithuania, Converts the
Lithuanians.
and in a twelve Month's time converted all that Nation; but this not so much
by their Preaching and Vigilance, as by his own exemplary Zeal and Persuasion.
Herb. de Fulst. l. 13. p. 207. Hartkn. l. 1. c. 2. p. 87.
After Founds the University of Cracow.
this he erected the University of Cracow, which Casimir the Great had only
begun, and sent to Prague in Bohemia for learned Men to instruct the Youth in
all manner of Sciences, which had never before been taught in this Country.
About this time Queen Hedwigis Hedwigis dies.
died, after having endowed the University, to encourage Learning.

His Wars with the Teutonic Order.
This Prince had long Wars with the Teutonic Order, which then very much
insulted over the Frontiers of his Kingdom; whereupon the Poles were not a
little inclined to be revenged on this proud and powerful People. Now Poland
not being alone sufficient to withstand 'em, Jagello made up a considerable
Army of Poles, Lithuanians, Russians and Tartars, with all which he marched
directly toward them, who were got ready to receive him with a Body of about
140000 Men; yet notwithstanding, after a long and doubtful Fight, the Poles
happened to have the better, and entirely routed the Teutonic Army, killing
their great Master Conrade of Thuningen with about 30000 Soldiers, and near
15000 taken Prisoners. This Victory the Poles pursued so far, that they took
most of the Towns in Prussia, and doubtless had entirely destroyed that Order
had not the Emperor Sigismund' come to their Relief, who soon forced the Poles
to make Peace with 'em, and to restore all they had taken from 'em. Afterward
Jagello had several other Conflicts with the Teutonic Order, in all which he
conquered.

His Death,
He died of a Fever in Russia after having reigned forty eight Years and some
Months, and lies buried in the Cathedral at Cracow. This King had had four
Wives, all which he And Issue.
caused to be crowned, and two Sons, Vladislaus VI. and Casimir IV. Tho his Son

Uladislaus VI. 1435.
ULADISLAUS the Sixth was but nine Years old when his Father died, yet after
long Debates and great Opposition in the Diet, he was elected at Briescia in
the Year 1435, and reigned ten Years. Florus Polon. lib. 3. cap. 2. p. 167.
He was so young when he was chosen, that his Coronation Oath was fain to be
dispensed with, his Mother Sophia and some of the Peers having promised he
should take it when he came of Age. The Senate, Regents.
In the mean time the Senate were Regents during his Minority.

Some while after the Tartars made great Incursions into Podolia which then
belonged to Poland, when having killed the Polish General Bucarius, and the
greatest part of his Army, they retired with great Booty into their own Country.

After this, by the Death of the Emperor Albert, Hungary having no King to
defend it against the Turks who threatened it on all sides, sent Ambassadors to
Vladislaus to entreat him to come and be their King, which, after some
Deliberation, he accepted of; and going into that Kingdom, notwithstanding the
Cabals and Party of the Empress Elizabeth, who was left four Months gone with
Child, he was crowned King of Hungary at Buda. The Child Uladislaus crowned
King of Hungary.
the Empress went with was afterward born, and called Ladislaus; but she dying
not long after, left King Vladislaus in Peace, at least at home, till the Turks
obliged him to take Arms for his Defense abroad; for Amurath, Emperor of the
Turks, was not only then on his March to besiege Belgrade in Person, but also
commanded the Hungarians to pay him Tribute. Hereupon Vladislaus was forced to
declare His Wars with the Turks.
War against him, and under the Command of Huniades sent an Army made up of
Poles and Hungarians to oppose him, which coming upon him by Night, surprised
the Turkish Army near the River Morava in Hungary, and made such a slaughter of
'em that it is thought the Turks lost above 30000 Men that day. After this happy
Victory Vladislaus banished all those Infidels out of Hungary, and pursued 'em
to the very Frontiers of Macedon in Greece, where he gained a second Battle
over Carambeius General of the Troops of Asia, took him Prisoner, and drove his
Army into Mountains and inaccessible Places. The King was wounded in this
Action.

Herburt. de Fulstin. lib. 14. p. 172, etc.
Upon this occasion John Palcologus Emperor of Constantinople, the Pope, and
many other Complimented by Christian Princes on his Victory.
Christian Princes, sent Ambassadors to compliment him. Afterward Amurath,
under pretense of ransoming Carambeius, sent Ministers to treat of a Peace, but
Vladislaus would only agree to a Truce for ten Years. After this the Gentry of
Poland sent to their King Vladislaus to return among 'em; but he being advised
by several Christian Princes, especially the Pope who sent a Nuncio to him on
purpose, to break the Truce and continue the War, instead of complying with the
Poles Request, marched immediately with all the Troops he could get together,
into Bulgaria, and came to Nicopolis Capital of this Province, where Florus
Polon. lib. 3. cap. 2. p. 175.
Dromla or Dracula, Palatin of Moldavia, meeting him, he earnestly entreated
him to keep his Royal Promise with the Turks, tho Enemies to the Christian
Belief; but perceiving the King's inflexible Resolution to continue the War,
gave him 4000 Men under his own Son's Command. In the mean while Amurath, who
after the Truce agreed upon with Vladislaus went to conquer a certain People of
Asia, called Caramani, hearing of this great Army's marching against him,
turned his Forces, consisting, as Jovius relates, of about 80000 Men, to meet
'em, and near the Town of Varna fought 'em; where by his Camels frighting the
Polish and Hungarian Horse, together with the invincible Courage of his
Janissaries, he entirely defeated the Christian Army, and killed King Vladislaus
Killed and routed by the Turks.
in the Year 1445. Whereupon some body made a Satirical Epitaph upon this
unfortunate King, as follows.

Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 88.
Romulidae Cannas, ego Varnam Clade notavi:
Discite Mortales non temerare fidem.
Me nisi Pontifices jussissent rumpere Foedus,
Non ferret Scythicum Pannonis Ora Jugum.
Ever after this, the Turks always fortified themselves against the Christians,
who they thought could never keep either their Oaths or Word; and not long
after Mahomet the Great took Constantinople in the Year 1453, wherein
Constantin Paleologus, the last Christian Emperor of the East, was crowded to
death in one of the Gates. King Vladislaus leaving no Children, his Brother

Casimir IV. 1446.
CASIMIR, great Duke of Lithuania, was elected next, and crowned in the Year
1446, and reigned forty five Years. He married His Marriage.
the Princess Elizabeth, Daughter to the Emperor Albert II.

In the beginning of his Reign the Prussians threw off the heavy Yoke of the
Teutonic Order, and put themselves under Casimir's Protection. Assists the
Prussians against the Teutonic Knights.
Hereupon this King went in Person into Prussia to take their Allegiance and
Fidelity, where he likewise granted them many Privileges; who thereupon obliged
themselves, especially at Dantzic, to maintain the King and his Court for four
days, whenever he should please to come again in Person among 'em. In the mean
time the Teutonic Knights got together a strong Army in Bohemia and Germany,
with which they immediately marched against Casimir, and routed him before he
could execute his Designs of besieging Is routed by that Order.
Marienburg, and several other Towns which that Order had yet left in Prussia.
Casimir, not a little sensible of this Affront, to lose a Battle where he
himself was like to have been killed, called a Diet, and prevailed so far upon
the Gentry as to grant him half their Yearly Revenues to carry on the War
against the Teutonic Order. By which means after a long and obstinate Dispute,
he at last obliged 'em to accept of Articles of Peace, wherein the Pope's
Nuncio was Mediator. By this Agreement they were to restore to Poland all Tet
obtains an advantageous Peace.
Pomerania, the Territories of Culm and Michalow, with the Cities of
Marienburg, Stuma and Elbing; and were to be left in possession of the rest,
only on condition that their Great Master for ever after should be Prince and
Senator of Poland, and take Oath of Fidelity to the King. The Moldavians
likewise by their Hospodar desire Casimir's Protection against the Turks, and
offer to take an Oath to him as Vassals, and a Tributary Nation, which they
continued for a long while after.

His Issue.
This King had four Sons, whereof Vladislaus was first chosen King of Bohemia,
and afterward of Hungary; for this last Kingdom, after their King's Death, had
entreated Casimir to send one of his Sons to reign over them. Whereupon
Vladislaus, then King of Bohemia, marched speedily into Hungary with a small
Body, to prevent any of his Brothers pretending to that Crown: Nevertheless,
his Brother John Albert went soon after with another Army to oppose him, and
met and fought him; but Vladislaus having got the better, was crowned not long
after; yet he was kind to his Brother, and gave him some Towns in Silesia,
which then belonged to Bohemia.

Deputies first admitted to the Diet.
In the time of this King Casimir, the Deputies of the Provinces first appeared
at the Diet: For before, the King and Senators had the supreme Power of making
Laws. Lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 89.
Hartknoch says, that till this King's Reign the Latin Tongue was very rarely
spoken in Poland; for that when the King of Sueden had a certain Interview with
Casimir at Dantzic, neither Casimir nor any of his Court could discourse with
him in Latin, but were fain to be beholden to a Monk to do that Office for
them; which Casimir being much ashamed of, publicly commanded all his Officers
forthwith to set about the Study of that Language; from which time the Poles
have continued great Prosicients therein, nay, beyond any other Nation
whatsoever.

His Death.
This Prince died in the Year 1492, and lies buried at Cracow, having reigned
forty five Years, and lived sixty four.

John Albert. 1493.
JOHN ALBERT succeeded his Father Casimir, being thought the fittest, tho I do
not read he was the eldest of his Sons. He was crowned King in the Year 1493,
and reigned His Character, with that of the Valachians.
nine Years. This Prince was very ambitions, but withal unfortunate; for
designing to reduce the Valachians, who were then Vassals to Poland, and who,
according to the Condition they saw that Kingdom in, would refuse or pay
Obedience, and who would sometimes side with the Turks and Tartars to ravage
it: Florus Polon. lib. 3. cap. 4. p. 198.
He, the better to compass his Intentions, pretended to make War against the
Turk, and for that purpose marched with his Army through Valachia, as if he
designed nothing but to make his way into Turkey; but being once got into this
Country, he caused his Soldiers to pick a quarrel with the Valachians for not
providing them with Forage as they desired; which however was not an easy
matter to do for an Army of 80000 Men which he His Policy and Army defeated by
the Valachians.
had with him. Hereupon he besieges Sozisaw, one of their strongest Towns; but
the Inhabitants defended themselves so well, and Stephen their Hospodar so
fatigued the Besiegers by taking their Convoys and intercepting their
Provisions, that at last Albert was forced to raise the Siege, and return into
his own Country; when the Hospodar greedily pursuing him, destroyed great ^^art
of his Army in a Wood, where he had laid an Ambush. Soon after this the
Hospodar, to be farther revenged on the Poles, called to his Assistance the
Turks and Tartars, who all joining together, entered Poland with a prodigious
Army, and carried away about 100000 Captives, of which the greatest Part were
Russians. The Moldavians and Valachians quickly returned home, but the Turks
out of covetousness of Plunder, stayed till the great Frosts and Snow surpised
'em, when not being used to such excessive Cold as this Country is subject to,
above 40000 of them were frozen to death. Florus Polon. lib. 3. cap. 4. p. 201.
Some among 'em that escaped were forced to cut open their Horses bellies, and
thrust themselves into them to preserve their natural Heat. After this, Makes
Peace with the Valachians and Turks.
John Albert made peace with the Valachians, and Bajazet Emperor of the Turks.
Next he went in Person into Prussia to oblige Frederic Duke of Saxony, then
Great Master of the Teutonic Order, to take Oath of Fidelity to him, which he
had for some time refused, but died suddenly at Thorn before he could effect
His Death.
his design. Albert leaving no Children, the Diet thought fit to elect his
Brother

Alexander. 1501.
ALEXANDER, Great Duke of Lithuania, the better to renew their Alliance with
that Country. This Prince being proclaimed King, comes to Cracow, where by his
Brother Frederic, Cardinal and Archbishop of Gnesna, he was crowned in the Year
1501, and reigned only five Years; but the Archbishop Herburt. de Fulstin. lib.
19. p. 348. Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 90.
refused to do the like Office for his Queen Helena, because she was of the
Greek Church, being Daughter to John Great Duke of Muscovy; which Country are
all of that Persuasion. Soon after that he was crowned, his Father-in-Law, His
Wars.
the Great Duke, made War upon him, and besieged the City of Smolensko, Capital
of a large Province of the same Name; but Alexander coming in time to relieve
it, obliged the Muscovite to make Peace for six Years. In his time also the
Moldavians and Tartars made Irruptions into Poland, but were beaten back with
great Loss; insomuch that it is said, there were killed only of the Tartars in
that Action near 20000. The King was not in Person at this Victory, he then
lying sick at Vilna, Capital His Death.
of Lithuania, where he died soon after, and was buried in that City.

His Character.
Fulstin. lib. 20. p. 356.
He was of a middle Stature, had a long Visage and black Hair; was very strong
built, but exceeding dull-witted, and consequently but a little Talker. He
exceeded all his Brothers in Generosity, and was wont to delight much in
Musicians and such trifling Artists. Nevertheless, this his Liberality was
generally esteemed but Prodigality, insomuch that some were so hold as to say,
That he died in time, or else both Poland and Lithuania might have been
lavished away. To prevent the like pernicious Generosity for the future,
Hartkn. l. 1. c. 2. p. 90.
the Diet made a Law, calling it Statutum Alexandrinum, by which they revoked
all this King's profuse Gifts. Alexander leaving no Children, and but two
Brothers, the Archbishop of Gnesna dying before him,

Sigismund I. 1507.
SIGISMUND was preferred to Vladislaus, King of Hungary and Bohemia, either
because the Gentry were more affected to him, being bred among 'em, or by
reason they were afraid of Vladislaus's great Power. He was elected at
Petricovia in the Year 1507, and reigned forty one Years.

When Sigismund left his Government of Lithuania to come into Poland, he
substituted one Glinski, a great ^^avourite of the late King's, in his room.
Florus Polon. lib. 3. cap. 6. p. 213, etc.
This Palatin having great Authority among the Lithuanians, became so ambitious
as to think of making himself Absolute; which concealing for a good while, at
length he agreed with Basilius Great Duke of Muscovy, to allow him his share of
that Province in case he would afford him his Assistance; which Proposal the
Great Duke being pleased with, readily consented to, and with all Expedition
dispatched away an Army to Glinski: but as such great Designs are not Defeats a
great Conspiracy and Army.
to be carried on without great Noise and Suspicions, Sigismund came soon to
hear of this treacherous Enterprise; whereupon drawing up all his Forces to
oppose the intended Invasion, he meets and defeats their Army, ravages and
destroys their Country, and at last obliges them to sue for Peace, which he not
without some difficulty granted.

His other Wars.
Afterward the Valachians and Tartars making Incursions into Russia and
Poland, he forces them to return home with great Loss. The Muscovites likewise
making War upon him a second time, and taking the City of Smolensko, with all
the Country about it, he beat their Armies in several Engagements, and having
killed in all above 30000 of their Men, retook Smolensko, and made 'em accept
of a Peace the second time for five Years. He soon after His Marriage.
married Buona Sforza, Daughter to John Galeatio Duke of Milan. Afterward he
made His War with the Teutonic Order.
War with the Knights of the Teutonic Order, the reason of which was, because
Albert Marquess of Brandenburgh his Sister's Son, and then Great Master,
refused to take an Oath as it was agreed in the late Wars. Hereupon Sigismund
took from him some Towns, and had great Advantages over him in several
Engagements; but however Albert having considerable Succors sent him from
Germany, prolonged the War for a good while in Prussia.

About this time Martin Luther's Doctrine came to be known in these Parts, and
most of the Citizens of Florus Polon. lib. 3. cap. 6. p. 226.
Dantzic embraced it; for which at first the King was very severe with them,
but at length, fearing that to preserve their Religion they might side with the
Teutonic Order against him, he granted them Liberty of Conscience. All this
while that Order made vigorous Resistance, and with equal Loss on both sides,
fatigued the Polish Army, till at last it was agreed by both Parties to make
the Emperor Charles V. and Lewis King of Hungary Arbitrators; who determined
that Sigismund should relinquish to the Marquess of Brandenburg all the Eastern
part of Prussia (which is above half of that great Province) and that he and
his Heirs should Ended by Mediation.
for ever enjoy it (as they have actually done ever since) without any
disturbance from Sigismund; but the Marquess of Brandenburg, as Duke of
Prussia, for himself and his Heirs was to take an Oath of Fidelity to the Kings
of Poland, and to send to their Service every Year in time of War a hundred
Horse ready equipt, which those Kings were to maintain at their own Charges
from the time they went out of Prussia.

At this time the House of Austria was not a little jealous of the exorbitant
Power and vast Dominions of the Family of Jagello: for not only Sigismund
possessed Poland, the great Dutchies of Lithuania, Smolensko and Severia, and
likewise all the Countries between the Euxine and Baltic Seas; but also his
Nephew Lewis, Son of Vladislaus, was King of Hungary, Bohemia and Silesia,
insomuch that they secretly raised several Enemies against them; whereupon the
Muscovites, Moldavians and Tartars came a third time to molest Poland, but were
forced to withdraw after having done some Mischief. About this time Solomon the
Great, Emperor of the Turks, made War with Hungary, and gained the famous
Battle of Mobac, where King Lewis and the flower of his Army were slain, and
the better part of Hungary subjected to the Turk. This King Lewis left only one
Daughter, How the Emperor came by Hungary, Bohemia and Silesia.
which was married to Ferdinand of Austria, whereby that House came into
possession of the Kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia, as likewise of Silesia, all
which it enjoys to this day. Sigismund died not long after the Council of Trent
begun, being 82 Years old, and having reigned about 40 with great Success.

Paulus Jovius says that in this King's time there were three Heroes, viz. the
Emperor Charles V. Francis I. King of France, and Sigismund I. King of Poland,
each of which deserved alone to govern the Universe, had they not happened to
live at the same time.

His Character, Marriages, and Issue.
This King was as famous in Peace as War, being adorned with more Virtues than
any Prince of Poland before him. Besides which Perfections of his Mind, he had
also great Strength of Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 90.
Body; for he is reported to have been accustomed to snap Horseshoes asunder,
and to have broke the strongest Ropes with his Hands only, as I am credibly
informed the Elector of Saxony, at present King of Poland, has often done. He
had two Wives, Barbara Daughter of Stephen Woievod of Transylvania, by whom he
had one Daughter named Hedwigis, married to Joachim, Marquess of Brandenburg;
and another Wife Buona Sforza, mentioned before, who brought him four
Daughters, which were Isabel, married to John King of Hungary, Sophia to the
Duke of Brunswick, and Ann and Catherine, both successively to the King of
Sweden; and one Son Sigismund Augustus, who succeeded his Father in the Kingdom
of Poland.

A false Christ.
Guagnini Tom. 1. p. 125.
Martin Bielski, a Polander, who writ the Annals of his Country in his Native
Language, mentions, that in the beginning of this King's Reign, a certain
Gentleman named James Melstinski Starosta of Brezina, being not a little beside
himself, pretended to be Christ descended again upon the Earth; and
consequently, together with one Peter Zatorski, a Citizen of Cracow, and eleven
others of the same stamp, set forward through diverse Cities and Villages,
canting and imposing upon the common People all along as they went; sometimes
he pretended to raise the Dea^^, which he seemingly effected by help of (...)
Compact with some of his fellow Impostors. Next he worked several pretended
Miracles by Legerdemain, as by finding things in places where it was almost
impossible for them to be, which nevertheless he had prudently taken care to
lay there before, as Fish in Bogs, and the like. Afterward he went to the
Monastery of Cestochow, where it seems he was not known. Here he caused one of
his Followers to pretend to be possessed with the Devil, who thereupon being
immediately seized on was led by the Monks to the Altar at a time when a great
Concourse of People were gathered together to hear Mass; but the Impostor
having provided himself a large Coat with several deep and winding Plights, as
likewise of diverse small Pebbles which he had wrapped up in his Sa^^, broke
furiously from those that held him, and immediately leaped upon the Altar,
where seizing upon all the Offerings, he soon conveyed them into these obscure
Folds of his Coat, when the Monks going to search him with great Violence,
found only the Stones in his Sash, which they believing to be the Money
transmuted by the Power of the Devil, immediately fell to exorcising the
Stones; but finding the same Species still remain, they threw down their Books
in great Indignation, and cried, Talem Daemonem nunquam experti sumus, abite
cum eo ad omnes Daemones. By help of the Money they had thus got by this Cheat,
they traveled all over Silesia, and at last came to a Gentleman's House where
they told his Wife, that Christ and his Apostles were come to visit her, and
that she must make some Offering, and her Soul should be saved; to which the
Woman replied, that her Husband was from home, and therefore she could not
possibly comply with their Requests: whereupon they demanded of her, if she had
any Linen to sacrifice; she answered, she had, and presently fetched them down
a small parcel, which they receiving from her hands, told her, they would keep
that for themselves, and Christ should bless her, and increase her Store:
whereupon, enquiring farther if she had any more, she showed them another
Parcel; but they being about to do the like by that as they did by the other,
she told them, her Husband not being within, she durst by no means part with
it: which Answer displeasing these Impostors, they privily slid a piece of
lighted Coal among the Linen, which the Woman not knowing any thing of, took
the parcel and locked it up in her Chest as before, but which not long after
bursting out into a Flame, first burnt the Chest, and then the House. The
Husband coming home and finding his House on fire, inquired into the cause of
it; whereupon his Wife answered, that because she had treated Christ
disrespectfully who came to visit her, this Judgment had befallen them. At this
the Man flying out into a Passion, cried, This was an Impostor, and no Christ;
wherefore calling his Neighbors together, they pursued them close till they
heard of them in a Village hard by, which the false Savior being informed of,
said to that Apostle of his, named Peter, Peter, now is my Hour come, and the
time wherein I am to drink that bitter Draught approaches, which I have no
other way to avoid but by leaping out at this Window: To which Peter replied, I
also will follow my Master's Example, that I may live. Whereupon they both
leaped out at the Window, and the rest of the Apostles fled also their several
ways; but the deluded Countrymen closely pursuing them, at length overtook
them, and surrounding them, with Clubs, Scourges, and the like, laid them on
most unmercifully, crying all the while, Prophesy to us, O Christ, with thy
Disciples, in what Wood did these Clubs and Scourges grow. By this severe
Discipline these Impostors having been totally reformed, confessed that it was
no small Task to imitate Christ and his Apostles.

Before his Death, Sigismund got the Diet to elect his Son

Sigismund II. 1548.
SIGISMUND II. surnamed afterward Augustus, who was crowned in the Year 1548,
and reigned to 1576. Florus Polon. lib. 3. cap. 7. p. 238, etc. Guagnini Rerum
Polon. Tom. 1. p. 128, etc.
The Diet was very angry His Marriage displeases the Diet.
with him, that after his Coronation he married the Lady Radzivil Widow to a
Woievod without their Consent, which is against the Constitution of that
Kingdom; but this Queen dying soon after without Children, they agreed to his
Marriage with the Princess Catharine, another Widow of the House of Austria,
which was before married to Francis Duke of Mantua.

In his time Livonia, which is a great Province that lies between Prussia,
Swedeland, Muscovy and Lithuania, whereof part belonged to the Teutonic Order,
and part to the Archbishop of Riga, being the whole under Protection of the
Empire, was like to have been overrun by the Great Duke of Muscovy, who
brought thither a powerful Army for that purpose, and took most of its Towns.
Whereupon the Inhabitants finding they were not able alone to resist so great a
Force, sent to the Emperor Ferdinand for Relief, who, being then busied in
other Wars, answered, he could spare 'em none; but gave 'em leave to have
recourse to whose Protection they thought fit. Some therefore among them put
themselves under Eric King of Sweden; but the Archbishop of Riga, and the
Great Master of the Teutonic Order, with all the Nobility and Gentry, requested
the Assistance of Sigismund King of Poland, who would by no means grant it
them, unless they would submit themselves entirely to his Obedience, and take
Oath of Fidelity accordingly; next that they should give up all their Towns and
Country, and lastly, annex Livonia for ever to Poland. To these Terms the
Livonians were neither ready nor willing to submit; however, at length they
thought it better to condescend to these Proposals, than be forced to accept of
worse from the irresistible Fury of the Muscovites; and therefore, Livonia
united to Poland.
having maturely deliberated on the matter, consented that Gothotred Ketler, a
Gentleman of Westphalia, then Great Master and General of their Army, should
publicly abdicate his Mastership, and give up to Nicholas Radzivil Palatin of
Vilna, deputed for that purpose by the King, the City and Citadel of Riga, and
declare Livonia from thenceforward subject to Poland, which was accordingly
done; and at the same time, by Order of the King his Master, Radzivil
proclaimed First Duke of Curland and Semigallia.
Gothotred Ketler Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Duke of Curland and Semigallia, which are two Provinces of Livonia; and next
day by further Orders, declared him Viceroy and Governor of Livonia. These
two Provinces of Curland and Semigallia Ketler's Posterity have enjoyed ever
since by Hereditary Succession, but still as Vassals to Poland.

Upon this Agreement the King declares His Wars with the Muscovites.
War immediately against the Muscovites, who were then very strong, having just
before taken from the Tartars the Kingdoms of Astracan and Casan; nevertheless
he defeated their Army upon the Frontiers of Lithuania, and forced 'em to
retire into their own Country, but they soon returned a second time, commanded
by their Czar, John Basilowits, tho with as little success as before.

Florus Polon. lib. 3. cap. 7. p. 255.
This Czar is reported to have been a most cruel Tyrant, it having been his
chief Diversion to invent new ways of torturing, insomuch that it is said, that
to boil and roast both his own Subjects and the Prisoners he took, was the
least Punishments he made 'em suffer. It would be both tedious and horrid to
hear all the Tortures he used toward Men, Women and Children. He was wont to
recompense such as invented new ways of Torture; but these his inhuman
Cruelties did so exasperate his Subjects, that Sigismund found no great
difficulty to force him to a Peace.

After this Sigismund sent a small Army into Valachia, to support Bogdan in his
Intentions to make himself Prince thereof; but the Valachians, assisted by the
Turks, soon obliged the Poles to return home.

Lutheran Religion propagated.
Neugebaver. lib. 8. Hist. Polon. p. 572, etc.
In this King's Reign the Lutheran Religion got great ground in Poland, the
cause of which was a Quarrel, upon account of a Whore, between the Courtiers
and Scholars, which induced the latter to retire into Germany, where they first
imbibed these Principles, and which upon their return they not a little
propagated in their own Country. The first Person of note that embraced this
Religon, was Johannes a Lasco Palatin of Lanschet, who in the Year 1540 left
his Government, and went into Holland and England; and at his return, converted
several to that Persuasion. All this while the King gave disturbance to none
that abjured the Roman Faith, but rather Sarnitius lib. 8. Annal. Polon. ad An.
1552. p. 394.
favored them, having heard several of their Preachers in his Court,
particularly two, Johannes Cosminis and Laurencius Prasnitius, which occasioned
most of the Bishops to be inclined to that Belief.

Here cannot well be omitted a great Escape King Sigismund had at Koningsberg
in Ducal Prussia, whither being invited by Albert Marquess of Brandenburg, and
at his Reception saluted with all the Cannon, by negligence of a Gunner a
Bullet was left in one of them, which when fired came so near the King as to
dash out one Neugebaver lib. 8. p. 585, etc.
Wisnoviec's Brains, who marched just behind him.

The Commonwealth of Babina.
In Sigismund's Sarnitius lib. 8. Annal. Polon. p. 395.
time flourished the jocular Commonwealth of Babina, consisting of several
merry Gentlemen of Lublin, who met together at a place called Babin to exercise
their Wits upon all occasions. This Meeting, to procure the greater respect for
their Proceedings, they modeled into the form of the Government of the
Kingdom, electing a King and Senate, together with diverse Officers and
Magistrates. As whenever any among them talked out of his Sphere, and meddled
with matters that did no ways belong to him, they created him an Archbishop or
Palatin; such a one as made a great many Blunders, and delighted in
Contradictions, they chose for their Speaker or Chancellor; and whoever boasted
too inordinately of his Valor, they preferred to be their General, passing
immediately a Patent for that purpose, and which was to be presented to him
with a great deal of Submission by the Bragadochios of a Minor Character; but
if the Person elect refused this Command, they persecuted him with hissing and
hooting till he had accepted it. Thus they created several other Senators of
different Qualities, whence it followed that in short time they became
judicious Censurers, wary Talkers, modest Observers, humble Performers, and
true Relaters of any Exploit. Whenever they admitted any of their Society, they
first inquired into his Abilities, and required a Specimen of his Parts, and
this to determine the better what Office or Employment he was fittest to
execute in their Commonwealth, they having several others of an inferior Rank
besides those we have already mentioned: As if any one introduced an
impertinent Discourse of his Hounds or his Hawks, him they immediately made
either their Huntsinan or their Faulkoner: Likewise if a Man run out too much
upon Religion, he was constituted their Chaplain; and where any dealt too much
in Matters of Controversy, he was forthwith ordained their Inquisitor: lastly,
where a Man was too exuberant in his Discourse about Horses, or Household
Affairs, him they either promoted to be their Master of the Horse, or their
Majordomo. By these means in a little time they reformed most of the Abuses and
Indecorums crept into the Government of Poland, and proved than the force of
Satyr is of no less benefit than that of Oratory. At length this pleasant
Constitution came to the King's Ear, who was often delighted with hearing of
their Transactions; and one day enquiring after their dignified Members, he
asked, whether they had any King among them? to which the Starosta of Babina,
who was most celebrated for his pleasant Countenance and jocular Humor,
replied, Far be it from us, most Serene Monarch, that we should make choice of
any other King while your Majesty is living. Which Answer so extremely pleased
Sigismund that he laughed heartily, and was so far from showing any signs of
Dislike, that by several Expressions which dropped from him he occasioned great
Mirth in all the Company. Afterward there arising some grave Disputes in this
Society about the Antiquity of the Monarchies of Persia, Greece and Rome, a
certain merry Fellow started up and cried, What makes you thus boast,
Gentlemen, of the Antiquity and Extent of these Monarchies, when ours of Babina
is much more ancient and of wider Bounds than them all? What says David? Omnis
Homo Mendax, all Men are Liars; wherefore the whole Earth must consequently
have been comprehended within the Limits of our Jurisdiction from all Ages. His
Opinion was unanimously received with Applause. This Society further boasts of
having always had Privileges and Immunities from Emperors and Kings: but still
such as were too severe in their Reflections, were not to be admitted of this
Republic. The place where this Assembly met the Members termed Gelda, being
the word that the Dantzickers use for a Tavern, and which the Poles apply to a
merry Company of witty Fellows.

His Death.
Sigismund died of a Chronical Distemper at Knyssin in the Consines of
Lithuania, etc, and left no Children, but had two Sisters surviving, Catherine
and Ann, the former of which was first married to John Duke of Finland, and
then to the King of Sweden; she was Mother to Sigismund III. who was afterward
King of Sweden and Poland. Ann lived a long while a Maid till she was married
to Stephen Batori Prince of Transylvania, and afterward King of Poland.

Jagellonic Family extinct.
After this Sigismund's Death the Male Race of the Jagellonic Family was quite
extinct.

I am afraid I have almost tired your Lordship's Patience with this prolix
Narrative of the second and third Classes of the Kings of Poland, yet I can
safely aver that I have been as concise as the Subject Matter would hear, since
I have run through the Course of about 800 Years; where your Lordship may
observe, that tho these Princes could never prevail with their Subjects to
declare their Kingdom Hereditary, yet they had sometimes Influence sufficient
over them, to cause them to elect their Children for their Successors while
they themselves were yet alive: And likewise sometimes the great Service they
had rendered their Country, obliged the Poles in Gratitude to advance their
Issue to the Throne after their Deaths: Besides, the natural Affection which
this Country always bore to the Royal Family, inclined them to elect the next
Relation to the deceased King. But notwithstanding after Sigismund the Second's
Death, tho there were several of the Family of Piastus and Jagello remaining
alive, both in Poland and Silesia, yet the Poles, for fear so long and so
uninterrupted a Succession of Princes of the same Line might subject them to a
Despotic Monarchy, as they almost were in Sigismund's time, resolved to choose
Kings out of other Families, as they effectually did afterward out of France,
Transylvania and Sweden, which it would be too tedious to give your Lordship a
Relation of; and therefore to ease your Impatience, I will subscribe my self,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most Obedient Humble Servant, B. C.

LETTER III.
To his Grace WILLIAM Duke of Devonshire, Lord Steward of His Majesty's
Household.
Of the Succession and Remarkable Actions of the fourth Class of the Kings of
Poland, consisting of mixed Families, from the Year 1574, to 1674.

My LORD;
THE great Esteem and true Respect which your eminent Qualities and gallant
Behavior, both beyond Sea and at home, command from all those who have heard
of your Name, made me ambitious to give your Grace, in this Account of Poland,
a Testimony of mine, and congratulate my self in the Honor of being known to
so great a Person. The Subject, my Lord, I thought most suitable to so great a
Mind and Genius as yours, is a Relation of Heroic Actions, I mean the Lives of
the Kings of Poland, from the last of the Jagellonick Family, to the Election
of the late King John Sobieski, comprehending the space of a hundred Years.

By Sigismund the Second's Death, the Great and Renowned Family of Jagello came
to be extinct as to Males; for he left no Children, and had only two Sisters,
Catherine and Ann. The former was first married to John Duke of Finland, and
next to John III. King of Sueden, having been Mother to Sigismund III. who was
afterward both King of Poland and Sueden. The latter Ann lived a Maid for a
considerable while, till Stephen Batori, Prince of Transylvania, being elected
King of Poland, married her, but had no Issue by her.

A Diet called.
The ABp of Gnesna, James Vchanski, having notify'd the late King's Death to
all the Gentry, called a Diet after the usual manner, to Elect another;
whereupon several Candidates appearing, they all had their different Parties
and Friends in the Kingdom. The chief Pretenders were Ernest of Austria the
Emperor's Son, John III. King of Sueden, the Great Duke of Muscovy, and Henry
of Valois, Brother to Charles IX. of France, besides several Natives of the
Country. After a long deliberation, they pitched upon

Henry of Valois. 1574.
HENRY of Valois Duke of Anjou, and sent Heidenstein Rerum Polon. lib. 1. p.
30. col. 2.
Adam Conarsky Bishop of Posnan, and Albert Laski Palatin of Siradia, in
quality of Ambassadors, together with several other Senators, into France, to
bring him into his Kingdom, after having agreed to the following Articles; to
the performance of which, both the King of France and his Brother the King of
Poland, took a solemn Oath. The Articles were as follows:

Imprimis, That Henry of Valois should transport all his Effects and Annual
Revenues in France into Poland.

2. That the King of France should pay Sigismund the late King's Debts with his
own Money.

3. That the French King should maintain a hundred young Polish Noblemen at his
Court, and fifty in other Places.

4. And lastly, That he should build a Fleet in the Baltic Sea, and help the
Poles to carry on the War against the Muscovites.

There was another Article the King would by no means consent to till he came
into Poland, and that was,

5. That he should marry the Princess Ann, Sister to Sigismund late King of
Poland.

King Henry having thus chiefly satisfied the Conditions, he set forth from
Paris about the beginning of October, in the Year 1576, and passed through
Lorain and Germany, directly to Posnan in Poland; whence he soon after His
Coronation.
went, and was crowned at Cracow the 21st of February 1577: but in four Months
time after his Coronation, receiving Letters from France that the King his
Brother was Heidenstein lib. 1. p. 62. col. 1.
dead without Issue; and being begged to return to enjoy his Right, he
communicated those Letters to the Senate, acquainting them withal, that it was
necessary he should return into France to prevent Civil Wars, and maintain his
Title to that Crown. But fearing lest the Poles might have detained him, (as I
have often heard them say they would certainly have done) on the 18th of March
he stole away, Abdicates Poland.
and rid Post through Silesia and Germany into Italy, and thence to France. The
King being missed next morning, they sent several Senators after him, who
overtook him in Silesia, and begged of him to return, and not abandon a Nation
so shamefully which had elected him with such Universal Affection; yet nothing
could prevail upon him, but he however promised, that as soon as he had settled
his Affairs in France, he would return among them; and moreover acknowledged,
that he was extremely obliged to the Polish Nation for their Kindness and
Good Will toward him. Hereupon the Senate afterward Polish Embassy into
France proves fruitless.
sent two Ambassadors into France to entreat him to return, which the King had
several times a mind to comply with, for he loved that Nation extremely well;
but his French Subjects still prevailed upon him to change his Mind,
representing to him the many Dangers he would expose France to by such a
Journey.

Thus the Poles having lost all Hopes of having their King again, the Primate
Vchanski calls a Diet at Warsaw the 4th of November following, to proceed to a
new Election, where two Princes were principally proposed, which Candidates for
a new Election.
were the Emperor Maximilian, and Stephen Batori Prince of Transylvania; but
they could never unanimously agree which of the two to choose, and therefore
the Diet was dissolved. Maximilian's Party sent Ambassadors to acquaint him
that he was chosen, and that they expected he should speedily come and be
crowned, while Batori's Faction did the like for him, and invited him to come
forthwith into Poland. Hereupon

Stephen Batori. 1577.
BATORI made more haste than the Emperor to comply with their Request; for he
immediately left Transylvania, and passing through Valachia and Russia, quickly
arrived at Cracow; where, on the 18th of April 1577, he was received and
crowned by Karnkovius Bishop of Vladislaw, the Archbishop of Gnesna being for
Maximilian; who yet afterward, rather than he would undergo a Siege in his
Castle of Lowitz, quietly submitted to Batori.

In the mean time the Emperor was more slow, resolving to come with an Army to
dispute his Right; but his Party growing less and less every day, at length the
Senate sent Ambassadors to acquaint him, that his Slowness and Indifference had
superseded his Right to the Crown, it being resolved to be given to him that
arrived first. Hereupon the Emperor, who was then at the Diet at Ratisbon,
ordered the Ambassadors to be put in Prison, and forthwith determined to go for
Poland himself, but was prevented by a dangerous Sickness; of which he soon
after died, October. 12.

Batori, it is true, was chiefly indebted to his Merit for the Crown of Poland;
yet at the same time the Family of Zborowski was not a little assisting to him,
occasioned by his civil Reception of one Samuel of that Family, who had been
banished his Country for striking John Teczynski Castellan of Wounitz in the
King's Court. Whereupon Samuel employed all his Interest for Batori, for at the
time of the Election he writ to several of his Relations and Friends to Vote
for that Prince; but it being the Temper of the Polanders never to think
themselves sufficiently recompensed after they have done a Service, Batori, tho
he sought all he could to oblige that Family, yet could not keep them from
proving his most inveterate Enemies, by reason that he would not submit to
govern according to their Humors: which not long after cost Florus Polon. lib.
4. p. 340.
Samuel his Life by a formal Proceeding in a Court of Justice.

His Rise.
Batori was first, as I find him, a private Gentleman in Transylvania; but at
length by his Merit and Valor came to have great Authority among the People of
that Country, for he was once sent Ambassador to the Emperor's Court, where
he managed Affairs to the satisfaction and advantage of both Parties; so that
after Prince John Sigismund, Son to the Sister of Sigismund II. of Poland,
died, they elected him Prince of Transylvania.

After he was crowned King of Poland by Karnkouski, whom he made Archbishop of
Gnesna, he endeavored to appease the Disorders among the great People, and to
win the Affections of the Malcontents, which at last he effected by marrying
the Princess Ann, His Marriage.
Daughter to Sigismund I. and Sister to Sigismund II. by whom he had no
Children.

The Dantzickers reduced.
Florus Polon. lib. 4. p. 302. Sleidan. lib. 65. p. 325, etc.
About this time the Emperor fomented a Sedition among the Inhabitants of
Dantzic, which induced them to refuse to take an Oath of Fidelity to Batori,
and moreover to raise an Army and stand upon their Defense. But the Senate of
Poland having declared 'em Rebels, their Army was soon defeated, and Town
besieged; and at last they were obliged to comply by Mediation of the Electors
of Saxony and Brandenburg, and Lantgrave of Hesse. The chief Cause of this War
was, that the Citizens of Dantzic pretended not to be subject to the Republic
of Poland, but only to the King; yet notwithstanding this Treaty, they were
forced to submit themselves to both.

No Courts of Justice.
Florus Polon. lib. 4. p. 306.
Hitherto there were no Courts of Judicature in Poland, all Differences being
decided by the King and Council. But the Gentry finding this way of Procedure
too tedious to the Nation, and too burdensome to the King, obtained leave of
Batori to erect two Courts of Judicature, which they commonly call Tribunals;
one at Petricovia, and the other at Lublin, where all Civil Causes were to be
determined absolutely without any Appeal to Court, unless upon any Matter
relating to the State; in which Case, the last Decision was to be reserved to
the King and Diet together.

Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 102, etc.
This King was more severe in his Punishments than the Polish Laws allowed, yet
he molested none on account of Religion, always affirming that three Things God
had wholly reserved to himself, which were, to make something out of nothing,
to foretell Things to come, and to govern and direct Consciences. This Prince,
like Sigismund I. very much encouraged speaking Latin in his Dominions, being
reported to have said often to the Gentlemen's Sons, Discite Isatine, nam unum
ex vobis aliquando faciam Mosci Pan, (a great Lord.) Whereby the Youth being
all in Hopes, practiced that Language with great Diligence, which very much
contributed toward the Increase of Arts and Sciences in this Kingdom. When
Sigismund I. sent the Bishop of Varmia his Ambassador to Vienna, the Emperor
was surpised to hear even the Polish Coachmen speak Latin fluently. Also after
Sigismund the Second's Death, when Ambassadors were sent to bring Henry of
Valois into Poland, the French wondered that not one of all their Train but
spoke this Language with great Address.

This King, in the beginning of his Reign, was like to have been overrun by
the Muscovites; for they had so great Advantages over the Poles, that they took
several Towns from them in a Dutchies of Severia, Smolensko and Lithuania. In
these Wars the Muscovites were His Wars.
not a little politic, for they took occasion to invade the Poles, either when
they had Wars abroad, or Disturbances at home; but at last King Batori having
appeased his own intestine Jars, and made Peace with his Neighbors, by the
concurrence of a general Diet declared War against the Muscovites, and poured
in upon 'em with such Vigor and Success, that in three Years time he re-took
all his own Towns, and besides carried the War into the very heart of their
Country, plundering and destroying wherever he came. In this Expedition he got
from them above twenty great Cities and Provinces, such as Polotia, Sokola,
Sussa, Krasna, Vsviata, Sitna, Jeseriscia, Kossiano, Nescerda, all the Duchy
of Plotia, Lukis, Neuela, Zavolotia, Ostrovia, etc. All this put the poor
Muscovites into such a fright that they immediately dispatched an Bizardiere,
p. 59.
Ambassador to the Pope, to give him hopes, that if he could prevail upon the
Poles to withdraw their Army out of their Country, and make an honorable Peace
with 'em, they would all submit to the Roman Church.

This your Grace may imagine soon put the Holy Father upon a pious Stratagem;
for he sent his Nuncio Possevinus to assure the Czar, that he would employ all
his Interest in his behalf. Whereupon the Poles, having besieged Pleskow, the
strongest Town in Muscovy, with ill success; and moreover, having lost above
forty thousand Men during the War, at length, through the prudent Management of
Possevinus, 15 of Jan. 1582.
they agreed to a Suspension of Arms for ten Years; and farther, that the King
of Poland should restore to Muscovy all the Provinces and Towns he had taken in
this War; and that, on the other side, the Czar should give up to the King all
Livonia: yet the Czar made no Alteration in his Greek Religion, as he had made
the Pope believe he designed to do. Thus ended the War with Muscovy, which was
like to have proved so fatal to that Country.

Bizardiere Hist. des Dietes, p. 59, etc.
The Tartars durst not make any Incursions into Poland during his Reign; and
their Cham having sent Ambassadors thither to demand the Tribute formerly paid
them for Transylvania, he dismissed their Embassy with a great deal of
Indignation, declaring he would pay Tribute to no Man. The Turk likewise showed
great Deference for this Prince, for he never made any Hostilities in
Transylvania while Batori governed there; but his Nephew being elected Prince
of that Country, the Port would have augmented their Tribute; but Batori
espousing his Cause by an Embassy to the Grand Seignior, the Port chose rather
to be contented with little than to hazard the losing of all by disobliging so
powerful a Prince.

All that huge Tract of Land, above three hundred Miles long from East to West,
and above a hundred broad from South to North, was for fifty Years before in
possession of the Poles. It is called by one general Name Vkraina, Ukraina
Whence so called.
which, in the Selavonian Language, signifies a Ibid.
Frontier, serving for Bounds betwixt them, the Turks and Tartars. This vast
and fertile Country is divided into two great Provinces, Volhynia and Podolia.
Of Volhynia, the capital Town is Kiovia, built on the Borysthenes, which was
formerly, as they say, one of the largest in Europe. It anciently belonged to
the Dukes of Russia, but now is entirely ruined between the Turks and Tartars.
The capital Town of Podolia is Caminiec, a fortified City built on a Rock. The
Inhabitants of Vkraina Inhabitants termed Cosacks.
are commonly called Heidenstein Rerum Polon. lib. 9. p. 326.
Cosacks, which in the Sclavonian Language signifies Robbers. At first they
were Peasants that came from Russia and other neighboring Countries, settling
in the Islands of the River Boristhenes, and who afterward spread all over
Vkraina, and lived on Robbery; for they used to make Inroads into Tartary and
Turkey, plunder Trebisond and Sinope, and ravage even up to the Gates of
Constantinople. They also used to pirate on the Black Sea, and have been very
useful to the Poles when they were engaged in War against the Infidels. I can
compare 'em to no People better than to the Miquelets of Spain, or Highlanders
of Scotland.

Chevalier Hist. de Cosaques, p. 3.
King Stephen, to make this People more serviceable to the Crown of Poland, put
'em Reduced to a Discipline.
under a good Discipline, ordered 'em Officers and a General; and moreover,
gave 'em the Town of Techtimoravia upon the River Boristhenes, which they made
a Magazine, as also the Place of Residence for their Governors, to be a
Bulwark against the Irruptions of the Tartars, who frequently infested them. He
endowed 'em likewise with many Privileges; for all which they afterward did
him considerable Services.

It will not here be amiss to give your Grace some farther Account of this
People, who are often much talked of, and yet at the same time but very little
known.

Guerre Civili di Polon. lib. 1. p. 7.
Whence their Name.
Alberto Vimina in his Civil Wars of Poland says, it is certain that they have
their Name from the Sclavonian Word Coza, which signifies a Goat; and this
either because they were wont to be clothed with Garments of Goats Hair, or
that they lived like Goat-herds in Huts; or else by reason that they skipt
about like Goats, and found no Country of too difficult Access for them.

Extent of their first Dominions.
The Country they first possessed was not above eighteen Leagues on either side
of the Borysthenes, not far from the Place where Ovid was sent into Banishment,
and where they affirm is a Castle still that goes by the Name of Ovidoua, where
Ovid may be supposed to have been buried: This Vimina says he does not at all
discredit, the Country agreeing with a Passage of Ovid in his Elegies writ to
Rufinus.

Non Ager hic Pomum, non dulces educat uvas;
Non salices Ripa: robora monte virent:
Neve fretum lauds terra magis, aequora semper
Ventorum rabie, solibus orba tument.
And the Fierceness of the People described by Ovid in another place, increases
his Opinion.

Maxima pars hominum, nec te pulchorrima curat
Roma, nec Ausonii Militis Arma timet.
Notwithstanding all this, we must not pretend to derive this Modern People
from Antiquity, for it is certain they were at first a Body of Vagabonds that
fled from Justice into this Country, where they lived only upon fishing and
hunting, and at last, as now, upon Piracy and Robbery.

Their present Extent.
Hist. des Cosaques, p. 26, etc.
The present Extent of their Country is much larger than formerly, for now it
reaches 100 Leagues in length, and above 40 in breadth. They report the Grass
here generally grows so high, that a Man on Horseback is easily hid under it.
This Country abounds so with all sorts of Grain, that the Inhabitants know not
what to do with it, their Rivers being shallow, and therefore not capable to
transport it to other places. They have also all sorts of Beasts, Fish and
Fowl, with most other Necessaries, except Wine and Salt, whereof the first
comes from Hungary, Transylvania, Valachia and Moldavia; and the second is
fetched from the Mines of Poland.

Their Buildings,
Beauplan. Descript. d' Ukraine, p. 3.
The Houses of this Country are generally of Wood, built in like manner as in
Muscovy and Poland, and rarely above one Story high. The Walls of their Towns
are most commonly made of Earth kept up with Stakes and Planks, such being most
proper to resist the force of Cannon.

Character,
Hist. des Cosques, p. 32.
The Inhabitants of Vkraina are for the most part robust and strong, generous,
and great Despisers of Covetousness, inconceivable Lovers of Liberty, and
impatient under the mildest Slavery: They are likewise indefatigable, bold and
brave, but withal excessive Drunkards, treacherous Friends, and perfidious
Enemies: Their common Employments are Hunting and Fishing, and they are
indifferently skilled in all the necessary Arts of Peace and War; but what they
excel most in is, the preparing Saltpetre, with which they furnish several
parts of Europe. They are moreover excellent in making Gunpowder.

The Peasants of this and the Neighboring Countries are very Slaves, being
forced to work three or four days in a Week for their Lords gratis, and to pay
besides several rigorous Duties; but still this is nothing, for their Lords
Power extends not only over their Goods, but also their Lives; wherefore it
cannot be wondered at if these miserable Wretches have often rebelled, and
defended their Liberty with great Obstinacy.

Religion.
Their Religion is generally the Greek Persuasion, which they received in the
Year 942, under the Reign of Vlodomir Prince of Russia; yet the greatest part
of the Gentry profess either the Roman or Reformed Religion. These Greek
Principles extend all over Muscovy, Moldavia, Valachia, Turkey and Persia. The
Cosack Priests are called Pops, which in their Language signifies Guides.

Their Fasts are very frequent and rigid, for then they not only abstain from
Flesh, but also from Butter, Milk, Cheese, Eggs, etc. feeding only on Herbs,
Pulse, Roots, and the like. There are some among them so excessive devout, that
they will never eat Bread, nor drink Water but on Saturdays and Sundays. The
Women court the Men in this Country, which is so common, that it is not at all
thought immodest, for they speak only to the Person's Relations whom they
design to make their Husband.

Abundance of Flies and Locusls.
This Country is so very much incommoded by Flies, that in Summer the
Inhabtaints are forced to fortify themselves several ways against them; but it
abounds much more with Grasshoppers, who in a dry Season come in Clouds of five
or six Leagues long, and four in breadth, and darken the Sky even at Noonday:
Wherever they settle they make a clean Harvest in less than two hours: They
live but sixth Months. Where they reside in Aumun they lay their Eggs, each
having about three hundred; these they hatch in the Spring, of which but very
few prove addle: Great Rains, or a violent North-East Wind can only remove
them. Before the young ones are strong enough to fly, they creep into the
Houses, hop upon the Beds, Tables, Victuals, and the like, insomuch that scarce
a bit can be swallowed without two or three of them along with it: At Night
they lie in the Roads and Fields, which are most commonly covered with them
above a Foot thick; and when a Couch or Wagon passes over them, it raises a
most intolerable Stink.

Language,
The Language of the Cosacks is a Dinlect of the Polish, as that is of the
Sclavonian. It is very soft, and full of Diminutives, and consequently very
delightful both to the Hearer and Speaker.

Customs and Manners.
The chief Study of the Cosacks is Arms, which, tho they practice for the most
part on Horseback, yet they will sometimes alight to do the Duty of Foot. They
endure the Hardships of War to a wonder, and will live upon little or nothing:
They commonly content themselves with a sort of black Biscuit, which they eat
with Garlic and Onions. They manage their Archibuss and Bow with great
Dexterity, and also make use of a kind of Scimiter. They are very little
acquainted with Luxury, only they love Aqua-vitae extremely, with which when
mixed with Honey they will often get drunk.

Customs and Manners in Peace and War.
They have all sorts of Handicrafts among them, and their Women are employed
chiefly in spinning Linen and Woollen. The Peasants understand perfectly all
sorts of Agriculture; and the Inhabitants in general are well skilled in
brewing Beer, making Mead, Aqua-vitae, etc. There is scarce any among them, of
what Age, Sex or Condition soever, but will strive to outdo each other in
drinking and carousing: and I believe there are no Christians in the World that
are more careless or negligent, tho they are by Nature almost capable of any
thing. When they are in the Field against their Enemies, they are always
extremely sober. Where the Cosacks show the most Courage is in their Tabords,
which are certain Chariots they use to fight in; tho by Sea also they are not
contemptible, but on Horseback they are little worth, for two hundred
Polanders would easily drive two thousand of their best Troopers; yet their
Foot will stand to the last Extemity. When they discover any Vessel by Sea that
they have a mind to take, they lie concealed with their Boats till about
Midnight, when they row toward her with great Swiftness, and having
encompassed her round, easily take her by Surprise. When they have drawn out
all her Lading, they generally sink her, because they are not able to carry her
off.

Having thus given your Grace a short Account, by way of Digression, of the
Cosacks, I will return to King Stephen, who having no Children, proposed to the
Diet to elect his Successor while he lived, and that to prevent Disorders that
usually happen in Interregnums; Batori is refused to name his Successor.
which this Grand Council would by no means condescend to, imagining he
intended to force one of his Brother's Sons upon them, or else for fear of
giving a bad Precedent for future Elections, which might tend in time to the
utter abolishing of their Privileges and Power* This King, by the Solicitations
of the Pope and other Christian Princes, being ready to engage in a War against
the Turks, died after ten Years Reign, and about the fifty fourth Year of his
Age, at Grodna in Lithuania, where he had established his Residence under
pretense of its being a fine Country for hunting, tho the true Reason is
thought to have been, because he did not care to live with his Queen Ann, who
was above sixty Years old when he married her.

His Character.
He was a prudent and circumspect Prince, courageous, and just even to
Severity. He not only enlarged his Dominions, but also settled a better Order
in 'em than any before him; and I have heard the Poles speak of him with the
greatest Respect and Veneration.

His Death, Sept. 13. 1586.
On this Wise and Valiant Prince a certain Person composed the following Elogy,
found in an ancient Manuscript.

Florus Polon. lib. 4. p. 349, etc.
In Templo plus quam Sacerdos.
In Republica plus quam Rex.
In Sententia dicenda, plus quam Senator.
In Judicio plus quam Jurisconsultus.
In Exercitu plus quam Imperator.
In Acie plus quam Miles.
In Adversis perferendis, Injuriisque condonandis, plus quam Vir.
In publica Liberate tuenda, plus quam Civis.
In Amicitia colenda, plus quam Amicus.
In convictu, plus quam Familiaris.
In Venatione, ferisque domandis, plus quam Leo.
In tota reliqua vita plus quam philosophus.
The Death of Batori put Poland into the same Confusion it had been in twice
before, from the time of Sigismundus Augustus. The Provincial Diets assembled
in 1587, whose business it was to secure the Frontiers from Invasion, and
settle the Peace of the Republic. Next the Primate Stanislaus Karnkowski
notify'd the Death of the King according to A Diet called.
Custom, and called a General Diet to meet at Warsaw in March, where it was
afterward agreed that the Diet of Election should meet in June following.

The Lutherans contended so high for their share in the Government, that for
Peace sake they had more granted them than the ancient Laws of the Kingdom
allowed: For in this Assembly their Party was so strong, that they not only
obtained Toleration, but also perpetual The Lutherans obtain Liberty of
Conscience.
Liberty of Conscience. This the Bishops vigorously opposed, which made the
Primate and Bishop of Vladislaw leave the Diet dissatisfied, when Demetrius
Sulikowski Archbishop of Leopol, presiding in the Assembly, in conjunction
with Laurence Goslicki Bishop of Caminiec, considering the Confusion occasioned
by the Absence of the Primate, thought it either necessary to comply with the
Lutherans, or to dismiss the Diet; but the Bishop of Caminiec at last found a
midway, which was to grant the Lutherans their Demands, but withal to insert a
Clause, that what had been done at that Session was merely to preserve the
Public Peace.

The time of the Election being come, Christopher Zborowski, who was banished
during Batori's Reign, and now recalled by the Power of the Lutherans, appeared
at the head of 500 French, with as many Germans and Lutherans The Lutheran and
Catholic Factions
as amounted to near 10000 Men; with these Stanislaus de Gorka, Palatin of
Posnania, joined: He was a Person of Wit, and extremely popular; for tho he was
crook-back'd, yet his great Estate and generous way of spending of it made him
looked upon with universal Esteem. Zamoski was also at the head of a
considerable number of Troops, which, tho they were fewer than those of the
opposite Party, yet were they much better disciplined; with these he encamped
within two Miles of Warsaw, and entrenched himself within Lines of
Circumvallation.

The wiser part of the Diet having a mind to accommodate these two Factions,
ordered them Audience one after another, forbidding either to appear in Arms
before them. They also showed an Inclination to reverse what had been decreed
in favor of the Lutherans, which these last would by no means hear of, Not to
be ^^nit^^d.
promising themselves a sufficient Defense from their Number, which Zamoski
ridiculed, relying upon the better Discipline of his Followers.

The Lutherans perceiving there was no Justice to be expected from the Diet,
without any regard to their Orders, came in Arms before them: After which they
retired, complaining that they were deprived of their Liberties. This had soon
occasioned a Rok^^z The Lutherans (...).
(being an Association in which the Gentry are obliged to engage when they are
oppressed) had not the Primate timely prevented it. During all this the
Lithuanians had not yet declared themselves; and it may be it would Suppressed.
have been difficult to have known their Minds, had not a Confusion given them
occasion to explain them.

Three Factions.
There were three Factions at this Election, whose Power was almost equal. The
first was that of Lithuania, which was for electing Theodore Odonowic, Great
Duke of Muscovy, he having proferr'd to unite his Dominions to those of Poland.
This Proposal might have been thought plausible enough had it been made by any
but Muscovites. The hopes several of the Gentry gave the Czar were apparently
only to amuse him, fearing he might invade the Kingdom during the Interregnum.
The second Party was that of Zborowski and Gorka Palatin of Posnania; they were
entirely in the Interest of Maximilian Archduke of Austria, Brother to the
Emperor Rhodolph. These Heidenstein Rerum Polon. lib. 8. p. 253. col. 1.
Anibal of Capua the Pope's Nuncio joined notwithstanding they were Lutherans,
yet he all along fed them up more with Promises than Presents. The third
Faction was that of the Senate, being the strongest of the three, by reason
that Zamoski with the Flower of the Polish Army was on their side.

It was much doubted upon which of the Several Candidates.
Competitors the Election would fall. The Czar of Muscovy and a Piasto were
talked of only for fashion-sake. The Batori's of Transylvania had their Envoys
at the Diet, but they had no other Orders from their Masters, than to demand
the Personal Estate of the late King, when, had they asked the Crown likewise,
it is highly probable some regard might have been had to Batori's Family.
Sweden was upon the Roll a third time, tho its King John had been rejected in
the two former Elections, by reason he was thought a Lutheran; but by the
Catholic Liturgy published in that Kingdom in 1575, the Poles were disabus'd
in that Opinion, wherefore his Son Sigismund was no longer suspected; for the
Poles had occasion to oppose some great Power to the House of Austria, and what
could be sitter for that purpose than the Family of Jagello, from which
Sigismund was descended by his Mother? King John also caused his Emissaries to
give out that Lithuania of right belonged to his Son, as being of the
Jagellonick Race. This bold Claim might well have raised a War between Sweden
and Poland, had not the latter prudently thought fit to avoid it.

The Lutherans Policy.
In the mean time the Lutherans were firmly disposed to Maximilian's Interest,
but Zamoski broke all their Measures: They had a mind to kidnap the Primate,
but by the Advice of this General he retired to the Castle of Warsaw.
Nevertheless Cardinal Radzivil, to whom the House of Austria had given a
Principality, declared for Maximilian, as likewise did several others by his
Example. This augmented the Courage of the Lutherans, yet did not in the least
diminish that of Zamoski's Followers; both Parties were like to come to Blows,
had not the Bishops mounted on Horseback and interposed.

While these Prelates were thus doing their Duty, the Pope's Nuncio, tho lame,
clamber'd up the highest Tower in Warsaw to view the Army: He doubted not but
his Friends the Lutherans would get the better, their Number being greater. At
this the Catholics were extremely offended, and used to say that Maximilian's
Interest must needs fall, being only supported by a Hook-back and a Cripple.

The Lutherans perceiving that both the Name and Family of Maximilian were
odious to the Poles, agreed together to relinquish him, and propose the Czar,
by which means they brought over to their Party those who were neither for
Maximilian nor Sigismund.

Ministers admitted to Audience.
After this the several Ambassadors had their Audience; the Pope's Nuncio spoke
first, and made his Harangue chiefly on the good Qualities of Maximilian; but
this Candidate was not better liked of than his Orator, or his Panegyric.
Stanislaus Pawlowski, the Emperor's Minister, was heard next, who run also out
in Commendation of his Master's Brother; but from whom there being more Ill to
be feared than Good to be hoped, his fine Speech was but little minded. Then
came the Ambassadors of Sueden to be introduced, which were Heidenstein lib. 8.
p. 256. col. 2.
Eric Sparre Senator and Grand Chancellor of that Kingdom, and Eric Brahe Great
Master of Prince Sigismund's Household. These insinuated that their Master did
not send sooner, because he knew the great Affection the Poles always bore the
Jag^^llonick Family, of which his Son was descended. They made no great
Profers, knowing well that the fear of Maximilian's carrying it would not give
the Diet leave to ask that of them which at other Conjunctures they would
surely have demanded.

The Primate being not unmindful of the fright the Lutherans had put him into
when they formed a Design to carry him away, had a mind to make a speedy End of
the business the Assembly met about; and therefore, without Election.
being deterred by any Threats, proceeded to an Election the 9th of August
1587. At which time the Number of the Lutherans was much lessened, Gorka their
Leader having ahus'd several of them; wherefore, to be revenged, they went over
to the contrary Party. Upon the Poll, the Majority of Voices was found for

Sigismund III. 1587.
SIGISMUND DE VASA, whom consequently the Primate proclaimed King of Poland.
After the usual Acclamations the Assembly separated; and the Archbishop,
accompanied by the Senate and Gentry, went directly to the Cathedral of Warsaw
to give Thanks for having so happily ended this great and dangerous Affair.
Hereupon Ambassadors were immediately dispatched to Su^^den to bring the new
King notice of his Election, and that his Coronation was designed to be the 7th
of October following.

Whilst the Catholics were thus laboring at the Election of a King, the
Palatine Gorka and those of Zborowski's Party minded nothing Lutheran Party
dissents;
but Drinking; yet when they heard of what had happened, they were extremely
surpised; but at the same time endeavoring to repair their Faults, they fell
into much greater. They immediately protested against the Election as both
Irregular and Illegal. Their Assembly ordained, that the King that was to be
chosen should annul all that had been done against Christopher Zborowski during
the late Reign. They likewise made several other Regulations, which were all so
very extravagant, that they were but little regarded. To this Faction the
Gentry of Lithuania offered their Mediation, which yet they would not accept
of, declaring they were resolved to elect Maximilian. Whereupon on the 21st of
August, Gorka, with his Associates, proclaimed Maximilian King Elects and
Proclaims Maximilian;
of Poland, and sent Ambassadors to acquaint him therewith. Whilst this was
doing, the Lithuanians declared against both Elections, and thereby disengaged
themselves from favoring either Party, till they saw which was like to have
the better.

The Diet as yet was luckily not dissolved; But pronounced Traitors by the Diet.
which Assembly pronounced the Election of Maximilian Seditious, and
immediately nulled all that the Lutherans had done: but as the best
Considerations become useless, if there be not force sufficient to put them in
execution, they at the same time provided for the safety of the Kingdom against
the Attempts of Maximilian and his Party; for this Prince was then but at
Olmitz in Moravia, and therefore might quickly have come into Poland, when
Sigismund had not yet passed the Baltic, which is a very dangerous Sea in
Autumn. The Diet, before they separated, charged Zamoski with the Care of the
Commonwealth.

A Comical Prophecy.
I may here acquaint your Grace of a famous Astrologer or Magician, who
happening to dine with Zamoski some hours before Sigismund was chosen, that
General asked him, If he could tell by his Art who should be elected King? To
which this Person, after a little Consideration, replied, Quem Deus volet:
Which Answer not in the least satisfying Zamoski, was but little regarded by
him. The next day after the Election, the same Astrologer sent a Note into the
Assembly, addressed to Zamoski with these Words: Sir, You understood not
yesterday the Answer which I made you, but now read the word Sued.
Deus backwards, and you will find the Mystery explained.

The two Candidates come into Poland.
Afterward Maximilian and Sigismund both arrived in Poland. The latter being
at Oliva, a Monastery near Dantzic, received the Oath of Fidelity; and
preparing to march toward Cracow, which the former then besieged, for want of
Troops was forced to retire to Rava. The Archduke hoped to have taken this
Place by the Intelligence he had with the Germans which inhabited the Suburbs,
who had promised him to harbor two Regiments in their Houses, which might
seize on the weakest Gate, and so let him into the City; but this Stratagem was
detected by Zamoski, who marching to raise that Siege, had notice of these
Designs; whereupon first suffering the two Regiments to enter, he set fire to
the Suburbs, and burnt them and their Friends together.

Maximilian routed by the Polish General.
Afterward the Siege was raised, but the Archduke did not go far off from the
City, but drew up in Order of Battle in a Great Plain, which infinitely pleased
Zamoski, who had no less Inclination to fight than he. At length they came to
Blows, and the Fight lasted two Hours; but in the end Maximilian being
defeated, retired to Cestochow, whither Zamoski did not think it proper to
follow him. A little while after Sigismund came to Cracow, where he was
harangu'd by the Bishop of Caminiec, whom he answered in the Polish Language
which his Mother had taught him. His Entry was ushered in with that Solemnity,
which was thought almost impossible to have been performed in time of War.
After some Difficulties surmounted, his Coronation was fixed for the 27th of
December following, when he was Crowned by the Sigisimund Crowned.
Archibishop of Gnesna. The Lutherans still insisted upon those Demands they
had formerly made, which were fain to be granted them, because Maximilian was
again ready to take the Field, notwithstanding his last Defeat.

In 1588, the Archduke came again into Poland, and Zamoski marched directly to
meet him; but Maximilian expecting more Assistance, went aside into Silesia,
whither he thought the Enemy would not dare to follow him: But this valiant
General not only overtook and fought him, but also routed and took him Prisoner
in the City of Biczycna, after having belieg'd it some small time. Having taken
this noble Prisoner, Zamoski gave him all the respect due to a Person of his
Quality; and moreover, that he might not appear under confinement at Cracow,
which he had formerly besieged, he left him in the Citadel of Crasnostow,
whence Zborowski's Party were like to have recovered him, had not their Design
been discovered by Mark Sobieski Governor of that Place. In all other
Respects, Zamoski treated his Prisoner very honorably, which gained so much
upon the Archduke, that he afterward stood Godfather to one of his Children.

Maximilian beaten again and made Prisoner.
The taking of Maximilian, with all his Artillery and Baggage, was not the only
good Event of this Victory, for hereupon the Malcontents immediately
acknowledged Sigismund. Also Zamoski's generous Usage toward the other
Prisoners, whom he released all upon their Parole, contributed very much to
confirm Sigismund in the Throne. The Kingdom of Poland now was become no more a
matter of Dispute. All the House of Austria aimed at, was to procure the
Arch-Duke's liberty, which at length was obtained through the Mediation of the
Pope, who sent Cardinal Hyppolito Aldobrandin into Poland to treat of his
Ransom, which by that means was rated much lower than the House of Austria
could have expected: For although it was urged to Sigismund, that as Charles the
Vth dealt formerly by the King of France on the like occasion, so he ought to
have a Sum of Money paid down suitable to the great Quality of his Prisoner; yet
Sigismund answered, That it was Offered Liberty on honorable Terms.
to no purpose to propose Charles the Vth as an Example in this Case, since
that Prince had been guilty of an Action unbecoming his Grandeur: When, for his
part, he did not look upon it sufficient Advantage to have got the better of
his Enemy, unless he likewise had the Glory to give him his Liberty, and not to
make him buy it. By this Mediation Maximilian was to quit for ever his Title to
the Kingdom of Poland, to restore some Places which had been surrendered to
him, and to remain in a perpetual Amity with Poland; to all which the Emperor
his Brother was made Guarantee. But although these Conditions were so very
reasonable, yet Maximilian would not ratify them till 1589. Wherefore his
Wilfulness detained him in Prison Dissents.
till that time, when he escape (...) to his Parole of Honor. Nevertheless, he
was afterward brought to sign them by the Power Consents.
his Brother had over him.

Sigismund 's Marriage.
Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 105, etc.
Sigismund III. was first married to Ann Daughter of Charles Archduke of
Austria; and after her Death to Constantia her Sister, by both which he had
three Sons, Vladislaus by the former, and Casimir and Ferdinand by the latter,
the two first succeeding him in the Kingdom. When the King his Father was dead
he went into Swedeland, and was there Crowned King of Sweden, 1592.
likewise crowned King of that Country in the Year 1592, on condition that
every fifth Year he should come and reign over Sweden in Person; but being
engaged in a long War against the Muscovites, Turks and Tartars, he could not
be spared in fifteen Years, and therefore sent a Senate of Jesuits to govern
them and suppress the Lutherah Doctrine, which was then mightily spread in that
Country. Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 105.
Here it must be observed, that this King's Mother Catherine strictly adhered
to the Roman Church by the permission of her Husband John III. King of Sweden,
who also leaned a little that way. Whereupon, when Sigismund's Tutor Arnold
Grothusius would have seduced him from that Persuasion, his Father John being
in a great Passion, and drawing his Sword upon the Tutor, cried, I will have my
Son educated in hopes of both Kingdoms, meaning his own and that of Poland.

These Jesuits the King ordered to be received with the same Honor as if he
himself had come in Person; at which the Swedes being grievously nettled, sunk
them in the Harbor of Stockholm in the Ship that brought Deposed, and Charl.
IX. proclaimed in Sweden.
'em from Dantzic, and immediately thereupon proclaimed Charles Duke of
Sudermannia, Sigismund's Uncle, their King, who had embraced Lutheranism some
time before, and which the Swedes have professed ever since. This occasioned
bloody Wars between these two Nations; but Sigismund being likewise engaged
with other Countries, was forced to accept of a dishonorable Truce. In the
beginning of this War King Charles IX. took a great many places from the Poles
in Livonia, most of which were afterward retaken by the Polish General and
Chancellor Zamoski. Besides this the King of Sweden was vanquished in a great
Battle fought near Kirckholm and Riga, where he narrowly escaped himself: but
some intestine Divisions arising between the King and Nobility of Poland, he
got time to recover Breath.

What caused the War with the Muscovites.
The occasion of the Wars between the Poles and Muscovites was this: A certain
Person coming into Poland, pretended to be Demetrius Son to John Basilowitz,
Great Duke of Muscovy, and that he was to have been murdered by order of Boris
Gudenow, afterward Grand Duke, who hoped thereby to secure the Succession
after the Death of Theodore, eldest Son of the said Duke, but that another had
been killed in his stead. Hereupon he found so great Encouragement from George
Mniszeck, Palatin of Sendomir, that he married his Daughter to him; and by the
Assistance of some other Polish Lords, gathered together a great Army, and
marched with Demetrius into Muscovy, when Boris Gudenow, then Grand Duke,
happening to die suddenly, he was received by the Muscovites, and proclaimed
Czar in Moscow. Hereupon he sent into Poland for his Bride; but while the
Nuptials were celebrating in Moscow, the People, suspecting him to be an
Impostor, gathered together, raised a Tumult, and attacked the Castle, where
they cut to pieces Demetrius with most of the Poles that came along with him
and his Bride, and took her Prisoner. Then Basilius Suski, descended from the
Grand Dukes by the Mother's side, having got together about ^^0000 Men, was
proclaimed Czar: immediately after which a Rumor being spread abroad that
Demetrius had escaped, tho Suski had taken care to expose his Body to view,
which was so mangled that none could know him, and a Person pretending to be
him, the Poles acknowledged him as such; whereupon they together with the
Cosacks assisted this Person to recover his pretended Right, and several times
beat Suski, and obliged him to set at liberty the Captive Bride. She also
acknowledged this Demetrius for her Husband; but whether he was really so or
not, could never yet be determined. Sigismund laid hold of this opportunity, to
try at least whether he could recover Smolensko and Severia; whereupon he
besieged the former in the Year 1609, but could not make himself Master of it
till the Year 1611, when he took it by storm. In the mean time the Poles, who
had hitherto sided with Demetrius, were recalled by Sigismund, who thought it
not convenient that so considerable a part of his Forces should be under the
Command of another. By the removal of this Army Suski had leisure to recover
himself; whereupon with the Assistance sent him out of Sweden, he marched
directly against the Poles, who then were besieging Smolensko, but was
shamefully defeated by them near Clusin. By this Overthrow the Affairs of the
Muscovites were again in a very dangerous Condition; wherefore to avoid the
danger, they resolved to depose Suski (who by his Misfortunes became odious to
them) and to offer their Crown to Vladislaus, Sigismund's Son. This Suski was
afterward surrendered to the Poles, and died at Warsaw in Prison. Whereupon
Vladislaus marching toward that Country with a powerful Army in the Year 1610,
and they hearing of it, thinking he came rather to conquer than accept their
Crown, unanimously revolted against him, especially when they heard that
Demetrius had been murdered by the Tartars who were his Guards. Hereupon Prince
Vladislaus his Expedition was made to no purpose, he being forced to make a
Truce with the Muscovites for fourteen Years, whereby it was agreed, that in
the mean time the Poles should keep in their possession the several Dukedoms of
Severia, Zernikow and Novogrod, which they had taken during the late Troubles
in Muscovy. In the mean time George Farenbach surrendered several Places in
Livonia to the King of Sweden, Gustavus Adolphus: but it was suspected that he
intended to betray that King; for soon after the said Farenbach was reconciled
to King Sigismund, to whom he restored all the Places except Pernau.

The Poles in War with the Turks*
In the Year 1620, the Poles were engaged in a War against the Turks, fomented,
as was supposed, by Bethlem Gabor Prince of Transylvania, for which the Turks
afterward endeavored to banish that Prince for siding with the Poles. In the
Year following the Turks marched with their whole Forces against Poland, but
were met by the Poles near Chocim under the Command of Prince Vladistaus, who
with an Army of about 65000 Men, repulsed above 392000 Turks commanded by their
Emperor Osman in Person. The Turks attempted three times to force the Polish
Camp, but were as often beat back with Loss. Nevertheless in the mean time the
Poles suffered extremely for want of Ammunition and Provisions, and besides
were mightily weakened by Sickness and a huge Mortality among their Horses.
Notwithstanding all this, at length the Turkish Emperor was forced to strike up
an honorable Peace with them after having lost about 60000 Men in the several
Attacks he made upon their Camp, and a greater number in his March back to
Constantinople.

Invasion by Gustavus Adolphus.
In the mean time Gustavus Adolphus falling into Livonia, took the City of Riga
without any great Resistance; and all the rest of that Country except
Dunneburgh was conquered likewise by the Swedes in the Year 1625. Afterward
Gustavus entered Prussia in the Year 1626, where he took the Cities of
Marienburg and Elbing, besides some other Places. This War was thus carried on
without any general Engagement till the Year 1629, when Hans Wrangel the
Swedish General defeated the Poles near Gorzno. Then the Emperor sent some
Forces to the Assistance of the Poles, who in a Battle fought near Stuma were
very near having made Gustavus Prisoner. But however, the Polish Affairs after
this Battle falling into great Confusion, they were forced to clap up a Truce
till the Year 1634, by the Mediation of Charles the First, King of England, and
of Lewis the Thirteenth of France; the Swedes in the mean while being to keep
possession of Elbing, Mcmel, Braunsberg, Pillau, and what besides they had
taken in Livonia.

Sigismund's Death.
After this Sigismund died the last day of April in the Year 1632, being sixty
Years old, and having reigned forty four.

His Character.
Bizardiere, p. 89.
He had all the Qualities that could be required in a great Prince: He loved
Justice, and all the World commended his Piety. He was always of an even Temper
either in good or bad Fortune; and the Luster of the Polish Crown obtained when
he was but young, together with the loss of the Kingdom of Sweden to his Uncle,
might well have either exalted or debased him, had he not had a great Soul: yet
among all these good Qualities, he was too much wedded to his Opinion, which
was the cause of some Misfortunes that happened to him.

Prince Vladislaus was absent when his Father Sigismund fell sick, yet he
arrived at Court just as he was expiring, whose Presence so much revived the
King, as to give him Power to put the Crown of Sweden on his Son's Head, tho he
was to leave that of Poland to Chance. This Election was much A peaceable
Election.
more peaceable than his Father Sigismund's, in that he had no Competitors to
oppose him. Some thought Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden had a design upon the
Crown; and his boundless Ambition, joined with the great Number of his Friends
the Lutherans, dispersed throughout the whole Kingdom, might very well support
that Opinion: yet the Gentry of Great Poland which were most to be suspected on
account of Conformity in Religion with him, were the first that strove to
exclude him; for they declared those Enemies to their Country, that should in
the least dare to propose him. Likewise at another Assembly, a Palatin offering
but to insinuate that it would be proper to choose a Foreign Prince, the Gentry
were so unanimously offended at him, that he was fain to retire betimes to
avoid their Fury. Also Gustavus Adolphus had then too many Irons in the Fire,
to draw any more Enemies upon his Back.

Prince Casimir suspected for a Competitor.
John Casimir, Brother to Prince Vladislaus, was likewise suspected to have a
mind to the Crown, and this Conjecture had a more plausible Foundation than the
former. These two Princes were both Sons to Sigismund III. yet had they not the
same Mother. That of Casimir did all she could to advance her Son to the
Throne: At the Diet met at Thorn she endeavored to have a Successor elected
whilst the King was living; whereupon she employed a certain Bishop to propose
her Son, but with which the Diet was so extremely incensed, that they would
have immediately tried that Prelat for infringing the Public Liberties, had
not more weighty Affairs intervened which caused them to lay those Intentions
aside. During this Prince Casimir did all he could to satisfy the Public that
he had no Design upon the Crown, but that all his Aim was to promote the
Interest of his elder Brother.

A Diet called;
The Primate John Vezik having notified the Death of the late King, convened
the Diet on the 27 th of June, where the Lutherans continued their Cabals and
Factions as formerly, but did not favor any of Vladislaus his Competitors as
before. The Diet of Election was fixed for the 27 th of September in the same
Year, whither the Gentry all flocked at the time appointed, but that more to
ingratiate themselves in their Prince Vladislaus's favor, than to sell their
Suffrages. One thing was proposed at this Diet, which had it been followed,
might have delivered the Kingdom from great Oppressions. This was to digest the
Laws into a Code, and to get the King Elect to confirm it: Also to reform the
many Abuses crept into the Practice of the Law; but this was too vigorously
opposed by the interessed Party, and therefore was fain to be let fall.

Proceeds to Election.
Hereupon the Diet devoted themselves wholly to the Election: Prince Casimir
first proposed his Brother Vladislaus, which Henry Firley Bishop of Premislia
seconded by a Speech to this purpose, That tho that Assembly had a Right to
elect whom they pleased, yet they had ever had a particular regard to the
Offspring of their Kings; that every body there acknowledged the Candidate to
be of the Blood of Jagello: That even the Merit of his Father pleaded for the
Interest of the Son: That Uladislaus his own Conquests had sufficiently
testified his Valor; and lastly, that a favorable Result was to be expected
from that Assembly, since each knew as much of the Merit of that Prince as he.
This was courteously answered by the Primate; after which they proceeded to
admit the Ambassadors.

Foreign Ministers admitted.
First Honorius Visconti, the Pope's Nuncio, had Audience; who being placed on
the left hand of the Primate, first desired the Assembly to choose a Catholic
Prince, and then recommended Prince Vladislaus. Next the Ambassadors of the
Emperor and King of Sweden contended for Prior Admittance, when the latter
being prevented by the Gout, or at least so feigning it, was forced to yield.
The Emperor's Minister therefore was introduced, who in the Name of his Master
recommended likewise Prince Vladislaus. Afterward the Swedish Embassador's
Indisposition gave him leave to be admitted; he proposed a strict Alliance
between Sweden and Poland, in case the Diet would elect none of Sigismund's
Issue, but on condition that he should first renounce all Right to the Kingdom
of Sweden. This Proposal was not at all approved of: and there was something
else said also by this Minister which mightily displeased the Diet; yet at that
time they thought it better to dissemble their Dislike, than provoke so
powerful a Prince as Gustavus by a Resentment.

Dantzic first allowed a Vote.
At this Diet the City of Dantzic had a great Favor granted them, which was
for the future to have a Vote at the Election of the Kings of Poland; which
Privilege had never been granted before but to the Cities of Cracow and Vilna,
one being Capital of Poland, and the other of Lithuania. Prince

Uladislaus VII. 1632.
ULADISLAUS was chosen the 13th of November 1632. when he took the usual Oaths,
was proclaimed by the Primate, and afterward crowned on the 18th of February
1633.

His Marriage.
He was first married to Coecilia Renata, Daughter to the Emperor Ferdinand
II. and afterward to the Princess Mary Ludovica di Gonzaga, Daughter to the
Duke of Nevers of the House of Mantua. The Kings of France always matched the
Princesses of Nevers and Nemours, as Princesses of the Blood, to Crowned Heads.

His Wars
The Year after his Election, Vladislaus not only forced the Muscovites to
raise the Siege of Smolensko, and obtained a signal Victory over them, but
likewise brought their Army to such Extremities, that they surrendered
themselves; and the Turks, who had made a Diversion, were also at the same time
bravely repulsed. Not long after Vladislaus made an advantageous Peace with the
Muscovites, by virtue of which they renounced their Protensions to the two
large Dukedoms of Smolensko and Zernikow, which begat such a Terror in the
Turks, that they also freely made Restitution for the Damages sustained in
their last Incursion, and strangled their Bassa who commanded those Forces. He
forced likewise the Swedes to restore him those Places they possessed in
Prussia, and to prolong the Truce for 26 Years; which they the easier consented
to, by reason that their Affairs in Germany were but in an ill Condition after
the Battle of Norlinguen.

Heidenstein lib. XI. p. 327, etc.
In the Year 1637, the Foundation of the With the Cosacks.
War with the Cosacks was laid, which brought unspeakable Damages upon the
Poles, and which was occasioned thus. The Privileges the Cosacks had obtained
from King Stephen, made them to increase in Number, and grow much stronger than
they were before; for the Peasants of all the neighboring Countries, having
been exceedingly oppressed by their Lords, to deliver themselves from Slavery,
ran in great Numbers into the Vkraine, whereby the Cosacks soon grew very
formidable both to the Poles and Turks, which emboldened them to make frequent
Incursions into Turkey, and which was afterward the occasion of many bloody
Wars between these two Nations. The Great Men of Poland having purchased diverse
Estates in Vkraina, thought their. Revenues might be considerably augmented, if
the Privileges of the Cosacks were but reduced to a narrower Compass; and if
instead of plundering their Neighbors the Turks, they were restrained to
manure the Ground, and live upon the Products of their own Labor. Whereupon
the Poles prevailed upon their King Vladislaus to send General Konicepoliski to
reduce them. Hereupon at first the Cosacks made a vigorous Resistance, and
opposed the Building of the Fortress Hudack just at a Point, where the River
Zwamer falls into the Boristhenes. But being at last entirely defeated by the
Poles, they were obliged to surrender their General Paulack, with some others
of the chiefest among them, who, notwithstanding a Pardon promised them
beforehand, were all beheaded. Besides this, it was decreed in the Diet, that
all their former Privileges, together with the Fortress of Tectimoravia,
granted them by King Stephen, should be taken from them, and a new Body of
Militia settled there in their stead. To put this Decree in execution, the
Polish Army marched forthwith into the Vkraine, but were opposed by the Cosacks
with great Bravery; who yet nevertheless promised to be faithful to the Crown
of Poland, Provided their ancient Privileges might be continued to them; which
the Poles readily agreed to, but however never performed: Nay, treated several
of them very ill; for among other oppressive Methods, they took from them some
of their Greek Churches. Afterward the Cosacks recovered in some measure under
their General Bogdan Chmielinski, who having been justly enraged by Jarinski's
ravishing his Wife, and afterward murdering both her and her Son, resolved on
some Expedient to revenge this Affront, and rid his Country of the Tyranny of
the Polish Government.

Constit. Ann. 1647. p. 9. tit. Ordinacya Poszty.
In this King's Reign Posts were first used in Poland, settled after the German
manner, in the Year 1647.

His Death.
King Vladislaus, after an indifferently happy Reign, died of a malignant Fever
at Merick in Lithuania the 20th of May, in the Year 1648. The Muscovites
vanquished under his Reign; The Turks forced to sue for Peace; The Inclination
he ever had to oblige every body, and the concern he was always under, when it
was out of his Power to give sufficient Proofs of his Liberality, were powerful
Motives to induce the Poles to regret his Loss, whose Consternation was the
more augmented after his Death by their Defeat, and the taking of diverse Places
by the Cosacks, for want of him. Vladislaus leaving no Issue, his Brother

John Casimir. 1648.
JOHN CASIMIR, who had led a religious Life for some time, and was afterward
created Piasecius ad Annum 1648. fol. 599.
Cardinal by Innocent the Xth. succeeded him, being elected King in the same
Year that his Brother died, with the following Circumstances.

The Primate Mathias Lubienski having signified the Death of the late King by
Circular A Diet called;
Letters, and convened a Diet to meet on the 25th of June, (the Diet of
Election having been fixed for the 6th of October) all the Senators and
Deputies met at the time appointed; but there were no such Heats and Intrigues
among them as formerly, by reason that the Cosacks and Tartars had raised too
great Disorders in Poland for them to think of any thing at that time but
Union: for the News of such prodigious Preparations made against them, were
enough to stagger any Resolution but that of the Polanders, whose Valor has
generally procured them the greatest Success.

Hereupon Orders were immediately issued out to raise Troops to oppose these
cruel Invaders; Proceeds to Election.
and afterward the Gentry proceeded to the Election of a Successor to the
Throne, at which time no body thought that Prince Casimir, who was then
complimented with the Title of King of Sueden, would have had any Competitor;
for the Great Duke of Muscovy, and the Prince of Transylvania, who both put in
for the Crown, were looked upon to have little or no Interest.

The Czar very bluntly demanded the Crown, or upon refusal threatened to come
and force a Compliance: But George Ragozzi seemed to have recourse to a milder
Method; yet tho he offered his Army of 30000 Men to the Republic to assist
them against their Enemies, he was suspected to have designed it against them.
But at length the Threats of the one, and Promises of the other, had no better
Effect than that they were both equally despised and rejected.

Prince Casimir opposed.
The Competitor that Casimir expected least, was Prince Charles Ferdinand
Bishop of Breslaw in Silesia, and Ploczko in Poland, who solicited the Crown
for his Brother, but designed it for himself. It was believed he had written
into Sueden to engage the Queen in his Interest. He had also lent a Million to
raise Troops; but this seemed no extraordinary Policy, since his Brother Prince
Casimir had before been declared Generalissimo of the Army. Stanislaus Zaremba,
Bishop of Kiovia, was thought to have given Ferdinand this bad Counsel,
thinking if he could advance that Prince, he might withal procure himself the
chief Dignity in the Kingdom, the Archbishop of Gnesna being then fourscore
Years old, and therefore not likely to live long.

His Character and Travels.
Prince Casimir had always shown an uncommon Virtue in all his Actions. He
loved War, and had ever a great Inclination for Travel: Whereupon in 1638, he
embarked at Genoa for Spain with design to assist that Kingdom against France;
but being taken in Provence, he was kept two Years, till he was restored to his
Brother Vladislaus by means of an Embassy sent to the Court of France. This
Disgrace which happened to this Prince, did not hinder him from undertaking other
Voyages; for in 1643, he left Poland a second time, and passing by Loretto,
became a Jesuit there, without acquainting the King his Brother therewith. To
withdraw him honorably from this Company, and prevent the Public from blaming
his Inconstancy, Pope Innocent the Xth made him Cardinal in 1646, which Dignity
Casimir seen after resigned; for his Brother's Son dying in 1647, and his
Brother being neither like to have any more Children, nor to live long, he
prudently bethought himself of other Measures: wherefore in 1647, he sent his
Renunciation to his Holiness by Francis Fredt de Moulinet, a French Gentleman,
a Person he had always cherished and employed upon diverse Occasions, and whose
approved Fidelity made him often say, That a Prince was always better served by
Strangers than by his own Subjects.

This Retreat of Casimir among the Jesuits, Like to be excluded.
gave occasion to the Bishop of Kiovia to labor at his Exclusion, in which he
was zealously assisted by the Protestants, who mortally hated that Society.
This Bishop likewise imagined he had got the major part of the Gentry on his
side, who seemed also dissatisfied with the Jesuits; but he was not a little
mistaken, for Prince Casimir being the Elder, and King Vladislaus his Brother
having recommended him by his Will to the States, the Faction against him only
retarded his Election for a few days, the Senate in that time having a mind to
reconcile the two Brothers.

The 6th of October began the Diet of Election, where almost all were
unanimous, and only studied to hinder the Progress of the Cosacks. First John
de Torres, Archbishop of Foreign Ministers admitted.
Adrianople, the Pope's Nuncio, the young Marquess of Grana Ambassador from the
Emperor, the Count of Arpajou Ambassador Extraordinary, together with the
Viscount of Bregi Ambassador in Ordinary from France, recommended the Interest
of Prince Casimir; whereupon, the 29th of the same Month, John Tyskiewitz
Bishop of Samogitia, made an elegant Harangue in his behalf, alleging the Case
of Casimir the IId. who had retired into the Abbey of Cluny, but nevertheless
was not excluded the Throne.

The next day the Minister of Ragozzi, Prince of Transylvania, had Audience,
who, contrary to all Expectation, recommended Prince Casimir; yet at the same
time insinuated, that if they did not think fit to elect him, his Master, who
had always had so sincere Affection for Poland, would gladly be their Prince.
The Diet, although they detested his Flattery, yet expressed themselves grateful
to his Master for the kindness he had professed.

The 3d of November Prince Ferdinand's Ambassadors were introduced with the
Bishop of Kiovia at their Head. The Profers these made were received with a
great deal of Indifference; but when the Bishop began to speak with disrespect
of Prince Casimir, he was soon silenced by a universal Confusion of Voices,
which seemed all to be against him. Whereupon Prince Ferdinand sent forthwith
his Excuses, and publicly resigned his Pretensions to his Brother; which
prevailed so far upon Casimir, that he granted him his Friendship; and
moreover, made him a Present of the Principalities of Oppolen and Ratibor in
Silesia, and likewise re-imburs'd the Charges he had been at to oppose him in
his Election; which generous Usage so influenced Ferdinand, that he expressed
less Joy for all these noble Presents than Sorrow for having been concerned
against so deserving a Brother.

Casimir elected.
The 17th began the Election, when all Obstacles being removed, Casimir had
been proclaimed the same day, if his Ambassadors had signed the Articles
proposed to them; but nevertheless on the 20th, he was admitted to the Throne
on the same Conditions with his Father Sigismund.

His Marriage.
He married, by the Pope's Dispensation, the Queen-Dowager Mary Ludovica his
Brother's Queen. She being a French Lady, and meddling too much with Affairs of
State, perhaps with design to promote a Successor of her own Country, is
thought to have contributed in great measure toward the Troubles which His
Wars.
afterward ensued. Soon after he came to the Crown, the Cosack General
Chmielinski began to put in practice his Revenge: Whereupon calling the Tartars
to his Assistance, he marched at the Head of a formidable Army into Poland;
where burning, plundering and ravaging wherever he came, he did all the
Mischief he could, defeated the Polish Army, took the City of Kiovia, and
afterward besieged Leopol, Capital of Russia, with an Army of near 300000 Men,
yet could never take it, tho its Fortifications are but very inconsiderable.
They nevertheless ravaged the Country all about it for many Leagues together.
To revenge which Affront, the Poles summoned the seventh Man throughout the
whole Kingdom, and marched against the Cosacks without the Consent of their
King, who had before refused to head them, but were again miserably beaten.
Nevertheless the King's Army at other times had considerable Advantages over
them; for tho they found they were not able to fight them, yet they fatigued
and weakened them so, that they were forced to call the Muscovites likewise to
help them forward with their intended Work. Whilst some put themselves under
the Protection of Muscovy, others had recourse to the Port, so irreconcilable
were they ever to have any more to do with the Crown of Poland, and have been
so ever since to their own Ruin, and the great Disadvantage of the Poles. The
only Damage they sustained, was, when Chmielinski was celebrating the Nuptials
of his Son with the Daughter of the Prince of Valachia, where the Poles
surpised them, re-took the City of Kiovia and plundered it, as likewise made
the Grecian Patriarch Prisoner. Then the Cosacks sent to the King to know if
this had been done by his Majesty's Order; which being answered in the
Negative, and moreover, that the Nobility had done it to be revenged on them
for the frequent Damages they had done them, they immediately, in conjunction
with the Tartars, fell into Poland with the greatest Fury imaginable. Against
these the King went in Person at the Head of the Nobility, and defeated them in
Battle. But nevertheless the King was afterward forced to clap up a Peace with
them, tho the Gentry were very much displeased at his granting them their own
Terms, by which the Muscovites were left in possession of Smolensko and Kiovia,
which they enjoy to this day. The Muscovites likewise took Vilna in Lithuania,
with some other considerable Cities in that great Duchy.

The King of Sweden invades Poland.
In the Year 1655, Charles Gustavus, King of Sweden, raised a more fatal Storm
in Poland; for with an Army of chosen Men he entered that Kingdom, and in two
years time made himself absolute Master thereof. He first conquered Great
Poland and Masovia, and afterward the Lesser Poland, with Cracow, the capital
City of the Kingdom; from whence he marched into Prussia, where almost all the
Towns immediately surrendered to him except Dantzic, wherein at first were a
great many Citizens that favored the Suedes; but who not long after, by the
Persuasions of some Ministers, continued their Obedience to Poland. The
Resistance made by this one City, was the main Reason why all the Advantages
got by the Swedes at last proved fruitless, and that they could maintain
themselves no longer in Prussia: notwithstanding that, not only the whole
Militia of Poland, and that part of Lithuania which was under the Muscovites,
had submitted to the Swedes, but also King John Casimir was fled into Silesia;
for the Poles having recovered themselves after their first Consternation was
over, and being moreover joined by the Brandenburgers and Tartars, fell upon
such of the Swedish Forces as were scattered up and down the Country. The
Lithuanians also rose up in Arms, and killed all the Swedes that were in
Winter Quarters among them.

Cause of his Invasion.
The Occasion of this Swedish Invasion was some familiarity King Casimir had
had with the Wife of the Vice Chancellor Radziouski, Father to the present
Cardinal Primate. This great Senator could by no means brook a Scandal so
public; and therefore having first made a Party in the Kingdom, he called in
the Swedes through Livonia to revenge his Quarrel, who soon got the Duke of
Curland's Country, and took him Prisoner. Afterward they had such vast Success
in their Progress, that all the Towns of Poland soon submitted to them, none
being able to withstand a Siege. It is to be observed, that there are but few
fortified Places in Poland; it being a Maxim of State there, That their Kings
should not strengthen themselves at home, whereby their Enemies might take
footing from abroad.

This vast Conquest made all the neighboring Princes very jealous of the Power
of Sweden; for on one side Ragozzi, Prince of Transylvania, thinking perhaps to
obtain that Crown for himself, entered Poland, but with no Success. The Danes
likewise made a considerable Diversion on their part by attacking Sweden. Also
the Muscovites came upon Livonia, and the Emperor sent Troops to succor the
Poles; whereupon, by Assistance of the Brandenburgers and Tartars, and the
prudent Conduct of General Czarneski, the Polish Nobility in six Months time
restored Casimir to his Throne.

Cracow took by a Stratagem.
This Czarneski re-took the capital City of Poland by a Stratagem, which was by
contriving to have some Cartloads of Wood enter the City betimes in the
Morning, and to break in their Passage through one of the Gates; by which
means, with 800 Men, he forced his way into the City, and destroyed the Swedish
Garrison. The Advantage of an unfortify'd Kingdom will always be this, That tho
it be soon conquered, it will nevertheless be as easily recovered.

King of Sweden enters into a League with the E. of Brandenburg.
When Charles Gustavus, King of Sweden, had met with an Opportunity to make War
with Poland, he made several private Treaties with the late Elector of
Brandenburg, Frederic William, and at length entered into a League with him, on
condition, that when he had conquered Poland, he should give him the
Sovereignty of Ducal Prussia; whereupon they both joined their Forces together,
and soon conquered the Poles. But afterward the King of Sweden being called
home to take care of his own Dominions, which were then invaded by the Danes,
he was forced to compound with Poland for 800000 Rix Dollars, which the Poles,
not having had any Intelligence of the Danish Invasion, were glad to agree to.
But the Elector of Brandenhurg observing that the Money stipulated for, was not
like to be easily raised, offered, unknown to the Swedes, to give the Poles
that Sum; and moreover, to help them to drive the Swedes out of their Kingdom,
in case they would but confirm to him and his Heirs the aforesaid Sovereignty
of Ducal Prussia. To this the Poles, being in extreme Confusion and Necessity,
quickly condescended, with this Restraint only, That whenever the said
Elector's Male-Issue failed, that Duchy should revert to the Crown of Poland.
Whereupon the Elector of Brandenburg having been proclaimed Sovereign Duke of
Prussia, he immediately joined the Polish Forces, and in short time drove the
Swedes out of their Kingdom, which he before had been instrumental in bringing
in.

This is the Account I have heard the Poles give of their Deliverance from the
Swedish Yoke; and Sir Robert Southwell also gave us lately the same Account at
the Royal Society, which he had had from the late Elector of Brandenburg's own
Mouth.

Treaty of Oliva.
At this Pufendorf. Rerum Brandenb. lib. VIII. Sect. 55. etc. fol. 508. col. 2.
Treaty of Oliva (a Monastery near Dantzic) the Poles likewise were to renounce
all the Pretensions they had to Livonia.

Casimir, after having routed the Swedes, raised an Army of about 30000
Germans, under pretense of being revenged on the Tartars for detaining several
Poles Prisonners, which he had betrayed himself, the better to curb his
Subjects. But Prince Lubomirski, Crown-Marshal, having discovered his private
Design, which was to render himself Despotic, raised an Army likewise, and
attacked that of the King with so good Success, that he entirely routed it,
took its General, a Frenchman, Prisoner, and quickly obliged the King to
disband his German Forces. At this Motive and Means of Casimir's Abdication.
Affront received from his own Subjects, Casimir was extremely netled, insomuch
that he abdicated the Crown not long after. But some time before his Abdication
he convok'd a Diet at Leopol to pay off the Army. The best Expedient to effect
this was thought to be, to call in all the Gold and Silver of the Kingdom, and
re-coin it; but this having been found deficient, the States consented to have
vast Quantities of Copper coined, which before had been very scarce in that
Country, and to raise its intrinsic Value to almost double the common
Standard. With this Money the King paid the Public for what they brought in,
as likewise the Arrears of the Army, but kept all the Gold and Silver, which he
afterward privately remitted into France, and soon followed himself, whereby
he beggared the Nation; for which the Poles condemn him even to this day. They
also hate his Memory for having favored the Cosacks Rebellion to the
empoverishing those Gentlemen that had Estates in Vkraina. This appeared
unquestionable by a private Letter intercepted, sent under Casimir's own hand
to Chmielinski and Doroczinko, Generals of the Cosacks Army, whereby he invited
them to make War against himself for not having been redressed in the
Grievances they had sustained under the Jews, the Noblemens Stewards in the
Vkraine; by which means he gave them occasion to deliver themselves from the
Polish Slavery, as they continue to this day.

All this while the Cosacks were not a little troublesome to the Poles, taking
advantage of these intestine Disorders, and the ill Condition the Affairs of
Poland were in during Casimir's Time, who at length, after 20 years Reign,
being tired out with Vexations, publicly resigned his Crown, like Charles V.
at St. John's Church at Warsaw the 16th of September, in Casimir 's Death. 1671.
the Year 1668; and retiring into France, died afterward at Nevers, the City
where his Queen was born.

While I was at Warsaw, I spoke with several old Gentlemen about this King's
Abdication, who told me that Casimir, the day after his Resignation, observing
the People hardly paid him the Respect due to a Gentleman, much less to a King,
seemed to have repented heartily of the Folly he had committed.

The Officers which this Prince had reserved to himself in his Retreat, raised
a stately Monument to the Memory of their Royal Master in the Abbey of St.
Germains at Paris, whereof he was made Abbot. The Brass and Marble of this
Monument shall not outlast the Latin Epitaph which Father Francis Delfault made
on this Prince, and which for the Excellency in its kind, I shall beg leave of
your Grace to insert.

HEIC; VII.

If King Casimir's Resignation procured Quiet to himself, it occasioned no less
Disturbance to the Polish Commonwealth; for thereby none of the Family of Vasa
remaining, several Princes raised Factions to get the Crown into their
Families, and consequently each endeavored to hinder him that was most like to
obtain it.

A Diet called.
Stanislaus Prasmowski the Primate had convened a Diet to meet at the beginning
of December, where, after some innocent Heats, the second of May 1669 was
pitched upon for the Diet of Election. This Interregnum, unlike the former, was
not disturbed by the Protestants; King Casimir having taken such Measures, that
the Socinians were in his time banished; and the other Sects being looked upon
with Contempt, were consequently discouraged in their Advances.

Competitors for the Crown,
At this Diet of Election, four Competitors appeared, viz. The Son of the Great
Duke of Muscovy, who had been bred in Poland, and spoke that Language; on whose
behalf the Great Duke his Father offered, 1. That his Son should change his
Religion for that of the Roman Communion. 2. That he should make a Public
Renunciation to Muscovy. 3. That all Places formerly taken from the Poles by
the Muscovites should be restored. 4. That four Millions should be advanced as
his free Gift toward the Payment of the Arrears of the Polish Army. And
lastly, That he would be obliged to assist Poland against all Enemies whatever
with an Army of forty thousand Men; and moreover, enter into a firm and
perpetual League with them. The next was the Duke of Neuburg, supported by the
French Interest. The third was the Duke of Lorain, upheld by the German
Faction. And the fourth was the Prince of Conde's Son, whom the Archbishop of
Gnesna, and General Sobieski were thought to favor.

Reduced to two.
At length the Contentions for the Crown of Poland were altogether lodged in
two Pretenders, for the Duke of Muscovy declined sending his Ambassadors out of
Pride, as being displeased with the Poles; and the Prince of Conde had quitted
his Pretensions on account of Discouragement; wherefore the two Competitors
that remained had the Gentry almost equally divided between them, and which
arrived to those Extremities, that almost every Night twenty or more were found
murdered in the Streets. These Disorders the Marshal of the Diet used several
Means to suppress, but at length found none so plausible as to proceed
forthwith to an Election.

Foreign Ministers admitted.
The 4th of June the Ambassadors were first admitted to Audience, when the
Pope's Nuncio made a Speech in Latin, and exhorted the Assembly to elect a
Catholic Prince. The 7th of the same Month Count Schafgots had Audience, who,
contrary to the expectation of every body, recommended the Duke of Neuburg in
the Name of his Master the Emperor.

On the 12th the Duke of Neuburg's Minister had Audience, who promised in the
Name of his Master two Millions to pay the Army; next to maintain always 4000
Men for the Service of the State out of his own Coffers; and lastly, to build
three Fortresses on the Frontiers of Poland, as likewise to found a College for
the Polanders in Germany. The Prince of Leixin, who had Audience next, profer'd
almost the same on the part of his Nephew the Duke of Lorain. To which the
Abbot of Riquet also added, that the same Prince, for whom he likewise spoke,
was ready to dispute the Crown in single Combat with his Opponent, to the end
he might obtain it by the most honorable Means. But nevertheless, the Pride of
the latter of these Competitors had not better effect than the Promises of the
former.

In the mean time the Gentry were very impatient at the tediousness of the
Diet, and at Heats arise;
length were ready to go together by the Ears; when Opalinski Palatin of
Kalisch, to appease the Disorder, made an elegant Speech, alleging, That it
was mere Madness for them to cut one another Throats about choosing of Princes
which they never saw, and that it would be more prudent to reject them both,
their Birth and Alliance with the House of Austria being sufficient to merit
their Exclusion. And proceeding in his Harangue, he put them in mind that the
Austrian Family, providing they persisted to make choice of a Prince out of it,
might in all probability serve them as it had formerly done the Kingdoms of
Bohemia and Hungary; and that therefore it was not only unsafe, but also
contrary to the Constitutions of their Kingdom to have any thing to do with
them. Hereupon the Tumults began something to abate, which gave him
encouragement to go on and show, that formerly, when Heats grew high, a Native,
meaning Piastus, had been chosen, who governed the Kingdom so prudently, that
even at 120 Years of Age his Death was regretted. These Appeased by a Speech.
Precautions (continued he) our Forefathers had against the Ambition, Envy or
Avarice of such as pretended to the Crown: Let us therefore (quoth he) leave
the Duke of Neuburg to govern his small Estate and numerous Family; and let the
Duke of Lorain exhaust his Treasures to recover his Paternal Dominions. For our
parts a Piasto would be most proper for us, as we may find by a serious
Reflection on these Divine Words, Admit ad te alienigenam, and subvertet te;
Admit a Stranger among ye, and he shall undermine and ruin ye.

By these means the Palatin of Kalisch having pretty well calmed the turbulent
Spirits of the Diet, and moreover influenced them with kind thoughts of a
Piasto, he immediately posted, together with the Palatin of Posnania, A Plasto
proposed.
to Wiesnowiski then at Warsaw, where finding him in the Church of the
Recollects, they both earnestly begged of him to accompany them to the Field of
Election, which Request, after some difficulty, he complied with. Whereupon all
three arriving while the Partisans of the two Competitors were ready to go
together by the Ears, the Palatins of Kalisch and Posnania took occasion to
propose Wiesnowiski; and the Illustrious House he was Hartknoch. lib. ^^. cap.
2. p. 109.
descended from soon determined the Gentry in his Favor. It must be understood
that Wiesnowiski was not lineally of the Race of Jagello, for that ended with
Sigismundus Augustus, but collaterally descended from Korybuth Jagello's
Brother.

Mr. Yard who went with Sir Peter Wyche to compliment King Michael on his
Accession to the Throne, told me lately, that the Palatin Policy disappointed.
of Culm acquainted them at Warsaw, that when Michael was proposed, the
Intention was not to have him elected, but only by proposing of him to discover
how far the Diet would relish a Native; some of the Great Men among them having
secret Designs to advance one of themselves to the Throne, but which they were
unexpectedly disappointed in by the Election of this poor Prince.

Wiesnowizki was not a little surpised when he heard himself named, and which
also increased upon him when they seated him by force in the midst of the
Assembly, and begged of him to accept the Crown. At first he Michael refuses
the Crown;
burst out into Tears, and declared he was not capable to sustain so great a
Burden; but the major part of the Diet persisting in their Demands, at length
he thought fit to acquiesce Accepts it.
and accept their Proffers. The Dukes of Neuburg and Lorain were hereby
immediately deprived of their most professed Friends: But the Lithuanians would
by no means accept of a Prince they had not first named, and therefore proposed
others. This dissenting of theirs occasioned new Disorders, which grew so high,
that a Gentleman speaking his Mind too freely, was cut to pieces on the spot;
yet at length, the latter being the weaker side, they were forced to comply
with the former, and confirm Prince Wiesnowiski.

The Primate conforms.
The Primate not approving of this Election, retired to his Castle of Lowitz;
but the Gentry threatened to force him, and the Senators entreated him to
consent, which at length he agreed to, and according to custom proclaimed him.

It is said that whilst the Palatin of Kalisch was haranguing, a Swarm of Bees
and a Pigeon happened to fly over their Heads, which the Poles immediately
taking for a good Omen, cried out unanimously, God save King

Michael Wiesnowiski 1670.
MICHAEL WIESNOWISKI. This his Excellency Monsieur de Cleverskerk, now
Ambassador from the States of Holland in England, assures me to be true, he
having been present at Warsaw as a Traveller at the time of this Election.

King Michael being thus chosen, chiefly indeed by the Minor Nobility, was
proclaimed by the Primate, and crowned the 17 th of September in the Year 1670,
and reigned to the Year 1673.

His Marriage.
He married Eleonora of Austria, Daughter to Ferdinand III. and Sister to
Leopold the present Emperor of Germany; by reason of which Alliance Jealousies
were raised, that his Majesty had a mind to make himself Absolute and
Hereditary, and to subvert the Polish Liberties, all which he soon appeased by
a timely compliance with the Demands of the disaffected.

This Prince before he was advanced to the Throne was very poor, subsisting
only on a Pension of 6000 Livres, which had been charitably allowed him by King
Casimir and his Queen Mary Luduvica di Gonzaga. He had, it is true, formerly a
vast Estate in Vkraina, but which the Cosacks were then in possession of. He
was, as I am informed, Gentleman of the Bedchamber to the present Emperor of
Germany, which yet that Prince did not think sufficient reason to exclude him
from marrying his Sister after his Election.

The Cosacks Rebellion
In the Year 1672, the Cosacks, assisted by some Tartars, having again fallen
to their old Custom of rebelling, General Sobieski with the Forces of the Crown
soon chastis'd them, and forced their Leader Doroczinko to retire. Favored by
the Turk:
Hence the Turk took an occasion to quarrel with Poland, upon pretense he had
taken the Cosacks into his Protection, whom he would needs have to be oppressed.

This King was by no means endu'd with the Warlike Spirit of his Predecessors;
for in his time the Turks not only overrun Podolia, but also took its Capital
City Caminiec, and Produces a bad Peace.
likewise obliged the Poles to dishonorable Articles of Peace, whereby Michael
was to pay the Turks an Annual Tribute. The farther Particulars of this Matter
are as follows: Sobleski, made Great Marshal and Crown-General by Casimir for
having always adhered to his Interest, presenting King Michael when elected
with a Coach and six Horses to comply with the Custom only, for it must be
understood Sobieski was his Enemy; the King by the Persuasions of his haughty
Mother refused the Present, which the General greatly resenting sought all
manner of ways to be revenged on him, and in order thereto, frequently caball'd
with the Gentry assembled in Parliament against him, and at length obliged the
Diet to be dissolved without concluding any thing to his advantage; while in
the mean time, I am positively assured, he kept Intelligence with the Turks and
Tartars, as may appear by their taking of Caminiec, and besieging of Leopol.
Mr. James Walker a Scots-man, who was in the City when besieged, and is now in
London, told me lately, that there were 90000 Turks, 20000 Tartars, and 10000
Cosacks and Moldavians at that Siege which happened in the Year 1672, all which
begirted the Town close, playing continually upon it from five Batteries. The
Governor that held out against them was one Lonsky, a Colonel of Dragoons, who
had, as Mr. Walker assures me, but five hundred of his Men in Garrison without
any Horse, besides 1100 of the Inhabitants in Arms: With these Lonski defended
himself vigorously, insomuch that what by the Correspondence he kept with the
Christians in the Turkish Army, and by the Bravery of his own Men he maintained
his Defense three Weeks, when the King sent Count Morstin and other
Commissioners to treat with Caplan Bassa General of the Turks, who agreed, that
for raising the Siege the King should pay 22000 Gold Ducats yearly Tribute to
the Grand Seignior, 100000 Lion-Dollars down on the nail to save the City,
whereof the Inhabitants paid 10000 presently, and the Public were to pay the
rest; this they gave eight Hostages to perform, who were kept Prisoners at
Caminiec, and died there by reason that the Debt contracted for was never paid.
Besides, the Turks were to remain in possession of Caminiec and all Podolia.
But General Sobieski, and the rest of the caballing Party being ashamed of this
dishonorable Treaty, came to a better Understanding among themselves, and
sided with the King to recover what had been lost.

The Poles march to recover Podolia;
Hereupon the Armies of Poland and Lithuania marched directly toward Podolia
to retake it, that of the Kingdom being commanded by General Sobieski, and the
other of the Duchy by General Patz. These two Generals soon obtained a signal
Victory over the Turks near Kochim five Leagues from Caminiec, by the Treachery
of the Moldavians and Valachians, who never hitherto signalized themselves but
persidiously, which yet proved very advantageous to the Poles, who were then in
want of every thing but Courage. Caplan Bassa commanded the Turkish Army, being
joined by the Moldavian Troops, headed by their Hospodar; but the former being
displeased with the Conduct of the latter, his Soldiers being not so many as
he expected, and those not well equipt, struck him over the Head with his
Scimiter, which the Hospodar highly resenting resolved upon Revenge, which he
afterward effected, by deserting the Turks in conjunction with the Valachians
who took his part, and going over to the Poles. This mightily facilitated
Sobieski's Entry into the Enemy's Camp, which gained him a complete Conquer;
Victory. This Defeat had doubtless put the Affairs of Poland into a good
Condition had the Generals sufficiently pursued it. But, as it has always been
the unfortunate Custom of the Poles, they immediately withdrew their But fail
in their Design.
Troops into their Country, and so have since left the Turks in full possession
of Podolia. This famous Battle began upon Saturday, and was scarce fully over
in three days.

Some few days before this Victory obtained, King Michael died at Leopol,
November the 10 th Michael's Death;
1673, supposed to have been poisoned by a Frenchman at Zamoisk, being about
32 Years old, and having reigned about four Years, leaving the Poles less
afflicted at his Death, than ashamed at the bad Choice they had made of him for
their Prince.

This Prince not long before he died, had the Misfortune to see an Aga come
from the Grand Seignior to demand Tribute of him, who brought him from his
Master a Commander's Staff and a Turkish Vest, both being Badges of Vassalage.
He left no Children, tho his Leaves no Issue.
Queen, who was afterward married to Charles late Duke of Lorain, has since
had several. She is lately dead, and in my Travels from Italy to Germany
resided at Inspruck, the Capital Town of Tyrol, where I had the Honor to kiss
her Majesty's Hand, being introduced by my Lord Carlingford. Her Brother the
Emperor allowed her and her Children a Pension out of the County of Tyrol; for
she received nothing either out of Poland or Lorain, the latter having been
hitherto in the French Hands; and the Constitution of the former being, that
when the Queen Dowager marries, she forfeits her Pension settled upon her by the
Diet at the King's Coronation.

Hartknoch. lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 109, 110.
An odd Story.
An odd Story goes of a Child that was born in this King's Reign in the Year
1670, at Vilna in ^^ithuania, with a Golden Tooth, which was esteemed truly
such by all the Physicians, Surgeons and Goldsmiths about that City, being also
tried on the Touchstone in the presence of the Bishop of that place: But what
is yet more wonderful, that Child having a Fever afterward in the Year 1673,
his Golden Tooth was changed into Bone. How worthy this is of Credit I leave to
the Judicious Naturalists; I have only this to say for my self, that I found it
in an authentic Author.

King Michael being dead was succeeded by John Sobieski the late King of
Poland, who was Captain of the Guards, and Gentleman of the Bedchamber to King
John Casimir. Whilst he had these Employments he married Prince Zamoski's
Widow, who had 10000 Rix Dollars left her for a Jointure, by the contrivance
and management of King Casimir and his Queen, to whom she was then Lady of the
Bedchamber. At this Juncture Sobieski's own Estate was not 2000 Pounds
Sterling a Year: But however, the King promised to advance him after he had
married this Lady, which he accordingly performed, and I may say that it was
through the means of this Marriage that Sobieski was gradually promoted to the
Supreme Dignity of the Crown.

Thus, my Lord, I have given as short and exact an Account of the memorable
Actions of the fourth Class of the Kings of Poland, as my Incapacity, and the
Precipitation with which it was published, would allow. But before I put an end
to this Letter, I must beg your Grace's leave to take notice, that the Crown of
Poland, tho always Elective, yet has been successively in the same Family from
Father to Son, or at least from Father to Daughter or other Relation, from the
Year 830 to the Year 1674, which is from Piastus his Reign to the Election of
the late King John Sobieski, except only the five Months that Henry of Valois
reigned, I mean Henry III. of France, who was killed by a Monk. To evince this,
your Grace may be pleased to understand, that the last of the Family of Piastus
in a direct Line was the Princess Hedwigis, who married Jagello, Great Duke of
Lithuania. His Male Race by her reigned to Sigismund the Second's time, of
whose two Daughters, one was married to King Stephen Batori his Successor, and
the other was Mother to Sigismund III. who with his Sons were successively
elected to the Throne to the time of King Michael Wiesnowiski; who, tho he was
not lineally descended from Jagello, yet came laterally from the Race of
Koributh Jagello's Brother: So that it is evident that the Poles have
reconciled a free Election of their Kings with an uninterrupted Succession of
the same for 844 Years; as likewise that they have never excluded the deceased
King's Son, nor ever elected any German Prince to the Throne before this last
Election of the Elector of Saxony, Frederick Augustus, now King of Poland. But
as it is lawful for all Governments to alter their Constitutions at often as
they find it convenient for the good of the Public; so the Poles observing
that their Native Kings have not of late sufficiently promoted the Interest of
their Country, were wise enough to choose a Foreign Prince, whose Wealth and
Courage would enlarge their Dominions, as their present King Frederick Augustus
is very likely to do, being in League with the Emperor, Muscovites and
Venetians. I hope your Grace will be pleased to pardon my Indiscretion in
presuming to write of Matters which are altogether out of my Element, since it
was only to show with what Deference and Respect I am,

My LORD, Your Grace's most Obedient and most Humble Servant, B. C.

LETTER IV.
To the Right Honorable WILLIAM Earl of Yarmouth.
Concerning the Family and Remarkable Actions of John III. King of Poland: As
also his Daughter's Marriage to the present Elector of Bavaria.

My LORD;
THE Obligations I owe to your Brother Mr. Alberti and his Lady, joined with
the Value I have always professed for your Lordship's Friendship, makes me glad
to find this occasion of giving both you and them a public Testimony of my
Respect and Gratitude; and since you have often showed your self willing to
know something of the Affairs of Poland, I thought nothing could be more
agreeable to your Temper, than that I should inform you chiefly of the Heroic
Actions of that great Prince, with whom your Brother for so many Years so
prudently managed the Interest of the wisest Republic in the World in a long
lingering War against the Ottoman Empire. It is to his Kindness that I must own
my self indebted for the Honor I have had of being in the Esteem of so Warlike
a King, and of being moreover entrusted with the Care of what was most dear to
him.

John Sobieski, my Lord, is not so much to be esteemed for his memorable
Exploits after his Election, as for his Merits, and the wise Conduct by which
he advanced himself from a private Gentleman of an indifferent Fortune, and
nothing at all related to any of the former Kings, through all the Posts of the
Army to the Crown of Poland, notwithstanding the several powerful Factions
which appeared against him.

Immediately after the Death of the late King Michael Wiesnowiski, John
Sobieski then Crown-General gave a signal Overthrow to the Turks near Caminiec,
which caused a great Alteration in the Republic of Poland; for thereupon the
Turkish Aga and Treasurer were not so peremptory in their demanding Annual
Tribute shamefully stipulated for by Michael, as they had been before, but were
contented to be put off to the Diet of Election.

A Diet called;
The Senate being assembled, ordered public Rejoicings, and began their
Session by leaving off their Mourning for the late King. The Diet which
preceded that of the Election was appointed to meet the 15 th of January 1674,
which was designed to be terminated in 15 days; but the ordinary Disturbances
that arose in these sort of Assemblies, together with the Inclination which
every body had to advance General Sobieski, occasioned it to be prorogued till
the 22 d or 23 d of February, without doing any thing but assigning a Jointure
to the Queen Dowager.

The 20 th of April began the Diet of Election; Poceeds to Election.
the Candidates were in great number, and every ones Pretensions were heard.
The Czar of Muscovy, who had been so often baffled at preceding Elections, yet
made fresh Interest at this. His Envoy demanded the Crown for his Master's
youngest Son, who was then about thirteen or fourteen Years of Age; but however
he neither made so great Profers as formerly, nor used any Threats, for he
would then have been laughed at, Poland being at that juncture in a much better
condition than before. Next the Prince of Transylvania offered fifteen Millions
of Money, as likewise that he would unite his Principality to Poland, and
maintain fifteen thousand Men in the Service of that State against the Turk:
but these Propositions were looked upon too considerable to be either real or
possible; for the Poles believed that they had possessed themselves of the
greatest Treasure of Transylvania when they chose Stephen Batori for their
King. The Elector of Brandenburg likewise had some hopes in favor of the
Prince his Son, when he profer'd that he should change his Religion as soon as
ever he was elected; but he soon quitted his Pretensions when he considered
what had passed in regard to the Germans and Protestants in former Elections.
If this Prince had been a Roman Catholic, his Family might have had just
Pretenses to Poland by the Interest of uniting Ducal Prussia to that Kingdom.

Several Candidates.
The Dukes of Modena and Parma had also their Envoys at this Election; but
whereas every body thought their business was to ask the Crown, they only came
to condole the Death of the late King, and congratulate the Poles on their
Victory at Chochim, so that they did not add to the number of the Competitors.

Don Pedro di Ronquillos came from Spain without taking upon him the Quality of
Ambassador: His Instructions were to recommend Duke Charles of Lorain, after he
had done his best in favor of Don John of Austria; but this Policy did not
take, and the Council of Spain afterward found another Expedient to rid
themselves of this Prince.

A French Prince proposed, but not named.
A French Prince, whose Name was not mentioned (tho I suppose it was the Prince
of Conde) occasioned the most Jealousy of all the rest. The other Pretenders to
the Crown were not a little pleased that this Prince was not named. The Duke of
Neuburg renewed his former Pretensions, tho they had succeeded so very ill. He
did not desire the Crown for himself, but for his younger Son Prince Philip.
This Duke made the like Profers for his Son as he had done for himself at the
preceding Diet. The Duke of Lorain solicited powerfully on his part, and Queen
Dowager's Zeal.
the Queen Dowager had pawned even her Jewels to augment his Party; but a false
Report, of which some Letters from Rome gave the occasion, was intended to
frustrate all his Endeavors: It was reported that this Prince was married to
the Empress Dowager. Every body knew the Obligations he had to that Princess,
and how she granted him Protection, and made the Emperor his Friend after he
had been deprived of his Patrimony by France; but notwithstanding the Queen
Dowager still continued her Esteem for him, and soon dissipated the Rumors
raised against him, by which she brought over the Lithuanians, who seemed
altogether to have forsaken the Interest she had before engaged them in.

Only three Competitors and Factions left.
At length the number of Competitors was reduced to three, in favor of whom as
many Factions were formed, all which threatened had Consequences. The first
Faction was that of Lithuania, headed by the Grand General Patz, who declared
for the Duke of Lorain. It was observed that whilst Patz was discoursing with
Sobieski, Grand Marshal of the Crown, at the Camp of Choczin, Sobieski said,
that it was convenient to choose a King that was rich, valiant, and not young;
to which Patz added, And who above all is not married. This sufficiently
showed, that whether the French Prince or Sobieski was proposed, it would be no
small difficulty to obtain the Consent of the Lithuanians, who would have no
King but such a one as was in a condition to marry after his Election. The
second Faction was that of the Polish Gentry, which was not at all considerable
by reason that it was divided, one Part being for a Piasto, and two others for
the Duke of Neuburg, and the Duke of Lorain. The Army composed the third
Faction, which was the most to be feared. General Sobieki proposed the French
Prince, but in reality worked underhand for himself. France employed its
Interest for the Duke of Whose Interest France espouses.
Neuburg, looking upon him as less engaged to the House of Austria than the
Duke of Lorain, who was indebted to that Family for all he either had or could
expect. If this French Prince had been but named when he was put up, doubtless
he would soon have ruined the Measures of the Germans, for whom the Republic
never had any Kindness, who consequently might have saved themselves a great
deal of fruitless Charge had they never thought of the Crown of Poland; but on
the contrary, their Ambition has all along hitherto surmounted the Dictates of
their Reason.

Magnificent Trains.
The Gentry arrived at the Diet one after another with their Followers; but
however. none had any thing like the Train of the two Marshals of the Crown and
of Lithuania: their Parties seemed too numerous to assist at a Diet where there
is so much Freedom as in that of Poland. Nevertheless Sobieski must be indulged
considering the great Services he had done the State, and common Justice
required the same Liberty for the Lithuanians. These two Generals no doubt had
different Intentions. Sobieski apparently sought the Crown from himself, and
Patz his Design was to hinder him from obtaining it. Both had a fair
opportunity to come to Blows, but it seems Fate had ordered it otherwise, tho
the Duke of Lorain was with an Army on the Borders of Silesia to animate his
Friends.

Lithuania against a Native.
The Lithuanians, who plainly perceived that Sobieski aimed at the Crown,
omitted nothing that might prove a means to exclude him from it: They therefore
endeavored all they could to raise ill Thoughts of a Piasto, and proclaimed
those Enemies to their Country who were not of their Opinion. This was thought
so very unjust, that most of the Diet protested against it, and that with so
great Indignation, that there would doubtless have been a great deal of Blood
shed had not the great Prudence of Sapieha grand Treasurer of Lithuania, and
Marshal of the Diet, intercepted and appeased their Fury.

The first that had Audience of this Assembly Foreign Ministers admitted.
was Francis Bonvisius the Pope's Nuncio, who desired them in the Name of his
Holiness to elect a Catholic Prince. Next Christopher Count of Schafgots the
Emperor's Ambassador, recommended the Duke of Lorain; as likewise did the
Bishop of Marseilles the eldest Son of the Duke of Neuburg, in the Name of his
Master the King of France. The Ministers of these two Competitors made almost
the same Profers as they had formerly done; yet notwithstanding the
beforementioned different Factions, did not forsake the Interest of those
whose Party they had espoused; for that of Sobieski continued to insist, in all
outward appearance, on the Anonymous French Prince, whose Character had
procured him a great many Suffrages. And the other of the Great Chancellor
Patz, tho not so strong, yet was not a whit less constant to the Interest of
the Queen and Duke of Lorain. Both these remaining A double Election
apprehended.
so obstinate in their Pretensions, gave great reason to apprehend a double
Election, which caused some of the more prudent sort to represent the great
Disorders that had ensued from thence in the preceding Elections of the Kings
Batori and Sigismund, but this with little or no effect.

These Contests and Heats occasioned the Diet to be prolonged to the 19 th of
May. The Senate deputed four or five Bishops to the Queen to acquaint her, that
if her Majesty would please to forsake the Interest of the Duke of Lorain, they
had orders to offer her Prince Philip of Neuburg for her Husband, together with
the Crown. These Ministers the Queen received very civilly, and thanked the
Senate for their Kindness to her, but withal insinuated, that she did not
believe that The Queen and Patz endeavored to be seduced.
they were yet absolute Masters of the Election, since her Friends the
Lithuanians had not forsaken her. The same Prelates perceiving the unalterable
Resolution of the Queen, went in quest of the Grand General Patz, whom they
also found firm in the Duke of Lorain's Interest, which yet they could not but
commend in him, he having had great Obligations to the Queen.

Lithuania tends toward a Civil War.
The next day all the Gentry of Poland and Lithuania met again, each Party
resolving to maintain what they had undertaken. It was plainly to be perceived
that Sobieski was strong enough to make himself Head of the Election, and
therefore the other side had thoughts of joining the Duke of Lorain's Army; but
this made all Men tremble who had regard to the Good of the Public. At last
the Palatin of Russia made a Speech to the Assembly, representing, That the
Queen having refused a Husband which the Government had profer'd her, the
Republic had no more to do with her; and that they had done but too much
already for the House of Austria and Germany, neither of which had ever done
them any Service; that notwithstanding the Opposition of the Lithuanians who
did but dishonor their Country by excluding a Piasto, yet they ought to choose
one, to show the World that if their Ancestors had not done the like oftener, it
was because they had a mind to avoid the Jealousies which would have arisen
between so many Subjects that deserved the Crown; and that since now there was
one present whose Merit was not to be questioned, they ought forthwith to elect
him. Then he proceeded to name John Sobieski with this Character, That his Life
had been entirely devoted to the Service of the State, which even while he was
speaking, peaceably enjoyed the Fruits of his late Victory at Chocim; and
further, that this present Happiness was hut a Specimen of what he was able to
do for his Country: and lastly, that the Crown was due to Sobieski out of mere
Gratitude and Acknowledgment, since it was through his means that they sat
there, and had a Power to dispose of it.

Poland and part of Lithuania biased to Sobieski by a Speech.
The Gentry of Russia being influenced by what their Palatin had said,
immediately declared for Sobieski, who was a Native of their Province, and all
the rest of Poland soon followed their Example; together with some Palatinates
of Lithuania, brought over by the Management of Prince Radzivil Vice Chancellor
of that Duchy; every one being forward to deserve Favors from one whom they
had acknowledged for their Prince.

Patz retires and dissents;
The Great General of Lithuania being highly displeased at all these
Proceedings, left the Diet in a Heat, and together with his Friends marched out
of the Field about Nine at Night, no body being able to bring him back.
Hereupon he immediately enters* Protest against this Election, alleging that
it was against the Constitution of the Kingdom for any King to be chosen
without the common Consent. The next day, being the 20 th of May, the
Lithuanians returned into the Field, but retired after having made their
Protestations against this Election; whereupon several Senators and Nuncio's
were sent to re-cal them, but their Answer was, that they were going to
deliberate upon the Matter, and would inform them of their Resolutions by their
Deputies. The Poles and Lithuanians who had espoused Sobieski's Interest,
forthwith commanded the Bishop of Cracow to proclaim him; which notwithstanding
this Prelate declined, wisely foreseeing the Disorders so rash an Election
might occasion, and which might probably end in a Civil War.

Complies, with the rest of Lithuania.
The Deputies of Lithuania arrived a little while after; whereof the Chief
being the Bishop of Vilna, Brother to the Grand General, delivered the Message,
giving Sobieski the Title only of Grand Marshal; yet in the conclusion of his
Discourse he told them, that he was ready to give his Vote for him, but desired
the proclaiming him might be deferred till next day, to the end the Lithuanians
might assist at it, and thereby the Election become unanimous: which Request of
his was readily granted. Whereupon the 21 st of May Andrew Trzebicki Bishop of
Cracow, who presided at the Diet in the room of the Primate Czartoriski just
then deceased (which happened very well for Sobieski, the Primate having been
no Friend of his) went with the Senators before the New Prince to the Place of
Election, where they were met by the Lithuanians with their General Patz at
their head, who was too politic not to assist there with his whole Family.

JOHN SOBIESKI was soon after proclaimed, John III. 1674.
and the Gentry proceeded to sing Te Deum in the Cathedral of Warsaw, ending
the Day with usual Acclamations and Rejoicings.

This Prince was descended of a Noble and Ancient Family, tho none of the most
considerable, nor richest in the Kingdom. His Father His Father.
James Sobieski was Castellan of Cracovia, a Person no less eminent for his
Abilities in Affairs of State, than renowned for his Courage and Conduct in the
Field. He was employed in the Year 1621, as Ambassador and Plenipotentiary upon
a Treaty of Peace, which by his Prudence and Address was honorably concluded
with Sultan Osman. He distinguished himself likewise on many other important
Occasions; and after several other great Services faithfully performed for his
Country, he died in the Year 1646.

His Mother.
His Mother was one of the Daughters of Stanislaus Zolkiewski, Grand Chancellor
and Grand General of the Crown, who bravely fought that memorable Battle at
Cicora on the 10th of September 1620; and tho he was again five times attacked
by the Turks on the 2d of October in the same Year, yet he gallantly repulsed
them, till at last being overpowered with Numbers, and forsaken by his
Followers, he was slain, courageously fighting among the thickest Troops of his
Enemies.

His Travels.
This Prince was carefully educated by his Parents in his Youth, and sent to
travel into France, where his Father bought him a Captain of Horse's
Commission, which gained him great Experience: He also traveled into England,
Germany and Italy; where having observed all the different Manners, Interests,
Laws, Military Discipline, Strength and Policies of those People, and, in a
word, all else that was necessary for a Person of Quality to learn in his
Travels, he at last returned home, when Casimir after several Trials both of
his Valor and Discretion, and admiring at his great Merit and quick Parts,
which he had improved so well both in Languages, Sciences, and Military
Accomplishments, made him first a Colonel of Foot, and afterward Captain of
his Guards; and from thence advanced him gradually through all the Posts of his
Army, till he arrived at being Grand Marshal of the Crown in the room of
Lubomirski, and Grand General of Poland in the room of Potoski. He behaved
himself in all these Employments with that Courage and Prudence as became a
Soldier, and was reputed the Hero of his Age, and the Terror of the Ottoman
Empire.

His Marriage.
He married Mary de la Grange, Daughter to the Marquess of Arquien (not long
since made Cardinal) of the Family of La Grange in Nivernois in France. She, by
the contrivance of King Casimir's Queen, to whom she was Maid of Honor, was
first married to Prince Zamoiski, one of the greatest Palatins in the Kingdom,
and after his Death to the Grand General Sobieski, by whom she had several
Children, and amongst the ^^est three hopeful Princes, the eldest of which has
the Honor to be Brother-in-Law to the Emperor, King of Spain, King of
Portugal, and to the Duke of Modena, by marrying one of the Princesses of
Neuburgh.

This Prince was not Crowned till above fifteen Months after his Election;
during which time, he gained great Advantages over the Turks, and forced them
to a Peace at Zorowna, whereby they were obliged to remit the yearly Tribute,
stipulated for by King Michael, but were still to be left in possession of the
Fortress of Caminiec.

At the time of his Election he was pleased His Generosity.
to promise, of his own free Will and Motion, that the Queen-Dowager should be
provided for sutably to her high Quality and extraordinary Merit; as also, that
the Arrears of the Army should be forthwith discharged out of his own Revenues,
since the public Stock was then hardly able to do it. He conferred the Command
of Grand Marshal on Prince Demetrius, Uncle to the late King, and that of
Lieutenant General of the Crown, thereby becoming vacant, on the Palatin of
Cracovia. But as he signified his Resolution to prosecute the War against the
Turk with the utmost Vigor, so he promised that at his own particular Charges
he would raise one thousand Foot, and maintain them during the War; and this to
encourage the Senators and other Great Men of the Kingdom, to do the like
proportionably: For which reason, he desired that he might retain the Command
of Great General in his own hands till the Campagn was ended, for that the
present Urgency of Affairs was like to prevent his Coronation* To which
Propositions the Nobility immediately assented.

A Jointure assigned the Queen-Dowager.
Pursuant to the King's Promise, the Queen-Dowager, by the Consent of the Diet*
had a yearly Revenue of two hundred thousand Guilders assigned her, with
Liberty to reside in any of the Polish Dominions, except Cracow, or some other
fortified Places on the Borders of Silesia; whereupon her Majesty made choice
of Thorn in Prussia for her Residence.

Tho the King was most solicitous to carry on the War against the Turk, yet the
Nobility and Senators were generally as remiss therein: for tho they had
promised him Maintenance for sixty thousand Men, yet he now desired but forty
thousand; however, such were their Dissensions and Jealousies, that they would
not afford him so many.

Notwithstanding, to oppose the Turks, Muscovites and Tartars in the Vkraine,
he got together a small Army of about fifteen or sixteen thousand Men, with
which he marched from Warsaw the 22d of August, toward the Frontiers; when at
the same time the Muscovite General's Army consisted of above one hundred
thousand; but which nevertheless did no damage, being diverted by the Turks by
a Stratagem, insomuch that these, with the Tartars, quickly got possession of
all Vkraina, except two or three Places.

The Troops of Lithuania, consisting of about twelve thousand Men, came up to
the King, which made his Army amount to near thirty thousand; so that he
immediately called a Council of War at Slotzow, and resolved to march directly
toward the Vkraine, with design to fall upon the Enemy with all the fury
imaginable, notwithstanding some Overtures of Peace made him by the Vizier: But
this was looked upon by the Poles only as a Stratagem to amuse them, and foment
the Jealousies of the Muscovites; by which means the Turks thought to divide
them.

Accordingly, upon his Approaches, he sends out the Woievod of Russia to learn
the Condition of the Enemy, who, near the Walls of Caminiec, surpised and
defeated a thousand Turkish Horse, and brought a hundred and fifty away
Prisoners. Whereupon he proceeds vigorously, and takes several Towns of great
Importance in Podolia.

But at this time the Lithuanians would needs leave his Majesty and return
home, alleging, that they were not able to bear the rigor of the Winter. But
nevertheless the King with his Gallant Poles resolved to continue the Campagn,
His Conquests.
and push on his good Fortune; scarce a Week passing, but some considerable
Place or other was yielded to him, the Turks all this while not daring in the
least to oppose him. So that now his Majesty had subdued all that part of
Vkraina, which lies Westward of the Nieper, except only the City of Czebryn.

In April 1675, the Turks and Tartars began in numerous Bodies to take the
Field: notwithstanding the King, animated by his natural Courage, resolved not
to stir a foot, but forthwith reinforced the several Garrisons of Mohilow,
Braclaw, Nimirow, Kalmick and Bialicierkiew; which done, he had hardly forces
enough left to deserve the Name of an Army.

The Turks and Tartars, after having been baffled at Slotskow, marched directly
toward Leopol, where the King's Army lay within a Mile of the Town. That way
the Enemy was to approach, there was an Ascent of about three hundred Paces,
when one was to descend again by a very narrow Way, amidst a Wood that had
lately been cut down. At the foot of this Hill there was a Plain, through which
the Tartars must necessarily pass to come at the Poles. Here the King posted
his Brother-in-Law Duke Radzivil with some Troops for Guard of the Pass on the
Right Hand of his Camp. And General Kariski on the Left, caused several Cannon
to be planted on a Hill, whence they might annoy the Enemy in the Plain. He
also caused the Wood on each side the narrow Way to be well lined with several
Companies of Musketeers. After which his Majesty ordered some Troops of Horse
to advance into the Plain to oppose the Enemy, who about four in the Afternoon
appeared in such Numbers, that they almost covered the Ground. In the mean time
the King from a Hill observed their Motions: After which with his usual Air of
Gallantry, common to him in time of Action, at the Head of the remaining part
of his small Army he descended into the Plain, encouraging his Soldiers, by
telling them that he came there with full Resolution either to conquer, or die.
Whereupon, A Battle.
repeating thrice the Name of Jesus, he briskly advanced toward the Enemy. The
Fight began with great Fury on both sides; the King omitting nothing either as
to Courage or Conduct, but performing both the part of a most prudent General
and a valiant Soldier, by his Example inspiring all the rest of his Officers,
insomuch that with this small handful of Men he forced Multitudes of the Enemy
to fly before Night, leaving behind them incredible Numbers slain upon the
place.

The King would gladly have pursued the Enemy, but that the Night prevented;
and that he feared likewise, lest the Cham might come up to their Assistance.
In this memorable Victory, the greatest perhaps that has been known in any Age,
the King had not actually with him much above five thousand Men, the rest
having been left to secure the City of Leopol and the Passes. With this small
Party, to defeat by downright Fighting an Army of threescore thousand Men, has
more of Prodigy than Probability in it; yet so great was the Fright and
Consternation of these Tartars, that they fled in one Night as many Leagues as
they had marched in three Days before.

But here this Dispute did not end, for the Cham and Ismael Bassa, to show they
were not dismayed at this ill Success, resolved to march against the King; and
in order thereto, commanded a Body of two thousand Janissaries out to attack a
Castle near Brzeziani, wherein were only sixty Poles, who defended themselves
so bravely, that they repulsed the Enemy with great Loss.

Soon after a Body of ten thousand Tartars advancing somewhat near the City of
Leopol, the King sent out the Lord Harkownisky with a good Squadron of Horse
against them, who after a brisk Engagement forced them to take to their Heels,
leaving Thousands of their Companions dead upon the Spot. In this Action there
were several brave Polish Gentlemen slain.

Afterward the King being again ioin'd by the Lithuanians, by which his Army
amounted to fifteen thousand Men, marched to seek out the Enemy, tho by a
modest computation they might be reckoned seven times as many. But
understanding that the Enemy had besieged Podhais taken by the Turks.
Podhais, he was marching thither to relieve it; when, by the way, he received
Intelligence of its being surrendered, burnt and plundered, and twelve thousand
Persons made Prisoners, tho the Garrison had expressly capitulated to march out
with Bag* and Baggage. The King was extremely nettled that so many Christians
should be made Slaves, and his Territories laid desolate; therefore he resolved
forthwith to remedy it, or perish in the Attempt, for he marched the same day
toward the Enemy, who were then set down before Buozalz; but upon notice of
his Approaches, they raised their Siege, and retreated with all their Forces to
Trembowla, which they likewise invested. Here they were often repulsed with
great Loss, yet continued obstinate to pursue their Enterprise, till at last
happening to intercept a Peasant that was carrying a Letter from the King to
the Governor, wherein his Majesty assured him, that he was coming with all
speed to his Relief; the Terror of King Sobieski's Name struck such a
faintness into the Infidels, that they immediately dislodged their Cannon from
their Batteries, which consisted of a hundred Pieces, and forthwith marched
toward Caminiec with a great deal of Confusion. Nay, so great was their
Consternation, that under the Cannon of Caminiec they thought not themselves
sufficiently secure; for not daring to stand an Engagement with the Poles, they
resolved to pass the Niester, and march toward Valachia: Yet this they could
not do so speedily, but Prince Lubomirski, with part of the King's Army, fell
upon their Rear, and slew great Numbers of them. The Turks, by the Fear they
were in of being farther pursued, re-pass'd the Danube, and the Tartars
returned home with great Precipitation by the way of Bialogrod. Whereupon the
King resolved to put his Army into Winter Quarters, and so to return home;
which he did to the Joy and Satisfaction of all his Subjects.

It being now high time to prepare for the Ceremony of the Coronation, January
the 17th the Corpse of the late King Michael was conveyed from Warsaw in a Hearse
drawn by eight Horses, attended by all the Officers of his Household, and
several Persons of Quality, to Cracow; where, together with the Body of King
Casimir, likewise brought lately out of France, it was honorably interred, all
Decency and Respect being paid to both their Memories. This Ceremony being
dispatched, His Coronation. 1676.
John Sobieski, with his Queen Mary, were both Crowned in the Castle of Cracow
the 2d of February, in the Year 1676, with great Pomp and Magnificence.

After this the King applying himself to supply the Vacancies (as usual) made
Lubomirski Grand Marshal of the Kingdom; the Lord Siniawski Court-Marshal, and
Prince Demetrius Wisnowiski Palatin of Beltz. He likewise bestowed the Command
of General of the Forces of the Kingdom on Jablownowski Palatin of Russia, at
present Great General of Poland.

In June following Sultan Nuradin, with the two Sons of the Great Cham, passed
the Niester with a great Army, having sent out Parties before to ravage the
Country. At the same time Ibrahim Bassa advanced likewise to several Posts
about Caminiec. Whereupon the King ordered what Troops he could get together
near Leopol, where they were to rendezvous, and likewise convok'd the
Pospolite, or Militia, for the defense of the Country.

My Lord Rochester's Embassy into Poland in the Year 1676*
The same Year his Excellency Mr. Hyde, now Earl of Rochester, was sent
Ambassador from his Majesty Charles the IId to the Court of Poland, to
congratulate the King upon his Accession to the Crown, and to stand for his
Master Godfather to the young Princess, now Electoress of Bavaria. He arrived
at Dantzic in August, where meeting with the Queen of Poland, who made a
Journey thither while the King was in the Field, he had Audience of her Majesty
there, and presented the young Princess her Daughter with a very rich Jewel, a
Cross of Diamonds of great Value: He afterward set forward for Poland, and was
received by the King in his Camp near Leopol in Russia, with Demonstrations of
Respect and Kindness suitable to his Character and Person; where his Majesty
sent some of his chief Officers to show him the Army, and their way of
Encamping.

The Turks and Tartars began to appear now very formidable, and yet at the same
time continued so sensible of their last Year's Defeats, and so dreaded the
Name of King Sobieski, that they seemed to desire nothing more than Peace; for
which purpose the Grand Seignior, by the Prince of Moldavia, made Peace
concludedwith the Turks.
an Overture for a Treaty, which was accepted after a Battle gained by the
Poles, and some other small Mischiefs done on both sides.

The Peace being thus happily concluded to the Advantage of Poland, his Majesty
returned in November to Zulkiew, his own Patrimony, whither my Lord Rochester
waiting upon him, Audience to the English Ambassador.
had his public Audience there in a more solemn Manner than before. He was
first carried in the King's Coach, and then received by the Court-Marshal, (who
is in the Nature of a Lord Chamberlain) at the Stairs-foot of the Palace, and
was conducted to his Majesty, who received him standing under a rich Canopy of
State: and after two Months residing there, his Excellency had his Audience of
Leave, and returned into England through Silesia, Austria, and the Empire.

The Poles enjoyed this Peace with the Turks till the Year 1683, when they came
under the Command of Cara Mustapha their Grand Vizier, to besiege Vienna,
whereof Count Starenberg He relieves Vienna.
was Governor. The King, with his Son Prince James, Prince Lubomirski, and
most of the Polish Grandees, came with an Army only, as they assured me, of
twenty four thousand Men to relieve it. This the King of Poland was obliged to
by the Alliance signed with his Imperial Majesty in 1683. When being joined by
the Imperial Army, together with the Electors of Bavaria and Saxony, the Duke
of Lorain, and a great Number of other Princes of the Empire, in all amounting
to near fifty thousand Men; he attacked the Turks with such Bravery and
Conduct, that on the 12th of September they, tho consisting of 191800 Men, as
appeared by a List found in the Grand Vizier's Tent, were obliged, after an
entire Defeat, to raise the Siege, and retire Defeat of the Turks.
toward Hungary. The great Standard and the Horse's Tail were taken by the
Poles, who obstinately pursued the Turks in their flight, tho no great way,
being too much fatigued before. There was also great Booty found in the Turkish
Camp, which was wholly plundered, even to the Tent of the Grand Vizier, where
they met with great Riches in Gold, Silver, and other precious things. All
their Ammunition and Baggage, with their Artillery, consisting of above a
hundred Pieces of Cannon, were taken.

This mighty Victory was obtained with not above the Loss of a thousand Men on
the Christians side, and of those very few Persons of Quality. This Overthrow
was chiefly ascribed to the great Conduct and Courage of the King of Poland,
who exposed his Person among the thickest of the Enemy, having always by him
the Prince his Son, who thus early signalized himself. Nor ought the Electors
of Bavaria and Saxony, the Duke of Lorain and Prince Waldec, to go without
their share in the Glory, since they all behaved themselves so wonderfully well
in this memorable Action.

His Entry through the Breach of Vienna.
The King made his Entry into Vienna, through the Breach, with great
Acclamations of the People, the great Turkish Standard being carried before
him, which he afterward sent to the Pope, and which I have seen hung up in the
Church at Loretto in Italy. Next day after his Entry, the Emperor came to meet
him, and made him his Acknowledgments with the most endearing Expressions
imaginable, while K. John received his Compliments with a Modesty equal to his
Courage. After his Imperial Majesty had ordered a rich Sword, set with
Diamonds, to be presented to Prince James, he departed, and the King of Poland
decamped with his Army, and marched toward He pursues the Turks.
Wisena in Hungary, and thence by a Bridge of Boats over the Danube, about a
Mile below Presburg, on the twenty fifth of September; and on the twenty
seventh the Imperial Army followed him over the same Place.

On the ninth of October, understanding that a Body of about fourteen thousand
Turks lay encamped near Barkan, being the choicest of the remaining Troops,
under the Command of several Bassas, the King of Poland, and some of the
Imperial Troops, advanced thither. The Turks no sooner saw them, but they
marched briskly up, and charged them very desperately; but being as warmly
received, after a sharp Encounter the Infidels were put to flight; one of their
Bassas slain, another taken, and the rest of them hurrying over the Bridge at
Gran, the same broke, and all that were upon it drowned; so that of all that
great Body of Men, there were scarce four thousand escaped.

Takes Zytchin in Hungary.
The next considerable Exploit was the taking of Zytchin, a Place of great
Importance in Hungary; for the King having parted with the Duke of Lorain, and
understanding that the Turks had a considerable Garrison at that Place which
might incommode the Communication betwixt his Troops and the Imperialists, he
sent his Son with the Palatin of Lublin to invest it; but the Garrison soon
retired into the Castle, which the King immediately commanded to be stormed:
Whereupon the Turks hung out a white Flag, and the Commander in Chief, with two
others, came out and begged his Majesty to permit them to march to Buda; which
was granted, and they left behind them a great Quantity of Provisions and
Ammunition. This Town he put into the hands of the Imperialists. Next the King
sent to summon two Castles, Brigh and Holoch, which soon yielded at Discretion.
Then he returned to his own Kingdom, but left the Lithuanian Troops in
Winter Quarters behind him. He arrived at Cracow the 21st of December, where he
was joyfully received with Testimonies of an universal Affection from his
People; and to render his Triumphs yet more complete, he was saluted at his
Arrival with the News of the General of the Cosacks, the Sieur Kiniski's having
obtained a great Victory over the Turks and Tartars in the Vkraine.

He afterward made a League Offensive and Enters into a League against the
Turks.
Defensive with the present Emperor, the Pope, and Venetians against the Turks,
which has continued ever since, tho very little to the advantage of either
Party. The Poles, since the Siege of Vienna, have been highly disgusted at the
ill Treatment they received from the Germans, whom they had delivered from the
Turkish Invasion; and besides, it is thought that the King for several Years
leaned toward the French Interest.

It Is certain, that at last he loved Money so Is immoderately Covetous.
well, that I heard the Poles themselves say, That he was the most covetous and
richest Prince that ever swayed their Scepter. Every Year, for the 22 Years he
reigned, they computed that he laid up a hundred thousand Pound sterling; all
which should have been disburs'd in the Expenses of the War, as all his
Predecessors were wont to do. Some of the Gentry told me moreover, that if his
Son James happened to succeed him, he would be obliged to disburse the best part
of that Treasure to pay the eight Years Arrears due then to the Army.

As for what relates to King Sobieski's Person, His Person and Dress.
He was a tall and corpulent Prince, large faced and full eyed, went always in
the same Dress with his Subjects; which because it is different from any other
in Europe, I thought an Account of it would not be unacceptable to your
Lordship. They have all their Hair cut round about their Ears like Monks, and
wear The Habits of his Subjects.
furred Caps, large Whiskers, and no Neckcloths; a long Coat hangs down to
their Heels, and a Wastcoat under that of the same length tied close about the
Waste with a Girdle: Their Sleeves are extreme close, like those of Mariners,
coming down to their Wrists, with a Flap on the back of the Hand, which reaches
as far as the middle Nuckle, which they turn up in hot Weather, and let down in
cold, for they never wear any Gloves. This long Coat is of strong Cloth, and is
lined in the Winter with rich Fur, but in Summer only with light Silk; tho I
have seen at Court some of the Persons of Quality wear Furs as they used to do
in Winter, for it is a fine Ornament: under this Wastcoat they wear wide Shirts
like Women's Smocks, tied loose about their Necks, with wide Sleeves coming down
to their Wrists. As to their Breeches they are likewise very wide, and with
their Stockings make one continued piece. Instead of Shoes they always wear
both abroad and at home Turkey Leather Boots with very thin Soles, and hollow
deep Heels made of a blade of Iron bent hoopwise into the form of a Half Moon.
They carry a large Scimiter, the Sheath equally flat and broad from the handle
to the bottom; it is generally set richly with Diamonds, according to the
Quality of the Person. It Is customary all over the Kingdom, not only among the
Gentry, but also amongst the Vulgar, to carry Pole-Axes in their Hands, or on
their Arms; they take care that this Pole-Ax be kept bright and shining, with
Plates of Silver round the handle, and sometimes set with Jewels. I have seen
the Palatins and other Senators come with those Pole-Axes into the King's
Presence, which seemed when I came first to Court a^^ frightful Sight, tho
reckoned an Ornament; but I was informed that at first it was for Defense, the
Nation being tumultuous and quarrelsom, that they might make use of these
Pole-Axes in a Throng where their Scimiters could be of no use. This Dress
looks extreme manly, particularly on Horseback, and is the most expensive of
any that I have seen in Europe; for their Furs are very fine and dear, their
very Fur Caps cost sometimes 20 or 30 Guineas: they change the Fashion of
making their Clothes as often as our Western Countries do.

His Character.
The King was a well spoken Prince, of very easy Access, and extreme civil, and
had most of the good Qualities requisite in a Gentleman; he was not only well
versed in all Military Affairs, but likewise in all Polite and Scholastic
Learning; besides his own Tongue the Sclavonian, he understood the Latin,
French, Italian, German and Turkish Languages; he delighted much in Natural
History, and in all the parts of Physic; he used to reprimand the Clergy for
not admitting into the University and Schools the Modern Philosophy; he loved
to hear Persons discourse of those Matters, and had a particular Talent to set
People about him very artfully by the Ears, that by their Disputes he might be
diverted, as happened often in my time, especially He engages the Author in a
Physical Dispute.
once when I was undesignedly concerned my self; the King being at Dinner, and
having the Bishops of Posnania, Plosko, Vilna, and other Divines about him,
particularly Father Vota, an ingenious Jesuit, the King asked me in Latin, What
part of the Body I thought the Soul was in? I was willing to decline talking of
that Subject, and told the King, That being a Physician, my chief Enquiry was
about the Body, and that the Divines there present were able to satisfy his
Majesty. The King replied, That since the Soul has an Influence upon the Body,
and since the Passions of the Mind, as Anger and Fear, breed Fevers and other
Distempers, it was necessary that the Physicians should examine the Soul in
that respect as well as the Body. I answered, That Physicians did enquire into
the Nature of Passions, and observed that there was such an Influence of the
Soul upon the Body, and of the Body upon the Soul, that altered the thoughts of
the one as well as the Operations of the other; but that the Soul being a
Substance invisible, and without Extension, it was impossible for Physicians to
conceive the Nature of it themselves, or explain it to others, as they do that
of the Body, which they take into pieces by Anatomy, and resolve into its
minutest Elements by Chemistry; that the Physicians only agree in the main,
that the supreme Author of things has established such Laws between the Soul
and the Body, which make a mutual Correspondence between them; that as for the
Seat of the Soul, I might perhaps differ from the Divines then present, and
consequently oppose the common Doctrine of the Schools, for they hold, with
Aristotle, that the Soul is entire in all the Body, and wholly in every part of
the Body, which was impossible to conceive; for if the Soul was entire in every
part of the Body, there would be as many Souls in the Body as there are Parts,
since it is impossible that the self-same Substance, tho an indivisible Spirit,
can ever be in two places at the same time; besides, the Soul cannot be but
where it does think* and every one finds by Experience, that his Thought is not
in his Hands nor Feet, but is conscious to himself that his Thought is in his
Head, and that consequently the Soul must be only in the Brain, which is the
Seat of Sensation, and the Origin of all the Nerves, which are the Organs of
Perception and Motion. Father Vota being alarmed at this Doctrine, which seemed
altogether new in that part of Europe, said, That if the Soul was only in the
Head, the rest of the Body would be dead, since the received Opinion was, that
the Soul was the Life of the whole Body, and that to enliven the whole Body,
the Soul must be wholly present in every part of it. This drew on a longer
Dispute than I expected; for I answered, That the Rational Soul was not the
Life of the Body, but the Blood only and the Animal Spirits, and that this
Blood and Spirits circulated equally all over the Body, and gave it its natural
Heat and Motion, which is properly its Life: and that this Circulation of the
Blood and Spirits could not possibly depend on the Rational Soul, because it
was an involuntary Motion formed by the Mechanic Structure of the Body, and by
the natural Impulse of the Heart, which is the Primum Mobile of the whole
Machine; and that tho they all held not only in Poland, but in other Countries,
that the Rational Soul performed every minute Action in the Body, yet this
Opinion was irreconcilable with the free Will of the Mind, which they all
admitted* for since they allow that whatever the Soul does, not only it is
conscious of it, but likewise does it freely without being necessitated
thereto; when as it is evidently obvious to every one, that the vital Motions
in our Bodies, I mean the Motion of the Heart, and that of Respiration, with
the Peristaltic Motion of the Stomach and Guts, are performed naturally with
such Mechanism that the Soul cannot stop them; no nor as much as hasten or
retard them, and that the Soul is not at all conscious of them; for if we think
of any Object, or not think at all, as when we are asleep, or in an Apoplex,
those vital Motions go on equally the same.

The Bishop of Posnania, who was bred up in his Youth a Physician, seemed to
speak in favor of this Opinion, as did likewise some others of the Company;
which made the Jesuit very angry, insomuch that he acquainted them in a kind of
Passion, That neither the King nor they ought to hearken to any Discourse
contrary to the received Opinion of the Church; that it might have been a
pernicious Discourse had it been public: for (says he) if the Soul be not in
all the Body, and if it does not animate the Body and perform all its vital
Functions, it would be of no use, and consequently we should live like other
Animals. I answered him, That doubtless the Operations of Life were performed
by the same Mechanism in us as they were in Brutes, since we have the same
Organs with them, as likewise the same Fluids to enliven us: That the
Prerogatives of the Soul are not less for its not being present to every Action
of the Body; for the Soul, tho it is not the cause of spontaneous or vital
Motion in us, yet it performs all voluntary Actions, as speaking, walking, and
all other free Motions of the Body; it received all Impressions from the five
Senses; it forms to it self all Ideas of ambient Objects: it reasons upon them,
to know what is most useful and hurtful to it self, and to the Body. The Soul,
in short, is like the Pilot, tho it does not set the Body in motion, as the
Wind does a Ship, yet it is capable of governing its Actions, and directing
voluntarily its Course.

The Dispute continues.
The King being thus satisfied, that the rational Soul did not actuate, as they
call it, or enliven all the Parts of the Body, desired to know what was
properly Death. The School Divinity maintains that Death was a Separation of
the rational Soul from the Body. I owned indeed that in Death the Soul was
actually separated from the Body, but I could not allow that that Separation
was the cause of Death, but that the Death of the Body was the Cessation of the
Motion of the Heart, of the Blood, and of the Spirits; which Cessation could
not proceed from the Separation of the Soul, since these don't at all depend
upon it, as I proved before; but it was occasioned by some Defects in the
Organs and Fluids of the Body, which losing their due Disposition, and their
mutual Correspondence with one another, all their Actions cease, which
Cessation is properly called Death; so that the Soul finding them incapable of
receiving its Influence, and of obeying its Commands, quits the Body after it
is dead: by which it appears that the Separation of the Soul is not properly
the Cause of Death, but that the Death of the Body is the cause of the
Separation. The King himself illustrated this Opinion with a familiar Example
of an Organ and an Organist: While the Organs were in their due order and
symetry, the Organist played upon them; but when by length of time they were
either broke, used too much, or any other way quite put out of Tune, he leaves
off playing on them.

This Discourse, my Lord, held from three of the Clock till seven, and the
Divines were extremely warm in it; and some of them had the boldness to tell
the King, that his Majesty should not suffer such Heretical Opinions (as they
called them) to be introduced before such a great Assembly, contrary to the
received Doctrine of the Church. This Discourse caused a great many other
Matters to be talked on, of which it would be too long to inform your Lordship.
By this you may plainly see how fond the Divines are of their old Opinions,
relying upon the Doctrine of Aristotle, whom we cannot suppose to be so
thoroughly acquainted with the Structure, Springs, and Motions of the Humane
Body, nor indeed with all other Natural Causes, as the Modern Physicians are:
yet it is the Policy of the Divines, not only in Poland, but in Spain, Italy,
and in most other Countries where their Power is very great, not to let any
Opinions creep in among them, that would seem to contradict those of Aristotle;
for having built their Systems of Divinity upon the Principles of this Pagan
Philosopher, they are justly afraid, that if Experience and Reason should shake
the Foundation, the Superstructure would fall to the Ground, as doubtless it
would for the most part.

His Buildings.
This King built several fine Houses both in Russia, and other parts of the
Kingdom, particularly three Miles from Warsaw, a neat Country House called
Villa Nova, very richly furnished. He has had several Natural Children, but
took no care of any of them; for it is not customary in Poland to have that
Consideration for them as there is in other Countries: but he left vast Riches
to his Lawful Children, and made a Motion in the Diet five His Care of his
Children.
or six Years before he died, to settle the Succession on one of them. He told
the Assembly of the Disorders that usually happened in Elections after the
King's Death; that the Turks and the Tartars took then Opportunities to make
Inroads into the Country and ravage all before them; that the Nobility of the
Kingdom were generally divided, headed by Factions, and biased by
Self-interest against the public Good of their Country; and that he himself
would be glad to prevent all those dangerous Broils before he died, out of the
Love he bore to his Country, and Subjects. But the Diet finding that his
private Design was to get one of his Sons elected, answered, That they hoped
that his Majesty would live yet a long while; that it was necessary to take a
long time to consider of a Matter of that great moment: which the King seeing
it was a civil way of refusing to enter upon that Subject, never after
intimated any thing to them like it, but took all possible care to enrich his
Children in case none of them should be elected after his Death. It was exactly
computed to me that he laid up every Year for above twenty Years 100000 l.
Sterling. which His great Riches.
he left partly in Bankers Hands at Dantzick, Hamburgh and Amsterdam, and put
the rest into the hands of the Jews, who are very numerous in that Kingdom, to
trade with it; besides, he bought great Territories in the Kingdom, tho it is
against the Constitution; so that his three Sons, James, Alexander and
Constantino, if they manage their Affairs right, may be worth each above 50000
l. Sterling per Annum; for it is the Law in Poland, to divide equally the
Estate among the Children.

The Queen's first coming into Poland.
The Queen was but ten or twelve Years of Age, when she together with the
present Duke of Gordon's Aunt, afterward married to Count Morstin great
Treasurer of Poland, came from France into this Kingdom, with Ladislaus King of
Poland's Queen, who made them both her Maids of Honor, and took great care of
Mademoiselle d' Arquien, being very ingenious Her first Marriage.
and beautiful: She got her married first to Prince Zamoiski, who soon left her
a Widow, with a Jointure of about 2000 l. a Year; she was afterward married in
Casimir's Reign to John Sobieski, then Captain of the Guards, who was not very
willing to marry her until the King promised that he would give him
considerable Places, which he accordingly did by the Instigation of the Queen,
for he made him Great Marshal, and Great General of Poland, which gave him
Authority and Interest enough to make himself afterward King, and her Queen;
so that this Marriage was the occasion of his Rise in the World, which he was
so sensible of, that he refused to be divorced from her, as the Diet would have
persuaded him to do after his Election.

Her Age, and Qualifications.
The Queen is now about fifty four Years of Age, tho she appears not to be
forty; she goes in the French Dress, as all the Polish Ladies do; she speaks
almost naturally the *Polish Tongue; which with lier sweet Temper, refined
Sense, and majestic Air, gained her such Affection with the Poles, such
Influence over the King, and such Interest always in the Diet, that she managed
all with a great deal of Prudence, and that to the advantage of her native
Country France, whose Interest she generally espoused upon most occasions
during the King's Life; which was believed to be the Cause that he did not
carry on the War with vigor these late years against the Turks and Tartars.
She maintained at her Court her Father Cardinal D' Arquien, and her Brother
Count Maligny, who had but a very small Estate of their own. She has two
Sisters, one is the Widow of the late Count Bethune, who was Ambassador from
France in Poland, and afterward died in his Embassy in Sweden; the other is
the Widow of a Nobleman in Poland.

Her Address in disposing of Employments.
The Queen had the Art to dispose of all the Employments in the Kingdom for
Money; for the King, who by the Constitution ought not himself to sell any
Place, gave to understand privately, that all Persons should apply themselves
to her first, that she might secretly negotiate the Price of every Preferment;
which she did very industriously, and obliged them furthermore to take an Oath
to espouse the Interest of one of her Children after the King's Death. The
Poles never scrupled those Oaths, tho they were resolved to keep them no longer
than they thought it for their Interest, which was manifested at this last
Election, in which so few appeared for Prince James; for this unlawful way of
treating the Nobility, together with the King's extreme Covetousness, and
Prince James's Inconstancy toward his Friends, set the Minds of the Gentry
against them.

Pr. James his Character.
This Prince is black, has a thin and meagre Look, and is of a low Stature,
more like a Frenchman or a Spaniard than a Pole; he is very sociable and
courteous. He is now about the Age of thirty, and has made several Campagns
with the King his Father, particularly that of Vienna; and had his Conduct been
answerable to his Courage, he would doubtless have made a more considerable
Party: He is extremely Liberal, which is the only good Quality he excels his
Father in: He was first contracted in Marriage to the rich Heiress of the House
of Radzevil in Lithuania, who was Widow of the present Elector of Brandenburg's
Brother, who died without Issue. An Envoy was sent to Berlin to negotiate the
Marriage, which was agreed upon by the Elector's and her Consent, and the
Prince himself came thither in Person with a numerous Attendance to consummate
it. At the same time came to Berlin the Elector Palatin's Brother, Prince
Charles of Newburg, Brother to the Empress, to see the Ceremony of the
Marriage; but this Princess taking more fancy to him than to the Prince of
Poland, gave him encouragement His intended Marriage disappointed;
to make his Addresses to her; which he did with that success, that he engaged
her so far, and so unexpectedly, that he was privately married to her the night
before she was to be married to the Prince of Poland, so that Prince James was
forced to return back shamefully: which the King his Father resented so highly,
that he was resolved to have satisfaction from the Elector of Brandenburg for
suffering his Son to receive so notorious an Affront at his Court; but the
Elector knowing nothing of that private Intrigue, justified himself, and all
Animosities were at last adjusted by Prince James's marrying his Rival's
Sister, But married to another.
the Princess of Newburg, who was sent into Poland, and has two Daughters by
him. This Account I learned in Poland, which was lately confirmed to me here in
Town by the Sieur Dankelman, now Envoy Extraordinary from the Elector of
Brandenburg at our Court.

A Character of his two Brothers.
Prince James has two Brothers, Alexander and Constantine, who were not taken
notice enough of in my time, to give your Lordship a Character of them, the
eldest being but eighteen, and the other sixteen. Alexander was a tall and
proper young Man, of a true Polish Complexion. The Queen had more kindness for
him than for Prince James, as I observed when he was any ways indisposed; she
was very careful of his Health, and did not seem much concerned for Prince
James, tho he was a weak and sickly Person.

Little Respect paid to the King's Children.
I was surpised to see the little deference the Nobility paid to these
Princes, who did not seem to take much more notice of them than of other
Gentlemen, and treated them very familiarly: for they say that the King's Sons,
by the Law, are no more than Gentlemen; and that if they give them the Title of
Prince or of Highness, it is more out of Courtesy to them, and Respect to the
King, than out of any Obligation they lay under to do it. The People had more
Esteem for Prince Alexander and Constantine, because they were born after the
King's Election, than for Prince James, who was born before; for they
superstitiously imagined that some Royal Stamp was engraven upon them, or some
Royal Tincture infused into their Blood, to give it a more exalted Nature.
Prince James was Knight of the Golden Fleece, which made him obnoxious to the
French Party. Prince Alexander and Constantine are, since my time, made (as I
am told) Knights of the Holy Ghost, as the King himself was, which makes them
suspected to the House of Austria to be of the French Faction.

The Character of the Princess.
The King had one Daughter, the Princess Teresa Cunigunda, now about twenty
three years of Age, who, tho she be not a complete Beauty, yet is a very comely
Lady, of a middle size; and tho she has not the Life and Vivacity, nor the Air
and Wit of the Queen her Mother, yet has she a great deal of Sense, Modesty,
and all the Accomplishments becoming her Birth: She is well versed in the
French, Italian, Latin, and the Polish Languages; tho she seems in her Carriage
and Discourse to be humble, obliging, and of an easy affable Temper, yet she is
of her self high-spirited and Her Marriage.
imperious. She was married in my time to his Highness the present Elector of
Bavaria, who twice sent thither Baron Zell, and afterward Baron Simeoni, his
Envoys Extraordinary, to negotiate and conclude this Marriage: for the Duke of
Bavaria having had but one Son by his deceased Electoress, the Emperor's
Daughter by the Infanta of Spain, younger Sister to the late Queen of France;
and this young Prince being designed to be King of Spain, if the present King
should die without Issue, as is likely to be, the Bavarians were afraid their
Country should be reduced into a Province, and therefore desired the Elector to
marry a second time, to have more Children that might reign over them, in case
the eldest Son should be called into Spain.

The King and Queen of Poland agreed to this Match, and gave 500000 Rix Dollars
for Her Portion.
her Portion, besides Jewels and other Expenses in her Journey, and the third
part of her Mother's personal Estate when she dies, which is reckoned at 50000
Rix Dollars more. The Ceremony of the Marraige was performed Ceremony of her
Marriage.
in the Month of August at Warsaw in the Year 1694, with a great deal of
Splendour and Magnificence. Most of the Persons of Quality and their Ladies and
Children came to this Solemnity from all Parts of the Kingdom; for there had
not been a Princess of Poland married for above 150 years before. The Ladies
were very richly dressed, and I saw at that time more Jewels in that Court, than
in any other that ever I was at. The Gentlemen and Ladies, after the usual
Custom in Poland, gave great Presents to the young Princess, some fine Pieces
of Plate, some Watches set with Diamonds, some precious Jewels, every one
making a Complement to her in a very formal manner. It was thought that the
presents amounted to the value of 100000 Rix Dollars. The Hospodar of Moldavia
sent her a pair of Pendants of a considerable Value. This Custom of making
Presents to the Bride is not only for Kings Daughters, but for every one else
according to their Quality; and the Gentlemen's Daughters do not so much reckon
upon the Portion their Fathers give them, as upon their Number of Relations and
Friends, who are to make them Presents; and the Husband is as diligent to know
how many Relations she has, as how much her Father will give her.

Pr. James officiates as Ambassador.
Upon the day of Marriage Prince James, the young Bride's Brother, took upon
him, by the King and the Elector of Bavaria's Consent, the Quality of
Ambassador for that day, by reason that the Court would not receive (as was
secretly whilsper'd) Ambassadors from the Duke of Bavaria, as being not an
absolute Prince: He went three Miles out of Town in the Morning, and about two
of the Clock in the Afternoon made a most solemn Entry on Horseback, having
his Brothers Prince Alexander on his Right Hand, and Prince Constantine on his
Left, preceded by a great Number of Coaches with six Horses, and a noble
Cavalcade of the Polish Gentry, who went two by two.

The Ceremony continues.
Thus he marched through the City to the Palace, where he was received by the
King and Queen; and after half an hour the great Officers of the Crown, the
Palatins and other Senators, with an incredible Number of Gentry, began to
march from the Palace on Foot two by two, upon Scarlet Cloth spread all along
to St. John's Church, being about three hundred Paces; after them Prince James
led the Bride, the French Ambassador Monsieur de Polignae led the Queen, and
the King came last alone with a grave majestic Countenance. The Ceremony of
the Marriage was performed by Cardinal Radziouski the present Primate, who was
the King's Relation. Afterward they returned to the Palace where they were
nobly entertained for four days together, with Feasts, Balls, Fireworks, and
an Italian Pastoral in nature of an Opera, made upon this occasion by the
Secretary of the Pope's Nuncio.

Equipage for her Journey.
After the Ceremony was over, a splendid Equipage was prepared for the
Princess's Journey from Warsaw to Brussels. The Bishop of Ploskow was named
Ambassador, and the Palatine of Vilna's Lady, Prince Czartoriski's Daughter,
was appointed Embassadress: Monsieur Zalowski the Bishop's Brother and his Lady
were likewise named, besides abundance of Gentlemen, and about forty of the
King's Lifeguard, to attend her Electoral Highness. The Ambassador represented
to their Majesty's, that in such a long Journey of near 1000 Miles, and in
frosty Weather, it was necessary to send a Physician with the Princess for fear
of any Accident or Distemper by the way: one Signior Revelli an Italian, and
several other Physicians made Interest for this place; but the Queen would by
no means employ any of them, having no Opinion of their Skill. Hereupon, my
Lord, I spoke to Mr. Alberti your Brother, Minister there from the Republic of
Venice, who had great Interest with the King and Queen, and desired him to get
me employed in that Journey, for I longed to be out of that remote Country (tho
I had not been a twelve Month in it) to come for England: for tho the King and
Queen had a great deal of Kindness for me, and Prince James (whom the Court
Party looked upon to be the King's Successor) promised me a considerable
Pension after the King's Death, yet seeing that the King, then being sixty four
Years of Age, very corpulent, and laboring under several Distempers, as the
Dropsy, Gout, Rheumatism, and Oppression of the Lungs, could not live long, and
that Prince James was not beloved; and besides having never had any mind to
engage my self to live in any Foreign Country, I resolved to come out of that
Kingdom. Their Majesty's, not knowing my private Resolution of coming for
England, did me the Honor to name me Physician to wait upon the Princess in
her Journey, which I was very ready to comply with, tho to outward appearance I
did not seem much desirous of it; this, my Lord, gave me opportunity to come
out of that Country sooner than I could have decently done till the King was
dead; which I must owe entirely to the Friendship and Interest of Mr. Alberti,
who is a great Lover of the English Nation.

Begins her Journey.
The Princess set forward on the 11 th of November following with a Retinue of
about two hundred Persons, all which came to Brussels with her, besides
abundance of the Nobility who waited upon her Highness to the Frontiers of
Brandenburg. The Palatins of the Provinces received and entertained her in all
the Towns she passed through with a great deal of Splendour and Expense: our
first Reception was at Lowitz, the Cardinal Primate's Castle; here the Princess
lay one Night, and was most magnificently entertained. The next was at Posnan,
a considerable City in the Province of Posnania, where she lay two Nights: the
Palatin and the City made her a Present, entertained all her Retinue, and got
Fireworks ready for her Reception. From thence we went to Frankfurt upon the
Oder in the E. of Brandenburgh's Country, where his Electoral Highness sent his
chief Officers to attend and compliment her: from thence we went to Berlin,
where the Elector and Electoress came two Miles out of Town Her Reception as
Berlin.
with a numerous Attendance to receive her; they took her into their own Coach,
and marched in order to the Palace, giving her with roaring of Cannons, and
ringing of Bells, all Demonstrations of Respect: Here she lay two Nights; the
Court appeared most splendid and very numerous, and the Elector got some
Fireworks which represented the King and Queen of Poland, and the Elector and
Electoress of Bavaria's Names; there were Balls both Nights, and English
Country-Dances, which the Electoress of Brandenburg, being descended from the
Blood Royal of England, delighted extremely in; it was the first time the
Princess of Poland had seen any, and therefore was extremely pleased. I was
glad to see some of our English Gentlemen, who traveled in Italy in my time,
as Mr. Archer, Mr. Ward, Mr. Duncomb, and the late deceased Mr. Tent, made so
much of at this Court, and behave themselves so handsomely at the Balls. The
Princess of Poland made Presents to the Electoress of Brandenburg, and to most
of the chief Officers of the Court; and the Electoress of Brandenburg likewise
made her a rich Present of a Poesy set with Diamonds, and to the rest of her
chief Officers other Presents. Afterward we set forwards on our Journey, and
were entertained for twelve days together in the Elector's Country; it is usual
with him to defray the Charges of all Princes while they are within the limits
of the Marquisate of Brandenburg: But when the Princess of Poland went out of
it into the other Territories of his Electoral Highness, she bore her own
Expenses; the chief Towns notwithstanding, as Magdeburgh and Menden,
entertained her, as did likewise the Elector of Hanover, the Bishop of
Heidelsheim, and the Bishop of Munster, for we past through some Skirts of
their Territories.

I must take notice to your Lordship, that passing through a part of the
Elector of Hanover's Country, we received News that Count Koningsmark, a Swede,
thought to have been familiar with the Princess of Hanover, the Elector's
Daughter-in-law, was made away with at that Court, and never heard of since. At
last we arrived about the latter end of December at Wesel, a fortified Town
belonging to the E. of Brandenburg, upon the Borders of the Rhine, near six
days Journey from Brussels; the Elector of Bavaria with his Court came hither
to receive his Princess, but the River being full of great Flakes of Ice, he
could not pass it in two days: but at last being impatient to see his Bride, he
ventured over in a little Boat with Prince Chimay, Is met by the Elector.
Baron Simeoni, and two or three more of his Courtiers; I happened to be in the
Room when he came in alone by way of the back Stairs, and saluted his Princess
with all the tender Expressions of Joy and Affection; and after having spent
about half an hour with her in Compliments, he turned to the Ambassador and to
the rest of the Company, and thanked us all for the Trouble and Fatigue of so
long a Journey; then he and the Princess with the Ambassador and Embassadress
withdrew into another Room, where they past about an hour and an half. In the
mean time a great many other of the Elector's Retinue came in, so that the
Court was very numerous at Nine of the Clock at Night; and thus the Elector
past till Ten of the Clock, then went to sup abroad, and immediately after
Supper came to wait on the Princess again, and about One of the Clock in the
Morning he left her and went to Bed to his Inn. He came to her the next Morning
to make his Court, and to desire her Consent that the Marriage might be
consummated that Night, which being accordingly done, he sent a Courier after
Midnight to the King his Father-in-law, to acquaint him therewith. The next
Morning there was a rich Hungarian Suit of Clothes given him to wear that day
from the King of Poland, valued at 30000 Rix Dollars; it was a long Coat of
Crimson Velvet, the Button-holes set with Clasps of Massy Gold, and a Wastcoat
of Cloth of Gold set with Diamond Buttons, and a Girdle of fine Turkey Leather
wrought with Gold, with massy Gold Clasps likewise set with Jewels, a Scimiter
with the Handle richly adorned with Diamonds and Rubies, and an Emerald Ring of
great Value, with a rich Zibelin Muff. In the Afternoon we all Proceeds on her
Journey.
past the River, and next day the Baggage followed: all the Coaches, the King's
Guards, and most of the Retinue returned back into Poland; for by the Articles
of Marriage no body was to stay with her except two Pages, two Women, and a she
Dwarf. The Elector's Guards and Coaches were on the other side of the River to
receive the Princess: She went through Antwerp to Mecklin, and from thence to
Brussels, where we arrived, after two Months Journey, on the 12 th of January.
I need not acquaint your Lordship with all the Preparations made here by his
Highness for the Reception of his Electoress, nor of the Presents he gave to
her Retinue, nor the Opera's and Comedies purposely made for the Solemnity of
her Marriage; I will only say, that I never saw a genteeler Court, better
Order, more Formalities, more variety of Dresses, nor the Punctilio's of Honor
and Courtesy more strictly observed. There were great Rejoicings all the first
Week, until the Court received the unwelcome News of the Death of our late
Queen Mary. Sometime afterward, having left the Care of the Princess's Health
to Monsieur Pistorini the Elector's Physician, I took my Leave of her Highness,
and went for Holland, from whence I arrived at London in the Month of February,
in the Year 1694/5.

The King's Sister.
The King of Poland had no near Relations except one Sister, who was married to
that Duke Radzivil, who writ in Latin his Travels into the Holy Land, and
describes the Pyramids of Egypt; he has been dead several Years, and his
Duchess died at Warsaw in my time. What small Reputation I got in that Country
in the Practice of Physic was by her Death; for when I arrived at Warsaw, the
A Consultation of Physicians.
King made me consult with all the Physicians of the Town, which were about
ten, concerning her Disease. His Majesty's first Physician was Dr. Jonas an
Italian and professed Jew; for your Lordship must understand, that in Poland,
particularly at Court, Religion is no Objection against any Person, especially
a Physician, since the King at his Coronation promises to protect four
Religions, the Roman, which he must seem to be of himself, the Protestant, the
Greek, and that of the Jews. I examined the Princess's Disease, and found it
was an Ague fomented by an Abscess in the Liver, which made her vomit up all
that she took; I thought her Case very desperate, tho her ordinary Physicians
made no account of it, thinking it was only an Ague which the constant use of
Jesuits Powder would infallibly cure. I discovered they were not acquainted
with the inward Cause of her Disease, being not versed in Anatomy; wherefore I
desired that most of the Learned Gentlemen at Court would be present to hear
their Reasons and mine. Dr. Jonas, who spoke first, gave his Opinion that there
was no fear; and that she should persist only in the use of the Bark, with
which they had crammed her for three Months before; all the rest followed his
Opinion. I spoke last, and summed up all their Arguments, to compare them with
her Distemper, and declared against their Method, and intimated that I believed
she could not live long let them change their Method ever so much for the
better. This alarmed the whole Court in a quarter of an hour. The Physicians
assured the contrary, and urged that I was a Stranger to the Climate, and to
the Princess's Constitution and Disease; and they promised in a little time,
tho some of them began to be dissident, to set her upon her Legs again:
notwithstanding she grew worse and worse every day, and died in a Month's time
in the 62 d Year of her Age. The Queen ordered her to be opened, and three
Bishops were present, but none of the Physicians would come but my self; we
found not only an Abscess in her Liver, but likewise a great many square Stones
like Dice in her Gall, Bladder, and other Stones in one of her Kidneys, besides
a great deal of Gravel in her Liver, which grated and crumbled its whole
Substance into putrid Matter.

Her Issue.
This Princess left only a Son and a Daughter: Duke Radzivil her Son married a
Relation of Prince Sapieha; and her Daughter was married to Prince Lubomirski.
Duke Radzivil told me that he traveled here in England when King James II. was
Crowned, and that the King his Uncle sent him the Character of Envoy to
compliment him upon his Accession to the Throne: He used to admire the
Government of England, and to say that it was the best in Europe, except that
of his own Country; and the chief Reason he gave me why he preferred the
Constitution of Poland, was, that the King of England had a Power of turning
People out of Employments, and the common People had the Benefit of the Law,
and could buy Estates as well as the greatest Nobleman. This Prince showed me
an old Roman Scimiter which his Father brought from Jerusalem, and told me it
was that with which St. Peter cut off Malcus's Ear: which a great many had
either Faith or Superstition enough to believe, and paid it a great deal of
Respect.

The year after I came into England, the King of Poland's Symptoms increasing
more and more, the Ambassador Monsieur Zalowski, Bishop of Ploskow, sent me
from Warsaw to London the following Letter, desiring Advice concerning his
Majesty's Distemper, which was very uncommon and extraordinary.

A Monsieur le Docteur Connor a Londres.
Varsovie 2 Juin 1696. Monsieur,
EN Attendant que Je vous Envoye les Memoires que vous Souhaitez pour l'
Histoire de Pologne and de notre Roy, qui requierent queque loisir, que Je n'ay
pas encore pu prendre, comme Je tacheray de fair le plutot qu'il me sera
possible, Vous obligeriez beaucoup sa Majeste si sur l' Information, que vous
verrez au bas de cette Lettre touchant l' Etat de sa Sante, Vous vouliez bien
prendre la peine d'en donner vos Avis, and Conseils, and d'en prendre aussi des
plus habiles Gens de la Profession, don't votre Royaume est si fertile; Vous
asseurant que vous en aurez du Merit auprez de leurs Majestez, and que vous
travaillerez a votre propre Gloire, que Je Souhaiteray de voir par la
augmentee, etant

Monsieur, Votre tres-humble Serviteur, E. de Ploskow.

Information de l'Etat de la Sante du Roy de Pologne.
SA Majeste a les pies, les jambes, and les cuisses, meme la Region Inferieure
du bas ventre tumifiees considerablement depuis queque tems, que ces Tumeurs
sont augmenteezde jour en jour depuis cette Ete quelles avoient commence a
paroitre, quoique l'on appliquat les plus efficaces remedes interieurs and
exterieurs pour en empecber le Progrez, and pour les dissiper. Lors qu'on
press du doit ces Tumeurs, il ne rest aucun vestige du doit; Carces Tumeurs
ont la durete du Fer and la pesanteur du Plomb: Quand sa Majeste march elle
croit avoir un poid pesant attache a ses jambes, la durete de ces Tumeurs ne
peut etre amollie, cependant lors qu'on frotte avec un linge chaud les parties
embarrassees and affligees, else semblent d'abord etre Degagees and Soulagees.
Mais peu apres else retournent a leur premier Etat: La Couleur de ces Parties
tumiflees n'est point Pale, mais Pourpree tirant verse le rouge.

Englished thus.
Warsaw the 2d of June 1696. SIR,
I Will send you as soon as possible the Memoirs you desire for the History of
Poland and of our King, which require more leisure than I could have hitherto
had. In the mean time you would mightily oblige his Majesty, if upon the
Information you will find at the bottom of this Letter concerning the State of
his Health, you would please to give your Opinion and Advice thereupon, and
likewise consult with the Ablest of your Profession, who are so very numerous
in your Kingdom, about it. I assure you, you will greatly gain their Majesty's
Esteem thereby, and advance your own Reputation, which I wish increased by
these means. Being,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, E. Ploskow.

An Account of the State of Health of the King of Poland.
HIS Majesty's Feet, Legs, and Thighs, as likewise the lower Part of his Belly,
have been considerably swelled for a good while. These Swellings have daily
increased since they began this Summer, notwithstanding the most effectual
Remedies, both Inward and Outward, which have been made use of to prevent their
Progress, and to discuss them. When these Tumors are pressed with one's Finger,
they do not pit, for they are almost as hard as Iron, and as heavy as Lead.
When his Majesty walks, he imagins he has a great Weight tied to his Legs. The
hardness of these Tumors cannot be softened: Nevertheless, when the swollen Parts
are rubbed a little with a hot Cloth, they seem immediately to be abated and
eased; but soon after they return to their former condition. The Color of the
Swellings is not pale, but reddish, something enclining to Purple.


The King's Death.
A Week after I received this Letter, news came that this Prince was dead, as I
could not but reasonably expect he would be, laboring under so rare and
dangerous a Disease, being a Dropsy turned into a Schirrus, or into a hard and
insensible Tumor. Cases of this nature, my Lord, are very seldom seen. I have
spoke lately with some old Practitioners in Physic that had never met with
any; for my part, I have never observed any Disease like it; and I was at first
surpised that the King's Legs, that used to pit an Inch deep when I was at his
Court, should become so very hard and so heavy afterward; but considering that
in our Mass of Blood there is, even naturally, a great deal of earthy Parts or
Dregs, and that these Lees may, by way of Sediment, fall into the Legs, and
that their Weight and Quantity can hinder them from ascending to the Heart with
the circulating Fluids, I rather admired why Cases of this nature do not more
frequently happen, particularly in old and Plethoric People, as the King was.
These hard Swellings of his Legs hindered the Blood to circulate downwards, and
so drove up all the Humors to the Head; which oppressing and overflowing the
Brain, caused an Apoplexy, of which he died the 17th of June, fifteen days
after the date of my Letter, in the Year 1696, in the sixty sixth Year of his
Age, and the 22d of his Reign. He was the oldest King then in Christendom. He
kept his Subjects in great Awe, and the greatest Noblemen paid him all the
Respect imaginable; they never used at Court to eat with him at his Table. He
dined always in Public, and the Great Men waited upon him, served him with
drink, and none of his Subjects ever covered themselves in his Presence. And I
admired to see the Persons that abused him in the Parliament House, and spoke
to him with all freedom when he sat on the Throne, pay him so great a
Submission and Respect everywhere else. But the Liberty of a Member of that
Parliament is such, that he can speak what he thinks, and think what he
pleases, without any Fear of the King.

The Interregnum.
After the King's Death, Cardinal Radziouski, Archbishop of Gnesna, and Primate
of the Kingdom, took the Administration of the Government, as is usual, upon
him, and notify'd the King's Death to foreign Princes, and to all the
Governors of the Provinces, and advised with the Senators that were then at
Warsaw of the proper Method and fit Time to ohoose a new King. They fixed upon
the 29th of August 1696, for the Convocation of the Grand Diet; but there
appearing several Competitors, which made powerful Factions, it was thought
necessary to take more time to appease the Dissensions of the Nobility.
Wherefore the Overture of the Diet was deferred to the 15th of May 1697. They
chose the Sieur Belinski for their Speaker, whom they call their Marshal. The
chief Competitors were at first Competitors for the Crown.
Prince James of Poland, and his Brother Prince Alexander; the Prince of Conti;
Don Livio Odeschalchi, and Prince Lewis of Baden: but at last the Elector of
Saxony unexpectedly came to the Frontiers of Poland with 8000 Men, and declared
himself Candidate, having a twelvemonth before privately abjured his Religion
to qualify himself for this Crown, which procured him the Interest of the Pope
and Clergy. So that at length no considerable Party appeared but for him, the
Prince of Conti, and Prince James. The Cardinal Primate, with a great Number of
the Palatins, supported with all their Interest the Prince of Conti, the French
having for several years before, as I observed when I was in that Kingdom,
given a great Character of his Merit and Valor, which made the King of France
believe that he would undoubtedly carry that Crown against all Opposers; as it
is probable he would have done, had he been in Person as near the Place of
Election as the Elector of Saxony was: For on the 26th of June, being the day
of Election, the Diet drew out into the Field, and he had that day more Votes
than either the Elector of Saxony or Prince James; which the Primate observing,
went with his Party, and immediately proclaimed him King: but the two other
Parties knowing this could not be legally done without the universal Consent of
the Diet, protested against it as Illegal; and Prince James perceiving his
Party to be the weakest, and having always been in the Interest of the House of
Austria, as being married to the Empress and Queen of Spain's Sister, resigned
all his Interest to the Elector of Saxony, who was likewise supported by the
Emperor. These two Parties being thus united into one, were more numerous than
that of the Prince of Conti: Wherefore coming next day into the field, they got
the Bishop of Cujavia, after the Primate had refused it, to proclaim

Frederic Augustus. 1697.
FREDERIC AUGUSTUS, Elector of Saxony, King of Poland, and sent Ambassadors to
acquaint him therewith, and to desire him to accept of the Crown. All this
while the Primate and Prince of Conti's Party stood firm to the first Election,
and dispatched Couriers into France to desire that Prince to come with all
speed into Poland. The Generals of the Army were divided. Count Jablonowski,
Great General of the Kingdom, declared for the Elector of Saxony; Prince
Sapieha, Great General of Lithuania, seemed to favor the Prince of Conti: but
the Governor of Cracow being for the Elector of Saxony, invited him and his
Army to take possession of that capital City, where he was crowned the 15th of
September Crowned K. of Poland.
following, which did extremely facilitate the good Success he has since had in
that Kingdom. For tho the Primate and many other considerable Persons did
insist on the pretended Legality of their Election; tho the Prince of Conti
himself came in Person to Dantzic with a Fleet, vast Sums of Money, and some
disciplined Troops; tho the French Ambassador Monsieur de Polignac had managed
a good part of the Army, and a great many of the Senators, with great Art and
Policy; tho the Turks and Tartars threatened an Invasion to support his
Election; and tho the Hungarians made an Insurrection in their Country, to
divert the Saxon Forces: yet the Poles seeing the Elector of Saxony was
actually Crowned; that he was in possession of the Metropolis Cracow, the
strongest Town in Poland; that 8000 of his disciplined Troops were in the
Kingdom; that the major part of the Army had declared for him, and that the
Czar of Muscovy threatened an Invasion if they persisted to support the Prince
of Conti; they thought it more advisable to quit his Interest than to give
occasion for a Civil War: for I have often heard* them say, That Kings were
easy enough to be had without shedding Blood for any; and that they were easily
deposed if they usurped any greater Authority than the Laws allowed. And
therefore they think it more prudent, after having sufficiently emptied the
Candidates Pockets, to declare for the first of them that joins his Party, and
appears in Arms, since he is deemed qualified, than to expose their Country to
ruin and devastation, by adhering to an illegal Election, of which the success
is always doubtful: for by their Constitution no Election can be really lawful,
nor any Law can be legally made without the universal Consent of the Lords and
Commons of both States, Poland and Lithuania, assembled in Parliament.

The Prince of Conti having full Intelligence of the Posture of Affairs in
Poland, did not think it politic to conside any longer in the Promises of the
Great Men, who in that Country are naturally sickle, and biased more to their
own Interest than any Inclination they have to serve any Prince; for they have
no other Notion of Princes than of Tools to raise their own Fortune by.
Wherefore this Prince foreseeing no probability of success, the Town of Dantzic
having declared for the Elector of Saxony, he thought it more prudent timely to
quit his Pretensions by sailing back into France, than to expose his Reputation
by being forced to retire when the New King's Authority was more confirmed, as
it is looked upon to be at present.

King Frederick Augustus the IId, being thus left in sole Possession of the
Kingdom, is likely to restore the decaying State thereof; for having large
hereditary Dominions of his own, out of which he can have both Men and Money,
and being likewise naturally animated with a martial Spirit, and moreover King
over a most Warlike Nation, which is at present in league against the Infidels
with the Emperor, Muscovites, Pope and Venetians: He has opportunity
sufficient to enlarge that Kingdom, and extend it to its ancient Bounds the
Euxine Sea, by retaking Caminiec and the Vkrain.

I may here take notice that this is the first time the Poles have elected a
German Prince, and likewise the first that they have excluded their King's Son;
for from the Year 550, when this Monarchy began, to this present Election, the
King's Children have been always chosen, and the Crown, tho elective, has been
in the same Family successively for above eight hundred Years. But hereafter it
is likely to prove otherwise, for the Gentry of Poland are so jealous of their
own Kings, and so covetous to be enriched by foreign Princes, that probably
henceforward they will choose no Native. Besides, the Pope will undoubtedly
always use his utmost Authority and Interest in that Kingdom to get Protestant
Princes elected. For when I was formerly at Rome, I heard the Politicians say,
that the best method to make the Protestant Princes of the North Roman
Catholics, was to elect them successively to the Crown of Poland. So that if
the Pope sees that the present King of Poland's Children are confirmed in the
Doctrines of the Church of Rome, he will doubtless after his Death make the
same Endeavors to advance to that Throne either the King of Sweden, the
Elector of Brandenburg, or the Elector of Hanover, as he has done in favor of
the Elector of Saxony; who has been elected to the Crown of Poland, not so much
by the Power of his Wealth and Credit in the Kingdom, as by the Influence of
the Clergy, privately instigated by the Authority of the Pope. This I gather
from a Letter sent me last Summer from Warsaw by my Friend Baron Scarlati,
Envoy Extraordinary at that Court from the Elector of Bavaria.

Thus, my Lord, I have given you as large an Account of John the IIId's Life,
and of what passed remarkable at Warsaw in my time, as we need perhaps know of
so remote a Country, or I could my self learn in so short a time as I had the
honor to reside at that Prince's Court; where I was so much taken up in the
Practice of Physic, that I had neither Opportunity nor Time to make all the
Political Remarks, which another perhaps that had nothing else to do but to
converse with Courtiers and Ladies, might have leisurely done.

I cannot therefore pretend to give (as is usual) a Character of the King's
Favorites, nor of other Great Men about him, nor to acquaint your Lordship
with the different Cabals and private Intrigues of that numerous Court. That
were a Subject fitter for a Statesman than for me to write of, my Genius and
Profession prompting me only to make Observations in Physic, and not in
State Affairs. I hope therefore your Lordship will excuse the deficiency of
this Letter, when you consider it was writ by a Physician, and one who values
himself only upon it in being with all Respect,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most obedient humble Servant, B. C.

LETTER V.
To the Right Honorable CHARLES Lord Townsend.
Of the Extent and Products of Poland; together with a Description of the chief
Towns and Provinces of the Kingdom.

My LORD;
I Know your natural Sagacity, improved so much by your Travels, and constant
Application to Sciences and Politics, is no less inquisitive after the Extent
and Products of Countries, than after their Maxims of State and Forms of
Government: And this I discovered in your Lordship, as well when I met you some
years ago in Holland, as since your return to England; and because you then
discoursed me often about my Travels into Poland, I thought a Geographical
Description of that Country might not be unacceptable to you. I must confess I
were not long enough in that Kingdom to survey it exactly, therefore have taken
pains to learn not only from the Natives themselves, but also from their
correctest Authors, an Account of such Parts of that Kingdom which I could not
visit my self.

I must first take notice to your Lordship, that the King of Poland's Dominions
are divided into two different States, which are the Kingdom of Poland, and the
Great Duchy of Lithuania. The Constitutions, Language, Customs and Genius of
both which Nations are as different as those of England and Scotland, except
that one Parliament or Diet serves both, which must nevertheless have one
Session in Lithuania to two in Poland, and the Senators and Deputies of each
Nation must meet together, as well in the Great Duchy, as in the Kingdom; for
no Law can be legally made without the mutual Consent of both. Poland therefore
being a distinct Nation of it self, I will here, as I have promised, present
your Lordship with a short Description of it alone.

My Lord;
The Ancient Extent of Poland.
POLAND, when first founded by Lechus in the Year 550, like all other Nations
in their minority, was but a small Tract of Land, in respect of what it
afterward grew to be: for at first it contained only High and Low Poland with
Silesia; but in process of time, either through Marriages or Conquests, it
became the largest and most powerful Kingdom in Europe, and raised as well the
Envy as Jealousy of its Neighbors.

Its Increase by Conquests:
The first Acquisition to this Crown was the Province of Pomerania, conquered
by Lechus, by his having killed Regulus its Prince. Boleslaus Chrobry likewise
made Bohemia, Russia, Moravia and Prussia Tributary: But Casimir II. entirely
conquered all Prussia in the Year 1183, and Casimir the Great subdued all
Russia in the Year 1338, when Maslaus the Duke of Masovia also submitted to the
Polish Crown.

Some time after, Valachia and Moldavia were united to Poland by Conquest; and
the Great Duchy of Lithuania added by Jagello's Marriage with Hedwigis Queen
of Poland. The large and fertile Province of Livonia was conquered about the
Year 1500; and afterward the Poles extended their Conquests toward Moscovy,
when they took the Great Dutchies of Smolensko, Severia and Czernicovia, and in
Vladislaus the VIIth's time conquered all that Country. They in like manner
enlarged their Dominions toward the Black Sea, for they made themselves
Masters of all Vkraina.

By Policy.
Over and above these vast Conquests, the Poles likewise grew very considerable
by electing several potent Neighbors for their Kings, whereby they added to
their own Strength that of Bohemia, Hungary, Sweden, and Transylvania, as they
have likewise at this juncture that of the Electorate of Saxony. In short, the
Poles, in process of time, grew so exorbitantly Powerful, from the XIIIth, to
the middle of the XVIIth Century, having in their possession all the Lands
between Austria, Moscovy, and the Baltic and Euxine Seas, that they gave their
Neighbors the Turks, Tartars, Muscovites, Swedes and Germans, just reason to
grow jealous of them: Whereupon these several Potentates, at different times,
made most bloody Wars upon them, till by degrees they had brought their
Territories to a narrower Compass, and made themselves Masters of the greater
part of them. For the Emperor got from them the several Countries of Hungary,
Bohemia, Transylvania, Silesia, and Moravia. Valachia and Moldavia now choose
Hospodars or Governors of their own, tho they are nevertheless Tributary to
the Turk. The Turks and Tartars are Masters of Podolia, and the best part of
Vkraina, which they overrun in King Michael Korybuth's time; and the
Muscovites conquered the other part of it, Kiovia, as likewise all the vast
Dutchies of Severia, Smolensko and Czernicovia. The King of Sweden also is now
in possession of all Livonia, except the Duchy of Curland, which is left still
Tributary to Poland. Ducal Prussia is entirely in the Elector of Brandenburg's
hands, of which he is of late an Independent Sovereign. Pomerania is now
possessed by the Swedes and Germans between them; and Dantzic is in the Nature
of a little Republic or Hans-Town, yet under the Protection of Poland.

Present Extent.
Thus your Lordship may observe, that the neighboring Princes have clipped so
close the Skirts of this vast Empire, that they have reduced it to one Third of
what it has heretofore been. Yet notwithstanding all these Losses, it is still
reckoned to the full as large as the Kingdom of France; but its Frontiers
toward Tartary are altogether desolate, most of the Inhabitants having been
carried away into Captivity, either by the Turks or Tartars.

To give your Lordship a just Account of the present Extent of Poland, I must
divide it into its several remaining Provinces, which are but Eight, Viz.

Little and Great Poland. Regal Prussia. Russia. Masovia. Samogitia. Volhynia
and Podlachia.


But first a word or two of the Country in general.

Its Bounds.
Poland, together with the Great Duchy of Lithuania, is now bounded on the
North by Moscovy, Livonia, and the Baltic Sea; On the South by Moldavia,
Transylvania, and Hungary; On the East by Vkraina, which belongs to the Turks,
and the Dutchies of Smolensko, Severia, Czernicovia, and Kiovia, which are now
in possession of the Muscovites; and on the West by Pomerania, Brandenburg,
Bohemia, and Silesia. It extends it self from South to North, that is, from the
Carpathian Mountains to the Gulf of Riga, about 200 Leagues, from the 45
Degree 36 Minutes, to the 55 Degree 29 Minutes of Latitude; and from East to
West, that is, from Smoleusko and the Vkraine, to the Frontiers of Pomerania,
Bohemia, and Silesia, above 240.

Soil.
Its Soil, for the most part, is Champain, tho toward the Borders of Hungary
very mountainous and woody; yet as it declines from thence, it generally grows
more fruitful. There is only one great Mountain in the middle of Lesser Poland,
called Mons Calvus, The Bald Mountain, tho it has a Monastery on the top of it,
surnamed the Holy Cross, and dedicated to our Savior. What others you shall
meet with may be rather termed little Hills than Mountains. The Eastern Part of
this Kingdom is full of Forests, Woods, Marshes, Lakes and Rivers which afford
a delightful Vista to the open Country.

Its Products.
Heretofore Poland is said to have been almost all Woods; but now, being
cultivated by the Industry of its Inhabitants, it produces everywhere all
kinds of Fruits, Grains, and Herbs: Nay, it wants for neither Fowl nor Fish;
and moreover, abounds with all sorts of tame and wild Beasts. There are also
Vines in many Places, whose Grapes are not ungrateful to the Palate, especially
if the Summer and Autumn are never so little favorable; but the Wine is
generally very sharp when it has once been drawn off. In the Mountains are to
be found Mines of Silver, Copper, Lead, and Iron, with diverse other kinds of
Minerals; as also Salt, which is commonly taken out in huge Masses, like Stones
out of a Quarry. The Western part of this Kingdom produces a great deal of
Corn, which is transported in considerable Quantities into foreign Countries;
and besides, it abounds with Honey, Wax, Hemp, and Linen for Sails: All which
are carried to Dantzic, and from thence transported.

Number of Towns and Villages.
The greatest Part of the Towns, and all the Villages of this Kingdom, are of
Timber and Thatched, the Gentlemen's Houses in the Country being also of the
same Make. The whole Number of Cities, Towns, Boroughs and Villages in Poland
amounts to near a hundred and seventy thousand, whereof there are not much
above twenty walled. There are two sorts of Cities in this Kingdom; the First
belong to the Republic, of which the King names the Governors and other
Officers; and the Second are under the Dominion of particular Seigneurs by
hereditary Succession, of which there can be no other Starostas but their own
peculiar Lords.

Climate.
The Air of this Country is suitable to the Climate, and sometimes so exceeding
cold, that Water freezes ere it falls to the ground. And Lakes and Rivers are
so frozen up, that Coaches and loaded Carts pass over them for five or six
Months together, even to the end of March.

Rivers,
The most remarkable Rivers of this Country are, The Weissel or Vistula. The
Wart or Varta. The Nieper or Boristbenes. The Niester or Tyra. The Dwina or
Duna. The Bog or Bobus. The Bug or Bugus. The Niemen or Nemenus.


Their several Courses.
The Weissel or Vistula takes its rise in the Duchy of Teschen in Silesia, out
of Mount Carpathus (now Crapack) and runs by the several Cities and Towns of
Oswieczin, Cracow, Sendomir, Casimir, Lublin, Warsaw, Plocskow, Vladislaw,
Thorn, Culm, Bromberg, Grandentz, Newenburg, Elbing, Marienburg, and Dantzic.
This River anciently separated Sarmatia Europea from Germany, and having
continued its Course for above a hundred Polish Miles, divides it self into two
Streams, emptying one into the Bay of Frisch-Haff, and the other into the
Baltic Sea, vulgarly called De Oost Zee.

The Wart or Varta arises in Lesser Poland; and after having watered Siradia,
Kalisch, Posnan, Olstin, etc. falls into the Oder, a River of Silesia.

The Nieper or Boristhenes, waters Smolensko, traverses part of Lithuania, runs
through Kiow or Kiovia, crosses the Vkraine, and at length rolls into the Black
Sea near Ockzakow.

The Niester rises near the Lake of Leopol; and having run by Halitz, Caminiec,
etc. discharges it self in like manner into the Black or Euxine Sea near
Bialogrod.

The Duna, or Dwina, springs near Biata in Moscovy; when having passed by
Witebsko, Polocz, Dunenburg, Kokenhauz, etc. with a Course of 130 Leagues, it
at last throws it self into the Gulf of Riga in Livonia.

The Bog, or Bobus, takes its Origin from a Lake in the Frontiers of Podolia;
and having passed by Constantinow, Bar, and Braclaw, it falls into the Nieper
near Ockzakow.

The Bug springs in Red- Russia, near Olesko, or Zborow; and having run by the
several Places of Glituani, Beltz, Sokal, Vlodzimierz, Chelm, Bresty, and
Warsaw, falls into the Weissel by Wischegrod.

The Niemen, or Nemenus, arises near Slonim, or rather Nessivicz, in the
Palatinate of Novogrodec, and waters the Sides of Novogrodec, Bielcz, Grodna,
Troki, Vilna, and after runs into the Baltic near Tylsa.

Its Lakes.
In Lower or Greater Poland, Cujavia, and the Territory of Lublin, there are
several considerable Lakes, replenished with all sorts of fresh Fish. The chief
of these Lakes is Goplo, five Miles long, and half a Mile broad. Next there is
Biale, otherwise named The White Lake; which might be so called by an
Antiphrasis, because in the Months of April and May it dies Skins with a sort
of swarthy Tincture.

To proceed according to my Division of this Country, in which I have followed
Starovolscius, I must begin with the first Province of this Kingdom, which is

I. PROVINCE.
Great or Low Poland, bounded on the North by Pomerania and Prussia, on the
South by Upper or Lesser Poland, on the East by Masovia, and toward the West
by Silesia, and the Marquisate of Brandenburg. It is called Great Poland,
because Lechus, the Founder of this Kingdom, first settled there, and divided
it into two Parts: Viz. Its Division.


1. Greater Poland, properly so called; and 2. Cujavia.
Both which contain seven Palatinates; Viz. The Palatinates of Posnania, to
which belongs the Territory of Wschow. Kalisch. Siradia, to which belongs the
Territory of Vielunia. Rava. Lanschet. Bresty, and Inowlocz.


Of these, the two last only belong to Cujavia.

The chief of all these seven Palatinates is

I. Palatinate.
Posnania, in which are these several Cities and Towns; Viz.

Posnan Bishopric. Palatinate, and Castellany.
Gnesna Archbishopric, and Castellany.
Koscien. Vskow. Sremsk. Miedzyrzeeze. Nacum. Curnic. Slupeia. Pysdra. Kcina.
Conin. Premecz, and Ragozno.
Cities and Towns of Posnan.
The capital City of all which is

Posnan, called by the Germans Posen, situate upon the River Varta in the 39th
Degree of Longitude, and 52 of Latitude. It is 7 Miles distant from Gnesna to
the West, 20 German Miles from Vratislaw to the North, and 50 from Cracow to
the South. It lies in the midst of several little Hills environed with a strong
double Wall, and a very deep Ditch. The City it self, it must be confessed, it
but small, yet nevertheless exceeding beautiful and well built, its Edifices
being for the most part of Freestone. Among the public Structures, the most
considerable is the Castle raised upon a small Eminence between the Rivers
Varta and Prosna. It is generally provided with all sorts of Ammunition, and
wants for neither Strength nor Beauty. The rest of the Public Edifices may
justly claim the like Character, tho the most stately lie on the other side the
River Varta in the Suburbs, which are very large. Here is the Cathedral Church
with a College of Prebends, and the Bishop's Palace situate among the Marshes.
This Pile of Building is commonly called Valisovia, and built so strong, that
like the Town, it is able to withstand a Siege. John Lubranscius, a Bishop of
this See, founded here a College to be visited by that of Cracow, and which was
afterward very much augmented and beautified by Adam Conarius his Successor,
and farther enriched by one Rosrasevius with several noble Gifts: So that now
the Jesuits have a College in the City, where Learning is greatly encouraged.
Yet this also in the Suburbs does not want for noble Youth, who daily flock
thither to be instructed by the Lectures of Mathematics and Law. These Suburbs
are all surrounded by a Morass and a great Lake. They are frequently laid under
water by the overflowing of the Varta, insomuch that sometimes with the
neighboring Villages for several Miles together, the tops of the Houses are
only to be seen. This Inundation likewise often extends to the Town it self,
notwithstanding its high Walls, in a manner that Boats have been known to swim
about the Streets: But this lasts not long, for the Waters commonly retire in
two or three days at farthest. There are three very famous Fairs kept in this
City, whither the Germans, both Traders and Gentry, come in great Numbers. The
first of these is kept about the beginning of Lent, and lasts a Month. The
second at Michaelmas, and continues five Weeks; and the last at Midsummer,
which is for the same time.

The Inhabitants of this City are generally Roman Catholics, tho vast Numbers
of Jews live also among them. The Government is executed by a Starosta, chosen
yearly out of the Schipins, or Aldermen, who, as long as this Office lasts,
enjoys also the Title of General of Great POLAND.

Gnesna.
Seven Miles from hence lies Gnesna, situate among Bogs and Hills, and called
also by the Germans Gnicsen. It is an Archbishop's See, and gives Title to the
Primate of all Poland. It is distant three Polish Miles from the River Varta to
the North, seven from Kalisch to the South, as many from Posnan to the East,
and about thirteen from Thorn, thirty from Dantzic, and thirty three from
Warsaw to the North-west. It was formerly Metropolis of the whole Kingdom,
having been built by Lechus, the first Founder thereof, and so named from an
Eagle's Nest, as is to be seen in the Life of that King.

This City was almost consumed by Fire in the Year 1613. and is at present
chiefly considerable for being the usual Residence of the Archbishop and
Primate of Poland, who yet enjoys very great Privileges. In the Cathedral is
reposited a great quantity of inestimable Treasure, most of which is owing to
the Tomb of St. Adalbert raised in the middle of the Church, cased about with
Silver by Sigis^^nund III. and to the Gifts of Henry F^^rleius, late
Archbishop of that See, who, among other Rarities, gave his own Mitre, valued
at 24000 Polish Gilders, or near 2000 l. Sterling. The Gates opening to this
Church are all of Corinthian Brass curiously wrought, which were first taken
from the Monastery of Corsuna in Taurica Chersonesus, afterward removed to
Kiow, and thence brought hither by order of Boleslaus II. Here are several
Fairs kept, the chief whereof is that on the Feast of St. Adalbert.

Koscien.
Koscien, a Town built in a Plain among Marshes, and defended with a double
Wall and a broad and deep Ditch: It is about seven Miles from Posnan.

Uskow.
Vskow, a walled Town situate in a Plain likewise, and about eleven Miles from
Posnan.

Sremsk, etc.
Sremsk, Premeez and Ragozno, three Timber built Towns belonging to the
Jurisdiction of Posnan.

Miedzyrzecze.
Miedzyrzecze, a Town built for the most part with Wood in a Plain amongst
Rivulets and Marshes, and which also its Name imports: It is situate upon the
^^onfiries of Silesia and Pomerania, and has a strong Castle fortified both by
Art and Nature, and, which it is commonly conjectured, could hardly be taken
unless it were starved. This several German Princes have experienced at their
Costs, who after a long and fruitless Siege of it, have at length been forced
to return home again re infecta. It is about 15 Miles from Posnan.

Slupcza.
Slupcza, a Town upon the Wart with a very strong Wall, and other suitable
Fortifications.

Pysdra.
Pysdra, a Walled Town upon the Wart likewise, built in a Plain among Woods,
and nine Miles from Kalisch.

The other Towns of this Palatinate are some of them walled, and chiefly built
with Wood, except only the public Edifices, such as Castles, Towns, Churches,
Monasteries, Abbeys, etc. which are all either Stone or Brick.

Senators of Posnania.
The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Archbishop of Gnesna, The Bishop
Palatine and Castellan
of Posnania. The Castellans of Sremsk, Miedzyrzecze, Premecz, Ragozno, Kriven,
and Zandoc.



There are moreover several other Officers in this Palatinate, as well Civil as
Military. The Starostas or Governors of Cities have some of them Jurisdiction,
and some none, as it is likewise all the Kingdom over.

Its Arms.
The Standard and Arms of this Palatinate are an Eagle expanded Argent in a
Field Gules.

II. Palatinate.
The second Palatinate of Great Poland, is that of

Kalisch, in which are these Cities and Towns,

Kalisch Metropolis, and Castellany,
Kolo, Land, Naklo, Odolanovia, Chocia, Stave, Cosmin, Dohra, Grabow, Opatovec,
and Plesovia.
Cities and Towns of Kalisch.
The Chief City of all which is

Kalisch, built among Marshes upon the River Prosna, and fortified only with a
Brick-Wall, and some low Towers. It has in it some Religious Houses, and a very
magnificent College for Jesuits, founded by Stanislaw Karncovius, Archbishop
of Gnesna. Here are the Ruins of a strong Castle remaining, which had formerly
been destroyed by the Teutonick Knights.

Kolo.
Kolo, a Timber-built Town, walled with Mud and Dirt: At certain times it is
encompassed and washed by the River Wart, near which it is built. It is about
eight Miles from Kalisch.

Land.
Land, a Town upon the Wart, about four Miles from Gnesna.

Naklo.
Naklo, a Timber'd Town near the Lake Goplo, with a walled Castle situate among
the Marshes.

Odolanovia.
Odolanovia, a Town with a Castle, built likewise among the Marshes.

Chocia.
Chocia, in which Andrew Lipski, Bishop of Cracow, founded a Collegiate Church
with vast Expense.

The other Towns of this Palatinate are not very considerable, and therefore
are omitted.

Senators of Kalisch.
The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin and Castellan of Kalisch, The
Castellans of Land, Naklo, and Kamin.



The Standard and Arms of this Palatinate, Its Arms. are a Buffaloes Head
eras'd, Sables, with a Crown between his Horns, all in a checky Field, Argent
and Gules.

III. Palatinate.
The third Palatinate of Great Poland is that of

Siradia, situate along the River Varta, or Wart, being divided into four
Districts, viz. The Districts of Siradia, Schadkow, Radomsko, and Petricovia.


In all which are the several Cities and Towns of Siradia Cap. Rosprza,
Spicemir, Petricovia, Konarzew, Wart, Lask, Vidavia, and Pabianice.


The Cities and Towns of Siradia.
The chief City of all which is Siradia, situate in a Plain, and fortified with
a strong Wall, with a Castle built on the Wart. Subject to the Jurisdiction of
this City are the following Cities and Towns.

Rosprza.
Rosprza, a Timber'd Town seated amongst the Marshes.

Spicimir.
Spicimir, a Town built likewise with Wood.

Petricovia.
Petricovia, a Walled City by no means inconsiderable, situate among Rivulets
and Bogs. Once a Year one of the great Tribunals of the Kingdom is kept in the
Suburbs of this City in one of the King's Palaces. Not far off there is another
Palace of the King's called Byki of a regular Structure, whither his Majesty
with his Court sometimes retires for his Pleasure at the time of the meeting of
the Tribuaal. There are several other Eminent Edifices built about this City,
belonging to Bishops and other Great Men, among which the most famous is the
Abbey of Vitrovia, and the Palace of Crusmen, after the Italian manner.

Konarzew.
Konarzew, a Town of no great Importance.

Wart.
Wart, a large City built upon a River of the same Name.

Lask.
Lask, where formerly Johannes Lascus Archbishop of Gnesna, founded a
Collegiate Church, and richly endowed it at his own Costs.

To this Palatinate also belongs the Territory of

Territory of Vielunia.
Vielunia, which has a Castellan and other Magistrates of its own, and is
divided into two parts, viz. Vielunia, and Ostresow. Both which contain some
Towns, and a great number of Villages.

Towns of Vielunia.
The principal of the Towns is Boleslaw, which is defended with a very strong
Castle.

Vielun, environed with a high Wall and a very deep Ditch, having likewise a
Castle on the River Prosna. Its Buildings are generally of Brick, whereof there
are several very stately.

Ostresow, a Timber-built City on the Borders of Silesia, situate in a very
large Plain, and encompassed almost every way with Woods.

In this Palatinate the Gentry formerly had a Privilege of sealing their
Letters with Red Wax, which was only allowed to the Senators in all the rest of
the Kingdom, and which they obtained by recovering the Standard of the
Palatinate of Lanschet, after it had been lost to the Prussians, and Teutonick
Knights.

Senators of Siradia.
The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin and Castellan of Siradia. The
Castellans of Rosprza, Spicimir, and Konarzew.


Its Arms.
The Standard and Arms of this Palatinate are in a Field Vert, a Lion Gules,
and Eagle Sables, both counter-coup'd in the middle.

Arms of Vielunia.
The Territory of Vielunia has its own Ensigns, which are an Agnus Dei with a
Cross Argent in a Field Guiles.

IV. palatinate.
The fourth Palatinate of Great Poland is that of

Rava, which is divided into three Districts, viz. The Districts of Rava,
Sochaczow, and Gostinin.

In all which are the several Cities and Towns of Rava, Cap. Lowitz, Volboria,
Gombin, Sochaczow, Gostinin, Viasdum, and Biala.


Cities and Towns of Rava.
The Capital City of this Palatinate is Rava, situate in a Plain, built for the
most part with Wood, and tolerably populous. It has a Castle on a small River
of the same Name, in which Prisoners of the best Rank are kept. The fourth part
of the Revenue of this Castle goes toward the Payment of the Soldiers. The
same Constitution was in Podolia, where former Kings thought fit to establish
the best Guard they could against the frequent Incursions of the Tartars. In
this City is a very considerable College of Jesuits, much visited by Learned
Men.

Lowitz.
Lowitz, a City much more populous than the former, and about five Miles
distant from it: It is famous for being sometimes the Residence of the
Archbishop of Gnesna, or Primate of Poland. His Palace there is built among
the Marshes, yet nevertheless consists of several fair Piles of Building: The
Church also is a beautiful Structure, and enriched with several noble Gifts. It
has likewise a great many considerable Monasteries, Abbeys, etc. In this City
are diverse famous Fairs kept, which the Gentry very much frequent from all
Parts.

Volboria.
Volboria, a Town wherein the Bishop of Cujavia commonly resides, and where he
has a Noble Palace. This Place is also very populous.

Gombin.
Gombin, a large Timber-built Town, situate in a Plain.

Sochaczow.
Sochaczow, a Place defended with Palisades, and a Castle built on a Rock,
which is washed by the River Bsura.

Gostinin.
Gostinin, a Wooden City built in a Plain among Marshes. This Place is famous
for having in it the Prison where Demetrius Suski the Czar of Muscovy, was kept
for a long time, and where he at length died.

Viasdum.
Viasdum, remarkable for its Strength and Beauty of its Castle, and situate not
far from Rava on the Left Hand.

Biala.
Biala, a Town belonging to the Bishop of Chelm.

This Palatinate contains likewise a Noble Palace of the Archbishop of Gnesna,
called Squernevicid.

Senators of Rava.
The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin and Castellan of Rava, The
Castellans of Sochaczow, and Gostinin.


Its Arms.
The Standard and Arms of this Palatinate are an Eagle Sables, with the letter
R on his Breast in a Field Gules.

V. Palatinate.
The fifth Palatinate of Great Poland is that of

Lanschet, divided likewise into three Districts, viz. The Districts of
Lanschet, Brezini, and Orlow.

In all which the most considerable Cities and Towns are, Lanschet, Cap. Orlow,
Bresina, Piontkum, and Vniejovia.


Cities and Towns of Lanschet.
The Capital Place of this Palatinate is

Lanschet, a walled City built among the Marshes in a Plain, and surrounded
with a very broad and deep Ditch; it has a Castle well fortified on a Rock, and
which is washed by the River Bsura. Not far off in a Village called Kosciol
there is a very neat Church built with Freestone. There are several famous
Fairs kept in this City, where one of the Little Diets is also convened
pursuant to the King's Command.

Orlow.
Orlow, a Timber-built Town seated between several small Lakes and a large
muddy River. It is four Miles from Lanschet.

Bresina.
Bresina, a wooden-built Town, indifferently large, situate among Bogs, and
about seven Miles from Lanschet.

Piatek.
Piontkum or Piatek, built among the Marshes on the Banks of the River Bsura.
This Place is famous for well-tasted Beer, which is transported from hence all
the Kingdom over. Here is a Monastery erected to the Honor of St. Paul.

Uniejovia.
Vniejovia, a Town where there is a very famous Castle founded on the Wart.
Both these Places belong to the Archbishop of Gnesna.

Senators of Lanschet.
The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin and Castellan of Lanschet.
The Castellans of Bresina, Brezina, and Biechovia.


Its Arms.
The Standard and Arms of this Palatinate are an Eagle Argent, and Lion Sables,
both counter-coup'd in the middle, and the latter crowned Or, all in a Field
Gules.

The sixth and seventh Palatinates are comprehended Territory of Cujavia.
in Cujavia, whereof the former is

I. Palatinate of Cujavia.
The Palatinate of Bresty, which is divided into four Districts, viz. The
Districts of Bresty, Cruswick, Coval, and Predek.

In all which are the several Cities and Towns of Vladislaw, Cap. Bresty,
Nisavia, Radzieow, Voisinow, Kowalow, and Sluzevia.


Cities and Towns of Uladislaw.
The Capital City of this Palatinate is

Vladislaw, built among the Marshes near the Vistula. This City is famous for
being the Episcopal See of the Bishop of Cujavia, who always crowns the King in
case either of the Death, Indisposition or Obstinacy of the Primate: It has a
neat Cathedral built after the Gothic manner, and about it stand the Prebends
and Canons Houses, with a large Free School. The Buildings of this City are
generally of Brick, with which the Castle is also built on the River Vistula.
The Country hereabouts is all Boggy, and there is so great scarcity of Wood,
that the Inhabitants suffer very much for want of it.

Bresty.
Bresty, a City seated in a Plain among Marshes, and defended with a very
strong Wall and deep Ditch. The Houses here are for the most part of Brick.

Upon the same shore with Vladislaw lies Nisavia.
Nisavia, being not far off from it; it is a walled Town.

Radzieow.
Radzieow, a Timber-built Town, situate in an open Country near a very large
Lake.

Koisinow.
Koisinow, a Town defended with a strong Castle.

Kowalow.
Kowalow, a Timber-built Town, seated amongst the Marshes.

This Palatinate is very fertile, and abounds with all sorts of Corn, which not
only suffices the Inhabitants, but is also transported in vast quantities to
Dantzic by several Navigable Rivers, whence it is carried out of the Kingdom.

II. Palatinate.
The latter and seventh Palatinate of the Province of Great Poland is that of

Inowlocz, which is divided likewise into three Districts, viz. The Districts
of Bydgosty, Bobrounitz, and Inowlocz.

This Palatinate extends it self from the Lake of Goplo and the City of
Cruswick, to the Vistula, and Confines of Pomerania, and has several Cities and
Towns, whereof the chief are, Cruswick, Bydgosty, Gnieukow, Vratislaw, Solec,
Dibow, and Strelce.


Cities and Towns of Cruswick.
Cruswick, an ancient City next to Gnesna for Antiquity, built upon the Borders
of Bresty, with a strong walled Castle near the Lake Goplo, out of which it is
said the Rats came that devoured King Popiel II. his Wife and Family by a
Divine Judgment. In the Suburbs of this City is the Church of St. Peter, built
with Freestone, together with a College of twenty four Canons. Here formerly
the Court resided, but was afterward removed to Cracow.

Bydgosty.
Bydgosty, a walled Town, in a Plain, washed by the River Barda; by which
several things are transported to Vladislaw, being only six Miles distant.

The other Towns are not to be despised, being generally very populous.

Senators of Cujavia.
The Senators of Cujavia are, The Palatin, and Castellan of Bresty. the
Palatin, and Castellan of Inowlocz. The Castellans of Kowalow, Cruswic, and
Bydgosty.


Its Arms.
The Standard or Arms of Cujavia is in a Field Or, an Eagle Gules, and Lion
Sables, counter-coup'd in the middle.

II. PROVINCE. Lesser Poland. Its Bounds.
The Second PROVINCE of this Kingdom is

Upper or Lesser Poland, which is bounded on the North by Masovia and
Podlachia; on the West by Lower Poland; on the South by Hungary, and on the
East by Russia; and is about fifty German Miles as well in length as breadth.

It is generally divided into three Palatinates, Viz. The Palatinates of
Cracovia, Sendomir, and Lublin.

I. (...).
The first Palatinate of Lesser Poland is that of Cracovia, which besides four
Districts, contains also three Dutchies and one County.

The four Districts are Cracovia, wherein are two Subdivisions, Viz. The
Subdivisions of Xianzen, and Prossovia. Lelovia, Briecz, and Sandecz.


The three Dutchies are, Oswieczin, Zator, and Severia.

Which are part of Silesia, and the County is that of Scepuz, which belongs to
Hungary, and contains thirteen Towns, the chief of which is Luboul, having a
well-fortify'd Castle, wherein constant Guard is kept.

The chief Cities and Towns of this Palatinate are, Cracow Bishopric and
Metropolis.
Biecz. Wounitz. Sandecz. Lelow. Kyaz. Oswieczin. Zator. Seueria. Proszovice.
Czenstochova. Slaucovia. Ilcussia. Wicliczka. Bocknia, and Dobcitia.


Cities and Towns of Cracow.
Of all which, the Capital of the Province and Metropolis of the Kingdom is,

Cracow, a famous City, seated in a spacious Plain near the Weissel, by which
Merchandises are transported to Dantzic. It lies nine Polish Miles East of the
Frontiers of Silesia, eleven from those of Upper Hungary, twenty three from
Sendomir, thirty from Olmitz, thirty five South-East of Vratislaw, forty from
^^ienna, and about fifty from Buda, and is placed in the 42 Degree of
Longitude, and 50 of Latitude.

Why so called.
It takes its Name from Cracus, Gracus or Gracchus, one of the first Dukes of
Poland, tho some others will have it to be the Cawdanum of Ptolomy corrupted
into Cracow. But let its Name come from whence it will, it is certain that now,
considering the stateliness both of its public and private Edifices, and the
great Plenty of all manner of Necessaries, it is equal to most Towns of either
Germany or Italy.

If this Character given to it by Starovolscius be disputed, no body can deny
but that it is the largest and best built Town in all Poland, being divided
into four Quarters, Viz.

Cracow, properly so called. Casimir. Stradomia, and Cleparia.
The first Cracow is encompassed with a very high Wall, and flanked with round
brick Towers, with a broad deep Ditch, walled likewise, The Castle.
and a stately Castle about a Mile in Compass, sounded on a Rock called Vavel,
on the Banks of the River Vistula. It is a large stone Building, consisting of
two Wings, magnificently raised about a Square-Court, having Galleries,
supported with Pillars, and paved with black and white Marble. The King's
Appartments, with some others, are adorned with diverse curious Paintings and
Statues, and the Country round about affords one of the most delightful
Prospects in Europe.

The Cathedral.
Here is the Cathedral of St. Stanislaus, in which a late Bishop of Cracow,
Martin Szyscovius, repaired and beautified his Tomb, which before had been all
of Silver. This, Sigismund III. and his Son Vladislaus VII. greatly augmented,
bestowing on it many Offerings of Gold and Silver Vessels. Sigismund I. also in
honor of this Saint, built a Silver Altar near his Tomb, bestowing on it
several Golden Crucifixes, and as many Vestments richly embroidered with Gems
of all sorts. His Daughter Ann likewise, Wife to King Stephen, built another
Silver Altar in the Chapel of the Annunciation, whose Roof is all gilded, and
wherein the Kings of Poland are wont to be interred. This Cathedral is
principally to be noted for its Chapter and Treasury.

I pass by several other inestimable Riches which are to be seen here; but I
cannot omit one thing, which is, that God is so incessantly praised in this
Church, that the Priests are never silent Night nor Day. The Bishop of The
Bishop and Chapter.
this Diocese is Lord over thirteen Cities, and Prince of the Duchy of
Severia. His Chapter, which consists of about thirty Canons, with several other
inferior Priests, having a proportionable Revenue. This City was erected into
a Metropolitan See upon the first Planting of the Christian Religion in Poland
by Miecislaus I. but within a hundred Years after it degenerated into a
Bishopric under the Archbishop of Gnesna, in regard that Lampert Zula could
not be persuaded to receive his Pall from the Sea of Rome; yet upon submission
he was afterward restored to that Dignity, but which lasted only for his Life,
his Successors having been ever since only Bishops.

Other Churches.
There are about fifty other Parish-Churches, as well in the Castle as the
Town: whereof the most celebrated is that of the Virgin Mary in the Circle of
Cracow, which is governed by an Arch-Presbyter, and fronts ten large Streets,
having moreover on all sides four Rows of magnificent Structures.

The University.
A University was first begun here by Casimir the Great, and finished not till
the Year 1401, by Vladislaus Jagello, conformable to the last Will and
Testament of his Queen Hedwigis, and had its Privileges soon after confirmed by
Pope Urban VI. However the Scholars forsook it in 1549, by reason that the
Magistrates had refused to do Justice on the Servants of Andrew Czarnkowski,
who in a Quarrel had slain a great Number of them. They afterward dispersed
themselves into several Parts of Germany, and becoming Protestants, spread the
Lutheran Religion throughout Poland, and gained a great Number of Proselites.
Yet notwithstanding all this, at last they returned to the Obedience of the Sea
of Rome.

In this University are taught all sorts of Learning, and which is now as great
an Ornament to the Polish Kingdom, as Athens was formerly to Greece. It
contains in all eleven Its Colleges.
Colleges, which are,

The Great College, which is only for Philosophers. The Law-College, where the
Professors of that Art cohabit and read Lectures. The Physick-College, which
the Physicians do not live in, because they are generally married, and have
Families. The College of Dlugossus for young Students in the Law. The College
of the Poor, for such as we call King's-Scholars here. The College of Nascovius
for other Sciences. The College of Jerusalem or of Olesnicius. The College of
Zisinius, newly erected. The College of Staringilius. The College of
Smiescovicius, and The College for Human Learning.
To these may be added fourteen Grammar-Schools, scattered throughout the City;
in which also sometimes University-Learning is taught.

Vice Chancellor.
All these Colleges and Schools are governed by a Rector or Vice Chancellor,
who takes care that Orders be duly observed, and Functions rightly administered;
which is so great Encouragement, that there is scarce any Ecclesiastical or
Political Dignity in the Kingdom but is filled by Persons that have been
educated in this University.

Monasteries.
In the Monasteries also are taught both Philosophy and Divinity, but more
especially in that of the Dominicans of the Trinity, where there are daily
Lectures kept, and several kinds of Moral Learning also promoted.

Mendicants.
There are likewise several sorts of Mendicant Friars in this City, who upon
solemn Feasts, according to the ancient Custom, go in Procession, clothed in
diverse Colors, such as Mendicants of the Rosary in Red. Mendicants of Mercy in
Green. Mendicants of the Mantle in Blew. Mendicants of the Passion in Black.
Mendicants of the Body of Christ in White. Mendicants of Saint Sophia in
Purple. Mendicants of Saint Ann in Ash Color. Mendicants of Saint Monica in
Crimson.


Houses of this City.
The Houses of this City are for the most part of Freestone, and four or five
Stories high, but covered on the Top only with Boards instead of Slate or Tiles.

The Quarter of Casimir is joined to the rest by a fair Timber Bridge, erected
over the River Rudawka, a Branch of the Weissel, whilst the other two,
Stradomia and Cleparia, are watered by the Weissel, and lie between Cracow and
the aforesaid Bridge.

Biecz.
Biecz, in the Territory of the same Name, is a walled City in a Plain, watered
by the River Rapa, a Branch of the Vistula, out of the Froth of which they make
Sulphur. It is about fifteen Polish Miles from Cracow, and five from Sandecz.

Wounitz.
Wounitz or Woynicz, a Timber-built Town on the River Dunaiecz, from Cracow
about nine Miles.

Sandecz.
Sandecz, a walled Town, in a very pleasant Plain, in the Territory of the same
Name, washed by the River Dunaiecx, and about eleven Miles from Cracow. It has
a Collegiute Church and several Monasteries, etc. Its Inhabitants are Active
and Industrious.

Lelow.
Lelow, in the Territory of Lelovia, of which it is the Capital, environed with
an old Wall, and a strong Castle built upon a Hill, wherein is a Palace and
several Gardens after the Italian manner. It is washed by the River Biala, and
about eleven Miles from Cracow.

Kyaz.
Kyaz, a wooden-built Town about seven Miles from Cracow.

Osvieczin.
Osvieczin, Capital of the Duchy of the same Name, a Timber-built City in a
Plain among the Marshes, with a wooden Castle plastered only with Clay. It is
about seven Miles from Cracow.

Zator.
Zator, Capital of that Duchy, built with Wood in a Plain near the River
Vistula, and about five Miles from Cracow.

Severia.
Severia, Capital of the large Duchy of the same Name. It has a very strong
Castle in an Island in the middle of a very broad Lake, and another at
Lipovecia upon a high Rock, famous for being the Prison of the insolent Clergy
of the Diocese of Cracow; for that Bishop being Temporal Prince of this Duchy,
which contains some Towns, and Lipovecia among the rest near Cracow, it is most
convenient for him to imprison Dclinquents there.

Czentochova.
Czentochova, a Town famous for good Beer, which is not only fetched from all
Parts of Poland, but also from the neighboring Provinces of Germany. Without
this Place is a very famous Monastery, situate upon a Hill, where is a Picture
of the Virgin Mary, said to be painted by Saint Luke, and to which Pilgrims
from all Parts come to make their Offerings.

We went upon our Journey from Silesia to Cracow to see this Convent, where
they showed us vast Quantities of Gold and Silver Plate, of rich Ornaments for
Altars and Habits, enriched with all sorts of Jewels, particularly with Pearls;
for the great Families in Poland think it a mighty Honor for their Posterity
to have given any thing of value to this Place, to be a Monument of their
Devotion as well as Liberality. The Monks told us of a great many Miracles that
were wrought here, with which they worked such Effects upon the Minds of those
credulous People, that they scruple not to impoverish themselves to enrich this
Place. Not only the Church is very rich, but likewise the Monks are Masters of
a great Territory round about it, and they maintain a Garrison of 300 Men upon
their own Charges, whom I have observed to be in a better Condition than any
other Soldiers of the Kingdom. I can compare this Place to none more properly
than Loretto in Italy, both for Wealth and Bigotry.

Slaucovia.
Slaucovia, in the same Duchy, famous for Silver Mines, which bring great
Profit to this Bishop.

Ilcussia.
Near to this City lies Ilcussia, a Royal Town, abounding also with Silver and
Lead. Its Citizens are very Luxurious, but notwithstanding no less Devout. This
Town is encompassed with a Wall, and its Houses are for the greatest part of
Brick. The Bread here is extraordinary, and Beef not to be equaled in Cracow,
whence it is scarce distant above five Miles*

On the Eastern side of the City of Cracow lies Velisca or Wieliczka, not above
two or Wieliczka.
three Miles from thence; a Town abounding with Crystal Salt, but which is not
so transparent as that of

Bochnia.
Bochnia, about five Miles from Cracow, where Salt is dug out in great Masses,
and exceeding clear.

Dobcitia.
Next toward Hungary lies Dobcitia, a strong Town with a Castle.

Proszovice.
To the North of Cracow lies Proszovice, a Timber-built Town, seated in a
Plain, where there is a Palace of the King's raised on the Banks of the River
Sozeniava, about four Miles from Cracow, in which is kept a Provincial Diet.

There are several other Cities and Towns belonging to Noblemen, as likewise a
great Number of Castles, Palaces, Religious Houses, etc. of no ordinary
Structure in this Palatinate: but all which, for brevity's sake, I have omitted.

Mines of Poland.
This Palatinate excels all the rest in Mines, except that of Sendomir only.
Silver and Lead are found about Ilcussia, Slaucovia, Severia, and Novogora; and
Copper and Gold at Novotargus, and in the Mountains about Sandecz; Mineral
Salt, like to huge Masses of Stone, at Bochna and Wieliczka; Marble of all
Colors at Selecia, belonging to the Barefooted Friars; Nitre at Wislicz;
Vitriol at Becia; Pit-coal at Tencinum; Iron-Mine and Glasshouses at Obstinia,
as likewise at several other Places in this Kingdom.

But what I shall give your Lordship a more particular Account of, will be of
Salt and Glass, which I have taken from my Observation in the Country. That of
Salt properly comes in here.

Account of Salt Mines.
You go down into the Salt Mines near Cracow by four or five pair of wooden
Stairs, by which you go from one into the other. The Horses also descend the
same way. The whole Depth of this Mine is thought to be near three hundred
Geometrical Paces. Below you may meet with a thousand Turnings and Windings,
and many Alleys and Streets like to a Town; all which the Proprietor and
hereditary Governor, Monsieur Morstin Covalski, told me would require above a
Week's time to go over. In some Places there is a great deal of fresh Water in
these Mines which the Miners drink, but in most it is salt, of which they make
Salt by Evaporation; but still the best sort is that which is natural, without
Preparation. Sometimes there are such fierce Winds in these Mines, that nothing
almost can withstand them; and generally there is so much Cold, that it is
hardly to be endured. Whilst it rains, the Salt is commonly insipid. They have
Engines to crane up the Water that it may not any ways incommode the Miners.
The Revenue of this Mine amounts to about eight hundred thousand Timfs or
Polish Florins annually, which makes about 400000 French Livres, whereof 50000
go to the King, 10000 to the Queen, and some thousands more to the Officers of
the Crown, and the Miners and other Laborers; yet over and above all this, the
Proprietor is obliged to make a yearly Present to all the Cities and Towns of
Poland, and more particularly to their Starostas. A Cobbler about the Year 1548,
first found out this Mine, who digging a Well near this Place, perceived a
Fountain with a thin Wall of Salt in the middle of it; which breaking, and not
knowing what to make of, he discovered to the Owners of the Land, who were then
the Family of Morstin; who digging deeper, by reason they did not meet with
much Salt near the Surface, found it in so great Quantity, that they have not
been able to exhaust it during the Space of 150 Years. The Miners say, that the
Lumps of Salt weigh a great deal less in the Mine than when taken out, which I
have not seen confirmed. There are four sorts of Salt in the Mine, whereof one
is extreme hard and rocky, like Crystal. Another less hard, and clearer. A
third brittle and softer, as also white and pure. All these three sorts are
brackish, when the fourth only is somewhat fresher. In these Mines you shall
have on one side a stream of salt Water, and on the other one of fresh. There
are some places in these Mines where you cannot work, because you dare not carry
a Candle for fear of setting the Vapors on fire, which are always Nitrous, and
easily susceptible of Flame.

Manna found.
In this Palatinate, and in some others, there is a particular sort of Manna,
which they gather in the Months of May and June by sweeping it off the Grass
with Sives, together with the Dew. They eat this Manna, and make several sorts
of Dishes with it for their Tables. More of this I shall take occasion to speak
of hereafter.

Senators of
The Senators of this Palatinate are, Cracovia.
The Bishop Castellan, and Palatin of Cracow. The Castellans of Wounitz.
Oswieczin. Sandecz, and Biecz.



The Castellans Power.
The Castellan of Cracow precedes the Palatin for Reasons given before in the
Life of Boleslaus III. otherwise called Krivoustus. This Palatin's Jurisdiction
is very large, and extends several ways, not only over the Citizens and
Countrymen, but also the Nobility or Gentry of his Palatinate.

Mayor of Cracow.
Next is the Praetor or Mayor of Cracow, which Office, Guagnini says, has been
discontinu'd ever since a Praetor, in the time of Vladislaus, betrayed that City
to Boleslaus Duke of Oppelin; for which he, together with his Accomplices,
afterward underwent deserved Punishment, and the Pretorship devolved to the
King, who now thinks fit to name a Mayor himself, who, in my time, was a
Scotchman.

Government of the Castle.
The Castle of Cracow is principally under the Command of the Palatin, who has
ten Deputies or Burgraves, who, both in time of Peace and War, cause a strict
Guard to be kept therein both Night and Day. These Burgraves, must always be
chosen out of the Gentry. Here the Crown and other Regalia are kept.

Arms of this Palatinate.
The Standard or Arms of this Palatinate are an Eagle expanded Argent, crowned
Or in a Field Gules, with a Baton cross its Wings of the Second.

Of Sandecz.
The District of Sandecz has a peculiar Ensign, which is Party per Pale, Argent
and Azure.

Of the Duchy of Oswieczin.
The Duchy of Oswieczin has for Arms in a Field Gules, an Eagle expanded
Sables, bearing an O in its Breast.

Of that of Zator.
The Duchy of Zator has also a peculiar Scucheon, which is an Eagle expans'd
Azure, with a Z in its Breast.

II. Palatinate.
The Second Palatinate of Lesser Poland is that of

Sendomir, which is divided into eight Districts, Viz. The Districts of
Sendomir. Radom. Stenziecz. Corzin. Wislicz. Chencin. Opoczno, and Pilzno.


In all which are the Cities and Towns of Sendomir, Cap. Opatovia or Opoczno.
Viazden. Radom. Jedbinsk. Solecia. Ilza. Cunovia. ^^ozontin. Kielcz. Malogost,
Cast. Sulovia. Drevicz. Inowlodz. Sydlovecz. Janovecz. Slupe^^z. Lagovia.
Racovia. Corzin. Wislicz. Pilzno. Chencin. Poloviec. Zawicost. Zarnow.
Zaclicin. Lezaisk. Osiec. Stasow. Polanecz. Stobnicz. Olesnicz. Ossolin.
Paczanovia. Sendisow. Zarnovec. Sokolow. Praeclavia, and Zaclycin.


Cities and Towns of Sendomir.
The chief City of this Palatinate is

Sendomir, a very pleasant City, seated on a Bank or small Hill of the River
Vistula, enjoying a very delightful Prospect, and being much frequented by the
Gentry on occasion of several Assizes of Justice held there by the Magistrates
of this Palatinate. It lies near the Confluence of the San with the Weissel,
and is twenty eight Polish Miles East from Cracow, and thirty-two South from
Warsaw. It is fortified with strong Walls, and a considerable Castle built to
the South, and washed by the Vistula, in which the Palatin resides, with some
other regular Works raised by Casimir the Great. Among the Public Buildings,
the Monastery of Dominican Friars, founded by Ivo, formerly Archbishop of
Cracow, is most remarkable. A Synod was convened here against the Heresy of
Stancarus in the Year 1570; and another, wherein the Confession of Ausburg,
Bohemia, and Switzerland, were reproved. This Town was sacked by the Tartars in
the Year 1240, and taken by the Swedes in 1655, but restored to the Poles the
Year following.

Opatovia.
Opatovia, four Miles from Sendomir, situate in a very pleasant Country, and
washed by the River Pilcza. It has several famous Religious Edifices.

Viazden.
Viazden, a new-built Town, much frequented, and well fortified.

Radom.
Radom, Capital of that District, built in a Plain, and environed with a strong
Wall and other Fortifications.

Jedlinsk.
Jedlinsk, famous for a School, and a wellbuilt Church.

Solecia.
Solecia, situate upon the Vistula, and celebrated for its Castle; repaired and
beautified by its ancient Duke Christopher Zboravius.

Ilza.
Ilza, a neat Town, built with Brick, and belonging to the Bishop of Cracow. It
is famous for Earthen Ware, with which it furnishes all Poland. It has a Castle
adjoining, consisting for the most part of old Buildings; yet the Bishop's
Palace is all new, and very stately.

Cunovia.
To this Town belongs Cunovia, or Kunow, celebrated for all sorts of Marble,
and that of all Colors.

Iron is exceeding plentiful in this Palatinate, Bozentin.
but more especially at Bozentin, the Bishop of Cracow's City and Residence.
This is a very beautiful Place, well fortified, in which the aforesaid Bishop
has a very neat Palace with exceeding delightful Gardens. This City is seated
near the bottom of the Bald Mountain, by much the highest in Poland.

Kielcz.
Toward the West lies Kielcz, famous for Mines of Copper, and Lapis-Lazuli.
These two belong to the Bishop of Cracow, who has here a very fair Collegiate
Church and Episcopal See.

Chencin.
Chencin, about three Miles from Kielcz, abounding likewise with Silver, Lead,
and diverse kinds of Marble. This Place belongs to the King. Here is a Castle
seated on a Rock, where Justice is distributed to the District of the same Name.

Malogost.
Malogost, or as some will have it, Malogsch, noted for being a Castellany. It
is a woodenbuilt Town, and has nothing in it very remarkable.

Sulovia.
Sulovia, a Town of some Note, by having Command over several neighboring
Places.

Drevicz, and Inowlodz.
Drevicz and Inowlodz, two Towns remarkable for the superb Ruin of two old
Castles.

Sydlovecz.
Sydlovecz, the Name of a County formerly belonging to the Dukes of the Family
of Radzivil, abounding with Iron Mines, good store of Fish, and vast Quantities
of Wood. Its chief Town is encompassed with an old Wall, and a Castle pretty
well fortified. Nevertheless, it is not to be despised, having in it a great
many fair Edifices.

Stenzicz.
Stenzicz, Capital of the District of the same Name, and adorned with a very
stately Monastery of Benedictin Monks.

Janovecz.
A little higher lies Janovecz, with a Castle on the other side of the River.

Slupecz.
Slupecz, belonging to the Abbey of the Holy Cross, on the Top of the Bald
Mountain, this Town being situate at the Bottom of it.

Lagovia.
Lagovia, a City belonging to the Bishop of Cujavia, famous for making Earthen
Ware.

Racovia.
Racovia, a Nest of the Socinians, formerly a City indifferently populous, with
a considerable Academy to instruct Youth: but which being now prohibited by a
Public Edict, the Catholic Religion is restored, but not therewithal the
Grandeur of the Place.

Corzin.
Corzin, Capital of the District of the same Name, a new Timber-built Town with
a Castle, seated near the River Vislock, and surrounded every way with Marshes.

Wislicz.
Wislicz, a Town built with Wood, and watered by the River Nida. It has a
strong Wall, and is moreover situate upon a Rock in the midst of a boggy
Country. Here is to be seen a Cathedral Church, built with square Stone, with a
very beautiful Close for the Habitations of the Canons. The Country round about
this Place abounds with all kind of Serpents and Insects; but as the
Inhabitants tell you, being interdicted by the Sea of Rome, they have no power
to do you any harm, and being transported out of that Place they immediately
die. This City is a Castellany.

Pilzno.
Pilzno, a Timber-Town built on the River Wislock.

Poloviec.
Poloviec, a Timber-built Town lying among the Hills. This is a Castellany.

Zawichost.
Zawichost, a Wooden City on the River Vistula, with a double walled Castle on
the other side: This is likewise a Castellany.

Zarnow.
Zarnow, a Town built with Wood, in which there is nothing remarkable, but that
it is a Castellany.

Zaclicin.
Zaclicin, famous for a very considerable Market.

Lezaisk.
Lezaisk, a Town celebrated for a Monastery, wherein they pretend are
miraculously kept several Relics, and which draw great Crowds of Pilgrims from
all Parts.

Senators of Sendomir.
The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin and Castellan of Sendomir.
The Castellans of Wislicz, Radom, Zawichost, Zarnow, Malogosch, Poloviec, and
Sechow.



Its Arms.
The Standard and Arms of this Palatinate are Party per Pale Argent and Azure,
in the first three Bars Gules, and in the second three Stars Sables, two and
one.

III. Palatinate.
The third Palatinate of Poland, is Lublin, joined also by the Territory of
Lucovia, which contains near two thousand Gentlemen's Houses. This Palatinate,
with both the others, is within the Diocese of Cracow, which comprehends a
thousand and eighteen Churches, thirteen whereof are Collegiate.

In this Palatinate are the several Cities and Towns of

Lublin, Cap. Casimir, Czemiernikow, Vrzendow, Lulow, Parkow, Opolia, Curovia,
Crasnicz, Levartovia, and Lenczna.
Cities and Towns of Lublin.
Whereof the Capital City is

Lublin, situate in the 45 th degree of Longitude, and 51 of Latitude, and
which lies five Miles from the Confines of Red Russia, twelve West of Chelm,
fourteen from Sendomir, twenty four South of Warsaw, and thirty six North-East
of Cracow. It is seated at the foot of a Hill, watered by the River Bystricza,
and defended by a high Wall, a broad Ditch, and a huge strong Castle, which
owes its Foundation to the Russians. This City is not very large, but
nevertheless exceeding healthy, and well built, and much frequented by the
Turkish, Armenian, Muscovitish and German Merchants, especially at the time of
the four famous Fairs that are annually kept there. It is encompassed every way
almost by Marshes, and was walled round by Casimir the Great. The Jews
generally inhabit the Suburbs, where they have a Synagogue. The principal
Church here was erected by Lescus Niger on occasion of a signal Victory he
gained over the Lithuanians near this place. This Church he dedicated to St.
Michael, who, it is said, had promised him good Success the Night before he
fought. There are several other well built Churches in this City, as likewise
diverse magnificent Monasteries, the chiefest of which was founded by Vladislaus
Jagello. This City is noted for two Courts of Justice, or great Tribunals for
all Poland, which occasions a great Concourse of the Gentry to this Place.

Casimir.
Casimir, a very fair Wooden City built among Rocks near the Vistula, whose
overflowing sometimes lays the Houses above half under Water. It is about seven
Miles from Lublin.

Czemiernikow.
Czemiernikow, famous for a very beautiful Palace, formerly built by the
prudent and illustrious Henry Firleius Archbishop of Gnesna, and adorned with
several delightful Gardens.

Urzendow
Vrzendow, a large Timber-built Town, situate on a Lake, and about seven Miles
from Lublin.

Lulow.
Lulow, Capital of the Territory of Leucovia, a City built with Wood in a
Plain, partly defended by a Bog, and partly by Palisadoes: It is about fourteen
Miles from Lublin, and has a very considerable Jurisdiction.

Parkow.
Parkow, a Wood-built Town, seated in a Plain near a very large Lake, and about
nine Miles from Lublin.

Senators of Lublin.
This Palatinate sends only two Senators, viz. The Palatin and Castellan of
Lublin.

Its Arms.
Its Standard or Arms is a Stag Passant, Argent, Collard Or, in a Field Gules.

III. PROVINCE.
The third PROVINCE of Poland is

Prussia, which depends only in part on the Jurisdiction of the Crown of
Poland; for it has its peculiar Laws, Customs and Courts of Justice. It is a
Country of great Extent, and everywhere watered with commodious Rivers, and
moreover toward the Baltic enriched with many convenient Ports and Havens. In
length it is about sixty Polish Miles, and near fifty in breadth, and is
bounded on Its Bounds.
the West by Pomerania, on the South by Cujavia and Masovia, on the East by
Lithuania and Samogitia, and on the North by the Baltic Sea.

Its Products.
This Province, tho it has no great store of Mines, yet it abounds with all
sorts of Cattle, wild Beasts, Fish and Fruit, and enjoys a very temperate
Climate. The Merchandises which it has from Poland, Russia and Lithuania, it
transports in great quantities, and likewise imports whatever either Europe or
the Indies afford, and that chiefly by way of Exchange. Hence it comes to pass
that its Inhabitants are generally richer, and live better than in any of the
other Provinces of Poland.

In this Province they make Glass of certain Wood-Ashes, or of the largest sort
of Pebles. These they boil for twelve hours before they will vitrify. When they
would have their Glass clearer than ordinary, they mix a certain Earth with the
Ashes of the Color and Hardness of Tartre, which renders the Glass of
different Colors, according to the quantity of this Earth mixed with it. Here
may be remarked, that if Salt be mixed with Glass, it becomes much easier to be
blown by the Artificer.

Its Rivers.
The principal Rivers of this Province are, The Weissel, or Vistula. The
Niemen, The Nogat, The Elbing, The Wesser, The Passar, The Alla, The Pregel,
The Ossa, The Drebnicz, The Lica, and The Lavia.


Its Lakes.
Together with a great many Lakes replenished with all sorts of Fish, the chief
of which are,

1. Habus, near fifteen Miles long, and about two in breadth, disjoined from
the Sea only by the Isthmus Neringa, or rather a small Neck of Land; for I find
it has Communication with the Sea, where the Inhabitants gather Amber in small
Nets of a Conick Figure, with a large Mouth, and narrow at the bottom. This Net
they tie to a long Pole, and set out in the Sea when the Waves begin to come
in, wherewith they take pieces sometimes as big as ones Fist. This Amber is
thought to be formed by the great number of Fir-Trees that grow along this
Lake, which dropping great quantities of Resina, or Turpentine, into it, is
carried into the Baltic Sea, where being labored by the Waves it is congealed
into Amber, wherein are found Flies and other Insects. But I am since better
informed, that Amber is a Mineral Juice that runs into the Sea; which at first
taking is soft, but quickly hardens in the Air. It is also to be got all along
the Seacoast in this Province.

2. Curona, another Lake something larger than the former in Ducal Prussia.

Prussia is generally divided into

Regal and Ducal.

This Province was at first subject to certain Sovereign Dukes, until the
Knights of the Teutonick Order got possession of it in the XIII th Century
after a tedious War. In the Year 1454, the Western Part was subdued by the
Poles; and in 1520, Albert Marquess of Brandenburg, the 34 th and last Master
of that Order, having shaken off the Polish Yoke, obtained the Eastern Part
under the Title of a Duchy; so that ever since it has been divided as
abovesaid. The same Albert embraced Lutheranism, persuaded most of the Knights
to marry, and introduced the Reformed Religion into this Country, whereof the
ancient Inhabitants are long since extirpated; and the present Prussians are a
mixed People sprung from the several Colonies of the Swedes, Poles, Germans, and
other Neighboring Nations.

Royal Prussia.
Regal or Royal Prussia is divided into four Palatinates, viz. The Palatinate
of Pomerania, Culm, Marienburg, and Varmia.

I. Palatinate.
The first Palatinate, Pomerania, being not in possession of the Poles,
requires no Description.

II. Palatinate.
The second Palatinate of Royal Prussia is that of Culm (to which also the
Territory of Michalovia, lying to the South, belongs) and has in it these
Cities and Towns, viz. Culm Bish. and Cap.
Thorn, Graudentz, Colmensee, Brodnicz, Radin, Golubia, Rogozna, Brathian,
Lubavia, and Kopriunicza.


Cities and Towns of Culm.
Of all which the chief City is

Culm, an ancient and famous Place built on a Hill, the foot whereof is watered
by the River Vistula. It lies about four German Miles from Thorn to the South,
and fifteen from Dantzic to the North. It was built by the Knights of the
Teutonic Order in the Year 1223, who likewise fortified it against the
Irruptions of the Heathen Prussians; and Herman Desalza, Master of that Order,
gave Laws and Constitutions for its Government. This City suffered much Damage
during the Swedish Invasion, and is now very thin of Inhabitants; insomuch that
the Episcopal See, subject to the Archbishop of Gnesna, has been for some time
removed to the neighboring Town of Colmensee. It has in it very fair Churches,
enriched with many valuable Ornaments and precious Offerings.

Thorn.
Thorn, seated upon the Bank of the Vistula, by which it is divided into two
parts: It lies four Polish Miles from Culm to the South, thirteen from
Marienburg, twenty two from Dantzic, fifteen from Lanschet, and twenty nine
from Warsaw. It was heretofore an Imperial and Free City, but was afterward
exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Empire, and as yet enjoys very many
Privileges. Its Name seems to have been taken from the German word Thor,
signifying a Gate, because built by the Teutonick Order as it were for a Gate
to let Forces into Prussia whenever occasion served: Whence its Arms are
supposed Its Arms.
to have been taken, being a Castle and Gate half open. This City does not
stand in the same place where the old one did, that having been seated a Mile
Westward from hence, where are now to be seen the Ruins of an ancient Castle,
and some other Monuments. However this City at present is the fairest and best
built of any in Royal Prussia, the Streets being much broader, and Houses more
stately than at Dantzic. It was very much beautisied by one of its
Burgermasters Henry Stwband in the Year 1609, who built a small University
here, and endowed it with a considerable Revenue. He likewise founded an
Hospital, and a Public Library, where two of Cicero's Epistles are preserved
written upon Tables of Wax, and a Townhouse built in the middle of the
Marketplace. The Inhabitants revolted from the Knights of the Teutonick Order
in the Year 1454, and put themselves under the Protection of Poland. Native
Town of Copernicus.
In this City the famous Astronomer Nicholas Copernicus was born; and John
Albert King of Poland died here in the Year 1501. It was taken by the Swedes in
the Year 1655, and regained by the Poles in 1658. Afterward the Swedes
recovered it, and the Poles surpised and retook it in 1665.

Graudentz.
Graudentz, only famous for a Castle and very strong Wall.

Colmensee.
Colmensee, or Culmensee* the Episcopal Seat of the Bishop of Culm, translated
hither from Culm. It is distant nine Miles from Thorn to the North, nineteen
from Graudentz, and twelve from Culm to the South-East.

Territory of Michalovia.
The Territory of Michalovia is a strait Neck of Land between the Rivers Brodna
and Drebnicz, which was the occasion of bloody Wars between the Teutonick
Knights and Poles: The chief Town is Michalovia, which, with some others that
are in this Territory, deserves no Description.

III. Palatinate.
The third Palatinate of Royal Prussia is that of

Marienburg, in which are these Cities and Towns, viz Marienburg, Cap. Elbing,
Stuma, Mewa, Gniew, Now, Stargardie, and Ornet.


Cities and Towns of Marienburg.
Of all which the chief City is

Marienburg, seated upon the Nogat, a Branch of the Vistula, about six Miles
from Dantzic: It is defended by strong Walls and high Towers, together with a
very large Castle, wherein the better sort of Prisoners in time of War are
kept. This City receives no small Benefit from the Neighborhood of the Island
Zulava, which is a very rich spot of Earth. This Island is divided into two
parts, viz. 1. The Greater, which lies next Marienburg, and 2. The Lesser, next
to Dantzic, to whose Inhabitants at present belongs


Elbing.
Elbing, a well fortified and trading Town, in which the English they say had
formerly a Consul. Here Albert, first Duke of Prussia, founded an Academy in
the Year 1542. but of no great moment.

The other Towns I find no Description of.

IV. Palatinate.
The fourth Palatinate of Royal Prussia is

The Bishopric of Varmia, whose Gentry are exempt from all Regal Jurisdiction,
being wholly governed by the Laws and Customs of Prussia, and by the Bishop who
is a Temporal Prince: It has in it these Cities and Towns; Heilsberg, Cap.
Fraumberg, Brunsberg, Gutestadt, Allestein, Resla, Vormitz, Messac, Vatemberg,
Seberg, etc.


Cities and Towns of
Of all which the chief City is

Heilsberg.
Heilsberg, famous for being the Residence of the Bishop, and defended with
strong Walls and other suitable Fortifications.

Fraumberg.
Fraumberg, celebrated for the Cathedral of the Bishopric of Varmia there
built, of which the famous Astronomer Copernicus was Canon.

Brunsberg.
Brunsberg, situate on the River Passar, so much frequented, and so worthily
esteemed, that it is reckoned among the chief Towns of Prussia. It has a
College of Jesuits built by Cardinal Hosius.

There are several other Cities and Towns of which I find no Description, and
therefore have omitted them.

Ducal Prussia.
Ducal Prussia, now entirely belonging to the Elector of Brandenburg, has these
Towns in it, viz. Koningsberg, Cap. Pilaw, Memel, Welaw, Tilsa, Marienwerder,
etc.
To the number of 60.

Town of Koningsberg.
The Metropolis Koningsberg is a Market Town divided into three parts, and
defended with a very considerable Castle: It lies in the 43 d degree of
Longitude, and 54 of Latitude, and has a small Academy founded by Albert Great
Master of the Teutonick Order, and first Duke of this Country in the Year 1544.
The Citizens are generally Lutherans, as are likewise most part of this
Country, which occasioned Sigismund III. when he received Homage of this Duke
in the Year 1621, to impose a Law, that the Catholics should have free
Exercise for their Religion there.

Senators of Prussia.
The Senators of Prussia are, The Bishop of Varmia, who is the Chief. The
Bishop Palatin, and Castellan of Culm. The Palatins of Marienburg, and
Pomerania. The Castellans of Elbing, and Dantzic.


There are other Officers which belong to the Senate or Great Council of
Prussia, which they hold among themselves, except when they are commanded to
the Grand Diet of the Kingdom. These are The Vice-Chamberlains of Culm,
Marienburg, Pomerania, Thorn, Elbing, and Dantzic.


Besides these several Magistrates, the Prussians have also a Treasurer,
Burgraves of Castles, Sword-Bearers, Judges, and Sheriffs; but none of all
these have any Place in the Council.

The Palatins of Prussia have far greater Power than those in any other
Province of Poland.

Its Arms.
The Arms or Standard of Prussia are an Eagle expans'd, Sables, with a Sword
evaginated, and held by a dexter Hand Argent: Both in a Field Or.

IV. PROVINCE.
The Fourth PROVINCE of this Kingdom is

Red-Russia.
Red- Russia, the other being White- Russia, and belonging to Lithuania. This
Province Its Extent.
extends it self from the Frontiers of Lithuania, as far as the Mouth of the
Nieper in the Black Sea; which River separates it from Moscovy to the East, as
likewise do the Carpathian Mountains from Hungary to the South-West. It is
extremely fruitful in Corn, Beasts of all kinds, Fish, and Honey. In this
Province there are several Trees daily found along the Shore of the River San,
which are very hard, and black as Ebony. The Country People say they have lain
there ever since the Deluge, but it is probable they might have been washed
down by the Course of the River a great while since. It is bounded on the South
by Hungary, Moldavia, and Bessarabia; on the East by the Scythian Deserts, and
especially Moscovy; on the North by Russia Alba, separated by the Rivers Stiro
and Pripecz; and on the West by Lesser Poland, from which it is divided by the
Rivers Vislocz and Vepre.

This Province comprehends seven Palatinates, Viz. The Palatinates of Russia,
Podolia, Braslaw, Kiovia, Volhynia, Belsko, and Chelm.


I. Palatinate.
The first Palatinate of this Province is that of

Russia, which is divided into four Districts, which are, The Districts of
Leopol, Premislaw, Halicz, and Sanoch.


I. District.
The first of these Districts has in it these remarkable Cities and Towns, Viz.
Leopol Archbish. Cap.
Grodeck, Javorisvia, Zolkiew, Gliniani, Zloczow, and Komarna.


Cities and Towns of
Of all which, the chief City is

Leopol.
Leopol, called Lwow or Luwow by the Polanders, and Lemberg or Russe-Lemberg by
the Germans. It is the Metropolis of this Palatinate, and lies in the 46 Degree
of Longitude, and 49 of Latitude. It is built amongst the Hills, on the Banks
of the River Peltaw, fifteen Polish Miles from Mount Carpathus to the South,
and as many from Premislaw to the West, thirty from Caminiec, forty from
Cracow, and about fifty from Warsaw to the South-East. This City is large and
well fortified, having two Castles, one within the Walls, and one without on a
rising Ground, which commands the Town; both which, together with the City,
were founded by Leo (or, as they call him, Loo) Duke of Russia, about the Year
1289. The Archbishop of Leopol is both Spiritual and Temporal Lord of his
Diocese. His See was translated hither from Halicz in 1361, by Order of King
Casimir. Here also reside an Armenian Archbishop, and a Russian Bishop
depending on the Patriarch of Constantinople, with several Churches belonging
to each Bishopric. The Armenian Roman Catholics have inhabited here time out
of mind, and are governed wholly by their own Prelat. They enjoy very great
Privileges on account of the considerable Commerce they maintain with the
Persians and other Eastern People. This City is famous for several Several
times besieged.
Sieges it has sustained. As first, it was besieged by the Cosacks and Tartars
with a dreadful Army. Secondly, by the Moscovites and Cosacks in the Year 1648,
with an Army of above 120 thousand Men, without being able to take it in two
Months and a half; but the last time the Turks became almost Masters of it in
the Year 1672, yet by an Agreement obliged themselves to quit it. This happened
under the Reign of King Michael Wiesnowiski, who died here in the Year 1673.
This City gives great Encouragement to Learned Men, who are very civilly
received by their Academy, which is supplied with Professors from that of
Cracow. Here is kept a very famous Winter-Fair, whither the Hungarian,
Moldavian, and, in time of Peace, Turkish Merchants resort in great Numbers.
Amongst other Rivers, it has Roxolania, wherein Barbels are taken of a great
Size. It has likewise an innumerable Company of Fish Ponds all about it,
replenished with several sorts of very fat Fish, which are salted up in great
Numbers, and transported all over Poland. The Churches here are generally very
fair and well built, and abound with all kinds of costly Ornaments.

Grodeck.
Grodeck, a palisado'd City, with a Castle built in a Plain, and surrounded
with Bogs. It lies about four Miles from Leopol.

Javorisvia.
Javorisvia, famous for a natural Bath arising in the next adjoining Village of
Sclovia. This alone suffices to disperse several stubborn Distempers, as Sixtus
Leo, a Physician of great Experience, testifies in his Treatise concerning it.

Zolkiew.
Zolkiew, a Town adorned and defended by a Castle, and intermixed with several
delightful Gardens, with a fair Church in the middle of it, built with various
sorts of Marble. It was the Seat of the late King John Sobieski, where my Lord
of Rochester had Audience of him.

Its Arms.
The Standard and Arms of this District are a Lion Passant Crowned Or, by a
Rock Sables, all in a Field Azure.

II. District.
The second District of this Palatinate is

Premislia, which has in it these principal Cities and Towns, Viz.

Premislaw, Bish. Sambor, Jaroslaw, Lancut, Resovia, Fulstin, Visnia, Zidaczow,
Moscisca, Dubiecz, Canczuga, and Prevorscia.
Cities and Towns of
Whereof the capital City is

Premislaw.
Premislaw, built on the River San with good strong Walls and a Castle, situate
upon a Rock on the other side of the River. This City lies about six Leagues
above Jaroslaw, and twelve from Leopol toward the West. There are in it two
Bishops, one of the Place, and the other a Russian Prelat of the Greek Church.
Orichowski, a Canon of this Cathedral, maintained* that Priests might marry.
Here is a College belonging to the Jesuits for the Education of Youth. The
Citizens are very much addicted to Trade, and have several famous Fairs every
Year. Near this City is a very spacious Park of the King's, full of all kinds
of wild Beasts, and strongly walled in, that they might do no mischief. The
Country hereabouts abounds with Castles for defense against the Incursions of
the Tartars; the chief of all which is the Castle Crassici, lately built on the
River San.

Sambor.
Sambor, a Palisado'd City upon the River Tyra, with a Castle built near the
Borders of Hungary.

Jaroslaw.
Jaroslaw, famous for a Fair kept on Lady Day, and the most celebrated of any
in all Poland. Where, besides several Merchandises brought from Persia,
Constantinople, Venice, Muscovy and Amsterdam, they say, it is wont to have
above four hundred thousand Head of Cattle, and half as many Horses. In this
Town the Jesuits have a College for Students, and without it there is a very
stately Nunnery of modern Architecture. Neither is its Castle to be despised,
which is seated to the East on the River San.

Lancut.
Lancut, famous for several magnificent Churches, founded by Stanislaus
Lubomirski, Palatin of Cracow, together with a Castle well fortified against
the Tartars.

Resovia.
Resovia has in it a considerable Castle, with several Monasteries, and a Fair
kept on the Feast of St. Albert. This Town is famous for a Linen Manufacture
performed by the Germans, whose Ancestors having been taken Prisoners by
Casimir the Great, were settled in and about this Place.

Its Arms.
The Standard or Arms of this District are an Eagle expans'd with two Heads,
both Crowned Or, in a Field Azure. III. District.


The third District of the Palatinate of Russia is that of

Halicz, encompassed toward the West with the Mountains of Transylvania, to
the South by the Boechy-Woods of Walachia, and toward the East is divided into
two Parts by the Tyra or Niester, a rapid River, which arises among the
Carpathian Mountains, and discharges it self into the Euxine Sea. The South
Division of this District is called Procutia. The whole District contains these
remarkable Cities and Towns, Viz.

Halicz, Cap. Sniatin, Cap. of Procutia. Colom. Martinow. Dolina. Strium.
Podock. Brezana. Buczavia or Busko, and Podhajecia.
Cities and Towns of
The chief all which is

Halicz.
Halicz, formerly Metropolis of the Russian Kingdom, which was then divided
into several Tetrarchies, each of which had its proper Duke. It is a large
Timber-built City, divided from Moldavia by the River Prud, and on the other
side washed by the Niester. It has a wooden Castle situated on an Eminence hard
by the Niester. Its Inhabitants are somewhat Rustical, and addicted more to
Agriculture than Trade.

Sniatin.
Sniatin, a wooden Palisado'd Town on the Borders of Walachia, watered by the
Prud, and is Capital of Procutia. In it were wont to be Fairs kept, which the
Valachians made their Magazine; whence it became very well furnished with
Cattle, Honey, Wax, and an excellent Breed of brave Horses in great Numbers.

Colom.
Colom, a wooden Town, built under a Hill near the River Prud. It is very much
frequented on account of its Refining Salt, with which it furnishes all the
rest of Russia and Lithuania, there being none in those two Provinces, except
only in the District of Premislaw. Almost all over this District there are deep
Wells, whose Water is boiled up into Salt. In the Deserts likewise of the
Vkraine, near the Boristhenes, there is a certain Lake, whose Water by the
power of the Sun is congealed into solid Lumps of Salt, and which the
Inhabitants thereabouts only use.

Martinow.
Martinow, a Town in Procutia, having a Castle built among the Marshes.

Dolina.
Dolina, a wooden-built Town, situated among the Hills.

Strium.
Strium, built likewise with Wood, near the River of its own Name.

Podock.
Podock, on the other side of the Niester, defended by a Castle, and adorned by
a fair Monastery, built by Steven Potucius, Palatin of Braclaw, who died and
lies buried there.

Brezana.
Brezana, a populous Town, built with Wood, having a walled Castle on a Hill
hard by.

Buczavia.
Buczavia, or Busko, built among the Marshes, near which the River Bug has its
Rise; by means of which several Merchandises are transported to Leopol.

Podhajecia.
Podhajecia, environed with a Wall, and other Fortifications, having not far
off the famous Castle of Zavalovia.

IV. District.
The fourth District of the Palatinate of Russia is that of

Sanoch, near the Mountains of Hungary and Transylvania, and consequently
abounding in little Hills except only toward Crosna. In it are these Cities
and Towns, Viz. Sanoch, Cap. Crosna, Brozovia, Rimanovia, Dinovia, and Lesko,


Cities and Towns of
Of all which the principal City is

Sanoch.
Sanoch, built with Wood, among the Hills, and near the River San. It has a
no-ways contemptible Castle, founded upon a Rock.

Crosna.
Crosna, the Staple of the Hungarians, whither they bring all their
Merchandises and Wines; and therefore the Fairs and Marts here are more
celebrated than those of their Neighbors. In this City likewise the Jesuits
have a College for Human Learning. It exceeds Sanoch in its Number of
Inhabitants, and Concourse of Strangers.

Brozovia, etc.
The other Cities and Towns of Brozovia, Rimanovia, Dinovia and Lesko, are
Places of no small Strength against the Incursions of the Tartars.

Senators of Sanoch.
The Senators of the Palatinate of Russia are The Archbishop of Leopol. The
Bishops of Premislaw, and Kiovia. The Palatin of Russia. The Castellans of
Leopol. Premislaw. Halicz, and Sanoch.



II. Palatinate.
The Second Palatinate of the Province of Red- Russia, is that of

Podolia, famous for the frequent Irruptions of Barbarians, and the many
Battles fought with them there. If these People (says Starovolscius) might
enjoy a wished for Peace like the Western Countries of Europe, they would have
no reason to envy either the Plenty or Riches of Italy or Hungary. This
Palatinate has in it diverse sorts of Marble and Alabaster in several Places,
and is divided into three Districts, Viz. The Districts of Caminiec, Trembowla,
and Laticzow.

In all which are these principal Cities and Towns, Viz. Caminiec, Cap.
Trembowla. Laticzow. Bar. Husiatinow. Czartikow. Janow. Czvaniec. Chmielnic.
Miedzibosz, or Misdzibozia. Zinkow. Jesupolis. Jacloveck. Satanow. Tarnopolia.
Kitaigrod, and Dunaigrod.


Cities and Towns of
The Chief City of all which is

Caminiec, situate on the Confines of Walachia, Caminiec.
among Rocks and Hills. It is well fortified both by Nature and Art, and has a
very strong Castle, built on an adjacent Rock which commands the Town. Its
Avenue is covered with a Horn-work, which is separated from the Body of the
Place by a deep Moat. Both City and Castle are almost encompassed by the River
Smotrzick, which a little below falls into the Niester. The Rocks lie every way
so high about this City, that you can discover only the Tops of the highest
Houses. It lies fifteen Polish Miles from Bar to the West, thirty from Leopol,
thirty six from Jassy, thirty from Kiow, eighty from Warsaw, and about a
hundred and seventy from Constantinople. This strong City, which is the Sea of
a Prelat, Suffragan to the Archbishop of Leopol, was very much damaged by a
Fire in the Year 1669, and has been often in vain attackt by the utmost Fury of
the Turks and Tartars, till in the Year 1672 it fell into the possession of the
former, in which it still continues. It was blockt up by Motula, General of the
Cosacks, in the Year 1687; and the Poles afterward made great Preparations to
join his Troops, but were both obliged to retire upon the Approaches of the
Ottoman Forces. Afterward another Blockade was formed by the Polish Army in
1688, and the next year they actually invested the Place, and began a formal
Attack in the Month of August; but the Siege was raised in September following,
and never since attempted, so that the Infidels remain at present in quiet
possession hereof, together with several other considerable Places in this
Palatinate.

Trembowla.
Trembowla, a City lying under a great Mountain, with a Castle built upon an
adjoining Hill.

Laticzow.
Laticzow, well fortified against Incursions, with an adjoining Castle and
Warlike Inhatants.

Bar.
Bar, a City built and palisado'd round by Buona, Daughter of John Sforza Duke
of Milan, and Queen to Sigismund King of Poland, so naming it from the Place
where she was born. It has a Castle on a Hill, surrounded every way with Bogs
and Lakes.

Husiatinow.
Husiatinow, well fortified also against Incursions.

Czartikow.
Czartikow, with the like strong Fortifications and a Castle.

Janow, etc.
Janow and Czvaniec, with several others, are very strong Places.

Chmielnick.
Chmielnick, a Timber-built Town, defended only with Palisado's, with a wooden
Castle, built upon the River Bog.

Miedzibosz.
Miedzibosz, a Town with a large Timber Castle, situate among the Marshes, to
which there is no Avenue but over Bridges. This Place was formerly much
infested by the Tartars.

Senators of Podolia.
The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Bishop, The Palatin, and The Castellan
of Caminiec, Podolia, Caminiec.


^^s Arms.
The Standard or Arms of this Palatinate are the Sun in its full Glory in a
Field Azure.

III. Palatinate.
The Third Palatinate of the Province of Red- Russia, is that of

Braslaw, or Braclaw, lying beyond Podolia, upon the Borders of Tartary, now
out of possession of the Poles; in which are these Cities and Towns, Viz.
Braclaw, Cap. Vinnicza, Zitomir, Sarogrod, Morachua, Jarosow, Felstin, and
Chmielnic.


Cities of
Of which the capital City is

Braclaw.
Braclaw, built on the River Bog, with a wooden Castle and other
Fortifications. It lies a hundred and ten Miles from Caminiec to the East,
fifty five from Bar, and fifty from the Confines of Walachia to the North,
toward Kiow. It was taken, and miserably wasted by the Turks in the Year 1672.

Vinnicza.
Vinnicza, a wooden City likewise, built on the River Bog, and defended with a
Castle and a Wall. This City is famous for a Meeting of the Gentry and a Court
of Justice; where the Jesuits also have a College to instruct Youth. These two
Cities have been very much infested by the Tartars. I find no Description of
the rest.

Senators of Braslaw.
The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin, and Castellan of Braslaw.

IV. Palatinate.
The Fourth Palatinate of the Province of Red- Russia, is that of

Kiovia, bordering on one side on Tartary, and on the other on Moscovy. It is
divided in the middle by the famous River Boristhenes. This Palatinate extends
a great way toward the Euxine Sea, to the Confines of White- Russia in
Lithuania. In it are these principal Cities and Towns, Viz. Kiow Bish. Cap.
Kaniow, Circassia, Oczakow, Stepanow, Fastovia, Bohuslaw, Pereslaw and
Bialerkiow.


Cities and Towns of
The chief City of all which is

Kiow.
Kiow, or Kiouf, according to the Pronunciation of the Inhabitants, an ancient,
large, and very populous City, fortified with strong Palisado's, a Castle,
Trench, and some other Regular Works, and situate on the Boristhenes or Nieper.
The old Kiow was built on a Hill a little beyond the River, where are still to
be seen the Ruins of many Arches, high Walls, Churches, and Burying-places of
diverse Kings with Greek Inscriptions. Of these Churches, two remain in
tolerable good Condition, viz. those of St. Sophia and St. Michael. The Walls
of the former are lined with curious Mosaic Work, and the Dome consists of
Earthen Pots, well cemented and filled with Mortar. St. Michael's Church is
chiefly remarkable for its gilded Roof. The Burying-places of the ancient great
Men of Russia were in several Caves near this City, some of which are said to
extend into the Borders of Moscovy above eighty Miles in length. The Bodies
here are preserved whole and entire, especially those of two certain Princes,
which are dressed in Antique Habits, and have been not long since shown to
Travelers by the Russian Monks. The Place where these Sepulchers are made is
of a sandy Stone, very dry, and seems to be of the same Nature with the
Catacombs of Rome. Kiow was heretofore an exceeding large City, as may appear
from the Ruins of the Walls, which extend themselves above eight Miles in
compass. It is said to have been first founded by a Russian Prince named Kius,
in the Year of Christ 861, and then constituted Metropolis of Tauro-Scythia.
Next it became the Seat of the Russian Empire, and was afterward governed by
its own Princes. It was stormed and pillaged by the Tartars in the Year 1615,
and has ever since declined from its primitive Grandeur. It has been often
taken and retaken within the Space of thirty Years, but now remains wholly in
possession of the Ozar of Moscovy, to whom it was lately pawned by the Cosacks.
The Episcopal See of Kiow is subject to the Metropolitan of Leopol. Here
resides the Russian Archbishop, supreme over all of the same Persuasion
throughout Poland. Here are diverse Roman and Russian Churches, and a great many
Monasteries, etc.

Kaniow.
Kaniow, seventeen Miles from Kiow, whose Inhabitants with its Neighbors round
about, are a very Warlike People.

Circassia.
Circassia, a Timber-built City on the River Boristhenes, about twenty five
Polish Miles from Kiow. Its Inhabitants were formerly the Circassi, a Warlike
People, and much celebrated in History, who likewise dwelt all along the
Boristhenes.

Oczakow.
Oczakow, built upon the Mouth of the Boristhenes, and inhabited by Tartars,
tho commanded and governed by Turks.

Stepanow.
Stepanow, fortified with a Castle, a Wall, and a Ditch.

Fastovia.
Fastovia, famous only for being the Residence of the Bishop of Kiow, and the
Jesuits College translated from Kiow.

Bohuslaw.
Bohuslaw, Pereslaw, and Bialerkiow, are all Towns indifferently populous, and
each defended by a Castle.

The Senators of Kiovia.
The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Bishop Palatin, and Castellan of
Kiovia.

Its Arms.
The Standard or Arms of this Palatinate are Party per Pale Argent and Azure.
In the former the Charge of Lithuania, and in the latter a Bear Passant.

V. Palatinate.
The Fifth Palatinate of the Province of Red- Russia, is that of

Belsko, joining to the District of Leopol, and Palatinate of Chelm, and placed
about the middle of Red- Russia. It is divided into four Districts, Viz. The
Districts of Belsko, Busko, Grodlow, and Grabow.


In all which are the several Cities and Towns of Belsko, Cap. of the
Palatinate. Busko, Cap. of its District. Grodlow, Cap. of its District. Grabow,
Cap. of its District. Sokal, etc.


Cities and Towns of
The chief of all which is

Belsko.
Belsko, or Belz, a Timber-built City, indifferently large, and situate among
the Marshes, between Leopol and Zamoisk, and about five Miles from the River
Bug. It has a wooden Castle, built on a Hill, surrounded every way with Bogs.

Busko.
Busko, or Busk, a Town seated in a Moor, where the River ^^ g takes its Rise,
by which Merchandises are ansported to Leopol only five Miles distant.

Grodlow.
Grodlow, a palisado'd Town, with a Castle upon a Hill washed by the River Bug.

Grabow.
Grabow, a wooden Town, seated in a large Plain, with a Castle fortified both
by Nature and Art, and of very difficult Access.

Sokal.
Sokal, a Town seated on the Bug, and defended only with Palisado's.

Senators of Belsko.
The Senators of this Palatinate are The Palatin and Castellan of Belsko.

Its Arms.
The Arms or Standard of this Palatinate are a Griffin Volant, Argent in a
Field Gules.

VI. Palatinate.
The Sixth Palatinate of Red- Russia is that of

Chelm, lying between Lublin, Lithuania, and Volhynia, and is divided into two
Districts, Viz. The Districts of Chelm, and Crasnistaw.

In both which are these Cities and Towns, Viz. Chelm Bish. Cap.
Crasnistaw, Zamoisk, Ratno, Lynbowlya, Rozana, Vlodavia. Scebresin, Turobin,
Tamogrod, Tomasow, and Ctesow.


Cities and Towns of
The Capital of all which is

Chelm.
Chelm, a small City defended with a Castle, the Outworks whereof are made of
Wood. It lies about ten Miles from Lublin to the East, twenty four from
Premistaw to the North, and twelve from Belsko. It has been sacked and burnt by
the Muscovites and Tartars during the late Wars, which occasioned the Residence
of its Bishop to be translated to Crasnistaw. Nevertheless, an Oriental or
Russian Bishop still resides there.

Crasnistaw.
Crasnistaw, a walled Town upon the River Vepre, where the Bishop of Chelm at
present has his Residence in a Palace of modern Architecture. Near this place
the Archduke Maximilian, when he came with an Army to seize the Crown of
Poland, was shamefully repulsed by John Zamoiski, who immediately afterward
built a Town in that Neighborhood, calling it after his own Name,

Zamoisk.
Zamoisk, well defended by high Walls, deep Ditches, and other strong
Fortifications, after the modern Manner. He likewise built a fair Cathedral
here, and enriched it with all manner of Necessaries; also a noble Academy,
furnished with Learned Masters from the famous University of Cracow. This
Person was so great a favourer of Learning. that not only Zamoisk, but also
several other Places of the Province of Russia found the Effects of his Bounty.

Ratno.
Ratno, a wooden Town, built among the Marshes, with a Castle washed by the
River Perepet on one side, and defended on the other by a Bog and the Niester.
It lies bout twenty four Miles from Chelm.

Lynbowlya.
Lynbowlya, a Town upon the Bug, with a tolerably fortified Castle.

Senators of Chelm.
The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Bishop and Castellan of Chelm.

Its Arms.
The Standard or Arms of this Palatinate are a Bear Argent passant between
three Trees proper in a Field Or.

V. PROVINCE.
The Fifth PROVINCE of this Kingdom is

Masovia, situate almost in the Heart of the Kingdom of Poland, and bounded on
the North Its Bounds.
by Prussia, on the East by Lithuania, on the South by Upper Poland, and on the
West by Lower Poland. It was formerly governed by its own Princes, but in the
Year 1526* by the Death of its Dukes John and Stanislaus, that Duchy fell to
the Kings of Poland. The Inhabitants.
Inhabitants hereof are generally Warlike: They speak the same Language with
the Poles, only they differ in some few guttural Accents: Their Manners, Habits
and Religion are much the same. This Province is divided into three
Palatinates, which are, Division.
The Palatinates of Masovia, properly so called. Ploczkow, and Dobrina.


I. Palatinate.
The first Palatinate of this Province is that of

Masovia properly so called, which in spiritual Matters is subject only to the
Bishop of Posnan, but in Temporal is divided into twelve Districts, viz. The
Districts of Warsaw, Wisna, Cyrna, Zembrow, Nuren, Wissegrod, Zakrow, Cickanow,
Lombze, Rozan, Makow, and Liw.


In all which the principal Cities and Towns are those of the same Name with
the Districts, adding moreover these following, viz.

Pultovia, Czerniensk, Czersko, Akroczim, Varka, Blonye, Pultowsko, Tarcin,
Grodzyec, Prasniz, Garvolinia, Vengrovia, Stanislanovia, Broc, Viskow, and
Seroicz.
Cities and Towns of
The chief City of all which, and Metropolis of the Province is

Warsaw.
Warsaw, defended with a Castle, Wall and Ditch, seated in a Plain in the very
Center of the Kingdom, and therefore pitched upon for the convening of the
Diet. It lies upon the River Vistula, in the 43 d degree of Longitude, and 52
of Latitude, and is divided into four Parts, viz. The Old and New
Town, with The Suburbs of Cracow, and Prag.



This City is adorned with diverse stately Piles of Buildings, particularly a
spacious foursquare Palace founded by Sigismund III. and much improved by his
Successors, where the Kings of Poland most commonly reside. Opposite to this on
the other side of the River, stands another Royal Palace in the middle of
delightful Groves and Gardens, built by Vladislaus VII. and called by the Name
of Viasdow, where the States or Diet of Poland formerly used to sit and debate
the most important Affairs of the Kingdom. There is moreover the Palace of King
John Casimir, as likewise a very stately one built by Count Morstin, Great
Treasurer of Poland. Also a League from this City King John Sobieski built a
neat Country Palace by the Name of Villa Nova. The other Public Edifices are
no less remarkable, being the Church of St. John Baptist, where Secular Canons
officiate; the Arsenal, Castle, Marketplace, etc. Diverse kinds of Merchandises
are conveyed hither along a River from the neighboring Provinces, and from
hence carried to Dantzic to be transported into Foreign Countries. In the
Suburbs of Cracow is a small Chapel built on purpose for the Burial of John
Demetrius Suski, Great Duke of Muscovy, who died Prisoner in the Castle of
Gostinin, together with his two Brothers. This City was taken by the Swedes in
the Year 1655, and is scarce three Polish Miles distant from Lesser Poland,
about twenty four from Lanschet, as many North-East of Lublin, twenty nine
South-East of Thorn, thirty to the North from Sendomir, thirty three West of
Gnesna, and forty to the North-East from Cracow and Posnan.

Wisna.
Wisna, a Town in a Plain near the River Narew, with a Castle upon an adjoining
Hill.

Wissegrod.
Wissegrod, a Wooden Town built in a Plain near the Vistula, with a
considerable Castle: It lies about twelve Miles from Warsaw.

Ciekanow.
Ciekanow, about the same distance from Warsaw, being a Town built in a Plain
likewise, with a Castle among the Marshes.

Lombze.
Lombze, a large City upon the navigable River Narew, consisting of fair
Buildings, and about twenty Miles from Warsaw.

Rozan.
Rozan, a Town built in a Plain near the River Narew.

Liw.
Liw, a Timber-built Town, with a Castle founded on the Banks of the River
Liwijecz.

Pultovia.
Pultovia, famous for being the Residence of the Bishop of Plosko. It is a Town
built with Brick, with a good Castle, and some other tolerable Edifices.

Czerniensk.
Czerniensk, a large Wooden Town built on the Vistula.

Akroczim.
Akroczim, a Wooden Town likewise seated on the Vistula, with a Castle. It is
about eight Miles from Warsaw.

Varka.
Varka, a large Town built in a Plain near the River Pilza, and about eight
Miles from Warsaw another way.

Blonye.
Blonye, a Town about four Miles from Warsaw.

Pultowsko.
Pultowsko, a Walled Town with a Castle, situate on the River Narew.

Tarcin.
Tarcin, a Timber-built Town, about five Miles from Warsaw.

Grodzyec.
Grodzyec, about seven Miles from Warsaw, and two from Tarcin.

Prasniz.
Prasniz, a large Town, intermixed with a great many fair Stone Edifices.
Senators of the Pal. of Masovia.


The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatine of Masovia. The Castellans
of Cyrna, Warsaw, Wisna, Wissegrod, Zakrow, Ciekanow, and Liw.



Its Arms.
The Arms or Standard of this Palatinate, are an Eagle expanded Argent in a
Field Gules.

II. Palatinate.
The second Palatinate of the Province of Masovia is that of

Ploskow, lying toward the East between the Vistula and Prussia. It is divided
into four Districts, viz. The Districts of Ploczkow, Zancren, Mlava, and Stenen.


In all which are these principal Cities and Towns viz., Ploczkow Bish. Cap.
Sieprcz, Srensko, Mlaw, and Radzanow.


The Capital of all which is

Ploczko.
Ploczkow, or Ploczko, Metropolis of the Palatinate of that Name, which stands
on a high Bank of the Weissel or Vistula, from whence one may have a very fair
Prospect of a pleasant and fruitful Country. This City is considerably enriched
by the Navigableness of its River, is very populous, and has been long
dignified with a Bishop's See. Besides the Cathedral, there are diverse other
Churches and Monasteries richly endowed, especially the Abbey of Benedictins in
the Suburbs, where amongst other Relics, the Head of St. Sigismund is kept in
Gold which was given by King Sigismund III.

Sieprcz.
Sieprcz, a Wooden Town built on a Hill among the Marshes, and about five Miles
from Ploczkow.

Srensko.
Srensko, a Timber-built Town, seated in a Plain, with a Castle founded among
the Bogs. This Place is about ten Miles from Ploczko.

Mlaw.
Mlaw, a Town built on the Confines of Prussia, and washed by the River of its
own Name. It is also about ten Miles from Ploczkow.

Radzanow.
Radzanow, a Timber-built Town on the River Vkra, with a Castle founded upon a
Rock amongst the Marshes. This Town is about eight Miles from Ploczkow.

Senators of Ploskow.
The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Bishop Palatin and Castellan
of Ploskow. The Castellans of Sieprcz, and Radzanow.


Its Arms.
The Standard or Arms of this Palatinate, are an Eagle expans'd Sables with a P
on the Breast: All in a Field Gules.

III. Palatinate.
The third Palatinate of the Province of Masovia, is that of

Dobrina, lying toward the West between Cujavia and Prussia: It abounds with
all sorts of Fruit and Fish, and is divided into three Districts, viz. The
District of Dobrina, Ripin, and Slonsk.


In all which are these principal Cities and Towns, viz.

Dobrina, Cap. Ripin, Slonsk, and Gorzno.
Cities and Towns of
The Capital City of this Palatinate is

Dobrina.
Dobrina, a Timber-built City, seated on a Rock near the River Vistula. It had
formerly a Castle which was demolished by the Teutonick Knights.

Ripin.
Ripin, a Wooden Town, built in a Plain on the River Odleck: It is about five
Miles from Dobrina.

Slonsk.
Slonsk, a Town in a Plain, situate upon the River Vistula, and about two Miles
from Dobrina.

Gorzno.
Gorzno, or Gurzno, a Wood-built Town, tolerably well defended by Nature and
Art: It is about six Polish Miles from Dobrina.

This Palatinate was formerly the cause of frequent Wars between the Poles,
Teutonick Knights, and Prussians.

Senators of Dobrina.
The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Castellans of Dobrina, Ripin, and
Slonsk.


Its Arms.
The Arms and Standard of this Palatinate, are a Man's Head proper, doubly
crowned Or and Argent: All in a Field Gules.

VI. PROVINCE.
The Sixth PROVINCE of this Kingdom is

Samogitia, having in it no Palatinate, tho many Capitanies, of which the chief
Starosta is he of the Province who has a Place in the Senate, tho no other of
the same Dignity have the like throughout the whole Kingdom, except he be
otherwise qualified. This Province is indifferently large and fruitful, tho it
be very much overrun with Woods. To the North it is bounded by Curland and the
Its Bounds.
Baltic Sea: On the West it has Ducal Prussia and the Baltic; and toward the
South and East it borders on Lithuania. It has several Cities as well belonging
to the King as the Gentry, which for the most part are all built with Wood.
This Province takes its Name from its Situation, which is low and marshy; the
word Samogitz in the Language of this Country denoting as much. It abounds with
Lakes and inaccessible Mountains, yet affords great quantities of Honey, purer
than that either of Lithuania or Livonia, and breeds Horses which are very much
admired for their Swiftness. The ordinary People here live in Manners of the
People.
Cottages for the most part seated near Lakes or Rivers, and covered either
with Thatch or Boards. They plough the Ground not with Iron but Wood, tho the
Soil be most commonly fat and stiff; which Custom they are addicted to even to
Superstition: for when a certain Starosta of that Country thought to introduce
Iron Plowshares among them, and the Season not happening to prove as kind as
usual, they attributed all the cause to this change of Instrument; whereupon
they were permitted to return to their old way for fear of an Insurrection.
Their Horses are generally so small, that one would wonder how they could
undergo the Fatigue they put 'em to. Most of the Inhabitants of this Country
differ little in Manners, Habit or Language from the Lithuanians; yet some of
them still retain several Idolatrous Worships, especially Their Superstition.
in the Deserts, where they pay Devotion to a four-footed Serpent, under the
Name of Givosit; and you will hardly find a Family in these Parts without one of
these Household Gods. Nay, even at this day in many Villages both of Prussia and
Lithuania, the poor Peasants, although they profess Christianity, yet keep Adders
in their Houses, to which they pay a more than ordinary Veneration, imagining
that some great Mischief would befall them if these Idols should come to any
harm. To be more particular with this Country, your Lordship may understand
that their Houses (except only those of the Gentry) are built low and
long-ways, with an Hearth in the middle, and but one Room, which serves not
only for themselves but their Cattle. The better sort drink out of Horn Cups,
and eat out of Wooden Platters. The Honey here is extraordinary, having but
little Wax; and some of it is perfectly white, with which the Woods are every
where almost lined. Manrer of sacrificing.
The manner of the Pagan Sacrifices and Feasts in Samogitia kept at this day
about the end of October, is as follows. First, the Place of meeting being
assigned, the Men with their Wives, Children and Servants, punctually appear
thereat, when spreading a Cloth upon the Straw, several Loaves are set in due
order, and between each Loaf a large Pot of Beer; then Beasts of diverse kinds
both Male and Female are brought in, and sacrificed after the ancient Custom,
thus. First, the Augur or Priest, after having mumbled over some few words,
strikes 'em with a Wand he holds in his hand on the Back, Belly, etc. when all
that are present likewise follow his Example, crying out, O Zimiennick! (for so
they call their God) these Offerings we make to thee for protecting us so
mercifully hitherto, and we most humbly implore thee to have the like
Compassion on us for the future, as to preserve us from Fire, Sword, Pestilence
and our Enemies: Which said, they immediately fall to, but first cut off a bit
from every Plate, and throw 'em about the Room, crying, O Zimiennick,
graciously partake of our Sacrifices, and favor thy Adorers! After which they
eat and drink heartily, and so the Ceremony concludes. These Sacrifices are
also still observed by the Country People in several places of Lithuania and
Russia. This Province is divided into three Districts, which are, The Districts
of Rosienia, Mednick, and Poniviess.


In all which are these principal Towns, viz.

Rosienia, Cap. Mednick, Poniviess, and Cowna.
Towns of
The Capital of all which is

Rosienia
Rosienia, a small ill-built Town, tho the chief of the Province of Samogitia,
being seated on the River Dubiss, about twelve Polish Miles from Cowna to the
North, thirty from Riga, and twenty seven from Vilna to the West.

Mednick.
Mednick, somewhat better built than the former, and famous for a Suffragan's
See belonging to the Archbishop of Gnesna. This Town is seated on the River
Wirwitz.

Poniviess.
Poniviess, Capital only of the District of that Name.

Cowna.
Cowna, situate on the River Niemen, and famous for a College of Jesuits, and
several considerable Monasteries. This Town was formerly much frequented by the
German Merchants, who built here diverse splendid Edifices both with Stone and
Brick, which the Inhabitants have since imitated, and in some things excelled.

Senators of Samogitia.
The Senators of this Province are, The Bishop Starosta, and Castellan
of Samogitia.

VII. PROVINCE.
The Seventh PROVINCE of this Kingdom is

Volhynia, which is divided into two large Districts, viz. The Districts of
Luccoria, and Cremen.

In both which are these principal Cities and Towns, viz. Lutzko Bish. Cap. of
Luceoria.
Vlodimir, or Woldzimiers. Krzemenec, Cap. of Cremen. Brodi, Olika,
Constantinow, Zsbarasz, Ostropium, Wisniovec, Zaslaw, Basilea, Miedirecz,
Rubesow, Dubna, Czartorisk, Olesk, and Krilow.


Cities and Towns of
The Capital City of the District of Luceoria, and Metropolis of Volhynia, is
that of

Lutzko.
Lutzko, or Luzuk, a Timber-built City, situate on the Banks of the River Ster,
near a Lake which encompasses part of the Castle. It is hardly seven Miles from
the Frontiers of Red Russia to the East, and twenty from Leopol to the
North-East. It is a large City, and is an Episcopal See, and the Residence of a
Bishop subject to the Metropolitan of Gnesna. The Cathedral and Chapter House
are in one of the Castles, there being two built on adjoining Hills near this
City. Here likewise resides a Russian Bishop.

Ulodimir.
Vlodimir, a Wooden Town, with Wooden Fortifications, and built among the
Marshes. It lies not far from Lutzko, and is the Residence of a Russian Bishop
with a considerable Jurisdiction.

Krzemenec.
Krzemenec, Capital of the District of Cremen, a large Timber City with a
Wooden Castle and Mud Walls.

Brodi.
Brodi, a Town built by Stanislaus Konicepoliski, Castellan of Cracovia, with
strong Fortifications, a Collegiate Church, and a public Academy.

Olika.
Olika, a Town belonging to the House of Radzivil, adorned with a fair
Cathedral, and Academy for all sorts of Arts and Sciences.

Constantinow.
Constantinow, adorned and defended by a well-fortified Castle.

Zsbarasz.
Zsbarasz, formerly a Free City, with a Territory or District of its own, but
now subject to that of Cremen.

Senators of Volhynia.
The Senators of this Province are, The Bishop of Luceoria. The Palatin, and
The Castellansof Volhynia.


Its Arms.
The Standard or Arms of this Province of Volhynia are Party per Pale, Argent
and Azure, the former containing the Arms of Lithuania.

VIII. PROVINCE.
The Eighth PROVINCE of this Kingdom is

Podlachia, a large Province and Palatinate, bounded on the West by Masovia,
and on the Its Bounds.
East by Lithuania, to which it formerly belonged till Sigismundus Augustus in
the Year 1569 united it to Poland. In Spiritual Matters it is wholly subject to
the Bishop of Luceoria, but as to Temporal it is divided into three Districts,
viz. The Districts of Byclsko, Drogiczynen, and Mielnick.


In all which there are these Principal Cities and Towns, viz. Byelsko, Cap.
Drogiczin, Myelnick, Tykoczin, Knyssin, Augustow, Mordi, Wasilkow, Narew,
Bransko, Visokie, and Holovacz.


Cities and Towns of
Of all which the Capital is

Byelsko.
Byelsko, a large Timber-built City, Metropolis of this Province, and seated on
the River Byala dividing it from Lithuania. Its Castle was burnt down by
Lightning, and never since rebuilt.

Drogiczin.
Drogiczin, Capital of the District of that Name, and built on a small Rising
near the River Bug. This City is famous for a Court of Justice, wherein the
Causes of the Gentry are tried. It lies about ten Miles from Bielsko, and
thirty from Warsaw.

Myelnick.
Mielnick, a Town on the Bug likewise, only famous for being Capital of its
District. It is about five Miles from Drogiczin.

Tykoczin.
Tykoczin, a Town built in a Plain upon the River Narew. It has a Castle well
fortified both by Art and Nature, being surrounded by vast Bogs, and defended
every way with several large Cannon. Here part of the King's Treasure is kept;
and here likewise Sigismundus Augustus caused Money to be coined. It lies about
ten Miles from Byelsko, and forty two from Vilna.

Knyssin.
Knyssin, a Wood-built Town, seated among Marshes and Woods. Here the King has
a Palace, and a very large Park, abounding with Deers of all sorts; and huge
Fish Ponds, replenished with all kinds of Fresh Water Fish.

Augustow.
Augustow a very large City, built by Sigismundus Augustus, and which lies
about twenty Miles from Byelsko.

Mordi.
Mordi a Timber-built Town, seated on a very large Lake, and about five Miles
from Drogiczin.

Wasilkow.
Wasilkow a Wood-built Town on the River Narew, where the King's Starosta
resides.

Narew.
Narew situate in the midst of Woods, and near the River of that Name. This
Town lies about four Miles from Byelsko.

Bransko.
Bransko built on the River Nar, only famous for a Court of Justice held there.
It lies about three Polish Miles from Byelsko.

Suras.
Suras a Town built at the foot of a Hill near the River Narew. It has a Castle
which commands the Town.

Senators of the Province of Podlachia.
The Senators of this Province are, The Palatine, and Castellan of Podlachia.

Its Arms.
The Standard or Arms of this Province are Party per Pale, Argent and Gules: In
the former the Arms of Lithuania, and in the latter an Eagle Expans'd of the
first.

Thus far, my Lord, have I traced the Extent of Poland, and the Divisions of
its Provinces, and have taken notice of what I have both observed and heard to
be most remarkable in them; whereby your Lordship may find that this vast
Kingdom is not so contemptible as we of the Western Parts of Europe have
imagined: for this Country abounds with all Necessaries to support it self,
both in Peace and War, without the help of its Neighbors; and had it been as
well improved by Art, and enriched by Trade, as it is made fruitful by Nature,
it would doubtless have been able to vie with any Kingdom in Europe: Which the
King of France, and other Princes, are now sensible of, since they have
profusely spent vast Sums of Money, to advance either themselves or Friends to
that Crown, tho they were no ways certain of Success, knowing, that let the
Sums they spent be ever so considerable, they would be fully recompensed when
they obtained their Ends; for a King of Poland can raise as considerable an
Army, and that chiefly of Horse, as any Christian Prince. He has ever had a
great Reputation with the Eastern Princes; and considering their History, I
find as remarkable Transactions and Exploits in the Lives of the Kings of
Poland, as in any other History whatever.

I must confess, the Poles have not been such refined Politicians, nor so
prudently managed their own Interest as some of their Neighbors have done; for
by their ill Conduct, and supine Negligence, they have lost the best Part of
their Ancient Dominions: which yet has happened to them, neither on account of
their Deficiency in Courage or Bravery; but at present the Poles beginning to
enquire into the State of Foreign Countries, and into their Maxims of
Government, they are become more Vigilant and Political, and are likely, under
the Command of their present King, as well to retrieve their Honor, as recover
their lost Dominions.

I would, my Lord, have presented you with a great many other entertaining
Matters relating to the Geography and Natural History of this Country, had I
either seen them my self, or been secure of the Relation of others; but I would
rather choose to be deficient in this Account, than to give your Lordship just
reason to believe that I were too credulous. I am,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most obedient humble Servant, B. C.

LETTER VI.
To GEORGE STEPNEY Esquire; late Envoy Extraordinary from his Majesty to the
Electors and Princes of the Empire.
Of the Origin and Extent of the Great Duchy of Lithuania, with the Succession
of its Great Dukes, and Description of its chief Towns and Provinces.

SIR,
THE Zeal you have showed for his Majesty's Service in your Ministry at the
Courts of the Empire, and the Reputation I found you left behind you in those
Places, to the Honor of so great a Master, deserve not only the repeated
Proofs of his usual Bounty, and the Choice he wisely made of you a second time
to represent his Royal Person, but likewise the Esteem of all those that are
acquainted with your Merits. To pretend to inform you of the Constitution of
any State in Europe, would not be only the calling in question your Experience
in Foreign Affairs, and your undoubted Knowledge in Politics, but likewise
exposing my own Judgment to the just Censure of the World. Wherefore, Sir,
thinking by our late Discourse about Poland, that nothing could be new to you,
but what was either very remote or very ancient; I will endeavor only to give
what I know of the Origin and Extent of the Great Duchy of Lithuania, which is
that vast Tract of Land that lies between the Kingdom of Poland, and the
Frontiers of Moscovy.

Lithuania how called by the Inhabitants.
The Great Duchy of LITHUANIA, called by the Inhabitants Litwa, tho subject to
the King of Poland, as Scotland to the King of England, yet is a distinct
Nation from this Kingdom, having different Customs, a different Dialect, and
particular Privileges, tho one Diet serves them both. It lies between Its
present Bounds.
Moscovy on the East, Livonia, the Baltic Sea, and part of Moscovy to the
North; Samogitia, Prussia and Podlachia to the West; and Russia, Volhynia and
Podolia toward the South. It extends near ninety German Miles in length, that
is, from the Borders of the Palatinate of Lublin to the Confines of Livonia,
and about eighty in breadth from the River Niemen to the Nieper. In the time of
Ancient Extent.
its Great Duke Vitoldus it was of much larger Extent, for then it reached from
the Euxine Sea to almost all along the Baltic.

Soil and Products.
This Province is a flat and Champain Country, formerly all overrun with
Woods, and of which a great Number still remain: Yet what with the Industry of
the Inhabitants, and the Peace they have enjoyed ever since Sigismund the
First's time, it is now very fruitful, and produces all sorts of Grain; as
likewise affords great quantities of Honey, Pitch* Tar and Timber, with good
store of Fish and Flesh: Nevertheless the Air is generally unhealthy, which
occasions many places to be little inhabited, and some quite Desert.

Union with Poland, and Privileges.
This great Duchy was only begun to be united to Poland by Jagello, in the
Year 1386; for tho that Union was afterward renewed at Grodno in the Year
1413, yet Lithuania still retained its own proper Dukes till the Year 1501,
when the great Duke Albert was chosen King of Poland, by whose means this
Country became absolutely under the Dominion of that Crown, and which was
afterward confirmed by a Diet held at Lublin in 1569, under the Reign of
Sigismundus Augustus, where it was agreed that Lithuania should enjoy its own
peculiar Laws and Privileges, and be constituted a part of the Polish
Commonwealth; insomuch that nothing of Importance was for the future to be
transacted therein, without the voluntary Concurrence of these States.

Division.
This Country consists of two Parts, viz. 1. Lithuania properly so called; and,
2. Lithuanic, or White- Russia.
Both which are divided into several Palatinates, and those again into
Districts; and all of them may be properly termed Dutchies, each having
formerly had its peculiar Duke.

Arms.
The Arms or Standard of Lithuania are, Party per Pale, Gules and Azure: In the
former a Horse in full career Argent, with a Warrior insiding Proper,
brandishing a Sword over his head. And in the second the Virgin Mary with our
Savior in her Arms, surrounded by a Glory.

Before I proceed to a Topographical Description of this State, I hope a short
Account of the Origin of Lithuania, with the Lives and most remarkable Actions
of the several Dukes, and Great Dukes of that Duchy, Samogitia, etc. may not
be unacceptable, which are as follows.

Lithuania, whence so called.
Lithuania, as Guagnini thinks, took its Name from this Occasion. When the
first Prince thereof Palaemon left Italy, on account of Nero's Tyranny, he
together with several of his Countrymen, fled, by a long Voyage, into these
Parts: Where after some time having been saluted Prince by the Inhabitants
thereof, he called their Country after the Name of his own, La Italia; which in
process of time, by mixing with the Idiom of those Barbarians, might (as he
says) have degenerated into Lithuania. Others will have it to be so named from
the Latin word Littus a Shore, because, say they, this Prince settled along the
Shore of the Baltic Sea before Different Opinions.
he descended into Lithuania. To confirm this Prince's Expedition into this
Country, there are several Italian and Latin words intermixed with its present
Language. As likewise most of the Noble Families have great similitude with the
Roman Names, tho the Vulgar sort are altogether Sclavonian. Notwithstanding
this Assertion, Hartknoch, with several others, positively affirm, that this
Country had its Name from Littuo, one of the Alani, a certain Duke therefore
long before Palaemon's Voyage: So that from Littuo Alanus they called his
Country Littualania, which afterward was contracted to Lithuania.

Palamon.
Palaemon first Duke of Lithuania being descended from the Roman Patricii,
after having undergon great Dangers, and effected many glorious Enterprises,
died peaceably, leaving three Nephews Borcus, Cunossus and Spera, all which
separately succeeded him in his Dominions.

Borcus.
Borcus took for his Share part of Samogitia, where he built a Castle on the
River Juria, a Branch of the Niemen, and called it after his own Name, and that
of the River whereon it stood, Jurburg, which continues even at this day.

Cunossus.
Cunossus extending his Dominion a different way, built Kunossow another
Castle, calling it after his own Name, and which remains to this day.

Spera.
Spera likewise built a Castle near the River Swenta, where he began his Reign.

At length Borcus and Spera dying, Cunossus seized on both their Dominions; but
soon after di'd also, and left two Sons, Kyernus and Gybutus; whereof

Kyernus.
Kyernus settled in Lithuania, and built the Castle Kyernow, which he made the
Place of his Residence; and

Gybutus.
Gybutus resided in Samogitia, which he likewise governed. Both these Brother's
joining together, made huge Devastations in Russia, and carried away great
Booty; but upon their return home, found Samogitia served the like Sauce by the
Livonians: To revenge which, they forthwith entered Livonia, and burnt and
plundered all that Country wherever they came.

Kyernus dying, was succeeded in Lithuania Zivibundus. Muntwil.
by his Son Zivibundus, and Gybutus in Samogitia by his Son Muntwil; which last
having reigned but little, died and left his Son

Uikint.
Vikint to succeed him in Samogitia; but

Zivibundus.
Zivibundus lived a great while after, and proved no small Victor over the
Russians and Tartars: for being willing to shake off the Russian Yoke, he sent
his Brother Wikinti Erdzivil.
Erdzivil to invade that Country; who so far succeeded as to take the City and
Castle of Novogrodec, and to fix the Seat of a Duchy there: And after
proceeding further, he built the strong Castle of Grodno on the River Niemen.
Then he descended into Podlachia, where he took several Towns, and soon reduced
all that Province. Afterward he conquered Kurdassus Prince of the Tartars, at
a Town called Mozera, near the River Okuniowka. This Erdzivil, after many
Heroic Actions, and succeeding his Brother Zivibundus, di'd and left two Sons,
Mingailus and Algimuntus, and divided his Dominions between them.

Algimuntus.
Algimuntus chose for his part Samogitia; and

Mingailus.
Mingailus ruled over Lithuania and Polocz; which last Country he took from the
Russians, and likewise extended his Dominion over all the Duchy of Novogrodec.
This Duke died, and left two Sons, Skirmunt and Ginvil.

Skirmunt.
Skirmunt having performed his Father's Obsequies, entered upon the Government
of Lithuania, with the Duchy of Novogrodec. And

Ginvil.
Ginvil by natural Right seized upon Polocz; which having governed for some
time, he died and left to his Son

Boris.
Boris, who ruled a great while in Polocz, and built a famous Church there with
Brick, calling it Sancta Sophia. He likewise founded several other famous
Edis^^ces, with the Town and Castle of Borissow upon the River Beresina. To him
succeeded his Son

Basilius Rechwold.
Basilius Rechwold, who lived to a great Age, and left behind him a Son called
Hlebus, and a Daughter named Poroskavia.

Hlebus and Poroskavia.
Hlebus survived his Father but a little while, and

Poroskavia wholly devoted her self to the Greek Religion; but afterward went
to Rome where she died, and was Canonized for a Saint. Now to return to the
Dukes of Lithuania.

Skirmunt obtained great Conquests over the Tartars and Russians, and dying,
left his Uncle

Kukovoitus.
Kukovoitus to succeed him in Lithuania and Samogitia; who having governed a
good while, died, and left his Dominions to his Son-in-Law

Giedrussus.
Giedrussus who had married his Daughter Poiata. This Duke dying, left for his
Successor his Son

Ringolt.
Ringolt, who having performed his Father's Funeral-Rites after the Pagan
manner, entered upon the Government of Lithuania and Samogitia. Against this
Duke the Russians, joined ^^y the Tartars, marched with great fury to reduce
him to pay Tribute; but he timely opposing them with equal Force, gave them a
signal Overthrow near Mohilna on the River Niemen. At length this Ringolt,
famous likewise for several other Victories, died and left his Dominions to his
Son

Mindog, 1240.
Mindog, or Mendog, in the Year 1240, who had various Conflicts with the Dukes
of Smolensko and Volhynia, both which at last he totally subdued. He likewise
fought several Battles with Boleslaus the Chaste King of Poland, and Daniel
Emperor of Moscovy, in most of which the Christians were worsted with great
slaughter. He frequently made Incursions into Masovia, Dobrina, Cujavia, etc.
and returned with great Booty. He also had bloody Wars with the Teutonic
Knights of Prussia and Livonia: But at length in the Year 1252, being
over-perswaded by the then Great Master Henricus de Zalcza, he gave up all his
Dominions to that Order, in acknowledgment of several Honors and Services done
him, and moreover consented to turn Christian, and afterward sent to Rome to
pay his Devoir to that See. Whereupon Innocent IV. deputed his Brother
Heinderic to consecrate him King. But whether it were that Mindog repented the
loss of his Dominions, or for any other Cause, it is certain that he refused to
receive this Nuncio; and the very same Year, together with all his Country,
returned to their former Idolatry. Nevertheless Acknowledged King.
the Teutonic Knights suffered him to continue King, and under him, in
conjunction with the Lithuanians, Samogitians, etc. invaded Masovia, and made
great Havoc of that Country. But afterward Mendog being unmindful any farther
of the Civility of those Knights, turned his Arms against their Country,
destroying most of their Cities, and returning with great Spoils.

Next Mendog having gathered together a great Army, and being likewise assisted
by Swarno Duke of Russia, marched against Semovitus Duke of Masovia, whom
together with his Son Conrade, he surpised in his Palace of Jasdow; where
Swarno struck off Semovitus his Head with his own hand; but Conrade was
preserved by Mendog, and afterward ransomed by his Countrymen. Soon after this
the Lithuanians and Russians having made great Devastations in Masovia, retired
with the Spoils and Captives into their several Countries. The next Year the
same People not being content with their former Irruptions, marched again into
Masovia; but scarce finding any thing left to prey upon by reason of their last
Year's Work, they only burnt and plundered a House belonging to the Archbishop
of Gnesna, and so returned home.

At length Heaven thought fit to favor the Polish Christians, by taking away
King Mindog, who was murdered by his Nephew K. Mindog murdered.
Stroinat, and his Son-in-Law Dowmant, in the Year 1263.

Stroinat, 1263.
Stroinat begun his Reign in the Year 1263, by the murder of his Brother
Towcivil Duke of Polocz; but not long afterward Woisalk Son of Mendog, tho
then a Russian Monk, being mindful of his Father's Death, deprived him also of
Life, and immediately seized on his Dominions.

Woisalk, 1264.
Woisalk took upon him only the Title of Duke, and began his Government with
frequent Irruptions into Poland, Mascovia and Prussia: But in the Year 1267,
endeavoring to subdue Russia, he was circumvented by Leo Duke thereof, (who
built Leopol) and slain in the Monastery of Wrowsko.

Great Dukes of Lithuania.
With him the Family of the Dukes of Lithuania being extinct, Vtenus, or
Vcienus, Utenus.
descended from the Kitauri, Princes in that Country, was unanimously elected
first Great Duke of Lithuania and Samogitia; who having had diverse Wars with
the Russians and Prussians, died, and left his Dominions to his Son

Swintorohus.
Swintorohus, who reigning but little, tho very well, died, and left behind him
his Son

Germontus.
Germontus, who ruled also a very little while, and was succeeded by his Son

Trahus.
Trahus, who governed well both in War and Peace for some time, and built a
Town and Castle after his own Name. This Great Duke left behind him five
Legitimate Children, viz. Narimundus, Dowmantus, Holsanus, Giedrutus, and
Troidenus, who all separately succeeded their Father in his Dominions.

Narimundus.
Narimundus the Eldest had for his part the Great Duchy of Lithuania, with
Samogitia; both which he had a Right to by the Prerogative of his Birth. He
translated the Ducal Seat from Novogrodec to Kiernow. His first Wars were in
conjunction with his Brothers upon Poland, Russia, Masovia and Prussia. Then he
declared War against his Brother Dowmant for taking away his Wife, whom he soon
recovered, and drove his Brother out of his Dominions; who flying to the
Russians of Polocz, was universally received for their Prince.

This Duke is recorded, in the Russian Annals, to have been the first Inventor
of the Lithuanian Arms; which are in a Field Gules, a Person armed Cap-a-pe,
Sables, riding full speed on a Horse Argent, and flourishing a Sword over his
head of the third. To him succeeded his Brother Troidenus; but first an Account
of the other Brothers.

Dowmant.
Dowmant had for his Share the District of Cosnia, where he built the Castle of
Vcian.

Holsanus.
Holsanus, the third Brother, was allotted his Division beyond the River Wilia
toward the East.

Giedrutus.
Giedrutus, or Giedrotus, the fourth Brother, built a Castle upon a Lake,
calling it after his own Name, and where he fixed the Seat of his Duchy. Whose
Descendants are famous even to this day.

Troidenus.
The fifth Brother Troidenus, succeeded Narimundus in Lithuania and Samogitia;
who having gathered together an Army of about 30000 Men, divided them into
three Parts; one whereof he sent against Masovia, and the other two against the
Teutonick Knights in Prussia; where having destroyed diverse Towns, he returned
with a great Booty of Captives and Cattle. The same Year Cujavia was overrun
by the Lithuanians. Some small time after which, Dowmant Prince of Polocz,
being provoked to see his younger Brother on his Father's Throne, hired three
Rusticks to murder him as he went into a Bath; which they effected. But Dowmant
marching with a formidable Army to take possession of Lithuania, was met and
vanquished by

Rimunt.
Rimunt Son to Troidenus; who thereupon succeeded his Father for a while: but
afterward calling a Diet at Kiernow, he publicly renounced his Right, and
retired to a Monastical Life, constituting

Vithenes, 1281.
Vithenes, of the Family of the Kitauri, descended of the Roman Princes, Great
Duke. This Prince was a Person of a brave and warlike Spirit. Wherefore Rimunt,
when it was demanded of him, Why he put by the Families of his Uncles,
Giedrutus and Holsanus? answered, Because there were none but Children among
them, when a Prince of Lithuania ought to correspond with the Arms of that
Country, invented by his Uncle Narimund, which were a Warrior on Horseback,
armed Cap-a-pe, and posting to subdue his Enemies. This Great Duke Vithenes
began his Reign in the Year 1281. The Year following he invaded the Palatinate
of Lublin, and continued destroying it for fifteen days together; till at
length Lescus the Black, King of Poland, being animated thereto by a Vision,
met and fought him between the Rivers Narew and Niemen, where the latter gained
a signal Victory. In testimony whereof he founded a Parochial Church at Lublin,
and dedicated it to St. Michael the Archangel.

1287.
In the Year 1287, the Lithuanians, Prussians, and Samogitians, made a Descent
upon Dobrina; and surprising the Capital City thereof on Sunday, when its
Inhabitants were busi'd at Devotion, killed and carried away great Numbers of
them into Slavery.

1289.
Afterward in 1289, the Lithuanians, to the number only of 8000, invaded a
part of Prussia, burning, killing, and destroying wherever they came; but
before the Country could make head against them, they were retired with great
Spoils. To requite which, next Year the Prussians marched into Lithuania, where
they killed and took vast numbers of the Inhabitants, as likewise possessed
themselves, under the Conduct of the Commendador of Koningsberg, of the strong
Castle Merabde. Afterward Memer, great Master of Prussia, entered Lithuania
with a formidable Army, and entirely destroyed two Districts.

Not long after this Vithenes invaded Cujavia, and burnt and destroyed all the
Country about Bressici, and likewise carried away great Numbers into Captivity.

1293.
In the Year 1293, Conradus Stange, Commendador of Ragneta, took the Castle of
Mindog in Lithuania; which Vithenes soon requited by entering Prussia, and
destroying it eighty days together.

1294.
Afterward in 1294, Vithenes, with a Body only of 1800 Horse, marching through
Woods and By-roads, surpised a great Concourse of People met in the Collegiate
Church of Lanschet, whereof the greatest part he killed, and the others,
consisting chiefly of Ecclesiastics, he carried away for Slaves. The Church he
robbed, and those that fled he stifled by firing all the House around them.
After which marching about the Country, he drove away all their Cattle; but
upon his return, meeting with Casimir Palatine of Lanschet, he was bravely
opposed for a while, till Numbers supplied the defect of Valor, and he
entirely routed the Christians near So^^aczow; which having effected, he
returned peaceably into his Country.

This Vithenes had a Master of the Horse named Gediminus, who being of a
haughty and ambitious Temper, conspired, together with the Great Duchess, to
take away his Master's Life, which in a short time he brought about; and having
married his Princess, he seized upon the Crown.

Gedeminus. 1300.
Gedeminus became Great Duke of Lithuania in the Year 1300; in the beginning of
whose Reign the Prussian and Livonian Knights, having got together a numerous
Army, invaded Samogitia, which they soon overrun, burning and destroying
wherever they came, and taking the strong Castle of Kunossow by Assault,
wherein they made Prisoner the Grand General of Lithuania. The Year following
Gedeminus, to revenge these insupportable Injuries, having raised a
considerable Body of his own Subjects, together with the Assistance of the
Russians and Tartars, marched directly against the Teutonic Knights; when
meeting them near the River Okmiena, both Armies came to Blows, and so
continued for several Hours, till at length the Samogitians forsaking the
Knights side, came over to Gedeminus; whose Strength thereby being greatly
augmented, as that of his Enemies weakened, he fell furiously in among them, and
soon put them to flight. This Victory being thus luckily obtained, Gedeminus
prosecuted it into the very heart of Prussia, where he found nothing able to
withstand him, except only the two Castles of Ragneta and Cilza; but which
nevertheless he took in a short time. Afterward having made a miserable havoc
in that Country, as also totally regained his Duchy of Samogitia, he returned
peaceably home.

1304.
In the Year 1304, this Great Duke having a Quarrel with some of the Russian
Princes, made great Preparations against them; when marching forthwith into
Russia, he first met and fought Vlodomirus Duke of Volhynia, whom he slew, and
routed his whole Army. Then he bent his force against Leo Duke of Luceoria,
whom he also vanquished, and took his chief City Lutzko: both which Princes
being thus defeated, made him absolute Master of all Volhynia. Next Spring,
being tired out with Idleness, he carried his Arms against Stanislaus Duke of
Kiovia, whom he overthrew, together with several Princes his Neighbors that
came to assist him. With this Victory Gedeminus being not a little encouraged,
proceeded and took most of the Cities and Towns of Russia; when after having
completed a glorious Conquest, he returned Triumphantly into his own Country.

Afterward Gedeminus going to hunt about five Miles beyond the River Wilia,
occasionally built a Castle there near a Lake, and a City, naming it Troki,
whither he then translated Troki built.
his Court from Kicrnow. After this, in the Year 1305, Gedeminus going a
Hunting again toward the East, after various Fortune became greatly fatigued
with that sport. Whereupon, Night drawing on, he was forced to take up a
Lodging upon a Mountain, then called Krzyunagora, now Turzagoria or Lissa;
where soon falling asleep, he dreamt that he saw and heard roar a huge Iron
Wolf, which had above a hundred Wolves of the same Mettle in his Belly, which
roared likewise after an amazing manner: whereat being extremely frighted, he
waked, and next Morning put this Dream to his Courtiers to expound; when every
one having delivered his Opinion a different way, at last a Pagan Priest named
Ledzieiko (said to have been found in an Eagle's Nest) whose Practice was to
foretell Futurities, expounded it thus: The Iron Wolf (quoth he) denotes a
strong City, and the other Wolves in his Belly a formidable Multitude of
Inhabitants. Hereupon he immediately advises Gedeminus to build a fortified
City and Castle there. Whence this Priest came to have the Name of Radzivil,
that is, A Counselor to build Vilna. From this Person's Family have descended
a great many famous Heroes, who have all sufficiently distinguished themselves
both in times of Peace and War. Gedeminus being easily moved by these
Persuasions, forthwith erected two Castles near that Place, one on a high Hill,
and the other in Vilna built.
a Plain; adding moreover a City called Vilna, from the River Wilia, running by
it; which is now very populous, and Capital of that Great Duchy; to which City
he not long after transferred his Residence from Troki.

1306.
In 1306, the Lithuanians having had Intelligence that the Poles were lulled in
Sloth and Security, marched through Woods and Byroads into Lower Poland, where
they burnt and plundered Kalisch, with several other Cities and Towns, killing
the old People and Children, and carrying the others away Captive. The same
Year Henry de Pleczko, a Saxon, Great Master of the Teutonic Order in Prussia,
surpised and took the Castle of Gartin in Samogitia, and put all the
Lithuanians, found therein, to the Sword. They likewise proceeded in this War
by help of the Germans; and after having totally destroyed the District of
Karsouin, returned with great Numbers of Spoils and Captives into Prussia.

1307.
In 1307, the Lithuanians made an Irruption into Siradia and Kalisch, where
doing a great deal of Mischief, they suddenly returned into their own Country.

1308.
In 1308, Olgerdus, Son of Gedeminus, marched with a great Army into Prussia,
where he made havoc with Fire and Sword wherever he came, carrying off
likewise great Booty. These Favors the Lithuanians and Prussians did
frequently and alternatively for one another within the space of few years. In
1315, the Lithuanians surpised the Territory 1315.
of Dobrina, where they made great Devastations, and likewise took the City of
that Name, and burnt and plundered it. In 1322, 1322.
they likewise entered Livonia, laying all wast for many Miles together. In the
same Year, in Wintertime, David, Starosta of Gartin, not being discouraged by
Cold, destroyed that Country up as far as Raval, carrying away great Spoils and
many Prisoners. Afterward, in the same Winter, they took the Castle of Memel,
and also entered Prussia, and killed the Comendador of Capion in a set Battle.
David of Gartin likewise invaded Masovia at the same time, and entirely ruined
a great many Towns and Villages.

1323.
In 1323, the Lithuanians came clandestinely upon Dobrina again, and did a
great deal of Damage there. In the following Year the Starosta of Gartin
entered Masovia again near Ploczko, wherein he destroyed and burnt above one
hundred and thirty Villages, thirty Towns, and carried away about four thousand
Captives; whilst another Army made a Descent upon Livonia, and served that
Country after the like manner.

1325.
In 1325, Ann Daughter to Gedeminus married Casimir, Son to Vladislaus King of
Poland, by which all that had been formerly taken from the Polanders was
restored, and a Peace concluded between those two Nations.

Afterward, at the Siege of the Castle of Fribourg, belonging to the Teutonic
Knights in Samogitia, this Great Duke Gedeminus received a Wound with an Arrow
which cost His Death.
him his Life. This Prince had seven Sons, Viz. Montividus, Narimundus,
Olgerdus, Keijstutus, Koriatus, Jauunutus, and Lubartus,
with some Daughters, one of which was married as before. Among these Sons, he
divided his Dominions while he lived; giving to

Montividus.
Montividus his eldest, Kyernow and Slonim, with the Territories thereunto
belonging. To

Narimundus.
Narimundus his Conquests, and other Acquisitions in Russia. On

Olgerdus.
Olgerdus he bestowed Krewo, and all from thence to Beresina. To

Keijstutus.
Keijstutus he gave Samogitia, Troki, Witebsko, etc. To

Koriatus.
Koriatus the City of Novogrodec, with its Territories. But on his Beloved

Jauunutus.
Jauunutus he conferred the Metropolis of Lithuania, Vilna, as also Osmian and
Braslaw, together with the supreme Command over all his Brothers Dominions.

Lubartus.
The youngest Son Lubartus had no share with his Brothers, because by his
Marriage with the Duke of Russia's Daughter, in his Father's Lifetime, he had
obtained the Succession to that Duchy.

Among these Brothers, Olgerdus and Keijstutus being most vexed to see their
younger Brother Jauunutus so highly promoted, conspired together, after their
Father's Death, to drive him out of Vilna; for the execution of which, they
fixed a certain time: but Olgerdus happening then to be absent on some
extraordinary Occasion, was forced to fail of his Appointment. Nevertheless,
Keijstutus firmly adhering to his Vow, resolved to accomplish the Design alone,
and consequently marching secretly toward Vilna, surpised and took it, with
both its Castles. When Jauunutus, flying toward a neighboring Wood, was there
taken by Keijstutus his Men; and being brought back to his Brother, was by him
ordered to be clapped in Chains. A little while afterward Olgerdus returning,
Keijstutus would have surrendered to him the Crown, as being his elder Brother;
but which Olgerdus refused, saying, It was due neither to his Fortune nor
Merit, and therefore he would not pretend to deserve it by Birth. But at length
they both agreed to divide those Dominions between them, and Vilna, with the
supreme Authority, fell to Olgerdus; but nevertheless, they both bound
themselves by Oath to entrench upon neither's Dominions. To their Brother
Jauunutus they yielded the Palatinate of Braslaw in Russia.

Olgerdus.
Olgerdus, being thus possessed of the Throne, began his Reign with invading
Prussia and Livonia, where the Teutonic Knights did not dare to oppose him; so
that having overrun all those Countries, and loaded his Army with Spoils, he
returned triumphantly to Lithuania, where he sacrificed the Captive Knights to
his Father's Ghost whom they had killed. The same Year Olgerdus marched
silently against the Marquisate of Brandenburg, which he destroyed and
plundered up as far as Frankfurt, and all along the Banks of the River Oder.

Next he drove the Tartars out of Podolia, Caminiec built.
about which time Caminiec was built by his Brother's Sons. Afterward
Janowitz, Czar of Muscovy, being puffed up with his great Power, sent to
Olgerdus, then lying sick of a Fever at Witebsko, That before a Month were at
an end, he would make him such Visit as should fright him into an Ague. To
which haughty Message Olgerdus only returned, That since he knew his Mind, he
would prevent his Journey, and wait on him at Moscow. Whereupon leaping out of
his Bed, he exposed his Life to his Honor, (but which, as it happened, did well
enough, for he recovered in few days) and getting speedily together a
considerable Army, he marched forthwith into Moscovy, laid Siege to Moscow, and
took it, together with the baffled Czar, whom he forced, before he left him, to
agree to a dishonorable Peace, and leave him in possession of great part of
his Empire. After which he reduced the major part of Russia, which he joined to
his Dominions, they having formerly been only wont to pay Tribute to Lithuania.

This Prince had by Mary his Wife twelve Sons, of which Jagello and Skiergelo
only were Great Dukes of Lithuania after him. His Brother Keijstutus had six
Sons, whereof Vitoldus and Sigismundus came to be Great Dukes of Lithuania.

Jagello 1381.
Olgerdus dying in the Year 1381, Jagello ascended his Throne with consent of
his Uncle Keijstutus. This Duke had a favorite Courtier, one Voidilus, a Man
of an obscure Descent, and whom he had raised from his Baker to be his
Secretary and prime Minister. This Person he affected so dearly, that he gave
him his Sister in Marriage, which was highly displeasing to his Uncle, who
protested earnestly against it: whereupon this subtle Upstart, fearing lest
Keijstutus might one day or other put him out of favor with his Prince, he
prevailed with Jagello to look upon his Uncle as his Enemy, and to proceed
against him accordingly; which Jagello, being young, was easily persuaded to
do: therefore clapping up a secret Truce with the Teutonic Knights, with whom
he was before in War, he made all imaginable Preparations against his Uncle:
which Keijstutus being informed of, was immediately alarmed at, till his Son
Vitoldus quieted his Suspicions, by persuading him that Jagello would never
attempt any such thing: but at length Jagello marching against the Russians of
Polocz, which were then his Uncle's Subjects, his design was past all doubt;
and therefore Keijstutus got together what Forces he could upon so short a
Warning, and invaded his Nephew's Territories, where he took Vilna, and would
have proceeded, had it not been for his Son Vitoldus, who still continued
Jagello's Friend. But afterward Keijstutus being busied in subduing the
Traitor Koributh Jagello, not only retook Vilna, but also besieged and gained
Troki by Treachery; which Keijstutus marching to recover, he, together with his
Son Vitoldus, was betrayed into Jagello's hands by means of his Brother
Skergelo, who pretended to bring these two Princes amicably together; but
Jagello having once got his Uncle into his Clutches, detained him, and threw
him into Chains, and afterward ordered him to be strangled in his Prison at
Kreva. His Cousin German Vitoldus he ungratefully kept a long while in Bonds at
Vilna; who afterward being removed to Kreva, and a time appointed for his
Death, escaped by means of his Wife, who always having free Access to him, by
exchanging Habits with one* of her Servants, got her Husband away in her own.
Hence he fled to his Kinsman John Duke of Masovia; but not thinking himself
secure there, he afterward went into Prussia, where at first he was reproved
by the Knights of the Teutonic Order for having recourse to them only in time
of Adversity; but afterward he was more courteously received, and promised
their Assistance to re-establish him in his paternal Dominions. Whereupon,
together with the Samogitians, who favored Vitoldus his Interest, they made an
Inroad into Lithuania, and took Troki; but they were afterward nevertheless
forced to surrender it. At length Jagello by secret Messages, recalled his
Kinsman out of Prussia; and upon his Promise to be faithful to him, settled him
in his Hereditary Estate. A little while after this, the Throne of Poland
becoming vacant by Lewis of Hungary's Death, Jagello was invited thither to
accept that Crown under certain Conditions, which may appear more at large in
his Life among those Kings.

Whilst Jagello was thus absent in Poland with great Numbers of his Subjects,
who went to wait on him into that Kingdom, the Great Masters of Prussia and
Livonia finding a fit opportunity, entered Lithuania, destroying with Fire and
Sword as far as the Castle of Lucom in Russia, which also they took, and having
furnished with all necessary Defense, placed in it Andrew Jagello's Brother,
upon whose Request this Expedition had been undertaken. About the same time
Swetoslaus, Duke of Smolensko, invaded Russia, and took Mscislaw and several
other Places by force; both which Actions Jagello being soon informed of,
immediately dispatched away his Brother Skirgelo, and Kinsman Vitoldus, into
Lithuania; who finding the Teutonic Army retired, forthwith laid Siege to the
Castle of Lucom; which having taken, they proceeded to Mscislaw, which they
likewise took, and killed Swetoslaus, who was in possession of it. Afterward
having recovered all the other revolted Dominions which had sided with Duke
Andrew, they made him Prisoner; and carrying him into Poland, he was ordered by
his Brother Jagello to be cast into a noisome Dungeon, whence, upon the request
of the good-natured Vitoldus, he was not long after delivered.

After Jagello's Death, tho there were several Great Dukes of Lithuania; yet
seeing they were Tributary to the Kings of Poland, and Lithuania it self was
afterward united to Poland under one Form of Government, I need not insist any
longer upon the Succession of its Dukes, since what past remarkable in their
Time, is comprehended in the History of the Kings of the Jagellonic Family, who
reigned in Poland from Jagello's time to the late King Michael Wiesnowiski;
therefore I will proceed to enter upon the Geographical Description of this
great Duchy.

The two Provinces of Lithuania contain these Palatinates, Viz.

I. PROVINCE.
Lithuania Proper contains the Palatinates of Vilna, Troki, and Briescia or
Polesia.


II. PROVINCE.
Lithuanic-Russia contains the Palatinates of Novogrodec. Mscislaw. Vitebsko or
Witebsko. Minski, and Polocz.


Lithuanic-Russia is commonly called Russia-Alba, or White- Russia, either
because its Hills are generally covered with Snow, and which lasts longer there
than in any other Parts of this Country; or else by reason that the Animals
bred there are generally inclined to be white, tho in other Countries the same
Species be of another Color. Both these Provinces abound with all manner of
Necessaries, besides several Merchandises, part of which they transport by the
River Duna to Riga in Livonia, and part by the River Niemen to Koningsberg in
Prussia.

I. Palatinate.
The first Palatinate of Lithuania Proper is that of

Vilna, whose Palatin is chief Governor of the City of that Name. This
Palatinate comprehends three large Districts, which are The Districts of
Osmian, Bratislaw or Braslaw, and Wilkomitz.


In all which are the several Cities and Towns of Vilna Cap. Bish.
Osmian, Bratislaw or Braslaw. Wilkomitz, Ikaznia, and Drizwiatz.


Cities and Towns of
The chief City of all which, and Metropolis of the Great Duchy of Lithuania,
is

Vilna.
Vilna, called also Vilenski by the Inhabitants, and Wildaw or Die Wild by the
Germans, and is situated near the Conflux of the Rivers Wilia and Wiln, from
whence it has its Name. It lies about 130 Polish Miles from Cracow to the
North-East, 48 from Riga to the North, 70 from Warsaw, and a hundred from
Smolensko to the East. It is a large and very populous City, well fortified
with two Castles, whereof one is built in a Plain, and the other on a Hill; the
former washed by the River Wilia, and the latter by the Wiln. The first of
these Rivers is large and navigable, whereby the Inhabitants transport
Merchandises to Dantzic; and the other small and inconsiderable. The Houses of
this City are generally low and mean, being most built with Wood, except some
belonging to the Gentry, others to Foreign Merchants, and several public
Edifices, which are all either of Stone or Brick. Of the two Castles, that on a
Hill is very ancient, and almost ruined; but the other is a Pile of beautiful
modern Architecture. The Churches here are all of Stone, both those belonging
to the Roman and Russian Persuasions. The Cathedral stands in the Lower Castle,
wherein lies the Body of St. Casimir, canonized by Leo X.* in a large Silver
Tomb of great Value. Here also is a very large Bell, like to that of Cracow,
which requires above four and twenty strong Men to ring it. Within this Castle
is the Archiepiscopal See of the Metropolitan of Russia. Among the other
public Edifices is the Great Duke's Palace, in which is a famous
Guard-Chamber, furnished with all sorts of Arms; and about two English Miles
from this City stands another Ducal Palace, named from its Situation Rudnick,
that is, Near the Water. This Palace is entirely built with Wood, and
beautified with a Park, pleasant Gardens, Orchards, etc. Next comes the Academy
of this City, founded by King Stephen in the Year 1579, and erected into a
University by Gregory XIII. the same Year, at the Request of the Founder
Valerian Bishop of Vilna. In this University are six Professors of Divinity,
five of Philosophy, four of Laws, and seven of Human Learning. Among the
Merchants Houses, there is one particularly neat, erected by the Moscovite
Company for the Repository of their Furs, Ermins, and other rich Merchandises
brought from Moscow. Here are also many other fair Edifices, which I pass by
for brevity's sake. In this City Guns of all sorts are cast, and likewise
diverse other Warlike Instruments of excellent Workmanship made. Vilna has the
Honor to have a Tribunal for all Lithuania. The Moscovites found means to make
themselves Masters of this City in the Year 1655, but were soon forced to
surrender it to the Poles, who are at present in possession of it.

Osmian.
Osmian, a wooden Town, Capital of its District, about seven Miles from Vilna;
to which belongs a large Jurisdiction, with several eminent Towns.

Bratislaw.
Bratislaw or Braslaw, a Timber-built City, situate on a large Lake, with a
Castle founded on a Rock. This Place lies about twenty Miles from Vilna with a
considerable Jurisdiction.

Wilkomitz.
Wilkomitz, a Wood-built Town upon the River Swienta. Here is kept a Court of
Justice to try the Causes of the Gentry. To this District belongs a very large
Jurisdiction, in which are several considerable Towns belonging to the King,
Bishops, and Gentry.

Ikaznia.
Ikaznia, a Town built with Wood near a River of the same Name. It lies about
three Polish Miles from Bratislaw.

Drizwiatz.
Drizwiatz, a Town built on a Lake near a River of the same Name, and about
five Miles from Bratislaw.

Senators of Vilna.
The Senators of this Palatinate are only The Palatin, and Castellan of Vilna.

For it must here be observed, that there are no Minor Castellans in all
Lithuania.

Its Arms.
The Arms or Standard of this Palatinate are of four sorts: The first of the
Palatinate it self, which are Argent and Azure; in the former the Arms of
Lithuania, and in the latter two Pillars of the first. Besides these, each
District has its Arms, which are, First, of Osmian, those of Vilna differing
only in changing the Columns or Pillars to erected Swords. That of Bratislaw a
Field Gules, with no Charge. Thirdly, That of Wilkomitz the same with that of
the Palatinate, changing only the Pillars to the Image of St. Michael.

II. Palatinate.
The Second Palatinate of Lithuania Proper, is that of

Troki, which has in it these four large Districts, Viz. The Districts of
Grodno, Lida, Cowno, and Vpita.


In all which are these principal Cities and Towns, Viz. Troki, Cap. Grodno,
Lida, Cowno, and Vpita.


Cities and Towns of
The chief City of all which is

Troki.
Troki, otherwise called Troccum or Trocum, built with Wood, and seated on a
Point of Land that shoots out into a Lake, and which lies about four Miles from
Vilna to the West. This City had formerly a strong Wall to defend it, but which
was long since destroyed by the Prussian Knights; but yet it still has a Castle
founded in the Lake, and sufficiently fortified both by Nature and Art.
Gedeminus, Great Duke of Lithuania, laid the first Foundation of this City,
which was the Ducal Seat before it came to be translated to Vilna. The
Moscovites stormed, burnt, and pillaged this Place in the Year 1655.

Grodno.
Grodno, a Timber-built City on the River Niemen or Cronon, having a strong
Castle on a Rock near adjoining, founded by King Stephen, who was wont to
reside here for convenience of Hunting. Sigismund III. built a fair Bridge here
over the Niemen, which is thought not to have an Equal in all Poland. The
Jesuits have a College or Academy in this City for Instructing of Youth. From
hence diverse kinds of Merchandises are transported from several Parts of
Lithuania to Dantzic. The District of Grodno is indifferently large, having
been formerly a considerable Duchy.

Lida.
Lida, a Town, Capital of its District, built with Wood, having in it a
tolerable Castle, and a Court of Justice for the Gentry.

Cowno.
Cowno, a famous Timber-Town, tho there are several Houses in it built with
Stone, situate on the Conflux of the Rivers Niemen and Wilia, with a strong
ancient Castle founded on a Rock.

Upita.
Vpita, a Wood-built Town, and Capital of a very large District, wherein are
several Towns.

Senators of Troki.
The Senators of this Palatinate are The Palatin, and Castellan of Troki.

Its Arms.
The Arms or Standard of this Palatinate are the Arms of Lithuania in a Field
Azure.

III. Palatinate.
The third Palatinate of Lithuania Proper, is that of

Briescia or Polesia, adjoining to the Palatinate of Lublin, and partaking in
all respects of the Manners thereof. It has but one very large District, which
is that of Pinsko.

This Palatinate contains these Cities and Towns, Viz.

Briescia, Pinsko, Biala, Prepetus, Camenecia, Cobrinia, Janovia, Voinia,
Rososia, and Vlodava.
Cities and Towns of
The chief of all which is

Brescia.
Brescia or Briescia, a large wooden City, built on the Confines of Lithuania,
on the Banks of the River Bug, with a Timber Castle founded on a Rock, and
washed by the River Muchavecz. This City is distant about twenty five Miles
from Lublin, and thirty from Warsaw to the East. In it is the most famous
Academy for Jews of any in Europe, whither that People resort from Italy,
Germany, Moravia, Silesia, etc. not only to study, but take Degrees in that
Religion. Without this City also is a Regal Palace of Modern Architecture, with
variety of pleasant Gardens.

Pinsko.
Pinsko, a Timber-built City, and indifferently large, seated on the River
Perepet; which passing by diverse Towns in Russia, falls into the Boristhenes.
The Inhabitants of this Place are very Industrious, and make frequent Journeys
into Muscovy and Germany on account of Merchandising. They are generally of the
Greek Persuasion, and have a Bishop of that Sect who resides among them.

Biala.
Biala, famous only for a Palace built by the Dukes of the Family of Radzivil,
which is now converted into a College for the Instructing of Youth.

Prepetus.
Prepetus, a Town with an old Castle, built on the River of the same Name.

Senators of Briescia.
The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin, and Castellan. of Briescia.

Its Arms.
The Arms or Standard of this Palatinate are the same with the former,
differing only by a B in the middle.

I. Palatinate.
The first Palatinate of Lithuanic-Russia, is that of

Novogrodec, which is divided into two Districts, which are The Districts of
Novogrodec, and Slonim.

In both which are these principal Cities and Towns, Viz. Novogrodec, Cap.
Slonim, Wolkowisko, Lacowickz, Mysza, Zlucz, Rozan, Neswitz, and Selecz.


Cities and Towns of
The Capital of all which is

Novogrodec.
Novogrodec, a large Timber-City, which formerly belonged to the second Sons of
the Princes of Lithuania. Here interchangeably with the Town of Minski, is held
a Parliament for the Great Duchy of Lithuania.

Slonim.
Slonim, a wooden City, whose District was formerly a Duchy.

Wolkowisko.
Wolkowisko, a large Town containing a Court of justice or Tribunal for the
Gentry.

Lacowickz.
Lacowickz, famous for a very fair Palace, built by a Grand General of
Lithuania, and well fortified after the Modern way.

Mysza.
Mysza, a Town with a Castle, seated by a Lake, and all surrounded by a Plain.

Zlucz.
Zlucz, one of the largest Cities in this Country, but nevertheless is all of
Wood, except only the Cathedral and Ducal Palace.

This City had not long since a Sovereign Prince with large Territories, but he
was always Tributary to Poland. It is at present in possession of the Family of
Radzivil.

Rozan.
Rozan, a well built Town with very fair Streets.

Neswitz.
Neswitz, where Nicholas Radzivil, surnamed the Pilgrim, has founded several
noble Public Edifices; a Description whereof I have omitted for brevity's sake.

Senators of Novogrodec.
The Senators of this Palatinate are The Palatin, and Castellan of Novogrodec.

Its Arms.
The Standard or Arms of this Palatinate, are that of the Great Duchy in an
Azure Field.

II. Palatinate.
The Second Palatinate of Lithuanic-Russia, is that of

Mscislaw, lying between the River Peripet to the South, and the Boristhenes to
the East, in a kind of Triangular form, being, for the most part, either
overrun with Woods, or over-flow'd with Water. What plain Land it has, is
generally very fruitful. It likewise abounds with Cattle of all sorts, and
great Numbers of excellent Fowl, and is divided into two very large Districts,
which are The Districts of Mscislaw, and Modziria.

In all which are these Cities and Towns, viz.

Mscislaw, Cap. Modzir, Dambrownuna, Bychow, Kopysz, Sklow, Reczycza,
Viszchorod, Strissin, Cleckum, Ouruckum, Homlia, Criczow, and Ostrskum.
Cities and Towns of
The Capital of all which is

Mscislaw.
Mscislaw, a Timber'd City built on the River Sosa, with a Castle defended by
Palisadoes. It lies upon the Borders of Moscovy, and therefore is strongly
garrisoned. This District was formerly a Sovereignty, but it is now reduced.

Modzir.
Modzir, a City, Capital of its District, built among the Marshes.

Dambrownuna.
Dambrownuna, a Town with a strong Castle built upon the Confines of Moscovy,
about fourteen Miles from Smolensko.

Bychow.
Bychow, a Town with a Castle seated on the River Boristhenes, about twelve
Miles from Mohilow.

Kopysz.
Kopysz, a Town with a Castle on the Boristhenes.

Sklow.
Sklow, a Town with a Castle on the Boristhenes, reputed to be a County, and of
which the magnificent John Chodkiewil writes himself Hereditary Palatin.

Reczycza.
Reczycza, a Town with a Castle situate on the Boristhenes.

Viszehorod.
Viszehorod, situate upon the Boristhenes about three Miles from Kiow.

Strissin.
Strissin, a Town and Castle on the Boristhenes.

Senators of Mscislaw.
The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin and Castellan of Mscislaw.

Its Arms.
The Arms and Standard of this Palatinate, are the same with those of the Great
Duchy, differing only in an M placed in the middle.

III. Palatinate.
The third Palatinate of Lithuanic-Russia is that of

Vitebsko, like the former, bordering upon the Duna toward the East, having
but one large District, which is

The District of Orsha.

In this Palatinate are these several Cities and Towns, viz.

Witebsko, Cap. Orsha, Mohilow, Czasniki, Sienno, Leplo, and Woroniec.
The Capital of all which is Cities and Towns of


Witebsko.
Witebsko, a Timber-built City, indifferently large, situate on the River
Dwina, by which diverse sorts of Merchandises are transported from hence to Riga
in Livonia. It has two large Castles well defended both by Nature and Art
against the Incursions of the Moscovites, who have been often repulsed thence
with considerable Loss. In this City there are always four Companies of Foot
Soldiers, each consisting of 500 Men, one whereof (says Guagnini) I my self
commanded for near ten Years. This Place lies about fourscore Miles from Vilna,
and had formerly a Prince of its own.

Orsha.
Orsha, a large Wooden City, defended on one side with sharp and strong
Palisadoes, and on the other by the River Boristhenes, together with a Stone
Castle washed by the River Orshicza. This Place lies about eighteen Miles from
Witebsko.

Mohilow.
Mohilow, a very large Market Town much frequented by the Moscovites, whence
they transmit their Firs into Poland and Germany.

Czasniki.
Czasniki, a Wood-built Town lying on the River Vla.

Sienno.
Sienno, a Town with a Castle, about six Miles from Czasniki.

Leplo.
Leplo, a Town with a Castle well defended, situate on a Lake, and about seven
Miles from Czasniki.

Woroniec.
Woroniec, a Town with a Castle lying upon the River Vsacza, and about three
Miles from Polocz.

Senators of Vitebsko.
The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin and Castellan of Vitebsko.

Its Arms.
The Arms or Standard of this Palatinate, are the Arms of the Great Duchy, in
a Field Vert.

IV. Palatinate.
The fourth Palatinate of Lithuanic-Russia is that of

Minski, which is divided into two Districts, viz. The Districts of Minski, and
Borissow.

In both which are these several Cities and Towns, viz.

Minski, Cap. Borissow, Koidanow, Radoskowice, Lohoisko, Swislocz, Bobroisko,
Odruczko, Smolniany, and Turkow.
Cities and Towns of
The Capital of all which is

Minski.
Minski, a large Timber-built City, with a double Wall, a strong Castle, and a
very deep Ditch, with other Fortifications. It is washed by a River that turns
a great many Mills. It was formerly the Custom in Russia, under whose Dominions
this Palatinate was when this City was built, to fortify their principal Towns
with a double Wall and two Castles. Here formerly the Diet was kept
alternatively with Vilna and Novogrodeck.

Borissow.
Borissow, a Wooden Town seated on the River Beresina, which has a Castle well
fortified: It lies about forty Miles from Vilna, and has in it a good Garrison
against the Incursions of the Moscovites.

Koidanow.
Koidanow, a Town with a Castle about twenty five Miles from Vilna.

Radoskowice.
Radoskowice, a Town with a Castle, where Sigismundus Augustus mustered above
100000 Men at once in the Year 1568.

Lohoisko.
Lohoisko, a Town and Castle about eight Miles from Borissow.

Swislocz.
Swislocz, a Town situate upon a River of the same Name.

Bobroisko.
Bobroisko, a Town lying on the River Beresina.

Odruczko,
Odruczko, a Town and Castle which formerly gave Name to a Duchy, whereof
several Noble Russians had the Title.

Senators of Minski.
The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin and Castellan of Minski.

Its Arms.
The Arms or Standard of this Palatinate are the same with Lithuania, only an M
placed side-ways.

V. Palatinate.
The fifth Palatinate of Lithuanic-Russia is that of

Polocz, which is divided into two Districts, viz. The Districts of Polocz, and
Vsacz.

In both which are these Cities and Towns, viz.

Polocz, Cap. Vsacz, or Vsalza, Disna, Drissa, Druha, Starzitia, and Volisia.
Cities and Towns of
The Capital of all which is

Polocz.
Polocz, seated on the River Duna, or Dwina. It was formerly a City very
considerable, but in the Year 1562, John Basilowitz Great Duke of Moscovy took
it, and carried most of its Inhabitants away Prisoners. This Place remained in
the hands of the Moscovites to the Year 1579, when Stephen Batori recovered it,
together with its whole Territory. It was formerly a Duchy, and subject only
to its own Princes. Here at present resides a Russian Prelat. The Jesuits also
have a very fair Foundation in this City built and endowed by Stephen Batori.

Usacz.
Vsacz, distant about three Polish Miles from Polocz, and situate on a River of
its own Name.

Disna.
Disna, built on the Duna, and tolerably fortified. It lies about six Miles
from Polocz, and forty from Vilna.

Druha.
Druha, upon a River of the same Name.

Senators of Polocz.
The Senators of this Palatinate are, The Palatin and Castellan of Polocz.

Its Arms.
The Standard or Arms of this Palatinate, are the Arms of the Great Duchy,
with a P^ sideways placed in the middle of the Coat.

Having thus, Sir, described to you the present Extent, and chief Towns of the
Great Duchy of Lithuania, it would seem requisite (as usual) to give you a
particular Character of this Nation; but having a design to proceed to a second
Volume of this Undertaking, where I will examine into the Genius, Manners and
Customs of both Poles and Lithuanians, at present I can only take notice, that
to Jagell^^'s time, being the XIV th Century, the Lithuanian were Pagans, and
worshipped many Gods, or rather Devils. First, they paid Divine Adoration to
Fire (which they called in their Language Znicz, signifying sacred) and kept it
always alight in some of their most famous Towns. For thi^^ end they assigned
several Priests, by whose Neglect, or otherwise, if ever it came to be
extinguished, they were immediately beheaded. Next, they worshipped Thunder,
calling it in the Sclavonian Tongue Perunum. Also they had diverse Groves where
they prayed to tall straight Trees, which they held it Sacrilege but to touch.
The Devil, (or rather the cunning Priest) it seems was so politic in those
days, as to promote all these Superstitions, by frightning these Idolaters when
they offered in the least to forsake them. When the Sky was clouded, they were
of opinion the Sun was angry with them, and therefore used their utmost Art to
appease him by Prayers, Music, etc. They likewise believed Serpents to be
Gods, which were their Lares, or Domestic Deities, and therefore each Family
kept one in their House, to which they daily sacrificed Milk, Fowls, and the
like; and one of which if they happened at any time to offend, they looked upon
it to be an Omen of Destruction to their whole Progeny. They had also a set
time appointed for a Solemn Sacrifice, being about the beginning of October,
when together with their Wives and Children, they feasted riotously for three
days, in like manner as we have said before in Samogitia. Upon their return
from the Wars they were wont to sacrifice one of the chief of their Captives
with all their Booty to the Fire. They used to burn their Dead with all their
richest Ornaments on, which they wore whilst living, together with one of their
most faithful Servants, their Horses, Arms, Dogs, etc. whilst all their
Relations and Friends brought Milk, Honey, Beer, and the like, and merrily
feasted and danced about their Funeral-Pile to Music of various kinds.

All these Pagan Superstitions and Errors Jagello, after he became Christian,
in great measure abolished; to effect which, He, together with his Queen
Hedwigis, the Archbishop of Gnesna, a vast number of Priests, and several
other Learned Men went into Lithuania about the beginning of Lent in the Year
1387, where at Vilna he first caused the sacred Fire to be extinguished, and
the place wherein it was kept to be converted into the Church of St.
Stanislaus; then he proceeded to kill the Serpents, cut down the Groves, pull
down their Altars, and the like, which the poor bigoted Lithuanians wondering
at, cried out, How can our Gods dissemble with these wicked Christians, so far
as to suffer 'em to profane their Divinities with unhallowed hands, when if we
had but offered to injure them in the least, we always immediately underwent
their Revenge! But at length when they perceived no Judgment to follow the
supposed Sacrilege of the Poles, they unanimously acknowlegd'd their false
Worship, and consented to be baptized, whereof about thirty thousand were
brought to the Font in one day. From henceforward the Lithuanians have for the
major part continued Christians, tho there are yet some Idolaters among them of
different Beliefs toward the Frontiers of Moscovy and Samogitia, in the great
Woods, who still worship Serpents, etc. as they used to do. There are also in
this Great Duchy about thirty thousand Tartars with liberty of the Turkish
Religion, who have enjoyed this Privilege for some hundreds of Years, on
condition that they shall send every Year twelve hundred Men to the Wars
against the Turks and Tartars. These Mahometans call their Churches Meczets.

No part of the King of Poland's Dominions abounds more in Woods and Deserts
than Lithuania, and there is one Forest of above a hundred Miles long, in which
People are very wild and ignorant, tho the Gentry of Lithuania for the most
part are more polite, more sociable, and more active and sprightly than the
Poles. It was assured me often at Court, and it is certainly believed all over
the Kingdom, that Children have been frequently nurtured by Bears, who are very
numerous in these Woods. There was one kept in a Convent in my time who was
taken among them, as I have described in my Latin Evangel. Medici, Art. 15.
page 181.
Treatise, Of the Suspensions of the Laws of Nature. He was about ten Years of
Age (which might be guessed only by his Stature and Aspect) of a hideous
Countenance, and had neither the use of Reason, nor Speech: He went upon all
four, and had nothing in him like a Man, except his Human Structure: But seeing
he resembled a Rational Creature, he was admitted to the Font, and christened;
yet still he was restless and uneasy, and often inclined to flight. But
depiction of child with bear in cave. Page 342.

at length, being taught to stand upright, by clapping up his Body against a
Wall, and holding him after the manner that Dogs are taught to beg; and being
by little and little accustomed to eat at Table, he after some time became
indifferently tame, and began to express his Mind with a hoarse and unhuman
Tone; but being asked concerning his course of Life in the Woods, he could not
give much better account of it, than we can do of our Actions in the Cradle.

Upon this occasion I was assured by the King himself, several Senators and
other Great Men of that Kingdom; and moreover, it is the common and undisputed
Report, that Children are oftentimes nourished and brought up by Bears in these
Parts. They say likewise, that if a hungry He-Bear finds a Child that has been
carelessly left any where, he will immediately tear it to pieces; but on the
contrary, had it been a She-Bear then giving Suck, she would undoubtedly have
carried it safe to her Den, and nourished it among her Cubs, which after some
time might probably have been rescued from her and been taken by Hunters, as it
happened in another Case of this nature in the Year 1669, which has been
positively asserted to me in a Letter from his Excellency Monsieur de
Cleverskerk, now Ambassador here to his Majesty King William from the States of
Hollond, which Letter I thought not amiss to insert.

A Monsieur Connor.
Monsieur,
JE veux satisfaire en party a votre desir, and vous render conte d'un Enfant
que J'ay veu a Varsovie, en l'an 1669. Me rencontrant en cette Ville de Pologne
pour etre present au tems de l'Election d'un Roy, qui se devoit fair a la
place du Roy Jean Casimir, qui s'etoit demis de la Couronne: Je m'informay a
cette occasion de ce qu'il y avoit a voir en ce lieu, and J'ay appris, enter
autres chooses, qu'il se trouvoit au Fauxbourg de la Ville (qui va verse le
Palais que le Roy Casimir y avoit fait batir) chez des Religieuses un Enfant
Male qui avoit ete nourri des Ours, ayant ete pris, queques tems auparauant, a
la chasse de ces Animaux. J'allay a ce lieu pour Satisfaire ma Curiosite, and
trouvay a la Port le dit Enfant jouant dans les Sables, sous l'Auvent qui
etoit devant la Maison. Il etoit, selon ma meilleure Memoire, de l'age de douze
a treize ans. Quand Je l'approchay il vint sauter, comme par surprise a mon
habit, and prit par la main avec beaucoup de precipitation un des boutons
d'Argent que Je portois a mon Justaucorps, and approcha le Nez pour le Sentir.
Puis Jl se jetta, tout d'un coup, a un coin par terre, faisant queque bruit
comme une espece d' Hurlement. J'entray dans la Maison, ou une Fille m' informa
plus particulierement de la Prise de cet Enfant; Mais comme Je n'ay point avec
moy le Livre ou J'ay ecrit les Observations que J'ay fait dans mes Voyages, Je
ne setccedil;aurois vous en fair le detail. Cette Fille appella and fit
entrer, le dit Enfant, and luy montra un grand Moretccedil;eau de pain; ce que
luy voyant il se jetta sur un Plancher qui etoit fait contre la muraille dans
cette Chamber; Il y marcha comme a quatre pattes: Il se leva avec une grande
vitesse; prit par les deux mains le pain qui luy fut present; le porta ainsi
au nez, and se Jetta en bas faisant encore un bruit etrange comme auparavant.
On m'informa qu'il ne parloit point encore des paroles, mais qu'on esperoit
avec le tems luy en apprendre, d'autant qu'il avoit l'ouie bonne: Il avoit
queques marquis au visage qu'on pensoit avoir ete des Egratigneures de l'Ours.

Voila Monsieur tout ce que ma Memoire me peut fournir d'une Particularite
qu'il y a si long tems que J'ay veue, Mais Person ne doit trouver etrange que
cela soit arrive d'autant qu'on a d'autres Exemples dans les Histories: Et on
m'a inform en ce Pais, que les Tartares y font souvent des Invasions par des
courses qu'ils font avec unc si grande vitesse qu'ils entrent ^^n peu de tems
bien avaunt dans le Pais qui est ouvert, leurs chevaux etant capables de fair
un tres-grand cheminsans manger ni boire; qu'etant allez jusques ou ils ont
propose, la ils Etendent leur grande Troop and prennent, comme dans les
filets, toutes les Persons qu'ils rencontrent en leur retraite, and les
menent en Esclavage: qu' d ces occasions les Hommes and les Femmes tachants
fuir n'ont bien souvent pas de tems de sauver leurs Enfants, and qu'ainsi
celuicy peut avoir ete laisse, and trouve par queques Ours, qui sont en ces
lieux de Lituanie ou de Pologne. Je suis marri, Monsieur, ne vous pouvoir pas
informer and satisfaire a votre Curiosite avec plus d'exactitude: cependant,
vous recevrez, s'il vous plait, cette Relation comme un petit temoignage de ma
bonne Volonte, comme etant,

Ce 1, Jan. School. Monsieur, Votre tres-Affectionne Serviteur, J. P. Van den
Brande de Cleverskerk.

Thus in English.
SIR,
I Shall endeavor partly to satisfy your Request, and to give you an Account
of a Boy that I saw at Warsaw in the Year 1661, who had been brought up by
Bears. Coming to this City of Poland with design to be Present at the Election
of a King after John Casimir, who had Abdicated the Crown, I inquired what was
worth seeing in or about this Place: whereupon I was informed, among other
things, that there was in the Suburbs of this City (which go toward King
Casimir's Palace) in a Nunnery, a certain Male Child, who had been brought up
among Bears, and who had been taken some time before at a Bear-hunting. Upon
this Information I went immediately to that place to satisfy my Curiosity,
where I found the aforesaid Boy playing under the Pent-house before the Nunnery
Gate. His Age, as well as I remember, I guessed to be about twelve or thirteen.
As soon as I came near him he leaped toward me as if surpised and pleased
with my Habit. First, be caught one of my Silver Buttons in his hand with a
great deal of eagerness, which he held up to his Nose to smell; Afterward he
leaped all of a sudden into a Corner, where he made a strange sort of Noise not
unlike to Howling. I went into the House, where a Maidservant informed me more
particularly of the Manner of his being taken. But having not with me the Book
wherein I wrote my Observations in my Travels, I cannot possibly give you an
exact Account of it. This Maid called the Boy in, and showed him a good large
piece of Bread; which when he saw, he immediately leaped upon a Bench that was
joined to the Wall of the Room, where he walked about upon all-four: After
which, he raised himself upright with a great Spring, and took the Bread in his
two Hands, put it up to his Nose, and afterward leaped off from the Bench upon
the Ground, making the same odd sort of Noise as before. I was told that he was
not yet brought to speak, but that they hoped in a short time he would, having
his Hearing good. He had some Scars on his Face, which were commonly thought to
be Scratches of the Bears.

Thus, Sir, you have all that I can remember of a Curiosity, which I saw so
long time since; the Truth of which no body ought to question, since there are
several parallel Examples in History; and I have been informed in this Country,
that whenas the Tartars make frequent Incursions there, which they perform with
such extraordinary Swiftness, that they can overrun great part of the Country
in a very short time, their Horses being able to Travel a whole Day together
without drawing Bit; being arrived at the proposed Place, they immediately
quarter themselves in a great Circle, whereby, as it were in a Net, they take
all that come within their Clutches, and carry them into Slavery. So that
either the Men or Women finding themselves thus ensnared, and endeavoring to
escape, have oftentimes not leisure to take care of their Infants, and
therefore probably this Boy might have been left behind after the like manner,
and found and born away by the Bears; Of which there are a great Number both in
Lithuania and Poland. I am sorry, Sir, I cannot give you a more satisfactory
Account of this matter, but I hope this will suffice for a Testimony of my good
Will, and to assure you that I am,

Jan. 1. 1697/8. SIR, Your most Affectionate Servant, J. P. Van den Brande de
Cleverskerk.


For another Confirmation of this Matter of fact, I have the Testimony of an
authentic Author, M. Christopher Hartknoch of Passenheim in Ducal- Prussia, who
writ two Books of the State of Poland. He says, that during the Reign of King
John Casimir, in the Year 1669, there happened an Accident which perhaps might
hardly be credited by Posterity; which was, that there were then two Boys found
by a Company of Soldiers among the Bears in the Woods near Grodna; one of
which, as soon as he saw the Bears assaulted, fled into the neighboring
Morass, whilst the other endeavoring likewise to escape, was taken by the
Soldiers and brought to Warsaw, where he was afterward christened by the Name
of Joseph. He was about twelve or thirteen years old, as might be guest by his
height, but his Manners were altogether bestial; for he not only fed upon raw
Flesh, wild Honey, Crab-Apples, and such like Dainties which Bears are used to
feast with, but also went, like them, upon all-four. After his Baptism he was
not taught to go upright without a great deal of difficulty, and there was less
hopes of ever making him learn the Polish Language, for he always continued to
express his Mind in a kind of Bear-like Tone. Some time after King Casimir made
a Present of him to Peter Adam Opalinski, Vice-Chamberlain of Posnan, by whom
he was employed in the Offices of his Kitchen, as to carry Wood, Water, etc.
but yet could he never be brought to relinquish his native Wildness, which he
retained to his dying-day; for he would often go into the Woods amongst the
Bears, and freely keep company with them without any fear, or harm done him,
being, as was supposed, constantly acknowledged for their Fosterling.

I might here, Sir, give you several other Accounts of this Nature, which I had
related to me when I was in Poland; and I am told Mr. Gibson, a Parliament Man,
has formerly seen some other Examples of this kind in that Kingdom; but by what
I have already mentioned, I believe you will be sufficiently convinced, that
the History of Romulus and Remus is not so fabulous as it is generally
conjectured to be, and as I thought my self it was before I had been in this
Country; for considering that Brutes (since Philosophers and Divines will allow
them no Rational Souls) breed up their Young merely out of a Natural Instinct
or Sympathy, which I need not describe here, I see no Improbability why they
may not likewise bring up those of another Kind, as we have several Instances
daily. But I will not insist longer upon these Philosophical Matters, nor
examine here whether Examples of this nature refute or establish innate Ideas,
as I have done in my Medicina Mystica, but will conclude,

SIR, Your very Obedient Servant, B. C.

A Chronological Table of the Succession, Reigns and Deaths of the Dukes,
Governors, Princes and Kings of Poland; together with an exact reference to
the Page where they are treated of.
Began his Reign. Reigned Years. Dv'd A. D. page I. LEchus, I. -- 550 uncertain
10 II. Visimirus -- Guagnini only mentions. III. XII. Woievods -- Deposed. 12
IV. Cracus -- 700 -- -- ib. V. Lechus, II. -- -- -- -- 13 VI. Venda -- 750 --
-- ib. VII. XII. Woievods -- -- -- deposed 14 VIII. Lescus, I. -- 760 16 776
ib. IX. Lescus, II. -- 776 28 804 16 X. Lescus III. -- 804 6 810 ib. XI.
Popiel, I. -- 810 5 815 ib. XII. Popiel, II. -- 815 15 830 ib. XIII. Piastus --
830 31 861 21 XIV. Ziemovitus -- 861 31 892 23 XV. Lescus, IV. -- 892 21 913
ib. XVI. Ziemovistus -- 913 51 964 ib. XVII. Miecislaus, I. -- 964 35 999 24
XVIII. Boleslaus Chroby -- 999 26 1025 26 XIX. Miecislaus, II. -- 1025 9 1034
ib. XX. Casimir, I. -- 1034 25 1059 27 XXI. Boleslaus, II. -- 1059 23 1082 29
XXII. Vladislaus Hermannus 1082 21 1103 30 XXIII. Boleslaus, III. -- 1103 37
1140 31 XXIV. Vladislaus Sputator 1140 6 1146 33 XXV. Boleslaus Crispus -- 1146
28 1174 35 XXVI. Miecislaus, III. -- 1174 4 1178 36 XXVII. Casimir, II. -- 1178
17 1195 37 XXVIII. Lescus, V. -- 1195 8 1203 39 XXIX. Vladislaus Lasconogus
1203 3 1206 42

Began his Reign. Reigned Years. Died A. D. page XXX. Lescus V. Reestablish'd
1206 22 1228 ib. XXXI. Boleslaus, V. -- 1228 51 1279 43 XXXII. Lescus Niger --
1279 11 1290 46 XXXIII. Henry I. -- 1290 6 1296 48 XXXIV. Premislus -- 1296 7
Mon. 1296 ib. XXXV. Vladislaus Locticus 1296 4 1300 49 XXXVI. Winceslaus K. of
Bomia -- 1300 5 1305 ib. XXXVII. Locticus restored -- 1305 28 1333 50 XXXVIII.
Casimir III. the Great 1333 37 1370 54 XXXIX. Lewis K. of Hungary 1370 12 1382
56 XL. Queen Hedwigis -- 1382 4 1386 58 XLI. Jagello, or Vladislaus, V. -- 1386
49 1435 59 XLII. Vladislaus, VI. -- 1435 21 1446 60 XLIII. Casimir, IV. -- 1446
43 1493 63 XLIV. John Albert -- 1493 8 1501 66 XLV. Alexander -- 1501 6 1507 67
XLVI. Sigismund, I. -- 1507 41 1548 69 XLVII. Sigismund, II. -- 1548 26 1574 75
XLVIII. Henry of Valois -- 1574 5 Mon. 1577 85 XLIX. Stephen Batori -- 1577 10
1587 88 L. Sigismund, III. -- 1587 45 1632 106 LI. Vladislaus, VII. -- 1632 16
1648 121 LII. John Casimir -- 1648 22 1670 124 LIII. Michael Wiesnowiski 1670 4
1674 145 LIVE. John Sobieski -- 1674 23 1697 163 LV. Frederic Augustus now
reigning -- 1697 5 Mon. -- 207

FINIS Partis Prima.
A Compendious Plan OF THE Body of Physic.
A Letter from a Gentleman in Cambridg to Dr. Connor, concerning the Method he
used in his Physical and Anatomical Lectures, and in explaining the Materia
Medica, at Oxford, in the Year 1695.
SIR,
WE have here some Account of the accurate Course of the Chemical and
Anatomical Lectures which you performed last Spring at Oxford, and of your new
method of explaining the Virtues of Medicines there, with the Approbation and
Improvement of all that had the Happiness to assist at them. I have spoke with
some curious Genntlemen that some Years ago saw your Dissections at Paris with
the like good Success: And I doubt not but your Skill and Insight in all the
Parts of Physic is considerably augmented since, by your Travels into Italy,
Germany, Poland, and the Low Countries, having had thereby the Opportunity of
conversing with Malpighi, Bellini, Redi, and the most celebrated Physicians of
those Places. I have also, with a great deal of Pleasure, perused your
ingenious Dissertationes Medico-Physicae, or Latin Treatises lately printed at
Oxford, concerning malignant Damps, pestilential Steams, infectious Air, and
Subterraneous Poisons, with certain other stupendous and rare Phenomenon. From
all this I conclude, that you not only understand Chemistry, Anatomy, and the
Materia Medica very well your self, but that also you are capable to lead
others into the Knowledge of them, by a most easy and compendious Method; in
which Opinion I am confirmed by my Correspondent in Oxford: Many besides my
self in this University do earnestly wish, that your other Occupations would
permit you to pass some Months here with us, as indeed we expected you should,
when you left Oxford last Summer. But since it so falls out that your Practice
keeps you at London, we entreat the Favor of you to let us understand, whether
we may obtain a Scheme of your Method in those Physical Exercises, or whether
at London you can spare any time to such as are desirous to wait upon you to
this purpose. Sir, by so doing, you are like to oblige several, but more
particularly,

Cambridg, October. 15. 1695. Your most humble, and obedient Servant, C. P.

Dr. Connor's Answer, containing a Plan of his Corpus Rationale Medicum; or of
his new and compendious Method Chemical and Anatomical, for understanding the
Oeconomia Animalis, the nature of Diseases, and the Materia Medica.
SIR,
WHatever you are pleased to say in Commendation of me or my Book, I must
wholly attribute to your Civility, and will return no other Compliment to you
for it, but that I shall endeavor to deserve your good Opinion. I am extremely
obliged to your Correspondent in Oxon for the advantageous Character he gives
of me; and I assure you that I have not met with better Discipline, nor with
Persons more universally learned in any University of Europe.

As for the Method or Scheme I observed at Oxford to lead the Proficients in
Physic, and other ingenious Gentlemen there into the Knowledge of the Fabric,
natural Functions, and Distempers of the Human Body, as likewise into the
Knowledge of the Materia Medica to cure the same Diseases, it is as follows.

I considered Man, in the first place, as a Being compounded of Spirit and
Matter: But seeing it is only the last of these Parts wherein our Faculty is
concerned, I took a stricter veiw of the Human Body, and find the Structure of
it like that of most other Animals. But to have any accurate Knowledge of Man,
we must not only have a distinct Account of his constituent Parts, but likewise
of all the external Bodies which any way affect him, or contribute to his
Preservation. Since therefore he cannot live without Earth to tread upon, Air
to breath, Animals and Vegitables to feed upon, Sun and Stars to afford him
Warmth and Light, etc. we must by consequence examine the System and Elements
of the World, and particularly as they concur to the Preservation or
Destruction of Man. We must be very well acquainted with the nature of the
three mixed Bodies of our Globe, viz. Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals, before
we can give any tolerable Account of the Generation, Nourishment, Health,
Diseases, or Death of Man; before we can discover the admirable Fabric and
Contexture, the Mechanic and Hydraulical Actions, Chemical Preparations, the
various Operations of Medicines, and an infinite number of other surprising
Phoenomena in the Human Body.

The best Method therefore, I presume, is to proceed Analytically from the
previous Examination of all the known Parts of the great World, to particular
Enquiries into the Microcosm. Now the first step to this Method, is a good
Insight by Chemical Experiments into the Nature, more especially the Figuration
and Qualities of the Principles of mixed Bodies, and chiefly of the Blood: For
the want of such a Discovery (which is not impossible) has hitherto been a
great Obstruction to the Improvement of Natural Philosophy, and the Practice of
Physic. It is plain to me, that a Man void of all Prejudice, and who considers
that all the Operations of Bodies are performed by natural Causes without
Miracles, may be easily convinced that the Causes of Diseases, and the true use
of Applications to cure them, can be rendered very intelligible; so that vulgar
Axiom, That there is no certainty in Physic, will be found most erroneous.

I don't, Sir, pretend to have discovered this just Method, which I hold
necessary to lead us into the abstruse Secrets of Nature; but I would fain hope
that the following Scheme, which is that I observed at Oxford, may approach it
in some degree; which Method, tho it may be called altogether new, may perhaps
be a just Model for others to imitate hereafter in the true Theory and Practice
of Physic, which rightly considered are one and the same thing.

A NEW PLAN OF AN Animal Economy:
Demonstrated at Oxford in the Spring Anno 1695, at London the Winter
following, and at Cambridg in the Year 1696.
1. OF the Elements, Fabric, and System of the World, with the mutual
Cohesion, Influence, and Dependence of its Parts.

2. Of the Elements of Terrestrial Bodies, where (after various Chemical
Experiments) are considered the Nature, Properties, Figures and Effects of the
four Chemical Principles, Earth, Water, Salt and Sulphur, and their main mutual
Action, Fermentation; as also the Productions of Animals, Vegetables, and
Minerals.

3. Of the Structure of the Human Body, and its division into fluid and solid
Parts; where a particular and new Account is given of the Nature and Contexture
of the solid Parts, being all made of Vascular Fibers, and demonstrated to the
Eye by Dissection.

4. Of the fluid Parts of the Human Body; of the Nature, Principles,
Fermentation, and Circulation of the Blood; of Nutrition, of the Temperaments,
of the Humors contained in the Blood, of the seat and nature of Fevers, where
likewise of Youth, old Age, and Death.

5. Of the Reparation of the Blood, of the Chyle, Lacteous Vessels, Chyliferous
Duct; of Appetite, Mastication, Digestion, and the Ferment of the Stomach; of
the Precipitation or Separation of the Excrements from the Chyle, where of the
Structure of the Oesophagu. Or Gullet, of that of the Stomach, and all the
Intestines, of the Peristaltic and Antiperistaltic Motions of the Guts, of the
Glands, of the Mesentery, of the Lympha, and the Lymphatic Vessels.

6. Of the Structure, Motion, and Use of the Heart, where of the various kinds
of Pulses, of the Polypus in the Heart, Palpitation, and Swooning; likewise a
new Hypothesis of the Motion of the Heart, and of Sanguification.

7. Of the Contexture of the Windpipe, or Trachea Arteria, and the Lungs, where
of the Cause and Use of Respiration; a new Account of the Nature of the Air,
Nitre, and of the Vnvoluntariness of Respiration, of the Hiccock.

8. Of the Praecordi. Or sanguiferous Vessels appended to the Heart, where the
Structure, Motion, and Difference of the Veins and Arterics are demonstrated.

9. Of the numerous Ramifications of the Vena Porta, and both the Vena Cava 's,
of Varix 's, Hemorrhoides, Bleeding, etc.

10. Of the Ramifications of both the Aorta 's throughout the whole Body; of an
Anevrism.

11. Of the Brain and Cerebellum; a new Account of the Animal Spirits, their
Generation, Motion, and Use; of Perception, Sleeping Waking, and the Influence
of the Soul upon the Body, where of Sensation, and the five Senses.

12. Of the Eye, Tears, Nasal and Aqueous Ducts; Of Sight, Blindness, Light,
Colors and the sharp Sight of some Animals.

13. Of the Fabric of the Nose, the Membrana Pituitaria, Snot, Smelling, and
Sneezing; Of the mutual Influence of the Nose and Tongue.

14. Of the Tongue, Palate, and Gums; of the Muscles and Motions of the Tongue;
of Taste, Voice, Stuttering, and Dumbness.

15. Of the Larynx, Pharynx, the Os Hyoides. Of the Glands, Salivation and
Spittle; of the Almonds, and Uvula, etc.

16. Of Feeling, the Cuticula, Skin, Hairs, milliary Glands, the mucous and
reticular Bodies; of Fat, Transpiration, Sweat, the Itch, cutaneous Diseases,
Palsy, and Plica Polonica.

17. Of the Ear, Aquaeduct, Hearing, Deafness, Tinnitus, etc.

18. Of the Structure, Use and Number of the Nerves; of Motion and Sense; of
the Par vagum, and the Intercostal Nerves spread over all the Viscer. Of the
Breast and Abdomen.

19. Of the Structure and various Figures of the Muscles, the vascular Fibers,
where Muscular, Natural, and free Motion are explained, as likewise stretching
and gaping, leaping, swimming, and flying, with Convulsive, Tonic, Systaltic,
Epilectic, and Hysteric Motions; of Vapors and Rheumatisin.

20. Of the Liver, Gall, and Pancreas, where the Secretion, Motion and Mixture
of the Bile, and Pancreatic Juice, with the Chyle are shown; of the Green
Sickness, Yellow Jau idice and Pica.

21. Of the Nature and Differences of all the Glands or Strainers of the Body;
a new account of the various Filtrations of the excrementitious and
recrementitious Humors, as Lympha, Spittle, Gall, Urine, Seed, etc. Of
Obstructions and Dropsies.

22. Of the Structure and Use of the Spleen, and what Melancholy is; what
Symptoms happen when the Spleen is taken out of the Body.

23. Of the Reins or Kidneys, the Atrabilary Glands, the Vreters and Bladder;
where of the Scrum of the Blood, Urine, and what is contained therein; of the
Stone and Gravel.

24. Of the Structure and Use of the Bones, Marrow, Ligaments, Periosteum, and
Apophyses; of the different Articulations or Joints; of the Nature and Seat of
the Gout, Spina Ventosa, Caries, Exfoliation, and Rachitis.

25. Of the Parts of Generation in Man; of the Nature and Formation of the
Seed, with its Effects in the Body of the Woman; the Cause and Seat of Venereal
Diseases.

26. Of the Parts of Generation in the Woman, of the Eggs and Ovarium; of
Generation, Conception, going with Child, Flowers, Birth, Monsters, Floodings,
false Conceptions, Whites, etc.

27. Of the Posture and Nourishment of the Embryo in the Womb; of the Vmbilical
Vessels, the Afterbirth, the Force of the Mother's Imagination, and the
peculiar way of the Circulation of the Blood in the Foetus; of Longings.

28. S ome Considerations of the Union of the Soul and Body, where the Laws and
Effects of that Union are inquired into.

You see, Sir, that after having examined the different Parts of the World, and
the Elements of Bodies by Chemistry, I have divided the Human Body into solid
and fluid Parts. Before I considered the solid Parts in particular, I thought
it necessary by way of Chemistry, to be acquainted with all the Humors, and
specially with the Principles and Motions of the Blood, which is the Primum
Mobile of the whole Machine; for which purpose it is fit to know how by
Digestion the Meat becomes Chyle, the Chyle becomes Blood, how the Blood
becomes Flesh and Bone, and consequently how it must be continually repaired by
Aliment; how the Heart is put in motion to communicate the same to the Blood;
how the Blood expelled by the Heart, after having been rarefied by the Air in
the Lungs, is conveyed by Arterial Tubes to all the Parts of the Body, and from
these Parts is brought back again by the Veins to the Heart. To know why this
Blood is carried to all the Parts, and what Alteration it receives in them, we
must by ocular Inspection see the different Structure of all the Parts of the
Body, and first follow the Blood to the Brain, to generate Animal Spirits,
which Spirits furnish the Soul with Ideas in the Brain, and conveyed through
the Nerves to all the Parts of the Body, they are the Causes of Motion in the
Muscles, and of Sense in the five Organs, which convey the Impression of
exterior Bodies to the Soul. I follow the same Blood into the Liver, where it
discharges its Bilious Juice; and into all other Glands, where it leaves some
superfluous Humonr, into the Spleen, where its Motion is moderated; into the
Reins, where it leaves its serous Particles; into the Testicles, where is
strained from it a glutinous oily Substance called Seed. In short, after
knowing Man in himself, I examine the natural Ways which he uses to propagate
his Kind, in begetting another by way of Generation.

Man, as I said before, is made of two Substances, Soul and Body. The Soul
preserves the Body by Reason, and governs it by voluntary Motion. The Body
furnishes the Soul with Ideas of Corporeal Beings. The Life of Man is the
Correspondence between Soul and Body; but the Life of the Body is the natural
Motion of the Blood and Splrits, the Cessation of which Motion is Death. The
solid Parts of the Body have no Motion (or Life) of their own, but such as they
borrow from the Blood and Spirits. The Blood and Spirits have none neither, but
such as they are allowed by the general Laws of Nature established by a Supreme
Being. To maintain this mutual Correspondence and Dependence between Soul and
Body, all the Organs, Springs and Humors of the body, must be in their due
Disposition; for the Death of the Body is properly the loss of this
Disposition, and not the Separation of the Soul, as is commonly believed: for
the Body is dead before the Soul is gone out of it; and the going out of the
Soul is but the Cessation of its Correspondence with the Body for want of
Motion in the latter. This Disposition is disordered or ruined by Diseases, all
which Diseases have their first Seat in the Blood, from whence they are
communicated to the solid Parts; and the solid Parts being affected, they
reciprocally insect the Blood. But tho the Blood was never infected, and Man
never sick, yet he should die of course, by the Relaxation and Attrition of his
solid Parts, from the long and continual Circulation of the humors through
them, which we call Old Age.

As to what relates to the Materia Medica, or the Account I have given of the
Virtue and due Application of inward Medicines in the Practice of Physic, I
should likewise give you a Series of the different Subjects I treated of, as I
have in my Plan of the Animal Economy; but finding it too tedious, and
needless, I will only mention in general, that all inward Diseases have their
first Seat in the Mass of Blood, that they are caused by a Ferment or Matter
hid in it, which derived its Origin from some outward Causes: That there are no
Specific Medicines for any part of the Body, as for the Head, Heart, Liver,
Stomach, Spleen, but that they must all operate upon the whole Mass of Blood;
that consequently outward Applications cannot avail much for inward Distempers,
that the Medicines must be carried in a convenient Vehicle through the Blood to
the place where the Distemper lies, and that then they either carry its Cause
out of the Body by Evacuation, or change the Nature of it within by altering
the Mass of Blood.

I may therefore reasonably divide all the Materia Medica, described by so many
voluminous Authors, only into two Classes of Medicines, Evacuating and
Alterating. I did not so much talk of those Remedies that evacuate only from
some parts of the Body, as Bleeding, Clysters, Leeches, Issues, Blisters,
Setons, Gargles, Snush, and the like, for they can hardly ever cure any inward
Disease; but of such as evacuate the Morbific Matter from the whole Mass of
Blood by the five general ways, Stool, Vomit, Urine, Sweat and Salivation;
where, without recurring to occult or precarious Qualities, I reduced to the
Principles of Chemistry and Reason, the Nature and Operations of Purgatives,
Emetics, Diuretics, Diaphoretics* of Antimony and Mercury, of Venereal and
other Diseases, as likewise the Nature and Usefulness of Baths, and other
Mineral Waters.

I have likewise examined and endeavored to explain the Nature and different
Effects of Alterating Medicaments, which operate in the Mass of Blood without
any Evacuation, such as sweeten the Blood when sour, that thin it when gross
and thick, that hasten its too slow Circulation, that stop its too rapid
Motion, as in Fevers; that cool the Blood, that heat it, and raise the Spirits,
as Cordials; that calm the Spirits, as Narcotics; that strengthen the Tone of
the Parts, as Styptics and Astringents; that open Obstructions, as Aperitives.
Here therefore I had occasion to consider the Virtues and Operations of Steel,
Opium, Jesuits Powder, of Alcalious and Acid Medicines, and of the whole Tribe
of other alterating Remedies.

It would, Sir, be too prolix and needless to mention to you all that can be
said in this nice and weighty Subject, which includes in a manner the whole
Machine of the Universe, which requires several Years fervent Application for
any one to attain a tolerable Knowledge of, and which cost me some Months
Labor to demonstrate at Oxford what small Insight I was thought to have in it:
Yet still I am not unwilling to comply with your Desires, and to spare some
time from my other Business here, to communicate what I know of these Matters
to any Persons of both Universities, or to such other ingenious Gentlemen as
have a Curiosity for things of this Nature. And I shall take care that all be
performed in such a decent and creditable manner, as may be for the Benefit and
Satisfaction of others, as well as my own particular Reputation. For not only
my Duty, but likewise the Usefulness and Agreeableness of my Profession, tho in
it self very abstruse and difficult, inclines me naturally to improve it as
much as I can; and I hope I shall be able in few Years to publish a Latin
Treatise of the Principles of Physic, and of the Oeconomia Animals, which
perhaps then will give You and the Public more Satisfaction than they or your
self can at present expect from,

From Bow-street in Covent Garden, London, Nov. 2. 1695. SIR, Your very
Obedient Servant, B. Connor.

A LETTER to James Tyrrel, Esquire; from Dr. Connor, Fellow of the Royal Society.
Containing a further Explanation and Vindication of the Plan of the Animal
Economy, or of the Chemical and Anatomical Method for understanding the
Fabric, Springs, Tempers and Diseases of the Human Body.

SIR,
IT is upon all hands acknowledged, that the Acquaintance of Men of Learning
and Worth is of great benefit toward acquiring not only the Knowledge of Men
and Manners, but of Nature too. But of all the Advantages to be reaped from
their Conversation, that of correcting our Prejudices or Mistakes, and of
setting us in the right way is the most valuable. I should be too disingenuous,
Sir, if I should not concur with the Public, in justly allowing you to be as
discerning a Judge as you are a true Friend. The World is convinced of the first
by your showing your self so great a Master as well of the Laws of Nature and
Nations, as of those of your own Country; and none that have the Honor to know
you can be ignorant of your Sincerity a^^d Zeal, in correcting the Errors and
Oversights of your Friends. To whom then should I more allowably communicate my
Designs? After begging your Pardon therefore for the Ambition of numbering my
self with your Friends, I must tell you, that being desired by several, and
willing my self, not to conceal the small Insight I was thought to have in
Anatomy, Chemistry, and the other parts of Physic; I thought first convenient
to borrow from some Ancient or Modern Authors the most easy and compendious
Method, for the benefit of my Auditors. But I was frustrated of my
Expectations; for after having examined the voluminous Works of most Writers in
our Faculty, I did not find it altogether fit to follow their Method, nor safe
to espouse their Opinions. But the best course, I think, is to pick the best
out of each, especially what relates to Matters of Fact, applying their
Observations to my own Design, and taking Reason and Experience to be my surest
Guides. But seeing several Persons either out of Malice or Rashness, have very
industriously misrepresented my Undertaking; I shall now give a larger Account
of it than formerly, as well to satisfy my Friends, as for my own Justification.

My Design therefore, Sir, is to find a short, easy, and clear Method, to be
acquainted with the Fabric, Functions, Tempers, and Diseases of the Human
Body: For which purpose I must not only know Man in himself, but must also know
all Bodies that are about him, and concur to his Preservation or Destruction.
For as I cannot understand all that belong to my Finger, without I understand
my whole Body, which ser^^es to nourish and move it; so I cannot understand my
Body without I understand the whole Universe: And as I cannot reasonably know
any one Distemper of my Body, without I know the general Sources of all
Distempers; so I cannot methodically cure any one Distemper without I
understand the Rules of curing all Distempers: Which shows that Quacks, and
other ignorant Pretenders, may not presume to have methodical Cures for any one
Distemper whatsoever. Since therefore it is necessary to have a general view of
the whole Universe to be competently acquainted with Man, the first thing we
must examine is Matter, which is the general Principle of all Bodies, or rather
all Bodies are Matter.

Matter is the only thing, in my mind, that we have any clear Notion of, if we
have of any. We conceive very well that an Atom has at least six Sides or
Surfaces, of which one is nearer the East than the West, another nearer the
South than the North, and another nearer the Zenith than the Nadir:
consequently between all the six Surfaces we conceive a Space or Extension,
which we call Matter or Body, tho never so little; and since we consider a real
Space between them, we can mentally divide it into several lesser Spaces, and
each lesser Space into as many other lesser ones as we please; so that every
minute Particle will be infinitely divisible. Besides, the distance between the
six Sides of the Atom is so filled up and occupied by the Atom or its
Extension, that it is impenetrable by any other Extension whatsoever. By an
Atom I mean the minutest part in a Body actually divided from others, and still
divisible in it self. Then the Properties of Matter will be Divisibility and
Impenetrability.

There is no essential Difference between one piece of Matter and another,
since all Matter is extended, divisible and impenetrable. But since the Machine
of the World is formed of different Bodies, and all Bodies formed of Matter, we
must derive their difference at least from the Accidents of Matter: We find
then that one part of Matter cannot be different from another, but in Bulk,
Motion or Figure; and according as it differs from others in one or more of
these Qualities, they will constitute different Bodies: By these three
Qualities of Matter we can give a general account of the different parts of the
World, as the Ethereal Fluid, and Terrestrial Bodies. We may observe that the
Stars and Planets, the Air, the Earth, and the Water, are made of three
different sorts of Matter. The Atoms of the first Matter have a lesser Bulk and
more Motion than all the rest. The Atoms of the second Matter are probably
spherical, have as little Bulk as the first, and less Motion: The Atoms of the
third Matter are of an irregular Figure, but have greater Bulk, and have none,
or a slower Motion than all the rest. We may lawfully suppose all the Stars to
be made up of the first Matter: The Aetherial Fluid, or the Heavens of the
second, and the Planets and Terrestrial Bodies to be made of the third. For the
Parts of the first being extreme subtle, and extremely rapid, must be fluid
and thin enough to pass through the Pores and Intestices of all other Bodies,
and leave no Vacuities; and influence upon us the same way as the Sun does, by
keeping the Air in a perpetual Fluidity, and by producing Fermentations in the
Ground in such solid Bodies as have no invincible Resistance in their Parts.
The Parts of the second Matter being likewise subtle, round, and consequently
agitated perpetually by the Subtilty and Rapidity of the first Matter which
pass through it, must form a Fluid and Transparent Extension, as the Expansum
or the Heavens are. The Parts of the third Element being more bulky, more
irregular, and having no Motion, or at least an inconsiderable one, must form
gross, irregular, solid, opaque, and sensible Bodies, such as we see the
Planets and Terrestrial Bodies to be. The two first Matters which I made
mention of, are exterior Agents, which Nature, or God makes use of rather to
influence a Motion into Terrestrial Bodies, than to enter into their
Composition, contrary to Monsier des Carts. So this last Element of the World,
is that which I am to consider most, being the only thing that our Faculty is
concerned in, because it constitutes Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals, which
are the three Things that I design chiefly to examine, because they furnish us
with Aliments and Remedies, and are the Causes of most Distempers.

Tho we find an innumerable variety of Terrestrial Bodies, and this variety
depending upon the difference of their Atoms, yet by tracing exactly the
particular Effects of these Atoms, and by several Experiments of Chemistry, I
can reduce all parts of Bodies to four only, viz. Atoms of Earth, Atoms of
Water, Atoms of Salt, and Atoms of Sulphur. But when, for Example, I am to give
Rhubarb, Jesuits Powder, or any other Remedy to a Patient, to be sure of its
Effects, and due Application, it is not enough to know that it is made of
Earth, Water, Salt, and Sulphur, but also I must know what Earth, Water, Salt,
and Oil themselves are: Besides, I am to know their Proportion, and which of
them predominates in it; which Physicians neglecting to discover, have left the
Practice of Physic very obscure, and will ever continue so, until they give
themselves the trouble to examine with more Exactness and Nicety the Nature (I
mean the Figure) and Effects of the Principles of the Blood, and of all
Remedies likewise.

I know that the Chemists will immediately answer, That they have with a great
deal of Toil and Labor, not only separated from mixed Bodies the before
mentioned four Principles, but also discovered their Nature; for they
confidently tell us, that the nature of Earth is to be porous, to absorb Water,
Salt and Oil; that the nature of Water is to dissolve Salt; of Sulphur to be
inflammable; and of Salt to prick, and be dissolved by Water. But they need not
take so much pains to tell us of a thing that every body knows without the
least insight in Chemistry. A Countryman knows that a Pot full of Ashes will
soak a great deal of Water, or any other fluid Body: That Water dissolves Sugar
and Salt; that Oil burns, and Salt pricks the Tongue. This is not answering the
Question, for they take the Effects of those Elements for their Nature. To say
that Earth absorbs, that Water dissolves Salt, that Oil takes flame, and that
Salt bites, is to tell me only what these Principles are capable of doing, not
what they really are in themselves. If being asked by a Person, What is Man? I
should answer, that he is a reasonable Animal, or an Animal capable of Reason;
he should not doubtless be satisfied with my Answer, because I tell him what
Man can do, not what he is, since he exists before he can reason. I desire to
know what is the particular Figure, the Specific Fabric, and the inward
Nature of Earth, that makes it produce an Effect different to that of Water;
and of Salt, to produce a different Effect to that of Oil.

Until therefore we are more intimately acquainted with the different Bulk,
Texture, and Figure, which are the ground of the Virmes and Qualities of all
these Elements, we can give no satisfactory Account of their Effects; and we
must consequently be uncertain as to the Operation of a Remedy, which has any
of 'em predominating in it. I confess it will be a difficult matter to
determine the different bulk and figure of the Atoms of Principles, a priori,
as they term it; for they are so small and imperceptible, that we cannot
discern any of 'em even with the most refined Microscopes: Yet I do not
despair, but by calculating and summing up all the Effects and Proprieties of
each of 'em by Reason, I may discover at least a posteriori, as they call it,
their different Bulk and Figure, which are the only primary Qualities they
differ in. For it is plain to me, that when I consider that a drop of Water is
insipid, transparent, easily evaporated, that it penetrates most Bodies, and
dissolves all Salts; I can reasonably determine the Figure and Bulk of its
Particles that are suitable to these Phenomena. I can say as much of a spoonful
of Earth, when I observe that it is spongy, solid, poroud, friable, opaque,
insipid; that it sinks in Water; that it cannot be raised by Fire in
Distillation; that it is the Matrix and Support of the rest of the Principles
of any mixed Body. Likewise of Oil or Sulphur, when I find it is fluid, insipid,
ropy, inflammable, extremely penetrating, and immiscible with Water; I can
guess the Nature or Texture of Parts, which is capable of such Effects. When I
see that an Acid Salt is always of its own nature, fluid, sharp, transparent,
penetrating; that it dissolves solid Bodies, and coagulates sulphurous ones,
as Blood, Milk, etc. When I consider that an Alkali Salt is always of its own
nature solid, white, porous, friable, sharp, dissolvable by Water, easily
movable; that it ferments with Acids, absorbs them, and dissolves sulphurous
Bodies; I can reasonably conjecture the Figure that renders both Salts capable
of producing such different, nay contrary Effects; which I endeavor to perform
in the Chemical and Anatomical Experiments, which I make at present in my Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury's Library, which his Grace, out of his wonted
Inclination to serve the Public, has been pleased to give me the use of for
this purpose.

After having examined the nature of the different Atoms of Matter, I trace
their Effects and Operations, all which I find are performed by Motion, which
is the only Cause of all things, and which has no other Cause or Nature it self
(that I know) but the pure Will of the Deity. For a Body cannot be moved
without it receives all its Motion from another Body that is in motion; which
Motion this second Body received from a third, that was put in motion by a
fourth, and this fourth by a fifth. So tracing backward to the Creation the
successive Transit of Motion from one Body to another, we must come to a first
Motion of Bodies, which flowed immediately from the Creator. A Body cannot lose
its Motion without communicating it all to another Body; consequently there
must be the same quantity of Motion now in the World as was in the beginning.
For no Motion can be lost, and no new Motion can be produced. By examining the
Laws and Occasions of Motion, I consider the Nature, Conditions, and Effects of
Fermentation, which is the chiefest and most universal Motion in Nature; by the
means of which are formed so many different Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals
of the different Proportion, different Situation, and different Application of
our four Elements, Earth, Water, Salt and Sulphur. But my chief Design is to
show how the different Parts of Man's Body, which is the principal Subject of
this Animal Economy, are made of them: For out of his Bones, his Flesh, his
Viscera, and even his Blood and other Humors, I draw in more or less quantity,
first Water, then Volatile Spirit, or Salt, afterward an inflammable Oil; and
there remains the Earth, out of which I draw by Water a fixed Salt. I do not
only examine the Nature and Proportion of the four essential Principles of our
Body, but also, what is more necessary, I design by Anatomy to demonstrate to
the Eye the Structure, Texture, and Use of its solid, sensible and integrant
Parts, as Bones, Cartilages, Ligaments, Muscles, Membranes, Veins, Arteries,
Nerves, Lymphatic Vessels, and Glands; all which I find to be formed of
vascular Fibers of the same kind: for I do not see that the Fibers of a Muscle
differ from them of a Tendon, nor the Fibers of a Membrane from them of a
Ligament, nor them of a Cartilage from the Fibers of a Bone, nor the Fibers of
any part, as for their Structure, from the Fibers of all the parts. I confess
the Fibers of some parts of the Body are more strictly united together than
others, which makes the Compactness of some Parts, and the Limberness of
others; so all parts differ from one another, only in a stricter or looser
Union of their Fibers; since we find by Experience, that Flesh becomes as hard
as Bone, and Bone as soft as Flesh: For we frequently discover in dissecting
dead Bodies, that the Center of the Heart, which is naturally fleshy, that the
Aorta near the Heart, that Ligaments, and Cartilages turn to solid Bone; we
observe likewise that Bones in the Rickets, and by Monsieur Papin's way of
boiling them, become as pliable as the Flesh of Muscles.

Before I show the Parts of the Body, I shall first examine the Humors, and
chiefly the Principles, Texture, Fluidity, Circulation, and Fermentation of the
Blood, the Seat of the different Constitutions and Distempers of Mankind.
Afterward I shall consider how the Blood is repaired by Digestion and Chyle;
how it is rarefied by the Air in the Lungs, how it furnishes Animal Spirits in
the Brain for motion in the Muscles, and Sensation in the five Organs: What
Alteration it receives in the Liver, in all Lymphatick Glands, in the Spleen,
Kidneys, and in the Parts of Generation; how it nourishes so many different
Parts of the Body at the same time, as the same Water seeds several thousands
of different Plants in the same Garden; and how after some Periods of Years the
Springs of the solid Parts must be worn out, the Vigor of the Body decay, old
Age must come on, and be necessarily followed by Death; where I must examine
the Laws of the Union, Correspondence, and Separation of the Soul and Body.

You have here, Sir, a short Extract of my Animal Economy, by which you may
perceive that my Design in it, is, by dissecting many Animals, (as they shall
best serve my purpose) and by several Experiments of Chemistry, to discover and
explain the Fabric, Springs, Humors, and Functions of Organical Bodies, but
chiefly of the Human, which, I hope, will considerably facilitate the Practice
of Physic, and satisfy the Enquiries of the Curious. But those Gentlemen do me
an Injury, who give it out that this is a bare Course of Anatomy. Truly that
were a mean and useless Business: for, as I have often hinted, I am of opinion
that Anatomy can never be well understood without not only Chemistry, but a
tolerable Insight into the other parts of Natural Philosophy; for which reason
I comprehend them all together, to show their mutual dependence, and how they
contribute to the knowledge of one another, which is perhaps a Method not
commonly followed. Tho several may be more capable of it, yet none can be more
willing to communicate it to the Public than I am.

As for what other Persons have taught or asserted in I hysick, I am not to
consider their Authority, or the number of their Followers, but how well they
have performed what they pretended to. Without this liberty, there would be no
hopes of Improvement, or any further progress in Physic, nor no other Labor
be necessary to attain it, but much Reading and a happy Memory. It would be
needless for us to be at the Pains and Expenses of traveling into foreign and
remote Countries, to converse with learned and experienced Persons, to learn
their different Methods and Maxims of curing Diseases, to observe a great
variety of Distempers and Symptoms in infectious Hospitals, to open so many
dead Carcases, and to try a great number of Experiments, if the Dictates of
Hippocrates, or Galen, or any other Author, were infallible Rules for us to
follow in the Practice of Physic. Since therefore Experience and Reason are
our only Guides, no Body is to take it amiss if I censure such as wrote before
me, with as much Justice as they did their Predecessors; for I Am sworn to no
Master.

You know, Sir, that the Place and Time are most convenient, and I hope you may
give us often the honor of your Company, and according to your wonted Candor,
both do me Justice to your curious Friends, and, where I speak amiss, convince
me of it, in which you will oblige,

Land. Feb. 12. 1695. Worthy Sir, Your very Humble Servant, Bernard Connor.

A LETTER to his Reverend Friend Dean J. R. concerning Evangelium Medici, seu
Medicina mystica de suspensis Naturae Legibus:
OR, A Latin Treatise lately published at London, in which supernatural Effects
are philosophically compared with natural ones, and explained by the Principles
of Physic, the not considered within the reach of Natural Causes.
SIR,
I Should be proud to meet with some occasion to give you a Testimony of my
Respect and Gratitude, and to show you how sensible I am of the Happiness of
having been educated in my Youth by so learned a Master: I am sorry the
distance between us, and the difficulty of Carriage gives me no opportunity of
sending you the Treatise you heard of concerning the Suspensions of the Laws of
Nature. I can only at present promise to give you a general Idea of my Design
in that Book, and of the occasion that put me upon examining these Matters. I
have been present often at some Disputes about supernatural Effects, in which
some maintained that there could have never been any performed: and last Year I
happened to be accidentally engaged against the Objections of some Persons, who
pretended they could not conceive either the possibility, or the manner of them.

These Objections I looked upon as weak in themselves, and seeming to imply,
That either a Supreme Being could do nothing but what their Faculties were
capable to comprehend; or, that there was a necessity, that, to convince
Unbelievers, to confirm some important Truth, or to bring about some other
great or weighty End, it were requisite that the Deity should not only work an
extraordinary and surprising Effect, but also show them the way and manner how
it was performed. We freely owned, That such Operations as are looked upon
supernatural, cannot be performed by the stated Laws of Nature, but immediately
by a Supreme Power, for some great Design.

This Answer, as being undeniably true, they could not but admit: and tho where
the Relaters were of an undoubted Credit and Veracity, they could not but
believe those Performances were supernatural; yet, for their clearer
Satisfaction, they desired my further Thoughts concerning the manner of such
Supernatural Effects.

This being above my Sphere, which reaches no further than Physic, or Nature
in its ordinary Operations, wherein, however, I find Matter more than
sufficient to employ my Time and Thoughts, and wherein I plainly see the
Existence, and can never sufficiently admire the constant Providence of a
Deity; yet being willing to comply with their Desires, I promised I would give
them what Satisfaction I could therein.

This, indeed, was not the first time the very same Difficulties had been
proposed in my hearing; for I had formerly discoursed with others, both in this
and other Countries, upon the same Subject, and had some Years ago drawn up a
rude Scheme of an Essay toward the clearing of this Point. But if this, or the
like occasion, had not put me upon reviewing this Paper, I might never have
given my self, or any body else, the trouble of reading it. But having thus
unwarily engaged my self, I resolved to revise this Design, and to give those
Persons a sight of it: This I did accordingly, and afterward showed it to some
Friends.

They owned the Notions I advanced, and the ways of Explication I proposed were
new to them, and might be so to others; and tho they were not, nor could be
convinced that these were the very ways the Supreme Power proceeded in the
effecting of such Operations, yet they seemed inclinable to imagine, that upon
these Principles supernatural Effects, and the Operations of them, were
conceivable by such as know any thing of the Nature and Laws of Motion.

This Communication of my Thoughts gave oecasion to others to discourse with me
about them, and to desire that if I did intend to publish them, I would in the
mean time give them, at least, the general Heads of my Design.

This I was willing to have been excused in, as having not digested them into
that Order I might at last publish them in, and was willing to reserve to my
self a Power of making what Additions or Retrenchments I should afterward
think fit to make; but the Plan of the Essay happening not to be fully
represented, and afterward being worse understood and commented upon, I at
last resolved to publish it as soon as I could, seeing Persons industriously
reported things I never thought of.

My Design therefore, Sir, is to endeavor to make it no longer a Difficulty to
conceive, and make evident by Reason, and the Principles of Physic, I mean the
Principles of Nature, all the supernatural Effects authentically delivered to
us concerning Bodies chiefly, but particularly the Humane: I mean, supposing
those Effects to be true Matters of Fact, and all Matters of Fact, as well
Natural as Supernatural, to be immediate Effects of a Supreme Being, which must
be granted; it is as easy to conceive the manner how this Infinite Power may be
applied to Bodies, to work supernatural Effects, as to produce the common
Phenomenon of Nature. By this I hope to convince our Scepticks, the Deists, who
must give their Assent, when they have the same evident Reason to conceive the
Possibility, and consequently to believe the Truth of such miraculous Effects,
that are authentically related, as they have to conceive that Straw can burn in
a flaming Fire.

The Foundation I go upon, is the Structure of the Human Body, which I have
often taken to pieces by Anatomy, and resolved into its essential Elements, or
minute Particles by Chemistry: for I find it as necessary to be acquainted with
its Fabric, to give an Account of the miraculous States it is supposed to have
been in supernaturally, as it is to explain the natural Effects commonly
produced in it. For want of a sufficient Insight in this matter, several
Divines of the latter Ages have given very gross Ideas of the supernatural
Effects they have pretended to explain; and in several places where I have
been, I saw them, either through Ignorance, or for Interest, give out for
Miracles, Phenomenon, that were only surprising Effects of Natural Causes,
which has given so great an occasion to Skepticism, and increase of Deism.

Having laid down for my Basis the Structure of the Human Body, as far as I
could discover from my Senses, Anatomy, Fire, Microscopes, and Experiments, I
proceed to examine, and endeavor to explain the different ways its natural
State is supposed to have been supernaturally altered by an Infinite Power:
For, finding that the Human Body is all Matter, and that all this Matter is
nothing but a Union of Particles with Bulk, Figure, and respective Situation, I
thought that all the Alterations that could supernaturally happen to this Bulk,
Figure, or situation, could be conceived. But before I enter upon those nice
Subjects, I find it first necessary to enquire into the Cause, Nature, and Laws
of Motion, because Motion is the only true Cause of all Natural Phenomenon; and
the Suspensions of the Laws of this Motion, are the only Causes of all
supernatural Effects. I conceive the Laws of Motion can be suspended three
different ways; and by one or more of those Laws of Suspension, it is as easy
to solve clearly all supernatural Effects, as it is to explain the most evident
Effects of Natural Causes by the common Laws of Motion.

Tho I mention, that all supernatural Effects whatsoever can be easily reduced
to some of the three Laws of Suspension of Motion, notwithstanding I do not
design to speak of them all in particular, but of such only as are most in
dispute among the Learned: Yet any understanding Man may easily make his
Application, and resolve all other miraculous Effects into one or other of 'em.

By the Suspension of the Laws of Motion, I do not mean that these Laws are
changed or abrogated, but only that their Course is stopped, while an Effect is
produced by the immediate Action of the Deity, without any Influence of theirs,
for some particular end: and it cannot be denied but that the Supreme
Legislator, who made first the Laws, may suspend them when he pleases; and in
that state of Suspension produce of himself alone, without their Concurrence,
the same Effects, which are wont to be produced only by the same Laws put in
Execution. So that tho a Body, for Example, of a hundred Pound Weight, by the
established Laws of Motion must be moved by another that has several degrees of
Motion, yet an Infinite Power may of himself, either move it without the
Concurrence of another Body, or hinder its being moved by any other Body of
what weight soever, tho put into the most rapid Motion; as if combustible
Matter should be in a flaming Fire without burning.

Because my Design in that Book is to explain all the supernatural States that
our Body is supposed to have been put into; and since its being in two places
at once, is the State the most disputed and doubted of, I thought it convenient
to examine the Reasons of those that assert it capable of being in several
places at once, to see whether they are reconcilable with our Senses, and with
the Nature and Structure of a Human Body, which is the chief thing to be
considered. I find it impostible to conceive that a Human Body can be in two
places at the same time, after the manner they have hitherto described, since
the same Human Body can never be in two places at once, with the same Bulk, and
with the same quantity of Matter.

It is true, that considering the Divisibility of Matter, the Structure of the
Human Body, the smalness of the first Stamina of the Embryo and Foetus, and the
Principles and Mechanism of Generation, I have thought of one particular way,
different from all that has ever been said upon this Subject, by which I may
conceive, that tho the self-same numerical Particles of Matter can never be in
two places at once, yet a Human Body, tho not the rational Soul, can be
multiplied by an Infinite Power: But since we have no evident Proof, or
Experience, that any Human Body has ever been thus multiplied; and because from
conceiving the poslibility of it, it is thought People may perhaps hereafter
take occasion to draw several Consequences that may be liable to dangerous
Constructions, and lead into erroneous Speculations, I was advised, and was
willing to decline treating of this Subject, having no mind to meddle with
Scripture or Religion, being not my Province. Wherefore I have endeavored only
(...) explain those supernatural Effects that most People agree upon,
submitting my Judgment to greater Capacities: For I had no other Design in that
Book, but to enquire how far we may look into, and confirm Supernatural
Effects, those chiefly that r^^^te to Organical Bodies, by the Principles of
Physic.

Sir, the Learned and Judicious Gentlemen of your Gown can have no reason to
complain that I have invaded their Province, or encroached upon their
Prerogatives: For I do not undertake to prove that there were ever any
supernatural Effects produced, that matter I think belongs entirely to Divines
to make evident from authentic Testimony; I only endeavor to demonstrate the
Possibility of them, and if there were ever any, to explain the Mode and
Mechanism with which we may conceive how they might have been performed: This
is not doing any Prejudice to your Profestion; for I have that Respect to the
Church, and that Deference to the Clergy, that I did nothing in this matter
without the Advice and Approbation of those of them that are in the highest
Station: And they owned, that tho this Subject had never been yet handled by
any Physician, nor indeed by any Divine that I know of, yet it was only a
Physician's business to treat of, according to the Principles of Natural
Philosophy and Physic. For since it is on all sides acknowledged, that
miraculous Effects are above Natural Causes, no People can better judge whether
any Effect is really supernatural, than those that make it their Business and
Profession to know how far the Activity of Natural Causes can reach. For
Physicians may find sometimes that what the wilful Mistakes of some, and the
Ignorance of others take for supernatural, is the visible Effect of a Natural
Cause, as I observed once at Rome some Years since: passing by chance through
the Strada del Popolo, I saw a multitude of People hurrying a Man to St. Mark's
Chapel, which belongs to the Venetian Ambassadors; they told me that he was
possessed with the Devil, and that they, were carrying him to be exorcis'd: I
crowded through the Throng into the Church, and felt the Man's Pulse; I found him
in a Fever, making hideous Grimaces and Motions with his Face, Eyes, Tongue,
and all his Limbs, which were nothing else but a fit of Convulsive Motions all
over his Body, occasioned by disorder of his Blood and Spirits, being a
Hypochondriacal Person. The Clergy and People began very devoutly to fright the
pretended Devil out of him, and in a little time his disorderly Motions ceased,
which, as they thought to be the miraculous Effect of their Prayers, I
attributed to the natural abatement and usual cessation of such Fits.

Every understanding Naturalist knows that an able Chemist can work such
surprising Effects in his Art as may very easily pass for Miracles with such as
are unacquainted how far the force of Natural Causes can extend. It would seem
to 'em very astonishing to see two Liquors, that are cold of their own nature,
ferment, boil, and become very hot, without any visible Cause to put them in
motion: To see Aqua Regalis dissolve Massy Gold, Aqua Fortis dissolve Silver,
Iron, Mercury, and most other Minerals; to see the Spirit of Nitre, and the Oil
of Cloves, which separately are very quiet, turn into a burning Flame when
mixed together; to see transparent Liquors when mixed, turn red, green, white,
and into all sorts of Colors. I say nothing of the Phosphorus, of the
surprising Effects of the, Air Pump, of the Elasticity of the Air, of the
Magnet, nor of an infinite number of other wonderful Phenomenon in Nature:
which tho they may be common, yet they are not the less surprising, because
their Cause is as hid from those that do not, and even to those that do study
Nature, as that of supernatural Effects is to those Naturalists who trace
Natural Causes to their highest Sphere of Activity. I do not doubt but that if
the Missionaries that are sent from the Western Churches to convert the Pagans
of the Eastern Nations, were as well versed in Anatomy and Chemistry, as they
are in the Tenets of the Christian Religion, and in the Mathematics; and that
if they did but dazel the Eyes of these ignorant People with a great many
curious and useful Experiments in these two fundamental Branches of Physic,
they would perhaps make as deep Impressions upon their Minds, and give them as
convincing Testimonies of the Power and Legality of their Mission, as they can
at present by the spiritual or indelible Character, they say is inherent in
them by virtue of their Commission.

Pope Clement the Tenth knew well the Effects Chemistry artfully applied might
produce in the minds of ignorant People, when he secured the Person of the
famous Italian Signor Borri, who about five and thirty Years ago by his Skill
in Chemistry did work several extraordinary Cures on Diseases in Germany, and
gained such universal Reputation all over the Empire and the Northern Kingdoms,
that (as it was reported of him) he thought he had Credit and Opportunity
sufficient to invent and propagate a new Religion, by making his surprising
Experiments in Chemistry pass for Miracles; which he might easily have done,
since Chemistry being then in its Minority, was not much known in the World.
But the Pope foreseeing the ill Consequence such a Design might produce, gave
timely Orders to his Nuncio, then at Vienna, to desire the present Emperor to
get him seized; which being accordingly done, he was sent Prisoner to Rome, on
condition nevertheless that his Life should be safe, here he lived in Castello
St. Angelo for several Years, where I saw him, and his curious Laboratory for
Chemistry allowed him for his Diversion; no body was admitted to discourse him
without special leave, for fear, I suppose, he should inform the World either
of his pretended new Doctrine, or of the Injustice he might intimate that was
done to him. He died lately in this close Confinement since I have been at Rome.

Thus, Sir, I have given you as succinct and comprehensive an Account of my
Design in that Book as I could well express in so few Lines, by which you will
believe perhaps that I have done nothing in treating of those Matters, but what
belongs peculiarly to one of my Profession to examine; and tho I do not pretend
to have explained this nice Subject with that Satisfaction the Public might
perhaps expect, yet I hope that having been the first Person that has ever
handled it after this manner, no body will blame me for having at least given
occasion to others to examine it better after me, and to give a more
satisfactory Explanation of it. I conceive the Subject I have undertaken to
treat of in that Book is nice as well as ungrateful, wherein the Principles of
Physic, the Experiments of Chemistry, and the Anatomy of the Humane Body are
philosophically made use of as a Foundation to illustrate the Metaphysical
Account I have given of these Supernatural Effects, which perhaps makes it not
so much universally understood as I designed; however I am resolved not to
meddle any more with Matters of this kind, but to apply my self entirely to the
Practice of Physic. I am,

London, the 21 st of January, 1697/8. Worthy Sir, Your Obliged Friend, and
Humble Servant, B. C.

FINIS.

