SOME REFLECTIONS On that part of a Book called AMYNTOR, OR THE Defense of
Milton 's Life, Which relates to the WRITINGS of the Primitive Fathers And the
CANON of the New Testament.

In a Letter to a Friend.

LONDON, Printed for James Knapton at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1699.

SIR,
THE Design which the Author of the defense of Milton's Life professes that he
had, in writing that part of his Book which relates to the Writings of the
Primitive Fathers, and the Canon of the New Testament, was only to vindicate
himself from the Charge of denying the Scripture and declaring his doubt that
several pieces under the name of Christ and his Apostles, recieved now by the
whole Christian Church, are supposititious; by showing that what he had said in
the Life of Milton, concerning the spuriousness of several pieces under the
name of Christ and his Apostles, was meant not of those Writings which are now
received by the whole Christian Church, but of those Apocryphal Pieces, which
were in many places received and approved in the Primitive Times. This is what
the Author professes to be the only design of this part of his Book: And though
for his own sake I cannot but heartily wish it were really no other; yet
because there are several Passages, wherein he either so expresses the very
slight esteem that he has for the Primitive Fathers, as seems to reflect upon
our Religion it self; or raises such doubts about the authority of the Canon of
the New Testament, as Heretics (to use his own words) may draw mischievous
inferences from, and by which Scruples may be put into the minds of Sincere
Christians; I have therefore sent you such short remarks as upon reading the
Book have occurred to me, and as I hope may be of some use to others on this
Occasion.

The Principal Propositions which our Author maintains, and which I thought
most to deserve consideration, are these three.

First, Page 38, 39.
That the Books ascribed to the Disciples and Companions of the Apostles, which
are still extant, and at this time thought genuine, and of great Authority;
such as the Epistle of Clemens to the Corinthians, the Epistles of Ignatius,
the Epistle of Polycarp to the Philippians, the Pastor of Hermas, and the
Epistle of Barnabas; (for about the rest which he mentions, there is no great
Controversy;) are all very easily proved to be spurious, and fraudulently
imposed upon the credulous.

Secondly, page 38.
That it is the easiest task in the world, to show the ignorance and
superstition of the Writers of these Books: page 45.
That Barnabas has many ridioulous passages; and by saying that the Apostles
before their Conversion were the greatest sinners in nature, robs us of an
argument we draw from their integrity and simplicity against Infidels: That the
Pastor of Hermas is the silliest Book in the World: And that Ignatius says,
page 46.
the Virginity of Mary was a secret to the Devil; which, I suppose, he cites as
a ridiculous saying.

Thirdly, That they who think these Books genuine, ought to receive them into
the Canon of Scripture, since the reputed Authors of them were the Companions
and fellow laborers of the Apostles, as well as St. Mark, or St. Luke, which
is the only reason he ever heard of, why these two Evangelists are thought
Inspired. page 48.
For to say that these Books ought not to be received now into the Canon,
because the Ancients did not think fit to approve them, is but a mere evasion;
since many Books now received as Canonical, were not approved by the Ancients;
page 57.
and some received by the Ancients, are now rejected b^ the Moderns; and Mr.
Dodael owns, page 73.
that anciently no difference was put by the Church between the Apocryphal and
Canonical Books of the New Testament: and besides, no stress can be laid on the
Testimony of the Fathers; page 80.
since they not only contradict one another, but are often inconsistent with
themselves in their relations of the very same facts; were divided into various
Sects, page 56.
who in those early days did, like us, condemn one another for damnable
Heretics; used to reason precariously, p. 50, 51.
( as Irenaeus the famous Successor of the Apostles, argues from the four
Regions of the World, and the four Winds, that there cannot be more nor fewer
than four Gospels) and give hard names to those who contemn such precarious
reasoning.

These are the principal Assertions of our Author, which because they seem to
me not only to be salse, but also to be proposed with too bold a liberty of
passing censures upon the judgment both of the ancient and modern Church; I
shall therefore in answer to them, and for a Vindication of the Primitive
Fathers and Modern Doctors of the Christian Church, with submission advance
these three Propositions.

First, that though we are not infallibly certain, that the Epistles of
Clemens, Ignatius, Polyearp and Barnabas, with the Pastor of Hermas, are
Genuine; yet that they are generally believed to be so, upon very great
Authority, and with very good Reason.

Secondly, That therefore, though they are not received as of the same
Anthority with the Canonical Books of the New Testament, yet they ought to have
a proportionable Veneration paid to them, both with respect to the Authors and
to the Writings themselves.

Thirdly, That neither the Belief of the Genuiness of these Books, nor the
Respect paid to them as such, does in the least diminish from the Authority of
the New Testament, or tend to make the number of the Canonical Books Uncertain
or Precarious.

I. First, That though we are not infallibly certain that the Epistles of
Clemens, Ignatius, Polycarp and Barnabas, with the Pastor of Hermas, are
Genuine; yet that they are generally believed to be so, upon very great
Authority, and with very good Reason.

1. The Epistle of Clemens to the Corinthians, a (...). Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c.
16.

(...). Id. l. 3. c. 38.

(...). Id. l. 5. c. 6. ex Irenaeo, l. 3.3. c. 3.


great and wonderful Epistle, says Eusebius, was unanimously and without any
controversy received by the ancient Church; and (...). Id. l. 3. l. 16.
read publicly in most Churches, both anciently, and in his time. And that the
Epistle now extant is the same with that which was so commended by the
Ancients, has not been questioned by any Learned Man these many years, and has
been lately proved at large by the Learned Doctor Wake in his Genuine Epistles
of the Apostolical Fathers and by Grabius in his Spicilegium, p. 261. whom I
shall not now transcribe.

2. That Ignatius wrote several Epistles (...). Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 36.
, one to the Ephesians, one to the Magnesians, one to the Trallians, one to the
Romans, one to the Philadelphians, one to the Smyrnaeans, and one to Polycarp;
Eusebius expressly testifies; quoting a large passage out of his Epistle to the
Romans, which passage is now extant word for word in that Epistle, being
published with the rest abovementioned. And that all the Epistles now extant
under these Titles, are the same with those mentioned by the Ancients; is
sufficiently proved by the very Learned Bishop Pierson in his Vindiciae,
Cotelerius, and others.

3. The Epistle of Polycarp to to the Philippians, is mentioned by Lib. 3. c. 3.
Irenaeus that knew him living, and by Hist. l. 3. c. 36.
Eusebius, In Catalogo, etc.
Hierom and others, whose Testimonies set down at large by Cotelerius I need
not transcribe: And that the Epistle now extant under his Name, at least the
greatest part of it, is the Genuine one, is acknowledged by See Dr. Wakes
Genuine Epistles, and Coteler. not. 1. in Epistolas Ignatii.
all Writers eminent for Judgment and Learning.

4. The Pastor of Hermas is incontestably a most ancient work, being cited by
almost all the Primitive Fathers extant, that lived in or near the second
Century; viz. by L. 2. and 4. and 6.
Irenaeus, by De Orat. c. 12. and de Pudic.
Tertullian, by Hom. 8. number. lib. 1, 2. and 3. de Princip. Comment. in Mat.
Hom. 37. in Luc. multisque aliis in locis.
Origin, by Clem. Alexand. etc. whose Testimonies are set down at large by
Nicol. de Nourry at the end of his Apparatus ad Bibliothecam maximam veterum
Patrum, and praefixed to the Oxford Edition of Hermas, and to that of
Cotelerius. Whether the Author of this book be the same Hermas that is
mentioned by St. Paul, though it is affirmed by many of the best and most
judicious writers, yet is it not so certain, nor of such consequence, that we
should be obliged to defend it.

5. The Epistle of Barnabas is also without controversy ancient, a work of the
Apostolic Age, being quoted by almost all the Clem. Alex. Strom. 2. and Strom.
5. Origin. contra Cells. lib. 6, etc.
Primitive Fathers; as you may see by the Testimonies set down at large, in all
the same Authors with the Testimonies concerning Hermas.

Upon these great Authorities then, though we cannot be absolutely sure that
these Writings are Genuine, yet we may well conclude and believe them to be so,
notwithstanding the suspicions which some have raised to the contrary. There
are also sundry other Arguments, which may be drawn from the simplicity of the
style and way of arguing used in these Writings, agreeable to the custom of the
Age in which they are supposed to be written; from the conformity of the
matters contained in them, to the Doctrine and Discipline of those times; and
from the exact Agreement of all the Quotations of the most ancient Authors, to
the Copies extant at this day: All which taken together, afford so good Reason
to believe these Books to be genuine, that whosoever considers them, may very
well wonder at the confidence of Mr. T. who is pleased to affirm that it is the
easiest Task in the World to prove all these Writings spurious, and
fraudulently imposed upon the credulous.

II. Secondly, Though these Writings are not received as of the same Authority
with the Canonical Books of the New Testament, yet ought they to have a
proportionable Veneration paid to them, both with respect to the Authors and to
the Writings themselves.

Clemens was a Companion of the Apostles, and Ignatius and Polycarp their
immediate Successors; and if the Authors of the Epistle of Barnabas and of the
Pastor of Hermas were not the same with the Fellow Laborers and Contemporaries
of the Apostles, known by those Names, yet are they so undeniably ancient,
(being certainly of the first Age,) as to challenge all the respect that can
possibly be due to any Writers upon the account of Antiquity. And as to the
Writings themselves, though Mr. T. will not be persuaded to grant with the
Learned Dr. In his Discourse of the Authority of the genuine Epistles, p. 175.
Wake, that they contain the true and pure Faith of Christ, without the least
Error intermixed with it; yet this we may be bold to affirm, that in general
they are so far from betraying either the Ignorance or Superstition of their
Authors, which Mr. T: so confidently charges them with, that they contain a
very good account of that Doctrine and Dicipline of the purest ages of the
Church, which all learned and good Christians heartily wish could be restored
at this day.

1. The Epistle of Clemens is styled by Eusebius, (as I have already observed)
a great and admirable Epistle; and was publicly read in the Christian Churches
both before and in his time: And indeed it does not at all come short of the
highest Praises which the Ancients have given to it; being a Piece composed
with such an admirable spirit of Love and Charity; of Zeal toward God, and of
concern for the Church; of the most excellent exhortations delivered with the
greatest plainness and simplicity of speech, and yet pressed many times with
such moving eloquence too; that I cannot imagine what could have been desired in
such an spistle, more proper for the end for which it was composed; what could
have been written more becoming an Apostolical age, and the Pen of one of the
most eminent Bishops of it. Thus the Learned Dr. Wake.

His making the Scarlet thread hung out by Rahab to the Spies, a Type of the
Blood of Christ; however it may possibly seem strange to such as Mr. T. was yet
in the Opinion of the Ancients very agreeable to the Tenor of the Scripture,
and particularly to that Type of the Scarlet Wool, wherewith the Blood of the
Sacrifice was sprinkled on the People under the Law, Heb. 9.19.

The History of the Phaenix, mentioned in this Epistle, is confessedly a Fable.
But he that considers that it was a Story at that time generally told and
believed, as Tacitus largely relates; and that the best of Men never had any
assurance of being preserved from vulgar and innocent Errors; will not be hasty
in censuring an excellent Man, and an excellent Book, for making such a vulgar
error the Topic of a Popular Argument.

2. The Epistles of Ignatius are written indeed in a plain, simple, and
unaffected style; as are most of the Books of the Holy Scripture it self: but,
whatever Mr. T. says, there is nothing in them either of ignorance or
Superstition; unless a Firm belief of Divine Revelation must be esteemed
Ignorance, and a strict Observance of the Laws of Christ is to be called
Superstition.

One Passage indeed there is in his Epistle to the Ephesians, which Mr. T.
cannot but smile at: viz. that the Virginity of Mary and her delivery, was kept
in secret from the Prince of this World. But he that considers the manner of
our Savior's temptation, and how the Ancients constantly, and (in the judgment
of the very Learned Sane Diabolum majus aliquid homine in C^r^sto agnovisse hoc
quidem tempore, constanter, nec sine magnis argumentis, negant Scriptores
antiqui. Grot. in Mat. 4.3.
Grotius) not without good Grounds, denied the Devil to have known any thing at
first of the great Mystery of the Incarnation, will not for this passage
condemn Ignati us of Ignorance.

3. The Epistle of Polycarp to the Philippiaus is a very valuable Monument of
Antiquity, containing nothing in it unworthy the Character of so great a
Father. (...). Eusebius. Hist. l, 4. c. 14. ex Irenaeo.
Irenaeus calls it a most complete Epistle; out of which they that are careful
of their own Salvation, may learn what was the Belief of that Apostolical Man,
and what the form of sound Doctrine which he delivered in his Preaching.

4. The Pastor of Hermas is a Book full of very excellent Moral Instructions,
delivered for the the most part in easy and natural Similitudes, and these
also explained at large to the apprehension of the meanest capacities: For
which reason, though it was not received into the Canon of Scripture, yet (as
Eusebius testifies) it (...). Eusebius. Hist. l. 4. c. 3.
was judged by the Ancients a most necessary Book, especially for those who
were to be instructed in the first Principles of Religion; and was therefore
accordingly read in Churches: And Origin (who was far from being an ignorant
Man) judges it to be a In Romans 16, 14.
most useful Book. But Mr. T. says it is the silliest Book in the World. Why
he should think so, I cannot apprehend, unless it be because there are here and
there some few odd Passages scattered in it, very different from our modern way
of Writing, which perhaps he can single out and expose; And so there is hardly
any Book extant in the World, which a witty Man may not turn into ridicule.

All the Objections which I think have been hitherto made to this Book, are
these: That Libri fabulosi sunt, in quibus contra Apostolicum consensum
adstruitur Liberum Arbitrium, una Paenitentia, Solitudo Monastica, and, quod
memoratu dignum, purgatorium ab anu quadam in visione tertia prosertui.
Scultetus de Script. Apoch.
it contains fabulous Visions: That it makes too much for Freewill: That it
assigns to every Man two Angels: That it favors the Novations in allowing but
one Repentance: That it favors Monkish Solitude: and, that it speaks of
Purgatory. The three first of these Objections we shall consider immediately;
But the three latter are so directly false, that one would wonder how prejudice
could possibly be so strong as to make Men see in any Author those things, of
which there is not the least syllable or hint in the whole Book.

That the Visions contained in it are fabulous, we ought not to say, unless we
be sure, either that God never afforded any Visions to the first Christians; or
that these Visions have some particular Circumstances, which prove that they
could not come from God. But if it were so, yet taking that which is used in
this Book to be no other than a Parabolical way of Writing, wherein the Church
is introduced as representing its own Doctrine and Discipline to a Person in a
Vision, it ought not to be styled fabulous, any more than Parable of the
Pilgrim. of the Prodigal, etc.
other Books of that kind which are written in our Age.

That maintaining the freedom of Man's Will, in the sense that Hermas asserts
it, is a good Objection against a Book, I suppose neither Mr. T. nor any Man
else, at this time of day, will contend.

That Hermas assigns to every particular Man two Angels, if the Titles of the
Chapters were of any Authority, could not indeed be questioned. But in the Book
it self there is no such thing expressly affirmed: All that the Author there
says, is only in general, That Duo sunt nuntii cum homine; unus aequitatis, and
unus iniquitatis. Mandat. 6.
there are two Angels with Man; one of Righteousness, the other of Iniquity;
and that when good thoughts arise in a Man's heart, then the Angel of
Righteousness (that is, some good spirit) is with him; and when evil thoughts
arise in his heart, then the Angel of Iniquity, (that is, some evil spirit)
tempts him: Which perhaps is no more, than what all Christians believe. So that
Cotel^rius in his Notes upon the place, might have spared the pains of proving
other Fathers to have been of the same opinion with Hermas, till he had shown
that these words do necessarily signify that Hermas himself was of that
Opinion.

That Hermas by allowing but One Repentance for great and scandalous Crimes,
favors the Novatians, whose Heresy consisted in allowing no other Repentance
at all, than that of Baptism, is so far from being true, that he in express
words opposes his One Repentance to Baptism, and says more for the validity and
efficacy of that after-Repentance for Crimes committed by Baptized Christians,
in this one little Book, than perhaps is to be found in all the other Wrirers
of the three first Centuries put together; insomuch that Tertullian, after he
turned Montanist, and had embraced the Opinion of the Novatians, Cederem tibi,
si scriptvra Pastoris, quae sola maechos amat, non ab omni concilio Ecclesiarum
inter Apocrypha and falsa judicaretur, adultera and ipsa, and inde patrona
sociorum. De Pudicitia.
exclaims with all imaginable bitterness against this Book for that very
reason, because it was more favorable than any other Book then extant, in
allowing Repentance to Adulterers after Baptism, which the Novatians denied.

That this Book favors Monkish Solitude, is also so far from being true, that
on the contrary it even expressly allows Mandat. 4.
Second Marriages, which was more than most Writers of that Age were willing to
do.

Lastly, So far is this Writer from establishing the Doctrine of Purgatory,
that there is not one syllable about it in the whole Book: All the places where
he speaks of Men's undertaking many hardships, and so purging themselves from
their sins, being as plainly meant of the Penances to be gone through,
according to the then established Discipline of the Church, as it is possible
for any thing to be expressed by words.

5. The Epistle of Barnabas was very much esteemed among the Ancients: And
though it must indeed be confessed, that it contains some very strange and
allegorical Interpretations of Scrigture; yet he that considers how much that
manner of Interpretation was anciently in use among the Jews in their Targums,
and how many important truths were that way conveyed, so that the Apostles
themselves in their arguing with the Jews did often make use of it, as we see
in their uncontroverted Writings; I say whosoever considers these things, will
rather choose modestly to suspend his Judgment, than rashly to upbraid this
Author with the Terms of foolish and ridiculous.

And as to his saying that the Apostles before their Conversion were the
greatest sinners in nature; this does not at all rob us of the Argument we use
to draw from their Integrity and Simplicity against Infidels. For supposing
them to have been never so wicked, were they the less Simple and Illiterate for
that? Or is their Wickedness before their Conversion any way inconsistent with
their Integrity after it? But besides, these Words might be spoken with
relation to such sins, as though very great in themselves, yet sincere and
well-meaning Men might be guilty of in their Ignorance; as St. Paul says of
himself, that before his Conversion he was the chief of sinners, in respect of
his blaspheming Christ and persecuting Christians even to Death, for Christ's
sake.

In short, though it must after all be confessed, that the Authors of these
Writings used a plain, popular and unpolite Style; that they were guilty of
some Mistakes, in things wherein the whole world at that time erred with them;
(for which Mr. T. is pleased to style them Ignorant;) and that they delivered
diverse things, which though very agreeable to the strictness of their Discipline
in the Primitive Church, yet the present times will not so well bear; (for
which Mr. T. calls them Superstitious;) Though I say, all this must be granted;
yet since in general the Matter of these Writings is such, that not only the
Ancients thought fit to cite them in their Books and read them in their
Churches, but also the Learned and most Judicious Critics of our own times,
as well Laics as those of the Clergy, have received them as genuine, and
recommended them as containing the true and pure Faith of Christ; I cannot but
think that the very great scorn and contempt, wherewith Mr. T. has thought fit
to treat them, is a very bold assuming to himself, and undervaluing the
Judgment of the greatest Men both of the Ancient and Modern Church, and
consequently a Reflection upon our Religion its self; and that after all, we
have very good Reason, as well as very great Authority, though not to receive
these Writings as of the same Authority with the Canonical Books of the New
Testament, yet to pay them a proportionable Veneration, both with respect to
the Authors and to the Writings themselves.

III. Thirdly, Neither the Belief of the Genuineness of these Writings, nor the
respect paid to them as such, does in the least diminish from the Authority of
the New Testament, or tend to make the number of the Canonical Books uneertain
or precarious.

This is the difficulty, on which Mr. T. seems particularly to insist, as if it
were impossible for those who believe the Genuineness of these Writings to give
any tolerable reason why they do not admit them into the Canon of the New
Testament, as well as several others, which are now received: And therefore I
shall endeavor to be somewhat more exact and particular in giving an Answer to
it.

1. First then, though we have great Reason to believe these Books to be Genuine,
yet have we not the same certainty of it, as we have of the Genuineness of the
Books received into the Canon of the N. Testament. The Books of the New
Testament, as it might be proved of every one of them particularly, were
received at their first coming forth as being written by Divine Inspiration,
and were quoted as such by Irenaeus and others of the Ancientest Fathers: And
though upon occasion of some Disputes that arose afterward among Christians,
the Authority of some few of those Books came to be called in Question; (not to
speak at present of those Heretics, the Cerinthians, Marcionites, Manichees,
and others, who rejected whatsoever made against their absurd Opinions;) yet
those few Questioned Books were so far from being (as Mr. T. salsely asserts)
rejected a long time by all Christians almost with universal consent, that even
those Books were not only kept entire from the beginning, but (as Eusebius
expressly testifies) were (...). -- (...) Hist. l. 3. c. 25.

(...). lib. 3. c. 3.


owned by most Doctors of the Church, and were all along read together with the
other Scriptures; and at last, upon the full and exact examination of all
Circumstances, the matter being put out of Question, they were unanimously
received, as well by those Churches where they were doubted before, as by all
other Christian Churches, into the Canon of Scripture; and so have been
continued ever since by universal consent, and by the uninterrupted Succession
of Christians in all Ages. Whereas of those Writings which we are now speaking
of, that which is the least controverted, viz. the Epistle of Clemens, was for
many Ages thought to be utterly lost: and though upon its appearing again, the
best Critics in the World thought they had good reason to pronounce it
Genuine; yet they could not be so sure that it was free from corruption and
interpolation, as we are of those Writings which were never lost. And now this
Argument is of peculiar force against Mr. T. For if he thinks, as he says, that
he can with all the ease in the World prove these Writings spurious; (which
notwithstanding his vain boast, he will never be able to perform;) he may at
least allow those, who do not doubt but they are Genuine, yet not to advance
them above their own rank, and place them among those which by the Universal
Church have been received into the Canon of the New Testament.

2. Secondly, Though the matter of these Writings be such, as that they do
therefore deserve very great veneration and respect; yet is there plainly
something humane, something of infirmity, something of fallibility in them, for
which they are with all reason thought inferior to the Writings of the
Apostles. And this Argument is also peculiarly strong against Mr. T. For if he
thinks, as he says, that he can with all the ease in the World show the
Ignorance and Superstition of the Authors of these Writings; well may he allow
those, who so far differ from him in this, as to think they deserve the high
Character of Primitive, Holy, and Apostolical Men, yet not to presume to equal
them with the Apostles themselves.

3. Thirdly, When we have made the best judgment of things, that we can
possibly at this distance of time, we cannot after all but pay some deference
to the judgment of the Ancients, especially when assembled in a Council; and
allow them to judge somewhat better in the Ages next after our Savior, what
Writings were of Authority to be made the Standard and Rule of Faith, than we
can after 1700 hundred years: Especially since of the doubted Books, which were
sometime read promiscuously with the uncontroverted, it is plain they received
such only into the Canon, whose style, and matter, and agreement with the rest
of the Apostolical Writings, do sufficiently prove them to have judged wisely
and upon good Grounds. But this Argument is of no force with Mr. T.

4. Fourthly, Therefore, and which is a direct decision of this Question, I
add, that the true reason why such a certain and determinate number of Writings
are received as the Canon of Scripture, that is, as an Authoritative Rule of
Faith and Manners, is because they were written by the Apostles themselves,
(who are acknowledged to have been guided by an infallible Spirit,) or which is
all one, were dictated, reviewed and approved by them or some of them. All the
Books of the New Testament, except the Gospels of St. Mark, and St. Luke, and
the Acts of the Apostles, are therefore received as Canonical, because the
Church upon undoubted Grounds believes them to be written immediately by the
Apostles themselves; and these three Books are therefore received as Canonical
likewise, because we believe them to have been dictated, reviewed and approved
by some of the Apostles. And this is a plain and direct reason, though Mr. T.
is so modest to say he never heard of it, page 48.
why the Writings of St. Mark and St. Luke, who were only Companions of the
Apostles, are received among the Canonical Writings of the Apostles; and yet
the Epistles of Clemens and Barnabas, who were Fellow Laborers with the
Apostles, are not. And that this is indeed the true reason, why some Books are
received as of infallible Authority, and others not; may be sufficiently proved
to any unprejudiced person, from what we find in the Ancients concerning this
matter. That all Books acknowledged to be written by the Apostles, were always
received as of unquestionable Authority, is evident. The Question concerning
any doubted Book, being, not whether the Writing of an Apostle should be
received as of good Authority or not, but whether that Writing said to be an
Apostle's, were indeed the Writing of him whose name it bore. That the reason
why the Writings of St. Mark and St. Luke were always received as of certain
Authority, was not because they were Contemporaries with the Apostles, (for so
were Clemens and Hermas, and Barnabas,) but because their Writings were
particularly approved and authorized by the Apostles, is plain from Eusebius;
who tells us expressly that St. Peter received and approved the Gospel of St.
Mark, and that (...). l. 2. c. 15.
it was this approbation that authorized it to be received by the Churches: In
like manner, (...). l. 3. c. 2^.
That St. John reviewed all the Gospels, and confirmed the truth of them:
Irenaeus likewise tells us Marcus discipul^s and interpres Pe^ri, quae a Pet^^
annunciata era^t, edidit. lib. 3. cap. 1.
that what St. Mark wrote, was dictated by St. Peter; and that Lu^as s^cta^or
Pauli, quod ab illo pr^^licabatur, Evangeli^^n in ^^bro condidit. Ibid.
the Gospel of St. Luke was only a Transcript of St. Paul 's Preaching: St.
Paul himself plainly refers to it, 1 Cor. 15.5. where declaring unto the
Corinthians the Gospel which he had before Preached, he puts them in mind how
that Christ rose from the dead according to the Scriptures, and that he was
seen of Cephas, etc. which appearance of our Savior to Peter, is no where
mentioned but in Saint Luke's Gospel, Luke 24.34.

And in the first Epistle to Timothy 5.18 he quotes it with the express Title
of Scripture; The Scripture says, The Labourer is worthy of his Hire; which
words are no where found in Scripture, but in St. Luke's Gospel, Luke 10. v. 7.
So that it is without great reason, that Learned Men have judged it to be St.
Luke's Gospel, which the Apostle calls his own Gospel, 2 Timothy 2.8. and
elsewhere. And then for the Acts of the Apostles, it is plain they are an
Account of St. Paul's Travels, Baron. ad ann. 61.
written before his Death; so that they are with all reason believed to have
been approved by him; and if they were not, yet Sunt enim Acta (...) ejus
operis (...) cuius (...) ipse suum agnoscit Evangelium. Acta postea ab
Evangelio divulserunt, quibus commodius visum, ob locorum saciliorem
expeditioremque invicem comparationem, Evangelistas separato codice complecti,
and ab Actis secernere. Dodwell. Dissertat. 1. in Irenaeum.
being anciently the same Book with the Gospel of St. Luke, they were
undoubtedly revievved by St. John, together with it, and their Authority was
hardly ever, that I know of, called in question by any, but Vid. Tertull.
adversus Marcion. lib. 5. sub. initio.
Marcion the Heretic. Lastly, That no other Books, however written by the
Contemporaries of the Apostles were received by the Ancients as of infallible
and decisive Authority in matters of Dispute, is evident. Eusebius tells us
expressly that the Authority of the Epistle to the Hebrews was questioned by
some, not because they doubted whether it was written in the Age of the
Apostles, (for that they could not not,) but (...). lib. 3. cap. 3.
because the Church of Rome thought it not to be written by St. Paul. The
Pastor of Hermas also (as Idem ibidem.
the same Author tells us) was esteemed so much as to be read publicly in
Churches and yet never received as of infallible Authority: Nay Origin goes
farther, and thinks it to be not only a useful Book, but written Quae scriptura
valde mihi (...) videtur, and, ut puto, divinitus inspirata. Origin. in Romans 16
14.
even with some degree of Inspiration; and yet Si cui tamen ^criptura illa
recipienda videtur. Origin. Hom. 8. in Nu^^.
imposes it not upon any one to be received as Scripture.

In like manner the Epistle of Clemens, though the most unquestionable Piece in
all Antiquity, and (as Eusebius Styles it) Lib. 3. c. 38.
(...), yet it is by the same Author Lib. 6. c. 13.
elsewhere reckoned up among the Apocryphal Pieces: that is, as Cotelerius well
observes, not that any one doubted of its Genuineness or Excellency, but only
that they would not reckon it among the Books (...), to which Eusebius there
opposes it.

The Truth is, the unquestioned Works of the Apostles were not anciently (as
Mr. Dodwel confesses) kept in a distinct Book from the Apocryphal, but read and
cited promiscously with the Works of their immediate Successors: But then it is
also certain, that as unquestioned Works of the Apostles, whenever they were
cited were looked upon by all as infallible and decisive; so the other Pieces,
whilst they were quoted and urged by some, might as freely be denied or not
yielded to by others.

Vainly therefore does Mr. T. object, That they who believe the Epistle of
Clemens and the rest to be genuine, cannot give any reason why they do not
admit it into the Canon of Scripture. And as falsely does he insinuate, that the
Establishment of that Canon is uncertain and precarious. Could it be proved,
That the Epistles of James and of Peter, and of Jude, or any of them, were not
written by those whose Names they bear; we should indeed be obliged to reject
them: And could the Preaching and Revelation of Peter be proved to be genuine,
we should be obliged to receive them into the Canon of the New Testament. But
so far is it from being true, That the Preaching and Revelation of Peter were
so received by the Ancients, as by more than a parity of Reason, to claim
admission into the Canon with his second Epistle, and the rest of the some time
questioned Books, that on the contrary these Pieces (besides the arguments that
may be drawn from the Writings themselves) were received by so few of the
Ancients, as to make (...). Hist. l. 3. c. 3.
Eusebius think, (though in that indeed he was mistaken,) that they were never
quoted by any of the Ancients at all.

What Mr. T. has invidiously urged about the Divisions among the Fathers, and
their want of exactness in their Reasonings, I suppose will not move those, who
know that Truth is never the less such for being surrounded with a multitude of
Errors; and that Men did not then write in a Nice and Scholastic way, but in a
plain and unpolite Style, mixing Arguments, Similitudes and Illustrations
promiscously, which is the way of representing things popularly, and to mean
Capacities.

Thus I have endeavored to give a short Answer to the Difficulties which Mr.
T. has with great freedom proposed: Hoping that what I have here very briefly
and with Submission hinted, may give occasion to some abler and more learned
Pen, to treat of this Matter with that largeness and clearness, with which so
great a Point well deserves to be handled.

I am, Sir, Yours.

FINIS.
BOOKS sold by James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul 's Churchyard.
CApt. William Dampier's New Voyage round the World. Describing particularly,
the Isthmus of America, several Coasts and Islands in the West Indies, the
Isles of Cape Verd, the Passage by Terra del Fuego, the South Sea Coasts of
Chili, Peru, etc. the Isle of Guam one of the Ladrones, Mindanao, and other
Philippine and East India Islands, near Cambodia, China, etc. New Holland,
Sumatra, Nicobar Isles; the Cape of Good Hope, and Santa Hellena. Their Soil,
Rivers, Harbors, Plants, Animals, etc. Their Customs, Religion, Government,
Trade, etc. Vol. I. Illustrated with particular Maps and Draughts. The 4th
Edition Corrected.

-- His Voyages and Descriptions. Vol. II. In Three Parts, viz. 1. A Supplement
of the Voyage round the Word, describing the Countries of Tonquin, Achin,
Malacca, etc. their Product. Inhabitants, Manners, Trade, Policy, etc. 2. Two
Voyages to Campeachy; with a Description of the Coasts, Product, Inhabitants,
Logwood-cutting, Trade, etc. of Jucatan, Campeachy, New-Spain, etc. 3. A
Discourse of Trade-Winds, Breezes, Storms, Seasons of the Year, Tides and
Currents of the Torrid Zone throughout the World: With an Account of Natal in
Africa, its Product, Negroes, etc. Illustrated with particular Maps and
Draughts. To which is added, A General INDEX to both Volumes.


