ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Concerning MATTERS Ecclesiastical:
EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen of every Parish within
the DIOECESE of LANDAFFE, In the First EPISCOPAL VISITATION OF THE Right
Reverend Father in God HUGH By Divine Providence Lord Bishop of LANDAFFE.

LONDON, Printed for T. Garthwait, at the King's Head in S. Paul's Churchyard,
M.DC.LXII.

The Oath to be Administered to the Churchwardens and Sworn-men.
YOu shall swear, That you and every of you shall diligently enquire of the
Articles given you in charge; and without any affection, favor, hatred, hope
of reward and gain, or fear of displeasure, or malice of any person, you shall
present all and every such person and persons that now is, or of late was in
your Parish, as has committed any Incest, Adultery, Fornication or Simony, and
any misdemeanour or disturbances committed or made in any Church or Chapel in
time of Common P^ayer, Preaching or Divine Service there used, to the
disturbance thereof, and also that have committed or done any other offense,
fault or default, presentable in the Ecclesiastical Court, according to the
Articles now delivered to you. Wherein you shall deal uprightly, fully, and
according to truth, neither of malice presenting any contrary to truth, nor of
corrupt affection sparing to present any, and so conceal the truth: having in
this action God before your eyes, with an earnest zeal to maintain the truth
and suppress vice. So help you God, and the Contents of this Book.

ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Within the DIOCESE of LANDAFFE.
TITUL. I. Concerning Churches and Chapels, with the Ornaments and Furniture
thereunto belonging.
I.ARE your Parish Church, Chapel or Chapels kept in good and sufficient
rep^i^? Are the Roofs thereof well covered with Lead, Tile or State? the
Windows well glazed, the Floors well paved, the Seats well fastened, and
conveniently placed, and all things so decently ordered, as becomes the House
of God.

II. HAS the Steeple or Tower of your Church or Chapel, or any part thereof,
been pulled down, or any of the Lead or Bells formerly belonging thereunto,
been imbezelled, sold or made away* In whose hands or custody does the same, or
any part thereof remain? Declare what you know, or have heard herein.

III. IS there a Font of stone, with a good Cover thereunto, standing in a
convenient place toward the lower part of your Church or Chapel, for the
Administration of Baptism? And is there in your Chancel, a decent Communion
Table, for the Administration of the Lords Supper; with a Carpet of Silk,
Stuff, or fine Woollen-cloath, and another Covering of white and pure Linen to
spread thereupon? And have you a fair Communion-Cup, or Chalice of silver, with
a Cover of silver, and one or more Flagons of silver, or pewter, thereunto
belonging?

IV. HAVE you in your said Church or Chapel, a convenient Seat, or Pew, for
your Minister to read Divine Service in? A Pulpit, with a comely Cloth or
Cushion for the same? A Bible of the last Translation, in a large Volume, and
the Book of Common Prayer, both well and substantially bound? Have you likewise
the Book of H^milies, set forth by A^thority? A Book of Canons and
Constitutious Ecclesiastical? And a Printed Table of the Degrees wherein
Marriage is prohibited?

V. HAVE you a comely large Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of
his Public Ministration in the Church provided, and to be duly washed at the
Charge of the Parish.

VI HAVE you a Register Book of Parchment, wherein to Register the Names and
Sirnames of all such persons as are married* Christened, or Buried within your
Parish? together with the Names and Sirna^es of both the Parents of the
Children so Christened, expressing the day, month, and year of all such
Christenings, Marriages, and Burials? And is the transcript thereof yearly,
within one Month next after the 25 of March, brought into the Bishops Registry?

VII. HAVE you likewise another Book of Paper, wherein to record the Names and
Licenses of all such Strangers as are admitted at any time to Preach in your
Church or Chapel? As also a third Book wherein to write down the Churchwardens
Accounts: together with a strong Chest, with Locks and Keys, wherein to keep
the aforesaid Books, and all other the aforementioned Furniture in safe
Custody? And lastly, have you a Bier, with a black Hears-cloath, for the Burial
of the Dead?

VIII HAVE you a Box with a lock and key, fit to receive and keep the Alms of
charitable men given to your poor, according to the 84 Canon?

TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Glebes, and Tithes, belonging
to the Church.
I. IS your Churchyard sufficiently senced with Walls, Rails, or Pales; and
decently kept from the annoyance of Swine, Horses, and other Ca^tel? Has any
person encroached upon the same? or made any door into it out of his own ground
or habitation, without allowance from the Ordinar^? Have any Cree^ there
growing been cut down? how long since, by whom? and to whose use and benefit?

II. IS the House of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate; (with all the outhouses
thereunto belonging) kept in good and sufficient repair? Or, have any of the
said Houses, or Out houses, been defaced or pulled down without license from
the Ordinary? and by whom? Has any person encroached upon any Garden, Yard, or
Clo^e, belonging to your Parson^ge or Vicarage house? or cut up any Trees
growing thereon? or changed or removed the ancient Parks and Bounds of the same?

III HAVE you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe lands, Gardens,
Orchards, Tenements or Cottages, belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage? As
also a Note of such Pensions, Rate-tythes, and Portions of Tithes, or other
yearly Profits (either within or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? Have
any of the same been withhold from your Minister? or by whom; as you know, or
have heard?

IV. HAVE any of the Ancient Gleb-lands belonging to your Parsosonage or
Vicarage been taken away* or exchanged for other, without the free consent of
the Incumbent, and license from the Ordinary? Have any Enclosures been made in
your Parish, to the detriment of the Church, by the decay of Tillage, and
converting Arable-land into Pasture? by whom has the same been made? and how
many years since? and how much is your Parsonage or Vicarage damnified thereby
in the yearly value thereof; as you know, believe, or have heard?

TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
I. IS your Minister a Priest or Deacon, Episcopally Ordained, according to the
Laws of the Church of England? If so, let him produce his Orders.

II. IS he defamed or suspected to have obtained either his Benefice or Orders
by any Simoniacal compact?

III. HAS he been legally Iustituted and Inducted into his Benefice? and did
he within two months after his Induction, publicly in the Church, upon some
Sunday or Holy Day, in the time of Divine Service, read the 39 Articles of the
Church of England, established by Authority, without omitting any one, and
there publicly declare his assent thereunto?

IV. HAS he any other Ecclesiastical Benefice, Prebend or Dignity? Is he
constantly resident upon his Benefice among you? How many weeks in any one year
has he been absent from it, without urgent necessity?

V. HAS your Minister a Curate to assist him? Is the said Curate in Holy
Orders? an able and discreet person, and conformable to the Laws and Orders of
the Church of England? Is he allowed by the Bishop to serve in your Church or
Chapel? and does he serve in any other Church beside and what yearly stipend
does your Minister allow him?

VI. DOES your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, in reading the daily Morning and
Evening Service, Administration of the holy Sacraments, celebration of
Marriage, Churching of Women after Childbirth, Visitation of the Sick, Burial
of the Dead, and pronouncing Gods Commination against impenitent Sinners, use
the form and words prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, without any
addition, omission, or alteration of the same? And does he use all such Rites
and Ceremonies in all parts of Divine Service, as are appointed in the said
Book?

VII. DOES your Minister at the reading or celebrating any Divine Office in
your Church or Chapel, wear the Surplice, together with such other
Scholastical Habit as is suitable to his Degree?

VIII. DOES he observe the Holy Days and Fasting-daies, as also the
Ember-weeks, and the yearly Perambulation in Rogation week, as in the
Common Prayer Book, or by the Ecclesiastical Canons, is appointed? giving
notice to the Parishioners of every of the same in the Church in the time of
Divine Service, upon the Sunday next before?

IX. HAS your Minister been licensed to preach by the Bishop, or either of the
two Universities? If so; Does he then constantly (unless in case of sickness,
necessary absence, or other reasonable impediment) himself preach in your
Church or Chapel, one Sermon every Sunday? Or if he be not a Licensed
Preacher, or being so Licensed, be hindered by sickness, or otherwise, as
aforesaid; does he procure a Sermon to be so preached by some other Minister, a
Licensed Preacher? or one of the Homilies set forth by Authority to be there
read by a Priest or Deacon lawfully Ordained?

X. DOES your Minister diligently instruct the youth of your Parish, in the
Church Catechism? and does he prepare and present them, being so instructed, to
be confirmed by the Bishop? And does he endeav^ur to reclaim all Popish
Recusants, and other Sectaries (if any such be inh^biting within your Parish)
to the true Religion established in the Church of England, and to their bounden
duty in obeying the Laws, and submitting to the Government thereof?

XI. DOES he neglect to visit the Sick, or delay the Baptism of any Infant that
is in danger o^ Death? In there any Child p^st Infancy, or other person of more
years, through your Ministers default, yet remaining unbaptized in your Parish?
Does he baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers, or admit either of the
Parents to be Godfather or Godmother to their own Children?

XII. DOES he in his Sermons preach sound Doctrine, tending to the edification
of the people in the knowledge and faith of Jesus Christ, and obedience to Gods
holy Commandments? or has he at any time (as you know, or have heard) preached
any false, heretical, seditious or schismatical Doctrine, thereby to seduce the
people into parties and factions, to the disturbance of the public Peace, and
unity either of Church or State?

XIII. HAS he presumed to marry any persons in private houses? or such as
being under age, have not the consent of their Parents, or without the Banes
first published on three Sundaies or Holy Days in the Church? or at any other
hours then between eight and twelve in the morning, unless he h^d a License or
Dispensation so to do?

XIV. DOES any person preach in your Parish as a Lecturer? Has he allowance
from the Bishop for so doing? Does he before his Lecture read Divine Service,
according to the Book of Common Prayer? and is he in all respects conformable
to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England?

XV. HAS your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private Fasts,
Prophecyings or Exercises, not appointed by Authority, or does he, or any
other, either Minister or Lay person, hold any Conventicles or meetings in
private houses within your Parish, for people of several Families to resort
unto, under the pretense of preaching, praying, thanksgiving or humiliation,
contrary to the Laws and Canons in that case provided? If so, present them,
with the time and place specified.

XVI IS your Parson, Vicar, Curate or Lecturer, a man of sober, unblameable,
and exemplary Life? Does he familiarly converse with ungodly, vicious, and
excommunicate persons? Is he a frequenter of Taverns or Alehouses? a common
Gamester? a profane or obscene Iester? a Swearer, Ra^^er, Scoffer or
Quarreller? Does he set Neighbors at variance one with another? or encourage
them to Suits and Contention? Is ^e noted to be an intemperate Drinker? or
vehemently susp^cted of Incontinency with any person, either within your
Par^sh, or without? Does he wear his hair of an immoderate or uncomely length?
Is his apparel grave and decent* both for fashion and color, as the Canons of
the Church require? Or is his Carriage and Conversation, in any kind
whatsoever, Disorderly or Scandalous, and unbeseeming a Minister of Jesus
Christ?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
I. JS there in your Parish any person a known or reputed Heretic or
Schismatic? any Papist, Presbyterian, Familist, Anabaptist, Quaker or other
Sectary, that refuse to come unto the public Assemblies. Pr^yers, or Services
of the Church, or that make profession of any other Religion then what is
established in the Church of England? and if there be any such, what are their
Names?

II. IS there any person in your Parish that lies under a common fame, or
vehement suspicion of Adultery, Fornication, or Incest? Are there any common
drunkards within your Parish, or common sweaters, or blasphemers of Gods Name,
or any that are noted to be railers, unclean or filthy talkers, or sowers of
sedition, faction and discord amongst their neighbors? If so, who are they?

III DO any of your Parish upon the Sundays or Holy days, follow their bodily
and ordinary labor? or permit their servants so to do? are any sh^ps kept
open, or wares sold? or do any Vintners, Iunkeepers, or other Victuallers and
sellers of Bear or Ale, suffer any persons to tipple or game in their houses
upon those days? Declare the persons so offending, with the time and place.

IV. DOES every person inhabiting or sojourning within your Parish duly resort
unto your Church, Ch^ppel or Chapels, upon every Sunday and Holiday appointed
for Divine Service? Do they then and there ab^de quietly with reverence, order
and decency, during all the whole time of Common Prayer, Preaching, or other
service of God there used? and are there any among you that come only to the
Preaching, and not to the Common Prayers of the Church? who are they?

V. DOES. every person reverently uncover his head, and so continue all the
time of Divine-Service and Sermon in the Church? Do they all reverently kneel
at the Prayers, and stand up when the Creed and Gospel are read, making due
reverence when the Name of our Lord Jesus is mentioned? Declare who do not, if
any such.

VI. ARE there any in your Parish, that refuse to send their Infantchildren to
be baptized publicly in the Church, unless in case of urgent danger; in which
case, the child may be baptized at home by a lawful Minister, after the form
and rites appointed in the Liturgy? Or do they send them to be baptized in any
other Parishes, or after other form then the Church allows? And are there any
Infants, or more aged persons in your Parish as yet unbaptized? If so, declare
who.

VII. DOES every Houshoulder in your Parish cause their children and servants
to learn their Catechism, and to give an account thereof unto your Minister, as
he shall require it of them openly in the Church upon Sundaies and Holy Days,
as in the Book of Common Prayer is appointed; that when they are well
instructed in the same, they may be confirmed by the Bishop?

VIII. IS there any person in your Parish, who being 16 years of age, and well
instructed in Religion, does not receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, at
least three times in the year, of which Easter is always to be one? Does any in
your Parish refuse to receive the same kneeling, or from the hands of your own
Minister, repairing for it to other Parishes and Ministers abroad? Or are there
any strangers not of your Parish, that forsake their own Churches, and usually
repair to yours for it? If there be any such, express who they are.

IX. HAVE you any among you that be denounced and declared excommunicate for
any crime committed? How long have they been so excommunicated? And do any of
your Parish keep society with them before they be reconciled to the Church, and
absolved? If so, declare who they be.

X. ARE there any living in your Parish who have been unlawfully married,
contrary to the Laws of God? Or any that being lawfully divorced have married
again? Or any that being lawfully married, and not separated or divorced by
course of Law, do not cohabit together? If so, express their several names.

XI. ARE there any married, women in your Parish, who after their delivery from
the peril of Childbirth, refuse to make their public thanksgiving to God in
the Church? And when they come so to do, do they come decently apparelled, and
make their offerings according to custom? If there be any such present them.

XII. ARE there any belonging to your Parish, who refuse to pay their duty for
Easter Offerings to your Minister? Or any that refuse to contribute and pay the
rate assessed upon them, for the repair of your Church or Chapel, and for the
providing of such books, furniture and ornaments, as be requisite for the
performance of all Divine Offices there: If so, who are they?

XIII. DO any refuse to bury their dead according to the Rites of the Church of
England? And are there any Wills or Testaments of persons d^^d in your Parish,
that be yet unproved? Or any goods administered, without a due grant from the
Ordinary? Did any dying in your Parish or elsewhere, leave any Leg^cy to your
Church or Chapel, or to the use of the poor, or to any other pious and
ch^ritable purposes? What were those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed?

XV. DO you know, or have you heard, of any Patron or other person in your
Parish, having the presentation or gift of any Ecclesiastical Benefice, who
has made gain thereof by presenting a Clerk or Minister to it upon any
bargain, either for money, or pension, or lease, reserve of Tithes or Glebe, or
any part thereof, or upon other Simoniacal compact whatsoever?

XV. IS there any strife and contention among any of your Parish for their Pews
or Seats in your Church? Have any new Pews been erected in your Chancel, or in
the Body of your Church or Chapel without leave from the Ordinary?

XVI. IF any brawl or fight one with another in your Church or Churchyard,
present them.

TIT. V. Concerning Parish-clerks, and Sextons.
I. HAVE you belonging to your Church or Chappelrie a Parish-Clerk, aged 21
years at the least? Is he of honest life and convers^tion, and sufficient or
able to perform his duty in reading, writing and singing? Is he chosen by your
Minister, and does he duly attend him in all Divine Services at the Church? Are
his wages and customarie duties duly paid unto him? or who withholds the
same from him?

II. DOES he or your Sexton (if there be any such appointed in your Parish,)
diligently look to the doors of your Church, that they be locked and opened at
due time? And does he keep your Church or Chapel clean from dust, cobwebs and
other annoiance? Does he toll or ring the Bells at the due accustomed hours
before the beginning of Divine Service, Morning and Evening, that the people
may be warned to come unto the Church? And when any person is passing out of
this life, does he, upon notice given him thereof, toll a Bell, as h^th been
accustomed, that the neighbors may thereby be warned to recommend the dying
person to the grace and favor of God?

TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, School masters, Physicians,
Surgeons, and Midwives.
I. IS there any Hospital, Almshouse or Free School founded in your Parish?
Who was the Founder, or is now the Patron thereof? and what is the yearly
Revenue or Stipend belonging to the Governors or Masters of the same? Is the
same ordered and governed in every respect as it ought to be? and are the
Revenues thereof rightly employed, according to the intention of the Foundor,
and of such grants and ordinances as have been made concerning the same?

II. DOES any man keep a public or private School in your Parish, who is not
allowed thereunto by the Bishop? Present such, if there be any in your Parish
or Chappelrie. Does your Schoolmaster teach his Scholars the Catechism of
Religion, set forth by Authority? Does he cause them upon Sundaies and
Holidaies orderly to repair to your Church or Chapel, and see that they behave
themselves there quietly and reverently, during the time of Divine Service and
Sermon?

III. DOES any man in your Parish practice Physic or Surgery, or any
woman take upon her to exercise the office of a Midwife, without approbation
and license from the Ordinary? If so, name them.

TIT. VII. Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen.
I. ARE the Churchwardens of your Parish yearly and duly chosen by the joint
consent of your Minister and Parishioners; or one of them by your Minister, and
the other by the Parishioners?

II. HAVE the former and last Churchwardens given up their due Accounts to the
Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Churchwardens, the moneys remaining
in their hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or
Chapel?

III. HAS there been diligent care to see who of your Parishioners be absent
from the Divine Service and Sermon in your Church or Chapel, upon Sundaies and
Holy Days, and to find who have absented themselves without a sufficient
cause? Has there been by Warrant or Warrants from some of the Justices of the
Peace, levied of such offenders, by way of Distress upon their goods, the sum
of 12 pence for every such day of their absence, according to the Act of
Parliament in that case provided: And has the same been distributed among the
Poor of your Parish, according to the Law?

IV. HAVE they been noted that come late to Church after Divine Service is
begun, or depart before it be ended? Have any been suffered to stand idle, or
talk together in the Church Porch, or walk in the Churchyard, during the time
of Prayers, Preaching, or other Sacred Offices?

V. HAS no mis-behaviour or disorder been suffered to be done by men, women,
servants, or children, in your Church or Chapel? Has care been taken, that
none of them sit, lean, or lay their H^ts upon the Communion Table? Have no
Minstrels, no Morris, dancers, no Dogs, Hawks, or Hounds, been suffered to be
brought or come into your Church, to the disturbance of the Congregation?

VI. HAS there been provided against every Communion appointed in your Church
or Chapel, a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and of good Wine,
according to the number of Communicants?

VII. HAVE all Strangers that preach in your Church or Chapel, subscribed
their names the same day, in a Book provided for that purpose, together with
the name of the Bishop that licensed them to preach in this Diocese? and have
none other preached?

THe Churchwardens and Sidemen are required to advise with their respective
Parsons, Vicars or Curates, concerning their several Presentiments, that so they
may be regular and direct in answer to the Articles given them in charge.

HUGH LANDAFFE.


