ARTICLES TO BE Ministered, Enquired of, and Answered, Concerning MATTERS
Ecclesiastical: In the first EPISCOPAL VISITATION Of the Right Reverend Father
in God GILBERT By Gods Divine Providence Lord Bishop of BRISTOL: In the second
ye^^ of his Consecration.

blazon of the Lord Bishop of Bristol surmounted by bishop's miter

London, Printed for H. Brom. M.DC.LXII.

The Tenor of the Oath to be Ministered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
Your Oath is, So help you God in Jesus Christ.

ARTICLES TO BE Ministered, Enquired of, and Answered: IN THE DIOCESE of BRISTOL.
Concerning the Kings Majesty's Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical.
1. HAVE you any in your Parish, that oppugn or gainsay any part of his
Majesty's Supremacy in the said Causes Ecclesiastical? 2. HAVE you any that
affirm, That the Civil Magistrate ought not to prescribe any thing to
Ecclesiastical persons, in or about the public Worship of God, but that their
duty only is, to protect and defend the said persons?
Of the Church of England.
1. HAVE you any in your Parish that affirm, That the Church of England, as now
by Law Established, is not a True and Apostolical Church, reproaching the same
as Antichristian? 2. HAVE you any that affirm. That the Book of Common Prayer,
now established by Law, contains any thing in it, that is Superstition, and
contrary to the Word of God; and therefore that godly men ought not to approve
and subscribe to the same? 3. HAVE you any that separate themselves from the
Church of England, and the public Worship thereof; and combine themselves in
a new Brotherhood, making Rules and Orders amongst themselves, to be Ruled and
Governed by, in Church Matters? or, that come not to Church till Divine Service
be ended, and the Sermon to begin?
Of Divine Service.
1. ARE the Lords-dayes, and other Holidays kept in your Parish, according to
the Orders of the Church of England, prescribed in that behalf, by frequenting
the public Worship, and using all charitable and sober Conversation? 2. DO
your Churchwardens diligently observe, what Irregular persons, or
Non-conformists absent themselves from their own Parish Church? And do they
repair to the Justices of the Peace for their warrants, to levy twelve pence
upon the Goods of such persons according as by Law is required of them? 3. IS
the Common Prayer Reverently used in your Church or Chapel, upon such days as
are appointed? And is the Letany used upon Wenesdayes and Frydayes weekly by
your Minister, without adding or diminishing in the matter and form thereof?
And do the Parishioners resort thereunto? 4. HAVE you any in your Parish that
cover their heads in Church or Chapel, in time of Divine Service, except he
has some known Infirmity, and then to wear a Cap only? Or do your
Churchwardens suffer any Idle persons to loyter, either in the Churchyard, or
Church Porch, in the time of Divine Service, or Sermon?
Of the Sacraments.
1. IS the Sacrament of the Lords Supper duly administered in your Parish, at
the least thrice a year, Easter being one? And does the Minister give warning
thereof at Morning Prayers the Sunday before such time? And does the
Churchwardens provide a sufficient quantity of Bread and Wine for the same? 2.
HAVE you in your Church or Chapel, a convenient Table covered in time of
Divine Service, with a Carpet; and in the time of Administration, with a fine
Linen Cloth? Is the Wine brought to the Communiontable in a clean Stoop or
Pot? 3. DOES your Minister admit any to the Sacrament of the Supper, that are
Excommunicate persons? or any that are known to live in any grievous crime? or
live in open contention with their Neighbors? Or any Churchwardens or
Sidemen that have heretofore neglected, or refused to present such public
Offenses, as they know to be committed in their Parishes, and so incur the
horrible crime of Perjury? 4. IS the Sacrament of Baptism duly Administered in
your Church or Chapel, according to the form thereof prescribed by the Church
of England? Is there a Font of Stone placed toward the lower end of the Church
for that purpose? And are there such Godfathers and Godmothers used therein, as
are of Age? or have received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper? 5. HAVE you any
in your Parish, that refuse to bring their Children to be Baptized by the
Minister, according to the Book of Common Prayer? who are they? and, how long
have they done so?
For Ministers.
1. DOES your Minister, when he reads Public Prayers, or Administer the
Sacrament, wear a comely Surplice with sleeves? And if he be a Graduate, such
Hood as by the Orders of the University is agreeable to his Degree? 2. HAS
your Minister more Benefices with cure then one? and if so, how far distant one
from an other? upon which does he reside? Has he a sufficient Curate to teach
and instruct the People? Does he Catechize the youth and ignorant persons of
the Parish, in the Ten Commandments, the Creed, and the Lords Prayer? And do
all Fathers, Mothers, Masters, and Mistresses send their Children and Servants
to be instructed accordingly, when required thereunto? 3. DOES your Minister
solemnly bid Ember-weeks, Holy Days, and Fasting-dayes, as they are set down
in the Calendar? Does he also use to visit the Sick? 4. DOES any Person Preach
in your Parish, as a Lecturer? Does he before his Lecture read Divine Service?
and is he Conformable to the Orders established in the Church of England? 5.
DOES your Minister Preach or Administer the Sacraments in private Houses? Or
appoint private or public Fasts without Authority? 6. DOES your Minister
frequent Taverns, or Alehouses, or any suspected places? or is he of an honest
and sober Conversation, such as becomes the Gospel of Christ?
Of Schoolmasters.
1. HAVE you any Schoolmaster in your Parish? Has he a License from the
Bishop to teach School? Does he instruct his Scholars in the Catechism, and
good Manners, as well as Learning? 2. DOES your Schoolmaster upon Sundays and
Festival-dayes, when there be Sermons preached, in your Church or Chapel,
bring the Scholars to Church, and see them there orderly to behave themselves,
and examine them, at times convenient, what they remember of the said Sermons?
Of the Church and Churchyard.
1. HAVE you in your Church or Chapel, a Bible of the largest Volum, and of
the late Translation? The Book of Homilies, set forth by Authority? And have
you the Book of Common Prayer, approved and commanded by the late Act of
Parliament? 2. HAVE you in your Church or Chapel a convenient Seat, or Desk,
for your Minister, to read Divine Service in? And a comely and decent Pulpit,
with a Cloth or Cushion, for the Preaching of Gods Word? 3. IS your Church or
Chapel sufficiently repaired, the windows glased, and all things there in such
orderly sort as becomes the house of God? 4. IS your Churchyard well and
sufficiently fenced by those who by Law ought to fence the same? 5. HAVE you in
your Church or Chapel a Chest for Alms, with a hole in the upper part
thereof, with three Keys, one for the Minister, one for the Senior
Churchwarden, and one for the Overseer for the Poor? 6. HAVE you in your
Church the Book of Divine Service, to be used upon the Fifth of November, the
Thirtieth of January, and the Nine and Twentieth of May? And does your Minister
and the Parishioners duly observe those days yearly, as they are appointed?
Have you also the Book of Canons and Constitutions? 7. ARE the Seats in your
Church kept in good repair? And are the Ten Commandments set up in some
convenient place, in your Church, with the Creed and the Lords Prayer, and some
choice sentences of Scripture? 8. HAVE you a Terrier of the Glebe-lands and
other Possessions belonging to your Church? Is your Ministers house kept in
sufficient repair?
Of Churchwardens.
ARE your Churchwardens chosen by the Minister and Parishioners, the Minister
choosing one? and do your Churchwardens at the end of the year, give up an
account of such Moneys as they have received?
Of Parish-Clerks.
HAVE you a Parish-Clerk, chosen by the Minister, sufficient for his Reading,
Writing, and a competent skill in Singing? And does he receive his accustomed
wages?
Of Marriages.
1. IS there any in your Parish that have Married within the Degrees prohibited
by the Laws of God, expressed in a Table, and set forth by Authority, Anno
1563? And have you the Table set up in your Church? 2. HAS your Minister
Married any in your Parish under the age of 21 without the consent of their
Parents? Or, has he Married any persons in private houses?
Of Physicians, Surgeons, and Midwives.
DOES any Man in your Parish take upon him to practice Physic, or Surgery?
And does any Woman take upon her to exercise the Office of a Midwife, without
approbation and license from the Ordinary?
Of Burials.
HAVE any been buried in your Parish Church, or Churchyard, that have been
known Recusants, or Excommunicated persons, or such as have been Felones dese?
And does your Minister bury the Dead, according to the form prescribed in the
Book of Common Prayer?
Of the Parishioners.
1. DOES any in your Parish use bodily labor in their Vocations upon Sundays
and Holy days, or suffer their Servants so to do? Or, do any of your Parish go
to Taverns, or Alehouses, to tipple or game on those days? 2. ARE there any
married Women, in your Parish, who after Childbirth, refuse publicly to give
thanks to God for their safe delivery, as is prescribed by the Book of
Common Prayer? 3. IS there any in your Parish that is known or vehemently
suspected of Adultery, Fornication, Incest, or that are common Swearers, and
Drunkerds, or Sowers of Sedition? You are to present all such. Knowing that the
discharge of your duty herein, is a means to reform such disorders in your
Parish, and to prevent the Judgments of God from falling on the same.
GILB. BRISTOL.


